Considerations upon the Act of Parliament, for reversing the Judgment in a Quo
Warranto against the City of London, and for restoring the City of London to
its Ancient Rights and Privileges.
1. THE said Judgment, and the Proceedings thereupon, are declared to be
Arbitrary and Illegal, p. 104. and in pursuance of this Declaration, that
Judgment is reversed; and the City restored to all its Ancient Rights,
Liberties, and Franchises whatsoever; and all Charters, Letters Patents, Grants
and Commissions, during the time of the avoidance of the Charter in the two
last Reigns, for incorporating the Citizens and Commonalty of the said City, or
touching, or concerning any of their Liberties and Franchises, etc. are
declared and adjudged to be null and void, to all intents and purposes
whatsoever, p. 104, to 107.

2. Notwithstanding this, it was not reasonable, that the City, which was no
way consenting to its own disfranchisement; but was wholly Passive in it,
should suffer or be prejudiced, as to its main concerns; but that all
Proceedings in Law or Equity, all Leases made or granted, with the Cautions and
Provisoes limited in the Act; all Judgments, Decrees, and Sentences had, and
obtained by any Person or Persons, taking upon them to be Trustees for, or
concerning any Lands, etc. all Freedoms, to which any Persons being natural
Born Subjects or Denizons, had been admitted since the said Judgment given,
that all these should stand and remain in full Force and Effect; so far as all
or any of the said Proceedings were or would have been, had the Charter not
been voided, materially Legal; being transacted and done according to the usual
Methods, and with the usual Forms of Law and Justice, respectively belonging
and appertaining to them, because though all these things for want of a
Charter, were now transacted by Commission from the King; yet if all the
Proceedings upon the said Commission, for the space of so many Years had been
declared null and void; the Restitution of the Charter would have been a far
greater mischief than the avoidance of it, and the inconveniences would have
been unspeakable, which the City must have suffered by the nullity of so many
reasonable and just, as well as weighty and important Proceedings; and
accordingly it is wisely provided by this Act, that all the Proceedings
aforesaid, though Illegal in themselves, conside^ing the root of Authority from
whence they sprang, yet shall be deemed and adjudged to be firm and valid, as
if the Charter had been standing, and the same Affairs had been transacted in
the old and usual course, under the Authority and influence of the same.

3. When it is said in general terms, that the Judgment given against the
Charter, and the Proceedings thereupon, is and were Illegal and Arbitrary; and
that all Charters, Letters, Pattents, Grants, Commissions, etc. For
Incorporating the Citizens and Commonalty of the said City, or any of them, or
touching, or concerning any of their Liberties and Franchises, etc. are
declared and adjudged to be null and void, to all intents and purposes
whatsoever.

And when it is then further added, for the reason that has been given, viz.
to prevent many and great mischiefs and inconveniences, that would otherwise
accrue; that notwithstanding any thing contained in the said general Clauses;
yet in some particular cases mentioned in the Act, that the Proceedings upon,
and after the said Judgment, shall be, and are confirmed as to their effect;
though in their cause, that is, to say the Authority from whence they were
derived, they are declared and adjudged to have been Arbitrary and Illegal;
from these two things considered and reflected upon, there are these ten very
natural Corollaries, or deductions to be made.

First, That the general Clauses would have been in vain, whereby the Judgment
against the Charter, and the Proceedings thereupon are declared to be Illegal,
and the said Proceedings to be null and void; nay, they would have been absurd
and ludicrous, unbecoming the wisdom and gravity of that great Assembly, by
which with the Royal Assent they were enacted, if after this either expressly,
or by any reasonable innuendoes, or intimations of such a design, all the
Proceedings upon the said Judgment, had been intended or employed, to be by the
same Legislators in the same Act Authorized and Confirmed.

Secondly, The Provisoes themselves would have been equally incongruous and
absurd; if all those Acts and Proceedings upon or after the said Judgment,
which were not confirmed by any such Provisoes, were notwithstanding to stand
good, and remain in full Force and Effect.

Thirdly, Thus much therefore is certain, and almost self-evident to every
Person of common understanding, that where there is a general clause of nullity
and avoidance of all the Acts of an Illegal Power, to which there are
subjoined, some particular exceptions by particular Provisoes made in that
behalf; that all those Acts, which neither come within the Letter of the said
Provisoes, nor so much as within the reason and intention of them, are by the
general Clauses evacuated and annulled, and the general Rule, in cases not
excepted, is fortified and strengthened by the exceptions from it, according to
that old Maxim, which is grounded upon the highest and the plainest reason,
exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis.

Fourthly, The word Alderman, not being so much as named thoroughout this whole
Act of Parliament, it is of necessity to be granted, that all those Aldermen,
that were admitted into that Honorable Court, after Judgment given against the
City Charter, till the date of this Act of Parliament, for the reversing of
that Judgment, that is to say, till the twentieth day of May 1690, were
illegally admitted; that Judgment and the Proceedings thereupon or thereafter,
till the time of restitution, being declared to have been Arbitrary and Illegal.

Fifthly, The said Admissions being Arbitrary and Illegal in themselves, and
not being confirmed by any Special Provisoe, nor contained within the true
reason of all, or any of the said Provisoes; they are by this Act of Parliament
made null and void, that is to say, those Gentlemen so unduly and illegally
admitted, have no Right to wear their Gowns, or to Sit and Act as Aldermen any
longer, in virtue of any such Illegal Admission, not confirmed by this Act.

That they do not come within the Letter of any of the Provisoes, is plain,
because they are not so much as mentioned or named in any of them; so that it
cannot be said there is any express Provision made in their behalf.

That they are not included within the reason or intention of any of them, (tho
this would hardly be sufficient to give them a Title at Common Law) will be
plain to any Man, that shall duly weigh, and consider the reason of the
Provisoes, which is twofold.

First, that the Public, or the City in common, and those with whom they
transacted might not suffer, for want of a just and reasonable Confirmation of
all those materially Legal Acts and Proceedings, which were had or done from
the avoidance of the Charter, to the restitution of it.

Secondly, That private Persons, who had bought Offices within the Mayor or
Sheriffs, or in any wise in the Cities gift, and who were competently qualified
for their employments, and capable of them had the Charter stood, might not be
turned out of them, to the great loss, if not ruin of themselves and Families,
only for want of a Just and Legal Title; a defect which the Parliament by their
Authority, was very well able to supply, as accordingly it has done; and as in
strict equity it was obliged to do; but of this a little more shall be said in
its proper place.

Now as to the First of these reasons of the said Provisoes; it is manifest the
Aldermen are not included in it, nor in the second neither, for it could be no
disadvantage to the City in general, nor to themselves in particular, for them
to resign their Seats in the Court of Aldermen, and put themselves upon a new
Choice in their respective Wards, any more than it was in the Case of Common
Council-men, of whom a new Choice was expressly enjoined; nay, the Majority have
agreed, that it was for the City's Interest to choose a new Common Council;
because they have chosen other Members, for reasons that do as nearly concern
some of the present pretended Court of Aldermen, as they did some of the late
Common Council.

It could be no disadvantage to themselves, to be dismissed from their Station of
Aldermen of the City, any more than for others, to be dismissed from the Common
Council, for neither the one nor the other gets any thing by the Bargain, only
the trouble of an Alderman is so much the greater, as Courts of Aldermen are
more frequent than Common Councils; and there is a charge of congruity, though
not of absolute necessity attending it, they being obliged for the Honor of the
City, to live in some greater port and equipage than they did before, and for
these two reasons, because they could not well spare so much time from their
private Affairs, and because of a Charge accompanying that Station, which
cannot without dishonor be avoided; there are multitudes that have chosen from
time to time, rather to pay a considerable Fine to the Chamber of London, than
undergo the unprofitable fatigue and trouble of that dignity, besides the
expense and charge, that usually goes along with it.

Sixthly, Which is the sixth Corollary, deducible from the premises: He that is
no Alderman within the meaning of this Act, by which all those Acts and
Proceedings, during the avoidance of the Charter, are expressly declared and
adjudged to be null and void; which are not by some especial Provisoe
particularly confirmed; I say, such a Person, let him be who he will, can be no
Lord Mayor, because the Lord Mayor according to the Ancient Customs and Usages
of the City, is to be chosen out of the Court of Aldermen, and all those
Ancient Usages, and Customs, are by this Act of Parliament restored and
confirmed.

Seventhly, Sir, T. P. who laid down his Gown, while the City Charter was still
standing, and took it up again without any Legal Warrant after the date of the
Judgment, and before that of this Act of Parliament, is no Legal Alderman; and
by consequence, he cannot make a Legal Lord Mayor.

Eighthly, Those Gentlemen, who have continued and sat as Aldermen, during all
this interval of the avoidance of the Charter; and were so by a due and lawful
Election and Designation thereto, before the Judgment given, have still a right
to continue, Sit and Act in that capacity, now the said Charter is restored,
and the said Judgment reversed; because the declared End and Scope of the Act
of Parliament, made upon this occasion, was to settle and confirm the Ancient
Constitution, as it stood when the Charter was seized into the King's Hands; of
which Constitution they themselves were an unquestionable Part; and if the
Aldermen since the Judgment do pretend a Right, yet they cannot but confess at
the same mite, that those that were made so before it, have, if not a greater,
for an absolute Right will admit of no comparisons; yet a much more plain and
manifest Right than they.

Ninthly, Those of the Court of Aldermen, that laid down their Gowns, and
desisted from any further attendance upon that Court, at any time between the
Judgment given, and the Restitution of the Charter by the Act of Parliament for
reversing of it, being Legal Aldermen while the Charter was standing, and at
the time of its avoidance; may, as many of them as are now surviving, take up
their Gowns again, and Act in the same capacity that they did before; they not
making a voluntary surrender, but conceiving themselves under a Moral
incapacity to Act, by reason of the Illegality of the Commission it self, or
not liking the Company that was obtruded upon them, whom they might not look
upon as Legal Assessors in that Honorable Court; or fearing to be questioned
in Parliament for what they did; as this very Parliament has declared, the
Seizure of the Charter, and the Proceedings consequent upon it, to have been
Arbitrary and Illegal; and therefore they resigned, not because they would not
Act; but because they thought they could not, being morally disabled for any
further Service, for id solum possumus, quod possumuus de jure; but the Charter
being restored, the capacity of acting, returned together with it, and the
surrender being an involuntary thing, created by scruples which they did not
make, and which they could not get over, the Right of acting still remained,
whenever the Legal capacity should return; as a Lawyer lays by his Gown, and
appears at no Bar in the time of the Vacation; reserving still to himself a
Right of doing both, when ever the Term shall return.

However, this is spoken, and the Author humbly desires it may be so
interpreted, without any reflection upon those honest and worthy Gentlemen, who
continued still to act, during all the time of the avoidance of the Charter;
which as it must be confessed, to have been a signal Service rendered to the
City and the Nation, by influencing in some measure the Proceedings of the
Court, and by hindering of worse Men from Sitting in their Places; so was it an
undoubted Argument of courage and a public Spirit; and no sign of want, either
of Integrity or Judgment; for the Judges and the Lawyers themselves, were not
agreed, as to the Legality of the Seizure of the Charter and its Franchises
into the Kings Hands; and much more then might those, who do not profess the
Law, but depend wholly upon others for their Sentiments in these cases, be
divided in their Opinions concerning it; and now in God's Name let them unite
together, for the behoof and service of their Country in the general, and of
this Famous and Renowned City in particular; since they both confess the
Restitution to be Legal, whatever disputes or controversies may arise
concerning the Seizure, which there is now no reason to keep stirring any
longer.

Tenthly, and Lastly, From all that has been said, there is this further
Consectary to be deduced, viz. that the Legal Court of Aldermen, now the
Charter is restored, does and will consist of three sorts of Persons.

First, such as were Legal Aldermen before the Seizure, and have continued ever
since to act in that capacity.

Secondly, Of such as laid down their Gowns, since the giving of Judgment
against the City; being before it Legal and duly qualified Aldermen of the
same, if they please to resume their Gowns and their Posts again.

And thirdly, Such as shall be Legally presented by the respective Wards, and
accepted by the Court of Aldermen, to supply the vacancies in those Wards,
where an Alderman is wanting; but all that took upon them that Style and Title,
during the avoidance, not being Legally possessed of it before; are by this Act
of Parliament manifestly prohibited from acting any longer, either to the
prejudice of those that have a Legal Right, or otherwise, where there is a
vacancy, without a new Election.

Fourthly, But in answer to all this, there is a Clause of provision in the Act
of Parliament, which is trumpt up in defense of those Gentlemen, who acted
under the Name and Notion of Aldermen of this City, whom the foregoing
Corollaries would exclude, it will be worth, our while therefore impartially to
consider it; the whole Clause is as follows.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Officers and Ministers
of the said City, that rightfully held any Office or Place in the said City or
Liberties thereof, or in the Borough of Southwark, at the time when the said
Judgment was given, are hereby confirmed, and shall have and enjoy the same as
fully as they held them at the time of the said Judgment given; except such as
have voluntarily surrendered any such Office or Place, or have been removed for
any just cause; and that every Person who since the said Judgment given, has
been chosen, admitted, or placed into any Office or Employment within the said
City, upon the death, surrender, or removal, as aforesaid, of the former
Officers, shall be and is hereby confirmed in his said Office or Employment,
and shall have and enjoy the same in as full and ample manner, as if he had
been admitted or placed therein according to the Ancient Customs of the said
City. For the right and clear understanding of which Clause, there are these
following things to be considered.

First, It can never be too often suggested and reflected upon in this case,
that the Seizure of the Charter, and the Proceedings thereupon, being declared
to be A bitrary and Illegal; it must needs be very absurd and incongruous, to
suppose, that any more of the said Proceedings was intended to be confirmed by
this Act of Parliament; but only such as could not be annulled or vacated
without a public Mischief; or at least a private hardship and injustice to
particular Persons, who had a fair title in equity to better usage, and must
suffer extremely by the repeal of all those Acts, which passed from and under
the Commission; to confirm the said Proceedings any farther than this, being to
Abett Arbitrary, and Illegal things for no reason at all, unless it were
because they were Arbitrary and Illegal; and at that rate, it had been more
suitable to the same design to confirm the Judgment given, which would at the
same time have justified all the Proceedings thereupon, than to reverse it.

Secondly, This Paragraph by the very wording and penning of it, however
obscure and ambiguous it may be pretended to be, does manifestly contain matter
of privilege, benefit, and advantage, and this is the meaning of those words,
that all Officers and Ministers of the said City, that rightfully held any
Office or Place, etc. are hereby confirmed, and shall have and enjoy the same,
as fully as, etc. and afterward, that every Person, who since the said
Judgment given, has been chosen, etc. shall be, and is her^by confirmed in his
said Office or Employment; and shall have and enjoy the same, in as full and
ample manner as if etc. now the word confirming, plainly implies a Privilege or
Emolument, accruing from the Office or Thing confirmed; and looks as if it were
something worth contending for, worth putting in a claim of equity, in order to
be confirmed; and the having and enjoying as fully, and in as full and ample
manner as, etc. are terms denoting a considerable advantage, and such as
amounts to a subsistence for life at least, if it will not add Ornament and
Splendour to it, as many of the City Offices are known to do by the Salaries,
and Perquisites respectively belonging to them, now if any Man will tell me,
where the profit or advantage of being an Alderman lies, unless it be an
advantage to spend more Money, to keep greater Hospitality within doors, and to
appear with greater Port and Grandeur without; to be at more trouble, and after
all, to have nothing but his labor for his pains; then I will confess, that an
Alderman is an Office within the meaning of this Clause, and that it was worth
the while to be confirmed and to sue and solicit to be confirmed in a Station,
which so many do yearly and almost daily pay considerable sums of Money to
avoid, and which others have laid down, out of mere weariness and irksomness to
continue any longer in it; and out of a sense of the damage and inconvenience,
which accrued by so frequent diversions and avocations, to their own private
and domestic Affairs; but if all this be quite contrary to the very truth; if
there be no advantage in it, but a great deal of trouble, fatigue, and
unnecessary expense altogether, for the sake of others, who are the only
gainers by it, then this is not an Office within the meaning of this Clause, by
which there is nothing more certain, than that a benefit or advantage was
intended to be conveyed to all, that have any interest or concern in it.

See a Book Intit. the Present State of Land. and another called the Royal
Charter of Confirmation, etc.
True indeed it is, that the Aldermen, besides that they are Presidents, or
Foremen, or Chairmen of their respective Wardmotes; and that they Sit in that
Charact^r, upon the Bench at Guildhall; having the chief Administration of the
Affairs of the City, committed to their Trust and Care; they are likewise
Justices, or Keepers of the Peace, in their Respective Wards, and all that are
past the Chair, and the three that are next it, have the same jurisdiction all
over the City, and some of them all over Middlesex and Surrey; but this though
it be indeed a great Honor and Dignity; yet it is a greater Burden, without
any proper advantage to themselves, whatsoever it may be to the Clerks acting
under them; and therefore as such they do not come within the meaning of this
Provisoe; which was to restore and confirm such Offices and Rights, as were of
advantage and benefit to the Possessors.

And in consideration of the great trouble, charge and expense they are at,
Royal Charter of Confirmation p. 64.
by taking the Style and Character of Aldermen of the City upon them; it is
expressly ordained in one of the Royal Charters, which is confirmed by, and
contained in the great Royal Charter of K. Charles II. that as long as they
shall continue Aldermen there, and shall bear the charge of Aldermen proper,
and also those, which before had been Aldermen; and have also with their great
costs and expenses Born the Offices of Mayoralty, shall not be put in any
Assizes, Juries, or Attaints, Recognizances or Inquisitions out of the said
City; and that without that City, neither they nor any of them be made
Collectors, or Collector, Assessor, Taxer, Overseer, or Comptroler of the
Tenths, Fifteenths, Taxes, Tallages, Subsidies, or other charges or impositions
whatsoever, etc. So, that it seems not only the Aldermen, but the Mayor
himself, notwithstanding any contigent advantages, which may or may not happen,
have been always reckoned to be in Stations of great expense and trouble; and
though it be a privilege and advantage to the City, to be governed by such
Persons of their own choosing, and of their own Body; yet, that to the Persons
themselves, it was, and was looked upon, as an inconvenience and a Burden; and
for this reason, neither the Mayor nor Aldermen come within the meaning and
design of this Clause; and the same may be said likewise of the Sheriffs, who
are at a very great charge, in the discharge of that weighty and important
Trust, without any prospect, but what is very remote and very contingent, of
any thing like an equivalent advantage in the time of their Mayoralty, when it
shall come; which depends wholly upon the uncertain lives, as well of
themselves as others; of themselves, because they know not whether they shall
live so long; of others, because they know not whether they will dye then or
no; the great advantage of the Lord Mayor, consisting in the disposal of those
Offices by Sale, that fall by decease of the several Officers that filled them,
during the time of his Government and Administration.

Thirdly, Furthermore, the said Offices hereby confirmed to the respective
Officiaries of the same, are in this Provisoe called not only Offices, but also
Places and Employments; now if a Man should ask the Question, what Place such
an one was possessed of, or was invested in? It would be absurd in this case,
to say he was an Alderman, because he gets nothing by it; but if you say he is
Commissioner of the Custom-house, or he is Postmaster General; these indeed
are Places in the English Language; because there is profit and business mixed
together, a Place being generally understood by an elliptical or curtailed way
of speech among us, of a place of profit or advantage; it cannot be denied,
that this is the most usual, and the most natural acceptance of the Word; but
whatever becomes of Place, Employment is certainly a Man's livelihood and
business; that by which he gets his subsistence in the World, and if the
Question were asked, what Employment such a one is of? it would be ridiculous
to answer, he is an Alderman, a Mayor, or Sheriff; because by Employment, is
meant that which is a Man's own proper business, for the acquitting an Estate,
or for the support of himself and Family; whether it be any Craft or Mystery in
the way of Trade, or any Place or Office, with salary or perquisites or both,
whether the income or gain be more or less, so it be that in which a Man's
particular business consists; and by which he endeavors, either to get an
Estate by honest and lawful means, or at least to provide a subsistence for
himself, or those for whom he is obliged by Nature, Custom, or Law, to make the
best provision he can; but if to be an Alderman, a Mayor, and Sheriff, be not
in the English Language an Employment, then in an English Act of Parliament;
nothing is more certain, than that they cannot come within the meaning of this
Provisoe.

Fourthly, But now if by Office, Place, and Employment in this Paragraph, we
understand all those Offices in the City gift and service, from the Recorder to
the meanest Officer, belonging to the Lord Mayor, or Sheriffs, or to either of
the Compters; receiving wages and perquisites for the same, and having a Legal
tenure or possession therein, then the sense of this Paragraph is very easy,
and that is manifestly the only true s^nse when all is done; that whereas, by
another Provisoe in this Act, care is taken, that all the Legal Proceedings,
that passed from, and after the Judgment given against the City Charter, that
is to say, all those Proceedings, either in Law or Equity, that wanted nothing
to make them Legal, but only a Legal Authority and Jurisdiction, should be
ratified and confirmed, as in Reason and Justice they ought to be, to prevent
the disorder and confusion, that would otherwise ensue upon their nulling and
avoidance, so as to private Persons, who were legally possessed of Offices and
Employments in the City Gift; while the Charter and its Authority were yet
standing, and in full force and effect; which Offices and Employments, were for
the most part their livelihood and subsistence, which they had purchased with
their Penny; and which they had still continued, to the great Service and
Benefit of the City and its Government, to exercise and administer, during all
the time that the Charter stood null and void, by virtue of the Judgment upon
the Quo Warranto; it would have been the greatest hardship in the World, to
reward all these Services with an ejectment, out of their respective Places; or
to put them upon the trouble or hazard of a new Choice, when they had already
purchased and paid for their Employments; and when the Charter being restored,
they were so naturally and rightfully restored together with it, by having
formerly belonged to it, and acted by and under its influence and virtue.

Again, as to those who were admitted, or chosen into any such Offices after
the date of the Judgment, or between that and the time of the reversing of it,
coming in upon decease, or upon voluntary surrender, or upon ejectment for a
just and lawful cause; they also are by this Provisoe confirmed, as in equity
they ought to be, their employments being for the most part their livelihood
and subsistence; they having generally purchased them with their Money; being
duly qualified for them, and having served the City, many of them for several
Years, with diligence and faithfulness in them. For which reasons, taken all of
them together, they had a great deal of equity on their side, and to eject
them, or put them upon a new risque, a new purchase, or a new choice in these
circumstances, would have been the greatest and the plainest hardship in the
World: But now nothing of all this concerns those Aldermen, that have been
chosen or admitted since the avoidance of the Charter, they have nothing of
equity to plead for themselves; neither can they complain of any hardship in
being ejected, or put upon a new choice in the vacant Wards, neither have they
any thing to plead for themselves, but only a Possession which in its root,
according to this very Act, is Arbitrary and Illegal; and the Parliament not
designing to confirm Arbitrary things for no reason, but only where the things,
though defective in their Authority, were materially just, and where there
would be cruelty and hardship in making them null and void; it is manifest that
they, as they do not come within the letter of this Paragraph, where the word
Alderman, is not so much as mentioned, so neither have they any share, or
Portion in the true meaning and intention of it; which was to show mercy in
some cases, where equitable reasons did so plainly, and so loudly require it;
not to confirm Illegal and Arbitrary things in all, which would have been to
confirm and justify the Judgment given, instead of disallowing or condemning
it; which was the first and greatest intention of this Act, and bating the
little underwood of equitable Provisoes, is the main timber of which it is
built and consists; and if a possession should be pronounced firm for no other
reason, but because it was a possession, without regard, whether it were legal
or no, this would overthrow and confound all property in the World, and make it
impossible for any Man to be ejected out of an Arbitrary Possession, otherwise
than by Force of Arms, which is not the legal way, and which would introduce a
State of War and Hostility in all times and places.

Fifthly, Further yet, all those above mentioned, are City Officers properly so
called, that is, they all Act by an Authority derived from the whole
Corporation considered as one entire Body; they are the constant Servants of
the City, belonging to the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs for the time being; and it
is of such only, that this Paragraph speaks, they are the very words; And be it
enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Officers and Ministers of the said
City, that rightfully held, etc. now an Alderman, though in a very large sense
of that word, he may be called an Officer; yet is he not a City, but a Ward
Officer, representing in the Court of Aldermen, and acting in the behalf of
that particular Ward, for which he serves: An Alderman is not properly an
Alderman of the City, or of the whole Corporation; but he is Alderman of the
Ward, Foreman, or Chairman of the Wardmote, in a particular District or Region
of the City, and from thence is sent as a Deputy or Delegate into that Superior
Court at Guildhall; and the Case is the same with the Common Council-Men; they
serve also such a number of them in the Common Council, for every particular
Ward, and are not City but Ward Officers; who all taken together in both these
Courts, make up a Court representative of the whole Corporation, and do
transact in their stead, and on their behalf, but taken singly, they are no
more City Officers, then a Parliament Man, is Knight or Burgess for the whole
Nation; but a Clerk of the Parliament, and a Speaker of the Parliament, are
Servants to the whole Nation; because they are Servants to the whole
Representative Body; and the difference between these things is still further
clear, by this, that there are distinct Clauses in this Act of Parliament,
relating to the Restitution of the City Charter, and the respective Charters
and Franchises of particular Companies; and there are also distinct Provisoes
for confirming the legal and necessary Proceedings in the one, and in the
other; which is as much as to say, what is clear enough in it self, that the
whole and part are not the same, and that one part is distinct from another,
that the Charter or the Officers of the City, are distinct from those of the
Companies of which it consists; that the City Charter or Officer, is not the
Charter or Officer of a certain Company, nor Vice versa, and the Charter or
Officer of one Company, is not the Charter or Officer of another; and by the
same way of reasoning a City Officer, and a Ward Officer are distinct things; a
Ward Officer is not a City Officer, nor a City Officer as such, the Officer of
a Ward, or to reduce the whole matter into plainer terms, that an Alderman is
not an Officer of the City, properly so called; and by consequence does not
come within the meaning of this Clause.

Sixthly, I have made this comparison, between an Alderman and a Parliament Man
the rather, not only because it is very natural, because of the Representation
of a certain place or district, and the Inhabitants thereunto belonging in both
cases; but because H. 3. in the 49th. of whose Reign some of our greatest
Antiquaries will needs have it, that the House of Commons at least had its
first beginning; was also the First Founder of this Institution, of Governing
each Ward of the City of London, by its respective Alderman thereunto
belonging; they are the words of Stow, Survey of Land. p. 696. 1. King John --
changed their Bailiffs into a Mayor and two Sheriffs, to these H. 3. added
Aldermen, at the first eligible yearly, but afterward by King Edward III. made
perpetual Magistrates and Justices of the Peace within their Wards; though Mr.
Cambden seems to be of another mind, and tells us, that the Wittena Gemot or
Council of Wise Men among the Saxons, was much the same with what we call a
Parliament nowadays; and in this he is followed by the Lord Chief Baron
Atkins, in his Learned Discourse of the Antiquity of the House of Commons; but
however that be, we do not only read that Hen. III. was the Person that set
Aldermen over every Ward; but in his time, we find mention also of the
Folkmtoe, which was the same with our Present Common Council, who were used
then upon Emergent occasions to meet at Paul's- Cross, See Holinsh. in the
Reign of Hen. III. p. 262, 263, 264.
as they do now at Guildhall, where sometimes the King himself; sometimes his
Chief Counselors and Ministers of State; and sometimes even Foreign
Ambassadors, and Foreign Kings too, with the Prime of our Nobility and Clergy
were present, so great and venerable an Assembly was the Common Council of
London reckoned in those days.

Seventhly, If Common Council Men, as Representatives of their respective
Wards, are not Officers within the meaning of this Provisoe, then neither are
Aldermen, because they both represent, and both of them represent the very same
Persons and Places, though the one do it in a Superior Orb and Station to the
other; and therefore this representation, if it do not make an Officer within
the meaning of this Clause in one case, neither will it in the other; and
especially, when both of these Officers, so called in the largest sense and
notion of this word, being of the same nature, which consists wholly in
delegation of trust and representation of Persons; yet neither of them are
directly named, and therefore, both of them must either be included in it or
excluded by it. Now that the Common Council are not included in this Paragraph,
for the Confirmation of Officers is manifest, because a new Election of them is
appointed in another Clause p: 111. and if it be said, that this is only an
exception out of that general Clause, for the Confirmation of Officers, that
cannot be neither, because at that rate the exception would be much larger than
the Rule it self; the Common Council amounting with the Aldermen, included, who
are a part of it to about 260. which is near an hundred more than the Officers
of the City properly so called, who receive Salaries and Perquisites by their
Places; now this would be so great an absurdity in an Act of Parliament, that
it is absolutely necessary first; that the former Paragraph considered by it
self, be not understood of all Officers in the general, in the utmost Sense and
Latitude of that word; as it imports any Post or Station whatsoever; wherein
there is a Trust and a Power for the execution of it. 2ly. It is equally
necessary for the same reason, that this latter Paragraph compared with the
former, be understood of Officers of a different nature; and thirdly, if the
latter had been only an exception out of the former as a Rule; to prevent the
plain clashing, and contradiction of the two Clauses with each other; it should
have been added, as is usual in the Style and Method of Acts of Parliament in
such Cases; any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding,
or words to that effect,

Eighthly, Again the same Person is both Alderman, and Common Council Man at
the same time; for every Alderman is a Member of the Common Council; now it
would be very strange, that the very same Person considered, as a
Common-Council-Man; which it is possible he would not have been, had he not
been Alderman likewise; should be excluded out of this confirming Clause; and
yet as an Alderman be included, when he is not so much as named in either
respect; and when the Representation is the same, and of the same Persons in
both cases, only in the Common-Council-Man, as barely such, it is but
Temporary, in the Alderman it is perpetual, in the Alderman the Representation
is more constant; inasmuch as Courts of Aldermen, are more frequent and more
certain than Common-Councils; and inasmuch as he always Acts in his Ward in
that capacity, though neither Court of Aldermen, nor Common Council be Sitting;
Lastly, an Alderman is a Name of greater Honor, and of a Superior Station; but
these are differences only in degree, in dignity, and in duration, not in
Nature; but as to the Representation it self, the delegation and the trust
reposed, tho in a lower Sphere, they are plainly and manifestly the same in
both.

Ninthly, If it be demanded, why was not a new Election of Aldermen appointed,
as well as of Common-Council-Men; the Answer is easy, the Common Council,
barely as such, are annual Officers, the Aldermen are perpetual; therefore the
Common Council, in being, at the making of this Act, was altogether illegal,
being wholly chosen since the avoidance of the Charter, during which time, all
the Proceedings are declared, by this Act, to have been arbitrary and illegal,
though some of them, for particular Reasons, contained in the Provisoes were
confirmed; but an Alderman being perpetual, all those Aldermen that were so
before the Judgment given, and have continued to act as such ever since, or are
still surviving, are confirmed, the Charter and Franchises being yet upon the
same bottom, and restored as exactly as they could be to the same state, upon
which they stood, and in which they were before the aforesaid Judgment; and for
this reason, those City-Officers that were so in the sense of the controverted
Paragraph, before the Date of the Judgment, would have been confirmed of course
by the general meaning and intention of the Act, without any especial Provisoe;
but that in such Cases abundans cautela non necet; the Act could not be too
cautious or too express in an Affair upon which the Subsistence and Livelihood
of so many Persons and Families depended, but now as for those Aldermen who
were made so, or took upon themselves to appear and act as such, since the
bringing of the Judgment, their Choice being vicious and defective in its Root,
and they not being confirmed by any special Proviso, or so much as named in it,
they are discarded of course, and the vacant Wards are of course to enter upon
a new Choice, when we have seen what Vacancies there still remain, after the
old and rightful Aldermen, that ceased to act for the Reasons that have been
given, have reassumed their Gowns.

Tenthly, If it be still further demanded, why is not the time assigned for
filling up the Vacancies in the Court of Aldermen, if any such there be, or
shall happen to be after the restitution of the old Possessors to their
respective Places upon the Bench; as it is in the Case of Common-Council-Men,
whose Election was appointed to be upon the Tenth of June, in the Year 1690.
the Answer to this likewise is very plain and easy, and it is this:

Upon the restitution of the Charter, the Parliament designing a new
Common Council, a new Lord Mayor, and new Sheriffs, there was a necessity that
the time should be assigned, otherwise the present must have gone on in their
respective Trusts and Charges, (or else there must have been no such Officers
at all, neither Lord Mayor, nor Sheriffs, nor Common Council) till the usual
time, when such Officers were wont, according to the ancient Customs of the
City to be chosen; for those ancient Customs being now restored by this very
Act, they could not be altered in any particular instance without a special
Proviso; but in the Aldermen it was quite otherwise; when ever a Vacancy
happens, let it be at what time of the Year it will, the destitute Ward may
proceed to a new Presentation, and the Court of Aldermens acceptance of a
Person presented by them, compleats the Ceremony of his Investiture into that
Office and Station; so that there was no need to appoint a time for the
Election of Aldermen, and therefore it was not done.

Eleventhly, But now because our Adversaries will needs be asking of Questions,
let us return the Curiosity on our parts, and ask them a few which they may
consider of at their leisure; in the mean time, because our hands are in at
answering as well as asking, we will give them such Answers as we think most
proper, and let them if they do not like them, afford us some that are better.

Quest. 1. What is the reason why the City are enjoined by this Act of
Parliament, to proceed to a new Election of Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, Chamberlain,
and Common Council, at the times therein particularly specified and appointed.

Answ. It was certainly, besides the illegality of the former Choice, that they
did not like the Persons chosen, otherwise it would have been very irrational,
not to confirm them till the usual times of Election of such Officers, but on
the contrary to put so great a Body into a Ferment and Contrast within it self,
just at the time when the King was going upon his Irish Expedition, but that
they designed to put he Government of the City, in his absence into better and
safer hands, and that indeed was a very good reason.

Quest. 2. What was the reason, that if there had been no Election of the
Officers aforesaid at the times appointed, it was provided that the old ones
should continue till the usual times of Elect^on and no longer, that were in
possession of their respective Charges at the time of the Judgment given.

Answ. The reason was very plain there was a Faction in the City that had been
strangely b^ffled, notwithstanding their boasted Numbers, in the Election of
Members to serve in this present Parliament, which the Persons that w^^e to
manage the Poli at the new Elections for the Officers appointed to be chosen,
being deeply sensible of, and upon the point of despair, that ever they should
succeed in any new competition, it was suspected by the Parliament, that the
Persons in possession would have insisted upon that, and would have declined a
Choice; but this, if it were not a probable, yet it was at least a possible
thing, and a possibility of such consequence, as deserved a Clause purposely to
be inserted, to obviate and prevent the possible Inconveniences that might
arise from it; and this was a further indication how deeply in Love that great
Assembly was with the present Managers and management of the City Affairs.

Quest. 3. A third Question to be started is, since in case of new Elections,
the old Officers before the Judgment given, were to continue out the remainder
of their time, (that time which they served afterward not b ing reckoned in
Law as any part of their Year) what was the reason they were to continue no
longer, notwithstanding in case of a new Election they were to go on through
the whole next Year?

Answ. The Answer to this is very easy also; they did not think fit to
continue them another Year, who had already to all intents and purposes of
Action, Trouble, and Charge, served one whole Year and about four Months
already. Let the World judge now, if this be a good Answer; whether they
intended that the present pretended Mayor should continue for three Years
successively together? Or whether there were not a plain innuendo in such a
Provisoe as this, by which he is tacitly barred from holding any longer?

And now from all this, I think there is nothing more evident than these two
things.

First, The Aldermen, so called since the avoidance of the Charter, are made no
Aldermen by the restitution of it.

Secondly, That Sir T. P. upon these Principles is no Alderm^n, and that by
consequence he is no Lord Mayor; which two things are so plain by the express
Letter, and by the Latent; but yet notwithstanding clear and undeniable
intention of the Act of Parliament, that nothing can be more.

But tho nothing can be more plain than this is, and tho one Demonstration be
as good as a thousand, yet to sum up all, and that the Gentlemen concerned may
not complain they have not their Measure, tho they have their Weight, I will
add one Argument farther, and it shall be taken from a Paragraph, page 106. of
this Act, which I will here transcribe.

And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Charters, Letters,
Patents, and Grants for incorporating the Citizens and Commonalty of the said
City, or any of them, and all Charters, Grants, Letters, Patents, and
Commissions; touching or concerning any of their Liberties or Franchises; or
the Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Immunities, etc. Of the Mayor, and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London; Made or Granted to any Person
or Persons whatsoever; by the Late King Charles II. since the late Judgment
given; or by the Late King James II. be, and are hereby declared and adjudged
null and void, to all intents and purposes whatsoever. The plain and clear
Inference to be made from which is this, if those Gentlemen, that have assumed
to themselves, the Style and Dignity of Aldermen, since the avoidance of the
City Charter, do hold by virtue of the aforesaid Letters, Patents, etc. For
Incorporating the Citizens and Commonalty of the said City, then their
Authority is null and void; because the Letters, Patents, under which they
hold, are declared and adjudged to be so, unless they can show some particular
Provisoe, that may secure them from this general Clause; which I think, I have
sufficiently proved they cannot do; or if there be any Authority they can
pretend for themselves; let them show it, and keep their Gowns on as long as
they please; but if they do not show it, off they go, and shall be on again,
when the Law and a new Choice pleases, not before.

But some may object and say, (...); what shall we do for a Lord Mayor, if Sir
T. P. be none, I answer Sir J. R. is certainly the Man; for he was presented
together with the other to the Court of Aldermen; and though they pitched by
Majority upon the former; yet since one of these two must of necessity be
returned back again to the Common Hall, let them choose who they will; the
incapacity of the one implies, and infers the choice of the other, the Common
Hall presented Sir T. P. as an Alderman in competition; and the Aldermen by
such another mistake accepted him, as such, if they had protested against the
Presentation of an unqualified Person; which a Court of Aldermen so Modelled
were not like to do, the Commons must have presented another in order to a
Choice; but not having made any such exception, and having but one whom they
could legally choose, the error on both hands, as well of the Commons, as the
Court of Aldermen, devolves and fixes the unquestionable Right upon the only
Legal pretender of the two.

Neither does it signify any thing in this case, that many of the Court of
Aldermen themselves, had in Law no right to fit there; for if they had been
never so legally qualified, yet an unqualify'd Person being presented to them,
they could not choose him, and the choice would of course have devolved upon the
other.

POSTSCRIPT, Concerning the HOSPITALS.
THE confirming Clause for Officers running thus, all Officers and Ministers of
the said City, etc. or in the Borough of Southwark etc. it has been argued
from thence, that the ejected Officers of the Hospital of St. Thomas, are by
this Clause restored; but these Men do not consider, that it was the design of
this Act, to restore the Ancient Privileges and Immunities of the City, not to
abridge any thing of that undoubted Right of Visitation, which the King had by
Act of Parliament; and by the grant of King Edward VI. while the Charter stood,
neither are they Charter Officers, of whom this whole Paragraph is meant, but
Officers and Servants at pleasure; that may be turned out, as well without a
reason, as with one by the Power that placed them there; only if the King be
the Supreme Visitor, as the Sun is not more bright, than it is clear that he
is; then the Officers of his placing, cannot be ejected by a Subordinate Power,
much less can they replace those, whom he has ejected; which would render his
Power and Right of Visitation contemptible and vain; besides that, tho the King
be the Judge of the Causes of Visitation; otherwise he shall not visit, but
when others please, yet the Reasons are notorious for which he did it; one had
justified the Murder of his Father; and all of them as well Officers, as
Governors generally speaking, were Dissenters from the Church of England;
Enemies to Monarchy; Persons disaffected both to Church and State; and I hope,
these were sufficient grounds for a King, not to suffer such to be fed and
maintained in his own House. A Papist, whether Governor or Officer; I suppose,
it will be granted may be lawfully ejected out of that Trust and Station; and
why should then a Dissenter, or a Favourer and Abetter of that Interest be
permitted, when they are both Enemies to the established Church; and the
Dissenter is likewise an Enemy to the Monarchy of England, to which the Papist,
to give the Devil his due, is a Friend; as well as to the Episcopal Form of
Government in the Church; though he loads and clogs both with such dangerous
Innovations, that we cannot accept of those blessings upon his terms.

Again, p. 109. of the said Act it is provided, that all Leases and Grants of
any Lands, etc. made by or upon pretense of any Grant or Commission by their
Late Majesty's; being made for just and valuable considerations; and whereupon
the old accustomed yearly rent, or more has been reserved, payable into the
Chamber or Bridg-house, or any of the Hospitals of the said City, etc. shall be
as good and valid, as if the same had been made by the Mayor and Commonalty,
and Citizens of the said City, under their Common Seal, etc. by which it may
seem to be employed, that the Hospitals are so closely and inseparably united to
the City and its Charter, that the said Charter being illegally seized into the
Kings Hands, (as this Act declares) all Leases made, and other Acts done by the
Commission under the Broad-Seal were Illegal, and consequently the tenant, had
no sufficient security by any such Grant or Lease. To which, I answer, that
this was really, and is still the Opinion of a great many, that this was the
case; and therefore, since Indemnities can never be too full or ample, the
scruples of such Men, and the inconveniences in the Administration of the
Hospital, that might arise from them, were provided for ex abundanti by this
Clause; where there was no absolute necessity: Secondly, though as to the
Commission, there was no question, but that the Acts done by it, (so far as
concerned the Hospitals, in which the King had Right of visiting under the
Broad-Seal) being otherwise materially Legal in themselves, were likewise so as
to the Authority from whence they sprung; yet the case was altered upon the
Dissolution of the Commission, by the ejected Aldermen and Governors, being
restored without the restitution of the City Charter, so that there was now no
Legal Authority at all; and therefore, this Provisoe was necessary, with
reference to those Leases or Grants, which had been made during that time.

FINIS.

