CONFIDENCE Corrected, ERROR Detected, AND TRUTH Defended; OR Some farther
REFLECTIONS Upon the TWO Athenian Mercuries, Lately Published about
INFANT BAPTISM.

By Philalethes Pasiphilus.

Mar. 16.16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved.

Act. 8.12. When they believed [Philip] preaching the things concerning the
Kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both Men and
Women.

Act. 18.8. -- Many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized.

Col. 2.8. Beware lest any Man spoil you through vain Deceit, after the
Traditions of Men, and not after Christ.

Mar. 7.7, 8, In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines, the
Commandments of Men. For laying aside the Commandment of God, ye hold the
Tradition of Men, as the washing of Pots, and Cups: (and as we are now told,
Men, Women and Children too) and many such like things ye do.

London, Printed in the Year, 1692.

Confidence Corrected, etc.
IT is a sad Thing, and much to be lamented, that there should continue to this
Day, not only so many Differences in point of Judgment amongst Christians, but
also so much Pride, and Prejudice of Spirit one against another, by Reason of
the same; insomuch, that there can hardly be the least Difference imaginable
amongst Professors of Christianity in Matters of Judgment, but they are too
readily turned into so many Marks of Reproach, and Causes of Malignity, one
against another. This has been very sadly experimented in this Nation, for many
Years past; and, to this Day, finds but too much Entertainment in the Minds of
many, who still reckon themselves Men in Reputation, for Wisdom and Honor.
But, though it may justly be expected, do what we can, that there will still
remain Differences in Judgment, and Controversies among Christians in some
things; yet of all the Controversies that ever appeared upon the Stage of
Christianity, I cannot but most of all admire at this Controversy about
Infant Baptism: And that chiefly upon two Accounts.

First, That ever it should become such a Controversy as it has done.

Secondly, At the strange Effects that it has produced.

First, I cannot but admire, how this ever became such a Controversy amongst
Christians, as it has done; especially amongst such Christians, as do daily
profess and declare, that the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith and
Worship, the only Guide to all Duty and Obedience, relating to everlasting
Happiness; whenas there is not the least Word, nor shadow of a Word (and that
by the Confession of Parties) for Infant Baptism, in all the whole Book of God.
I cannot imagine what the matter should be, that Men should make a Trade, of
straining their Wits, to find out so many Tricks and Inventions, to maintain
and defend a Practice, and count it part of God's Service and Worship, that
they know, and are convic'd in their Consciences (as appears by their frequent
Acknowledgments) is no where to be found in God's Word. There is scarcely any
other Controversy, that ever happened in the World among Christians, but makes
a greater pretense to Scripture than this does, or can: It is not so much to be
wondered at, that there has happened such a Difference among Christians about
the Tenets of Arminius and Calvin, about Absolute and Respective Election and
Reprobation, and all the Appurtenances belonging thereunto; because there
pretty plainly seems to be some considerable Glances in Scripture in favor of
both Opinions: yea, the very Socinians themselves, (which deny the Deity of
Christ) challenge a far fairer Pretense to Scripture, than any Pedo-baptist can
do; because the Text plainly says, My Father is greater than I: Which as
little as it is, if the Pedo-baptists could but produce such a Glance as that,
in Scripture, for Infant Baptism, it would be more than ever yet was done upon
that account. Yea, the very Papists are less to be wondered at, in their Plea
for Transubstantiation; because the Text says plainly, This is my Body, etc.
Which is a Plea, beyond what any Pedo-baptist can pretend unto, in the behalf
of that which they make such a stir about. Yet how is the Weakness and Folly of
Socinians and Papists, and others, condemned and censured by many
Pedo-baptists, whilst they magnify and bless themselves in that for which they
cannot produce even so much seeming Authority from Scripture.

I question not, but I may presume, that if a hundred of the most Learned and
Judicious Men in the World, should read the Bible over forty times from one end
to the other, they would never so much as think of Infant Baptism, by virtue of
that Reading, and their best Consideration into the Bargain, if the Voice of
Tradition and Custom had not possessed them with it beforehand: and if so, how
justly may it be wondered at, that such a thing should ever become a
Controversy amongst Pretenders to Scripture? -- The Baptists say,
Infant Baptism is no where to be found in Scripture: The Pedo-baptists
frequently confess the same thing. -- The Baptists say, that whatsoever is not
to be found in Scripture, is no Part of Divine Worship: -- All Protestant
Pedo-baptists, do freely acknowledge this also. Now who can tell where the
Controversy lies? Is it not strange that Men should pretend to differ, yea, and
to differ greatly too, in that very thing wherein they seem to be so plainly
and fully agreed? Who can give any good Reason now, why this Conclusion should
not necessarily be agreed to by mutual Consent, namely, that Infant Baptism is
no part of Divine Worship? Which if it were, the whole Controversy would be
gone at once. -- The Baptists do from time to time assert, that there is
neither Precept for, nor Precedent of, nor Promise unto, Infant Baptism, in all
the Word of God: And their most Learned and Judicious Adversaries, do
frequently grant and confess the same thing; and yet strive to maintain and
uphold the Controversy in the World. This is one Part of my Wonder, with
respect to this Matter.

Secondly, I cannot but wonder at the strange Effects it has produced, and they
are many; but I shall only touch upon one, namely, That though the Principle
and Practice of the Baptists (so called) is in the point of Baptism, so plainly
and plentifully laid down in Scripture, and holds such an undeniable
Correspondency and Agreement with Primitive Purity, yet that they should be
loaded with so much Contempt and Reproach, as they have been, and yet are, by
many in this Nation, for no other thing than this honest and harmless, yea,
Honorable and Heaven-born Practice. Who is it that is any whit wise and
judicious, that knows not that Christ and the Primitive Christians were
baptized, as they now plead and practice? Yet how have they for many years, in
this Christian Kingdom, been not only slighted, but rendered odious, and counted
as the very Dreggs and Offscouring of the World, even for this very thing?
Yea, the worst and vilest of Men, have been counted worthy of more Honor and
Respect amongst People than they; insomuch, that Highway-men and Anabaptists,
have been almost Titles of equal Dignity. Is it not strange that any that
pretend to be the Disciples of Christ, and the Followers of Jesus, should dare
so boldly to throw downright and naked Reproach upon the Practice of their
Savior; and cast all manner of Dirt and Scorn in the Faces of any, merely for
endeavoring to follow him in that which he has not only commanded, but set
them an Example in his own Person? -- Though blessed be God, through the
gracious Influence, and benign Aspects of our Chief Rulers, this Spirit at this
day is somewhat corrected and abated; yet to this moment, there are but too
many that still strive to foment and cherish it. This is the second Part of my
Wonder, with respect to this Controversy, above any other, that ever happened
among sober Christians. -- Now how far our Athenian Gentlemen have contributed
toward the Removal of this Wonder, I shall take upon me the Boldness a little
to remark: -- Wherefore now I shall direct my Discourse to them.

Gentlemen, I will not say, that you have so much bespattered us with Dirt and
Reproach, as some others have done before you; yet I cannot but observe that
you, at least, seem to have a good mind, (if I may use such a Soloecism) to be
nibbling at it; and that appears chiefly, if we consider these three things.

1st, How liberally and tartly you bestow that silly and idle Nickname of
Reproach [Anabaptist] upon us, so often repeated in your Papers? Though you
know it is a Name we disown and deny, especially too to do it at the same time
that the Question is militating betwixt us: Which indeed, besides the Malignity
that seems to be in it, is an implicit begging of the whole Question. For what
do you else, when you aforehand briskly take it for granted, that we are a
Parcel of Anabaptists, making no Question of that, when you know you are a
disputing that very Question, which ought to determine whether we are so or no?
Pray, Sirs, why may not we as justly make a trade of calling you, and all of
your Party or Persuasion, Anti-baptists or Cata-baptists? for you cannot but
know, that according to our Principles, you do as much deny Baptism, and abuse
it too, as we can possibly, according to your Principles, be twice Baptized;
but we reckon it below any that pretend to Wisdom and Ingenuity, to make such
beggarly things any part of their Refuge: Wherefore, Sirs, I think I may safely
conclude, you have not dealt so heartily with us in this Particular, as you
ought to have done.

2dly. In that you very unworthily, if not proudly, insinuate, that there are
none, nor ever were any among the Baptists, that are so knowing in the Customs
of Nations, Linguisms, Radixes, or Original Significations in Languages, as you
are; and that may perhaps be the great Cause of Disputes upon this Subject:
When, Sirs, it is very well known, that there have been, and are to this Day,
many amongst them, of very great Parts and Learning, and excellently well
skilled in all those Matters you talk of. Wherefore, Gentlemen, if you are
Ignorant herein, you might have done better to have kept your Ignorance to your
selves: But if you are not Ignorant hereof, there is nothing can excuse you from
an invidious and spiteful Insinuation. And you farther politickly expose them
to popular Prejudice, by giving them a Paraliptical Bite, and by an Apophasis
cunningly charge them with a Spirit of Contention; which may also be a great
cause of Disputes upon this Subject: As if your Opinion and Practice about
Infant Baptism, was so manifestly clear and evident, that it is scarce possible
for any Body to make the least Doubt or Scruple about it, if they be not
aforehand troubled with a Spirit of Contention; or else ignorant of the
Customs of Nations, etc. But pray, Sirs, Why a Spirit of Contention in the
Baptists, any more than in your selves? What Is the Matter, Gentlemen, that they
must needs presently be supposed to be Criminals in this Case for disputing,
any more than their Antagonists that dispute against them? Really, Sirs, if
there must needs be a Spirit of Contention on one side, it may with a little
Consideration easily be perceived, that it lies rather at your Door than at
theirs; if you do but seriously reflect upon the Darkness of your own Practice,
and the Clearness of theirs with whom you contend, Adversaries themselves being
Judges.

3dly. In that you so impertinently and boldly mention several Persons, whom
you call Ringleaders amongst Anabaptists, who are supposed to be guilty of
several Crimes, and remarkable Enormities; for no other end that can rationally
be thought of, but to expose your Antagonists to farther Contempt and
Prejudice. Here, Gentlemen, I cannot but admire at your Wisdom, (if I had said
Folly, I think it had been no great matter) that you should be so
inconsiderately hardy, to venture upon such an Argument as this.

When, in the First Place, we have just cause to question the Truth of those
Things, as to Matter of Fact, being, as may rationally be supposed, first
promoted by Lying and Malicious Papists, who speak as bad things of Calvin and
Luther, and the Waldenses before them: And may justly be thought, to be taken
from them, by some inveterate Protestants, which bore them as little good Will
as the Papists did, or Mr. Ross himself. Alas! What strange Work have we seen,
even in our own Nation, upon this account? How many good Men have been
miserably misrepresented before our Faces, when there have been Thousands
alive, at the same time, that were able to have detected the Scandal, but durst
not attempt it? How many Men in England, have even been Diaboliz'd in the Face
of the Sun, that in some time after have been little less than Canonized for
Saints? and had it not been for remarkable Revolutions, had never recovered out
of the shape of Devils. And amongst many other Things, Mr. Ross's Brother
Edwards his Gangrena, is too fresh in Memory to be forgotten.

Secondly; If all were unquestionably true, you cannot choose but know there is
no Argument in it, it is not only the weakest, but the worst of Arguments; it
greatly reflects upon the Wisdom of any that shall venture to use it. For tho
Hind, Hannam, Cutting Dick, and the Golden Farmer were all Villains; yet who
doubts but there are many Pedo-Baptists in England, and other Countries too,
that are honest Men? and not only so, but their Principles too may be good,
notwithstanding any thing in this Argument against them.

Thirdly; If there were any thing of Argument in it, who need matter it? Pray,
Gentlemen, consider, who do you think has most cause to fear it, if there were
any thing in it, they, or your selves? If they were disposed to draw the Saw
against you here, you may easily foresee what dreadful and bitter work might be
made with you, by virtue of this Argument. Really, Sirs, it argues you are
heavily put to^^, and in a desperate Case, that you dare venture upon such
dangerous and self-killing Methods: But you had better suffer a Famine of
Arguments for seven Years together, than to meddle with such Noli me Tangere's
as these; for you cannot but know, that we might in this Case, give you
Argumentum ad Hominem, at least forty for one: And if so, then how wisely you
have done in this Matter, you may upon farther Thoughts become your own Judges.
But I care not to insist any farther upon this, unless we be farther foolishly
provoked.

I now come to consider how you answer the Questions about Infant Baptism,
chiefly in your First Mercury, and the Second occasionally, as there may be any
fresh matter worth regarding.

The first Question you undertake to answer, is, Whether (as is commonly
taught) Baptism is the proper and natural Antitype of Circumcision? etc. Your
positive Answer is, that in many Cases it will bear the Affirmative; which you
endeavor to prove, from some following Considerations.

And your first is, from the Custom amongst the Jews, in proselyting the
Gentiles into their Religion: So far indeed (say you) Circumcision was not
properly a Type, but rather the Continuance of a Custom, that by St. John, our
Savior and his Apostles, had added unto it, all that was necessary to make it
a full, proper, and pertinent Type of Baptism. Now, Sirs, what a strange,
loose, unintelligible and unsatisfactory Answer is this?

For first; Your positive Answer is not so positive as it ought to have been;
for you do not positively answer the Question at all, either that Circumcision
was, or it was not a Tyye of Baptism: Now this I humbly conceive you ought to
have done, namely, positively to have asserted, that Circumcision was a Type of
Baptism, if you had looked upon it so to have been, notwithstanding they might
have differed in some Circumstances, as indeed all Types and Antitypes do in
something or other, otherwise they could not have been two, but one and the
same thing: for things that differ not at all, cannot be different things. And
diverse things may agree with other things, under some general Considerations,
of which they never were Types, as well as those that were: Isaac and Ishmael,
were both Sons of Abraham; therein there was an Agreement. 2dly, They were both
Subjects of Circumcision, there they agreed again, etc. yet Ishmael was no Type
of Isaac. A Horse is a Substance, so is a Man, there is an Agreement; a Horse is
a Living Creature, so is a Man, there is an Agreement again; a Horse eats and
drinks, so does a Man, there is another Agreement; yet neither of them was ever
a Type of the other: So that your positive Answer, does as strongly imply that
Circumcision was not a Type of Baptism, as it does that it was.

But secondly, Is it not strange that such Pretenders to Ingenuity as you are,
should bring a Consideration to prove Circumcision a Type of Baptism, which as
soon as ever you have laid down, you plainly confess and acknowledge it proves
no such thing, but rather the contrary? For do not you plainly tell us, that
you shall endeavor to prove the Affirmative, by these following Considerations?

And the first is, From the Custom amongst the Jews; and yet in the very next
Words, you tell us as plainly, it proves no such Matter: for so far it was no
Type, but the Continuance of a Custom. Pray, Gentlemen, why then did you urge
this Consideration for such a Purpose, when you knew beforehand, it was not
capable of performing that Service? Methinks, you should never be in love with
such a Cause, as does so strangly captivate your Intellects; as not only
appears in this, but in other things that follow: Circumcision (say you) was
rather the Continuance of a Custom, etc. Now, Sirs, here I must of necessity be
puzzled to find out your Meaning? Your Words are so unintelligibly laid down,
that it will be hard for me to know what you intend by them; and if I should,
without any more ado, take that to be your Meaning, that the Order and Grammar
of your Words here do imply, I know not but I might wrong you in your Meaning,
which I would not willingly do if I could help it: I must be forced therefore,
to guess at 2 or 3 things, and hit upon it if I can: Some one or other of
which, I think must be your Meaning, or else I am like to continue ignorant of
it till further Revelation. Certainly these words Continuance of a Custom here,
must refer either to Circumcision it self, or else to that other Custom among
the Jews you speak of; if to Circumcision, as one might justly be under a
Temptation to think it may, when you so plainly tell us both Negatively and
Positively, what it was not, and what it was; not a Type, but a Continuance of
a Custom; who can think but you must mean Circumcision all this while? For how
Circumcision could be the Continuance of another thing, I do not well
understand: if you had said a Cause or Occasion of Continuance, there might
have been some small matter in it, though not very much; but to be the
Continuance it self of another thing, is not easy to be perceived. Now then, if
this Passage of yours be referred to Circumcision, then you only tell us, that
Circumcision was a Continuance of Circumcision: Which is such a gross Identity,
as is not much incident to ingenious Men: But if we refer it to the Custom
among the Jews, then in the first place I ask, how could Circumcision, which
was a Precept of God, be the Continuance of another thing, that was only a
Custom among Men? Was the Practice and Continuance of the one, the Practice and
Continuance of the other? or how would you be understood?

Secondly; If your word Custom here, relates to the Custom of the Jews
aforesaid, then you seem to say, it was that Custom that St. John, our Savior
and his Apostles, made a full, proper, and pertinent Type of Baptism; and then
it is so far from appearing that Circumcision was a Type of Baptism, which was
the thing to be proved, that after all, it falls to the lot of this Jewish
Custom, to be this Type: Which our Savior it seems, was so much in love with,
that he and his Apostles, make it a Type of their own Baptism: Which is not
only a very strange thing, but wonderfully remote from your Purpose.

But because I would do you all the Justice I can, there is another thing which
I have thought on, which may be your Meaning, for ought I know, but whether it
is or no, that I cannot determine; but if it be, it is very far fetched, and
must needs have a very uncouth Reference. However, the Supposition is this,
namely, that St. John, our Savior and his Apostles, added to the old Custom of
the Jews, all that was necessary to make Circumcision a Type of Baptism: And if
so, then it is a plain Case, that Circumcision was never ordained or intended by
God, neither in its Original nor Progress, to be a Type of Baptism, till
Baptism was made a Gospel-Ordinance by Christ and his Apostles; which is a very
strange and Self-contradicting Notion. For if Circumcision was ever a Type a
Baptism, it must be so before ever Baptism, as a Antitype, could have a Being;
for upon the Coming of the Antitype, the Type ceases: As soon as ever the
Antitype lives and is in force, the Type dies and is out of date: how then
could Circumcision be made a Type of Baptism, by Baptism it self? when
according to this Supposition, it must continue all its Life-long without such
a Title, and when it was dead, it could never come at it. If Circumcision were
not the Type of Baptism before Baptism came, how then could Baptism be the
Antitype thereof? It could not come as an Antitype, because it seems there was
no Type before it came. -- If you had told us, that a Man cannot properly be
said to be born, till he is properly said to be dead; or that the Father cannot
properly Be, till the Son lives and begets him, it had been just such a piece
of Philosophy, as this is of Divinity. -- But if it be said, that Circumcision
did not expire upon the coming in of Baptism, for they were both in force for
some Years together: I answer, it is very true, but then it is a good Argument to
prove, that Circumcision and Baptism were never Type and Antitype. And this
Supposition our Gentlemen do as good as grant, for they tacitly tell us, it was
no Type before Baptism came, and how it should be a Type afterward, I know not.

You say further, Had John the Baptist, Christ, etc. undertook any new Way of
proselyting the Jews to the Gospel, they had not only struggled with the
Oppositions of a new Doctrine, but also of a new Practice, etc. Really, Sirs,
your Words here seem to imply, that it was some old Trade to proselyte Men to
the Gospel long before it began; for if it was not some old Practice before,
then it must be a new Practice, when St. John and our Savior began it. And if
the very proselyting of Men to the Gospel, were a new Practice, and the
Doctrine leading thereunto, a new Doctrine, what force can there be in this
Objection of yours? However, Gentlemen, this Suggestion of yours, seems to be
very raw and inconsiderate; for the great and principal Struggle of the Jews
with our Savior, was about his Divinity and Authority; his being the Son of
God, and sent by his Father, to teach and instruct the World, by virtue of that
Authority which none ever before him had: And accordingly, whenever our Savior
taught amongst the Jews, he very frequently, not only reproved their vicious
and enormous Lives, but corrected and condemned their false and erroneous
Doctrines, their idle and vain Traditions, and foolish Superstitions, wherein
they taught for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. And herein lay the chief
Quarrel of the Jews against our Savior, who instead of owning of him in that
Divine Capacity he justly challenged, they counted him a Samaritan, a Devil,
and a Madman, contradicting, opposing, and charging of him with Blasphemy, for
making himself equal with God, and condemning them in their Ways, as one that
had Authority from Heaven so to do. -- It was no part of our Savior's
Business, to countenance or encourage any in their vain Inventions and
superstitious Fooleries, which were never appointed nor approved by God; but to
enlighten their Minds, and take them off from all such Dotages, and settle them
upon such things as were purely of God, and such things as he had in Commission
from his Father to teach them. -- And give me leave to tell you, that if your
Notion in this case, were supposed to be true, it cannot rationally be thought,
that our Savior could have made any great Earnings upon the stubborn Jews, by
virtue of that; for if he had only taken their old Custom, and altered it, or
added any thing to it of his own Pleasure, and made it what it was not before,
(as you say) and given it out in his own Name, requiring Obedience to it by his
own Authority, even of the Jews themselves, which never submitted to it before,
and that too in order to their being proselyted or initiated into a new, or
another Religion; he would in so doing, have declared and asserted his
Authority to them and over them, altogether as much as if he had required a
downright new Practice of them; and have crossed their Humors and
Inclinations as much in the one as in the other. And as for those that were
inclinable to fall in with his Authority, and to own his Divinity, as he
himself asserted it, it may readily be taken for granted, that they would give
him leave to give out what precepts he pleased, without struggling with him
about it: Those that received his new Doctrine, would never contend with him
about new Practice; for indeed, all Practice is comprehended in Doctrine: so
that the ground of your Notion is altogether groundless.

That Expression of yours also, I must a little remark, as another piece of
crabbed Intricacy, which I cannot make very pleasant Sense of. When you tell
as, that therefore this Custom was continued, (namely, to please the Jews) and
had the Superaddition of the full force of Baptism, viz. a Consignation, or a
Seal of the Covenant: -- Do not these Words now seem strongly to imply, that
there was some other Baptism in force as a Seal of the Covenant, which the
Jewish Baptism had not the force of, till our Savior takes it, and gives it
now the full force of Baptism, viz. makes that Custom a Seal of the Covenant as
well as Baptism, Baptism being the very Rule and Standard, unto which that
Jewish Custom was brought? for how could that Custom have the full force of
Baptism added, or given to it, if there had been no Baptism then in force, unto
which this Jewish Custom is now said to be advanced? -- And if so, then People
may take their choice, whether they will have this last made Jewish Baptism, or
the first made Christian Baptism; for it seems, though they are two distinct
Baptisms, yet they are both Seals of the Covenant. Really, Sirs, it is not
usual for Men, in the face of the Sun, to speak Daggers at this rate; No more
would you, I conceive, if your undeserving Cause did not force you to it. -- I
see it is not for nothing that you so freely acknowledge, in your second Mercury
upon this Subject, that you delivered your Assertions a little darkly. Indeed,
Gentlemen, I think you were greatly in the dark when you wrote them, and
therefore no wonder you were delivered of such a dark Issue: Which though you
seem to be sensible of, yet you seem to have no Inclination to come into the
Light, that you may see to make better work. But, Sirs, after all this, I might
justly enquire, how you came by all this Confidence? Gentlemen, I beseech you,
who told you, or where did you read such a piece of Christian Divinity, as you
so boldly dictate to the World; namely, that John the Baptist, Christ and his
Apostles, did so highly approve of this old Jewish Custom you talk of, as to
take it, and put a Divine Sanction upon it, and make that very Custom a
Consignation, or a Seal of the Covenant, and so it became a proper Antitype of
Circumcision? Does the Scripture, which we all pretend to be our Rule in
Matters of Divine Worship, tell you any such Story, or teach you any such
Doctrine? Is there the least Whisper of any such thing in all the
New Testament? if there be, pray be so kind as to tell us where; if not, what
signify your Dictates? Nay, Sirs, I am very apt to think, that your great
Friend Maimonides, nor yet any of the Jewish Rabbis, ever told you such a
linsy-woolsy Story as this; yet here seems to lie the greatest show of your
Proof that Circumcision was the Type of Baptism. Sirs, if you did not seem to
be a little proud and obstinate in this Matter, I could heartily pity your
Distress: but why should you strive, thus to impose your vain Crochets, and
Scriptureless Notions upon us; and seem to be angry with us, that we do not
greedily swallow them?

As for the three Texts you bring, further to prove Circumcision a Type of
Baptism, which you call undeniable Texts; I confess, it might be worth any ones
while, to take these three Texts, and read them well over; for they are, as the
Gentlemen call them, undeniable Texts: But withal, do but remember for what
purpose these Gentlemen quote them, and then forbear smiling if you can. The
Gentlemen, I confess, were very much in the right, when they called them
undeniable Texts: But they were extremely in the wrong, when they thought these
Texts would prove Circumcision a Type of Baptism, or do them any service for
Infant-Sprinkling. The first Text is, Col. 2.11, 12. In whom also ye are
circumcised with the Circumcision made without Hands, in putting off the Body
of the Sins of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ; buried with him in
Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him, through the Faith of the
Operation of God, etc. Now in the reading of this Text, any one might be ready
to think, that certainly, if any thing here spoken of, may be supposed to be
the Antitype of Circumcision with Hands, it must be the Circumcision here
mentioned, made without Hands, in putting off the Body of the Sins of the
Flesh; and this is very soberly, not only suggested, but (one would think) also
very rationally and fairly proved, by the Gentleman in his Animadversions, as
also in his Rejoinder: And also in that other Gentleman's Answer to your two
Mercuries. And indeed it lies so fairly in the Text, so easy to be understood,
and so rational in it self, that one may justly admire how any understanding
Man could miss it. But, say our Gentlemen, in their second Mercury, The Scope
of the Apostle here was to take off the Colossians from the Rudiments of the
World, (then I hope, by the way, it was not to settle them in any old Custom)
especially Circumcision, which troubled most of the Churches; so far indeed, I
shall not dispute: And therefore, the Apostle very wisely and rationally gives
them to understand, that they had not the least occasion to dote upon these
weak and beggarly Rudiments; for, says he, ye are complete in Christ; (without
them) in whom also ye are circumcised (if that be it you would have) with the
Circumcision made without Hands, in putting off the Body of the Flesh, which is
far better than your old outward Circumcision; and this is plainly signified
and confirmed to you, in your being buried with Christ in Baptism: So that you
have no reason in the World, to hanker after these unprofitable things, but
rather much reason to be content in your Gospel-Station, and keep where you
are: being not only in a better Condition, in being delivered from that Yoke of
Bondage, but also strongly obliged to persevere in the Christian Religion, by
being listed under the Captain of it, by your being buried with him in Baptism,
wherein also you are risen with him, through Faith, etc.

But say you, they might object, We want the outward Circumcision to us and our
Children. No Sirs, they might not now object at this rate, for this was the
Objection that was supposed to go before, unto which the Apostle had given a
very fair, full and satisfactory Answer, by telling them that they were
Circumcised with the Circumcision made without Hands, as aforesaid: So no room
for that Objection now. But this Interpretation is rejected, and condemned, by
our Athenian Gentlemen; and Circumcision must, even by this Text, be the Type
of Baptism when all is done: But for what Reason I cannot imagine, unless it be
merely because they find these two Words in the Text, Circumcision and Baptism;
and therefore conclude one must be a Type of the other. But, Gentlemen, if you
will but let our Interpretation pass for Orthodox till you are able to give us
a better, we shall in this Case desire no more. Moreover, Sirs, If we should
grant you your own Exposition here, and give it you for Truth, I do not yet
understand what great matter you would gain by it; unless we give you also what
you please to beg for into the Bargain: What if I should grant you, for
Argument-sake, that Baptism supplies the place, or came in the room of
Circumcision, and that Christians are in effect Circumcised because Baptized
(as you say:) All this might be, and yet this Text signify nothing for
Infant Baptism, unless it were also plain in the Text that Infants are the
Subjects of it; but there is not the least glimmering of such a thing in the
Text, but rather plainly the contrary: There Is nothing in the Text but what is
rationally exclusive of Infants. It cannot be supposed that the Apostle is to
be understood of Infants, when he tells the believing Colossians, that in
Christ they were Circumcised with the Circumcision made without Hands, in
putting off the Sins of the Flesh, and were buried with Christ in Baptism,
wherein also they were risen with him through Faith, etc. What therefore, if I
should now grant you that the Apostle in this Text should intimate, that in the
place and room of Infant-Circumcision, Christ has now appointed Believers
Baptism; that instead of Abraham's Fleshly Seed that were wont to be
Circumcised, he will now have only Abraham's Spiritual Seed baptized? As in the
case of the Passover and the Lord's Supper, most judicious Christians do
suppose and believe that the Lord's Supper came in the room of the Passover,
and that tho Infants did partake of the one, yet they are excluded from the
other. Where then would your Advantage be, if we should grant you that Baptism
might come in the room and stead of Circumcision? you would still be as far to
seek for Infant Baptism as ever you were. For you know, it is not Circumcision
and Baptism, running parallel in some things, that will make them parallel in
every thing; and by the same Rule you grant them to differ in the case of
Women, why may they not also differ in the case of Infants?

Your other two Texts, is 1 Cor. 10.2. and 1 Pet. 3.21. the one speaks of the
Israelites being baptized unto Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea; and the
other of Noah and his Family being saved in the Ark, etc. Now let all the World
judge how these Texts prove Circumcision to be a Type of Baptism. What course
shall we take to frame an Argument from these Texts for such a purpose?
Gentlemen, because I perceive you are such Friends to a Syllogistical way of
arguing, I Will try how well I can do your work for you, which you seem to have
no Stomach to do for your selves.

First, thus, If the Cloud and Sea were a Type of Baptism, then Circumcision
was a Type of Baptism: But this Text implies, That the Cloud and Sea were a
Type of Baptism: Ergo, Circumcision was.

Again, If Noah 's Ark were a Type of Baptism, then Circumcision was so: But
Noah 's Ark was a Type of Baptism: Ergo.

But if you think this Hypothetical way of Syllogizing is not so good as the
Catagorical way; I Will try how they will look when they are laid down
Catagorically.

Then thus it must be; The Cloud and the Sea were a Type of Baptism: But
Circumcision was the Cloud and the Sea: Ergo, Circumcision was a Type of
Baptism.

Again, Noah 's Ark was a Type of Baptism: But Circumcision was Noah 's Ark:
Ergo, Circumcision was a Type of Baptism.

If our Gentlemen should not like these Arguments, I would advise them to study
a better Cause, that they may know how to mend them: In the mean time, whoever
is in love with such Logic, let them go to these Gentlemen to learn it.

But Gentlemen, I have not yet done with your Jewish Custom, I am willing to
paraphrase a little farther upon it before I pass it: Wherefore, in the first
place, I must needs tell you, that I see no reason but why we may yet question
the very Truth of it, even with respect to matter of Fact; for although it is
true I lay no great stress upon the Business, for I do not much care whether it
be true or false; yet I cannot but reckon it is at least lawful to question
whether your Story be true or no, especially a Truth of such an ancient
standing as you talk of, and not only so, but a Truth sufficient to make the
Bottom and Foundation of a Gospel-Ordinance. You had need of good Evidence,
Sirs, to palliate your Boldness; but if you had far better Evidence than you
have, as to Matter of Fact, it will not excuse you in imposing it upon us as a
Gospel-Duty: How great is your Folly then if it should happen to be but a
Fiction, which seems at least to be likely, if we seriously consider these two
or three Things?

First; Because there is not the least mention of such a Thing in all the Old
and New Testament; the Scripture knows nothing of such a Story, which is a very
probable Argument to prove it false: For if there had been such a remarkable
Custom amongst the Jews so long ago as you intimate, Is it not strange, that
neither Moses, nor any of the Old Testament Writers, nor our Savior, nor any
in the New Testament, should ever give us the least hint of such a Thing? And
yet you confidently dictate, that our Savior took that Custom, and turned it
into a Gospel-Sacrament, and yet never gave us the least Signification that
ever there was such a Custom in the World: Which does, at least, very strongly
imply one of these two Things. First, That either there never was such a Custom
in the World in those Days; or if there was, our Savior had nothing to do with
it, at least in your Sense; your choice of either (Gentlemen) wholly destroys
your Cause.

But Secondly; Matter of Fact may yet be doubted, because, as far as I can yet
perceive, this Story is originally taken out of the Jews Fictitious and Lying
Talmud; in which is contained such a Bundle of fabulous and ridiculous Stories,
which almost every Man in his Wits is so far from believing, that they must
rather conclude them to be abominable Falsehoods.

Thirdly; Because, as Sir Norton Knatchbull observes, (as I find him quoted by
Mr. Danvers) there is a difference in this Matter even between the Jewish
Rabbis themselves: two eminent Rabbis that were Contemporaries, plainly
contradicting each other in this Point, even as to matter of Fact; Eliezer
affirmed that the Proselytes were Circumcised and not Baptized, and Rabbi
Joshuah attested the quite contrary, that they were Baptized and not
Circumcised: Whereupon Sir Norton demands to which of them must we adhere, to
Eliezer that affirms what the Scriptures teach, or to Joshuah that asserts what
the Scriptures no where teach? All these things well considered, it seems to be
more than probable to be but a lying Invention.

I confess, had you not brought this Story as a Basis of that which all
Christians count part of Divine Worship, I should not so much have concerned my
self in questioning the Truth of it, neither had your Weakness been so
apparent, whether the Story had been true or false; we might have believed just
what we had listed in it without being one jot better or worse. But now, Sirs,
with respect to what you bring it for, nothing less than Scripture-Testimony
ought to serve the turn; therefore your Disingenuity (to say no worse) appears
to be exceeding great in going about to put us off with the Story of Alexander
the Great, Cato and Hannibal. Alas! Sirs, we may make a pretty good shift to
believe such things as these, if Human Testimony do but hang well together
about them, because they are of the same Nature and Concernment with the
Testimony that gives them; and if they should happen to be false, yet our Souls
have no Dependency upon them. But if any Body shall tell me that Alexander, or
any Body else, consulted the Apostle Paul about Baptizing Bells and Pots, and
the Apostle's Answer was that it is a Christian Duty so to do, it is part of
God's Divine Worship, and it ought to be done in the Name of the Sacred
Trinity; and should refer me to some old Human History to prove it by as a
Divine Truth; I shall only say, that he that takes this for good pay, deserves
to be cheated.

But Secondly; If your Story, as to matter of Fact, were unquestionably true;
and that it is so certain that the Jews had such a Custom, that none needs doubt
it, this would be far from being satisfactory to the matter in hand: For first,
Who bad them do it? Did they come honestly by this Custom? Was it appointed and
approved of by God, or was it not? If you say it was, you cannot but reckon
your selves obliged to prove it: And if it was not of God, but their own
Superstitious Invention, what does it signify to us Christians, any otherwise
than to admonish us to take heed that we do not provoke God by our foolish
Inventions as they did? And can it be imagined that God should abolish his own
Appointments, and ratify and consecrate one of their God-provoking Customs, as
a Divine Sacrament in the room and place thereof, to be a binding Duty upon all
Christians? Sirs, if you dare assert such a thing, you had need to have special
Evidence to bear you out in it; and yet behold you have none at all,
notwithstanding you can venture very boldly to tell us that there was no need
to have this expressly set down, in what Method and what Persons, whether
Infants or not, the Custom being so well known beforehand; when it may not
only be questioned, whether Christ and his Apostles knew any thing of it, or
whether you know any thing of it your selves from good Authority? But it is
evident there are many thousand in the Christian World that know nothing at all
of this Custom; What must all these poor Creatures do that have nothing to
inform them into their Duty in this matter, but the Scriptures? Do not you a
little too plainly give us to understand, that the Scripture signifies nothing
to our Instruction or Direction herein? And if it be our Duty to baptize our
Infants, we are like to know nothing of it from thence? But those that are
ignorant of the Customs of Nations, (as you intimate many are) must of
necessity remain ignorant how to serve and please God in this particular,
unless by consulting the Jewish Talmud they can arrive at that Happiness; for
it seems by this Passage of yours it is in vain to consult the Scriptures about
it, Res stupenda and horrenda! etc.

The Second Question you undertake to answer is this, What certain indubitable
Grounds can we have for the practice of Infant Baptism?

Your Answer is now direct and positive, from the Scripture. Gentlemen, I do
assure you, I am very glad of this Answer; for then, I hope, we shall hear no
more of that old Jewish Custom, which has lain so long in our way: If you had
thought of this sooner, you might have saved your selves and me too, a great
deal of Labor: for hitherto, the Jewish Custom has been the only Oracle that
one would have thought, might have been sufficient fully to have decided the
Controversy: for it does not only prove Circumcision a Type of Baptism, but it
goes further, and answers the main Objection in that case; for though Women
were not circumcised, and so one would think should have been excluded from
Baptism: No, not so; this old Custom take, that quite off: for, inasmuch as
Men, Women and Children, among the Heathen, were baptized by the Jews, it
wholly answers that Objection; and one would think, should fully prove the
whole Controversy, that Men, Women and Children, are all the Subjects of
Baptism. Who could imagine, that after all this, we should need to be beholden
to the Scripture for Infant Baptism? But however, the case it seems is altered,
the Scripture must now do the business: And I freely confess, that if it do but
appear from Scripture, that either Infants were baptized by God's Appointment,
or ought to be Baptized, we ought to be silent in the Case. But what Scriptures
are these, that thus certainly and indubitably prove Infant Baptism? Why the
first is, Matthew. 28.19, 28. Good Reader, do so much as read the Text, and see
else if it do not: Thus it reads, Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.
Certainly, Sirs, you must be Gentlemen by your Boldness, else you durst not
have ventured upon such a Text as this, to have proved Infant Baptism: Sure you
cannot but think, that any Text in the Bible will prove it as much as this; and
there are abundance of Texts that have less in them against it. I wonder why
you did not urge them by Dozens! But, Sirs, what reason had you to bring this
Text for Infant Baptism? Does not the Text rather plainly exclude them, when it
says, Go, teach all Nations, and then baptize them? Pray, Sirs, consider, and
answer plainly, if you dare venture to be ingenuous; Is any more, or any other,
here commanded to be baptized, than what are first commanded to be taught, and
that too, by the Apostles preaching of the Gospel to them, as it is expressed
in Mark 16.15, 16. a parallel Place, where this same Commi^^ion is repeated? If
this be not exclusive of Infants, I wish you would let us know what is. But,
say you, the Order of Words in the Commission, does your business: Well, Sirs,
if it do, we are well contented; for we are very well pleased, with that Order
that our Savior has here laid down: And I plainly perceive, that with all your
Art and Learning, (though you seem to have a great mind to it) you are not able
to disorder them, to serve your purpose. The words in the Commission, you say,
is, Matheteusate panta ta ethne, disciple all Nations; and then follows,
Baptizontes kai didascontes, and this you say, in your second Paper, you shall
ever stand by, (as the Sense and Scope of this Commission) to wit, disciple all
Nations, Baptizing and Teaching them. Good now, Sirs, stand your ground; mean
but honestly, and there is no danger of Discord from any that I know of. What do
we say, or plead for, more or less, than you have thus far plainly given us? We
freely grant, that the Word Matheteusate signifies to discipulize, disciple, or
make Disciples: and this must be done, by this Commission, before Persons are
to be baptized: and when that is done, they are to be baptized, and after that,
still to be taught, to grow in Grace and Knowledge, that they may go on to
Perfection. Now, Sirs, if this be the thing you resolve to stand by, we bid you
God speed; you will hardly meet with any Dissenters among the Baptists. Yet
though you not only grant, but plead to this purpose, in your first Paper, and
tell us you are resolved to stand by it, in your second: You have no mind we
should take this Sense into our hands, though you know not well how to keep it
in your own; neither have you any mind to keep to it your selves, when all is
done; for you strangely strive to shrink away from it, as soon as ever you have
laid it down; and very odly make these two incongruous Observations from the
Text so read:

First, Infants are not excluded from Baptism, as is generally believed by
Anabaptists.

Secondly, A Person may be baptized before he be taught.

Certainly, Sirs, you can never think, that these two Propositions receive
Countenance and Confirmation from this Text: For first, If Infants are not
excluded from Baptism by this Text, good now do so much as tell us who are.
Secondly, If Persons may be baptized, by this Text, without being first taught,
pray be so kind as to tell us, who by this Text, are not to be baptized. If you
think none are excluded, or if there can be none in the World, that are not to
be baptized, I wish you would tell us so in words at length, that we might
readily give you the Reputation of extraordinary Doctors of Divinity. Pray,
Gentlemen, tell us also plainly, how you think the Apostles, by virtue of this
Commission, were to make Disciples of Christ, in order to their being baptized:
Were they to make People Disciples of Christ, merely by looking upon them,
without speaking a word to them? This indeed seems to be the Design of your
struggle in your two Papers; namely, that the Apostles were to disciple People
to Christ, wherever they came, without teaching them any thing in order
thereunto. Which he that can believe, certainly need stick at nothing: for if
People may be Disciples of Christ, without being taught, then they may be
Disciples of Christ without learning any thing at all; and if so, then sure one
would think, that all the World should in every, or any Capacity, ipso facto,
be Disciples of Christ. And yet again, they were to be made Disciples before
they could be so; and the Apostles were to do something in order to the making
them so: but what that was, who can imagine, for they were not to speak a word
to them, to teach them any thing about it. Sirs, why do you strive thus, by
your confused Confidence, to deceive People, and bring them into a miserable
Maze? Besides, if this were the Design of the Commission, that the Apostles
were to make Disciples without Teaching, then these two things will follow:
First, That our Translators of the Text, were either very Ignorant, and knew
not how to translate the Words as they should have done; or else very
unfaithful, that they did not: For they have, by their Translation of the Text,
given us occasion to believe, almost whether we will or no, that Teaching must
precede Baptism: and really, it seems to agree so mightily, not only with
Reason it self, but also with other Scriptures, that we can do no less than
think it true. 2dly, If this were the Sense and Design of the Place, then if
the Apostles had ever presumed to preach the Gospel to any Body, before they
had baptized them, they had gone quite besides their Commission, and broke the
Command of their Master: for either they were to teach People by this
Commission, before they baptized them, or they were not: if they were, then all
your strange Prattle to the contrary is gone; if they were not, then that which
I have said must follow: Or else there must be two Commissions in this one,
contra-distinct to each other, given out in the self-same Words, which can be
but of one Signification, and yet must be understood in two, quite contrary to
each other; that is, you shall, and you shall not, teach People before you
baptize them: And how consonant these things are to Scripture and Reason, let
all the World judge. But, alas! were it not for the sake of the poor Ignorant
World, that are apt to be taken with any thing you say, we need not take any
pains to confute you; for after you had been pedling a while, to make Folks
believe, that the Apostles were to make Disciples without Teaching, you
presently, even in the Prosecution of your Proof, contradict and confute your
selves: for you say, Matheteusate, which signifies, to disciple all Nations, is
a general Word, and contains in it the other two that follow: viz. Baptizontes
kai didascontes, Baptizing and Teaching; the Commission is to disciple, and the
Manner how, is Baptizing and Teaching; both it seems, as well as one; without
which a Disciple cannot be made. Is not this a clear Confession, that Teaching
is as necessary and essential to the making of Disciples, as Baptizing? And if
so, what will you do for Infant-Disciples? Are you not as far to seek now, as
ever your were? What are you the nearer, if this be true, to baptize your
Infants, unless you teach them too? you even leave them as you found them, no
more Disciples of Christ, than they were before: and if so, had not you better
still let the Needle go before the Third, (or Teaching before Baptizing) than
thus to strive to teach the World a ridiculous Trade, and take a deal of Pains
to no purpose? Though when all is done, it is very plain from Scripture, that
Persons may be made Disciples of Christ before Baptism, as indeed they ought,
even by this Commission of our Savior; and that by Teaching too, and then to
be baptized: and this is not only agreeable to the Current of Scripture in many
other places, but particularly most exactly to Joh. 4.1. Jesus made, and
baptized more Disciples than John: first made them Disciples, then they were
baptized.

Secondly; You say, Children are capable of Proselytism, as may be observed
from our Savior's Words, Suffer little Children to come unto me; which your
great Skill in the Greek, tells us is the same with, to proselyte. Now how you
would be understood here I know not, whether you reckon that their bare coming
to Christ were their Proselytism; or, whether they come to Christ with a design
and purpose to be proselyted to him some other way? If the former, then all
that came to Christ (when he was upon Earth) upon any account whatsoever, (tho
it was to betray him) were immediately by that very Act proselyted to him, the
Act it self was their Proselytism; but if they came with a design and purpose
to be proselyted to Christ by any other way, as he pleased to direct and
instruct them, then certainly they could not be such eight-days-old Proselytes
as you frequently baptize. Now, Sirs, we deny not, but when Christ was
personally upon Earth, little Children might either come to him, or be brought
to him, upon diverse occasions, as well as others; and so far as that very thing
made Proselytes of them, such Proselytes let them be, who shall hinder it? But
then that Act must be performed, or else that Proselytism has no being. But now
Christ is not upon Earth; Ergo, there is no insisting upon this now: And whoever
is capable of coming to Christ now, with a Design and Purpose to be proselyted
to him, by Faith, Repentance, Love, etc. let them be young or old, we are so
far from hindering them, that we had rather do all we can to help them forward.
But, if this don't please you, good now do so much as tell us plainly, what you
mean by Proselytism, when you say, Children are capable of Proselytism; wherein
lies their Capacity, or what is it they are capable of doing? or whether there
is any thing required of them in order thereunto? If any thing, what? If
nothing, why are not all Proselytes as well as any? or how shall we do to know
the Capacity of a Believer's Child, from an Vnbeliever's? If they are both
alike in Capacity, then there is no difference: If there is a difference in the
Capacity of the Children of Believers and Unbelievers, pray tell us where it
lies; especially, since the Children that came to Christ, were Children
indefinitly: or whether it be any Child's Virtue to be a Proselyte, or fault
that it is not? or whether this young Proselyte, you talk of, understands any
thing more of the Mind of God in Baptism with it, than it or another did, or
may without it? For if it be no fitter for Baptism with it, than it or another
is without it, pray what is it you talk of? For we say none are fit for
Baptism, that know nothing of it, or care nothing for it. But if its
Qualifications for Baptism be increased by it, tell us by what means? Truly for
ought I know, you may even intend as little by it when you say they are capable
of Proselytism, than as if you had told us they are capable of Sleeping. But to
enlarge no farther upon this, I shall only say that it is a very plain Case,
that this Text will do no Service for Infant Baptism.

First, Because there is not one Word of Baptism spoke of in the Text, tho
recorded by three Evangelists; and it is not likely that a Text that makes
nothing for any Body's Baptism, should make any thing for Infant Baptism.

Secondly, Because our Savior makes no improvement of such an Argument as this
to your purpose; and yet doubtless he knew as much of their Proselytism as you
can pretend to know: And if he did not, pray, why should you? He saw nothing in
it for their Baptism, I marvel how you came to be so strong-sighted: Yet you
are so far from being able to prove that Christ baptized these Children, that
we are able to prove he baptized them not; as appears, Joh. 4.2. Jesus himself
baptized none. And if so, this Text rather affords an Argument against
Infant Baptism than for it. And if you will not believe me, I shall leave you
to struggle with Dr. Tailor about it; who tells us, The Conclusion would with
more probability be derived thus; Christ blessed Children, and so dismissed
them, but baptized them not: Therefore Infants are not to be baptized. Let us
see, Sirs, when you will be able to give us a better Argument for it, than this
is against it.

You tell us you meet with Instances of Children that have been so young, some
before they could either go or speak, that have had strange Exits into another
World: Well, and what then? pray, what is all this to Infant Baptism? Certainly,
their going out of this World, let it be by what Exit it will, can be no
Argument for their Baptism; unless you will suppose that they ought to be
baptized after they are dead, or else in the next World, by virtue of their
strange Departure out of this: For you cannot make use of this Argument till
you have it, and you cannot have it till you see and know their Exits into
another World; and then you have no sooner got it, but you have lost it.
Besides, you cannot but know, that a thousand such Stories as these are not at
all to the Question between us; for the Question in this Case between you and
your Antagonists, is not concerning the State of Infants, but rather concerning
their Duty, if there is any such thing in the World; and if there be, whether
Baptism be any part of it: If there be not, then we think we may safely
conclude Infant Baptism to be no Duty. For we say, all the true Subjects of
Baptism are bound in Duty and Conscience to yield Obedience to God in that
Ordinance, which Infants cannot do, neither is it required of them, neither do
they lose any Privilege, or one jot of God's Favor through the want of it. But
if you say the Duty lies not upon the Infants, but upon the Parents; then if
you would defend this Argument, you are bound to prove that God requires all
such Parents, whose Children make such Exits at their Death, to baptize their
dead Children; for they cannot come at this Argument sooner: But as for all
other Parents and Children, this Argument concerns them not. And yet in the
strength of this miserable Argument, you can valiantly trample upon your
Antagonists, and boldly tell the World, that you may (by virtue of this rare
Argument) with all the Indignation imaginable, explode that uncharitable
Position of the Anabaptists, that say, Children have no more Right to Baptism
than unreasonable Creatures: When, alas! this Position, let it be what it will,
appears to be not one jot better or worse, either for your Indignation, or for
the Argument from whence it flows. However, Sirs, we only say Infants have no
Right to Baptism by God's Appointment, for God requires no such thing of them,
nor from them: if you say they have, for my part I should be very well pleased
to see you able to prove it: But if you cannot prove it, you ought to be as
well pleased to let it be otherwise, without reflecting upon any Body. Now,
indeed, there is a Consequential Truth in it, which I know you love dearly to
aggravate, if by any means you may render us obnoxious to the Hatred and
Displeasure of the Foolish. For I confess, it cannot properly be said that they
that have no Right at all to a thing, can have any more Right to that thing,
than any other thing that has likewise no Right to the same. And yet we have
not the least uncharitableness in our Breasts or Thoughts against Infants; for
we say they are not one tittle the worse for having no Right to Baptism, nor
any thing the less in the Love and Favor of God without it: It only argues
that Baptism is beyond their reach and capacity; and as it is so, God neither
requires nor expects they should be concerned about it. And pray, Sirs, what is
that to you, or to me either, if it be so? If this be the Case, who is it you
quarrel with? Now, Sirs, it is you Pedo-Baptists rather that are so uncharitable
toward poor Infants, that unless you may have your own Wills, and have them
baptized (as you miscal it) not only whether they themselves will or no, but
even whether God will or no, you presently grow so Surly and Ill-condition'd
toward poor harmless Babes, that there is scarce one in forty of you can afford
them a good word; and not only so, but condemn, censure and sentence them far
beyond what they dare pretend to do by any unreasonable Creature. Besides all
this, Gentlemen, you forget that you your selves are guilty of the self-same
Crime, or at least a Crime of the same Nature, which you here pretend with so
much Indignation to explode: And why may not we reflect upon you, as well as
you upon us, by telling you, That we may with all the Indignation imaginable
explode that uncharitable Position of Pedo-Baptists, that say Infants have no
more Right to the Lord's Supper than unreasonable Creatures? Is not this
altogether as sayable from your practice, as the other is from theirs? and is
not this as bad and as uncharitable a Position as the other? What Is the Matter,
Sirs, that you seem to be so quick-sighted abroad, and so very blind at home?

But above all things, I perceive, I must not forget the Instance of the
Ruler's Daughter; for it seems there lies so much strength in that for
Infant Baptism, that it must be reckoned a piece of Cowardice to evade it. You
say, you would ask such Persons who deny Infants incapable of Baptism, because
they can show no actual Sign of it. By the way, Sirs, I must demand of you who
are the Persons you mean here, that deny Infants to be incapable of Baptism?
Surely you cannot mean the People you call Anabaptists; for they plainly say,
that Infants are incapable of Baptism: and if any will say that they can and do
give Actual Signs and Demonstrations of their Incapacity in that Case, I shall
not reckon it worth my while to contradict them. Here, Sirs, you seem to be so
eager in the discharge of this Mortar-piece, that you have miserably over-shot
your selves, which you it seems looked upon to be so formidable, that because
the Gentleman in his Animadversions thought it had been empty, and so passed it
by as a useless thing; you reckon it was because he was afraid to come near it.
Well, however, some Body it is you have a mind to ask what they think of the
Ruler's Daughter? Our Savior, say you, bid him only believe, and it should be
done. Would not any now be ready to think, that surely this must be some plain
Instance of Infant Baptism? when they that are supposed to deny it are so
briskly and closely called upon to tell their Thoughts of such a particular
Instance, that is in short, without any Paraphrase, brought to confute them.
Certainly if it chance to prove a Story of another Nature, and relate to
another thing, and not at all to Infant Baptism, our Gentlemen then must needs
be strangely impertinent, and deserve to be corrected in their Imperious
Confidence. Now let any body, for tryal-sake, but read the Story as it is
recorded by three Evangelists, in Mat. 9. Mark 5. and Luke 8. and they will
find it to be only a Story, wherein is comprehended an excellent Relation of
our Savior's Power and Compassion toward poor Mortals, manifested in
restoring a young Damsel to Life and Health, even when she was supposed to have
been dead. And now, Sirs, my Thoughts of the Ruler's Daughter, is, that she was
recovered by our Savior from a very dangerous Distemper, and given as it were
again to her Father, as a fresh token of our Savior's Kindness to him. And for
you only to say (as you do in your Second Paper) this shows that believing
Parents Faith avail for their Children. What is it you talk of? you must needs
know it is nothing to your purpose: For, in the Sense of this Text, who ever
denied it? We deny not, but the Father's Faith, Humility and Love to Christ
might and did greatly avail herein, as to the Recovery and Restoration of his
Daughter: but still we deny, that she immediately became a true and proper
Subject of Baptism, by her Father's Faith; there is not the least Shadow of
such an availment in the Text: Our Savior does not say, believe, and thy
Daughter shall be baptized, nor any thing tending thereunto. And, Sirs, you
ought to know, that if you plead for Infant Baptism upon the Parents Faith,
nothing short of such a-like Instance will, or can, do your Business: You know
very well, that whether a good Man's Faith, and pious Endeavors, may or may
not be available, in the behalf of a Child, a Wife, a Servant, a Neighbor, a
Friend, yea or an Enemy either, in some respects, is no part of the Question in
Debate. And if you should affirm that it may, and sometimes is available, who
do you think will be your Enemy therein? Now for you to clap your Wings, as it
were, and crow as if you had got some famous Victory, by discharging this
Piece, when you know you have not so much as killed a Flea in your Enemies
Quarters; What strange Men are you? Pray, Sirs, why were you not so
publick-spirited as to bring in the Centurion's Servant to take his share of
Right to Baptism, out of the common stock of second-hand Faith? Was not his
Master's Faith as available to him, as the Ruler's was to his Daughter? Pray
read the Story in Mat. 8. and Luke 7. and you may easily perceive it was so.
Now what Rule is this for you to baptize any of your Servants, whether they
believe or not believe, merely because you your selves believe, and plead their
Right to Baptism by virtue of your Faith? Besides, If this Argument were good
for the purpose you bring it, I cannot imagine who must be excluded from
Baptism: For it will not only take in any ungodly Person whatsoever, upon whose
account a godly Man may, in some respects, prevail with God; but it will take
in whole Cities of ungodly Men by the Lump, and make them all immediately true
Subjects of Baptism, without any Change or Alteration at all in themselves. For
you know God, upon Abraham's Request, offered to spare the whole City of Sodom,
if there could have been but Ten Righteous Persons found in it: And it had
certainly been saved from that fearful and amazing Ruin and Destruction that
befell it, if only Ten had been there found. Now the Argument is the same in its
Nature and Consequence, tho they were not found as if they had been found; and
if they had been there found, pray tell us what you would have to be the
Consequence of your Argument, concerning all the rest of the Inhabitants? And
if God should show any Kindness to any City, Place or Kingdom now adays, upon
the account of the Faith and Prayers of some Righteous Persons, as there is no
doubt but he does, Would not this Argument turn all the Inhabitants immediately
into Subjects of Baptism? And who knows but in your next you may improve it to
the utmost; and why not? For it is of the same Stamp with the Ruler's Daughter:
And we know you are Valiant, and dare venture upon very great Undertakings.

You likewise tell us, That it is a great Weakness to believe Children not
baptized from the example of the Jailer. Indeed, Sirs, I rather think it is a
greater Weakness for any to believe they were: If by that ambiguous Term,
Children, you mean little Infants, such as you frequently baptize: And it is not
your Syriac Latiniz'd that will help you at this turn. For pray, Sirs, what
great Discovery have you made by going to Syria, and there hearing of the
Jaylor's Sons? You need not have taken that pains, (especially since it is to no
purpose) for we can freely grant you, without putting you to struggle for it,
that the Jailer might have several Sons, yea and Daughters too: And if he had
had ten Sons, and as many Daughters, I readily acknowledge that in all
probability they were all baptized. I will not so much as suppose that any of
his House, let them be Sons or Daughters, or Servants, or what else you please,
were here exempted from being baptized. But yet still, Sirs, you cannot choose
but know (or else you must be horribly ignorant) that all this does you no
Service at all for Infant Baptism; you are still but where you were, you have
gained nothing at all by this Syriac Bargain, tho you seem as great upon it, as
if you had been at some profitable Market: For surely nothing can be more
evident, than that all that were here baptized in, or of, the Jaylor's House,
were grown Persons, and famous Converts, not only Actual, but Active, Lively,
and Spiritous Believers. For how plainly does the Text tell us that they spoke
the Word of the Lord to the Jailer, and to all that were in his House. Here it
seems teaching went before baptizing, however it came about. But do we hear of
any Infants yet? Although we should suppose them all to be Sons, which is not
probable, for there might be Daughters as well as Sons, and Servants as well as
either: But not an Infant amongst them all. And when he and all his were
baptized, he brings his welcome Prisoners into his House, and like a good
Christian, set Meat before them, and rejoiced, believing in God, with all his
House. Suppose it were all the Sons of his House still, it is the same thing,
it is plain they were All Believers, let them be whose Sons they will. What a
strange thing it is, that our Gentlemen cannot understand them to be Believers,
merely because it is thought they might be Sons: When alas! the Jailer himself,
no doubt, had a Father, and was certainly Some-body's Son. Now it seems it lies
within the reach of our Gentlemen's Understanding, that the Jailer himself might
be a Believer, but they cannot think that his Sons should be such: Pray, Sirs,
why might not the Jaylor's Sons, if he had any, be Believers as well as their
Grand-Father's Son? It Is true any Body would be ready to think they might, and
not only so, but that in reality they were so too. But then this quite spoils
our Gentlemen's Business, for they must have Infants, or they die. And
therefore, rather than they will admit of this, they will venture to tell you,
it is Nonsense to urge from the consequent Text, that those which were baptized,
glorified and praised God, which Children could not do: And that which proves
it Nonsense, is, because it only means such as were capable of doing it.
Gentlemen, it is very true; you are now in the Right, it is only meant of such as
were capable of doing it: But then it is as true, that it means all of the
Jaylor's House that were baptized; for it is certain that all that were here
baptized, were capable of so doing, and did so do. If I be so honest as to
grant what you say in the former, I hope you will not be so dishonest as to
deny what I and the Text both say in the latter: For it is a plain Case, that
there were no more baptized of the Jaylor's House than what were first
Converted by the preaching of the Word of the Lord; and glorified God in the
strength of their Faith: But Infants are not capable of this: Ergo, All your
Infants are lost.

There Is one profound Observation more which you make hereabouts, which I shall
a little Remark, and so proceed to something else. At their Rate, say you, we
shall have all the Children of Anabaptists starved: For it is said, he that will
not work, let him not eat: But Children must eat, tho not capable of working,
etc. But why I beseech you at their Rate, any more than at your Rate? What is
it that makes them so guilty in this sad supposed Murder any more than your
selves? You have not in any measure made it appear, how they stand chargeable
with such a Crime, whilst your selves remain Innocent: I wish you had attempted
it, for assuredly, Sirs, such a Charge requires a Demonstration. But inasmuch
as many ignorant People will be apt to take it for granted, merely because you
tell them so, tho they know no more why than a Post: I shall guess at your
meaning as well as I can, and either clear the Baptists of this frightful
Suggestion, or else bring you in guilty along with them. Now, I hope, we may
take this Proposition for granted without any more a-do; Namely, that you are
not at all guilty of this strange Plot against all the Infants in the World.
Now if I can but make it appear, that if you be Innocent, they cannot be
Guilty; or if they be Guilty, you cannot be Innocent: I hope you will be
willing to dismiss them without Damage. Your meaning then certainly, I think,
must be to this purpose; That forasmuch as the Baptists say that Infants are
not to be baptized, because not capable of believing; They may as well, and do
in effect say, that Infants must not eat, because not capable of working; for
tho Faith is required of grown Persons in order to Baptism, so is Working
required of them in order to Eating. But now Infants may either be baptized
without believing, or else it will follow that they may not eat without
working. Herein I reckon I have done you the utmost Justice imaginable, in
stating your Proof to the full, which you ought to have done your selves; but
perhaps you durst not, lest your Folly should have been the more easily
discovered. Now, Gentlemen, I intend to join Issue with you, and see what
Conclusion we can bring it to. Sirs, why may not I as well conclude, that
because you say that Infants are not to be admitted to the Lord's Supper,
because not capable of Self-Examination, or discerning the Lord's Body; you may
as well say that Infants must not eat, because not capable of working: For tho
Self-Examination etc. is required of grown Persons, as previous to the Lord's
Supper, and working required of them in order to eating; But as for Infants
they must either be admitted to the Lord's Supper, without Self-Examination, or
else it will follow that they must not eat without working: And therefore at
your Rate all your Children must be starved, and not only so, but the Race of
all Christians, nay of the whole World, must soon be extirpated, as you very
boldly tell us in your Paper. Now, Sirs, your Charge is very fairly returned
upon your selves; What say you, Guilty or not Guilty? To suppose you will plead
Guilty here, would be little less than to commit Sacriledg; yet if you say Not
Guilty, you do in so saying fully acquit your Antagonists: For now it appears,
that if you be Innocent, they cannot be Guilty: And so I hope this dreadful
Tattle of starving Infants is blown over, and come to nothing. Yet, Sirs, I
think you ought to take some blame and shame too, to your selves, for being so
mighty willing to expose and condemn your Neighbor for nothing. I shall only
say thus much more for the present to this matter, and so leave it, viz. If you
had but clearly proved that God has given you the like Command and Authority to
baptize Children in their Infancy, as he has done to Fathers and Mothers to
feed them in their Infancy, you had then said something to the purpose;
otherwise you had far better have said nothing.

But the Text says, Act. 2.39. The Promise is to you, and to your Children.
Well, Sirs, it does so: But how comes this Text to be anything to your purpose
for Infant Baptism? especially, unless you were able to prove, that by Children
here is undoubtedly meant Infants, which I doubt you will find such a Task, as
you will hardly ever live to finish: What, Sirs, do you take it for granted
that Infants must here be understood, merely because you find the Word children
(...) the Text? What strange Reasoning is this? Is this one of your necessary
and unavoidable Consequences you talk of in your Paper? Why may you not as well
conclude, that because the Text tells us, Josh. 22. That the Children of Reuben
and the Children of Gad built them an Altar: Ergo, The Infants of Reuben and
Gad were Masons and Stone-Cutters. And because it is said concerning the
Virtuous Woman, Prove. 31.28. Her Children rise up and call her Blessed:
Therefore her Infants of eight Days old did so. And our Savior says of
Jerusalem, How often would I have gathered thy Children together, as a Hen
gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not? Can it rationally be
supposed that our Savior here means Infants in the Cradle? And yet a little
Consideration will make you capable of discerning that Infants are not more
excluded by these Texts, than they are by this Text now in Hand. For if Infants
are here intended, then the Promise here mentioned, let it be what Promise it
will, is not Conditional, but must be Absolute: But the Promise here spoken of
is not absolute, but conditional: Ergo, etc. Repentance and Baptism is here
plainly required, as the Means or Condition leading to the Promise, unto which
the Promise is annexed; without which the Promise is not to be claimed. And the
Promise is here mentioned as a Motive or Encouragement to perform the Duties or
Condition required. And who is it, that in the reading the Text is not able to
discern this? If you were not strangely biassed, or devoted to an Error,
methinks you might easily perceive, that by you and your Children in this Text,
is meant the Jews and their Posterity after them, as they should come to close
with this Doctrine now taught them: Wherein they are all encouraged to fall in
with Christ upon the Terms of the Gospel, for Remission of Sins and Salvation,
notwithstanding their great and unparalled Wickedness, in killing the Lord of
Life, and imprecating that dreadful Curse upon themselves, and their Children,
or Posterity, the cutting Sense whereof, now upon their Hearts, might have been
apt to have driven them to Despair, had it not been for Peter's Cordial:
Wherefore the Apostle gives them to understand that God would not be so severe
as to take such Advantage thereby, but that upon their hearty Repentance, and
Submission to the Terms of Salvation required in the Gospel, they and their
Children, or Posterity after them, upon the same Terms, should certainly be
received to Mercy. All that I shall say more to this at present, shall be only
to recommend to you the Sayings of two eminent Church of England Doctors, in
Reference to this Text and Matter, Dr. Hammond, and Dr. Tailor.

If any, says Dr. Hammond, have made use of that unconcludent Argument, I have
nothing to say in defense of them: I think, says he, the Practice is founded
upon better Basis than so; and the word Children there, is really the Posterity
of the Jews, and not particularly their Infant Children.

And Dr. Tailor, upon this Scripture, says; That the words mentioned in St.
Peter 's Sermon, are interpreted upon a weak Mistake: The Promise is to you and
your Children, therefore Infants are actually receptive of it, in that
Capacity; that is the Argument: but the Reason of it is not yet discovered, nor
ever will: for to you, and your Children, is to you and your Posterity: to you
and your Children, when they are of the same Capacity, in which you are
receptive of the Promise: But he that, whenever the word Children is used in
Scripture, shall by Children understand Infants, must needs believe, that in
all Israel there were no Men; but all were Infants. And if that had been true,
it had been the greater Wonder they should overcome the Anakims, and beat the
King of Moab; and march so far, and discourse so well, for they were all called
the Children of Israel. Now, Gentlemen, I leave you to your liberty, whether
you will, in this case, contend further, or submit.

But you say, Children are in the Covenant, and they are holy, and of such is
the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. I might here justly enquire, what you mean by
Infants being in the Covenant; and whether you mean all Infants in the World,
or but some; if all, I wish you would tell us so; if but some, then which are
they? or whether any thing is required of them, or is to be done by them, in
order to their getting into the Covenant? if any thing, what? if nothing, how
came they in more than others? or whether it is their Virtue to be in, and the
Sin of others to be out? or whether there is any difference in the Capacity of
those that are in, and those that are out? Is their Wisdom, Knowledge, Judgment
and Understanding, Increased by it, or not? if you say it is, you must make it
manifest: but if not, then there is no difference betwixt them and others, in
respect of their Fitness for Baptism, etc. I say, I might enlarge and insist
upon several things of this kind: Which I confess, I could be glad to be
resolved in: But for the present I shall not here insist, but shall rather take
you at all Adventures; and mean what you please by all these Allegations, I
shall endeavor to show you, that there is nothing at all in them for your
purpose. For what if I grant you all you say in these cases, that Infants are
in the Covenant, and Holy, and such as shall be saved, etc. what then? if you
infer, that then, or therefore, they ought to be baptized, I deny that
Consequence: for by this Rule, Moses might have baptized Infants as well as
you, if a bare being in the Covenant, etc. were sufficient to warrant the
Practice: however, Sirs, he might have circumcised them, the first, second, or
third Day after they were born, as well as to have staid till the eighth Day:
for certainly, they were as holy, and as much in the Covenant, and as fit for
the Kingdom of Heaven the first or second Day, as they were the eighth: and
what is the reason think you that he did not? He might also have circumcised
Females, if this had been good Reasoning, for there is no doubt to be made, but
they were holy, and in the Covenant, and such as should be saved, as well as
the Males. But if he had done so, would he not (think you) have been a
Transgressor rather than a faithful Servant? Yet he might have taken up your
Plea, and defended himself altogether as well as you do or can, in the business
of Infant Baptism: but it is a plain case, he did not like this Argument. But,
Sirs, you ought to remember that the Will and Pleasure of God, ought in a
special manner to be heeded in all such Cases: for it is the Command of God
that gives Life and Being to all Duty, without which, all your Allegations are
in vain: with which, we should gladly cease to contend; and that is the reason
why Infants were circumcised precisely upon the eighth Day, either before, or
after, would certainly have incurred Displeasure. And this was that which kept
Females from Circumcision, tho holy and in Covenant, as well as Males. Nay, if
Christ had not commanded Believers to be baptized, their being Believers would
not have justified the Practice, neither will it now justify any other Practice
that he never commanded or appointed to be done. Besides, Sirs, do you not
herein sin, because Grace abounds? for is God so good and gracious, as to place
our Infants in Covenant with himself, must we therefore take the holy Name of
God in vain, and sprinkle Water upon their Faces, as if we supposed the
Covenant worth nothing, unless we confirm it with our own Inventions, and clap
a Seal to it of our own making, without any order from him so to do? Sirs, if
Infants be in Covenant, be content there to let them rest, without disturbing
or interrupting them in it: be content with that, till you are able to make
them sensible of the Obligations that may lie upon them, by virtue thereof to
discharge Duty toward God.

I have only two Demands to make, and then I shall leave this to Consideration:

First, Pray, Sirs, tell us, do you think Christ and his Apostles did not know
as much of this Nature, concerning Infants, as you do? do you think they were
not as well acquainted with their being holy and in the Covenant, and such as
should be saved, as you are? I hope, as Learned as you are, you will hardly
venture to say they did not: yet where did Christ, or any of his Apostles, give
either Command or Permission, to any Body, to baptize their Infants upon any of
these accounts? Where is thee the least Sign or Shadow of such a thing, in all
the New Testament? If you know of any, pray produce it, and let us see it, that
we may read and understand such a thing as well as your selves; and in so
doing, the Controversy would soon be ended: but if there be no such things
signify? if you should argue and write for three seven Years together, what is
it all worth, unless you bring Scripture-warrant for what you affirm and
practice?

My second Demand upon this account, is as follows: Supposing all these
things to be unquestionably true that you talk of; that Infants are in the
Covenant, holy, and such as shall be saved, and what you please of that kind:
How comes this to entitle them any more to Baptism than it does to the
Lord's Supper? What Is the reason, (I beseech you) you do not receive them to
the Lord's Table upon these Accounts, as well as admit them to Baptism? Are you
able to give us an Instance in all the New Testament of any that were accepted
as fit Subjects of Baptism, and at the same time, as such, reckoned and known
to be unfit for, and incapable of the Communion of Saints in the Supper of the
Lord? I marvel, Sirs, what you make of Baptism, that you should think Infants
so fitly and fully qualified for that, and yet dare not venture to plead,
either Right, or Obligation to any other Gospel-duty: Is not Baptism a
Gospel-requirement as well as the Lord's Supper? a Command of Christ, an
Ordinance of Heaven, and part of that Service and Obedience which Christians
owe to God, in and under the Gospel? And do you think it ought not to be done
with more Knowledge, Judgment and Reverence, than Infants of seven Days old are
capable of? What Subjection, or Obedience to God, is there, or can there be, in
a little Infant in the performance of that which you call its Baptism, when it
knows nothing at all of the thing commanded, nor of the Lawgiver commanding,
nor any reason in the World why it should, or should not submit; neither is it
capable of thinking either well, or ill, concerning any thing relating
thereunto? How then can it be done as a Duty, in Obedience to Christ, as the
answer of a good Conscience toward God, when the Subject knows nothing of
these things, and is altogether incapable of the least motive to Subjection?
But if you say, Infants must notwithstanding all this, be admitted to Baptism,
certainly you must needs wrong them greatly, in debarring them from the Lord's
Supper. Gentlemen, these things deserves to be well considered; and then take
Advice, and speak your Minds.

As to what you say about universal consent of Churches, and Antiquity for
Infant Baptism, I shall not so much as concern my self to enquire after the
Truth or Falsehood of the matter; because, let it be true or false, all the
while it is Scriptureless, there is not the weight of a Feather in it: It
neither hurts us, nor helps you, in this Case. For what does all the Consent
you talk of signify, unless you can clearly prove the thing consented to, to be
Truth without it? And if you can, then you have no need of its help; but if you
cannot, it has no help for you; for it is not the greatest Consent imaginable
that can make a Falsehood Truth: It must either be Truth previous to that
Consent, or else it remains a Falsehood notwithstanding that Consent: The
Consent it self can be no Argument to prove it Truth. So that all that appears
from this Argument, if all that you say were supposed to be unquestionably
true, is only this, That a great many People a great while ago held
Infant Baptism; but whether they did well or ill, in so doing, still remains
the Question, as much as ever: And if it want the true Primitive Mark of
Antiquity, let it be as old as it will, it is never the better for that, but
indeed the worse; for that only serves to prove it an old overgrown Error. As
old as it is, it is not old enough to be Truth, because from the beginning it
was not so. It Is in vain to talk of Antiquity, all the while you want the true
ground thereof; for if that be wanting, all your talk of Antiquity is so far
from being an Argument for it, that it is clearly an Argument against it: For
if it be very old, and of a long standing, and yet not old enough to be Truth,
it is high time for us, even for that Reason, to reject and explode it with
Indignation. As a Learned Church of England Doctor well observes and directs,
speaking of old Popish Pretensions, When they obtrude (says he) their
Revelations, or teach for Doctrines of God the Commandments of Men; we must ask
them every one how they read in the Beginning: We may not draw out of their
Ditches, be the Current never so long, whilst we have Waters of our own of a
nobler taste, which we can easily trace back to the Crystal Spring, etc.

The next Question you undertake to Answer, is, Whether Infant Baptism is to be
found in Scripture? Your Answer is not expressly in the Letter, but from
necessary and unavoidable Consequences, as, say you, we have already shown,
etc. Now, Gentlemen, if the latter part of your Answer here were but as true as
the former is, I should very readily give you the Case, and Dispute no more;
for I am clearly of the Opinion, that whatsoever is truly proved by necessary
and unavoidable Consequences from Scripture, is sufficiently proved, as you
say, to all disinterested Persons. But the misery of it is, we could never yet
see these necessary and unavoidable Consequences; but your Consequences are all
so grievous sick of one Distemper or another, that all the Doctors in
Christendom will never be able to make them sound: And this we have pretty well
found by your Consequences hitherto produced, unto which I refer, having not
now time to repeat. Besides, Gentleman, if it be true, that there is nothing of
Infant Baptism to be found expressly in the Letter of the Scripture, I cannot
readily understand how you can come by those necessary and unavoidable
Consequences you talk of: for tho it is true you may lay down a Proposition in
such Terms as cannot be proved verbatim from Scripture, and yet I confess it
may be well enough proved from very good Consequences. But if there is nothing
at all expressly in Scripture about it, not one Word in the Letter concerning
it, I Am afraid you must be content to go without those necessary and
unavoidable Consequences. Sirs, will you say that there is nothing of the
Doctrine of the Trinity, or three in one, to be found expressly in the
Scripture? Is there nothing expressly of the Godhead of Christ, or of his being
born of the Virgin Mary, to be found in the Scripture? If there is not, for my
part I know no Reason in the World they should be received for such Great and
Orthodox Truths: But if there is, What strange Men are you to talk at this
extravagant Rate, as if the Scripture spoke nothing expressly about these
Matters? And how boldly do you insinuate and endeavor to make the World
believe, that Infant Baptism is at least altogether as plain in Scripture, as
Christ's being born of the Virgin Mary; and that altogether as dark and as hard
to be proved from Scripture as Infant Baptism. Now, Sirs, this Insinuation is
either true or false: If false, don't you deserve to be severely corrected for
such Imperious Tricks? But if you stand by it, and say it is true, How do you
think you would come off if we should join Issue with you about it, and bring
the matter to a Trial? But I confess I have been so large hitherto, beyond my
first Thoughts or Intentions, that I shall say no more to this at present, and
not much to what remains.

There is no less than three Questions following which you undertake to answer,
which I reckon so inconsiderable and insignificant, both Questions and Answers,
that I count it not worth my while to spend one Line about them. I therefore
purposely omit them (time being precious with me) for the sake of something
else which I judge more worthy to be noted; wherefore I wave the Fourth, Sixth
and Seventh Questions, and pass on to the Eighth, and shall take some small
notice of the Fifth, last of all, and so draw to a Conclusion.

The Eighth and Last Question you undertake to answer, runs thus: Whether
Children have Faith or no, since Faith and Repentance are pre-requisite to
Baptism? To which you answer and say, That you have already showed that
according to the Words of the Commission, Baptizing goes before Teaching:
Therefore there is no such pre-requisiteness as some dream of, etc. But, Sirs,
I tell you plainly this is a mere idle swagger, for you have showed no such
matter, but the contrary does most evidently appear; therefore there is a
greater pre-requisiteness of Faith and Repentance than you dream of. Why you
refer us to Acts 9. and tell us our Savior was born King of the Jews, I cannot
imagine: I wish I did but know your Inference. But you say further, Admit Faith
as pre-requisite to Baptism, you could answer that Children have Faith
potentia, tho not in actu visibili; as an Artist, when he is indisposed or
asleep is potentially an Artist, tho not actually. Sirs, it is a plain Case that
you merely speak what you list, not knowing what you say, nor whereof you
affirm: What is it that you may not say Infants have, and are, if this kind of
talk be allowed you for good? Whatsoever you have a mind your Infants shall
have, or be, put but potentia to it, and it is done. What if you had been in the
Humor to have told us that Infants have the Greek Tongue and the rest of the
Oriental Languages, and are as good Preachers as any in the World, potentia,
tho not in actu visibili; as an Artist when he is a-sleep, is potentially an
Artist tho not actually? Could you have expected that any Body in their Wits
should have regarded you? And why not in this. I marvel, as well as in the
other? Besides Sirs, what can you mean by Childrens having Faith potentia? You
do not mean that they do actually and visibly believe; no by no means, that is
not to be imagined. Well, but what then do you mean? For my part I think it is
partly the same thing, at if you had told us only that they have Power, Might,
Strength and Ability to believe; but yet, whatever the matter is, they do not
believe: Notwithstanding this potency of believing, they neither do, nor can
make any improvement of it so as to do the thing. And if this be true, good now
what is it you talk of when you say Infants have faith potentia? And yet if
they have Power and Ability to do it, it must needs be their Sin if they do it
not. So that our Gentlemen's great Plea for Infants seems to prove a very Fatal
Charge against them, for the damning Sin of willful Unbelief must needs lie
upon them, if they have Strength, Might and Ability to believe, and make no use
of it to act accordingly.

Moreover, What reason have you to conclude any Man to be an Artist, tho but
potentially so, when you see him asleep, if you never saw, nor knew any thing
at all of his being an Artist before? if he had been asleep all the Days of his
Life, you would have had small cause to have counted him an Artist, tho you had
put the word potentia to it. But now Infants have (to follow your Simile) been
asleep all their Lifetime, in this case: You never, so much as saw, or knew of
a time when they were so far awake, as to show themselves Believers, as the
Artist was to show himself and Artist: So that as you have no reason to
conclude any Man to be an Artist potentially when asleep, that you never knew
to be any thing of an Artist actually, at one time or another before; so you
have no reason to conclude Infants Believers potentially, unless you had seen
or known them at one time or another to have been actually such. So that I
think you had as good blot out potentia (unless you will put it to their
Baptism too); and let your Children rest without Actual Baptism, till you can
write upon their Faith Actu visibili.

But you say, our Savior is full to the purpose, who assures us, as you tell
us in your Second, that Children have Faith, when he says, Whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones, which believe in me, etc. Sirs, I do plainly
confess that our Savior is full to the purpose, but not to your purpose; for
he does assure us, that the Persons here spoken of, were such as did really,
properly, and actually believe in him: he does not so much as intimate any
thing of their having Faith, potentia, but not in actu visibili; but in
downright terms tells us, they are such as do believe in him; which little
Infants, I think, by your own Confession, cannot do: therefore, little Infants
not here intended by our Savior in this Passage; but only such as were
converted, and become as little Children, in Plainness of Spirit, Humbleness,
Innocence, and freedom from Malice. Our Savior does not only assure us, that
such shall be greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven; but also plainly tell us, that
whosoever shall offend, or scandalize, one of these, thus converted, little
ones, which believe in him shall certainly incur great Displeasure from God.
And this is easily discerned, with a little Consideration, in reading the Text,
and Coherence of the same: That after our Savior had called a little Child,
and taught his Disciples how they should be converted, and become as little
Children, and humble themselves as that little Child; he under that
Consideration, gives the Denomination of little ones, even to such as should so
learn and so do, which did truly believe in him, from that Analogy, that was
and ought to be, between little Children and them: therefore, whereas you argue
thus, or to this purpose, [These little ones which believe in me;] therefore
Infants do believe. I argue the direct contrary from the same Text, thus; Those
of whom Christ here speak, did really believe in him: but little Infants
neither do, nor can believe in christ: Ergo, Christ speaks not here of little
Infants. To prove the Minor here, I thus reason; Faith in Christ, comes by
hearing the Word of God understandingly: but little Infants cannot hear the
Word of God understandingly: Ergo, Little Infants cannot be Believers in
Christ. Again, if little Infants neither do good or evil, nor so much a know
good or evil, then they can neither hear the Word of God understandingly, (for
if they can, they must of necessity be capable of knowing good;) nor be
Believers in Christ, for if they be, they must of necessity do good; for
believing in Christ is one of the best things that can be done in the world.
But the Scripture it self, besides Experience, plainly tells us concerning
Infants, that they neither do good, or evil; nor know good or evil: Ergo, Romans
9.11. Deuteronomy. 1.39. Isa. 7.14, 15, 16. See the Assembly Annotations on this
Passage of our Savior; and Reverend Diodate on the same: See also these
Scriptures, where this Phrase, little ones, or little Children, is used to
grown Believers, and Disciples of Christ; Mat. 10.41, 42. Joh. 21.5 Gal. 4.19.
1 John 2.1, 12, 13, 18, 28. and 3.7, 18. and 4.4. and 5.21.

Besides, Gentlemen, if you must and will have little Infants here intended,
then it must and will, of necessity, be but a Prosopopoeia however; and so do
you no Service at all, tho we should out of Charity give you what you so
earnestly beg for.

A few words to your Answer to the fifth Question, and so I draw to a
Conclusion. The Question is only thus; Why Sprinkling, and not Dipping? To
which you answer and say, Our Church denies not the latter to any one that
desires it; but looks upon it as a clear Representation of our Savior's
descending into the Grave, abiding there, and rising up again; according as the
Apostle makes use of it, when he says, we are buried with him in Baptism. Sirs,
it is a clear case, that Dipping or Covering the Body under Water, was the true
Primitive, Apostolical and Scriptural way of Baptizing: and you and your Church
both, seems plainly to be convinced of the Truth hereof; by this free and full
Confession and Acknowledgment which here you make; that it is a clear
Representation of our Savior's descending into the Grave, abiding there, and
rising up again: and this you deliver, not as a Conceit that may come into a
Man's Brains by chance; no, but it is very seriously given us, as a thing by
your own Acknowledgment, which is according to Scripture, as the Apostle
himself makes use of it, when he tells us, we are buried with him in Baptism.
Now, Sirs, stand by this, and all is well; but if you will be so unfaithful, as
to dissert these true primitive Colors, you certainly run away from Truth and
Substance, to close with Falsehood and Vanity: for either this is the mind of
God, which you have here ventured to give us, or it is not: If it be not,
wherefore did you urge it as a thing, not only acceptable to you and your
Church, but even acceptable to God himself, as being according to Scripture? If
it is the mind of God, what is the reason that you tattle of a dispensing Power
in your Church with respect to this matter? As if the Mind of God, were
altogether insignificant with you; that let God command what he please, you
will be so stately as to conceit, that you may by virtue of your dispensing
Power, do just what you list. And if he don't think good to accept of what you
please to give him, as the result of your Power, tho it is but Sprinkling, for
Baptizing or Dipping, he is like to get nothing else from you. Yet in your Plea
for this Power, you do as good as dwindle it into nothing too: for you
endeavor to make us believe that it only relates to Circumstantials, and the
manner of Acting, but not to the Act it self. Really, Sirs, if this be true,
you had better have kept where you were, without the least pretense to this
dispensing Power, for it can do you no Kindness at all: For if Dipping or
Burying in Water, be the thing that God requires, then according to your own
grant, your Church has not Power to dispense with this Act, and turn it into
another, which cannot by any means be the same Act; which is certainly the Case
of Dipping and Sprinkling: For Sprinkling and Baptizing are certainly two
different Things, two different Actions, having two different Forms, and cannot
by any means properly be called the same. All that you can fairly pretend to,
if you be true to your Plea, is, That the Administrator is at liberty to dip,
or put the Person under Water, diverse manner of Ways, as forward, backward,
sideway, toward the Right Hand, or toward the Left, quickly, or slowly; all
these Things being merely Circumstantial; yet all this while Dipping, or
putting under Water, is the Act or Thing to be done: Which if it be done, the
Person may truly be said to be baptized, notwithstanding these different
Circumstances; because the Essential Form of Baptism, viz. Dipping in Water, is
to be found in all these ways. But if you only sprinkle a little Water on his
Face, that is quite another Thing; not another Circumstance in which the same
Thing is yet done, but clearly another Act, in which not the same but another
Thing is done; and the Person thereby is no more truly baptized, than as if you
had given him a Flip or two with a wet Finger: For here is differentia
essentialis, the very Formality of Baptism is absent. So that you had better
continue your first Compliance with us, than strive as you do in your Second,
to run away from us; for it is certainly true, that if our Practice be Right,
(as you know it is) yours must of necessity be Wrong: And all your idle Greek
Struggles will never be able to make it otherwise.

I must, before I conclude, take a little notice of your great Argument so
formally laid down in your Second Paper; which I had like to have overlooked
and forgot: I confess it is here a little out of due place, but it is no great
matter, better here than no where, lest you should think a mere Sense of its
Strength frighted me from it. The Argument in form appears thus, An Ordinance
once enjoined, and never repealed, is always in force: But the Ordinance of
Childrens incovenanting was once in the Old Testament enjoined, and was never
repealed. Ergo, It Is yet in Force. Good now, Sirs, do so much as tell us, what
is the Question this Argument relates to? or what is it brought to prove? Sirs,
Do you urge this Argument to prove Infant Baptism, or do you not? If not, what
Business has it here? If you do, certainly such an Argument was hardly ever
laid down for such a purpose, by any that pretended the least Skill in Logic:
For there is not the least mention of Infant Baptism in any part of the
Argument. If you had intended the Proof of Infant Baptism by it, it ought to
have run thus, An Ordinance once enjoined, and never repealed, is still in
force: But the Ordinance of Infant Baptism was once enjoined, and was never
repealed: Ergo, Infant Baptism is still in force. Now if you had argued thus,
and proved your Minor, you had then done your Business. But now, Sirs, what is
it you have done by this Argument? What Ordinance is this that was once
enjoined and never repealed? One would think you must of necessity mean either
Circumcision or Baptism: If Circumcision, then that is in force still, and it is
Circumcision you plead for: If you mean Baptism, then I deny your Minor, and
put you to prove that Baptism was ever enjoined as an Ordinance upon Infants.
But if you mean neither, but only a mere Incovenanting, as you call it, although I
do not well know what you mean by it, neither do I understand any thing of such
an Injunction separate from Circumcision; yet, for Discourse-sake, I give it
you, pray take it and make your best of it: Incovenant your Children as much as
you will, or can, who shall hinder you? But then you must not speak a Word of
their Baptism, by virtue of this Argument, for it is now supposed that this
Argument neither mentions or means Baptism, much less does it prove their
Baptism: So that you are as far to seek for Infant Baptism as ever you were,
unless you had produced a Precept, or an Appointment of God for that purpose;
otherwise all the Inconvenanting you talk of will do you no good: For if God
had never commanded Infants to have been Circumcised, who durst have done it,
notwithstanding this Plea? So if he had no where commanded Infants to be
baptized, who shall dare to do it, notwithstanding the same Plea? Although you
were sure you had it, which I do not in the least believe, tho I will not at
this time dispute it: Besides, what need you care whether you have it or no?
for you that dare baptize your Infants without being enjoined, what need you
care whether the other be enjoined or no? what need you trouble your selves,
whether Childrens incovenanting were once enjoined or no? or if it was, what
matter is it if it should be repealed? You may as well baptize them of your own
pleasure, without this Plea, as with it. For if God never appointed it, there is
no Plea for it; but if he has appointed it, there is none against it: So that if
it be your pleasure, that Infants shall be baptized, you had as good insist
upon your Churches Power, and never trouble the World with an Argument about
it. And that will be the easiest way for you to answer the three Sheets and a
half already published (as you it seems are informed) by the joint Consent of
the principal Anabaptist Preachers in London, or any other of their Papers:
Because you know you have publicly obliged your selves to give a full answer
to all the Questions in them, or to any other Questions or Objections that can
be sent to you in the mean time. And the Remark that you make at the same time,
is so Remarkable, that I shall make a Remark upon it. Your Remark is this, That
surely had not the Anabaptists thought you had advanced something of moment, in
your two Mercuries about Infant Baptism, they would never have called in such
assistance for the answering of them, or made such a stir about them.

Really, Sirs, I plainly perceive, that you are fully resolved, that every
thing shall make for your Credit, let it be what it will: For here, because
some few of them consented and thought good, your two Mercuries should be
answered, and accordingly were so; you merely make that an Argument of the
Strength and Moment of your Matter contained therein: And yet, because the
Gentleman in his Animadversions, did but omit that impertinent Passage of the
Ruler's Daughter, tho we may reasonably suppose it was, because he almost
thought it below a Man to take notice of it; how bravely could you improve that
poor Omission against him, and make that too an Argument of the great Strength
and Moment of that Passage? So that you are the most fortunate Men alive. Your
being answered signifies Greatness in you; not answering you, signifies the
same? Every thing, it seems, works for the Reputation of the Athenian Society:
What is it that Men so priviledg'd may not venture upon? You say likewise, If
any Anabaptists are disobliged by your Reflections upon those called
Anabaptists in Germany; you promise, or threaten, (for my part I know not
which) to put the Matter in its true Light, which has never been done yet.
Sirs, the main thing, I think, that they commonly mind in that case, is to
observe the very great Folly and Weakness of you Pedo-baptists, who generally
are mighty apt and forward to make a clutter about the Anabaptists in Germany,
when you ought, instead thereof, to give us a good sound Argument for
Infant Baptism. We cannot imagine what you mean in so doing, or what should
make you so silly, from time to time, without the least Occasion, Provocation
or Reason, to be so miserably impertinent. Good now, Sirs, do so much as tell
us seriously, what it is you propound to your selves in your so doing: Do you
give it us as an Argument for Infant Baptism, or do you not; if not, then you
your selves don't look upon it as any thing to your purpose, with respect to
that Controversy; if you do, you are as much out in your Methods, as the Man
was in his Tools, that bought a Hammer and a Chizzel to make his Neighbor a
Dubblet. But I Am afraid there is something worse in it yet than all this; and
that is, you urge these things commonly, for no other reason, than thereby to
expose the Baptists to the Contempt and Hatred of ignorant and undiscerning
People; whom you are willing to hope, will believe you in all you say, without
examining any thing: And from their great skill in Logic, will conclude, that
all Anabaptists must be such, or one way or another as bad. If this be your
design, Sirs, it is very bad; and it is no marvel, if those you call Anabaptists
should be disobliged at it: but if you can clear your selves, pray do; for my
part, I should be very glad herein to be mistaken. And that which aggravates
your Folly herein, (to say no worse) is, that you cannot but know, that if your
Antagonists were in the humor to recriminate, what an Augean Stable might soon
be made of your unclean Oxen: such a one as all the River Alphaeus would never
be able to cleanse.

Moreover, if this true Light you talk of, be a new Light, as your words seem
to imply, it may then justly be suspected to be your own Invention, and so
nothing but mere Darkness; but if it be an old Light, then it will be the same
as it was before, and I Am afraid too near a kin to Guy Faux's Dark-Lanthorn, to
be good for any thing. However, Gentlemen, use your Pleasure, do what seems
good in your own Eyes; only remember, that for all these things God will bring
you to Judgment.

Postscript.
HAving a little Paper-room left, which I was not aware of till the Press
convinced me of it, I shall a little reflect upon two or three things, which
hitherto I have wholly omitted.

The First is, that strange and prodigious Ignorance, you seem to be guilty of,
when you insinuate to the World, that there is not one Instance of
Female-Baptism in all the Scripture. Sirs, Is it likely that you should be fit
Persons to manage such a Controversy, satisfactorily and convincingly, wherein,
and concerning which, you appear to be so astonishingly ignorant? yet this
strange Ignorance of yours, is attended with as strange a Confidence, with
which you boldly, and in the face of the Sun, challenge your Antagonists to
show where they have one Instance of Female-Baptism. Really, Sirs, in my
opinion, it is (at least) a very great shame for any Man, or Woman either,
(pretending to Christianity) of the meanest parts imaginable, to be so horridly
ignorant, as here you appear to be: How much more then is your Shame and Blame
increased and aggravated, when we consider with what Magnifying Glasses you
look upon your selves, and what public Pretenses you make to Parts, Learning,
Wit, and almost, if not altogether, universal Understanding? You confidently
insinuate, that Infant Baptism is as plainly to be found in Scripture as that
of Adult Females. Now, Sirs, if this did but appear to be truth, we should then
immediately have done disputing; but it is so far from appearing to be truth,
that the contrary is not only easily demonstrated, but you your selves shall be
my Witness, that it is directly false: for you plainly confess, in words at
length, that Infant Baptism is not expressly to be found in Scripture. Now then,
if Women's being baptized, is expressly to be found in Scripture, then you are
Witnesses against your selves of the Falseness of that Suggestion: But the
Baptism of Women is expressly to be found in Scripture; Ergo. See Act. 8.12. and
16.14, 15. All that I shall say more to this particular, is only this; that as
you have publicly abused, and endeavored to deceive the World, by your
ignorant, rash, and false Insinuations, especially in this matter, wherein you
are so easily detected and convicted; so you ought at least to make as public
an Acknowledgment and Recantation, of this Injury done to the World by this
blind, yet bold Attempt of yours: for it is no small matter thus to abuse the
World, and make no conscience of making Compensation.

The second thing I would a little note, is a piece of Divinity and Logic,
somewhat agreeble to the Ignorance just now complained of. When you tell us,
that if Children do behold the Face of God in Heaven, as (say you) our Savior
says; then it follows, that they have Faith in Heaven; and (consequently) why
not on Earth? To which I answer, That Children do, or may behold the Face of
God in Heaven, I will not deny; yet I profess, I do not remember where our
Savior tells us so: however, it does not in the least follow, that therefore
they have Faith in Heaven; but it rather strongly implies the contrary; because
Faith and Sight, are plainly opposed to each other, 2 Cor. 5.7. where the
Apostle plainly tells us, that here, while we walk by Faith, we walk not by
Sight: Implying, that while Faith continues, Sight is absent; consequently,
when Sight comes, Faith disappears. Tho it is true, here, whilst we are in the
Body, we are absent from the Lord; and to see him that is invisible, must needs
now be an Act of Faith, according to the Text you quote, Heb. 11.27. But the
time will come, when Faith will be turned into Vision, and Promise, which is
the ground of Faith, into Fruition, which is the end of Faith. When we shall
see Face to Face, see him as he is, and know as we are known, 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 John 3.2. So that it is so far from being evident, that Infants have, or shall
have Faith in Heaven, that it is, at least, a very great Question, whether such
a thing can fairly be said of the greatest actual Believer in the World. But
further, suppose we should give you the Premises, and grant you that Infants
may have Faith in Heaven; your Conclusion is not a little to be admired, or
rather your selves, for your strange skill in Theological Logic. Sirs, do you
indeed look upon this to be good Reasoning, that because a thing is, or may be,
thus or so, in Heaven, therefore it is, and must be so here on Earth? If you do
not, why do you talk at this extravagant rate; and endeavor to impose that
upon others, which you do not believe your selves? If you do, I must
acknowledge, that all the Wit I have is not sufficient to discover the Greatness
of your Folly; yet take a taste however: In Heaven, the Saints shall be wholly
freed from all Sin, Sorrow and Trouble, of what nature soever: Ergo, Why not so
here on Earth? In Heaven Saints shall be immortal: Ergo, Why not so here on
Earth? In Heaven, the now vile Bodies of Saints shall be changed, and be made
like unto the glorious Body of Christ: Ergo, Why not so here on Earth? with
much more of this nature. Certainly, Sirs, there is none could ever have thought
you so preposterously ridiculous, if you had not your selves proclaimed it upon
the Housetop. What a strange thing it is, that Men so manifestly weak, should
yet be so conceitedly strong, as to suppose themselves able to answer all the
Questions, Arguments and Objections, that can be sent them from the People
called Anabaptists? But I hope you may yet live to see your Vanity, and so get
into the Road of learning more Wisdom.

Thirdly; I cannot but note, how strangely sometimes you abuse your
Antagonists, in asking them such kind of Questions, as imply an Absurdity in
them, when they are no more concerned in the Questions than your selves. As for
instance, you very reprehensively ask them, How the Faith of the Parent can put
the Child further off from God: and how Children can lose by Christ's Coming,
who came to take away the Sin of the World, etc. Now, would not any Body be apt
to think, that the Baptists must needs hold the Affirmative here, in both these
Questions; or else you must needs be very impertinent and injurious to them,
thus unworthily to insinuate? Now, Sirs, I challenge you, to give an Instance
if you can, of any amongst the Baptists, that ever told you, either in Word or
Writing, that the Faith of the Parent put the Child further off from God; or
that Children lost any thing by the Coming of Christ: for certainly, either you
do know of some such, or you do not: if you do, you ought to put it out of
question, for your own Vindication; and then I shall reckon them as weak in
that, as you are in some other things: But if you know of none such, what Shame
ought you to take to your selves, for thus disingenuously misrepresenting your
Antagonists to the World, as if those very things were the Questions in debate
betwixt you?

In the last place, I shall take a little notice what a strange Faculty there
is generally in you Pedo-baptists, of fawning one upon another; how apt you are
to magnify and extol one another, for every little nothing you do upon a
Publick-Stage. This has been a Fashion of a long standing amongst you; that
whoever carries the Thing, you still resolve to carry the Thank: and whoever
loses, you must still ride Triumphant. And this is the Case of your
Postscript-Gentleman, toward Mr. Elliot of New England: Not that he so much as
attempts to prove, that Mr. Elliot did merit or deserve any Honor for what (he
there says) he did; but merely, because Mr. Elliot did something, with which
that Gentleman was pleased, therefore Honor will for ever redound to Mr.
Elliot of New England: Whereas, it is ten to one if the merit of the Cause were
but thoroughly examined, and impartially considered, the Honor might rebound
from Mr. Elliot, and redound to them which opposed him: and why not? for he
only tells us, that he openly and earnestly maintained the Cause of
Infant Baptism against a sort of Persons, who forget that in the Gospel Church,
the Promise is to Believers and their Children; and are unwilling to reckon
Children among the Disciples of Christ, etc. He scarcely so much as tells us,
much less does he prove, that Mr. Elliot was in the Truth, and his Antagonists
in an Error: so that still for ought we know, the Honor might belong to the
other side, to them who openly and earnestly opposed the Cause of
Infant Baptism, against a sort of Persons, who forget that in the
Gospel Church, the Promise, he alludes to, is any otherwise, to any Body, than
it is to every Body; or to Believers Children, any otherwise than it was to
Believers themselves: namely, upon Condition of their believing, and performing
the Conditions required in order thereunto; as their Parents before them were
fain to do, before they had any Interest therein; for the Promise belongs to
all the World, upon those Conditions, and to none in the World without them.
For if it belong to any without Condition, then the Promise is absolute, and
belongs as much to Unbelievers and their Children, as it can do to any Body
else. And it is worth observing that these very Persons, unto whom Peter speaks
these Words, were not themselves Believers as yet, but Unbelievers, when Peter
spoke these Words unto them, etc. Neither has this Gentleman told us at all,
what Infants are the better for Mr. Elliot's reckoning them Disciples of
Christ: he has not so much as told us, that Mr. Elliot proved them so to be:
And pray what Advantage can it be to poor Infants to be miscalled, and reckoned
what they are not? What if Mr. Elliot of New England had reckoned Children of
Believers to be Lawyers, Counselors, and Judges, would this have done the poor
Children any Good, or have provoked any wise Man to have carried any of them a
Fee to plead his Cause? Or, what Honor would have been due to Mr. Elliot for
such an idle Encomium, any more than to those that should oppose him therein?
But what kind of Folks those are that are unwilling to grant that of such is
the Kingdom of Heaven, for my part I know not: Certainly there is no People in
the World more guilty of such a thing than Pedo-Baptists. I am very much of the
Mind that the Gentleman that talks of it, never met with a Baptist in his Life,
that could justly be charged with such a thing: But you Pedo-baptists generally
say what you list, (especially in this Controversy) and matter not what you
charge your Antagonists with; for if you did, you would either not do as you
do, or else often be ashamed where you are not: For it is well known, that there
are a great many of the Baptists so far from what is here insinuated, that they
do steadfastly believe that all Infants in the World, dying in Infancy, shall
certainly be saved; and some of them have writ Books to the same purpose,
against the Cruelty of some Pedo-baptists that damn them by Millions: And tho
there may possibly be some of the Baptists, that may not be of that Persuasion,
yet the worst of them believe as well as the most of you, concerning them.

It may also be worth while to enquire wherein lay the Greatness and Worth of
that thing in Mr. Elliot, to be so earnest to bring Infants under the Bond of
the Covenant? May we suppose, that Infants being brought under this Bond, was
really the Act and Deed of Mr. Elliot? for so indeed the Words plainly seem to
imply; and if so, then it seems they never were under this Bond before, neither
would it have been so now, if it had not been for earnest Mr. Elliot: Let any
one judge then of the Excellency of this Act. Besides, what the Gentleman means
by the Bond of the Covenant, who can imagine? unless by Bond of the Covenant, he
means the Duties which the Covenant binds and obliges People to perform toward
God, I cannot guess at his Meaning: and if so, then what Honor is due to Mr.
Elliot, may soon be discerned, for bringing poor incapable Infants under an
Obligation to perform the Duties of the Covenant, and affording them no more
Strength to perform them, than they had before they were brought under this
Obligation; and so through Mr. Elliot's Earnestness, poor Infants are undone
for ever. But the best of it is, this is all false, a mere idle Conceit that
has nothing in it; or else Mr. Elliot's Honor had been raised upon the Ruin of
Infants.

I have now done, when I have only told you, that the principal Anabaptist
Preachers in London, (as you call them) were not at all concerned in the
drawing up of these few Sheets: for I can assure you it was done by a very mean
and private Hand, by one, and one only, that is so far too from being a
principal Preacher, or any Preacher at all, as that he is not accounted worthy
to be a Member amongst them: neither had they, whom you call principal
Preachers, nor any in a public Capacity, any hand either in the Composing or
Publishing of these Lines: But the Author was so hardy, as to get it printed of
his own accord, and upon his own account, without being concerned who were
pleased or displeased at his so doing. Wherefore, whatsoever Defects appear to
be in them, they are all his own; it is not fit, that any Body should so much
as share with him in any thing that may be justly due upon that account; and
whatsoever mean or unworthy Apprehensions you may have either of the Author or
his Work, if you think it worth your while to take any public Notice of it,
pray speak directly to him, and to the Matter in hand, without disingenuous and
impertinent Reflections: for I must signify to you, that as mean as the Author
is, he is not altogether so silly, as to take idle and impertinent Reflections
for solid and satisfactory Answers; but looks upon all such Persons, as the
greatest and worst Sort of Fools in the World, that take Sanctuary in such
rotten and desolate Buildings. Gentlemen, I do not charge you with any such
thing aforehand, but only give you this timely Admonition, that if you should
happen to act at that rate in your Answers to me, or any Body else, you might
appear to be the more inexcusable: But if there should appear to be any little
Strength in these Lines, pray do not think that you have yet got, either all,
or the principal Strength that you may expect from the People you call
Anabaptists, if further occasion require: For so long as the Way of the Lord
continues Strength to the Upright, you may not expect to see an end of their
Strength.

Here I fully designed to have ended, but unless I had written somewhat less in
my Postscript, I plainly perceive I must be obliged to write a little more,
because my Postscript has bespoke a little more Paper than I first intended. I
shall therefore briefly offer two or three Arguments to Consideration, against
Infant Baptism, without any enlargement at all, to defend or secure any part
thereof, till I plainly see or know what Objections or Exceptions our
Antagonists shall please to make against them.

Arg. 1. The New Testament does plainly, fully and sufficiently declare to us
who are the true Subjects of Baptism: But the New Testament does neither
plainly, fully nor sufficiently declare to us that Infants are the true
Subjects of Baptism. Ergo, Infants are not the true Subjects of Baptism.

Arg. 2. None ought to be Baptized without knowing what they do, and consenting
thereunto: But Little Infants are not capable either of Knowledge or Consent in
that matter. Ergo, Little Infants ought not to be Baptized.

Arg. 3. That which there is no Precept for, nor Precedent of, nor Promise unto
in all the Word of God, is not of Divine Authority: But there is no Precept
for, Precedent of, nor Promise unto the Baptizing of Infants in all the Word of
God. Ergo, Baptizing of Infants is not of Divine Authority.

Arg. 4. If Infant Baptism be of Divine Authority, then it is (by the
appointment of God) for some good Ends and Purposes: But Infant Baptism is not
(by the appointment of God) for any good Ends and Purposes. Ergo, It is not of
Divine Authority.

Arg. 5. That Doctrine and Practice, that is not agreeable to the Doctrine and
Practice of John the Baptist, Christ and his Apostles, is not of Divine
Authority: But the Doctrine and Practice of Infant Baptism, is not agreeable to
the Doctrine and Practice of John the Baptist, Christ and his Apostles. Ergo,
The Doctrine and Practice of Infant Baptism, is not of Divine Authority.

Arg. 6. If Infant Baptism be of Divine Authority, then it is a Sin in Parents
to omit baptizing their Infants: But it is not a Sin in Parents, to omit
baptizing their Infants. Ergo, Infant Baptism is not of Divine Authority.

Arg. 7. That which is substantially and severely forbidden by the Word of God,
is not of Divine Authority: But baptizing Infants in the Name of the Lord, is
substantially and severely forbidden by the Word of God. Ergo, Infant Baptism
is not of Divine Authority.

I shall say nothing at present in the Defense of these Arguments, only leave
them (thus briefly and nakedly laid down) to the Consideration of any that
shall please to peruse them: But when I perceive what it is that my Antagonists
have to say against them, or where their Answers or Exceptions will be chiefly
concerned, I shall then reckon my self obliged to prove whatsoever is denied,
or else submit to the Strength and Authority of the Answers given.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 23. l. 6. r. came. P. 24. l. 5. r. will do you no service.


