The continuance OF THE HIGH COURT OF CHANCERY vindicated, to be absolute
necessary, (the abuses and corruptions being removed,) and the removal thereof,
and the perfect Reformation of the proceedings in that Court, Proposed in
several Bills weekly, or more often, intended to be Published.

By many Citizens, and others of the Commonwealth, well knowing of such abuses.

LONDON: Printed for Lawrence Chapman in the Strand, near the Savoy. 1654.

Bill: I. For remedy against untrue, and unjust Reports by Masters of the
Chancery, and other Referrees.
WHereas Masters of the Chancery, and other Referrees of late years have been
much complained of for taking Rewards, and thereby many times carrying
businesses the wrong ways, and for extraordinary and unwarranted Fees, or so
called, taken by them, which has occasioned much trouble, perplexity, charge,
and delays in diverse Suits for many years.

For remedy whereof it is proposed to be desired, that it may
BE Enacted, that if any Master, or Referree shall make any Report, or
Certificate contrary to the Books, Writings, or Notes showed him, which by his
Order he shall have power to view, or peruse, or Copies of Bills, Answers, or
Depositions, or other things taken, in, or concerning the cause to him
referred; Or that if such Master or Referree shall not report so much for the
benefit of the party, upon whose Motion any matter shall be referred to him; Or
for the other Party, Plaintiff, or Defendant in his Order of Reference, as the
Counsel learned in the Law, Attorney, or Solicitor of either party shall show,
and make appear unto him, the Matter so to be reported, to be necessary to be
reported or certified, then every such Master or Referree shall forfeit and pay
unto the party grieved, or to be grieved thereby 100 l: and double damages,
with costs of Suit to be recovered by Action of Debt, etc.

Provided, that (before the commensing of any such Action, or etc.) the party
or parties finding him, her, or them self, or selves grieved by such Report or
Certificate, shall (within one month next after the fileing, or delivering the
same into the Court where such Order of Referrence shall be made; Or the Office
of such Court proper for receiving of such Reports or Certificates) give notice
unto such Master or Referree, or Referrees, and require him or them to alter,
amend, or procure to be altered, or amended such Report or Certificate. And
that if such Master, or Refer, or Referrees do or shall alter or amend; or
cause to be altered or amended such Report or Certificate; or notify or
declare unto the party, or parties, by, or for whom such notice or Declaration
be, or shall be so given unto such Master, or Referree, that he will move the
Court (where such Order was made, or entered,) and deliver, or cause to be
delivered to him, her, or them a Copy in writing of such Notification or
Declaration, and the matter of such thing to be moved within days then next
following,) and receive and take such matter in writing as such party so
supposing to be grieved, do or shall (within days next from thence) alledg to
impeach, damn, or overthrow such Report or Certificate, and cause both the same
matter so to be alleged on both fides to be delivered into the Court, to which
such Report, or Certificate shall be, or to be made [wherin there be, or shall
be two or more Judges, or Justices of the one Bench, or the other sitting, and
there have equal power with such others, who do or shall fit there to give
their Votes] to be read, then if such Report or Certificate be, or shall be by
such Court, (so supplied, or assisted, or so to be) approved of, etc. the same
to stand firm and stable, and not to be reversed or dissolved (but by the
Supreme Power) and such Master, or Referree, or Referrees not to be questioned
for doing the same, but justified therein, and have their reasonable costs to
be sustained in that behalf of the party, or parties unjustly vexing them, upon
such occasion.

Bill II. For avoiding of many unnecessary Hearings in Chancery, and
mittigation of the Charges in diverse others: And speedy trial, and finding out
the truth of every Deposition, of which any doubt shall arise.
Whereas in and after diverse Hearings in the High Court of Chancery, and other
Courts called English Courts, or Courts of Equity upon Debate of Counsel
learned on both sides, there has happened in diverse Causes in these Courts such
doubt of the truth, in many of those Causes; that such Courts have been so
cautious and tender in, and concerning the same, that those Courta have not
thought meet or convenient to make any final Order or Decree in such Courts in
such causes; but have Ordered an Action to be con^^lved and drawn, and a Plea
thereunto to be pleaded, and an Issue to be taken thereupon of the matter of
the doubt of such truth, and then accordingly the Jury, or Jurors have found
and given a Verdict thereupon; And then such Courts have made final Orders or
Decrees for the same, which course has been accounted, applauded, and
commended to be very good and beneficial for the Public, and few or none have
found fault, or themselves grieved therewith: but only have complained of the
excessive charge there.

For establishing of the Benefits before mentioned, and avoiding of the excess
aforesaid.

It is proposed to be destred that it may
1 BE Enacted that if either Complainant, or Complainants D^fendant, or
Defendante, his or their Commissioners do, or shall misdoubt the truth of any
matter, thing, or things being matt^r of Fact or D^ed done to be tried by
J^rors, and not by Record) deposed by any such Witness or Witnesses, and refuse
to agree the same for Truth, then an Action or Actions of, or upon the Case,
Trespas^, or Debt, may or shall be drawn, wherein such ma^ter, thing or things
may, or shall be alleged to be true by such either Complainant, or
Complainants, Defendant, or Defendants; (who do or will endeavor to maintain
the same to be true.) And that the other of such Complainant, or Complainants,
Defendant or Defendants, (who do or will endeavor to maintain the same matter,
thing, or things not to be true) shall answer, or plead in bar thereof, that
such matter, thing, or things is not, or was, or are not, or were not true
according as the same is, or was, are, or were alleged: And that Issue or
Issues may, or shall be thereupon joined, and one such Action shall be for such
matter, thing, or things which is, or was, are, or were, or shall be done, or
acted in the same County (where such matter, thing or things is, or was, are,
or were, or shall be acted or done) whether or not such matter, thing, or
things is, or was, are, or were, as shall be l^cal or transitory; unless such
Complainant, or Complainants, Defendant, or Defendants shall alledg, and make
it appear by Oath that the other, or others of them be, or shall be powerful in
such County, by being feated in having overmuch commanding power of him, or
them there; or by overmuch affection by them gained, in lending money, or such
like favors, or power gained by him, or them there, that then such Action, or
Actions shall be laid in the County next, or nearest to the place where such
matter, thing or things shall be so acted, or done.

2. And that such Action or Actions shall be brought within days next after
publication in the Cause or Suit to be so in question, or proceeding or Debate
by either such Complainant, or Complainants, Defendant, or Defendants, and
within that time fairly written (as is mentioned in another Bill concerning
many other matters,) and sent into one of such of the Superior Courts at
Westminster; which usually, or most commonly have holden Plea, and had conusans
of such Action, and Issue; or power of trying, or sending the same to be tried
at any Assizes, or places, of, or for trial, wheresoever such superior Courts
be, or shall be nereafter holden or kept: And that the other of him, her, or
them shall so plead, or answer to the same (within one week, or days next
after a Copy, or copies of such Declaration, or Declarations shall be delivered
to him, her, or them, his, her, or their Clerk, Attorney or Agent authorized,
or to be authorized to receive the same: Or left for him, her or them in the
Court, or Office aforesaid and deliver unto such Complainant, or Complainants,
Defendant, or Defendants his, her, or their Clerk, Attorney, or (...) in that
behalf a Copy, or Copies of such Plea, or Pleas, Answer, or Answers, with the
Issue, or Issues thereupon joined, or to be joined as before is mentioned; or
leave the same for him or them in the Court or Office (where such Declaration
is, or shall be so delivered to be ^led, or kept) within convenient time next
after such delivery of the copy of such Declaration, or Declarations, or notice
given to such Complainant, or Complainants, Defendant, or Defendants, (who so
should plead or answer) or otherwise next after notice thereof in writing left,
at his, her, or their usual dwelling house, or houses, or place, or places of
abode, at the time of such delivery of such Declaration, or Declarations so to
be filed and kept into such Court, or Office (that is to say) by the space of
days for every 20 miles distance off, or from the place where such
Declaration, or Declarations be, or shall be delivered, or such notice given
from the Court, or Office (into which such Declaration, or Declarations be, or
shall be so delivered, and notice be given to the Clerk, or Attorney of such
complainant or Complainants, Defendant or Defendants of such Note or writing
left, or to be left at such House, or place of abode within the said time: And
that such Complainant, or Complainants, Defendant, or Defendants (who shall so
plead or answer) shall within such time so limited, or to be limited to him,
her, or them to do the same) leliver into such Court, or Office, such plea, or
pleas, Answer, or Answers with such Issue, or Issues thereupon joined, or to be
joined as aforesaid, fairly written in manner and form beforementioned.

3. And that such Complainant or Complainants, Defendant or Defendants (who
shall bring, or cause to be brought such Action, or so declare) shall at the
then next Assiz^s, or place or places for trials of Issues upon Actions to be
holden within days next after a copy of such plea, or pleas, and Issues so
delivered, or to be delivered as aforesaid; or the same plea, or pleas, and
Issues so delivered, or to be delivered (in manner and form aforesaid to be
fi^ed and kept) cause or procure such Issue or Issues to be tried; and that
every such Declaration, Answer, plea, and Issue, and proceedings between such
Declaration and Issue so written, and delivered in as aforesaid (for the ease
of the charges and trouble, and more ready and speedy dispatch thereof) may and
shall be taken off, and from the file in such Court, and delivered out, and
sent to the Justice, or Justices of the Assizes, or other Justice or Justices
(who shall be authorized or empowered to try such Issues) to such place or
places of Assize, with an expression or making mention in a piece of Parchment
by it self so written, to be affixed to the same D^claration, and Plea, or
answer, and issue of the Term, and year, when and of what such declaration is
was, or shall be filed: or so delivered in to be kept, and when such Plea or
answer with such Issue joined i^, was, or shall be put in, or delivered into
such Court, or Office, and to what time, place, or places the Jury, Jurors, or
Jurats to try such Issue, or Issues is, are, or shall be respiced, stayed,
adjourned, or delayed to the effect in substance as has been usually done, or
written at the beginning and ending of Records usually taken, and issued Out of
such Courts to be at Assizes, or before Justices there (changing things
necessary to be changed.) And that if any of such Declarations, Issues, and
proceedings shall happen to be lost, then each, or any such Complainant, or
Complainants, Plaintiff, or Plaintiffs, Defendant, or Defendants, his, her, or
their Counsel, Clerk, or Attorney, may have a copy or copies of the same, or
any part thereof, written again as they were at the first, and put or delivered
into the same Court, and shall be satisfied for so doing by him, or them, by
whom the same were, or shall be so lost.

4. And that all and every of such notice, and notices so to be given, be, and
shall be invalid unless the same shall be made appear to be done as aforesaid
by Oath of such credible person as is mentioned in the Bill herein before
recited.

5. And that if either of such Complainant or Complainants, Defendant, or
Defendants (who do or shall endeavor to maintain such matter, thing or things
for truth, or to be true) do or shall sail, or make default in any thing by or
for him, her, or them, his her, or their Coun: Clerk, Attorney, Solicitor, or
Agent, such matter, thing, and things shall be granted, deemed, judged, and
admitted not to be true to all intents and purposes, but taken for untruth.

6. And that if the other of such Complainant, or Complainants, Defendant, or
Defendants (who do, or shall endeavor to maintain any such matter, thing, or
things for truth, or not to be true) do, or shall make default in any thing,
by, or for him, her, or them, his, he^, or their Counsel, Clerk, Attorney,
Solicitor, or Agent, then such matter, thing, or things shall be construed,
deemed, taken, and adjudged for untruth, and not to be true.

Other Bills are intended in convenient time to be published.


