CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE COMMONS, IN This Age of Distractions.
OUr present breaches call out to every honest Christian to become a continual
centinell, watching against the incessant assaults of such as endeavor to
undermine the peace of this Kingdom, therefore seeing a storm Inevitably
falling its good to meet it with understanding rightly informed, that so we
may know how to propose the way of truth to others, and how to prosecute it our
selves. It has ever been, and still is, the constant practice of the common
enemy to set at variance not only the Princes of several Nations, but each
Kingdom against it self, dividing betwixt Prince and people, and incensing
subject against subject, that so they might the more easyly accomplish their
wicked intentions in our divisions; and how zealously this design of the
adverse party has been carried on of late years in these Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, I think there is no intelligent ones but they
can readily trace it in sundry particulars, and now at last having crowned
their endeavors with the accursed fruits of engaging this Kingdom in a civil
war, they drive on furiously in the pursuance of this their hellish design,
which must of necessity usher in ruin, and destructions, if not speedily
opposed and crushed: and let all good Christians be careful lest by their own
backwardness they make good that base assertion of some malignants, That the
Protestant profession is too tame to withstand them.

Now therefore since our present breaches call for a contribution from every
one, its no more then our own interest requires, that we apply our selves to
the common good, and that we may the better know our duty, and how we are to
dispose of our selves either in the assisting of the one side, or in resisting
of the other as we are thereunto called, Let us briefly take a view,

1. Of the chief authors and fomenters of these unhappy distractions. 2. Of
the ends they drive at. 3. Of the means they use to accomplish those ends. 4.
Of the dangerous inconveniences that will ensue if these be not opposed.
1. For the Authors of our present miseries, the several Declarations of
Parliament tell us that they consist of Papists, of an ambitious and dissolute
Clergy, of delinquents obnoxious to the Justice of Parliament, together with
some part of the Nobility and Gentry that either fear reformation, or else
seek to lay the Foundation of their own honor and preferment in the ruin of
the Kingdom, and we appeal to all the World, whether all of them or at least
the greatest party of them that have withdrawn His Majesty from his
Parliament, and are now about him, do not come within the compass of this
definition, being such as have constantly labored to bury the happiness of
this Kingdom in the ruin of the Parliament; and therefore they that trust
these Men too much, questionless they know them too little: for surely there
is no man unless he be wilfully blind and stupid, but will conculde that
the many eyes of those famous Peers (that have sometimes been adjudged the
ablest Statesmen in this Kingdom) accompanied with so many choice worthies
out of all parts in the Land, should see more plainly and discern more
clearly into those things that tend to the good and safety of King and people,
then those dim lights about of Majesty which can see no further then their
own personal preferments and base ambitious aims do lead them; now
accordingly let people adhere to the Counsels and commands of the one or the
other, as in reason they shall find cause.

2. Consider the ends that this malignant party has hitherto and still
continues to drive at (and their practices shall be judged) one chief and
maine end they drive at, is the destruction of this present Parliament, and in
it all future Parliaments, and together with them, the alteration of Religion,
the subversion of the Laws of the Kingdom, with the utter abollition of the
rightful liberties and privileges of the Subjects. All this will clearly
appear if you take but a brief survey of their proceedings from time to time,
first their love (or rather indeed inveterate hatred) to this Parliament
appears in the many consultations they had, and attempts they made (as is
plain by the depositions of many) to bring up the Northern Army against the
Parliament; and likewise in that unjust charge of Treason which was pretended
against some members of both Houses, and the Kings coming with a company of
Cavaleeres to the House of Commons to fetch them away by force, and then that
which adds vigor to all the rest, their withdrawing of His Majesty, from his
great and best council into the Northern parts of this Kingdom under
pretense that His Person was in danger at Whitehall, which was a notorious
black lie. Then for their love to Religion, I think that is manifest to the
World by their conversation, their affecting of Blood, rapine, Torture,
Oppression and Cruelty, their frequent Swearing, God damme me, and God sincke
me; together with that sweet harmony and mutual corespondency betwixt
Romanists and they, the Counsels of Jesuiticall Papists having a chief
influence into their proceedings, Judge if these render them defendours of the
true Protestant Religion. And then the great care they take for upholding and
maintaining the Laws of the Land, appears by their love to Parliaments which
are the Laws protectors, as also by their favorable construction of the
Commission of Array, the putting of the Sword of Justice into the hands of
diverse Popish and ill affected persons, giving them places in the Commissions
of the Peace, and outing of others which it seems were too zealous of the good
of King and Kingdom. And lastly their care of preserving the liberties of the
subject appears by those many illegal taxations of old, and of their late
endeavors to possess the World of an absolute, and unlimitted power in
Princes. Thus for the ends.

3. Consider the means they use to accomplish these their ends; the maine
whereof is to raise up a spirit of divisions and continually to increase a
disunion, first betwixt His Majesty and his loyal subjects, and then betwixt
one subject and another; for they well know that where verity is accompained
with unity, it makes a people invincible; and therefore the better to carry on
this their truth-detesting design, first the King must be dealt with that the
Major part of Parliament (being seduced by a few Traiterous, factious spirits)
endeavor to deprive him of his just prerogative, and to trample upon his
Crown, and having thus impudently suggested a thing as false as the Father of
liars can invent, then no stone must be left unrowled whereby this
misunderstanding betwixt the King and his people may be increased. After this
the Subjects they must be dealt with, by many specious pretenses, and smoath
expressions, and heartlesse Protestations of the zeal of these men both for
the good of King and people, and of the earning desires they have after a
reformation (as heretofore established) and that all their counsels and
designs tend this way; And then they secretly stab the sides of those worthies
in Parliament by their calumniations, and false aspersions, telling you of
their countenancing, or at least not suppressing the Tumults of Sectaries,
Anabaptists and Brownists that swarm in the Kingdom, and hence they will
affirm that all our distractions have their rise, Its well we know to the
contrary, however grant it were so, yet these men will be found to be the cause
of the cause of our distractions, for had not they by their divellish
subtleties engaged the Kingdom in this intestine broyle, and brought our
religion, lives and liberties and all to the stake, we need not to have
doubted, but that the Parliament with the assistance of the assembly of Divines
would by this time in so me good measure have composed the divisions in the
Church. But the truth is the Malice of these men is so general against all
goodness, that it had been a slander if these worthies in Parliament had not
been slaundered by them, for envy and slander do always attend good deeds in
a bad age. Many other means that these malignants have used in the pursuance
of their destructive designs might be added. Their frequent attempts of
fetching in foreign Forces to invade us, and providing great supplies of
ammunition beyond Seas to destroy us, Their complying with Papists, Atheists,
fugitives, and other notorious delinquents, to the end they might enslave us,
if these be not sufficient to render their intentions many miles distant from
their Protestations of endeavoring the common good, let the World judge.

Lastly, that the crafty devices and fraudulent pretenses of these arch
impostours may not be believed, nor their impudent expressions, threatened
violence, and seeming courage may not be feared, It were good that people were
rightly informed of the manifould benefits that must needs redound to
themselves and posterity, by declining the ways and Counsels of these men,
and by adhering to the faithful Counsels and obeying the just commands, of
the Parliament by whose Wisdom and industry so many excellent works have
been wrought for us, whose proceedings from their first meeting to this
instant have been so spotless, that the enemies of the State have been angry
with them, because they could not be angry with them, finding no just cause
wherein to accuse them, whereupon they have been forced to broach many
notorious untruths from time to time, thereby scandalizing the proceedings of
Parliament, which time having confuted and given them the lie to their Teeth,
has not a little redowned to the disgrace of themselves and the cause they
favor; And doubtless those that have vented their minds against this
Parliament, by such invective speeches upon all occasions, they would not be
backward to nominate that factious party in both Houses (acording to the
promise made in a Message, etc.) had they had either ground or reason for it.
But as hitherto we can neither hear the crimes of such as have been
impeached, nor the Names of such as are thus threatened; for could we see any
thing but mere words, we should the sooner believe that the King was
necessitated to desert the Parliament. I would wish the Commons of England were
able to build their hopes upon any probable grounds that they should receive
good from these men, that have thus shamefully and despightfully spit their
venom upon the heads of our Tribes. Nay I fear there is few that can
apprehend a possibility, that His Majesty should really make good those solemn
Protestations, of defending our Religion, Laws and Liberties, so long as these
Achitophels are about him. In the late breach betwixt Scotland and us,
doubtless had not the Kings ears been shut against the wholesome advice of his
Scottish subjects, whilst they were open to the destructive counsels of some
evil affected ones in England, the fidelity of the Scots and the treachery of
those counselors had been sooner discovered. Therefore if we do not stand to
the cause now, and render our selves loyal to our Sovereign, and faithful to
the State wherein we live, by withstanding and opposing the destructive
counsels and ways of those about his Majesty, who endeavor nothing more then
to enslave the free subjects of this Nation, and to keep them continually
under the harrow of oppression, we may forever bid adieu to all that we now
enjoy. It ought therefore to be every man's wisdom and care seriously to
consider, that in forsaking this Parliament, they forsake themselves, their
Religion, Laws, and Properties, and all that can properly be called theirs,
for our Liberties receive their life from the Law, and the Law its life and
protection from Parliaments; so that in case we refuse to protect them that
protect the Laws which are the protection of our Liberties, of necessity all
must fall to the ground, and the will of the Prince and Favorites shall be the
Law of the people, and so honest men will be out of hopes, and delinquents out
of fear of justice.

There is not any age that can produce a story of a Parliament, freely elected
and held, that ever did injure a whole Nation; neither have we ever heard of
Prince or people that casting themselves upon this well constituted Assembly
that they were ever defrauded or prejudiced by them. But some we have heard of
that never prospered having once diserted this great Council. And indeed it
may seem strange to any reasonable man, that the Lords and Commons who are so
deeply interressed in the Kingdom, and who must of necessity have a large
share in the miseries thereof, that they should take such pains early and late
in contributing to their own inevitable destruction and to the ruining of the
freedoms of this Nation. But put the case that we by our wilfulness and gross
stupidity should so far provoke the Parliament as to desert us and our
interest, and to pursue their own by complying with those Councels that are
now about his Majesty, let the World judge what were likely to be the portion
of the Communalty of this Kingdom, should the Parliament betray that trust we
have reposed in them, themselves might live like Princes, but we like slaves.

It has of late been the maine design of our adversaries by their subtle
insinuations to render the Parliament a void assembly because the King refuses
to join with them. This was well answered by him that said, if the Parliament
might not save the Kingdom without the King, he was sure the King might
destroy the Kingdom in despite of the Parliament. It must needs sound harsh
in the ears of a free people, that the King withdrawn by evil Council may
at pleasure take away the very essence of Parliaments merely by his own
dissent, thereby stripping them of all power in matters of judicature that they
may not determine any thing for the good and safety of the Kingdom. If this be
true, it must needs follow, that its both vain and needless to trouble the
whole Kingdom to make choice of its representative body, since being convened
and disserted by the King, they must stand as ciphers, and surely that time
which was spent in preparing and passing the Bill for triennial Parliaments,
and that for the not dissolving of this, was but lost labor, for not to exist,
and to exist without any power, are things little differing in such a case as
this.

Never was there any age, wherein the hearts of people were more perplexed
betwixt command and command then in this; We find the King commanding and the
Parliament forbidding, the King affirming and the Parliament denying, now in
this uncertainety each man is doubtful how to dispose of himself for the
common good. If people could rightly distinguish betwixt protection and
oppression, Monarchy and tyranny, they would the better understand their duty
in such times as these. Questionless the duty that we owe unto our Sovereign,
it does not deny us this privilege of having respect to our own safety. Now
no man will deny the King to be the Lords anointed, his Deputy, and
Vicegerent, and that every subject ought to honor, and obey him so far as
his commands thwart not the commands of God; this comes not in question,
neither is it questioned, whether an absolute obedience is to be yielded to the
unlawful commands of an evil Magistrate, for I presume none of our
adversaries will affirm that; neither is the question, whether Subjects may
make an offensive war taking up arms against their Sovereign (as some have
falsely and despightfully suggested.) But the question is merely about our own
safety, and just defense, and may be thus stated. When as the King is seduced
by wicked men who have a constant opportunity of instilling their poisonous
counsels into his sacred ears, venting such destructive arguments as may most
conduce to their own ends, thereby prevailing over his innocent thoughts and
purposes to his people (the most candid dispositions being subject to dangerous
inconveniences by the constant concurrence of evil examples and counsels) and
carrying him on to take up arms against his loyal Subjects, The question is,
whether in such a case of extreme danger it be lawful for the subject to take
up arms in his own defense.

That a defensive war is lawful and warrantable in such a case as this, will
appear by these reasons.

1. Because the end of all government is to make provision for the good and
safety of the people (that being the supreme Law) if then Princes being
entrusted shall refuse to join with the people in their necessary defense, the
people may without dis-loyalty save themselves, it being contrary to the nature
and intent of such a trust, that necessary defense should be barred and
natureall preservation denied to a people. It must needs be a direct
overthrowing of the very foundation of policy for a people by preserving
subjection to their Prince to give way to the destruction of the Commonwealth.

2. If the people might not preserve their own peace against the unjust
invasion, and causeless violence of their Prince, we must conclude that God
has left man destitute of any sufficient humane help of saving himself; for
grant that, and this will follow, that when a Kingdom is exposed to eminent
dangers, the people must of necessity yield their necks and submit their lives
to the wills of cruel men, since the King denies them means of safety.

3. The Law of nature binds each private man to defend himself against the
Magistrate as a private man assaulting him by violence and not pursuing him in
a legal way, and to repel force by force, the example of Naboth will clearly
demonstrate this, when Ahab commanded him to give him his Vineyard, Naboth
refuses to comply with the Kings command it being unlawful for him to part
with the inheritance of his fathers: Well, Ahab by the instigation of his wife
still pursues the design, and the thing must be put to the trial, and to this
end witnesses must be suborned, and these to give in testimony to the Elders
and Nobles so and so. Now in this case Naboth was bound to submit to his
censure being tried in a legal way, and so to leave the undeservednesse of his
death charged upon the consciences of the false witnesses. But now had Ahab
come violently upon Naboth and attempted the killing of him for not subjecting
to his unlawful command, will any man affirm that it had been unlawful for
Naboth to have defended himself against the unjust invasion and violence of
Ahab? If then it be lawful for a private person thus to defend himself (as
doubtless it is) then much more it is lawful for a whole Nation.

4. This is warrantable by Scripture examples, 2 Chronicles. 26. 17, etc. When Vziah
the King entered into the Temple, and would have burnt Incense to the Lord,
which was not lawful for him to do, Azariah the Priest and four score more
withstood him and caused him to depart the Sanctuary, 1 Samuel 14. 45. When Saul
would have unjustly put Jonathan to death the people rescued him out of his
hands and told the King plainly that he should not die, several other
examples there be in Scripture which do clearly demonstrate this truth, That
the unlawful acts and commands of Princes may be opposed,

To conclude, that which gives men security in troublesome times, is the
justness of the cause they endeavor to vindicate, let Achitophels plot,
Samballats mock, Rabshekahs wail, and seducers wax every day worse and worse,
yet Magna est veritas and praevalebit, The ways of the wicked though for a
time they may prosper, yet they shall never be blessed; God has hitherto
carred on the work of reformation with a strong hand, in despite of all
Anti-reformers, and doubtless the Churches cause shall prevail though second
causes should fail, yet the zeal of the Lord of Hoasts will perform this.

FINIS.

