PASSAGES AT NEWPORT, IN THE Isle of Wight.

CERTAIN PASSAGES Which happened at NEWPORT, IN THE Isle of Wight, NOVEMBER. 29.
1648. Relating to KING CHARLES I.

WRITTEN By Mr. EDWARD COOK, of Highnam in Gloucestershire, sometime Colonel
of a Regiment under Oliver Cromwell.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXC.

TO THE READER.
THAT which I had read, and heard of King Charles the First, of Blessed Memory
raised in me a great Veneration for him.

This made me curious in enquiring after any Memorials which related to him,
especially such as concerned his Solitudes and Sufferings; which though they
did not create his Virtues, yet they increased them, and rendered them much more
Illustrious.

Among other Relations, this of Colonel Cook's came lately to my hands; and I
did believe it fit to be made public, both because the Account given in it is
more particular than any yet extant, and given by a Convert of Integrity, who
bare a great part in the Affair; and also because it shows how tender a regard
that good King had to his Word, choosing rather to fall into the hands of cruel
Men, than to give occasion to a mere appearance of the Breach of it. If all
Princes were of that Disposition, their Faith would more effectually secure
them one against another, than their Arms.

I shall here say no more, than that the Doctrine which was practiced in Forty
eight, was published in English in Twenty one, in the Book entit'led, [The
Rights of the Prelate and the Prince] as good Roman Catholic Divinity, by J.
E. with License of Superiors; and consequently, that John Goodwin and John
Milton were not the first Broachers of it in England.

The strain of the whole Book is of that nature, and the following words are
part of it: Chap. 15. page 375.
And if Kings, who were not excommunicated nor deprived by the Pope, may by the
Commonwealth be deposed and killed, when they are intolerable Tyrants; why may
not the Commonwealth exercise the same Power over Tyrants excommunicated and
deprived by the Pope, They, after Excommunication and Deprivation, being no
more Kings, but private Men.

Jan. 18. 1689.
CERTAIN PASSAGES Which happened at NEWPORT, IN THE Isle of Wight, etc. NOVEMBER.
29. 1648.
THAT Evening, between the Hours of Seven and Eight, the King sent for the Duke
of Richmond, the Earl of Lindsey, and Col. Edward Cook (who were all three
together at the Duke of Richmond's Lodgings, in Newport, in the Isle of Wight)
with all speed to attend him, who accordingly hastened to the Court; the two
Lords entering into the King's inner Room, while the Colonel waited in the
outward Room for farther Orders.

The King acquainted the Lords, That one of his Servants had been sent for by a
Person in a kind of disguise, who having informed him, that the Army would that
Night seize upon the King's Person, abruptly left him. The Duke of Richmond
acquainting the King, that Col. Cook attended without, was commanded to call
him in: The King asked him whether he had heard any thing that the Army
designed to seize upon him that Night. He answered, That he did not hear any
thing so much as tending toward it; adding, Surely, if I had, I would have
acquainted the King with it. The King giving the Colonel the reason of his
Question, commanded him to find out Major Rolph, and enquire of him, what he
knew of it, (who was then left as Deputy Governor by Col. Hammond, with
Directions, That on all occasions he should address to the King through the
said Colonel Cook, as himself had usually done during the Treaty.

Col. Cook having the King's Commands, and opportunely finding Major Rolph in
his Chamber, acquainted him that the King sent him to enquire of him, Whether
the Army resolved to seize upon him that night. He answered, Not that he knew
of; adding, You may assure the King from me, That he may rest quietly this
night; for on my life he shall have no disturbance this night. Colonel Cook
observing that he placed so much Emphasis on those words [This Night] though
that was all he was commanded by the King to ask, urged him farther, whether
really there was any such design at all or not. After a little pause, he
answered, It was impossible for him to know the present purposes of the Army at
so great a distance, but that as yet he had received no such Orders. The
Colonel replied, But if you shall hereafter, shall I be sure so timely to be
made acquainted with them, as that the King may not be surprised with the
execution of them? To which request he seemingly consented; answering, That was
but a due respect to the King.

Col. Cook thereupon returning to the King, gave him a punctual Account of all
these Passages; who in the mean time having been informed, that a considerable
number of the Army were that night landed in the Island, remanded Col. Cook
back to Major Rolph to enquire the truth thereof; who thus answered him, That
he knew fresh Forces would e're long come over to relieve those that then past
on Duty there, but that as yet he was not certain of their being landed. Which
Answer also the Colonel returned to the King; who, in that short time of his
absence, had received a farther Information, That Two thousand Foot were drawn
up about Carisbrook Castle; at which the King seemed to be most startled,
saying, Sure there must needs be some extraordinary Design on foot, that such a
Body of Men should not only be so privately landed, but also in such a bitter
night as this is, to be exposed to such extremity of Weather, the Wind blowing
very high, and the Rain falling very fast. The King expressing a great desire
to be satisfied in the truth of this, and doubting that he might not be so
clearly dealt with by Major Rolph, Colonel Cook offered his Service to go and
see; but the King (reflecting on the severity of the Weather) refused to expose
him; yet owning it an important particular, whereof to be rightly informed:
which the Colonel observing, importuned the King, that, if he could be so long
dispensed with from His Majesty's Service there, he would give him leave to go,
he knowing no other expedient for the King's certain Satisfaction. He also
pressed the Lords to intercede for him therein, and at last obtained leave of the
King; His Majesty adding these gracious Expressions, That he hoped he, being
young and healthy, would receive no prejudice by it, and that he might live to
requite it; repeating his desire to know the truth of it.

The Colonel took leave, and having soon got himself and his Horse ready,
though the night was extraordinary dark, fortunately grop'd out his way through
the dark, and found the Castle; which having carefully rounded, and finding no
body without, he went to the Gate, and having performed the usual Ceremonies
(as giving the Word to the Corporal) and sheltred himself under the Gate from
the excess of Rain that then fell, he sent his desires to the Governor, to have
one Captain Boreman (a Gentleman of that Island, who commanded a
Militia-Company there) with whom he was well acquainted, to come to him: In the
mean time he discoursed with the Soldiers, to try what he could get out of
them; but found they were altogether ignorant, being a Company of the Islanders
newly marched in; the two Army-Companies, formerly garrisoned there, being
drawn down into the Town of Newport, probably to double the Guards. After a
longer stay than he expected, the Messenger returned with this Excuse, That the
Captain could not conveniently come out to him, but invited him in; who, when
he came into the Parlour, was surprised with the sight of about a dozen
Officers of the Army, most of whose Faces he knew: And after mutual Salutation,
he addressed himself to the Governor, desiring to speak with him; who (he
observed) first asked, and obtained leave of those Officers; wherefore asking
him in private, what he meant by that; the Governor plainly told him, he was no
better than their Prisoner in his own Garrison, for they had threatened him with
immediate Death, if he but so much as whispered with any of his own Servants.
The Colonel asked him, whether he could imagine the Cause of all this? He
answered, He supposed there was some considerable Design on foot, but he knew
not what it was; adding, That he understood that the Captain that commanded the
Troop of Horse in the Island, was in the same condition, and that his
Lieutenant commanded in his place; but that he knew no other cause for either,
unless that they suspected that they had too much Duty for the King. Which gave
the Colonel the opportunity of asking the particular Question, Whether he knew
any thing of the King's being that Night to be seized upon? Who answered, It
was not improbable but that might be the Design, though he knew nothing of it.

Col. Cook received as much light as the Governor could give him, took leave,
and hastened to give the King an exact Account of all had past; but found at his
return a great Alteration at Court, Guards not only set round the King's
Lodgings, and at every Window, but even within doors also; nay Sentinels on the
King's very Chamber Door, so that the King was almost suffocated with the Smoke
of the burning Match; which hastened the Colonel to Major Rolph, to complain of
the rudeness of the Soldiers; whom he found in his Bed (it being now near
Twelve or One a Clock) having entered his Chamber against the will of his
Servant: After his Apology, he made his Complaint, and received this Answer,
That he was no way guilty of it, That the two Companies being late drawn out of
the Castle, could not that night have Quarters provided for them, and therefore
he had ordered them to double the Guards, not foreseeing this would happen; but
the next day he would redress all things himself, with all due respect to the
King, and consult him the said Colonel in it; and that in the mean time he was
confident on the Colonel's Complaint to the Captain of the Guards, he would
draw off the Men from being offensive to the King; adding, If the Colonel found
it needful, he might make use of his Name to the Captain of the Guard; to whom
the Colonel making his Application, in his return to the King, prevailed with
him to draw off those Guards that were so great annoyance to the King, to a
more tolerable distance.

At Col. Cooke's return to the King, he made him repeat over all the several
Passages that had happened that Night; which being compared together, and duly
considered by the King, the Duke of Richmond, and Earl of Lindsey (for the Earl
of Southampton being indisposed, was before that time returned to his Lodgings;
and the Marquess of Hartford had taken leave of the King, and left the Island
that Morning, and was gone to Netley) all unanimously concluded that the Army
would suddenly seize upon the King's Person; which being taken for granted on
all hands, the next Question was, in this desperate case, What was most
advisable to be done?

The Lords argued for the King's attempting an immediate Escape; for he would
better bring about a Personal Treaty with the Parliament (which he so much
coveted) when out of the reach of the Army, than when within their Power; and
this would certainly secure the Safety of his Person, which else might be very
probably much in danger.

But before they could proceed to debate the manner of this Escape, the King
prevented it, thus arguing against the Escape itself; first arguing the
difficulties, if not impossibility of accomplishing it; next the consequences,
that in case he should miscarry in the Attempt, it would exasperate the Army,
and dishearten his Friends; and lastly, That if the Army should seize him, they
must preserve him for their own sakes; for that no Party could secure their own
Interests, without joining his with it, his Son being now out of their reach.

The Earl of Lindsey replied, Take heed, Sir, lest you fall into such hands as
will not steer by such Rules of Policy, remember Hampton Court, where your
Escape was your best Security. The Duke of Richmond adding, That yet he thought
it feasible enough, and turning about to Colonel Cook, asked how he passed to
and fro? who answered, He had the Word. The Duke asked, Whether he believed he
could pass him too? who answered, He made no question but he could. At which
the Duke took a longer Cloak, without a Star, and made the Colonel go along
with him through the Guards, and so returned again to the King, acquainting him
with what he had done, and with what ease; and thence took the advantage again
to persuade the King's attempting to escape.

Who on a sudden turning himself from the two Lords that were discoursing with
him at the Window, to Colonel Cook, who stood drying himself by the Fire,
said, Ned Cook, What do you advise me in this case? Who humbly answered, He
suspected his own Judgment too much, to presume to offer any Advice,
considering both the greatness of the danger, and the Person concerned in it:
That His Majesty had his Privy Council with him, to whom he humbly besought him
to listen, observing what they pressed him to. At which the Lords resumed their
former Discourse, of attempting an Escape.

But the King turning about again, said, Ned, I command you to give me your
Advice. At which the Colonel begged leave, That after he had premised some
Particulars, he might ask His Majesty a Question. Who permitting him; Suppose
(said he) I should not only tell Your Majesty, That the Army would very
suddenly seize upon you, but by concurring Circumstances fully convince Your
Majesty it would be so: Also that I have the Word, Horses ready at hand, a
Vessel attending at the Come, and hourly expecting me; That I am ready, and
desirous to attend you, and this dismal dark night as it were suited to the
purpose; so that I can foresee no visible difculty in the thing, which I
suppose to be in all particulars the true state of this present case: The only
Question now is, What will Your Majesty resolve to do? Who, after a small
pause, pronounced this positive Answer, They have promised me, and I have
promised them, I will not break first.

The Duke of Richmond urging the Colonel to speak, he craved leave to speak to
argue the Point with the King; who said, With all his heart. I presume, Sir
(said the Colonel) Your Majesty intends by those words [They, and Them] the
Parliament; if so, the Scene now is quite altered or changed, your present
Apprehension arising from the Army, who have so far already violated the
Promises of the Parliament, as to invade Your Majesty's Freedom and Safety, by
changing the single Sentinel of State at the outward Door, into strong Guards
on your very Bedchamber; which is in it self no better than a Confinement, and
the probable forerunner of something more, a speedy absolute Imprisonment.

The King replied, however he would not do any thing that should look like a
breaking of his Word, and so bad him, and the Earl of Lindsey Goodnight; and
that he would go and take his rest too, so long as he could. To which Colonel
Gooke replied, I fear it will not be long. The King answered, As please God.
The King perceiving great uneasiness and disorder in the Colonel, said, Ned,
What troubles you, tell me. Who replied, Sir, to consider the greatness of Your
Majesty's Danger, and your unwillingness to avoid it. The King replied, Never
let that trouble you, were it greater, I would not break my Word to prevent it.
Sir (said the Colonel) will Your Majesty but respite the Resolution, and give
me leave to step and call my Lord of Southampton? What needs that (said the
King) Are not these my two Friends? (pointing to the Duke of Richmond and Earl
of Lindsey) I tell you they are my two true Friends. Said the Colonel, Be
pleased then to consult them. Said the King, I am resolved, go you two to Bed
(meaning the Earl of Lindsey, and Colonel Cook, for the Duke of Richmond was
then in waiting) and if I have need of you, I will send for you. Whereupon both
took leave.

But the Duke of Richmond stepped after Col. Cook, to consult him, whether or no
he had best put off his Clothes that night? Who answered, He himself for his
part would not; for notwithstanding Major Rolph's Promise, he feared the King
would soon be disturbed, or else the face of Affairs deceived him. The Duke
asked, whether he should let the King know what his Opinion was? Who answered,
With all his heart, and that he would stay in the outward Room, in hopes that
he might occasion some new Discourses of the business. But the Duke soon
returned, and told him, the King was resolved to go to Bed. It was then almost
One of the Clock, and though Col. Cook went not to Bed all night, yet all things
were carried with so great secrecy and quiet, that not the least Noise was
heard, nor the least cause of Suspicion given.

But in the Morning, just at break of day, the King hearing a great knocking at
his Dressing-room-door, sent the Duke of Richmond to know what it meant; who
enquiring who was there? was answered, one Mild-may (one of those Servants the
Parliament had put to the King, and Brother to Sir Henry.) The Duke demanding
what he would have? answered, There were some Gentlemen from the Army very
desirous to speak with the King; which Account the Duke gave the King; but the
knocking increasing, the King commanded the Duke to let them into his
Dressing Room. No sooner was this done, but before the King got out of his Bed,
those Officers rushed into his Chamber, and abruptly told the King, They had
Orders to remove him. From whom? said the King. They replied, From the Army.
The King asked whither he was to be removed? They answered, To the Castle. The
King asked what Castle? Again they answered, To the Castle. The Castle (said
the King) is no Castle; he told them he was well enough prepared for any
Castle, and required them to name the Castle. After a short whispering
together, they said, Hurst Castle. The King replied, They could not name a
worse, and called to the Duke of Richmond to send for the Earl of Lindsey, and
Col. Cook. At first they scrupled at the Earl of Lindsey's coming; but the
King said, Why not both, since both lie together? They promised to send for
both, but sent for neither.

And tho the Duke of Richmond had ordered the King's Breakfast to be hastened,
presuming there was little Provision in the desolate Castle; yet when he was
scarce ready; the Horses being come, they hurried him away, only permitting the
Duke to attend him about two Miles, and then told him he must go no further.
Where he sadly took leave, being scarce permitted to kiss the King's Hand,
whose last words were, Remember me to my Lord Lindsey, and Col. Cook, and
command Col. Cook, from me, never to forget the Passages of this Night.

The Duke returned directly to the Earl of Lindsey's Lodgings (on which, it
appeared, a Guard had been set all the night to keep him from the knowledge of
what was doing, or at least to confine him from stirring forth, had he known of
it) and surprised both the Earl of Lindsey, and Col. Cook with the Account of
the King's being carried away, with all its remarkable Circumstances,
delivering the King's gracious Remembrance to them both, and his concluding
Command to Col. Cook. Wherefore while all Passages were ripe in their
Memories, Col. Cook, with the assistance of the Duke of Richmond, and Earl of
Lindsey, drew up this Narrative in Obedience to the King's Command.

After this the Duke of Richmond, Earl of Lindsey, and Earl of Southampton,
with his Countess, immediately left the Island, and embarked in a Vessel that
belonged to Colonel Cook, and landed near Tichfield (the Earl of Southampton's
House) where just at their landing, they were all seized on by a Party of
Colonel Okey's Regiment; who, by the Persuasion of Colonel Cook, and his
Engagement for their forthcoming, were all permitted to go to the Earl of
Southampton's House the next Morning.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE Fifteen Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin, examined
and confuted by several London Divines, 4o. With a Table to the whole, and the
Authors Names.

Preparation for Death, by William Wake, D. D. 12o

Dr. Wake's Tracts and Discourses against Popery, in 2 vol.

A Private Prayer to be used in difficult Times.

An Exposition of the Ten Commandments. By Simon Patrick, now Lord Bishop of
Chichester.

Markham's perfect Horseman, in fifty years practice. 8o.

Valentine's Devotions. 24o.

The Lay Christians Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures. By Dr. Stratford,
now Lord Bishop of Chester.

The Texts which the Papists cite out of the Bible for proof of the Points of
their Religion, examined, and showed to be alleged without ground. In Twenty
five distinct Discourses, viz. by several London Divines, with a Table to the
whole, and the Authors Names.

Taxes no Charge; in a Letter from a Gentleman to a Person of Quality; showing
the nature, use and benefit of Taxes in this Kingdom; and compared with
Imposition of Foreign States. Together with the improvement of Trade in time of
War.

The Case of Allegiance in our present circumstances considered; in a Letter
from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country. Quarto.

A Breviate of the State of Scotland in its Government, Supreme Courts,
Officers of State, Inferior Officers, Offices, and Inferior Courts, Districts,
Jurisdictions, Buroughs Royal, and Free Corporations. Fol.

Some Considerations touching Succession and Allegiance. Quarto.

Reflections upon the late great Revolution. Written by a Lay hand in the
Country, for the Satisfaction of some Neighbors.

The History of the Desertion; or an Account of all the public Affairs in
England, from the beginning of Sept. 1688. to the Twelfth of February
following. With an Answer to a Piece called, The Desertion discussed, in a
Letter to a Country Gentleman. By a Person of Quality.

K. William and K. Lewis; wherein is set forth the inevitable necessity these
Nations lie under, of submitting wholly to one or other of these Kings; and
that the Matter in controversy is not now between K. William and K. James, but
between K. William and K. Lewis of France, for the Government of these Nations.

Two Sermons, one against Murmuring, the other against Censuring. By Simon
Patrick, D. D. now Lord Bishop of Chichester.

An Account of the Private League betwixt the late King James the Second and
the French King. Fol.

Dr. Wake's Sermons and Discourses. Octavo.

Mr. Tully's Sermon of Moderation, before the Lord Mayor, May 12. 1689.

An Examination of the Scruples of those who refuse to take the Oath of
Allegiance. By a Divine of the Church of England.

A Dialogue betwixt two Friends, a Jacobite and a Williamite; occasioned by the
late Revolution of Affairs, and the Oath of Allegiance.

The Case of Oaths stated. Quarto.

The Advantages of the present Settlement, and the great Danger of a Relapse.

The Interest of England in the Preservation of Ireland.

A short View of the unfortunate Reigns of these Kings, William the 2d. Henry
the 2d. Edward the 2d. Ric^ard the 2d. Charles the 2d. and James 2d.


