Behold my innocence after such disgrace
Dares show an honest and a noble Face
Henceforth there needs no mark of me be kno^^
For the right Counterfeit is herein shown
Aetatis ma^^ proxemo 22o Ianuar stilo novo vicesimo primo 1663:

Io. Ch: sculp: MC
portrait of Mary Carleton

THE CASE OF Madam MARY CARLETON, Lately styled The German Princess, Truly
Stated: With an HISTORICAL RELATION OF HER Birth, Education, and Fortunes; IN
AN APPEAL TO His Illustrious Highness PRINCE RVPERT.

By the said MARY CARLETON.

Sic sic juvat ire sub umbra -- London, Printed for Sam: Speed at the Rainbow
in Fleetstreet, and Hen: Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane. MDCLXIII.

The most Illustrious PRINCE RUPERT, Elector Palatine of the RHINE, etc.
portrait of Prince Rupert

TO HIS Most Illustrious Highness PRINCE RUPERT, Count Palatine of the Rhine,
AND Duke of Cumberland, etc.
Great Prince,
TO whom should the injured innocence of a Forain and desolate woman address it
self but to your Noble and Merciful Protection, who with the Majestical Glories
of your Relation to this Crown, have most condescending compassions to the
distressed and low estate of the afflicted.

For when I considered the general report of this your Generosity and Clemency
even in the greatest incitements of passion, amidst the victorious progress of
your Arms; I could not but presume Your Highness would open Your ears to the
Complaints of an abused Woman, in a Case wherein the Laws are altogether as
silent, us in the loudest and clamorous noise of the War.

Besides, the different necessity of my Cause, and the vindication of it, did
inevitably put me upon your Highnesses Patronage. I am traduced and
calumniated as an Impostor (and the scandal continues after all the umbrages of
it are vanished) and that I am not a German, nor so well descended there as I
have alleged, and do and will maintain: Therefore to your Highness as the
sacred and fittest Sanctarie of this truth I have betook my self; whose
excellent purity I do so revere and honor, that I would not soil it with the
least tincture of a pretense, or paint of falsehood for a world.

Your Highness drew your first Princely Breath, which has since filled the
Trump of Fame, within the limits of that circle of the Rhine, where I was born:
and within the Confines of your paternal Dominions, my Infant cries were to be
heard; and therefore with all alacrity I submit my cause, and my stronger cries
for Justice to your Highness, who partakes equally of this and my Country.

Notwithstanding I should not have been so bold as to have given your Highness
this trouble, but that I have been informed you have been graciously pleased
to pity my ruins, and to express your resentment of those incivilities I have
suffered: And indeed that with the just indignation of other Noble persons, who
are pleased to honor my desertion and privacy with their company, is the only
support I have against those miseries I endure, the more unsupportable because
irremediable by the Laws of this Kingdom made against Femes Covert.

I take not upon me to dispute the equity thereof, but in all submiss obedience
do cast myself and my cause at your Highnesses feet, most humbly requesting and
beseeching your Grace and Favor in some extraordinary redress to be vouchsafed
to

Your Highnesses most Obedient and most Devoted Servant, MARY CARLETON.

Mary Carlton Called the German Prince.
AEt: Suae 38

portrait of Mary Carleton

Mary Carlton.
portrait of Mary Carleton

TO THE Noble Ladies AND Gentlewomen, OF ENGLAND.
Madams,
BE pleased to lay aside that severity of your judgment, by which you examine
and castigate the licitness and convenience of every of your actions or
passages of moment, and therefore seldom run into the misgovernment of Fortune,
and cast a favorable eye upon these Novels of my life, not much unlike those
of Boccace, but that they are more serious and tragical.

The breach that is made in my Credit and reputation, I do feel and understand
to be very wide, and past my repayring, what ever materials of defense, excuse,
and purgation I can bring to the scrutiny of men; who are not sensible to what
sudden changes our natures are subjected, and that from ayry thoughts and
motions, things of great influence, sometimes good, sometimes bad, have been
exhibited to the world, equal to the most sober and firm resolutions of the
valiant and the wise.

It has been my mishap for one among many others to miscarry in an affayr, to
which there are more intrigues and perplexities of kin and alliance, and
necessary dependence, then to any other thing in the world, i.e. marriage:
(Hymen is as blind as Fortune and gives her favors by guess) the mistaken
advantages whereof, have turned to my real damage: so that when I might have
bin happy in my self, I must needs transplant my content into a sterile
ungrateful soil, and be miserable by another. Yet have I done nothing
dishonorable to your better beloved Sex, there is nothing of leudness,
baseness or meanness in the whole carriage of this noised story, nor which I
(...) not, cannot justify, as the actions of a Gentlewoman; with the account
of which, from the beginning of my life, I here present you.

My Fortune not being competent to my mind though proportionable to any gentile
degree, has frowardly shrunk into nothing, but I doubt not to buoy both my
honor and estate up together, when these envious clouds are dispelled that
obscure my brightness; The shadows are at the longest, and my fame shall
speedily rise in its due lusture, till then, and ever I am,

Ladies, your devored Handmaid, MARY CARLETON.

Mary Carlton.
depiction of Mary Carleton

The German Princess with her Supposed Husband and Lawyer.
J. Nicholls delin. J. Basire. sculp.
depiction of Mary Carleton with husband and lawyer

THE CASE OF Madam Mary Carleton The Wife of Mr. John Carleton, Formerly styled
A German Princess.
I Am so much the the more beholden to my Innocence then to my Fortune, that I
dare more confidently appear to the Vindication of the one, then (through the
malign deceit and injury of my Adversaries) to the vendication of the other;
And ch^llenge my enemies, and the Spoils they have made of me, though I dare
not lay claim to my Friends, my Honor and my Estate, which I shall keep
concealed and inviolable from such rude and mischeivous hands as my Person has
been betrayed to. And yet the suspicious, noxious world does very hardly
conceive of me other then a Malefactor, and prefer my Wit and Artful Carriage
to my Honesty, and take this untoward passage of my life for some festivous and
merry accident of the times, and look upon me as a notorious (nay even among
the more ingenious, but as a) notable person.

I can give no other reason for this, but the diligent and forestalling
slanders of my accusers, who by lewd and most false suggestions have precluded
all ways to my justification and defense; and my own unwearied patience in
suffering those calumnies to pass unrefuted, further then by a legal Trial; not
willing to cast any dirt upon those by way of regesting those foul mouthed and
libellous scandals by personal reflections; for I concluded that time, and the
justice of my Cause and the Laws of the Kingdom would clearly absolve me, and
that therefore such exasperations on my part would widen that breach, which the
fraudulent covetousness of some Relations had made between my Husband and my
self, and render it irreconciliable, when as I had resolved to redintegrate
that affection, we were mutually bound to have for each other.

But since I have perceived, and have been fully satisfied and informed of
their insatiable and implacable malice against me, not only in prosecuting me
with fresh Indictments after the Jury had acquitted me of the former, (though
the grand Jury were so fully sensible of the Injustice and maliciousness
thereof, that they would not receive any more) to say nothing also of the
Witnesses brought against me, the blind and the lame (as to their tales and
stories) procured by most wicked and detestable practices, (whom God forgive)
but by advising my Husband after my acquittal to forsake me, and renounce my
bed, and so defeating me of my Jewels and other things of value of mine own,
and leaving and exposing me destitute to the World, and to the pity or scorn of
people, as my condition shall weigh with them: These unsufferable mischeifs
have now at last extorted this Narrative from me, which I request the courteous
Reader to give Credit to, and equally and seriously consider my Case.

It has already made a great noise in the World, suitable to that bluster my
Husbands Friends had raised my Fortune and Quality to; but those High winds
being laid by their weeping showers, I will secretly and clearly tell the World
the naked truth of all this story, having premised a short Apology for my self,
and given some account of this my (Errant-like) Adventure and Peregrination
from the place of my native Country.

I was born at Collen in Germany, though incredulous people do take that for a
pretense, and better concealment from any research that can be made after me;
but as I have declared it before that Honorable Judicature in the Old Bailey,
whose grave and reverend Authority, I hate to profane and abuse with a lie; so
I do again assure the World by the greatest pledges of a Christian, that I am a
Native of that place, and did continue in it, or thereabouts, the most part of
my life hitherto. They that know it, know it to be one of the Mistresses and
compleatest Cities in that Empire, not only famed for the birth of very
Illustrious persons of Ancient Times, and the Honor it has received from them
(as I could largely instance, especially from its Latin adject of Agrippina)
but for that modern glory it received by the entertainment of the King of Great
Britain, who was most Hospitably and Cordially, and with all imaginable
respect and Honor treated Here, when by virtue of Cromwels League with France,
he departed that Kingdom.

I mention this at large, because hence I took up those Resolutions, which
since, with so much misfortune I have put in Execution. I observed here the
courteous civility, and affable good temper of the English Nation, for by those
Gentlemen that then attended the King I measured his Kingdom. Those were
persons of such winning and obliging carriage, of so easy and familiar
address, and yet of that generose and regardful demeanor, that I was hugely
taken with such sweet Conditions, and being then young, by their frequent
converse in the Town, which was constantly in my ears, came to such an
acceptable knowledge of their manners, that I then thought of passing over to
that Country, for a fuller satisfaction and delight I had promised my self
among such a people.

As to my Parents, who by Pythagoras his fancyful Philosophy, or rather envious
Witchcraft, have been transmigrated into I know not what filthy and vile
persons, of the most perdite and abominable sort of men; I do desire pardon of
their Ghosts, and shall sprinkle their ashes with my tears, that I have by my
unadvised and ungoverned Resolution, raised them from their quiet and
Honorable Graves, to be the suspicious and lewd discourse of every malevolent
and busy tongue. But let such know, that my Fathers name was, Henry Van
Wolway, A Licentiat and Doctor of the Civil Law, and Lord of Holmstein, a man
esteemed for his services done to this City of Colen, in mediating their Peace
and Security and Neutrality, in the Swedish and German War, and for other
effects of his Counsels and Endeavors to our Ecclesiastical Prince Elector,
and the House of Lorrain, in all those turmoyls of that Country, in the first
rupture of the Spanish and French War.

I instance these remarques, because having been so long dead some nineteen
years, I cannot better describe or Characterize him to strangers, though he
were known in his own Country by other great and Noble actions, as well as for
his long and ancient descent from an honorable Family of that name: which
whosoever shall give himself the trouble of curiosity in Enquiring, may yet
find preserved from the ruins of a destructive, and but just composed
conflagration.

It will seem foolish and sottish flattery in me, to adorn His Monument with
any more Elogy, to a strange and perhaps unbeleiving Nation, who have no faith
for any thing they see not, or not have heard from plain and undeniable
testimony. And if I be taken for uncharitable in this rigid imputation, let the
practices of those, who have made their unreasonable incredulity, a pretense to
their more barbarous cruelty, be my excuse to the World.

I shall not need therefore to particularize any more of him, for places and
circumstances, and the like accidents, will be of no greater demonstration, or
convincing verity, then those punctual relations of Sir John Mandevile,
concerning things that were impossible to be in humanity and nature; and I will
not so much as seem to impose upon the reader, with those nearer artifices of a
Lie. I am capable of doing my self right, (which I suppose will be too readily
interpreted to my disadvantage) by any means, within the compass of a woman's
understanding, and therefore if I thought I should need more ordinary ways, I
would have applied my self thereunto.

And so I will proceed to a further Narrative of my life, having acquainted the
Reader, that it pleased God to take away both my Father and Mother before I was
full three years old, but my Father died last suddenly, and left me entirely
possessed of his estate, without any Guardian or Trustees; the expectation of
many people who had long designs both upon it and me.

Being thus an Orphan, and destitute of a Procurator, as we call it in our Law,
the Church as next a Kin to such estates (and claims the right and disposal of
the Ward) secured me, and what I had, in their hands, until such time as I
should be of age and understanding to determine of my self and my Fortunes,
which they hoped by so early a matriculation, and induction of me into the
profession of the Religious, to grasp finally into their hands.

By them I was put into the Monastery or Nunnery of Sancta Clara, at this
Infant age, and educated in all such breeding as was fit for one devoted to the
service of God and his Church, wherein, if ignorance and innocence might render
devotion acceptable, my young probation-years I may be confident were not
offensive. But growing up to some capable years, and my active busy soul
exerting it self, and biting as it were the bit of this restraint and
confinement; the hours and days of this solitude and retirement, in which I was
as it were buried as soon as I was born, grew most irksome and tedious to me,
though I was not yet acquainted with the World. I felt some such strong
impulses and natural instincts to be ranging abroad, and in action, as the
first finders of Terra Incognita, were urged with, to the discovery of those
Regions, of whose Existence they had no further assurance then their own
hopeful bodings and divinations.

The Discipline also, began now to aggrieve me, and the more my thoughts
wandered and strayed after my roaming and strange fancy of the worlds bravery
(which I began now to take notice of, from the gallant appearance of persons of
quality, who frequented our Chapel) the more did the orders of the place
streighten and fret me. I began to be weary of my Company, and the poverty of
those Votaries, called in derision, as it were the Barefooted Clares; and
though I suffered none of these hardships, nor underwent any of those nice
penances and mortifications, as having no inordinacies of youth to quell and
subdue, yet the customary severity of such dealing with that sweetness and
tenderness of our Sex, did much grate me; and I blindly wished I were (what my
inclinations prompted me (...)) a man, and exempt from that tedious life, which
yet was so much the worse, because it was altogether passive and sedentary.

Nor could I find when more matured, but that Religion when imposed as a Task,
and made an employment, was one of the greatest burdens I could endure; (though
I have learned better things by practice and the troubles of the World, and
could wish my self safe in such a retreat from the cares of the future, and the
doleful thoughts of my past time, and have a zeal for my Religion, the
obligations and conduct whereof I have to my sorrow so much in my late
unadvised resolutions, abdicated and neglected.) I looked upon it more as
constraint, and not a voluntary act, wherein I had no manner of election; and
my Libertine spirit which mistook bold Humanity, and the dictates of a generous
nature, for simple and genuine adoration, confirmed me in this opinion, and
finally persuaded me and prevailed with my Reason, which grew not up equal
with my passion, to abandon this serene and blissful mansion, and venture upon
the Worlds alluring, promising vanities.

I was arrived at that age wherein I was capable of being admitted, and
professing my self a Nun, and to take upon me the Vows of the Order of
perpetual Virginity, and the like requisites of that Monastical life, and
therefore the Fathers and Confessors willing to make me a Proselyte, were very
urgent that I would take the Habit and devote my self to a religious life,
setting before me the many examples of some excellent Ladies and Gentlewomen
then in the Cloister (though it be one of the poorest Convents of all) who had
great and noble friends, and great Estates (some of them) and had
notwithstanding with all readiness of mind separated and estranged themselves
from all worldly things, and consecrated themselves to God. But my resolutions
of forsaking that melancholy and silent abode, were so far advanced, and so
obstinated in me to the prosecution of my masculine conceptions that I obtained
my discharge at the same time, as I have partly hinted before, that his Majesty
was in Colen, whom, with the rest of the desirous world I longed to see:
accompanied therefore with my maid who had attended me in the religious house,
and a manservant who was my Steward or Bailiff abroad, and had prepared all
things for my secular estate, I went to his Palace, were to pass other
rencounters, I met with a civil person, one Mrs. Margaret Hammond, the Daughter
of Sir Richard Hammond, living somewhere then in the North of England, a very
accomplished woman, who for her Religion had left England, intending to have
betaken her self to the English Nunnery at Lovain; but some difficulties
happening therein, she had journied up hither upon the same account, and
perceiving me a stranger, did me the civility with her Countrymen, as to
procure me the satisfactory view of the King and his Court, which could do no
less then oblige me to invite her home, and to desire her while she staid at
Colen to make use of my house, and what entertainment she found.

She was pleased to accept of this offer, and hereupon my curiosity having
attained some part of its wish, we began to be familiar, and I for my part to
enquire into her condition, the reason of her travail, and the news of the
world, of all which she gave me so delightful an account, insinuating the
necessity of her condition, with the perfection of her Endowments; that I told
her if she could think it answerable to her content, to stay with me, and be my
Governess, she should plentifully partake of my fortunes.

We agreed: but not to weary the Reader with those Instructions and
fundamentals of Education she laid, as she was a rare and absolute Mistress of
all those Arts, it will be sufficient to declare, that seeing so much virtue in
her, my greediness of communicating with it more freely and clearly, put me
upon giving her the trouble of teaching me the English tongue, the locked
repository of so many Excellencies.

This by a fond and most pleasing diligence, I pretty well attained in a years
time, having my Governess always in my company, whither abroad, as I I used to
ride some miles, by Coach, or else pass in a Pleasure-boat in the Summer, to
acquaint my self first with my own Country; the tenderness of my years,
offering no man the occasion or thoughts of Love or Marriage, by which means I
passed free and unobserved, and then returned again to my Country retirement
near the City.

I now addicted my self to the reading of History, and then to take off the
gravity and seriousness of that study, to more facile pastimes of literature;
Romances, and other Heroical Adblandiments, which being written for the most
and best part in French, I made that my next business, though of lesser
difficulty, to gain a knowledge in that Tongue, which being counterminous to
ours, and spoke promiscuously in the adjacent provinces of the Walloon Country,
rendered it self at my devotion.

The felicity of these two, put me upon a desire of attaquing the rest of the
European Languages, wherein without a^dw gance, and as many can testify, I
have more then a Smattering, and here was lately an Italian (as I have since
been told upon discourse and some wonder of my readiness in them) who was one
of my Masters; and who might have justified the truth of this and the rest of
my story; his name was Giacomo Della Riva, well known to many Gentlemen in this
Town.

In those and the like Studies, and other befitting Exercises of my sex, I past
away the age of nineteen years, when I thought it high time to put all this
Speculation and Theory into practice, and being furnished with such a fraught,
and store of all Foreign necessaries, to lanch into the World, and see what
returns I could make of this stock, but in the interim of such meditations, an
unhappy accident, (at my being at the Spaw the last Summer, to drink those
medicinal waters) discovered me, and invited two strange Gentlemen, which that
place always is furnished with, to enquire further what I was: who having
obtained my Country, and some inckling of my quality, made claym to be my
servants. I could not in that place, the Mart of good manners, and where there
is no nicety of converse, but all persons use their frankest liberty of visit
and discourse, refuse their Addresses, but seeing both of them so importunate,
and both so disparately and unsociably qualified for my choice or approbation,
I privately withdrew home, but could not so be rid of my odd pair of Gallants,
who quickly haunted me and my House.

I was thus of a suden encompassed with two evils, of so indifferent a choice,
that I could not tell which was worse: one was an old Gentleman that had fair
demeasnes about Liege or Luyck not many miles distant from Colen, a man of
serious gravity and venerable aspect for his gray hayrs, but disfigured with
some scars his youthful luxury had given him, which were repaired and
supplemented by Art, but so that he plainly spoke his infirmity through the
ruined Arches of his voice. He accosted me the rude military way, for he had
been a Soldado, and had caught as he said, that rotten hoarse cold, and
snuffling in the Trenches of Breda, in German Princess
depiction of Mary Carleton the Brigade of Count Henry o^ Nassaw in Spinolas
Army, and had afterward served Mounsieur Tilly against the King of Sweden,
whom he had seen fall at Lutzen, and therefore by no means must be said no, or
denied his suit, since he had never known what a repulse meant in his life.

The other was a young and pale Student in the Mathematics, Chemistry, and
Magic, like a fellow here that pretends to be Secretary to God and Nature, and
had exhausted a plentiful estate, and was like to be a second Dr. Faustus, and
like my Lord, threatened either a contract with me, or with the Devil: for
having lost his Projection of the Philosophers Stone, and decocted all his
money and estate, his magical Glass showed him me, who should by my fortune
make him up again. In short, the one said he would storm and force me, and the
other would make me yield or else he would set Archimedes his unexperimented
Engine at work, to remove me with him into some unknown World, to which he
added the efficacy of his Spells and Conjurations.

I had by my Servants and some distant friends account of such a design as
carrying me away, and forcing my consent by the Gouty Cavalier, who had some
Castellanes and Governors in Alsatia his friends, and there was no less danger
from my Magical Sweetheart, but the open violence of the one, and the secret
mines of the other were in prudence to be prevented by my absence, which I now
concluded on by my self.

I shall not be obliged to give you any further account of my parentage or
condion, for by such means my disaster here, may reach the ears of some Friends
and Acquaintance, from whose knowledge my purpose is yet to estrange my self,
(and to general enquiries Collen is too spacious and populous to afford any
discovery) It will suffice, that I was liberally and honorably educated, and
such principles laid, that I wonder at the superstructure of my fortune. I knew
not what belonged to vulgar and Plebeian customs or conditions, and they that
idly tax my discourses and behavior with mimick pedantry, know not the
generous emanations of a right born soul. And so, that which probably makes me
obnoxious to the censures of the multitude, as it has to the hatred of my new
Relations, is the low spiritedness, and pityful ignorance of such Mechanic and
base people.

I would not be thought to boast of any accomplishments, which some persons
(who favor my distressed estate, and they are of honor also) do please to
acknowledge in me, all the use I can make of them, shall serve only for an
Argument against that vile and impertinent falsehood, that I am of a most sordid
and base extraction in this Kingdom, no better then the Daughter of a Fiddler at
Canterbury.

That Blasphemous lie was first broached in an Anonymous Libel, Entitled the
Lawyers Clark trappanned by the crafty Whore of Canterbury, but at whose
instigation I could never tell, nor did I make enquiry, but at last
spontaneously the Roguery discovered it self at my being in custody near
Newgate, where I understood the Devil and necessity with the Writer, and
undertaker, were as instrumental as the Devil and Covetousness, in the
Occasioner of that report; but that fellow is of so lewd and miserable an
infamy, for such defamatory Pamphlets, that his name will poison the eyes of
the Reader, and fester even my charity in forgiving him, to proceed.

The time of my deliberated departure being come, and other intervening
accidents having confirmed me to the purfuance of that journey, some pece-meal
rumors whereof have been scattered up and down, not far distant from the
truth, namely Constraint and awe of an unliked and unsuitable match, which the
freedom of my soul most highly abhominated and resented) I privately by night
withdrew from my Governess, and by the way of Vtrecht, where I stayed a while
incognito, thence passed to Amsterdam, and so to Rotterdam, I came to the
Brill, and there took Shipping for England, the Elyzium of my wishes and
expectations being in hope to find it a Land of Angels, but I perceive it now
to be, as to me, a place of Torments.

I am not single, or the first woman, that has put her self upon such hazards,
or pilgrimages, the stories of all times abound with such Examples, enough to
make up a volume. I might as well have given luster to a Romance as any any any
of those supposed Heroina's: and since it is the method of those pieces, and
the Art of that way of writing to perplex and intricate the commencement and
progress of such adventures, with unexpected and various difficulties and
troubles, and at last bring them to the long desired fruition of their dear
bought content, I am not altogether out of heart, but that Providence may have
some tender and more courteous consideration of me; for I protest I know not
what crime, offense or demerit of mine has rendered her so averse and
intractable as she has proved to my designs.

Nor do the Modern and very late Times want Examples of the like adventures. I
could mention a Princess, and great Personage out of the North, who not long
since came into my Country, and has passed two or three times between Italy
and France, and keeps her design yet undiscovered, and is the only Lady Errant
in the World. I could mention another of a far worse consequence in this
Country, a She-General, who followed the Camp to the other World in America,
etc. and was the occasion of the loss of the design. Mine compared with those
are mere puny stories, and inconsiderable, I neither concerned my travail in
negotiatiog peace, or carrying war, but was merely my own free Agent.

Nor can I be blamed for this course, for besides the necessity and
enforcements of forsaking my Country, without running into a more unsupportable
condition of Marriage then this I am now in, (for my patience and suffering,
and Continence I have, I trust in my own power, and shall endeavor to keep
them undisturbed and uncorrupted, what ever temptations or occasions, by reason
of this unjust separation, now are, or shall be put upon me hereafter; but my
life is not in my disposal or preservation, which I had certainly endangered at
home, if I had been bedded to him whom my heart abhorred:) and besides other
reasons, which I cannot in prudence yet render to the World, the very civility
and purity of my design, without any lustful or vicious appurtenant, would
fairly excuse me.

What harm have I done in pretending to great Titles? Ambition and Affection
of Greatness to good and just purposes was always esteemed and accounted
laudable and praiseworthy, and the sign and character of a virtuous mind, nor
do I think it an unjust purpose in me to contrive my own advancement by such
illustrious pretenses as they say I made use of, to grant the Question, that I
am not so honorably descended as I insinuated to the Catchdolt my Father in
Law, (which yet by their favor they shall first better and more evidently
disprove then as yet they have done, before I relinquish my just claym to my
Honor) I think I do rather deserve commendation then reproach; if the best
things are to be imitated, I had a good precept and warrant for my assumption
of such a personage as they were willing to believe me to be; If indeed by any
misbecoming act unhandsome and unbefitting such a person, I had profaned that
quality, and bewrayed and discovered any inconsistent meanness therewith (as it
was very difficult to personate greatness for so long a time without slips or
mistakes) I had deserved to be severely punished and abhominated by all
Geetlemen; whereas after all these loads of imputations which my enemies have
heaped upon me, I do with my acknowledgements to them for it) enjoy, and am
happy in many of their loves and good estimation.

And I will yet continue the same respects, and make the World to know that
there is no possibility of such perfections, without a more intent care and
elegancy of learning, to which I have by great labor and industry attained.

I need not therefore engage further in this preluminary part of my defense,
only as an irrefragable confutation of the poorness of my birth, and in this
Kingdom, I would have my Adversaries know, as some of them do, though they
don't well understand, that the several languages I have ready and at my
command, as the Greek, Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, English, and something
of the Oriental Tongues, all which I pronounce with a Dutch Dialect and Idiome,
are not common and ordinary endowments of an English Spinster, no not of the
best rank of the City. And since I must praise my self, in short, I came not
here to learn any thing for use or ornament of a woman, but only the ways to a
better fortune.

I come now to the matter of fact, the first place I touched at was Gravesend,
where I arrived toward the end of March, and without any stay took a Tide-boat
came to London in company with a Parson or Minister, who officiously, but I
suppose out of design, gave me the trouble of his service and attendance to the
Exchange-Tavern right against the Stock, betwixt the Poultry and Cornhil, the
house of one Mr. King, not having any knowledge of the Master or his
acquaintance, and free, God knows from any design, for I would have entered any
other house if I had found the doors open, or could have raised the folks
nearer to my landing, for I was distempered with the nights passage; but it was
so early in the morning, five a clock, that there was no body stirring
elsewhere, only here by mishap Mr. King himself was up and standing at the
Bar, telling of brass farthings, whom the Parson desired to fill a pint of
wine, which he readily performed, and brought to a room behind the Bar. while
the wine was a drinking, (which was Rhenish wine, the complement being put upon
me by the Parson as the fruit of my own happy Country) Sir John very rudely
began to accost me, and to offer some incivilities to me, which I found no
other way to avoid, then by pretending want of rest to the Master of the house,
and acquainting him with my charge of Jewels, and that I was as I do justify
my self to be a person of Quality. Hereupon a room was provided for me to
repose my self in, and the Clergyman took his leave with a troublesome promise
of waiting upon me another day to give me a visit, which I was forced to admit,
and to tell him, I would leave word wherever I went; but he considering as I
suppose of the unfeasibleness of his desires, and the publiqueness of the
place, neglected his promise and troubled me no more.

He being gone, Mr. King began to question me, what Country woman I was, and of
what Religion, I frankly told him; and acquainted him withal what charge I had
about me, which to secure from the danger of the Town, that was full of
cozenage and villainy, he advised me to stay with him till I could better
provide for my self.

I rested my self here till eleven a clock at noon: when I arose, and was very
civilly treated by Mr. King, who well knowing I was a stranger and well
furnished with money, omitted no manner of respect to me, nor did I spend
parcimoniously, and at an ordinary rate, but answerable to the quality and
account, at their fetching and itching questions, I gave of my self.

This invited him earnestly, with all submiss address to request my staying
with them till I had dispatched, and had provided all things for my public
appearance, for the better furnishing and equiping whereof, I acquainted Him I
would send by Post to my Steward, for the return of some moneys to defray the
expenses thereof, which Letters he viewed, and conceived such imaginations in
his Head thereupon, that it never left working till it had wrought the effect
of his finely begun, and hopefully continued Enterprise.

These Letters he himself delivered at my desire, to have them carefully put
into the Male, to the Post House; and thereafter observed me with most manifest
respects. In the Interim of the return of these moneys, I was slightly, and as
it were by the by, upon discourse of my Country (wherein they took occasion to
be liberally copious) engaged into some discovery of my self, my estate and
quality, and the nature of both, the causes of my coming hither, etc. but I did
it so unconcernedly, and negligently, as a matter of no moment or disturbance
to me, though I had hinted at the discontent of my match, that this did assure
them that all was real, and therefore it was time to secure my estate to them
by a speedy and secret marriage.

Let the World now judge, whither being prompted by such plain and public
signs of a design upon me, to counterplot them, I have done any more then what
the Rule, and a received principle of Justice directs: to deceive the deceiver,
is no deceit.

I knew not nevertheless, which way their Artifices tended, till Master King,
brought into my acquaintance old Mr. Carleton his Father in Law, and soon after
Mr. John Carleton his Son: it seems it had been consulted, to have preferred
George the Elder Brother: He troubled with a simple modesty, and a mind no way
competent to so much greatness, was laid aside, and the younger flusht and
encouraged to set upon me. By this time they had obtained my Name from me, viz.
Maria de Wolway, which passage also has suffered by another lender Imposture,
and allusory sound of De Vulva: in the language of which I am better versed,
then to pick out no civiller and eleganter impress.

To the Addresses of Mr. John Carleton, I carried my self with so much
indifference, not superciliously refusing his visits, or readily admitting his
suit, not disheartening him with a severe retiredness, or challenges of his
imparity, nor encouraging him with afreedom or openness of Heart, or arrogance
of my own condition, that he and his friends were upon the spur to consummate
the match, which yet I delayed and dissembled with convenient pretenses, but
herein I will be more particular in the ensuing Pages.

In the mean while, to prevent all notice of me, and the disturbance of their
proceedings, that might be occasioned thereby, they kept me close in the nature
of a Prisoner, which though I perceived, yet I made no semblance thereof at
all, but colluded with them in their own arts, and pretended some aversness to
all company, but only my enamourate, Mr. Carleton: nor was any body else
suffered to come near me, or to speak with me; Insomuch, as I have bin
informed, that they promised 209 l. to one Sackvil, whom for his advice, they
had too forwardly, as they thought imparted the business, the sum of 200 l. to
be filent, lest that it should be heard at Court, and so the Estate and Honor
which they had already swallowed, would be lost from their Son, and seized by
some Courtier, who should next come to hear of this great Lady.

After many visits passed betwixt Mr. Carleton and my self, Old Mr. Carleton
and Mr. King came to me, and very earnestly pressed the dispatch of the
Marriage, and that I would be pleased to give my Assent, setting forth with all
the qualities and great sufficiencies of that Noble person, as they pleased to
style him. I knew what made them so urgent, for they had now seen the answers I
had received by the Post, by which I was certified of the receipt of mine, and
that accordingly some thousands of Crowns should be remitted instantly to
London, and Coach and Horses sent by the next Shipping, with other things I had
sent for, and to reinforce this their commendamus the more effectually, they
acquainted me, that if I did not presently grant the suit, and their request,
Mr. Carleton was so far in love with me, that he would make away with himself,
or presently travail beyond Sea, and see England no more.

I cannot deny, but that I could hardly forbear smiling, to see how serious
these Elders and Brokers were in this Love-killing story, but keeping to my
business, after some demurs and demands, I seemed not to consent, and then they
began passionately, urging me with other stories, some of which long repetition
I will now insert:

Wednesday the first of April, Mrs. King made a great Feast, where were diverse
persons of quality, as she said, amongst the rest, her Brother Mr. John
Carleton. At which entertainment Mrs. King did advise me to call her Cozen, the
which I did. Thursday the second of April, Mr. John Carleton came in his Coach,
with two Footmen attending on him, calling him my Lord, and Mrs. King did also
call him my Lord. With that I asked Mrs. King, if it was not the same person
that dined with us yesterday; she said, True, it was so, but he was in a
Disguise then, and withal, that in a humor he would often do so: But, says
she, I do assure you he is a Lord. Upon that I replied, Then his father must be
an Earl, if living. She affirmed, that he was a person of great honor. The
same time my Lord presented me with a rich box of Sweetmeats: I could do no
less then thankfully accept thereof.

My Lord came every day to Mr. Kings, and by his importunity would carry me
abroad in a Coach to Holloway and Islington. Mrs. King would often ask me, what
my Lord did say to me; I told her, nothing that I observed, but his Lordship
abounded in civility, mixed with complements. How; said she, Madam, He loves
you. Loves me, for what Mistress King? I replied. She said, For your great parts
and Endowments. I asked her, How my Lord could tell that I had either. She
said, My Lord must have very good eyes if he could see within me, or else I
must be very transparent.

After which, I did order the matter so, that his access to me was not so
easy: Mistress King importuneth me to admit my Lord to visit me; I told her
plainly, That I did not understand his Lordships meaning. He provided me a
great Banquet, at which his Lordships mother was very fine dressed, who
questioned what I was. I told my Lord, That I had received civilities from him,
and he had the like from me, and that I had no necessity to give any account to
any person what I was, for any thing that I intended; and that if any design or
affair of his required any such thing out of convenience, or otherwise he might
forbear it. His Lordship excused his mothers inquisition, by saying, She was
his Mother, and that Parents did think themselves concerned, in looking after
the good of their Children. But (said he) Madam, Wave all this, however I will
marry you to morrow. What (said I) my Lord, without my consent: my Lord, I
desire your Lordship not to come near me any more, I will not lie under such
questioning and scrutiny: Your Lordship will be safe in following my advice, in
not coming at me any more. Upon this his Lordship wept bitterly: I withdrew my
self from his presence: He writ a Letter of high Complements to me (the which
Letter was lost in that violent surprise of me and my things, by the force of
Mr. George Carleton, my Husbands Father.) At the same time I had a Gown making
upon my own account, by Mrs. Kings Tailor in the Strand, I took a Coach and
went thither; all this while the young Lord not knowing where I was, remained
impatient until my return, where I found him standing at the Bar (in a very
pensive and melancholy manner, as if he had been arraigned for not paying his
reckoning) at the Exchange-Tavern, and suddenly claspt about my middle, and
violently carried me to my Chamber. I asked his meaning: He answered, That I
had forbid him my presence; that it had almost made him mad; that he desired
nothing more of me, then but to let him look upon me. Upon that he did, with a
very strange gesture, fix his eyes upon me: In compassion to him, I asked him
what his Lordship meant, and intended; he replied in a kind of discomposed
manner, I would have you to be my Wife. I answered him, My Lord, I rather think
you have courted me for a Mistress, then for a Wife: I assure you, that I will
never be a Mistress to the greatest of Princes, I will rather choose to be a Wife
to the meanest of men.

Upon which, he uttered diverse asseverations in confirmation of the realty of
his intentions, and earnest desire of the Honor in making me his Wife, without
any respect to what I had.

After my Lord had insinuated his affections so far, that I began to understand
him, and did mix and scatter some such like acceptable words, which put him
into some confidence of obtaining me; he began like other Lovers to set forth
the amplitude of his Fortunes, and those brave things he would do if I would
finish his suit; among many other finenesses and Grandures he would bestow on
me, I well remember, he told me that he had given order for a great Glass Coach
of the new fashion to be presently made, against our wedding was over, where
eleven or twelve might conveniently sit, and that he would suit it with a set
of Lacquies and Pages, the neatest and handsomest of the Town for their
Liveries and persons. That I might see I had married a person that not only
dearly loved me, but would also highly honor me, with the most splendid
accomodations that England yielded.

At the very same time, he had changed as he told me (and part of it I saw) two
hundred pound of silver, into two hundred pieces of Gold, for the better
portableness thereof, that his Princess might see nothing of meanness belonging
to him, and that as soon as the Coach was made and all things fitted to it, he
would presently go to Court, and carry me with him, and introduce me to the
King and Queen: his further intention being, which as yet he concealed to me,
to get a Knighthood, and have something of honor to oppose the envy of men,
that so great an Estate was conferred on a private person.

And now my Lord spoke nothing but Rodomantadoes of the greatness of his
Family, of the delights and stateliness of his Lands and houses, the game of
his Parks, the largeness of his stables, and convenience of Fish and Foul, for
furnishing his liberal and open Housekeeping, that I should see England
afforded more pleasure then any place in the World, but they were (without the
Host) reckoned and charged beforehand to my account, and to be purchased with
my estate, which was his, by a figure of anticipation, when we two should be
all one, and therefore he lied not, but only equivocated a little.

But he did not in the least mention any such thing to me, nor made any offer
of enquiry what I was, no not the least semblance or shadow of it; he seemed to
take no notice of my fortunes, it was my person he only courted, which having
so happily and accidentally seen, he could not live, if I cherisht not his
affections. Nor did I think it then convenient or civil to question the credit
of his words, and the report given me of him. His demeanor I confess was
light, but I imputed that to his youth, and the vanity of a Gallant, as
necessary a quality, and as much admired as wit in a Woman.

The last day of my virgin state, Easter Eve, the Tailor brought me my Gown to
my Lodging, I being dressed and adorned with my Jewels, he again renewed his suit
to me; with all importunity imaginable: His courteous Mother was also now most
forward, pressing me to consent, by telling me, that she should lose her Son,
and his wits, he being already impatient with denyals and delays, adding
withal, that he was a person hopeful, and might deserve my condiscention: I
withstood all their solicitation, although they continued it until twelve of
the Clock that night: The young Lord at his taking his leave of me, told me he
would attend me betimes the next morning, and carry me to St. Paul's Church, to
hear the Organs, saying, that there would be very excellent Anthems performed
by rare voices, the morrow being Sunday, the 19. of April last: in the morning
betimes, the young Lord comes to my Chamber Door, desiring admittance, which I
refused, in regard I was not ready; yet so soon as my head was dressed, I let
him have access: he hastened me, and told me his Coach was ready at the door, in
which he carried me to his Mothers in the Grey-fryers, London, where I was
assaulted by the young Lords tears, and others to give my consent to marry him,
telling me that they had a Parson and a License ready, which was a mere
falsehood, and temporary falacy to secure the match.

So on Easter morning, with three Coaches, in which with the Bride and
Bridegroom were all the kindred that were privy to the business, and pretended
a License, they carried me to Clothfair by Smithfield, and in the Church of
Great St. Bartholomews, Married me by one Mr. Smith, who was well paid for his
pains: and now they thought themselves possessed of their hopes, but because
they would prevent the noise and fame, of their good fortune from public
discourse, that no sinister accident might intervene, before Mr. Carleton had
bedded me, offense being likely to be taken at Court, (as they whispered to
themselves) that a Private Subject had Married a Foreign Princess, they had
before determined to go to Barnet, and thither immediately after the
celebration of the Marriage we were Driven in the Coaches, where we had a
handsome treatment, and there we staid Sunday and Monday, both which nights Mr.
Carleton lay with me, and on Tuesday morning we were Married again, a License
being then obtained to make the match more fast and sure, at their instance
with me to consent to it.

This being done, and their fears over, they resolved to put me in a garb
befitting the Estate and dignity they fancied I had; and they were so far
possessed with a belief of it, that they gave out, I was worth no less then
80000 li. per annum, and my Husband, as I must now style him, published so much
in a Coffee-house; adding withal, to the extolling of his good hap, that there
was a further Estate but that it was my modesty or design to conceal it: And
that he could not attribute his great fortune to any thing but the Fates, for
he had not any thing to balance with the least of my Estate and Merits: So do
conceited heighths of sudden prosperity and greatness dazzle the eyes and
judgment of the most, nor could this young man be much blamed for his
vainglorious mistake.

My Clothes being made at the charge of my Father in Law, and other fineries of
the mode and fashion sent me by some of his Kindred and friends (who prided
themselves in this happy affinity, and who had an eye upon some advantages
also, and therefore gave me this early bribe, as testimonies of their early
respect, and as for Jewels I had of mine own of all sorts, for Necklaces,
Pendants and Bracelets, of admirable splendour and brightness. I was in a
Princelike attire, and a splendid equipage and retinue, accoutred for public
view among all the great Ladies of the Court and the Town on May day ensuing.
At which time in my Lady Bludworths Coach, which the same friends procured for
my greater accommodation, and accompanied with the same Lady with Footmen and
Pages, I rode to Hide-Park, in open view of that celebrious Cavalcade and
Assembly, much gazed upon by them all, the eximiousness of my fortune drawing
their eyes upon me; particularly that noble Lady gave me precedence, and the
right hand, and a neat Treatment after our divertisement of turning up and down
the park.

I was altogether ignorant of what estate my Husband was, and therefore made no
nicety to take those places his friends gave me, and if I be taxed for
incivility herein, it was his fault that he instructed me no better in my
quality, for I conceited still that he was some landed, honorable and wealthy
man.

Things yet went fairly on, the same observances and distances continued, and
lodgings befitting a person of Quality taken for me in Durham Yard, at one mr.
Greens, where my husband and I enjoyed one another with mutual complacency,
till the return of the moneys out of Germany failing the day and their rich
hopes, old Mr. Carleton began to suspect he was deceived in his expectation,
and that all was not gold that glistered: but to remove such a prejudice from
himself, as if he were the Author of those scandals that were now prepared
against my innocence, a Letter is produced, and sent from some then unknown
hand, which reflected much upon my Honor and Reputation; and thereupon on the
fifth or sixth of May ensuing, I was by a Warrant dragged forth of my new
Lodgings, with all the disgrace and contumely that could be cast upon the
vilest offender in the World, at the instigation of old Mr. Carleton, who was
the Prosecutor, and by him and his Agents divested and stripped of all my
clothes, and plundered of all my jewels, and my money, my very bodies, and a
payr of silk Stockings, being also pulled from me, and in a strange array
carried before a Justice.

But because this story has not yet been fully discovered, I will more
manifestly here declare it; That Letter abovesaid, came from one Mr. John Clay,
the younger Son of Mr. Clay a Drugster at the Bear and Mortar in Lumber-street,
a Servant and Admirer of Mrs. King my fine Sister in Law, (who because her
Husband has a weak head, (though he sat like a Parliament man once in Richard
Cromwels time for three days, as since I have been informed) must have an
assistant to carry on the business. The contents of this Letter were near to
this purpose,

SIR,
I Am unknown to you, but hearing that your Son Mr. John Carleton has married
a Woman of a pretended great Fortune, and high birth, I thought fit to give you
timely notice of what I know, and have heard concerning her, that she is an
absolute Cheat, has Married several men in our County of Kent, and then run
away from them, with what they had; If it be the same woman I mean, she speaks
several languages fluently, and has very high Breasts, etc.


I was at the Exchange Tavern, as it was designed, when this Letter was
brought, and thereupon their countenances were set to a most melancholy look,
and pale hue, which showed a mixture of fear and anger: presently I was brought
before the inquisition of the Family, and examined concerning the said Letter,
which I constantly, innocently, and disdainfully denied, so that they seemed
something satisfied to the contrary, and so my Husband and I went home in a
Coach, but that very same night, all the gang, with one Mrs. Clark a Neighbor
to King, came to my lodging where after most vile language, as Cheating Whore,
and the like, they pulled me up and down, and kept me stripped upon a bed, not
suffering my Husband to come near me, though I cried out for him to take my
part, and do like a man to save me from that violence, who at a distance
excused it, by putting all this barbarity upon his Father; In fine they left me
not a rag, rincing every wet cloth out of the water, and carrying them away,
The whole, was a most unwomanly and rude Action at the best of it, if I had
been such as they pretended me to be, and not to be parralleld, but by a story
I have lately heard of the six woman shavers in Drury Lane.

See the fickleness and vanity of humane things, to day embellished, and
adorned with all the female Arts of bravery and gallantry, and courted and
attended on by the best rank of my sex, who are jealous observers what honor
and respect they give among themselves, to a very punctilio; and now disrobed
and disfigured in misshapen Garments, and almost left naked, and haled and
pulled by Beadles, and such like rude and boisterous fellows, before a
Tribunal, like a lewd Criminal.

The Justices Name was Mr. Godfrey, by whose Mittimus, upon an accusation
managed by Old Mr. Carleton, that I had married two Husbands, both of them in
being, I was committed to the Gate House. Being interrogated by the Justice,
whither or no I had not two Husbands as was alleged, I Answered, if I had, He
was one of them, which I believe incensed Him something the more against me,
but I did not know the Authority and dignity of his place, so much am I a
stranger to this Kingdom.

There were other things and crimes of a high nature objected against me
besides, That I cheated a Vintner of sixty pounds, and was for that committed
to Newgate, but that lie quickly vanished, for it was made appear, That I was
never a Prisoner there, nor was my name ever recorded in their books; And that
I picked a Kentish Lords pocket, and cheated a French Merchant of Rings, Jewels
and other Commodities, That I made an escape, when sold and shipped for the
Barbados, but these were urged only as surmises; and old Carleton bound over
to prosecute only for Bigamy, for my having two husbands.

Thus the world may see how industrious mischief is to ruin a poor helpless
and destitute Woman, who had neither money, friends nor acquaintance left me;
yet I cannot deny that my Husband lovingly came to me at the Gatehouse the same
day I was committed, and did very passionately complain of his Fathers usage of
me, merely upon the disappointment, as he said, of their expectations, and that
he could be contented to love me as well as ever, to live with me and own me as
a wife, and used several other expressions of tenderness to me.

Nor have I less affection and kind sentiments for him, whom I own and will own
till death dissolve the union, and did acquaint him with so much there, and
protested my innocence to him, nor do I doubt could he have prevailed with his
Father, but that these things had never happened. If now after my vindication
he prove faithless and renege me, his fault will be doubly greater, in that he
neither assisted my innocence when endangered, nor cherished it when vindicated
by the Law.

In this prison of the Gatehouse I continued six weeks, in a far better
condition then I promised my self, but the greater civilities I ow to the
Keeper: as I am infinitely beholding to several persons of quality, who came at
first I suppose out of curiosity to see me, and did thereafter nobly
compassionate my calamitous, and injurious restraint.

All that troubled me was an abusive pamphlet which went under my Husbands
name, wherein, most pitifully he pleaded his frailty and mifortune, and
entitled it to no lesser precedent then Adam, which I suppose was had out of
the new Ballad, of your Humble Servant, a hint whereof, please the Reader to
take in this Abridgement.

Reader,
I shall not give my self the trouble, to recollect and declare the several
motives and inducements that deceitful, but wise enough, Woman used to deceive
me with, etc. Her Wit did more and more engage and charm me: Her Qualities
deprived me of my own; Her Courteous Behavior, her Majestic Humility to all
persons, her Emphatical speeches, her kind and loving expressions; and amongst
other things, her high detestation of all manner of Vice, as Lying, etc. Her
great Pretense to zeal in her Religion; her modest Confidence and Grace in all
Companies, Fearing the knowledge of none; her demeanor was such, that she left
no room for Suspicion, not only in my opinion, but also in others both Grave
and Wise. And all this is real and not feigned, and more convincingly and
apparently true, by this foil of his own setting, As for his undertaking to
tell the Story of the management of the business betwixt us; he is so far from
doing me justice herein, that he wrongeth me and his own soul by lying.


For Confutation of which, I refer the Reader to the ensuing Trial; Only there
is one passage that I am unwilling to let slip, that is, he says there, that
my Father was in Town upon my Commitment, and did acknowledge me to be his
Daughter, and that I had played many such tricks. It Is strange this Father of
mine could not be produced at the Trial, if that had been true.

And yet a little before this, upon his visiting me in the Gatehouse, where I
was destitute of money and subsistence, at my first coming in he seemed very
tender of me, and charged the Keeper I should want nothing, for as far as 40sh.
went, he would see him paid, which I believe he must ere long, and after that
sent me a Letter, which is the only paper I have by me of his, the other
amorous and loving scriblings being lost and taken from me, the same time that
they plundered me of my Jewels, I do not know what I may do for them, but I
hope I shall never cry for those Epistles. This done in these words, so that my
Love and my Dear, could be hot and cold almost in an instant.

My Dearest Heart,
ALthough the manner of your Usage may very well call the sincerity of my
Affection and Expressions to you in question; Yet when I consider, That thou
art not ignorant of the Compulsion of my Father, and the Animosity of my whole
relations, both against You and my Self for Your sake, I am very confident your
goodness will pardon and pass by those things which at present I am no way able
to help; And be you confident, That notwithstanding my Friends aversion, there
shall be nothing within the reach of my power shall be wanting, that may
conduce both to your liberty, maintenance, and Vindication. I shall very
speedily be in a condition to furnish you with Money, to supply you according
to your desire. I hope Mr. Bailey will be very civil to you; and let him be
assured, he shall in a most exact measure be satisfied, and have a Requital for
his Obligation. My dearest, always praying for our happy meeting,

I rest, Your most affectionate Husband. John Carleton.
May the 11th. 1663.

Other of my Husband's Friends came to Visit me in the Gate House, (of the many
hundreds of other I shall say nothing) one of them said, Madam, I am one of
your Husbands Friends and Acquaintance, I had a desire to see you, because I
have heard of your breeding. Alas, said I, I have left that in the City amongst
my Kindred, because they want it.

Another in his discourse delivered as an Aphorism, That marriage and hanging
went by Destiny. I told him, I had received from the Destinies Marriage, and he
in probability might Hanging. To waive many others of the like nature.

My innocence furnished me with several of those answers, and repartees to the
mixed sort of visitants, who either for novelty or design came to trouble me. I
was advised indeed to seclude my self from such company, but because there
might be no disadvantage pretended by reason I kept close, and evidence might
be puzzled, not having seen me in so long a time, as afterward at my Trial
might have been suggested, I gave all persons the freedom of my Chamber. But
for the Nobler sort, I may in some measure thank my stars, that out of this
misfortune extracted so much bliss, as the honor of their acquaintance, which
other wise at large I had been in no capacity to attain.

The time of the Sessions of the Peace for London and Middlesex being arrived,
I was conveyed from the Gate House to Newgate; where by the civility of the
Master of the prison I had lodgings assigned me in his own house, which adjoyns
to the Sessions-house-yard; and there I was publicly seen by all comers: that
my enemies might want no advantage of informing their witnesses of my Person,
Age and condition, and so square their Evidence: but my innocence and my good
Angels preserved me from the worst of their malice.

From thence, on Wednesday, June the third, in the evening, the first day of
the Courts sitting in the Old-Bayly, I was brought down to the Bar: and there
an Indictment upon my Arraignment was read against me; to which I pleaded Not
guilty: and, as instructed by my friends, and a good conscience, (being
altogether ignorant of the Laws and Customs of this Kingdom) put my self for
my Trial upon God and the Country, without making any exception, or ever so
much as examining what my Jury were.

And because they approved themselves men of honesty, judgment and integrity,
and did me so much justice, I can do no less then take occasion here to return
them my humble thanks, that they would regard the oppressed condition of a
helpless prisoner; and not give credit to the wicked asseverations of a wretch,
who only swore to the purpose against me: and to let the world know my
particular gratitude, I will transcribe into this my Case, as one of the
happiest and fairest remarks therein, the names of those upright Jurors, viz.
William Rutland, Arthur Vigers, Arthur Capel, Tho. Smith, Fran. Chaplin, Robert
Harvey, Simon Driver, Robert Kerkham, Hugh Masson, Tho. Westley, Richard
Clutterbuck, and Randolph Took.


The Indictment was in haec verba.

That she the said Mary Moders, late of London Spinster, otherwise Mary
Stedman, the wife of Tho. Stedman late of the City of Canterbury in the County
of Kent Shooemaker, 12 May, in the Reign of his now Majesty the sixth, at the
Parish of St. Mildreds in the City of Cant. in the County aforesaid, did take
to husband the aforesaid Tho. Stedman, and him the said Thomas Stedman then and
there had to husband. And that she the said Mary Moders, alias Stedman, 21
April, in the 15 year of his said Majesty's Reign, at London, in the Parish of
Great S. Bartholomews, in the Ward of Farringdon without, feloniously did take
to husband one John Carleton, and to him was married, the said Tho. Stedman her
former husband then being alive, and in full life: against the form of the
Statute in that case provided, and against the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord
the King, his Crown and Dignity, etc.

After which being set to the Bar, in order to my Trial, I prayed time till the
morrow, my witnesses not being ready; which was granted: and all persons
concerned were ordered to attend at nine of the Clock in the Fore-noon.

Being returned to my lodging, where some Gentlemen gave me a visit to counsel
and advise me; my Husband Mr. Carleton came thither to take his leave of me, as
I understood afterward by his complement: but my Keeper knowing of him,
thought him not fit company for me, who was one of the causers of my injurious
usage: but notice at last being given me of it, I gave order for his
admittance, and treated him with that respect which became my Relation to him;
though he, to add trouble to me, fell into more impertinent discourses
concerning the shortness of my days, and speedy preparation of Repentance for
another world; and that he would pray for me, and the like: to the which I
replied, Pray my lord let none of those things trouble you; I thank God I am as
well as ever in my life, and do of all things least fear hanging: and as for
your prayers, are you righteous or no? if not, they will so little avail me,
that they will not profit your self. Hereupon a Gentleman to break off this
discourse drank to him in a glass of Canary; which my Lord unhandsomely
declining to accept, I could not forbear to tell him, I was sorry to see his
Lordship's slender breeding could not suffer him to be civil.

Thus the world may see how these mine Adversaries had already swallowed my
life and my credit, and devoted them to the Gibbet without redemption: the
only security of all their past injustices toward me. -- Per scelera
sceleribus est iter: they must end as they have begun. Thus the Devil and his
imps were here frustrated.

For, on Thursday June the fourth, I proceeded to Trial, according to
appointment; but my fathers bandogs being not ready, my husband came into the
Court very spruce and trim, in one of his wedding-suits, and prayed the Court,
that in respect his father and his witnesses were not yet come together, or
rather had not concinnated their lies to be found in one tale, that the Trial
might be deferred for half an hour. I could not but smile to see my dear
husband labor so to make sure of my death, and with so little regard to pass
by his dear Princess without so much as vouchsafing a look to her; as if he
were angry at his eyes for having beheld so much already. But to abrupt these
thoughts, and to continue the discourse: the Court growing impatient of these
uncivil civil delays, and telling my father-in-law that they were not bound to
wait on him or his witnesses; they were now produced before them, and sworn;
and with old Carleton himself were six in number: namely, James Knot, one that
will almost cleave a hair; William Clark, and George Carleton her
brother-in-law; Mr. Smith the Parson, and one Sarah Williams; which for fuller
information of the world, I will give, with a review of the whole Trial,
according to the exactest copy of it, which was taken in shorthand at my
desire.

James Knot. My Lord, and Gentlemen of the Jury, I gave this woman in Marriage
to one Thomas Stedman, which is now alive in Dover, and I saw him last week.


Court. Where was she married?


Knot. In Canterbury.


Court. Where there?


Knot. In St. Mildreds, by one Parson Man, who is now dead.


Court. How long since were they married?


Knot. About nine years ago.


Court. Did they live together afterward?


Knot. Yes, about four years, and had two children.


Court. You gave her in marriage, but did the Minister give her to her husband
then?


Knot. Yes, and they lived together.


Jury. Friend, did you give this very Woman?


Knot. Yes.


Court. What company was there?


Knot. There was the married Couple, her sister, my self, the Parson and the
Sexton.


Court. Where is that Sexton?


Knot. I know not, my Lord.


Court. You are sure they were married in the Church, and this is the woman?


Knot. Yes, I am sure of it.


Court. How long ago?


Knot. About nine years ago.


Court. Did you know this woman before the Marriage? and how long?


Knot. Yes, I knew her a long time; I was an Apprentice seven years near her
Mothers house in Canterbury.


Court. Then she is no foreign Princess? Of what Parentage was she?


Knot. I did not know her own father (and in that he might be believed) but her
father-in-law was a Musician there.


Court. You see her married: what words were used at her marriage, and in what
manner?


Knot. They were married according to the order of the Land, a little before
the Act came forth touching Marriages by Justices of the Peace.


Court. Was it by the Form of Common Prayer, any thing read of that Form?


Knot. I did not take notice of that: I was but a young man, and was desired to
go along with them.

William Clark being sworn, said, My Lord, I was last week in Dover, in company
with this James Knot, and Thomas Stedman, and he the said Stedman did own that
he did marry one Mary Moders, a daughter of one in Canterbury, and that Knot
gave her, and that he had two children by her, and declared his willingness to
come up to give evidence against her, but wanted money for his journey: And I
have understood that a person here in Court was of a Jury at Canterbury, at a
Trial between Day and Mary Stedman at the Bar for having two husbands.


Court. Was she cleared?


Clark. I cannot tell.

Young Carletons father sworn.

My Lord, I was at Dover the last week on Wednesday; I saw the husband of this
woman, and the man acknowledged himself to be so; and did say that James Knot
was the man that gave her in marriage to him.


Court. Where is this man her husband? Hearsays must condemn no man: what do
you know of your own knowledge?


Carleton the Elder. I know the man is alive.


Court. Do you know he was married to her?


Carleton. Not I, my Lord.


Sarah Williams. My Lord, This Woman was bound for Barbados, to go along with
my husband, and she desired to lodge at our house for some time, and did so;
and when the ship was ready to go, she went into Kent to receive her means, and
said she would meet the ship in the Downs; and missing the ship, took boat and
went to the ship. After several days remaining there, there came her husband
with an Order and fetched her ashore, and carried her to Dover-Castle.


Court. What was his name that had an Order to bring her on shore again?


Sarah Williams. His name was Thomas Stedman.


Court. Have you any more to prove the first marriage?


Carlton the Elder. No, none but Knot; there wa s none but three, the Minister
dead, the Sexton not to be found, and this Knot who has given Evidence.


Court. What became of the two children, Knot?


Knot. They both died.


Carlton the Elder. Stedman said in my hearing, that he had lived four years
with her, had two children by her, and both dead; five years ago last Easter
since she left him.


Court. Mr. Carlton, What have you heard this Woman say?


Carlton. My Lord, she will confess nothing, that pleases him.


Court. Mr. Carlton, did you look in the Church-Register for the first marriage?


Carlton. I did look in the Book, and he that is now Clerk, was then Sexton
(just now not to be found;) he told me, that Marriages being then very
numerous, preceding the Act beforementioned, the then Clerk had neglected the
Registry of this Marriage. If she intended this Trade, she likewise knew how to
make the Clerk mistake Registring the Marriage.

Young Carlton's brother sworn, who said,

My Lord and Gentlemen of the Jury, I was present at the Marriage of my Brother
with this Gentlewoman, which was on or about 21 April, 1663. They were married
at Great St. Bartholomews, by one Mr. Smith a Minister here in Court, by
License.

Mr. Smith the Parson-sworn.

My Lord, all that I can say, is this, that Mr. Carlton the younger told me of
such a business, and desired me to marry them; they came to Church, and I did
marry them by the Book of Common Prayer.


Court. Mr. Smith, are you sure that is the Woman?


Parson. Yes, my Lord, it is; I believe she will not deny it.


Prisoner. Yes, my Lord, I confess I am the Woman.


Court. Have you any more witnesses?


Carlton. We can get no more but Knot to prove the first Marriage; the last is
clear.

Judge Howel. Where is Knot? Remember your self well what you said before. You
say, you know that Woman at the Bar; that you had known her a great while;
that she was born near you in Canterbury; that you were present at her
marriage; that Parson Man married them; that none were present but your self,
the married couple, Parson, Sexton, and her sister.


Knot. Some others came into the Church, but none that I knew; I am sure none
went with her, but those I named.


Court. Who gave her in marriage?


Knot. I did.


Court. How came you to do it?


Knot. I was Stedmans shopmate, and he desired me to go along with him.


Court. Were her Parents then living, or no?


Knot. Her Mother was.


Jury. How old are you?


Knot. Two or three and thirty years.


Jury. How long ago was this marriage?


Knot. About nine years since.


Court. Then he was twenty three, and might do it. What is your Trade of life?


Knot. I am a Cordweyner, otherwise, a Shoemaker; Stedman was so too: we
wrought both together.


Jury. We desire to know whether she bad a Father and Mother then living.


Knot. She had a Father-in-law.


Court. Did you know her Mother?


Knot. Yes.


Court. How long before that Marriage did her own Father die?


Knot. I did not know him. He said so before indeed.


Court. What age was she when married?


Knot. I suppose nineteen or twenty.


Prisoner. May it please your Honors, and Gentlemen of the Jury, you have
heard the several witnesses, and I think this whole Country cannot but plainly
see the malice of my Husbands Father against me; how he causelessly hunts after
my life: when his Son, my Husband, came and addressed himself to me, pretending
himself a person of honor, and upon first sight pressed me to marriage; I told
him, Sir, said I, I am a stranger, have no acquaintance here, and desire you to
desist your suit: I could not speak my mind, but he (having borrowed some
threadbare Complements) replied, Madam, your seeming virtues, your amiable
person, and noble deportment, renders you so excellent, that were I in the
least interested in you, I cannot doubt of happiness: and so with many words to
the like purpose, courted me. I told him, and indeed could not but much wonder,
that at so small a glance he could be so presumptuous with a stranger, to hint
this to me; but all I could say, would not beat him off: And presently
afterward he having intercepted my Letter, by which he understood how my
affairs stood, and how considerable my means were, he still urged me to marry
him; and immediately by the contrivance of his friends, gaping at my fortune, I
was hurried to Church to be married; which the Parson at first did without
License, to secure me to my Husband, and sometime after had a License.

And my Husbands Father afterward considering I had a considerable fortune,
pressed me, that in respect I had no relations here, and because, says he, we
are mortal, you would do well to make over your Estate to my Son your Husband;
it will be much for your honor, satisfaction of the world, and for which you
will be chronicled for a rare woman: and perceiving he had not baited his hook
sufficient (with some fair pretenses) to catch me then, he and his Son, who
were both willing to make up some of their former losses in circumventing me of
what I had, they robbed me of my Jewels, and Clothes of great value, and
afterward pretended they were counterfeit Jewels; and declared, that I had
formerly been married to one at Canterbury, which place I know not; and this
grounded on a Letter (of their own framing) sent from Dover, with a description
of me; that I was a young fat woman, full brested; that I spoke several
languages; and therefore they imagined me the person; and so violently carried
me from my lodging before a Justice of Peace, only to affright me, that I might
make my Estate over to them. The Justice having heard their several
allegations, could not commit me, unless they would be bound to prosecute me;
which my husband being unwilling to, the Justice demanded of his Father whether
he would prosecute me, saying, they must not make a fool of him; and so after
some whisperings, the Father and his Son were both bound to prosecute; and
thereupon I was committed to prison: And since that, these people have been up
and down the Country, and finding none there that could justify any thing of
this matter, they get here an unknown fellow, unless in a prison, and from
thence borrowed, you cannot but all judge, to swear against me. My Lord, were
there any such Marriage as this fellow pretends, methinks there might be a
Certificate from the Minister, or place; certainly if married, it must be
registered: but there is no Registry of it, and so can be no Certificate, no
Minister nor Clerk to be found: and if I should own a marriage, then you see
that great witness cannot tell you, whether I was lawfully married, or how? but
it is enough for him (if such a paultry fellow may be believed) to say, I was
married. I was never yet married to any but John Carlton, the late pretended
Lord: But these persons have sought always to take away my life, bring persons
to swear against me, one hired with five pounds, and another old fellow
persuaded to own me for his Wife; who came to the prison, and seeing another
woman, owned her, and afterward my self, and indeed any body. If such an old
inconsiderable fellow had heretofore wooed me, it must have been for want of
discretion, as Carleton did for want of money; but I know of no such thing.
Several scandals have been laid upon me, but no mortal flesh can truly touch
the least hair of my head for any such like offense: they have framed this of
themselves. My Lord, I am a stranger, and a forreigner; and being informed
there is matter of Law in this Trial for my life, my innocence shall be my
Counselor, and your Lordships my Judges, to whom I wholly refer my Cause.
Since I have been in prison, several from Canterbury have been to s^e me;
pretending themselves (if I were the person as was related) to be my
school-mates; and when they came to me, the Keeper can justify, they all
declared that they did not know me.


Court. Knot, You said she lived near you at Canterbury; What woman or man
there have you to prove she lived there? have you none in that whole City,
neither for love of Justice nor Right, will come to say she lived there?


Knot. I believe I could fetch one.


Court. Well said, are they to fetch still?


Prisoner. My Lord, I desire some Witnesses may be heard in my behalf.


Elizabeth Collier examined. My Lord, my Husband being a Prisoner in the
Gatehouse, I came there to see my Husband, and did work there a days; and
there came in an old man, his name was Billing, he said he had a wife there;
says Mr. Baley, Go in and find her out; and he said I was his wife, turned my
hood, and put on his spectacles, looks upon me, and said I was the same woman
his wife; and afterward said I was not, and so to others: I can say no more.

Jane Finch examined.

My Lord, there came a man and woman one night, and knocked at my door; I came
down, they asked to speak with one Jane Finch. I am the person, said I. We
understand, said they, you know Mistress Carleton now in prison. Not I, said I,
I only went to see her there. Said they, Be not scrupulous: if you will go and
justify any thing against her, we will give you 5 l.

Court. Who are those two?


Finch. I do not know them, my Lord.


Mr. Baley examined.

My Lord, there has been at least 500. people have viewed her; several from
Canterbury, forty at least that said they lived there; and when they went up
to her, she hid not her face at all, but not one of them knew her.

Court. What Country-woman are you?


Prisoner. I was born in Cullen in Germany.


Court. Mr. Carleton, How came you to understand she was married formerly?


Carlton the elder. I received a Letter from the Recorder of Canterbury to that
purpose.


Prisoner. They that can offer five pound to swear against me, can also frame a
Letter against me: they say I was nineteen years of age about nine years ago,
and I am now but one and twenty.


Court. Mr. Carlton, you heard what Knot said; he said she lived near him four
years a wife: why did not you get some body else from thence to testify this?


Carleton. Here was one Davis that was at her Fathers house, and spoke with him
--


Court. Where is he?


Carlton. I know not; he was here.


Court. You were telling the Court of a former indictment against her, what was
that for?


Carlton. She was indicted for having two husbands, Stedman of Canterbury her
first Husband, and Day of Dover Surgeon, her second Husband. The indictment
was Traversed the year before His Majesty came to England, she was found not
guilty.


Court. who was a^ that Trial?


Carlton. One here in Court was of the Jury; but that party said there was such
a trial, but knows not that this is the Woman.


Judge Howel. Gentlemen of the Jury, you see this indictment is against Mary
Moders, otherwise Stedman, and it is for having two husbands, both at one time
alive; the first Stedman, afterward married to Carlton, her former husband
being alive. You have heard the proof of the first marriage, and the proof does
depend upon one witness, that is Knot; and he indeed does say, he was at the
marriage, gave her, and he names one Man, the Parson that married her, that he
is dead; none present there but the married couple that must needs be there,
the Parson, this witness, her sister, and the Sexton; that he knows not what is
become of the Sexton. All the Evidence given on that side to prove her guilty
of this Indictment, depends upon his single testimony. It is true, he says she
was married at Canterbury, but the particulars, or the manner of the marriage
he does not well remember; whether by the Book of Common Prayer, or otherwise:
but they lived together for four years, had two Children. If she were born
there, married there, had two children there, and lived there so long, it were
easy to have brought some body to prove this; that is all that is material for
the first marriage.

For the second, there is little proof necessary: she confesses her self
married to Carlton, and owns him; the question is, Whether she was married to
Stedman, or not?

You have heard what defense she has made for her self, some Witnesses on her
behalf; if you believe that Knot, the single witness, speaks the truth so far
forth to satisfy your conscience, that that was a marriage, she is guilty. You
see what the circumstances are, it is penal; if guilty, she must die; a Woman
has no Clergy, she is to die by the Law, if guilty. You heard she was indicted
at Dover for having two husbands, Stedman the first, and Day the second. There
it seems by that which they have said, she was acquitted; none can say this was
the woman: that there was a Trial, may be believed; but whether this be the
woman tried or acquitted, does not appear. One here that was of that Jury,
says, there was a Trial, but knows not that this is the Woman. So that upon the
whole, it is left to you to give your Verdict.


The Jury went forth, and after some short Consultation, returned to their
places.

Clerk. Mary Moders, alias Stedman, hold up thy hand; look upon her Gentlemen,
what say you? Is she guilty of the Felony whereof she stands indicted, or not
guilty?


Foreman. Not guilty. And thereupon a great number of people being in and about
the Court, hissed and clapped their hands.


Clerk. Did she fly for it?


Foreman. Not that we know.


Afterward I desired, that my Jewels and Clothes, taken from me, might be
restored to me: The Court acquainted me, that they were my husbands, and that
if any detained them from me, he might have his remedy at Law. I then charging
old Mr. Carleton with them, he declared they were already in the custody of his
Son her husband. So that if they had been counterfeit, as they all along
pretended, I doubt not but that they would have had so much confidence and
justice for themselves, as to have acquainted the Court with so much, to the
bettering the envy and scandal of their gross abuses: but concerning the real
worth of those Jewels, I shall have further occasion to speak presently.

Being thus fairly acquitted, I was carried back to my former Lodgings; where,
among other visits, I had one from my Husbands near Friend, who but two hours
before had swore and threatened my death: yet to feel my temper in this
disappointment of their bloody design against me, he was sent with an
impertinent story into my company, where he began to glaver, and offer me a
glass of Wine; (above which their generosity yet never reached:) but my
passions were so high at the very sight of him, that I bid him get him out of
the room, and not trouble me with his company: which he did, by slinking from
me, as the Dog in the Proverb that had lost his Tail.

They thought being thus freed I would have ranted and vapoured, and gave them
some further unwary hint of my condition, as being now out of danger: but I
(that knew myself not to be in any) was transported with no such exultation,
but kept the same equanimity and constant tenor; no less affected with the
triumphs of Justice, then those of my Honor and Reputation.

Hitherto they have not found any thing unbecoming the person I am, or what
they made me to be, except in my necessities, and that frequency of company to
which they have subjected me by false imprisonment, and other scandals; which I
could not better remove, then by my barefaced appearance to all comers: so that
that which other women hide and mask for modesty, I must show and set to
public view for my justification.

On the sixth of June, being Saturday, I was discharged of my confinement,
(having been all along most civilly used by the Masters and Keepers of both the
Prisons where I was in durance; but indeed rather in the suburbs of a Prison,
then a Prison it self; for which I am their Debtor) and did expect that my
husband, by whom I was committed, that is, by his Relations, would have brought
me out; and I stayed there to that purpose two days after my acquittal and
purgation: but no such matter; they had got my Estate, I might do what I would
with my person; the groundless slanders they had cast upon that, should yet
serve turn to infame my bed; and the Counterfeit, though after conviction of
the falsehood thereof, must be separated and divorced: but the counterfeit
Jewels they will Hug and Embrace, and part withal at no rate.

And therefore in stead of my lawful and true Husband, they endeavored to put
a counterfeit upon me: but too much are they stupefied, in stead of being
sublimed in this mysterious way of cheat, which as in melancholy people, works
still-in their fancy that they sent me the most ridiculous Dotard for
Husband-Gentleman-Usher, that ever woman laid eye on: a Fellow that could be no
younger then brother to Mother Shipton, and had his Prophetical Spectacles to
fit him for a Legacy.

It was one of my pretended husbands, by whom a Bill was preferred (but not
found, as I said before) by Billing the Brick-layer. Upon Whitsun-Monday, the
8th of June instant, the said Billing came to Newgate, demanded of the Keepers
to deliver his Wife to him. The Turn-Key, and other subordinate Officers of the
Goal, told him, They had none of his Wife. He insisted upon it, and with-stood
all denial, mentioned my name, and the particulars of my Trial. The Keepers
remembering there was a former mistake of the same person, given in Evidence on
my behalf at the Trial, called one Grizel Hudson a Convict, a pretty Woman, and
in good habit: the Turn-Key asked Billing, Whether this was his Wife? Billing
replied, Yes; and asked her, Why she did not come to him upon his first sending
for her? She told him, That the Keepers would not permit her to stir out of the
Prison, in regard her Fees were not paid. Billing said, He would pay the Fees;
and whispered her in the Ear, saying, That they had a mind to hang her
(meaning the Carletons) but he would not prosecute her. True it was, he had put
in an Indictment against her, but he could not help that. Well Moll, said he to
her, Have ye all your things? She said, Yes. But, said he, Moll, Why do you
stay here amongst such wicked company, Rogues and Whores? I see their Irons
about their Legs. Why, said she, I have left some Linen engaged in the
Cellar. To the Cellar the Keeper carried them both; and there Billing left a
note under his hand, to pay five shillings to the Tapster: Which Note he has
to produce, to satisfy any that shall make further Enquiry in this particular.

He further said, That she had cheated him of forty pounds, and that he would
pawn the Lease of his house, rather then she should want Money, although she
was a wicked Rogue, if she would but live with him: she promised she would. He
told her he would give her a Sky-colour'd Silk Petticoat and Wastcoat, and a
Podesway Gown, new Holland for Smocks, and all other things necessary. Billing
turning himself to the Company there present, said merrily, That she had cost
him much before when he married her, but he never lay with her, but he had kissed
her, and felt her a hundred times. Billing asked her again, if she would leave
these wicked Rogues, and go along with him. She said, she had another Debt to
pay: He asked what it was; She said, twenty pounds to such a one, a stranger
then present, unto which person he gave a note to pay 20 l. in one month after
the Date thereof: (it is more then probable he will be made so to do.)

He further said to her, That now it will trouble me to pay all this Money, and
then you to run away from me in a short time. Withal, said he, Moll, You need
not, for I have a better estate then the young man that tried you for your
Life. So gave the particulars of his Estate, what in Money, Houses, Leases and
Land. He added moreover, that he did love her out of measure, notwithstanding
she had done him other mischiefs, then what he had before mentioned. She asked
him, what they were? He said, She had stolen from his Daughter a Knife and a
wrought Sheath, a Handkercher, and a Sealed Ring. With that, the standers by
told him, that he was mistaken, that this Grizell Hudson was not the person. He
swore it was, and that he knew her well enough; that he saw her in the
Gate House, and that she knew what passed between us there: But, said he, Moll,
Thou art a cunning Rogue; I desire nothing of thee but to be honest, and live
with me; the which she promised, and he parted with great content thereupon.

This affront and indeed disgrace I put to the other; but am very sorry the
poor old Fellow should be abused so by my Relations; the second part or worse
of the cheat of a cunning Gypsy, who having inveagled his affections, and set
him on edge by some lascivious gesture, entangled him in a marriage; and for
the better port and celebtation of the Nuptials, procured him twenty pound from
a friend of hers, for which he gave Bond, (the Duplicate of this story) and
when bedtime came, and the rusty Bridegroom had prepared himself, he ran away
in the dark with most of the money, and some odd things, as Linen, and the
like, and never after appeared, till those skilful Conjurers of Gray Friars (in
quo peccamus, in eo plectimur; where my fault was in deserting my first station
among the Religious, from the like demolished place am I punished) raised up my
white name, and made me perfonate the baseness of that Imposture.

To proceeed: I might now very well be said to be set at libetry, having no
where to go, or where to betake my self: for the Verdict did not reach to give
me possession of my Husband, whose Wife I was declared to be, (the Jury telling
my young Lord, upon his asking of them the Verdict, as they were coming through
the Garden of their Sessions House into the Court, That he must make much of
his Princess, and keep her to himself:) Nor was it easy to avoid the trouble
of twenty several Courtiships for Lodgings, which I well considered might give
further occasion of reproach, and abuse of my Credit.

But Mr. Carleton not appearing, which gave me suspicion of some further
design, I took Lodgings in Fullers Rents, where in privacy I resolved to wait
the reduction of him to better and honester thoughts; and that when they his
friends had all prejudice laid aside, and considered the duty and obligation
that lay upon him, they would have restored and returned him to me. But this
neither had its designed end, though the danger that I threatened his father
with, brought him to me.

This was on Sunday in the Evening, June the sixth, when he came to me,
accompanied with Mr. George Hewyt his Master, a Barrister of Grays Inn in
Coney-Court; where after some discourses, and perseverance of my resolved
manner of proceeding against his Father in the same method, and at the same Bar
where he had arraigned me; he did most submissively supplicate me, and adjure
me by all respects to him, falling upon his knees to move me the sooner, that I
would promise him not to prosecute his father for my Jewels, or any other
account: adding moreover, That if I did it, he should presently murder
himself; with suchlike cowardly Bravado's as he had used to the overruling of
my affections, when he pretended he would do an hundred more mischiefs to
himself, if I would not consent to marry him.

And now he resumed his first kindnesses, in hope I would do what he entreated;
kissed me, and offered his embraces: though I could not so easily admit such
danger into my bosom, having so lately felt the viperous sting: but this
loving humor, like a time-serving passion, soon abated by the interposition of
Mr. Hewyt.

I do suppose, that if he had been alone, and out of the custody and tuition of
that person, he would have stayed with me all night, and perhaps for the
future; but that person who has surfeited may be, and has had too much of a
woman, had now so little respects for our sex, as to curse it in general: but
let him beware, as froward and as great a woman-hater as he is, lest he expiate
those Maledictions, by some notable feminine revenge a steeping and preparing
for him.

Next day I sent a Letter to my husband, and left it for him at Master Hewits
Chamber: but through his means, as I can conceive no otherwise, I received no
word of any answer; so that I resolved once for all to go and make a demand of
my said goods and Jewels of old Mr. Carlton; which I did on Friday night, the
19th of June, at his house at Gray-Friars; and knocking at Door, he himself
asked who was there: I answered, Your Daughter when a Princess, but now your
sons wife: he demanded my business; I told him I came to demand my Jewels, and
other things he had taken from me, and also my husbands Person. He replied in
short, the old Gentlewoman pulling him back from further discourse, That for
the Jewels, my husband had them; and for himself, he was gone.

There being no more to be said or done, I bid them look to their hits, and
departed: having on all occasions, after so many injuries sustained, proffered
a reconciliation, being willing to cohabit with him, and have left no means
unattempted to bring us together, that the world might see I am not such a
loose irregular lewd woman as I am slandered to be, by my carriage and
demeanor in that relation of a wife, which title I am more ambitious of then
any other yet put upon me: but since it must be otherwise, I doubt not so
prudently and innocently to behave my self, as I shall not want a husband, much
less the trouble of so impertinent and fickle a person as my husband, whom I
would willingly exchange for my Jewels, and give him liberty to look after
another Princess where he can find her.

And now for that Hocus Pocus, the delaying of those counterfeit Jewels, as
they talked, I shall make it no difficulty to prove that those Gems they had of
me were none of their Bristol-stones, or suchlike trumpery: for not long after
my trial, they were offered in Cheap Side to the view of a Goldsmith, and he
demanded what they might be worth; who having steadily and considerately looked
them all over, said, they were worth 1500 l. At which the Trustee, or
Fiduciary, in whose hands they were, asked the Goldsmiths if he was mad, or knew
what he said. Yes, that I do, replied he, and will presently lay you down so
much money for them, if you have power to sell them: whereupon my Gentleman put
up his counterfeit ware with a more counterfeit face, saying, he came only to
try his skill, and departed.

And now let all the world judge of the Cheat I have put upon this worshipful
family of the Carletons. I have of theirs not a thread, nor piece of any thing,
to be a token or remembrance of my beloved Lord, which I might preserve and lay
up as a sacred relic of a person dear to me (I think indeed the dearest that
ever woman had.)

But it may be they intend to furnish my Lord with this portable and honorable
furniture to the second part of this Gusman-story, against he shall
knight errant it abroad; and having found the way, marry some other great
foreign Lady, and in stead of Boys whooping and hallowing at him here, be
revered and adored by subjects, as his great spirit always divined and
suggested to him he should be somebody, though to little purpose: but I hope
to prevent that design, and to have speedy redress against all this fraud and
violence that has been acted against me.

And now I have concluded the Narrative, and I hope to the satisfaction of the
world: and if there be any thing not so elegantly and clearly expressed as
mycause requires, let it be known it is my fathers, not my fault, which has in
some places disturbed and muddied my fancy, and in others reserved a hiding
place and obscurity for my pursued honor.

I hope the ingenuous will pardon and admit of this defense, considering the
nature of it. No man is bound by any law to set forth more then what he is
directly interrogated and questioned to; and there I have for my innocence sake
exceeded. And for the ignorant and malicious, let them wonder and slander on;
and when they shall give me worthy occasion, which is not in the capacity of
their shallow brains, or in their dishonest intentions, to a further
vindication; that is, when my relations shall have returned me what they took
from me, and leave me in statu quo, by any handsome expedient, I shall not
fail of making this discourse most evident demonstration, and descend to such
undeniable proof of every particular here, that shall make their impudence and
rash folly one of the leudest stories of the Age.

The world usually and frequently judges as it likes and affects, and is
altogether swayed by interest and humor; and even by that, amidst all those
industrious calumnies, I dare stand or fall. Let my quality and condition
alone, and he is not weighed in the common scales; yet the fair conduct and the
harmless example deserves no censure. Let both alone, my sex is to be pitied
and respected, and my person not to be hated. But I will not prostitute my fame
to them: to his Highness I have appealed, and to him I shall go. Not doubting
but what the strictness and nicety of the Law does at present withhold him, we
shall by his gracious protection of innocence be freed from such encumbrances;
and some easier solution found for those intricacies, then my Lawyers can at
present expedite.

I am advised howsoever to prosecute my adversaries in the same manner, and at
the same Bar where they arraigned me for a suspicion, of a real suit of Felony,
for that riot against the public peace committed upon my person: which I am
resolved to do, in case I receive not better satisfaction from them before the
Sessions: nor shall my husbands dilating entreaties and persuasions befool me
any longer.

Either love me, or leave me,
And do not deceive me.
The fashions and customs here are much different from those of our Country,
where the wife shares an equal portion with her husband in all things of weal
and woe, and can liber intentare, begin and commence, and finish a suit in her
own name; they buy and sell, and keep accounts, manage the affairs of household,
and the Trade, and do all things relating to their several stations and
degrees. I have heard and did believe the Proverb, That England was a Heaven
for women: but I never saw that Heaven described in its proper terms: for as
to as much as I see of it, it is a very long prospect, and almost disappears to
view; It is to be enjoyed but at second hand, and all by the husbands title;
quite contrary to the custom of the Russians, where it is a piece of their
Divinity, that because it is said that the Bishop must be the husband of one
wife, they put out of orders, and from all Ecclesiastical function such Clergy
men, who by the Canon being bound to be married, are by death deprived of their
wives; so that their tenure to their Livings and Preferments clearly depends
upon the welfare and long life of their yoake-fellows, in whose choice, as of
such moment to their well-being, they are very curious, as they are afterward
in their care and preservation of them.

I could instance in many other customs of nearer Nations, in respect to
female right and propriety in their own Dowers, as well as in their husbands
estates: but, cum fueris Romae, Romano vivite more. I will not quarrel the
English Laws, which I question not are calculated and well accommodated to the
genius and temper of the people.

While I mention these customs, I cannot forbear to complain of a very great
rudeness and incivility to which the mass and generality of the English vulgar
are most pronely inclined, that is, to hoot and hallow, and pursue strangers
with their multitudes through the streets, pressing upon them even to the
danger of their lives; and when once a cry, or some scandalous humor is
bruited among them, they become Brutes indeed. A Barbarity I thought could not
possibly be in this Nation, whom I heard famed for so much civility and
urbanity. This I experimented the other day in Fanchurch-street, as I was
passing through it upon some occasion, which being noised and scattered among
the Prentices, I was forced to bethink of some shift and stratagem to avoid
them, which was by putting my Maid into a Coach, that by good hap was at hand,
and stepping into an adjoining Tavern; which the Herd mistaking my Maid for me,
and following the Coach as supposing me there for the convenience thereof, gave
me the opportunity of escaping from them. A Regulation of this kind of uproar
by some severe penalties, would much conduce not only to the honor of the
Government of the City, but the whole Nation in general; having heard the
French very much complain of the like injuries and affronts: but those to me I
may justly place to my husbands account, who has exposed me to the undeserved
wonder, and to be a May Game to the Town.

And to his debility and meanness of spirit, I am likewise beholding for some
other scandalous Libels and Pasquils divulged upon this occasion of our
marriage; chiefly for the Ribaldry of some pitiful Poetry, entitled, A
Westminster-wedding, which equally reflects as much upon himself as me. This
tameness of his does hugely incense me; and I swear, were it not for the
modesty of my sex, the bonds of which I will not be provoked to transgress, I
would get satisfaction my self of those pitiful Fellows, who by this impudent
and saucie scribbling, do almost every day bespatter my honor. At least, I
wonder my husband does not vindicate himself, and assert his own individual
Reputation, having threatened so much in print against a civil person that
formerly and first of all endeavored to clear and justify mine.

But when I consider how apt his kindred are to return to their vomit of
slandering me, and reckoning the nine days wonder of their great cheat
discovered is over, are like those that have eat shame and drank after it; I
did the less wonder at his stupidity and senslessness of those indignities done
him: and commonly those that have no regard to another honor, have as little
respect for their own; as he is Master of another man's life, that is a
Contemner of his own.

I shall therefore omit all the subsequent sneaking Lies, raised by the same
kindred, when they saw their more mighty and potent Accusations helped forward
with such prejudices, noise and ostentation, were at once disappointed and
blown to nothing: such are those Chimaera's of their framing and fancying, that
I was seen in man's apparel, with a Sword and Feather, in design to do mischief
to some body; and that I have used to do so: and so punctual are they in this
Lie, as to name both the time and place: that I resolved to set up a
Coffeehouse, and at last to turn Player or Actor: with an hundred other flams
to sully my Name, and of a multitude of the like, to make one or other of those
Calumnies and Reproaches to stick upon me.

Whereas on the contrary I do resolve, as soon as my cause is heard, and
justice done me by the supreme-power, if I cannot otherwise attain it, to
retire and return back, though not immediately to my own home, yet to make such
approaches at necessary distance for the present, that I might be in a
readiness and view of all transactions there, as soon as this bluster shall be
so laid here, that I shall not fear the tail of this Hurricane pursuing me: yet
shall I always have my heart and my Arms open to Mr. Carleton, as a person whom
for his Person and Naturals I do and shall ever affect, as his wife and my
husband, maugre all those practices (as for my part) of rendering us mutually
hateful and suspect to each other.

And while I thus open the way to a composure of this unhappy business, and am
willing to put up so many private injuries, and public contumelies and
disparagements, in tendencie to, and in consideration of the relative state of
marriage, which my conscience commands me to prefer before any advantage,
respect or honor of mine own individual particular; and have not refused, but
rather by all fair means, and too mean condescentions have courted an
Accommodation and Agreement; what Injustice is it upon Injustice, Oppression
upon Cruelty, refined Malice like Salt upon Salt, to pierce and exasperate that
bosom which is full of so much indulgence to, and dallyance with their worst
of injuries, in expectation that time would give them to see their mischievous
error?

But neither Time nor Truth it self will reclaim them, without Angels appear to
confirm them in it. And I do in some part not blame them for it: for the excess
and lofty structure of their hopes has so dazzled their looks downwards, that
they can see nothing aright, nor in any true proportion or color. Their
dejection and fall from the pinnacle of their ambition, has quite stunned them,
that they will hardly recover the dizzie mistake that lies between a Princess
and a Prentice.

They are angry their golden Mountains have traveled and been in labor with a
Mouse, and that they cannot finger any of my Estate; and very importunate they
are for me to declare it; and this they say is the only argument to prove me
no Cheat, and I say and believe it is the only argument to prove me a fool;
and with that, of all other their slanders and durtiness, they shall never
abuse me.

But may not I with a great deal more reason enquire for, and demand my
Jointure and Dowry? and those Manors, Leases, Parks, Houses, and the like
Rhapsodies and Fictions of an Estate, mere castles in the Air; and as one
merrily since told me, he believed they were Birds Nests? It is sure a greater
imputation and shame to them to be found such Cheats and Liars, then it can be
the least blur to me, who never avowed any such thing, nor boasted of my
Quality and Fortune.

As to the Letters they intercepted of mine from my Steward, I wonder they do
not produce them: but they are ashamed of their most ridiculous simplicity
therein. I knew very well the uncertainty of my condition here; and therefore
the Letters were merely Ciphers, and under those terms of Moneys, etc. an
account was given me of another affair at home: the distaste whereof made me
comply with, and so soon yield to those importunate and lovesick
solicitations of my Lord.

But what will they be the better for a Rent-roll, or particulars of an estate
in Germany, the Tenure and Customs of whose propriety and nature of claim if
they did know, yet could they not tell how to make their Title to it? I could
easily name places, and discover my own Hereditaments perhaps without danger,
and they never the wiser: nor will the impartial Reader be better satisfied.
But if my sister King, or any of my kinsfolk long for some Baccharach grapes,
I Will send to my Steward for them, and he will convey them from mine own
vineyard as soon as they are ripe; and I can furnish her husband with
Westphalia Hams, which run in my woods gratis. All those fine things I have
store of: and when Mr. Carlton pleases to make it a surer match, and be married
the third time, all things shall be done in ample manner: I will make a
resignation of my whole estate, and have nothing settled in lieu of it, but a
necessitous despised condition of life, and be taught to sing Fortune my foe to
the pleasant new tune, or echo of a Cheat.

But I trust Providence will better govern me, and put me upon no necessity of
abandoning good and just resolutions I have made to my self, whether in case of
separation or reunion, which I shall not over-fondly press, or urge from them
who love not me but mine, and require signs and wonders, and love to be no
less then Principalities.

FINIS.

