A Pattern of Mercy. Opened in a SERMON AT St. PAUL'S, BEFORE The Right
Honorable, the Lord Mayor, AND THE Lord General Monck: February 12. 1659. By
TOBIAS CONYERS, Minister at St. Ethelberts, London.

LONDON, Printed by M. I. and are to be sold at the Greyhound in St. Paul's
Churchyard. at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley, and at the Elephant and Castle
near Temple Bar, 1660.

The Authors Apology.
WHen I entered upon the ensuing Discourse in my private Meditations, I looked
upon the complexion of the times, and considered the temper of the climate in
which we live, and in a Nation all rent and torn with differences in Opinions
both Civil and Religious, I thought nothing could be more acceptable then a
proposition of peace: But whilst I spoke for peace, (such was my unhappiness)
some men made themselves ready for battle. The giving of offense to any sort of
persons, was a thing as far remote from any design or purpose of mine, as it is
disagreeable to my temper and disposition to be at ods with any man. And
looking over these Papers which now I publish to the world, (if I may be
permitted to judge in mine own case) I cannot but wonder from whence the great
cry of the City arose, as if some Theudas, or Judas Galilaeus were risen from
the dead; being naturally averse from the starting of any new Opinions, and far
enough from having any thing extraordinary in me either to create or make me
the head of any new sect or faction: It is confessed the 12th. of Fehruary was
a critical day, and all circumstances concurred to render me unacceptable: What
I suffered in my self, was nothing; but that I should so much as accidentally
occasion any reflection upon that noble Gentleman, the Lord Mayor, (whom all
men must needs judge both too great and too wise to concern himself in any
thoughts or meditations of minds) troubled me not a little; it is true, I had
been often soliciting my Lord for dismission; and that he took this occasion to
do it, was so far less displeasing to me, as it was satisfactory unto others;
for having served his Lordship for himself without any mercenary proposals and
expectations, I could not in the least be dis-satisfied with any thing that did
but seem either to support or vindicate his Lordships Honor and Reputation in
the World.

The aspersions cast upon me are either that I am Schismatical, an Enemy to the
Church, or that I am Heretical: To both which I crave leave to answer, and make
my just defense.

1. That I am Schismatical, or a Sectary, I know not why any man should think
so; it is true that I hold communion with, and observe the laws of Piety and
holy Charity with that Christian people to whom Mr. John Goodwin is Pastor;
and this I always thought I might do with the salvage of truth, honor and
conscience; and yet that it might be known that in that congregation are
persons of greater wisdom, moderation and latitude, then to confine the
administration of Ordinances within their own precinct; I think it not amiss to
inform the courteous Reader, that with their permission I do perform all those
Ministerial duties that any Church Officer does in the place where he lives.

If it be the Episcopal party that censures me for schism, I humbly crave leave
to remonstrate, that I entered the Ministry at a time when there was no Church
Government established, but every one did that which was right in his own eyes;
as I had no hand in pulling down their Hierarchy, so will they not (I hope)
blame me for joining with a people that I thought espoused the interest of
truth and holiness, since I did it (as appears by my practice) with the
preservation of that Ministerial freedom and liberty which any Officer
Ecclesiastical either justly exercises, or pretends unto.

If it be the Presbyterian party, if I had made any schism, of all men they
have the least reason to take notice of it; He that is of them without sin in
this kind, let him cast the first stone at me; (to borrow our Savior's words.)
For if the little Foxes and Boars have entered to root up and destroy the
vinyard, it was by that schism or gap which themselves made, therefore the
Brethren of the Presbytery remembering their own faults this day, will (I hope)
exercise great lenity and grace toward those that are found in the same sin
and transgression (if it be a sin and transgression) with themselves.

To both parties (whom I wish may be no more called two, but one) I shall only
add this, That when the fence is made up, which how strong soever it may be, I
wish may not be too strait, I must either keep out, or at my further peril. The

Second part of my accusation, is Error and Heresy; Erroneous I may be,
Humanum est Errare; Heretical I cannot be, because never censured by any lawful
Authority: I know not what brought me so much as into suspicion with the City,
unless it were for my Judgment about the death of Christ, Election and
Reprobation, etc. wherein I am sure I hold nothing contrary to the Doctrine of
the Church of England contained in her 39. Articles, and interpreted, according
to her most learned and best beloved children, as Dr. Hamond, Dr. Tailor, Mr.
Thorndike, Mr. Thruscross, Mr. Gunning, Mr. Pearce. Now having so often
profer'd to the Commissioners for Approbation, and others, bona fide, to
subscribe these forementioned Articles, which contain the Doctrine of our
reformed Religion ever since the time of reformation, there is no ground in the
world why any man should accuse me either for Novellism, or Opinion.

But because some men may even censure the Articles themselves, and because I
am extremely desirous to cut off all future jealousies concerning me, touching
the five so much controverted points, I will here propose my sense in mine own
terms.

I. That God's Eternal Decrees of Election and Reprobation, are not of
Qualities, but of Persons.

II. That Grace of God which is afforded unto all men, is sufficient to leave
men without excuse.

III. That the death of Christ is sufficient for all; but none shall have
benefit by him but those that believe.

IV. That no man has power of himself to do any thing that good is, but
stands in need of the preventing, exciting, and assisting Grace of God in
Christ, for the beginning, progress, and perseverance in all good. Or thus: The
will of man set at liberty by grace, is only free in its choice both of good
and evil.

V. That there is a state of grace attainable in this life, from which it is
difficult, if not impossible to fall away.

More particularly I now come to satisfy the Christian Reader concerning the
following Discourse: The offense that was taken at my Sermon, was either in
gross from the general tendency of it, or in particular, from that distinction
which I made 'twixt goodness and Mercy, and from that passage concerning the
punishment of Blasphemy: To hoth which (good Reader) I shall crave the leave
both to explain my self, and give my Reasons. 1. For the general and natural
tendency of my Sermon, I think it was for Peace, Love, Mercy and Unity; and if
any thing otherwise either has, or shall ensue upon it, it is absolutely
contrary to its primitive intention: I am indeed (till I see reason for the
contrary) very much persuaded of the equity and reasonableness of suffering
with lenity and moderation, all those that dissent in Religion, provided they
trample not upon Authority, make no breach upon the civil peace, offer no
violence or dishonor unto those who are different in their persuasions from
them. Here I take shelter under the great St. Austin, who writing to
Proculianus the Donatist, acknowledges, That such as err from the Truth must
be drawn home by mild instruction, and not by cruel enforcement. When Bishop
Itacius (as my Author informs me) had put to death Priscilian, and diverse of
his Followers, Anno 383, he was first condemned for that bloody act by
Theognistus and St. Ambrose; afterward meeting some Bishops at Triers that had
partaken with Itacius in his bloody execution, refused to have any Communion
with them: Neither do I think can it be made appear, that the Councils of Nice,
Calcedon, or Constantinople, made use of any other weapons against the Arrians,
Nestorians, Macedonians, but the Word of God.

And my same Author brings in Thuanus proaem. in Histo, p. 5. a Romanist
challenging all the world to show him any approved euample in all the Monuments
of Antiquity, of any execution done upon the Opinionists of those times, but
that the Church of God did always abhor the shedding of blood, in matters that
merely concerned Religion. To deny unto men the exercise of their Religion,
(provided, as before, they keep the civil peace) is that which neither the
Pole, nor the French deny unto the Hugonets, the Sectaries of those parts.

That the Church of Rome should impose in matters of Religion, is so far
rational, that she does pretend to an high infallibility: but why one Minister
should impose upon another, one Protestant upon another, when neither the one,
or the other, does so much as pretend to infallibillity, for the present I see
not; and should be glad that any person of piety and learning would give me
sober reasons of Conviction.

In particular, concerning that distinction which I gave twixt goodness and
mercy in God; for which some took occasion boldly to aver, That I denied the
Attributes of God: whoever they were, they fulfilled the old saying, Fortiter
calumniare, aliquid adhaeretis; and I hope I shall wipe off both the dirt and
the stain by denying it: I will not disparage the Auditory at Paul's so far as
to make any other explanation then what I then made, and to which I refer the
Reader; as it is truly transcribed and printed: for when we said, that God
could not be merciful, till the creature, sin and misery opened a door
thereunto; we spoke of mercy in actu exercito, in the exrcise and practice
thereof; and in this sense only it seems distinguishable from goodness, and
in all other respects identified, and made one with it; for mercy it is elicit,
and drawn forth of goodness by the consideration of want and misery.

In the second and last place, That which was most excepted against, and which
has opened the mouths of so many men against me, was that one Expression, That
I could subscribe to punish Blasphemy according to the Judaical Law, if there
were any person to be found who could infallibly determine it: This is all that
was spoken (more (...) less) upon this Subject; and what grounds there may be
for it, thou shall judge.

1. Consider, that at that time when this Law was put in execution against
Blasphemers, the Jews that were entrusted therewith, were such as had an
immediate, and consequently, infallible Direction in all difficult and
important Cases, from God himself, and therefore could not swerve in the
Administration of Judgment, unless they would directly oppose the plain and
positive Determination of God himself; but since we cannot expect any such
immediate Direction or Determination, in an Affair of this importance, whether
we ought to put any such Law in execution, ought to be the subject of our
serious thoughts and inquiry.

2. It is worth our consideration how the Jews made the ordinary and common
naming of Jehovah, to be blasphemous, and punishable by death, judging it
warrantable from the Letter of that Text, Lev. 24. 11. And the Israelitish
Woman's Son blasphemed the Name of the Lord; it is in the Septua. (...), And
naming the Name of the Lord, cursed: And Ver. 16. without the explication or
addition of cursing, or execration, its said, (...), He that meth the Name of
the Lord, shall surely be put to death; though our translation has it, He that
blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, shall surely be put to death. Now I submit it
to the Judgments of the Wise, how difficult it is to state the Nature of
Blasphemy; how high, or how far the Expression must go, to bring the person in
danger of this Law, and how requisite it was even for the Elders of the
Congregation to put the Offender in Ward, (as they used to do) till the mind of
God was known concerning this thing.

3. The Law against Blasphemy seems to be much of the same kind with that
(equally severe) against presumptuous Sins, Numb. 15. 30. But the soul that
does ought presumptuously, whether he be born in the Land, or a Stranger, the
same reprocheth the Lord, that Soul shall utterly be cut off, (i. e.) Punished
with death: An Instance is there given, Ver. 32. They found a man that gathered
sticks on the Sabbath Day, and they brought him unto Moses and Aaron, and unto
all the Congregation, and they put him in Ward, because it was not declared
what should be done unto him. We observe,

1. There was an Atonement to be made for sins of Ignorance; but sins of
Presumption were to be punished by Death.

2. Presumption, or as ihe Septuagint reads it, (...), to sin with an hand of
pride, is such a sin that cannot be judged of accurately, and distinctly, by
any save God only; men may guess, but it belongs unto God to pass a definitive
Sentence. The man was brought into just suspicion that had gathered sticks on
the Sabbath Day; but how far God would interpret it presumptuous, neither Moses
nor the Congregation could determine: Therefore they put him in Ward till they
knew the mind of God. Observe Christian Reader, that the Inquiry which they
made at the mouth of God, seems not to be concerning the Punishment, (for that
was determined before, The soul that does ought presumptuously, shall be cut
off,) but concerning the Sin, how far God would interpret it presumptuous, and
within the Cognizance of his own Law: Hence I infer, That if Moses could not
judge (as to this Statute) in the breach of a known Law, such as was the
breaking of the Sabbath by gathering sticks thereon; of how much greater
difficulty is it for any person or persons now living, to state and define the
whole nature and extent of Blasphemy? which is necessary for the Judges that
sit upon life and deatb.

3. Besides, if we will make the Judicial Law binding, and still in force for
the punishment of Offenders in Religion in one case, why not in all cases? (i.
e.) of things in eodem genere, in the same kind; If Blasphemy, why not
Sabbath-breaking, especially since we make it Jure Divino? Why do we not punish
Atheism, Idolatry, Judaism, Swearing, Execration, or any presumptuous Sin, with
death, according to the rigor of the Jewish Law? In these things I am bold to
offer my thoughts, and do with all possible humility submit my Apprehensions to
be regulated by better Judgments; hoping, Christian Reader, thou will take
these things with the same candor they are now delivered unto thee; and the God
of Peace that brought again our Lord Jesus Christ from the dead, establish thee
in the Truth, and preserve thee in perfect Love and Charity unto the State and
Kingdom whereinto no Atheist, Idolater, Blasphemer, shall enter; where the
Church shall be no longer Militant, in diversity of Opinions, but Triumphant,
in absolute and entire Love and Unity, where all Gods People with one heart,
and one mind shall join togegether with the blessed Angels in one Chore;
Perpetuas Dei Celebrare lauds, and aeternum cantare Hallelujah.

ERRATA.
APol. page 2. l. 5. r. mine: p. 2. Marg. r. innoxias. p. 4. l. 5. r.
equipollent. p. 6. l. ult. r. Messiah. p 8. l. 27. r. Officio: p. 9. l. 12. r.
fructus. ibid l. 20: r. Acts. p. 14. l. 25. r. fuco. ibid. l. ult. r. Agricola.
p 15. l. 11. r. Aquinas. p 16. l. 35. r. with. p. 13. l. 32. r. These. p. 19.
l. 5. r. assimilate. p. 23. l. 12. r. Field. p 28. l. 14 r. ultionum. p. 29. l.
14. for unto that day, read unto us in that day. p. 30. l. 1. r. like. ibid. l.
11. r. genius.

A Pattern of Mercy.
THE TEXT. Luke 6. 36. Be ye therefore merciful, as your heavenly Father is
merciful.
THis is part of our Savior's Sermon, either upon, or at his coming down from
the Mount; and therefore does highly challenge and bespeake our best attention
and observation, since it is no ordinary Teacher, but the great Master of
Truth, the great Doctor of the World that speaks.

A Discourse of Mercifulness, I presume will seem neither low, nor yet
unseasonable in this Auditory; not low, because the subject of our blessed
Savior, and directed to his own Disciples, not excluding the rest of his
Auditors gathered together in great multitudes for to hear him: Not
unseasonable, since we dwell in an age wherein those black passions of Envy,
Jealousy, Hatred; those sad distempers of Malice, Revenge, Cruelty, are so
great and predominant.

The Evangelical Duties that are scattered in this Book, are in this respect
not unlike the Proverbs of Solomon, that have no great connection with, or
dependence one upon another.

That which relates unto the Text, begins Verse 27. where he urges them [to do
good to those that hate them:] and ver. Duplex est autem resistendi modus;
alter quo innoxius araemus injurias; alter quo retali amus. Calvin.
29. [to him that smites thee on the one cheek, offer also the other:] i. e.
Be far from Revenge; do not oppose violence with violence; but put up, rather
then repay an Injury; [and him that taketb away thy Cloak, forbid not to take
thy Coat also:] which is explained Matt. 5. 40. [if any man will sue thee at
the law, (...), go to Law with thee, and take away thy coat, (i. e.) If any man
go about to rob thee of thy coat by any unjust course or process at law, rather
then oppose violence or fraud, to his deceit and injustice, let him take thy
Cloak also; not that our Savior herein forbids Christians to make use of the
Civil Law for the maintenance of themselves, their just Rights and Properties;
for this were to expose them (too obnoxious already) to the ravenous appetite
of every covetous and unjust person.

Verse 30. [Give to every man that asks: (i. e. such as we judge are in need;
the poor are the proper and necessary objects of every good man's charity) and
of him that takes away thy goods, (...) (i. e.) that takes thy goods upon
lone, that borrows of thee, [(...)] ask them not again, (i. e.) Exact them
not again by hard Usury, and oppression; which seems to be the same with that
Mat. 5. (...). as mutuum exigor debitum, reposco.
42. Give to him that asks, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not
thou away; In St. Matthew we are commanded not to refuse to lend to those that
would borrow; and in St. Luke, not to exact what we do lend, with cruelty and
oppression.

He urges them unto this,

1. Ab aequitate, from the equity and reasonableness of it. ver. 31. And as ye
would men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise; make their case your
own, and what you would have done to you, were you in their condition, do you
the same for them.

2. By an Argument drawn, a minori ad majus, ver. 34. Sinners lend to sinners,
to receive as much again: If you only have a common and ordinary love and
charity for those which have the same for you, what reason or ground have you
to expect Divine Remuneration? But as it is ver. 35. Love your Enemies, and
your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the highest, for he
is kind unto the unthankful, and the evil; From whence he infers the duty in
the Text, and shuts up that part of his Discourse; Be ye therefore merciful.

I will not spend time in opening of the words, (there being nothing in them
but what is obvious to the most common Understanding) least I should seem to
raise a dust with my feet, and make the Comment more dark then the Text.

2. Parts.

1. A duty enjoined, Be ye merciful. 2. The measure or pattern of this duty, as
your heavenly Father.
In both which, we have three things.

1. The mercifulness of the Divine being declared, Your heavenly Father is
merciful. 2. The Creatures mercifulness enjoined, Be ye merciful. 3. The
assimulation likeness, and proportion that ought to be 'twixt the one and the
other, (...), as your heavenly father is merciful.
Hence I might lay down three Axioms or Divine Propositions:

1. That God is merciful. 2. That we ought to be merciful. 3. That Gods
mercifulness is the Copy and Rule of ours.
But I will not cast the words into any other Mould then that wherein they lie
in the Text, Viz.

Doct. That we all ought to be merciful, even as our heavenly Father is
merciful.

METHOD.
1. I shall give you an account what mercy is, and what it imports in the
phrase of the Scripture. 2. Wherein the mercifulness of our heavenly Fathers
appears, that we may see wherein we are to imitate him. 3. What reasons and
grounds we have to be merciful as he is merciful.
1. Concerning Mercey: Sometimes Mercy is the same with Pity, Compassion, and
Tenderness: Phil. 2. 1. the Apostle exhorts to Unity by the consolation of
Christ, by the comforts of Love, by the fellowship of the Spirit, by bowels and
mercies, (i. e.) If there be any tenderness, pity and compassion in you toward
your common Father, fulfill you my joy; where bowels and mercies are equipolent
terms, that serve to illustrate and explain the sense one of another: To this
we may refer that of the Prophet, Jer 31. 20. where God is brought in troubled
and discomposed in himself for the punishment and affliction of Ephraim; Is
Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against him, I
do earnestly remember him, therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will
surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

2. Mercy is the same with pardon, remission and forgiveness, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
Who, was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious; but I obtained
Mercy, because I did it ignorantly, (i. e.) being so much unfit and unworthy
whilst I was a Jew, blaspheming Christ, and persecuting his people; yet I
obtained mercy, (i. e.) pardon and forgiveness of God, God looked upon it as an
act of blind zeal in me, and not of propense malice against them.

3. Mercy is used for the donation or vouchsafement of some Privilege
spiritual or temporal, unto a person or people, 1 Pet. 2. 10. Which in times
past were not a people, but are now the people of God, which had not obtained
mercy, but now have obtained mercy.

This is supposed to have been written from Rome to the converted Jews, and
then the meaning ls this; You that for a long time (for this Epistle is
believed to have been written Anno Christi 44.) whilst Christ was upon the
earth had not the happiness to receive Christ and the Gospel, now are made
partakers of this great Mercy and Privilege, viz. to come into the Church and
House of God.

So Romans 9. 16. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of
God that shows mercy. The Apostle here argues in the behalf of God, that he
was at full liberty in the collation and distribution of his Mercies, and that
he did the Jews no wrong in calling the Gentiles to Christianity, Ver. 15. As
he says unto Moses, I will have mercy upon whom I will have mercy, etc. As if
he had said unto him, In the distributing of my blessings I will do what I
think good, without giving thee or any man a reason, though I have always
reason for what I do; yet as it is ver. 13. Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I
hated, which is either true in the Letter, in choosing the Israelites, and
rejecting the Idumeans; or else in the Type, in preferring the Covenant of
Grace before the Covenant of Works; So then it is not of him, etc. (i e.) in
point of merit, satisfaction, or condignity, but of God that shows mercy; (i.
e.) vouchsafes to call the Gentiles to Christianity, when the obstinate and
incredulous Jews have rejected it.

4. Mercy is taken for Charity, or that relief which we give unto the poor,
Dan. 4. 27. Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by
showing mercy unto the poor; (i. e.) by being liberal and charitable toward
the poor; in which sense many understand that of Peter 1. 4. 8 Charity covers
a multitude of sins. So likewise it is used Psalm. 37. 26. He is ever merciful,
and lends, and his seed is blessed.

For the further opening the nature of Mercy, observe the difference betwixt
Goodness and Mercy: Goodness in God is supposed to be absolute, but Mercy is a
relative thing: God might have been good to all Eternity, though man had stood,
yet Merciful he could not have been without a supposition and introduction of
sin.

As all Pardon includes an offense, so all Mercy involves want and misery:
Goodness supposes a man, Mercy a sinner. Goodness supposes a man in being;
Mercy, a man in misery: God might have been eternally good, and transcendently
glorious in the free communication of himself, though sin and misery had never
introduced mercy.

Goodness and Mercy are thus distinguishable in men; Goodness is the Root, and
Mercy the Branch growing out from it; We must first be good in ourselves,
before we can be merciful toward others: We must as our Savior shows, first
make the Tree good, before we can bring forth good fruit. Charity begins at
home; if we be not good, have not an inward principle of Goodness in our
selves, how can we laudably exercise any pity or compassion, any bounty or
clemency, any love or charity toward others.

So much for the first point.

2. Br. Come we now to speak of the mercifulness of God, and produce a great
Copy and Exemplar for your imitation: And now methinks we are fallen upon the
noblest subject in the World, being we are to treat of Divine Mercy, which the
Scriptures declare, which men experience, which the Devils envy, the good
Angels admire, and which all the World ought to adore.

A man that looks down from an high Precipice, albeit he is in no danger of
falling, yet would his fear seize him, and a secret trembling take hold of him:
The Scriptures and our own experience have set us upon a great Mount, and being
to look down upon the great abyss of Divine Mercies, we are ready to cry out
with the Apostle, Romans 11. 33. (...), O the depth of the riches both of the
Wisdom and the mercies of God

I shall speak to this, 1. Negatively. 2ly. Positively.

1. In that he bears with the daily violation of his truth, and suffers
with incredible lenity, the breaches that are made upon it, and though men do
not believe what God says, nay, (which is more) do believe things different
and contrary thereunto, yet still God contains himself, and does not
withold his Mercy from them. The Church of God is said to be the ground and
pillar of truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. The Church it is that sacred Depositary wherein
the truth is laid up. The Frogs of Egypt were not more numerous, that came
crawling into the Kings Palace, then the Errors and misshapen Opinions, which
in all Ages (especially in this) have infested the Church, the house of God;
and herein the mercifulness of God appears, that he does not presently rid
himself of them, nor destroy the men for their opinion sake.

In the Jewish Church he suffered the Essens, (a pensive and melancholy Sect)
who slighted the Hierarchy of Moses, dissented from the common way of Worship,
and held Community, as Josephus reports of them.

He suffered the Herodians, Mark 3. 6. a politic and ambitious Sect, who
thought Herod the Aschalonite to be the Messiahs, the sent of God: and thence
called Herodians: It is likely they were abused into that opinion, from the
misconstruing the prophecy of Jacob, Genesis 49. 10. That the scepter should not
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his knees, till the Shilo came.
Hence they might conclude that Herod was the Shilo, because the ensigns of
Royalty and Government ceased from the Asmonean race, and Herod a stranger, the
son of Antipater, an Idumean, succeeded by unjust usurpation in the Government
of Judea.

He suffered the Samaritans, who though they acknowledged the five Books of
Moses, yet denied the Authority of the Prophets, because they judged them not
(...), inspired by God; and likewise slighted the Temple consecrated at
Jerusalem, and worshipped the God of Israel upon mount Gerizim. Where first
they had a magnificent Temple built by Sanballat a Samaritane-Prince, in
opposition to Jaddus the High Priest of the Jews; and when it was afterward
destroyed and razed to the ground by Hircanus the Maccabaean, the earth
remained sacred to them on which it stood, and continued a place of Worship to
the days of our Savior, Joh. 4. 20. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain,
etc.

He suffered the Sadduces, mentioned Mat. 22. who denied the souls immortality,
and all future estate and being after this life; many of them serving God
zealously and strictly, according to the prescript of Moses his Law, upon no
other expectations then a temporal reward upon earth.

In the Gentile world the mercifulness of God appears, that he does not rain
down fire from heaven to avenge himself of those Idolaters, who worship the
Host of Heaven, the Sun, Moon, and Stars which he has created: And still he
bears with almost incredible clemency and mercy in the Christian world, those
strange, monstrous, and absurd conceptions that are framed of him, he suffers
himself to be represented as unjust, unwise, unmerciful, and whatever is
unworthy of his eternal Truth and Godhead.

And there are two things that render his Mercy more eminent and conspicuous.

1. In that he is infallible in his judgment, liable to no mistake, or
mis-apprehension, and consequently may be absolute and definitive in his
sentence and determination; albeit he knows most certainly the difference
'twixt good and evil, light and darkness, truth and error, yet he builds
nothing thereupon (unless in some extraordinary cases) to man's outward
prejudice and damage; but endeavors by the light shining in us, by the
inspirations and notices of his spirit, by the convictions and authority of his
word, to reduce humane conceptions to a likeness with, and conformity unto the
fair and beautiful Idea's set up in his own mind, and declared unto us in his
holy Word of Truth.

2. In that he is of Power sufficient to vindicate the sacred honor and credit
of his Truth, and to avenge himself upon the Erronists, the Transgressors
thereof; He has the power of life and death, health and sickness, poverty and
plenty; and were he so minded, he needs not be beholden to any arm or power to
assist him.

If it were objected, God punishes not Murder, Theft, etc. it does not follow
that therefore we should not. To this I answer, The case is not the same; all
men have a perfect and distinct knowledge what Murder is, what Theft is; but in
matters of Opinion concerning Religion and the things of God, there is the
greatest variety and discrepancy imaginable; and The Church of Rome excepted.
no man does so much as pretend, or lay claim to an unerrancy or infallibility
of Judgment: Besides it is agreed, that the civil Magistrate does ex Offlcio,
punish the breach and violation of the Laws of Nature, and the Laws of God,
where he is authorized and appointed so to do, let it be shown primitively,
that under the Gospel he ought either ex officio, precepto, vel exemplo, to
judge, determine, and censure opinions abstracted, and wholly remote from
secular consideration; or let it be shown wherein, or when the People did choose
them either for their Representatives in Religion; or make them Judges in
matters of Opinion and Conscience, and the Controversy will presently cease,
and the Dispute end.

2. The mercifulness of God appears, in that he suffers the breach and
transgression of his Laws, and does not speedily avenge himself of the
transgressors.

He looks into our houses, and there he finds profaneness, sensuality,
riot, excess.

He looks into Chambers, and more secret retirements, and behold, wantonness,
intemperance, luxury, uncleanness.

He looks into our places of commerce, and there he finds deceit, fraud,
cozenage.

He looks into our places of Judicature, and behold, favors, partiality,
injustice, oppression; Or, as it is Amos 6. 12. in cicutam mutatur jus and
fractus Justitiaein absynthium; Judgment turned into Gall, and the fruit of
Righteousness into Worm wood.

He looks into our Churches and places of Worship, and for Knowledge, he
finds Zeal; for Piety, Interest; and for Devotion, little else but Curiosity;
spectatum veniunt. Our Churches are turned into Theaters, whereinto we come to
see, and to be seen; not remembering that great Theater wherein we must all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ.

In our hearts he beholds envy, jealousy, emulation, cruelty; in our lives
disorders and confusions, and yet God holds his hand, he endeavors the
reformation, not the destructionof of his creatures.

So great was the mercy of God, that David seems to awaken him, and stirred him
up to Judgment, Psalm. 119. 126. It is time for thee, O Lord, to work, for they
have made void thy Law. And the Apostle Peter is forced to make an Apology for
God, to the profane scoffers, why he seemed to defer his coming, and neglect
Judgment in taking vengeance upon the World, 2 Pet. 3. 9. The Lord is not
slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness, but is
long-suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish; (i. e.) God does
not forget his promise, neither is he unmindful of Judgment, but he is loath
to come in upon the World at unawares, as a Thief in the night, to overtake
them in the height of their presumption and security, and therefore he extends
and lengthens out the day of Grace, that none might perish, (if it were
possible) but that all might come to repentance.

2. We come to speak positively.

1. Mercy it is the same with Pity, and in this sense God is merciful; he is
(...), full of bowels, pitiful and compassionate toward the children of men;
he is called, (...), Pater miserationum, the Father of Compassions: Numerus
pluralis est emphaticus.
There dwells no hatred, no malice with God; no rancour, exasperation or
cruelty is lodged in his eternal breast; he loved man in the state of his
innocence, uprightness and obedience, and when man degenerated, he turned his
love into pity, and his delight into commiseration; and even then when his
Justice makes him severe, it is exercised (to speak after the manner of men)
with reluctance and regret.

The pity and compassion which we so much admire in men, are but weak umbrages
and representations of Gods; and yet the first wants not its due praise and
commendation.

The Court of Areopagite, mentioned Asts 17. so much famed in the World, put to
death a young child for that he took an unnatural pleasure in depriving the
very Birds of their sight, and letting them fly for his recreation; fearing
least he who exercised so timely an apprentiship of Cruelty upon Birds, might
in his more ripe years exercise it upon men.

The like is reported of the Senate at Carthage, who censured one of their own
Citizens for no other cause in the world, but that he had civilized and made
tractable a Lion, supposing so frequent a conversation with wild Beasts, had
made him put off all humanity and pity, and degenerate into the nature of that
Beast with whom he had so much conversation.

Marcellus the Roman Consul, being commanded by his Masters at Rome to raze
Syracuse, even then when he saw their Commands put into execution, and beheld
the great City on fire, he began to relent, and (out of his good nature) to
shed tears in abundance, wherewith if it had been possible, he would have
quenched those flames which himself had kindled.

And Caesar Titus (whom for his clemency they called the delight of mankind)
beholding the streets of Jerusalem covered with the dead bodies of the Jews,
found his heart much touched; but when he saw the glorious Temple all on fire,
and the Jews themselves that were entered thereinto, would not suffer it to be
quenched, he could then contain himself no longer, but with hands to Heaven
protested that it was the act of the gods, and not effect of his disposition.

But as the heavens are high above the earth, even so are the compassions of
men exceeded by the compassions of God; behold a greater then Marcellus, a
greater then Caesar Titus is here. Sin has set the world on fire, and we like
the Jews, will not suffer it to be quenched.

God came down from heaven in his own person, communicated his thoughts to the
Patriarchs before and after the Flood, beseeched his people by his Prophets,
and lastly by his own Son, the man Christ Jesus, and still endeavors by his
Word and Spirit to quench this great flame and conflagration kindled by sin; so
that if it be not quenched, but proceed to devour the souls of men, God
Almighty may with Caesar Titus, enter his just protestation, that the
destruction of the World is an effect of our Wickedness, and not of his own
inclination and disposition.

The love of our gracious God is more to be judged of by what he would do for
us, then by what he does for us, though (to speak the truth) he has done all
that did become a great Wisdom (checked with Justice) to do.

Even as the love of a tenderhearted Father is more seen by what he would do
for his obstinate and ungracious Son, (were he a capable subject) then by what
he ever actually does for him.

He frowns upon him, gives him correction, dis-inherits him, and goes down into
the grave with a resolution of not doing him the least good thing for him, (in
the sense the World calls good) and yet whilst he lived his heart was set upon
him, his bowels yern toward him, his desires are great that he might enrich
him, and his complaints many, that he was not a subject capable of his favor.

In like manner the love of our heavenly Father is rather to be estimated by
what he would do for us, then what he does for us, were we capable subjects of
his Grace and Favor, according to that, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. O that there were an
heart in them, that they would fear me, that it might be well with them and
their children for ever.

The Sovereign Creator he hates not any thing in the World, because the whole
World is the rare and singular Workmanship of his hands; for as his Wisdom is
free from Error, so are his Works devoid of repentance; all things are
eminently in him, and under the covert of his pure and simple Omnia unum sunt
in Deo, and cum Deo, etc. Ber. Scrm.
Essence, are hid all creature-perfections whatsoever; Nec aliunde Justus, aut
Bonus, quam unde Magnus; that I may borrow the expression of that contemplative
and devout person, which is English't thus* That form of Divinity which makes
him Great, makes him by the same means, Wise, Just and Good; which is the true
reason that he can no more hate or neglect any thing that he has made, then
the Architect or Master Builder can slight his own piece which he finds
agreeable to the fair Idea's of Art set up in his own mind.

God having thus united all in himself, therefore he loves all, and regards
all, as rays of his own light, issues of his own bounty, productions of his
own Wisdom and Goodness; the venom and malignity of the Toad and Aspick, the
poison of the Scorpion, which are so destructive to ours, are very good and
suitable to their natures; that which is to us poison, is to them blood and
spirits; the giving it to us, and the taking it away from them, we find equally
prejudicial to both their natures and ours: May I shut up this point in the
words of a learned man? God hates nothing, nor curses any thing but what he is
not, and he is all, sin excepted: It is that alone which he abhors, which he
accounts worthy of all detestation, which he chastises here, and which he
pursues with an armed hand to the Gates of hell, and beyond the Gates of hell,
and which he will never forgive in its proper subject, either in this world, or
in the world to come.

2. Take Mercy for Pardon, and in this sense God is merciful, he is known by
this great Title which he assumed in that Solemn Publication, Exodus 34. 7.
Keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. It is
the glory of a man, much more of God to pass by an offense; God cannot desire
sin, (as no man can wish to be displeased) but man having sinned, it is
infinitely pleasing to the Divine Nature to show mercy, pardon and forgiveness:
He that has set us that Rule, Matthew. 18. 22. That we should not only forgive
till seven times, but until seventy times seven, will not transgress it himself.

God excepts against no man's person, but as it is Prove. 28. 13. Whosoever
confesses his sins, and forsakes them, shall have mercy. Because God
respects no man's person, therefore he excepteth against no man's person: As he
has no man's person in admiration because of advantage, so he has no man's
person in disdain because of prejudice.

As there is no person excepted from the general pardon of the Gospel, upon the
terms proposed therein; so is there no sin excepted, save only that sin unto
death, the nature of which may consist either in the contempt or despair of the
pardon it self: The mercy of heaven shines forth in this, that God is pleased
to take our submissions, accept of our acknowledgements, and admit us to
repentance; Esau found no place for repentance, though he sought it with tears,
Heb. 12. 17. (i. e.) He found no place for repentance with his Father Isaac;
for as it is in the same verse, how that afterward when he would have inherited
the blessing he was rejected; pointing unto the story Genesis 27. But with God is
mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption. True indeed, God pardons no man's
sins before they be repented of; there are no indulgencies granted in heaven,
and obtained on earth by unrepentant sinners.

To say that some men's sins are pardoned before they be committed; or that they
are pardoned past, present and to com; or which is all one, that they are
pardoned from eternity, is questionless a Doctrine (to borrow the expression of
a learned man) that transcends the licentiousness of Popery, and is of worse
consequence then the Roman Indulgences, and were there another Luther now
alive, he would enter his dissent from this Doctrine, and make it another
ground of separation.

3. If you take Mercy for the vouchsafement of grace and favor unto a person
or people, and in this sense God is merciful, having called all the World unto
peace and felicities by the Gospel; the Scriptures declare it, Experience so
far as it extends, confirms it, all Reason and Authority establishes it, 1
Col. 23. If you continue in the Faith, etc. not moved away from the hope of the
Gospel which ye have heard, and which was preached to every creature which is
under heaven; (i. e.) not only to the Jews, but also to the Gentiles; it is
(...), in every creature; which intimates not only the vocal and external, but
also the internal and spiritual preaching of it. In this Gospel we are told of
the blood of sprinkling that speaks better things then that of Abel: Abel
died in former time, and his blood cried Justice; Christ dyed in the fullness
of time, and his blood cried Mercy: We are told of a potent Advocate that
continually intercedeth for us in Heavens Court; We hear of the full and most
gracious promises that Almighty God can make to all burdened and heavy laden
souls, and that whosoever comes unto him in the Name of Christ, he will in no
wise cast out.

And all this is laid down in a most plain and intelligible way, sine fraud
and fuce, without any secret Will, any double mind, or mental reservation; God
has washed his hands in innocence, and is free from the death of all men; the
dsteruction of men is of themselves, and the blood of souls upon their own
heads.

A question might here be moved, How the mercifulness of God is consistent with
his Severity; we all understand how Mercy is consistent with Justice; but how
Mercy and Severity stand together, is the subject of our present Inquiry and
disquisition. We find the Apostle puts Goodness and Severity together, Romans 11
22 Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God, (...), on them which
fell, severity, but toward thee, goodness; (...). Severity comes from (...) a
Metaphor taken ab art Agricola, from the cutting off unprofitable branches,
and so made applicable upon occasion, unto God, who cuts off unprofitable
members both in Church and State. In the solution of this question,

1. I shall give you several instances of Divine Severity. 2. I shall by a
common distinction make peace betwixt the one and the other, setting God's
Severity and Mercy at a good consistency together.
Instances are many.

1. Of the fallen Angels, when all was peace in Heaven, and a blessed security
environed them, a thought of Pride did but spring up in them, (Aquinus thinks
it was no more) and God changed countenance presently, tumbled them out of
Heaven, and as the Apostle Jude speaks Cap. and v. 6. (...) he has reserved
them in everlasting Chains, unto the Judgment of the great Day.

2. After that God had made unto himself another friend of flesh and blood,
placed him in Paradise, conversed with him most familiarly, made him his
Substitute, Vicegerent and Deputy here on earth, imparted unto him not only
being with the rest of the creatures, but his image, likeness and similitude,
provided him an Associate and Companion that might bear him company in this his
abode on earth; and yet behold the Severity of God, he committed but one sin,
and that of no great importanee neither, as might seem to an eye of flesh and
blood, the eating of an Apple, the tasting of the forbidden fruit, and that not
of his own contrivement and malice, but at the solicitation and importunity of
another, and yet we see what ensued upon this trespass, the amity and
friendship 'twixt Heaven and Earth was broken, man's communion with God was
interrupted, and he thrust out of Paradise, and condemned to perpetual misery
and exile, with his posterity.

3. Lots Wife did but look back from behind her, in statuam mutatur, she was
turned into a pillar of Salt, and so she stood for many years, as a monument
both of severity and disobedience, till Time (that consumes all things) removed
her, Genesis 19. 26.

4. Uzziah with a good intent laid hold of the Ark, 2 Samuel 6. 6 to keep it from
falling when the Oxen shook it, and because his hands were common, and
unconsecrated, God there smote him, and he dyed by the Ark of God.

5. A poor man was but gathering a few sticks on the Sabbath day; and God
commanded him to be stoned, Numbers 15. 36.

In the New Testament, Ananias and Sapphyra did but conspire together to tell a
lie, and it cost them both their lives, Acts 5.

The Corinthians, men subject to the like passions and infirmities that we are,
behaved themselves irreverently at the Lords Table, and the Text tells us, 1
Cor. 11. 30. (...) for this very cause (...) etc. many are weak and sickly
among you, and many sleep.

Notwithstanding all this, the Mercy of God is very well consistent with his
Severity, if we consider a threefold acceptance of Severity.

Severity is either in temper and disposition, in purpose and decree, or in act
and execution.

In the first acceptance, Mercy and Severity are absolutely inconsistent; he
that is severe in his temper and disposition, cannot be likewise tender,
compassionate and merciful in his disposition; these two are as contrary and
imcompatible, as light and darkness, cold and heat, that do mutually expel one
another: In this sense God is not severe, (i. e.) in his temper and disposition.

2. If we take severity in the decree or purpose, so it admits of an easy
compliance, and very good consistency with the clemency, long-suffering, and
mercifulness of God.

A Judge that is merciful in his own nature and constitution, may yet be very
strict and rigid in his decree and purpose, to punish offenders, whom no mercy
or clemency can obljge, no goodness or bounty win upon, or gain.

In like manner it is which God, of whom we may say as Pliny says of Trajan,
Est piger ad paenas princepi, ad praemia velox, Slow to punish, swift to
reward; and yet notwithstanding, he has formed in himself an immutable
resolution and purpose (at the regular importunity of his Wisdom and Justice)
of punishing with rigor and severity all those impartially, whom his clemency
and mercy could not sweeten and mollify: If man will not return, He has whet
his sword, and bent his bow, and prepared for him the instruments of death,
Psalm. 7. 12.

3. Severity in the Act or Execution, which is the third acceptance, as in the
many instances before alleged; which though at the first it might seem most
opposite and repugnant to his clemency and mercifulness, yet even those very
acts of severity may admit of a gracious construction, if we consider these two
things:

1. That many of those persons of whom the Scriptures speak, had drunk deep of
the cup of divine goodness; had been made to rest under the sweetest influences
of his love and favor; and from whom God might have expected better things.
The Angels sinned whilst they were before the throne, and in the immediate and
actual enjoyment of God himself. Our first parents in Paradise, whilst they
injoied all the felicities heaven and earth could afford them. Lots wife
against the miracle of her deliverance; there was something or other found in
them to vindicate that passage, Clementia laesa vertitur in furorem.

2. God is severe toward one, that he might be merciful to many; he strikes
some, that others may take warning? if now and then an act of justice and
severity was not interposed in the world, sin would grow bold, even to control
the Laws of heaven: God, that he might put a stop to the course of sin, gives
ample testimony of his displeasure against it. Like the skilful Surgeon,
that cuts off the gangrened member, ne pars sincera trahatur, lest the sound
part should be corrupted.

3. Br. Why we ought to be merciful, as our heavenly father is merciful.

1. Propter similitudinem, that we may be like unto God. 2. Propter
gratitudinem, that we may be thankful unto God. 3. Propter necessitatem (i. e.)
dispositionis and preparationis; that we may be fit to receive mercy from God.
1. Propter similitudinem, that we may be like unto God; which is the Argument
in the text, the motive our Savior uses to press the duty in hand: There is
something in this persuasive argument and motive; because it is God's way, it
is Christ's way, it is the Apostles way to press unto duty. When God urges men
unto holiness, Lev. 19. 2. it is by something of this nature and tenor; Ye
shall be holy, for I, the Lord your God, am holy. When Christ presses men to
perfection, Mat. 5. 48. still the argunent is drawn from similitude; Be ye
perfect, (...), quemadmodum, even as your heavenly father is perfect. When St.
John urges Christians unto love, it is drawn from the same topic of likeness
and quality; 1 John 4. 16. God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells
in God.

A forcible motive, a cogent argument to prevail with rational creatures,
whether Angels, or men; because of those sparks of desires kindled in them, of
becoming like unto God; which is not simply unlawful, but rather commendable in
them.

We read Isa. 14. 12, 15. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of
the morning, etc. for thou have said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven,
etc. I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most
High:: which though it be the Prophets triumphant insultation over Babylon, yet
was it true originally of Lucifer, The argument was urged by the Serpent, Genesis
3. 4. to persuade our first parents to eat of the forbidden fruit: [And ye
shall be as Gods] a plausible argument indeed, to prevail with mortal minds,
naturally prone of themselves to aspire after likeness and similitude.

The presidents I now allege and set before you, to show the force of this
argument, and what grounds there are of its success and prevalency upon us. Can
there be a better reason why we should be tenderhearted, merciful,
compassionate, herein we shall be like unto God, we shall transcend in a manner
the line of our Creation, be lifted up above the region of common mortality,
and placed in a vicinity and similitude of God himself. I pass this, with
re-minding you, that as there are somethings wherein we are to imitate God, and
aspire after likeness unto him, so there are other things wherein we are forbid
under the penalty of his displeasure, so much as to aspire and assimulate.

The subject without offense here on earth, may attempt to be like unto his
Prince in wisdom, goodness, clemency, patience; but he cannot without rebellion
and disobedience endeavor to be like him in power, greatness, and majesty; we
may imitate our Saviors virtues, but not his miracles: In like manner we may
with safety and honor attempt by an holy ambition, to be wise, just, merciful,
ad exemplar, according to the original copy, God himself, not aspiring after
his greatness, power, and majesty, lest with Lucifer, we incur his hatred and
great displeasure.

2. We are to be merciful, propter gratitudinem, that we may be thankful unto
God; we should show mercy unto others, because our heavenly Father has shown
mercy unto us; the very Laws of Gratitude and Retaliation require it: The
Reason is lodged here, That if God has forgiven us ten thousand Talents, ought
we not to forgive one another an hundred pence, Matthew. 18. 25. The King that
did remit ten thousand Talents, took it ill at the hands of his Debtor, that
went forth presently, took his Brother by the Throat that ought him an hundred
pence, would not be entreated, but cast him into prison till he made him
satisfaction; Ver. 31. So when his fellow servants saw what was done, they were
very sorry, and came and told unto their Lord all that was done; Ver. 32. Then
his Lord said, O thou wieked servant, I forgave thee all that Debt because thou
desiredst me, should thou not also have had compassion on thy fellow servants?
Should thou not? (i. e.) thou should have had compassion in point of
gratitude and thankfulness unto me.

The King in the Parable is God Almighty; the servants with whom he reckons,
are the sons of men; for we are all the Debtors of Heaven; God for Christ's sake
does forgive us many talents: The wicked servant is he that takes his Brother
by the throat without all mercy and pity, and will not forgive those few pence
that his brother owes him; the servants being sorrowful, shows how much it
troubles good men to see their fellow creatures so hardly dealt with; the Kings
anger expresses the wrath of God kindled against those who are found guilty of
this great cruelty and ingratitude; cruelty against their Brethren, ingratitude
against their Father; that when God has forgiven unto them ten thousand
Talents, they will not for Christ's sake forgive unto their Brethren an hundred
pence.

God draws us with the Cords of a man, (i. e.) with such reasons and arguments
as are proper to work upon the rational nature; to be drawn unto our duty by
that soft, yet strong cord of Love and Gratitude, is most acceptable to God,
most delightful and pleasing to our selves and others.

3. We are to be merciful propter necessitatem, because of the necessity of the
thing; if we show not mercy unto others, neither will our heavenly Father show
mercy unto us. In the close of that Parable which we quoted before, Matt. 18.
we read at the 35. ver. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you,
if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses;
which refers unto the 34. verse, wherein is expressed the rigor and severity
of God against offenders in this kind, And his Lord was wrath, and delivered
him to the tormentors till he should pay all that was due to him.

Our Savior likewise in that Prayer which bears his Name, teaches us to pray,
Matthew. 6. 12. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

As it was said by Jesus Christ, That he could do no mighty Works because of
their unbelief, Mat. 13. 58. meaning, that though he had never so great a mind
to confirm his Doctrine by Miracles, and to give proof of his being the
Messiah, yet such was the incredulity and distrust of the Jews, his own
Contrymen, that they bound his hands, and hindered him from doing of it.

Even so God Almighty, our gracious and loving Father, though he had never so
great a mind (to speak after the manner of men) to make us Vessels of his
mercy; yet finding us fraught with all malice and envy, straitened in our
bowels, filled with all cruelty, hatred, revenge, we do shut up his bounty
against us, and indispose him to Mercy.

Matthew 57. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy; (...), the
merciful shall be mercifully dealt with.

Though our mercifulness be not causa propter quam, the cause for which we
receive mercy, by way of merit or condignity; yet may we say it is causa, sine
qua non; the cause, without which we cannot obtain mercy; though not by way of
merit or condignity; yet by way of preparation, and Gods gracious disposition.

Many more grounds and reasons might be added, but these may suffice to confirm
and establish the point in hand.

Application.
I shall endeavor to improve this Doctrine two ways.

1. By way of imitation. 2. By way of consolation.
1. By way of Imitation; Here is an excellent Copy for us to write after; we
have seen wherein the mercifulness of God consists, let us patrizare, endeavor
to be like unto him.

1. God bears with the violation of his truth, and suffers with incredible
patience those erring and wandering souls that go astray from it; he does not
here destroy men for their opinions sake: We dwell in an age wherein we have a
large subject to exercise our clemency, moderation, loving kindness, and
brotherly forbearance upon. As we said before, so now again, the frogs of
Egypt were not more numerous then the errors and misshapen opinions that do
infest the Church of God, and are come up into the Palace of the great King;
God suffers them, certainly we must; if otherwise, he would either do it
himself, or have appointed some persons under the Gospel to have done it. If
Moses was faithful in all things appertaining to the House of God, Jesus Christ
much more; but our great Lord and Master, the great Propognour of Truth,
directs to no other Weapons to to be made use of in this Warfare, but such as
are spiritual; if his Kingdom was not of this World, then must not his servants
fight: The Weapon which he has put into our hands, is his Word, which is
sharper then any two-edged sword, by which we may best cut in pieces all those
snares of error wherewith Satan has entangled the souls of men.

When any fall mad, or are distracted, bereft of understanding, though they do
or say never so much evil, though they should blaspheme God and the King, we
are so far from censuring, punishing, or destroying them, that we pity them,
bewail and lament them, we provide for their cure by all rational means, if
happily we may effect their recovery.

The case is much the same, (though I do not desire the parallel should run on
four) we cry out against Errors, and declaim much against those phanatick
Opinions that have so much troubled Israel, and disturbed the peace of Gods
holy Church; and if it were in our power, out of a pang of zeal in killing the
Opinionists, we might persuade our selves we should do God good service.

That we do reprove them from the Word of God, that we sharply censure them,
that we do warn men both publicly and privately, to take heed to their feet,
lest they be taken in the snare of death, and so led away with the error of the
wicked, is a thing (without question) highly acceptable to God, very useful and
profitable unto men; and herein the Gospel from place to place, is our clear
rule.

But that we should touch them in their Estates, or practice upon their bodies
for the cure of their minds; or that we should seek to convince them by any
other Arguments then those that are Divine and rational; or where we fall short
of conviction, to add force and violence, is a temedy for the cure of Error, I
am not for the present persuaded, the great Physician of souls, Jesus Christ,
ever prescribed. Alas! these are poor deluded souls, not only phanatick, but
lunatic; how many amongst us are even distracted and bereft of their spiritual
senses and understanding: We are even to bear with them as we do with mad men
and children; to take little or no offense at their words, but that we be, as
the blessed Apostle would have Timothy, 2 Ep. Gap. 2. v. 25. (...) in Meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves.

1. We are to do this from the Divine Precept Matt. 13. in the Parable of the
tares, Ver. 27. The servants of the household came, and said unto him, Sir,
did thou not sow good seed in thy Field? from whence then has it tares? Ver.
28. He said unto them, An Enemy has done this. The servants said, Will thou
then that we go and gather them up. Ver. 29. But he said, Nay, least whilst ye
gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them.

The Parable is explained by Christ himself, 38 verse. The seed is the world
wherein we all live: observe, it is not the Church, but the World; they may be
censured in Ecclesia, in that spiritual Court, but not in the World: [The good
seed] are the Children of Truth; or as Christ says, The children of the
Kingdom. The tares are the sons of Error, the children of the wicked one. The
enemy that sowed them is the Devil, and those his Emissaries whom he imploies.
God refers the burning of the Tares till the Harvest; which our Savior
interprets, the end of the world: and the reason why the Tares must not be
plucked out, but let alone until the Harvest, is this, rendered by himself,
ver. 29. Least while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up the wheat also.

By the Tares here can be meant nothing more properly then erroneous persons:
no other sinners or offenders, but sinners injudgment, offenders in opinion:
For if by Tares we should understand Murderers, Adulterers, Thievs, or any
such kind of transgressors, then would our Savior be understood to plead for a
toleration of such sinners, as his Father had expressly injoined to be punished:
He that sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: He that stole, to
make restitution and satisfaction.

To this we may refer the counsel of Gamaliel, a great Civilian, and though not
endowed with an infallible spirit, yet one as we may presume, in a special
manner moved by the Spirit, to interpose in the behalf of Christ and his dear
servants, to rescue them from the bloody rage and malice of the Council.

The Apostles standing before the Council, the Jewish Presbytery indeavoring to
suppress their erroneous opinions, for so the doctrine of Christianity was
accounted, Gamaliel stands up, Act. 5. 38. And now I say unto you, (...), Stand
off from those men, meddle not with them, let them alone! for if this counsel,
or this work be of men, (i. e.) if it be a fancy, or an opinion of their own;
if it be of humane invention and contrivance, it will come to naught, (...), it
will be dis-jointed, broken, it will suffer a dissolution; But if it be of God,
ye cannot overthrow it; (i. e.) it will stand all opposition to the contrary
notwithstanding, and ye your selves be found fighters against God.

2ly. We are urged unto this duty by example; and that by the greatest example,
even that of Christ himself, Luke 4. 55. in the story we have three things
considerable:

1. The churlish in hospitality of the Samaritanes, refusing to give
entertainment, not so much as a nights lodging unto Christ and his Disciples:
and the ground of this was their difference in opinion, as we collect from the
53. [And they did not receive him, because his face was as though he would go
to Jerusalem; because he worshipped not in the same place with them, upon Mount
Girizim, but seemed to hold communion with the Jews in their Worship at the
Temple at Jerusalem, they would not so much as receive him into their Village.

2. You have the fiery indignation of his Disciples that was kindled against
the Samaritans, ver. 54. Will thou that we command fire to come down from
Heaven, and consume them, as Elias did? Here we have a notorious president, how
far the intemperate and untutored zeal even of good men, may transport them;
it is strange that nothing but fire from heaven can expiate the fault of the
Samaritans incivility.

2. We have our Saviors rebuke and discommendation of that rash zeal wherewith
his Disciples were heated, V. 55. But he turned and rebuked them, (...) he
angerly or sharply rebuked them, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of;
i. e. The Spirit of Christ and the Gospel is another manner of spirit then that
of the Law, another manner of spirit then that of the World: Besides, its
contrary to the end of my coming, that any man should be thus dealt with for
any injury or affront done unto me; The Son of man is not come into the world
to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

To come home:

We must not burn a Samaritan because he will not turn Jew; neither must we
destroy men, because they will not be proselited to our Opinions; the Jews must
not call for fire from Heaven upon the Samaritans, because they Worship not
with them at the Temple at Jerusalem, nor the Samaritans refuse to give
entertainment to the Jews, because they do not worship with them upon Mount
Girizim. Herein our Savior was a great pattern of moderation, forbearance and
brotherly kindness; and his Gospel is not Evangelium Armatum, an Armed Gospel;
it is Mahomet's, and not Christ's way to propagate Religion by the sword;
Prayers and Tears, and Sufferings, and Fastings, and Alms deeds, and Love, and
Charity, are those Forces by which Christian Religion became so victorious and
triumphant in the World.

3. Ab utilitate; It is profitable to bear with our dissenting Brethren.

1. It Is best for the Church. 2. It Is best for the State.
1. For the Church; There is a twofold Unity; an Unity in Judgment, and that is
Truth; an Unity in Affection, and that is Love: If we cannot obtain the first,
we may the latter; if we cannot have an Unity in Truth, we may by this means
have an Unity in Love: It is yielded, and need not be made the subject of any
man's Dispute, That Heresies are damnable and pernicious; but since as the
Scriptures speak, 1 Cor. 11. 19. There must be Heresies also amongst you; not
because that God ordained them to be, for he cannot decree sin; but because he
permitted them, and saw they would be held and maintained in the Church; as the
Astronomer prognosticates an Eclipse either of the Sun or Moon, not that he
has any influence upon those Heavenly Bodies, to cause the least change or
alteration; but because by the Rules of his Art he sees such and such things
will happen: We ought to follow St. Paul's advice unto Titus, 3. 10. An
Heretic after the first and second admonition, reject.

Heresy it is the mutilation and maiming of some of the principal branches of
Christian Faith, and this pertinaciously defended and maintained contrary to
the reproof and censure of a lawful Authority: But as for those less
differences in Religion, and since there will always be such amongst us, (for
faces do not more vary then understandings and conceptions) it is best (for the
preservation of the Churches peace, love and unity) that we bear with, and
exercise a wonderful lenity toward those that dissent from us, that we do not
presently excommunicate, unchurch and deliver one another up unto Satan for
every difference in opinion and judgment: We complain much of the want of
Love, of that hatred, malice, and jealousy that we find stirred up amongst
the present Gospellers and Professors in Religion; methinks it should be with
us the Students in Divinity, as it is with those Students and Proficients in
Philosophy at the University, who though they do often dispute their Opinions
pro and con, in the Schools and Halls, yet do they love one another
nevertheless, though one be for Aristotle, another for Ramus, a third for Zeno,
a fourth for Epicurus, yet does it not occasion the least animosity, breach or
dis-affection. We all acknowledge one God, the resurrection from the dead,
salvation by Jesus Christ, future rewards and punishments, the necessity of
Virtue, Righteousness and Holiness; that no man has power of himself to do any
thing that good is; that all grace, strength and suffic ency are of God: These
are every man's Concessions; neither do I know any man living that does so much
as dispute or question the truth of them: We agree in the greater, why do we
differ in the less? How much would it make for the Church, its peace, increase
and enlargement, could we give unto one another some few Granes of Allowance in
this case.

2. It is best for the State, for the settlement of the peace and prosperity
thereof. This I offer to humble consideration; there wants nothing so much to
make us happy and glorious, as mercifulness one unto another; there is nothing
more tender then a man's conscience; the Grasshopper is a burden to it; those
that will suffer others to touch them in their Estates, to touch them in their
Dignity and Greatness, both which are very dear to them, will not endure to be
touched in their consciences: This has broken us so often in pieces, that men
are not content to secure their own Christian libetty, unless it be with the
infringement of othet men's: May the Princes and Magistrates of this World (to
use the expression of a sober person) take heed of coming too near that Mount
which Jehovah has sanctified for himself, and for his Son Jesus to set their
Thrones on. We are for peace and settlement, and that upon such a Basis as may
stand to the good liking both of God and men, till he come who shall call in
the Commissions of all the Kings and Rulers of the Earth; may the foundations
therefore be laid in Principles of Justice, Righteousness, Moderation, that the
glory of our Nation may grow up in Renown.

The Consciences and Judgments of men, are the proper Territories and
Dominions of Christ; whosoever shall enter by any other Authority then this,
upon these Sacred Demeans, intrencheth upon another Right.

I pass this Use with these following Limitations.

In general, by what has been spoken, we do not seek to infringe the
Magistrate's just Power, or to lessen his duty, as he is a Christian, we
willingly yield him the dignity of being Gods Deputy, and if he please, Custos
utriusque tabulae.

1. That they vouchsafe to see to the observation of the Lords Day, not only
that men forbear their Callings, but also that they come to Church, or such
places of Worship where Divine Service is performed, that under a pretense of
Liberty of Conscience, men take not an occasion to transgress the Laws of
sobriety and holiness; For were this Lords Day an Ordinance only of man, it
becomes every man to submit to it for the Lords sake.

2. That nothing that has been spoken extend to deter the Magistrate from
punishing swearing, profanation of the Lords Name, all immodesty, and violation
of the Laws of Nature; for these are things that all men have agreed in, as
worthy of punishment; and if there were no warrant from the Word of God, yet
volenti non sit injuria; he that is willing has no injury done him.

3. Nay, I would even subscribe to punish blasphemy according to the Judicial
Law, if there were any persons lawfully appointed, who could infallibly
determine.

2. Br. Let us imitate the mercifulness of God in pardoning Injuries, and
forgiving offenses one against another; let us take out our Savior's Lesson,
Let us pray for our enemies, do good to those that hate us, so shall we heap
coals of fire upon their heads. But alas! how far are we from this God-like
temper? Every man almost seeks to be Deus ultionem, a god of revenge. We write
favors and benefits on the Sand, but injuries in Marble, never to be blotted
out. Though we crave and expect all forgiveness from Heaven daily, yet we
exercise very little upon the Earth: Instead of extenuating one another
offenses, we heighten and aggravate them in our bills of debts and trespasses;
for fifties we write hundreds, and for hundreds, thousands. As God is prone to
forgive, so we are to take revenge one upon another; I wish there were not that
occasion for me to tell you how much you are unlike unto God.

For pity, lo cruelty; for love, envy, hatred and jealousy; and for pardon,
behold revenge; every man studies the Law of Retaliation, to return like for
like, which our Savior expressly abrogated, Matthew 5. 38. Let me borrow an
Apostrophe.

O cruel Revenge, of a venomous and dangerous malignity, which fills the
heart with Plagues, the life with Furies, and the World with Tragedies: What
havoc do thou make, what flames do thou kindle, unless Grace and Reason
give some temper and alleviation. A spirit from beneath, raised from Hell,
injurious to civil Society, pernicious to States and Kingdoms, kindled by
pride, nourished by flattery, sharpened by insolent Tongues, which makes their
lives a continual crime, and their memories that exercise it, a perpetual
execration. Christians! what shall I now say farther to persuade you to
Moderation, Clemency, Pardon, Forgiveness? If the example of God, the pattern
of Christ the practice of the most eminent Saints; If this will not do it, what
will? Only let me re-mind you of that great day which is ready to dawn upon
the world, when the Judge of heaven and earth shall come riding upon the clouds
with ten thousand Angels in his company, and shall take his seat in the air,
when that general Assize shall be kept, we shall all come to hold up our hands
for mercy at his Bar. Let me tell you from God, in whose name I now prophecy
unto you, that unless you here display the ensigns of your mercy on earth,
neither will God hold forth the Scepter of his mercy and pardon unto that day.

3ly. Let us imitate God in his bounty and liberality, (that I may speak a word
for the poor) who causes the Sun to shine, and the rain to fall, both upon the
just and the unjust. I speak now to the rich, the great and mighty in this
world, You live upon the alms of heaven, subsist by divine bounty, and are
maintained at his cost and charge: he keeps a plentiful house, and has made
large provision for You, only in the disposition of things, he has left the
poor to be taken care of by the rich. The poor, says our Lord and Savior, ye
have always with you; me ye have not always: that what love we feel in our
hearts unto Jesus Christ, we might express unto our indigent brethren for his
sake. To do good therefore, and to communicate, forget not, for with such
sacrifices (...), God is well pleased. However some men have taken up a
Religion that excuses them from all acts of bounty, goodness, and charity, yet
the Apostle, Col. 3. 12. makes Charity, or mercy to be a peculiar sign and
character of God's Elect: Put on therefore as the Elect of God, (...), bowels
of pities and mercies.

Let me therefore give you that advice which was given to Nebuchadnezar, Dan.
4. 27. That you break off your sins by righteousness, and your iniquities by
showing mercy to the poor: be daily casting in of your abundance into this
treasury of God: Make unto your selves bags that wax not old; so shall you have
treasure in heaven.

Let us not be lift the hypocritical Jews, who fasted for strife and debate,
and to smite with the fist of wickedness, and even then when they made long
prayers, devoured widows houses; but rather like the good Centurion, Act. 19.
that not only our prayers, but our Alms and Charity may come up in remembrance
before God.

Thus we have finished the first Use, by way of imitation.

2ly. By way of Consolation; if our heavenly Father be so merciful: Are any of
us made sensible of our great miscarriages, and how unsuitably we have acted,
to the genious and Spirit of Christ and the Gospel: Do we recollect how often
we have violated his righteous Laws, transgressed his holy precepts, abused his
mercies, against the light of nature, against the light of grace. This Doctrine
administers great Consolation; that we have to to do with God, and not with
men; with God, whose mercies are infinite; and not with men, whose mercies are
cruelties.

This is the greatest comfort that can possibly be laid before us, in all our
soul-conflicts: That our God is a lover of souls; that the lives of his
creatures are very dear and precious in his sight, and next unto his own
Justice, which is himself, we are considerable with him. It was a great comfort
to the Syrian King, and his Nobles, 1 King. 20. 31. that they heard the Kings
of the house of Israel were merciful Kings, this was the great encouragement of
Address, a motive to humiliation upon hopes of acceptance: We have allheard
that God is a merciful God, a tender and merciful Prince: Let it move us to put
on the garment of true humiliation, and make our solemn and penitential
Addresses unto him, That he may pardon our sin, and remember our iniquities no
more. To conclude; Let us not presume upon the mercies of God, so as to turn
his Grace into wantonness; to take Arguments of Sinning from the considera-of
Divine mercy; that because mercy abounds, therefore we make sin to abound; this
were ill to requite the Lord; and know, that by how much the mercies of God
have been increased, by so much will the wrath and the displeasure of God be
increased against us, if we abuse them.

FINIS.
Books worth Buying.
THe Banner of Justification displayed; or a Discourse concerning the deep and
important Mystery of the Justification of a sinner, wherein the several causes
thereof, being both numerous and various, are from first to last diligently
inquired after, and their several contributions toward so great and happy a
work, clearly distinguished, and assigned to their proper causes
(respectively:) By Mr. John Goodwin; newly come forth. Triumviri; Or the
Genius, Spirit, and Deportment of the three Men, Mr. Richard Resbury, Mr. John
Pawson, and Mr. George Kendall, in their late Writings against the Free Grace
of God in the redemption of the World, and vouchsafement of means of salvation
unto men; briefly described in their native and true colors, borrowed of
themselves in their Writings (respectively.) Together with some brief touches
(in the Preface) upon Dr. John Owen, Mr. Thomas Lamb (of the Spittle) Mr.
Jeans, Mr. Obadiah How, and Mr: Marchamond Needham, in relation to their late
Writings against the Author: In Quarto, by Mr: John Goodwin. The Tryers and
Ejectors of Ministers, tried and cast, by the Laws of God and men: By John
Goodwin. Mercy in her Exaltation; a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr.
Daniel Tarlor; by Mr. John Goodwin: In Quarte. The Natural Man's Case stated; Or
an exact Map of the little World, Man; in 17. Sermons; by Mr. Christopher Love:
To which is added a Sermon preached at his Funeral, by Mr. Thomas Manton of
Newington. In Octavo. A Comment on Ruth; together with two Sermons, one
teaching how to live well, the other minding all how to dye well: By Thomas
Fuller, Author of the Holy State. Gospel public Worship; Or the Translation,
Metaphrase, Analysis, and Exposition of Romans 12. from verse. 1. to 8. describing
the complete Pattern of Gospel Worship. Also an Exposition of the 18. Chapter
of Matthew, to which is added, A discovery of Adams threefold estate in
Paradise, viz. Moral, Legal, and Evangelical, by Thomas Brewer: in Octavo. The
Grand Enquiry who is the righteous man, by William Moore at Whaley in
Lancashire. The Declaration of the Judgment of James Arminius, concerning
Election and Reprobation; translated into English by Tobias Conyers. An Idea,
or body of Church Discipline in the Theorick and Practick, by Mr. Rogers: in
quarto. Lucas Redivivus, Or the Gospel-physician, prescribing (by way of
Meditation) Divine physic to prevent Diseases not yet entered upon the soul, by
John Anthony, Dr. in Physic, in quarto. A Letter of Address to the late
Protector Oliver, by D. F. alias, Tobias Conyers; in quarto. The Return of
Mercies, or the Saints advantage by losses. By Mr. John Goodwin, in 12.



