A DECLARATION By JAMES Earl of CARLISLE, LORD of the Caribee Islands, or
Province of Carliola.
Manifesting His care of, and affection to, the good and welfare of the
Inhabitants of the Island of BARBADOS, and of all other People under His
Government.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing shall concern, sends
greeting. Whereas diverse people have been transported from the Kingdom of
England to my Island of Barbados in America, and have there remained a long
time as Servants in great labor for the profits of other persons, upon whose
Account they first were conveyed thither, expecting after their faithful
service, according to the Covenants agreed upon at their first entrance, there
to make some advantage to themselves by settling of Plantations for their own
use, but by reason of the great number of people who repaired thither, and who
by the blessing of God have multiplied the^e; the land is now so taken up as
there is not any to be had but at great rates too high for the purchase of poor
servants: In confideration hereof, and out of a hearty affection toward the
welfare and happiness of all such people as have left their native Country
to settle under my Government in so Remote parts, I have thought fit to
declare, that each freeman who is unprovided of land, and shall therefore
desire to go off from the Barbados shall have a proportion of land allotted to
him in my Islands of Nevis Antigua, or any other Island under my Command
according to the Custom of the Country. And whereas Complants have been made
concerning the miscarriages of some of my Governors, and of the oppressions of
the people under their charge, I shall God willing suddenly repair thither*
and by my self, or Leivtenant General authorized by me, take such course as
shall be for the ease and satisfaction of all parties, and for the settling of
all my Islands in a peaceable and happy condition; and in particular, seeing
my Island of Antigua is looked upon by diverse knowing persons as a place of
great concernment if it were well peopled, by reason of the convenience of
Harbors which are wanting in my other Islands, I shall take care for a
constant supply of ships twice every year, to bring Provision from England
thither, and to take of the Commodities of the Country there: and because
diverse factious people have of late endeavored to estrange the affections of
the Inhabitants of my Islands from me, and to suggest intentions of disignes by
me to their prejudice: I do hereby solemnly profess, That the honor and glory
of God, and the promoting of his worship and service, according to the
established Laws of the Kingdom of England have the first place in my
thoughts, and I do as earnestly desire the happiness of those people under my
charge as of my self, and shall not any way endeavor the advantage of my own
interest further then may conduce to the settling of such differences as have
already been raised: And the removing of all doubts, scruples, and jealousies,
which hereafter may arise betwixt us.

Given under our hand and Seal, at London this 22 day of November Anno Dom.
1647.

