THE OLD PROVERB, As good be a Knave, as amongst Knaves (though Committee men)
is debated, and concluded to be false, by Francis Cook, and Thomas Gualter, as
they were riding between London and Cambridge, and conferring upon this
proverb, and many other things useful for all to know, but more especially for
some in authority. In which conference the innocent, and such as have stood for
the truth, are made known and commended, and the nocent and such as use deceit
and falsehood are discovered, and left to bear their deserved shame and
punishment. AS ALSO THE CRUEL AND UNREASOnable doings of some Committee men,
and others, against good men, and such as have been most forward for the
Parliament: some of their abuses stripped, which deserve to be whipped.
Prove. 1.10.13. My Son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not: if they say,
we will fill our houses with spoil, come cast in thy lot amongst us, we will
have one purse. Prove. 11.8, 9. The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and
the wicked comes in his steed. An hypocrite with his mouth destroys his
neighbor, but through knowledge shall the just be delivered. Iam. 1.26. That
man that seems to be religious, and refraineth not his tongue, his religion
is vain. Matthew. 5. Blessed are ye when men revile you, and speak all manner of
evil against you falsely for my sake. 1 Pet. 3.17. For it is better (if the will
of God be so) that you suffer for well-doing, then for evil doing. Psalm. 50.
But to the wicked said God, what have thou to do to take my words into thy
mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed?
A CONFERENCE BETWEEN FRANCIS COOK, And THOMAS GVALTER, as they were riding
between LONDON and CAMBRIDGE.
Thomas Gaulter, YOu are well overtaken Mr. Cook, how far travel you this way?


Francis Cook. To Cambridge.


Ga. So do I, what shall we get thither to night; think you?


C. No, but to morrow in the forenoon, I hope, I use to ride easily.


G. I will ride as easily as you, for I desire to have some talk with you about
your brother Scotten, what think you? had it not been better for him to have
been quiet, and have let his fellow sequestrators alone? I believe he repents
it now.


Cook. Then it seems you think the old proverb is true, as good be a knave, as
amongst knaves, I grant you, that if my brother Scotten had not reproved them,
and complained of their misdemeanors concerning the sequestration, they had not
complained of him to the commissioners of the excise, nor sequestered his goods,
as they have done: my brother heard before that some of them did threaten him,
that if he complained of them about the sequestration, they would out him of
the excise office: but not knowing wherein he had offended, was no whit
deterred, but being bound by a double band to disclose their naughty doings,
did proceed to complain against them, what though he did expose himself to
their rage, he thought it better to do so, then worse.


G. You seem to charge some Committee men, and other officers (I know who you
mean) to be knaves, I think you do very ill, for there be many deceived if they
be not honest men, and very forward for the Parliament: but I am not of opinion
it is as good be a knave, as amongst knaves, but that a man should rather
suffer any thing in his name, person, and estate, then join with knaves in
their knavery, but it will be a hard task to prove them to be knaves.


C. My bro Scotten was once of your mind, he being in a manner a stranger to
them, yet their seeming forwardnes for the Parliament, and their cunning
carriage, made him believe they were men converted, insomuch, that when they,
or any of them suffered, he was bound to suffer with them, spoke, writ, and
spent much money and time in their behalfs, yea lost the favor of many great
and good men in pleading their cause, for my br. bearing an honest mind, did
think they had done so too; and whereas you say I seem to charg them to be
knaves, I do not love foul language, but when you have heard but some of their
carriages, which are known to many, and may be proved against them, then I
shall leave it to you, and to all men, to judge what they be.


G. It may be they will say they can prove as much against your br. Scotten.


C. I am sure some of them have foully scandalized him already, but they neither
have, nor can prove the least tittle against him in his offices, that was in
his power to help, and when it is known how their tongues are accustomed to
slander, not only good men, but also great men, not sparing the Parliament, nor
the assembly of Divines, and other orthodox Ministers, then it will be thought
no marvel if they shall deal so with my brother: but I shall pass by many of
their misdemeanors, both in their words and actions, which although they are
true, cannot be proved so clearly, an instance against them, and in the behalf
of my brother Scotten, in such things as are well known to many, and may be
fully proved*


G. If you will do so, I Will tell you after, what I have heard them and others
affirm concerning your brother Scotten, I would gladly know how you or he can
answer them, for I desire to be rightly informed, if he be an honest man, he is
much wronged.


C. It is very true what the Scriptures say, Prove 4. he that reproves a
scorner, purchases to himself shame, and he that rebukes a wicked man,
gets himself a blot: for I am well assured, my brother is exceedingly
wronged by them, and by many others that side with them, since he began to
reproove them, and complain against them: but I shall begin, and first I shall
instance Downham house, they selling the best of those household goods that were
the Bishops, to themselves, and to one another, at undervalues, insomuch that
it is grown into a proverb in Cambridgeshire, and the Isle of Elie, that Luke
Voice sold to L. Voice, etc. to make short, it is most certain, that L. Voice
sold to himself, and to his sons, the richest, and the best of that household
stuff, except one room ready furnished and hanged with tapestry, for 20. l. to
Jam Whinnell, which some say was worth 60. l. I never saw it to take any notice
of it, and they made my brother believe they gave to the full value of them,
until every one cried shame of their doings.

Secondly, I shall instance in Downham park, with the lands adjoining, worth
120.l. per annum, L. Voice having a share therein, let it be examined what it
has yielded to the State, I am sure it had not yielded 1.d. when my brother
complained in June 1645.

Thirdly, Mr. Pigs goods sold, and part of his lands, let between Ia. Whinnell
and his father, and W. Nichols at undervalues.

Fourthly, some of them combine with Th Wilson of Emneth, a notorious Malignant
to conceal about 120.l. from the state, which the said Wilson was in arrears to
Mr. Dove a delinquent.

Fifthly, the better to color their naughty doings, after my brother had
complained of them, they draw on 2. others, and give this Th. Wilson 4. months
longer time, under a pretense it was possible he might clear himself of the
concealment of the said 120. l. when he had had to long time given him before,
which they have done in favor to the said Wilson, and in wrong to the State,
and contrary to a former order consented to by the said Wilson: and yet this
Wilson known unto them to be a bitter persecutor of my brother Scotten in the
Bishops times, and a wicked reviler of the present Parliament.

Sixthly, they under color of their office, join with this Thom Wilson against
a godly painful preacher, approved of by the assembly, and put in by the
honorable Committee for plundered ministers, and made it cost him above 60.l,
before he could enjoy the profits given him by the said Committee, such is
their hatred to godly preachers.

Seventhly, after my brother began to suspect them, he looked into their
accounts, and found them to be defective, imperfect, and false, wronging the
State for their own advantage, not regarding their oaths.

Eighthly, my brother complained several times to some of them, that there were
amongst them, that gathered up some hundreds of pounds, and paid it not into
the treasurers appointed* besides 160. l. one of them was in arrear to the late
Archdeacon of Ely, which was also the Parliaments money: yet although my
brother waited long, he could get no justice done amongst them.


G. You need instance in no more, if you can but prove these, but if I be not
deceived, your brother did complain of most of these things the 20 of June
last, to the Committee of the accounts of the Kingdom, why did he not prove
these things against them then?


C I Will tell you why, they knowing themselves to be in an evil taking, and that
it was like to fall foul upon them, they most cunningly contrive and plot which
way to take of my brother from prosecuting his complaints against them, and to
this end in July last, they seize and drive away his milch cowes, plow and cart
horses and mares, in all, near 30. head of cattle, besides near 60.l. worth
of cole seed, to the great affrightment of his wife and children, leaving his
house destitute of necessary provision, his land untilled, and his harvest
uncarted in, and besides leave a great scandal upon him: so by this means they
take him off from proving his complaints, he had now another task in hand, to
clear himself, and to petition to get his goods again, his wife not being able
to bear crosses so well as he, it was no little trouble to him, his family, and
friends.


G. Why, but your brother was an unwise man, did he know his goods liable to
sequestration, and would he go and complain against them, and so inrage them:
he that reproves or complains against others, should be without fault himself.


C. You say truly in that, I will not go about to justify my brother, so as if
he had no failings, but that he should be liable to sequestration is a riddle
to him and me, one that has been so forward for the Parliament as he has been.


G. But I have credibly heard, that your brother did receive of Jonas Dunch of
Elye a collector 500.l. to pay in to the Treasurers at Guild Hall London, and
he paid in but 400.l. to them, and kept 100.l. to himself, and for that they
sequestered him.


C. My brother will confess that, and yet never the more to blame, for he was
then Treasurer, and at the request of Ja. Whinnell, did pay in 100. l. of the
excise money at Wisbeech, to Mr. Brown subtreasurer for the Earl of Manchester,
for his 3d. part of the sequestration money in the Isle of Ely, there being
then great need of the money, to go against Crowland, and was to receive that
100 l. again of Jonas Dunch at Ely, in the way as he went to London: for said
Ia. Whinnell, why should we be at cost and trouble to fetch 100.l. from Ely
hither of the sequestration money? and must carry so much of the excise money
thither toward London, both labors may this way be saved: my brother
perceiving he spoke reason, consented to him, and it was done accordingly: but
now you have brought it into my mind, I will tell you of a pranke Ia. Whinnell
did at that time, for the same time my brother received the 500.l. of I. Dunch,
which was in Dec. 1644 he received also plate worth 25.l. odd shillings, which
he carried up to London with the 500.l. my brother intending it should be sold,
and at that time paid into the Treasurer^ at Guild hall, but presently after
their accounts were given in, the plate was sold, and Ia Whinnell pursed up the
money, and had not paid it in the 29. Sept. last, but made use of it himself
all that while, if not still.


G. But I pray you tell me truly, had not your brother Scotten 100.l. of the
States money in his hand when they distrayned his goods?


C. No, nor one penny, for he had expended more in the States service upon
necessary expenses then he had to account for to the State, so that although he
had 87. l. 6. s. 6, d. for which he was to be accountable for: yet being
allowed for necessary charges and pains according to the ordinance for
sequestration, as it is there expressed, p. 8 l. 1. in these words. Lastly it
is ordained, that all and every the said sequestrators and Committee; shall
have allowances for their necessary charges and pains in and about the
premises, as they shall be allowed by both houses of Parliament. I say his
expenses being mo^^ then his fellow sequestrators, and more then 87.l. 6.s. 6
in two years, he had not (as I said before) one penny in his hand, is it
probable that he should first complain to some o^ them, and after to others,
that Ja Whinnell, Will. Nichols, and Ric. Ponsonby, and others, kept the States
money in their hands, and be guilty of the same offense himself?


G. Why then did they sequester his goods, was not there first a fair trial?
had he not notice given that he might answer for himself, before they did
sequester him?


C. No, my brother Scotten never knew of it until it was done, was never
summone^ to make any account, neither was there any cause why he should, nor
was he ever called t^ answer for himself: but have you forgotten what I hinted
to you before, it was to tak^ him off from proving his former complaints
against them, they would set him to work^ upon another subject, to go see if he
could get his goods and credit again, they would teach him to tell tales out of
the school.


G. If this be true which you tell me, they are most abominable in their
doings, and they have wronged your brother exceedingly, for as you say, the
ordinance for sequestration does intend allowance for necessary charges and
pains, but if it did not, it seems each of them had more in their hands at the
same time, then your brother was to be accountable for: but what did your
brother do when he heard of it, did he not desire his goods again, until there
might be a fair trial, and know for what cause they sequestered him?


C. Yea, what I have told you is most true, and I Will tell you what my brother
did, the first 2. or 3. days he could not tell what to think upon it, that his
cattle should be driven away, nor by what authority, nor for what cause; at
last he heard by the authority of Ia. Whinnell, L. Voice, and Ric. Ponsonby his
fellow Sequestrators, and W. Nichols their Collector, and that it was for this
100.l. he received of Ion. Dunch (as you heard it) and then he sent some
neighbors and friends, to desire of them that he might have his milch cowes
again, his plow, and cart horses and mares for his present use, and he would
put them in what security they would require, that they should be forth coming
the last of Sept. then next following, in case he did not betwixt that and then
(which was about 8. weeks between) bring an order to have them again, they
peremptorily refused, yet my brother staid a while longer before he went to
London to complain, thinking they had not been so far transported with rage,
but upon cold blood they would have yielded to so reasonable a request; but
after he perceived they had sold them, up he goes to London and does petition
the Lords and Commons for sequestration, who after some weeks attendance,
referred it to the standing Committee at Cambridge, to send for the parties on
both sides, and their witnesses, and examine them and end, or certify within a
month.


G. Is it possible they should refuse to let him have his milch cowes, plow and
cart horses and mares, those necessary cattle upon security, and that but for
8. weeks, this makes them more and more odious, and I think if these things be
proved, they will be judged to be unfit men to be employed in any office under
the Parliament. But what did the Committee at Cambridge in it?


C. My brother says he is bound to honor that Committee for their justice,
for after they had examined 5. or 6. witnesses on his behalf, they perceived
that malice was the cause they sequestered his goods, but because I. Whinnell
did allege that they could not have their witnesses there (although they had
warning and time enough) and did further allege, that he must of necessity go
to London, so that the month would be out, which was the time limited to end
the business, the Committee did not fully end it then, but ordered that for the
present my brother should have his milch cowes, plow, and cart horses and mares
again (they being sold but for 40.l. as themselves confessed) the Committee
being informed that the parties that had bought them (considering how my
brother was wronged) were willing he should have them again, and further
ordered* that his other goods which were unsold, should not be sold, until the
cause was fully heard, and that if they did prove sequestrable, my brother
should pay the said 40 l. to the State.


G. What has your brother done, has he yet got longer time of the Committee
of Lords and Commons, that the gentlemen at Cambridge might hear it out, and
determine it?


C. Not as yet, for they would not obey the order of the Committee of
Cambridge, until very lately, that they heard they were like to be sent for
up, to answer their contempt before the Committee of Lords and Commons, I.
Whinnell being so far from obeying the order of Committee of Lords and Commons,
that since their order of reference to the standing Committee at Cambridge, he
has forged a warrant, and counterfeited hands, and sent men into Norfolk with
that forged warrant, has taken 40. coombe of cole-seed from my brother, which
grew there, where he had nothing to do to sequester, pretending in the warrant,
he took it for the State, but caused it to be brought into his own chamber at
Wisbeech and then said he had a right to it himself, this forged warrant my
brothers son did get from the men, and it is to be seen with the counterfeit
hands: besides, instead of obeying the order of Committee of Lords and Commons,
and of the Committee of Cambridge, they did still proceed, and seized upon my
brothers wheat, imprisoned and fined those that did help him to make money for
the relief of him and his family, notwithstanding that the much honored
Governor of the Isle (at my brothers request) required them to forbear, and
yield obedience to the said orders. And now my brother has voluntarily sent in
his accounts in particular to the Commissioners for the accounts of
Cambridgeshire, where it will evidently appear, that my brother was to be
accountable but only for 87.l. 6, s. 6.d. of the States money, before they
sequestered his goods, which being not so much as he expended in the States
service in two years upon necessary charges, it must needs follow that he had
not one penny of the States money in his hand when they sequestered his goods
(as I said unto you before,) which when the standing Committee at Cambridge
perceive plainly to be so, they cannot but in justice restore to my brother all
his goods again, they being so unjustly taken from him, and allow him for
reparation of his losses, his damage being very great in his estate, besides
what he has been damnified in his credit, which is not a little, a good name
being better then precious ointment, as Solomon says.


G. Some say Ia. Whinnell gave it forth he would not have sequestered your
brothers goods, but that he was the cause to hinder his brother in law for
preaching any more at Wisbeech; and they further say, that very many there are
much imbittered against your brother for that.


C. Yea I heard that Ia. Whinnell did say so, but I do not believe for all his
saying, that that was the cause alone, but it is true, that many people
thereabout are much enraged against my brother for that; but they have no
reason so to be, I hope they will see their errors one day, and be sorry for
them.


G. I Will tell you now the particulars they reckon up against your brother, they
do not let to say, he has been a contentious man most part of his time, and
they instance in these following. First he contended with Vicar Giles 12.
years together, and with his son in law Tho. Wilson, not only about the Ship
money, but also about Trespasses; and that your brother almost alone in the
country opposed the paying of the said Ship Money, in so much that men were
constrained to distraine him for it: And now in reprooving his fellow
Sequestrators and then complaining of them and of their Collector Will Nichols.
And then speaking of Ja. Whinnels debts and arresting him at London and that
your brother was the cause of the displacing the Vicar of Wisbeech. And that he
framed a false Petition to the Committee of plundered Ministers, to get in a
Minister in the room of a Delinquent Minister that last had it. And that it
was agreed on between him and the Minister, that it he could procure the
personage for him, it being worth 200. l. per. an. he should have it for 100 l.
a year. And that your brother being in debt 60. to Mr. Nichols a Preacher that
formerly had the said parsonage, did threaten him in writing, that unless he
would forgive him his debt, and let him his personage still, he would complain
of him to the Parliament, for he knew faults enough by him that would cast him
out, but if he would do the former two things, let him be as bad as he would,
he would not meddle with him. And they say your brother has sought to be
revenged on Ja. Whinnell, complaining against him to the Committee of
Examinations, and they speak hardly concerning the witnesses that testified
against him, because they did not complain of it before, and they say further
that he is such a strong Presbiterian that he is the only man that opposes
their proceedings in those parts about Religion.


C. If all these were true, my brother were bad enough, though many of them
deserve praise, were but the weather sociable, the ways cleaner, or the wind
lower, I should spend two hours time in answering these things, but being as
it is, I shall be very brief, but so as I hope I shall make it plainly
appea^e that in most of these things my brother deserves praise, and that some
of them (as they are reported) are very false. I shall begin with Vicar Giles
or Iame Giles (for so he was called) my brother living in the same Town with
him and farming the parsonage there, heard him deliver these popish points,
That men since the fall had ability to keep Gods commandments. That the
second Commandment was indeed no commandment, but a commentary on the first.
That it is not lawful for lay men to read the Scriptures, That some men were
in Heaven for their good works, That before the words of Consecration, the
bread in the Sacrament was indeed bread, but after those words, it was the very
body of Christ and ought to be adored. My brother after two or three times
talking with him concerning these points in private, he still persisting, after
prayers were ended my brother told the people that Mr. Giles taught them false
Doctrine, Mr. Giles said bear witness, and shortly after obtained of the
Churchwardens to present my brother in the Bishops Court before Doctor Eden,
who suspended him and enjoined recantation. But because my brother would not
deny the truth, he brought above 20. witnesses before the Bishop and Dr. Eden
at the Bishops palace at Downham to prove Giles his evil life and false
doctrine, Bishop Buckridge only reproved Giles. About this Bishops death, Vicar
Giles about with this business again before Dr. Eden at Cambridge, my brother
because of Dr. Edens injustice there, was advised to appeal into the Arches
where it became two suits, Dr. Eden was advocate for Giles there, after Vicar
Giles neglected Dr. Eden, And then he turned to my brother, and advised him to
sue Giles in the Audience, but after a year or two the Dr turned to Giles
again. After many years my brother was cast in the Arches both in the
Gravamen and the principal cause by Sir Io. Lamb, at which time and before my
brother sought agreement with Vicar Giles, and offered him money enough No,
says Vicar Giles, I seek not your money but you; you shall recant. He had
thought to have converted my brother to him: but he being resolved not to deny
the truth, what ever came of it, appealed to the Delegates: After 2 or 3.
years there, D. Eden being still advocate for Giles, both suits past against
my brother, who again tendered Vicar Giles all cost, and a great deal more
money, but nothing would serve the Vicar, but he must recant; he would not, so
it cost my brother in 12 year^ ^t being in 4. courts, what with transmission of
all the books, many commissions, one charge or other) above 400. l. and was
constrained to live for the most part of 3. years and a half about London to
keep from the Vicars rage: this T. Wilson was then solicitor, against my
brother in the behalf of his father Giles, and persecuted him fiercely, and
caused my brother during the space of these 12. years to be presented at Doctor
Edens court at Ely 100 times and more, because he went to hear the next
preacher, when Vicar Giles did not preach, he usually preaching not above once
in 4. or 6. weeks: At last a Parliament came my brother did petition against
this Giles, and against Doct. Eden, Sir I. Lamb, Judge Bartlet and others, for
injustice, he had Vicar Giles voted an unfit man for the ministry, by the grand
Committee for scandalous ministers. But his other petition against the Judges
for injustice to his damage 500 l. was referred to the Committee for Courts of
Justice, my brother attending with his witnesses at both the Committees, until
one charge or other cost him 45.l. and then the troubles of the Kingdom grew to
be so great, that private causes were adjourned, and there that petition lies
still; but Vicar Giles died, it was said he poisoned himself* As for T Wilson
for trespasses, my brother brought only 2, actions against him, when he might
have brought ten, and did not that neither, until after Th. Wilson sued him
for pigs once coming into his yard, and my brother did prosecute but one of
these actions to execution, although Thom. Wilson was cast in them both, and
this Th. Wilson amongst other of his almost incredible malicious actions
against my brother, did cause him to be taxed at Emneth for the ship money, in
such a disproportionable manner as was unreasonable, insomuch as my brother
found so much justice from the Sheriff and high Constable, that they laid a
great part of that tax upon T. Wilson, and eased my brother there, for should
my brother have born all his wrongs, it had been more then unexpedient (as one
said wisely) it would have inspired him with boldness, and so drawn on more
injuries: evil natures grow presumptuous upon forbearance, in a dogged stomach
which is only capable of the restraint of fear: the silent digestion of a
former wrong, provokes a second: and Religion allows us as much of the serpent
as of the dove, it is our duty indeed to be simple as doves, in offending them,
but we are no less charged to be wise as serpents in defending ourselves.


G. But let me interrupt you a little, is that this Th Wilson of whom your
brother complained of before, that Ia. Whinnell, and W. Nichols combined with
to deceive the State? and that he and the rest joined against that painful
preacher put in by the Parliament,


C. The same man, I Will warrant you he is no changeling, but I Will proceed. As
for my brothers standing out 4. years against that illegal tax of ship money,
and suffered 17.l. to be taken from him by violence in that time, this has
been since counted for a good work in others that did the like, and I hope it
will not now be taken by the wise, for contention in him: for his arresting I.
Whinnell in June last at London, needs no other answer but this, that he knew
not otherways how to get his money; and for speaking of his debts, and
complaining of his fellow sequestrators, I gave you a hint of that before,
after many of his debts came to my brothers knowledge, he was forced to reveal
them to save himself, in giving a reason to Capt. Cole, L. Voice, and others,
why he was so earnest to have W. Nichols sent for to bring in his accounts and
money, for that he knew them to be both poor, and in debt, and not responsible
for 3. or 400.l. they had collected, (or more for ought he knew) they having
paid in none, and the ordinance of sequestration expressing, that the Committee
shall be answerable for the acts and doings of their Colectors, and knowing if
that money miscarried, the blame must light upon him, he l^^^^g in the same
Town where I. Whinnell and W. Nichols lived, and they 20. miles of, if he did
not make it known, and disallow of their doings: besides, my brother had taken
an oath to do all things to the best advantage of the Commonwealth, so that as
I told you in the beginning, he was bound in a double band to reveal them, and
could he have had just proceedings at home amongst his partners, when he made
several journies to Ely for it, he had not been forced to have complained
further off for his own safety: and for my brothers pains and cost in getting
out the former Vicar of Wisbeech, put in by the Bishop, and was judged to be so
unfit for the place, that there was not one that voted for him, but when he
offered to show some hundreds of hands in his behalf, it was said they needed
no other evidence of the ignorance and blindness of those people that would set
their hands in the behalf of so unfit a man to be their teacher, and that they
had need of an able minister to teach them better, and commended Mr. Barthol.
Edwards, and my brother for their good pains, where so few joined with them:
and I hope those that set their hands for him, will one day (when they are
better instructed) say it was a good work, and help my brother to some of the
money again he is out of his purse about it. And as for framing a false
petition, and agreeing before hand with a Minister, that if he could procure
him the parsonage, it being worth 200. l. yearly, he should farm it for 100.l.
per An. this is utterly false, in every particular: and that my brother was in
debt 60.l to Mr. Nichols, or 60.d. either, is utterly false, he owed my brother
above 60. l. which if he would have set but a part of it off when he received
his rent (according as he had promised in his letters,) there had been no more
ado* for it is well known; my brother at that time (which was about the
beginning of this Parliament) had store of money lying by him, and did lend to
poor men at their needs, but owed no money to Mr. Nichols nor any other man;
except that debt for trespass to Tho. Wilson, the Costs of the suit amounting
to 5. l. 10. s. which his Attorney had ready for him, and he might have had it,
had not malice so far prevailed with him, as to sue my Brother upon the same
judgment, to put him to more charges: And Mr. Nichols had reason to let my
Brother his parsonoge, for that he paid him his rent at his times. And the
letter he sent to Mr. Nichols, has no such thing in it, as is falsely said to
be; and it is to be seen and (the cause of it rightly considered) deserves
praise: And I hope my brother has not sought revenge, against James Whinnell
and the rest, his complaining at the Committee of Examinations, and accounts
being in June, which was before they sequestered his goods, and so could not be
in revenge of that: But the revenge will fall upon them, for after my brother
had reproved and complained of them, then they to be revenged of him, sequester
him: Again to seek to the Magistrate for Justice, is not revenge: and so did
my brother: But they to fall upon him themselves (who was a Sequestrator with
them) and spoil him as they did, this is revenge in them: Neither was my
Brother the first moover of those Articles against them, but being at a
Gentleman's house in London, he heard two letters read, which came from about
Wisbeech, complaining of the outrages and uncivil carriages of James Whinnell,
and others that fided with him, aleadging that if the Parliament knew what a
man they employed they would not own him: hereupon my brother spoke of some
things that he and others could prove against them. A Gentlemen being by,
said, men could not keep their oath and Covenant, if they knew such things and
would not complain of them. Hereupon my Brother did put them in writing, and
with others did go to the Committee of Examinations, and as for those that
either think or speak hardly of him, and those that did testify against
James Whinnell; for which he is sentenced and imprisoned: I think they have
little reason, for who could hear such a well deserving honorable person,
which has done so much good, not only since the Parliament began, but like^ise
before? For which he deserves to be had in everlasting honor: that both he
and his honorable family should be scandalized in such a high nature, and not
endeavor to bring the Author thereof to dondigne punishment: but to stop the
mouths of all such, they may take notice, that there be others that heard him
speak the same scandalous words, and that a Gentleman has given it under his
hand in writing, that if he be called, he will testify he heard James
Whinnell speak the same wicked words: and there be others can testify that
the hearers of those words did speak of them the same day, but there wanted a
fit opportunity before that time to make them known in its proper place* And I
believe my Brother is so far from revenge, that notwithstanding the wrong he
has received, he could be content to join in a Petition to that Noble Lord,
that although he has wronged his Lordship in such a high nature (yet upon his
humble submission) he might be enlarged.

And whereas they say my brother is such a strong Presbyterian etc. I Will tell
you he is so far from sideing so, as to make the breach wider, that he
honors all those that be godly men; whether Presbyterian or Independent, not
pretending to have so much knowledge as to conclude certainly which is the
best, where so many Godly men do differ, yet according to that small measure of
knowledge he has, his judgment is rather inclin^ble for the Presbyterian: But
desires to wait until it shall please God to reveal those things to his humble
servants that seek unto him.

But I Will tell you what kind of people my Brother does not approve of, such as
the Apostle Peter and Jude speaks of, which speak evil of those things they
know not nor understand, someing out their own shame, and walking after their
own lusts, one of them affirmed openly in the Market place at Wisbeech, that a
Godly learned Preacher, that preached there, could a ly in the Pulpit, because
he said whom God loves once he loves to the end, and cited John 13 1. to prove
it: And threatened he would pull him out by the ears, if he came thither
again. And (the same man James Whinnell) another time coming to carpe at an
able Ministers doctrine, now placed by the honorable Committee for plundered
Ministers, in Wisbeech, tells him the scriptu^es are plain enough of
themselves, they need no interpretation. This Preacher demands of him, what
he thought of those places where it says the eyes of the Lord, and the Arm
of the Lord and the like, whether he did think that God has eyes and Arms as
men have, yea says he, I think so, for is it not said? God made man after his
own Image. And this man has many that side with him, and seek to uphold him;
such as call our best Preachers Baals Priests, Rascals, and the like, although
they be such as the Apostle Paul commends, workmen which need not be
ashamed, but are able to divide the word of God aright; Yet themselves (whilst
they thus vilify Godly Preachers) are profane in their lives, not regarding
the Lords days, (but speaking their own words, and doing their own works on
those days) nor observing the fast days, but minding feasting rather then
fasting when God and men call for it.


Gualter, I am very glad to hear your answer concerning these complaints, for
certainly most of these things deserve praise, we have had too few such men, as
your Brother.


C I am glad to hear you judge so rightly of them, he spoke truly that said,
truth may loose at the start, yet it will get ground afterward and win. I Will
tell you of two or three things more, my Brother has done, that his
adversaries will now hardly speak of, But if the Kings party should prevail
they will be laid open to the full. At the first setting forth of the
Parliaments propositions for Horse, Men, Money, and Plate, my Brother lent and
expended above the tenth part of his poor estate, in July 9. and July 12.
164^. He listed two ^^^at horses in Moor-fields with their riders ready
furnished, valued at 42.l. besides he kept them in London one month, at 5
shil. per diem, which cost him about 7 pounds more: they went forth in Major
Gunters Troop, the first was raised but the Lord Brooks, If every one of his
ability had then hearkened to the Parliament, and set forth but one such horse
with his rider, (or the value thereof in money) at that time as the City of
London did abundantly in all probability their forwardness would so have
damped the other side, that they would have had no hearts nor hopes to have
taken up Arms, and so all this unnatural war had been prevented, and many
thousand of men's lives preserved and multitudes that have been plundered and
undone, would still have been in a flourishing Condition. I speak not of
those that were contrary minded, for if all men had been for the Parliament,
they had not needed to have prepared for their defense, I only speak of those
that seemed to be so, but did nothing or very little until it was too late:
my Brother being at London in July aforesaid, when he listed his horses and
their riders, it being in harvest time (he not regarding so much the getting in
of his harvest as the peace of the Kingdom) meets with a Country Gentleman of
his acquaintace, who admired his forwardness, my Brother answered him, he did
it to keep peace, for said he, if the Countries would do as many of the
Londoners and I have done, it would be a means to preserve peace, the Gentleman
answered, my Brother said well, but I think at that time he did but little,
but it has Cost him the price of many such horses since.


Gualter, But why do you speak of this? Now it is too late to help it.


C. I speak of it to this end, First, that many who now ly under sundry
grievances may cease to murmr against others, and repent they came not timely
to help the Lord against the mighty, for it may be now said unto them, as Paul
said to the Mariners and Master of the Ship, in another case, Sirs you should
have hearkened to the Parliament, and have saved all this loss; And as they
were faithful unto you, who made choice of them, so ought you to have been,
and not have deserted them: and the cause in which your selves were interessed
with them, when they made it publicly known, there was need of your help.
Secondly to show my Brothers faithfulness and readiness at that time which
the Parliament must needs take as an acceptable service, what though it
resemble the two Mites cast in by the poor Widow, in comparison of what
others did. Thirdly to show the evil disposition of those that derive their
power from the Parliament, and have so ill requited him, as to take away his
Cattle and goods without cause. After this my Brother had only two sons, men
grown, both which he set forth to bear Arms for the Parliament, who have
voluntarily Jepordide their lives in the high places of the field, have been
in the greatest fights, (and though I say it) they are men that have behaved
themselves so as they have had praise. Besides my Brother himself followed the
Army, at least three months, to encourage the Soldiers at his own Costs;
after which he coming to Wisbeech, was a chief instrument to preserve the I Will
of Elye out of the hands of the Parliaments enemies, for he hearing that Sir
Ier. Scroote raised Soldiers about Gednie-Cap Welby, near Sutten, and others
began to fortify Crowland of another side, and Linn Regis of the other side:
And Captains entertained at Dodington in the said Isle, and began to fortify
there, Capt. Pigg spoke of beating up a Drum about Wisbeech for Soldiers, And
that the Castle of Wisbeech was in the hands of the Parliaments enemies,
whether men and Ammuniton might be quickly and closely conveyed both by land
and Sea, And that diverse Captains were entertained at Wisbeech and thereabouts
and all enemies to the Parliament. My Brother began to draw a petition for
prevention, and acquainted Andrewe Burrell Esquire. with it, who advised with him
about drawing up of the same, which Petition for secrecy had not above 12
hands to it, was speedily carried to Arrundel-house, in London And Mr. Earl
the Parliament man. S^nne in Law to the Lord Say caused it speedily to be read
in the House of Commons, whereupon an order was the same day posted down to
Collonell Cromwell, who without delay sent down Capt. Dodson (now Governor of
Crowland) with his Company of Dragoones, who instantly took posession of the
Castle of Wisbeech, My Brother rested not here, but Master Burrell, Capt Dodson
and he with some others cast about which way to raise a Company of volunteers
about Wisbeech to join with Capt. Dodson, which was soon brought to pass,
with the assistance of that deserving Honorable (and never to be forgotten)
Lief. Genesis Cromwell Mr. Burrell being at great Charges of Drum, Colors, Men,
Muskets, Powder and Match: besides his lending the Parliament near 100. l.
worth of Plate, which he did to encourage others, although he might ill spare
it, in respect of his great losses both in Ireland and England. Capt. Dodson
did bravely many ways, and so did some others, and to give Ia. Whinnell his
due, he was forward in these things, which caused my Brother Scotten to think
so well of him as he did: My Brother was at Cost of maintaining three men more
besides himself in Arms did bear his part of the Charge to maintain a
Captain to train them and lead them forth as occasion should be offered. And
himself his men and Horses with their Arms have been out against Crowland 4.
or 5. days and nights together, and at other places as occasion required and
all at his own Costs. By all which means (with the Blessing of God) the Isle
of Ely was preserved, and so Crowland, and Linn, sooner reduced to the
obedience of the Parliament. And yet for all this my Brother to be spoiled and
plundered by James Whinnell, Luke Voice and Richard Ponsonbye Sequestrators for
the Parliament, is such an act as is almost incredible, and whether they
themselves by doing hereof be not liable to sequestration by the Ordinance of
Parliament in that behalf, I leave to others to judge, see the Ordinance p. 4.
l. 15. And it is further observable how these men presevere in their evil.
Thomas Wilson that known Malignant could have time after time, granted unto
him under a color it were possible he might clear himself and the rest of
the aforesaid concealment, which they denied to Mr. Burrell who had done as
aforesaid, and was much oppressed in taxes otherways, and utterly deneyed any
time at all; to be given to my Brother to clear himself.


G. You have defended your Brother Scotten well hitherto, and set forth his
deserved praise and have laid open the great abuses of his adversaries, which
when Authority shall understand they will undoubtedly repair him in his
damages and punish those that have thus wronged him; But there is one thing
more, if you could clear him of that, it would do well. He has lost it seems
the favor of the Commissioners of the Excise, and it will be thought those
grave Aldermen would not have been incensed against him if there were not
proof that he were faulty.


C. You say very true, and I shall declare the particulars of that also the
greatest matter the Commissioners have found fault with him has been his
absence from the Excise Office at Wisbeech diverse weeks.


G. That's cause enough to turn him off, and to get a carefuller man in his
room, its a great fault for any man to take charge and trust upon him, and
neglect it; how can you answer that?


C. No way but this, my brother was at charge of another in his room, and his
absence was a forced absence, I Will tell you how, he by means of I. Whinnel, did
deliver 50.l. to Ric. Towel, upon 28. Feb. 1644. which he promised to pay in to
Mr. Iackson at the excise office at London within a month, it being a usual
thing for this R. Powel and his partner, to receive money about Wisbeech
country, and lay it out there for fat beasts, and when he had sold them at
London, to pay in the money there, this R. Powell and his partner had lately
before that, received 50.l. of my brothers son, and had paid it in according to
his promise and his partner received above 100.l. of my brothers son not long
after, which was paid in accordingly: but when my brother came in at the end of
the quarter to see the books made even, there wanted this 50.l. it would not
be found received in the books, my brother repaired to R. Powel, who could show
him receipts for all the other money, but none for that, my brother waited weeek
after weeek, for 3. weeks, hoping he would have paid it in by fair means,
after that would not be, he arrested him in London, hoping to have had a trial
quickly, but R. Powel removes it by habeas corpus, to keep it from trial: then
my br. petitions the commissioners of the excise, that they would get this R.
Powel sent for before the Committee of Parl. for the excise, the commissioners
gave order to Mr. Skinner so to do, who indevoured it: but after my br had
waited a month longer in London, hoping to have had a warrant for R. Powel, at
last the Committee would not, they would see a trial at law first, so by this
means he was forced from the excise office 7. weeks.


G. Did not I Whinnel after this time meet your br. at the excise office? and
affirmed before the commissioners that this R. Powel was an honest man, did he
not pay in that 50 pounds think you? and lost his acquittance.


C. J. Whinnel did say so before the commissioners, but I think he is such
another honest man as I. Wh. is, who likewise received money of my brothers son
at Wisbeech, to pay into the excise office at London, but did not, for which
(with other money) my brother now sueth him. And these words of I. Whinnels
must needs reflect upon the receivers of the money in the excise office, for my
br. has 3. witnesses that R. Powel received this 50. l of him, but it is no
great matter whom I. Whinnel calls honest, nor whom he accuses to be dishonest,
for I believe R. Powel has not paid in the money, for 2. or 3. days after the
month was ended, in which time R. Powel promised to pay it in, my brother
spoke with him, and then he confessed he had not paid it in, but said he was to
pay in above 100. l. more, which his partner had received of my brothers son at
Wisbeech since, and he would pay it in all within 2 days after, besides I
cannot find but the officers that receive the money are very exact in setting
down what they receive.


G. But is this 7. weeks absence all they have against your brother?


C. No, he was but one market day at the excise office at Wisbeech in 2.
months after this time, the cause you heard in part before, for I. Whinnel and
L. Voice having threatened him that in case he complained against them about the
sequestration, they would out him of the excise, and he did complain of them as
you have heard, after which L. Voice being in a rage at Cambridge, said of my
brother Scotten, he was an ill bird to defile his own nest they would show him
a trick, and so they did, when shortly after they sequester his goods for by
that means they did not only prevent my brother from prosecuting and proving
his complaints against them, in putting him upon another business, and
disgracing him, as I told you before, but also he must be forced from the
excise office, that so they might complain of his absence there, for as you
heard before, it took up his time for the most part from the latter end of July
(the time they sequestered him, what at London and at Cambridge, and to and
again) until the latter end of Sept. which is 8. weeks, which with the former
7. makes his absence to be 15. weeks from the office, he was there present
only one week, in that time.


G. This was a cunning plot indeed, it has more in it then I understood at
first, for by this one act of sequestring his goods, they did not only so far
forth revenge themselves of him, as to take away his present maintenance, and
all manner of relief from himself and his family, and disgrace him, and so
disable him from prosecuting and proving his just complaints against them, but
also to force him from the excise office, that they might complain to the
Commissioners of his absence from thence, and so to deprive him of that place,
as an unfaithful man in the trust reposed in him, yet methinks if the
Commissioners were rightly informed of these things, they would not be offended
with your brother, he having another in his absence, for what loss can it be
to the State if a sub-commissioner be absent sometimes, if he be at charge of a
sufficient man in his room?


C. You conceive very right, yet I Will tell you, because they would make sure to
keep him from the excise office, L. Voice and I. Whinnel join with this T.
Wilson, to cause my brot. to loose 49 l. due to him, and they had prevailed,
had he not spent some weeks in London to prevent them, and my br. did endeavor
to inform the commissioners of these things, but his memory being short, he
could not make things so plain unto them, as I have done now to you, besides my
br. had many adversaries, not only L. Voice, and I. Whinnel, but all they
could procure, with the States venison in Downham park, and otherwais Neither
do I know any loss to the State, if an honest sufficient man, and one that is
well acquainted with the business, be there in the absence of a subcommissioner,
such as my br. had, for he had his br in law^ Fr^ ^erkins and his son, who kept
the office the summer before, when I. Whinnel was absent 16. weeks.


G. Now you have brought it to mind, I have heard they made some complaints
against your son, as if he were unjust to the State in some trifling sums as
much as came to 3. or 4 l. and that he used some men hardly that did not bring
in their money when they should.


C. Its true enough that I. Whinnel gave in a writing against my br. and his
son both, but this was after both of them had found much fault by I. Whinnel,
and had complained of his naughty doings at Wisbeech (my br. being loath to
trouble the commissioners with complaints against him, whom before he had
commended to them) and likewise after my br had informed against him and the
rest, at the committee for accounts of the Kingdom, and the honorable
committee for examinations, but I. Whinnel could not prove the lead tittle
against them for unjust dealings, nor did he go about it, neither do I believe
the Commissioners gave any credit unto it: neither had they any reason, for he
that will scandalize godly ministers, and the whole Assembly of Divines, the
Parliament, and the worthy members of both Houses (such as did never meddle
against him)and forge a warrant and counterfeit hands to it, as I told you
before, and counterfets my brothers hand, and puts it to a petition against I.
Hubberd Esquire. and other gentlemen about Wisbeech, when my br. was 60. miles off,
and never knew nor heard of it, causing those gentlemen to think hardly of him
without a cause, it is no marvel though he scandalize my brother and his son,
who had complained against him before.


G. But did not I. Whinnel now of late complain that your brother was behind
hand in the excise office for money he should have paid in there?


C. Sure enough, but he never told them of the 20.l. at a time, and more, that
he gathered into his hands of the excise money at Wisbeech, upon the Sabbath
days, of Mr. Marshals clark the brewer, and others, which was more then he
should have received: nor how he wronged my brother between 7. and 8.l. in one
quarters book and a half, my brother di^ acknowledge that the 50.l. in R.
Powels hand was owing to them, and that he did keept in his hand 15. l. when
they began to put the money into the iron box my brother had provided before
with 2 locks and keys, because I. Whinnel and W. Nichols had 15. l. in their
hands, besides the other money my brother now sues him for, and besides the
money he gathered upon the sabbath days as aforesaid, but my brother withal
told the Commissioners, that when the 50.l. in R. Powels hand was paid in,
there would be money coming to him (he having his salary allowed him in his
forced absence as aforesaid, being at charge of another in his room, as Ja
Whinnel had the summer before in his absence 16. weeks) besides my brothers
part in the 9^. l. taken from them (to use against Crowland) his share therein
being above 40. l. for that he was out of purse above 16.l. in hiring men to go
abroad about the excise money, and other things in the first settling of the
excise office (as by his account I. Whinnel has approved of) appears, which
50, l. my brother did promise to pay in, hoping he should have got it where it
was due: but I. Whinnel, L. Voice and T. Wilson aforesaid prevented him, but he
hopes the Commissioners will yet be pleased to be assisting to him in getting
the said 60 l this next term when it come to trial.


G. Did not the Commissioners blame your brother for that he was a means to
bring Ia. Whinnel into that office, by commending of him to be a fit man for a
subcommissioner.


C. Yea they did so, but my brother told them he was exceedingly deceived in
him (as some others have been) he had hoped he had been converted from his
former deboist and evil courses, but since he has found, he is like the dog,
turning again to his vomit.


G. I see nothing yet but your brother (being a man so well deserving of the
Parliament) might be still continued in his office of excise, for to deal truly
with you, I had much ado to refrain my self when you told me how he was
persecuted by ^ic^ Giles and his son Wilson, and had such injustice by those
Judges, and how he stood out to the end, and would not deny the truth, though
it cost him 500.l. and how since to his cost, he has with stood the illegal
tax of sh^p-money, has been at cost, and taken pains in removing bad ministers
in the place of his abode, and been a means to help good ones in their room,
been so forward for the Parliament, that it cost him above the tenth part of
his estate, hazarding his own life and his sons for the Parliament, and the
cause maintained by them, has been a means to preserve the Island where he
dwells from being under the power of the enemy, the State thereby having the
benefit of the excise: and yet to be scandalized, disgraced, and counted as an
evil doer, made to suffer so much loss in his estate, and that by men deriving
their power from the Parliament, and such as would be taken to be for them
(being so ungrateful to him that has suffered so much for them) I say I cannot
but take it to heart, and certainly all good men that hear it, must needs do
so, and therefore I would advise you to put this our conference in print, that
it may be published to vindicate your brother, who has been so publicly
disgraced, and give to each of the Commissioners, and such Committees as it
most concerns, a little book, I cannot think but they will have a good opinion
of your brother, and show him all lawful favor, for there is nothing in it
that casts the least spot upon the Parliament, nor any good men in authority
under them.


C. I thank you Mr. Gaulter for that you give credit to what I have told you,
and for your good counsel, and that you have a fellow feeling of my brothers
sufferings for his well doing, but I must tell you, my brother was resolved
never to have joined with I. Whinnel any more in the excise office if he might,
for he has been a great looser by his means, since he trusted him, and since
I. Whinnel was sentenced out of his offices, my brother has not been with the
Commissioner for the excise* for as he sought not for that office at first, so
has he not gone about to make friends to continue ^^, although for the better
taking of all scandal from him, he could willingly have joined with some
sufficient honest man. But now I hear certainly the commissioners have made
choice of others, and have much endeavored to choose honest men, yet I
conceive if it were published, it would be for the benefit of the State, and so
far from casting the least aspersion upon the Parliament or any Committees of
Parliament men, or others that are good, that it sets forth their deserved
praise, besides it may be a means to vindicate my brother Scotten, nor only
before the Commissioners of the excise, but all others that have been deceived
by false reports, and so repair him in his damages, and lay open the abuses of
such men as (in some respects) are worse then that unrighteous Judge, that
neither feared God, nor reverenced man, resembling those ungodly men that are
crept in unawares, of whom Jude speaks, that they may be brought to their
de^erved punishment and further it may be useful to all, First to confirm this
truth, that no bonds of friendship will make wicked men faithful to godly men
therefore try before you trust, have good experience of the conversion,
conversation, and faithfulness of men, before you trust them so far, that if
they prove perfidious they may do you a mischief, take heed how ye both reprove
a scorner, or cast pearls before swine, the former will endeavor to work you
shame, the latter will rend you, embrace that counsel as much as in you lies;
have peace with all men, but because peace always cannot be, for we are
exhorted to contend for the faith once given to the saints, and there is a what
peace etc and the wisdom that is from above is first pure, and then
peaceable, therefore secondly, let every one resolve to do his duty in his
place, although he be accounted contentious or a busy man for his pains, were
Nehemiah now living amongst us, and should do as he did in Jerusalem, as you
may read. 13. he would certainly be counted a contentious busy man, yet he
had peace within, and could say, remember me O my God in mercy, in the good
that I have done: I Will tell you (to Gods praise and glory be it spoken) that
during all that 12. years and above that my brother was troubled and persecuted
for contending for the faith against Vicar Giles, that it cost him 500. l. he
was not worse in his estate at the end of that time, 500. d. finally, if God
see it good otherwise, as to suffer evil men not only to raise and spread false
reports of his people, but also to spoll and depri^^ them of many of these
outward blessings, let us remember what Paul says, Phil. 1.18.19. And in
nothing terrified by your adversaries, which is to them an evident token of
perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God, for to you it is given not
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. Observe the words
well, a suffering condition is a gift, as well as faith, which God uses to
bestow upon his beloved ones, to adorn them withal. Now Mr. Gualter are
welcome to Cambridge.


G. I thank you Mr. Cook both for your company, and for the good satisfaction
you have given me concerning your brother, get it printed as soon as you can,
good use may be made of it many ways, and if it give not satisfaction to all,
yet it will to many that fear God, and have experience of the enmity that is in
the seed of the serpent, to the seed of the woman.


FINJS.
LONDON, Printed according to order, by Thomas Pain, 1645.


