A Copy of a COMMISSION UNDER The Great Seal OF IRELAND, Granted by the Right
Honorable Sir William Parsons Knight and Barronet, and Sir John Borlase Knight,
Lords Justices of that Kingdom: FOR Disarming all Papists in and about the City
of DVBLIN, And restraining the access of any suspicious persons unto the said
City, and for the preservation of the same in safety and good order.

London, Printed for E. Husbands and J. Franck; October 6. 1642.

CHARLES by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
defender of the Faith, etc. To our we^beloved Our Major of the City of Dublin
for the time being, Sir William Anderson Knight, Sir Christopher Forster
Knight, Sir William Usher Knight, Sir Philip Percival Knight, J^hn Bysse Esquire
Recorder of our City of Dublin, Richard Barry of Dublin Alderman, Charles
Forster of Dublin Alderman, William Smith of Dublin Alderman, William Bladen of
Dublin Alderman, William Plunket Esquire, Captain Theodore Sc^out, Robert
Savill Sergeant at Arms, Matthew Ford, Anthony Dopping, Captain Philip
Fernely, Robert Kenedy, John Woodcock, John Pue, Sankey Sulliard, Josua
Carpenter, Brian Jones, Thomas Tallis, William Rowlls, Thomas Leigh, Thomaas
Hill, William Scott, Daniel Forster, Richard Francis, Joseph H^ll, Daniel
Adrian, Thomas Hook, Frederick Panchart, Captain Balthazar Creamer, John
Wogan, Randall Becket, James Smith, John Fisher, Ralph Bryen, Richard Stone,
Robert Davies, Ralph Wallis, Daniel Hutchison, Peter Wybrant, John Hill
Merchant, John Norris, Thomas Haukins, Thomas Windall, Nathaniel Neve and
Robert Scarborow greeting. WHEREAS We have taken into our Princely
consideration the strange and unusual Concourse of Papists to our City of
Dublin, and the Suburbs thereof, some of them not having formerly dwelt there.
And others of them as well Masters of Families as Servants, having formerly dwelt
there, but withdrew themselves into the Country for a time since the present
Rebellion began, and of late returned again to the said City and Suburbs, and
there all of them now continue as Inhabitanas or Sojourners, not only to the
needless and exceeding great burden of the Inhabitants, and disappointment of
the Soldiers, as well in their lodging, as in the raising of the price of meat
and other needful provisions, but also to the terror of many of Our good and
loyal Subjects inhabiting in this City and Suburbs thereof, as well in respect of
the numbers of those Papists, as in the advantages observed to be daily thereby
gained to the Rebels, as well in frequent intelligences from Our said City as in
Supplies of needful provisions from thence from time to time. AND forasmuch as
in these times of open Rebellion, when the Rebels appear in all parts of this
Our Kingdom in open Arms, with Banners displayed against Us and Our Royal
Authority, We are necessitated to take some extraordinary way whereby to free
Our said City and good Subjects therein from the fears and dangers threatened
against Us and them, and against the peace and safety of this Our Kingdom, by
that unlimitted concourse of people flocking so dangerously to Our said City
and Suburbs, and for reformation of sundry other abuses and disorders in Our
said City of Dublin and the Suburbs thereof.

KNOW ye therefore that We reposing special trust and confidence in your
fidelity and circumspection, have nomin^ted, constituted and appointed, and by
these presents do nominate, constitute and appoint you to be Our
Commissioners. And do hereby give unto you or any two or more of you full power
and authority from time to time, and as often as you or any two or more of you
shall think fit to repair to all and every part of the said City and Suburbs,
and there as well by Examination of Witnesses upon Oath, which oath and oaths We
hereby authorize you or any two or more of you to administer, when, and as
often as you or any two or more of you shall from time to time think fit, as by
all other lawful ways and means whatsoever to examine, search far, inquire
and find out what Arms or Munion are or shall be remaining in any house, houses,
or other place or places in the said City or Suburbs belonging to any Papists,
or in the house or houses of Protestants, whose wives and children are Papists.
And the same so found out, to inquire how when and where (...) they came by
them, and all other matters touching and concerning the same, which you or any
two or more of you shall think fit.

And it is Our pleasure, and We do accordingly require and authorize you or
any two or more of you to seize upon, and take into your hands, or the hands of
any two or more of you all the said Arms and Munition, as also all the Arms of
what kind soever which you or any two or more of you shall find any Papist
carrying about him either in his house or dwelling, or abroad in the streets,
whether he or they be commorant in Town, or Traveller to or from the said City
or Suburbs. Giving the party from whom the same shall be so taken, a note in
writing under the hands of you or any two or more of you mentioning the
particulars and quantity of Arms or Munition or both so to be taken from him,
her, or them to Our use, and that thereupon you or any two or more of you cause
the same to be delivered forthwith after you shall so seize the same into Our
store of Arms and Munition at our castle of Dublin, taking the clark of the
store's hand for receipt thereof, which shall be a good discharge for you
against your said note or notes formerly given.

And We also require and authorize you or any two or more of you as well by
examination of witnesses upon Oath, as by all other lawful ways and means
whatsoever to examine, search, inquire, and find out what titulary popish
Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars-generall, Jesuits, Priests, or Friars, or other
superstitious Orders of the popish pretended Clergy are or shall be in and
about the said City or Suburbs. And them to apprehend and commit to prison
there to remain until further direction from Us, or Our said Justices, or
other Our chief Governor* or Governors and Council of this Our Kingdom.

And in like manner to examine, search, inquire and find out, what men and
women that are Papists, and what Papists children of what quality or degree
soever he or they be, have come to the said City or Suburbs to reside,
sojourne, or any way to continue therein since Easter last? Where they now
lodge, and since their coming to Town have lodged either in the houses of
Papists or Protestants? What their names and sirnames are, and of what sept or
kindred they be? Whence they came? What occasions called them thither? What now
deteynes them there? And all other matters concerning their being there, Which
you or any two or more of you shall think fit. And then that you or any two or
more of you do command so many of them as you or any two or more of you shall
think fit to depart from the said City and Suburbs within so many hours, as to
you or any two or more of you shall be thought fit, and not to return back to
the said City or Suhurbs without special license from Us, or Our Justices, or
other chief Governor or Governors of this our Kingdom for the time being;
And to enjoyne all those in whose house or houses either Papists or Protestants
such person or persons so to be commanded away do, or shall lodge, so journe
or live, that they or any of them presume not thereafter to entertain them, or
any of them into his or their house or houses, as they will answer their so
doing at their extreme peril.

And We do also require you or any two or more of you to cause two Books to be
made up, and in one of them to cause to be inserted in writing, the names,
strnames, and qualities of all men and women ordinarily Town-dwellers in Our
said City or Suburbs as well Masters of Families as Servants that are Papists.
And in the other Book to cause to be inserted the names, sirnames, and
qualities of all men and women whom you shall so command to depart from this
City and Suburbs. And in another part of that Book to insert the names,
sirnames and qualities of all such men and women that are Papists whom you
admit to stay, and expressing at their nams for what time their stay is
admitted; that so you may upon a new search (wherein We require you to be
diligent and frequent) find out whether or no they have exceeded the time
limited for their stay.

We do also require and authorize you or any two or more of you to charge and
command all person or persons whatsoever in the said City and Subburbs in whose
houses any such person or persons formerly lodged, soiourned or lived, and to
publish and declare to all others whom it may concern that in case any of the
said persons so to be commanded away shall return again at any time to the said
City or Suburbs, or any other men or women whatsoever that are Papists, and not
resident continually in the said City and Suburbs, without any late
intermission since the first of October last shall hereafter come to the said
City or Suburbs; that then the person or persons to whose house or houses, he,
she, or they so returning, shall return or come, do from time to time, and as
often as any such shall happen within two hours after the receipt or
entertainment into his, her, or their house or houses of any such person or
persons return under his, her, or their hands unto two or more of you the
names, sirnames, qualities and conditions of all and every such person and
persons so received, lodged, or entertained.

We likewise require and authorize you or any two or more of you in like manner
to examine what Victuals, Clothes, Arms, Munition, or other provisions
whatsoever have been carried; or shall be carried out of the said City or
Suburbs for the relief of the Rebels, and by whom, and who were furtherers and
privy thereunto, and what Townsmen, or their Servants that are Papists, have
been since Easter last, admitted into any Horse Troop or Foot company or Ward
in Our pay? And by whom? And in whose Troop, Company, or Ward so admitted? And
what Arms of any kind have, are, or shall be sold by any Soldier Horseman or
Footman to any Towns-man, or other Inhabitant in the said City and Suburbs?
And where the said Arms now are? And what Masters or Mistresses of Families or
Servants that are Papists that formerly resided in the said City and Suburbs,
have between the three and twentieth of October and the first of April last
withdrawn themselves into the Country, and having continued there a while,
returned again to live in the said City and Suburbs? And if upon examination
you or any two or more of you shall find them, or any of them, to have been
with the Rebels, to cause all such to be apprehended and committed to prison,
and to certify their names under the hands of you or any two or more of you to
our Justices, or other Our chief Governor or Governors, and Council of this
Our Kingdom. And what else shall appear unto you concerning them.

AND We also require and authorize you or any twelve or more of you, to view
all thatched Houses and Cabins in and about the said City and Suburbs, and to
give six days warning to the possessors of such of the said thatched houses
and Cabines, as you or any twelve or more of you shall find to be dangerous to
the safety of the said City and suburbs, and therefore ought necessarily to be
removed or pulled down, to remove or pull them down; wherein if they fail,
then and in such case you or any twelve or more of you are to cause such of the
thatched houses and Cabines to be removed and pulled down, as you or twelve or
more of you shall find not to have been pulled down by the possessors within
the said six days according to the said warning given.

AND in case you or any two or more of you shall find any person or persons
disobedient to your commands in and concerning the Execution of the premises,
or any part thereof. We do in such case authorize you or any two or more of you
to commit to prison such person or persons, when, and as often as there shall
be just cause, and afterward to release such person or persons, when you or
any two or more of you shrll think fit. And for the better and more full and
due performance of these services, It is Our pleasure, and we do hereby
authorize you or any two or more of you as aforesaid to administer from time to
time an Oath or Oaths to any person or persons, witnesses touching or
concerning all or any the points, Clauses, Articles, Authorities or Commands in
these presents above mentioned. And that you Our Commissioners do divide your
selves in and throughout the said City and suburbs into several limits,
streets and parishes; and so to proceed in the execution of the premises either
altogether or severally as you shall find cause. And that you be frequent at
least weekly, or oftener if you find cause in the searches, examinations, and
other services by these presents committed to your trust.

AND we require all Majors, Sherriffs, Justices of the peace, and all other our
Officers, Ministers, and loving subjects whom it may concern, and particularly
all Colonells, Commanders, officers and soldiers of our Army to be unto you or
any two or more of you always aiding, helping and assisting in the due
execution of the premises from time to time, as there may be occasion. And we
require you from time to time to give an account of your proceedings to our
Justices, or other Our chief Governor or Governors of this Our Kingdom for
the time being. And this Our Commission is to continue in force during Our
pleasure. Witnesses Our right trusty and welbeloved Counselors, Sir William
Parsons Knight and Baronet, and Sir John Borelase Knight, Our Justices of Our
said Realm of Ireland.

At Dubin the ninth day of September in the eighteenth year of Our Reign.
Carleton and Exham,

FINIS.

