The Copy of a LETTER sent to Dr. Sherlock, upon the occasion of his Preaching
at St. Margaret's on Jan. 30th. 1691.
SIR,
SInce the Wisdom of those Beneficent Patriots (who have so illustriously
preserved the Liberties and Privileges, and advanced the Trade, and Riches off
the People, whom they represent) has chosen you to be their Orator upon the
approaching (...) 30th. of Jan. suffer me a Stranger to advise you to demean
your self, as it becomes you, on that Day of pretended Fasting and Humiliation.

It is not enough that you deal tenderly with the memory of that great Saint
and Hero his Royal Highness Oliver Cromwell (who by your own principles was the
Lord's Anointed, and set over these Nations by a Designation from above, by a
continued series of mighty victories, which according to your arguing as truly
discovered him to be the Vicegerent of Heaven, as Prophecy did the Kings of
Israel) but you are obliged to speak honorably of that eminent Benefactor to
this People, who set a Pattern to future Ages how to treat Tyrannical Kings.
Make a Panegyric in his praise, and raise your Voice to a due pitch, that the
Audience may admire an Eloquence adequate to the grandeur of the Subject; and
that you may be in all things just to your Principles, treat that Man, whom the
last Age fondly made a Martyr, and foam few in this think so as he deserved;
the Man, whom the People accused of endeavoring to introduce Popery and
arbitrary Power; and who by following as undue courses, as his Son, brought
himself to the Block; treat him magisterially, and with that assuming, that is
inseparable from men of your profound parts; treat him, as you have done the
little Writers amongst the Jacobites (whom instead of answering you contemn) or
as your dear spouse treats you, when you fail of dutiful compliance; exalt your
well furnished Forehead, lift up your Voice like a Trumpet, that Voice that
has been all along spared for this infamous occasion; call upon the Nation to
rejoice at the downfall of its Enemies, and exhort them to maintain their
Rights against the encroachments of insolent Princes, who suck the blood, and
prey upon the marrow of those, whom they should gently govern, settle the Power
of the People over Kings, and prove God an accessory to all their prosperous
Rebellions and Perjuries. You know the vindication of these Opinions was the
purchase of your Deanery, and men use to maintain what they have gotten, by
such methods as they got it by; I cannot call it Simony, that old Magician was
a fairer Merchant, he would have purchased the Gifts and Powers of the Holy
Spirit (things of great excellency and use, while you leave the sacred
assistances of the Church to such silly Chapmen, and pursue the nobler quarry
of its more sacred honors and revenues.

Advice those grave Senators to make solemn sanctions against all your former
old obstinate Friends, counsel them to establish a Tax upon every man's head,
like the Haracht Musslemen upon the poor Greeks; commend the example of those
sage Ottomans to the imitation of our no less wise and merciful Commons; who,
even when they acknowledge the Bible to be the word of God, make it meritorious
to murder all those, who profess to live according to its Rules.

And whenever a Convocation shall be called, in which your new Station gives
you a place of course (...) take care, as to retract your Antisocinian Writings
(to put your self in the good graces of your new Primate) so to condemn all
your quondam Monarchical tenants, and make a public sacrifice of your Case of
Resistance to the injured Ghost of the Invincible Protector; and before you do
either of these, consult your Pillow, and your comfortable importance (whom you
by fits love and dread, as the Indians do the Devil) make her, as you are wont,
your Oracle; and believe me to be

January the 28. 1691. Your Faithful true Friend and Servant.


