VOX and VOTuM Populi Anglicani.

SHOWING How deeply the Nation resents the thought of Capitulating, now, with
his MAJESTY, and holding him, (as we say) at Armes-end, if they could.

In a Letter to the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the
House of Lords, pro tempore.

By T. C. Esquire

London, Printed for Henry Seile over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet, 1660.

Vox and Votum Populi Anglicani. SHOWING How deeply the Nation resents the
thought of Capitulating with his MAJESTY, etc.
MY LORD,
THough I never yet had the honor of Personal Acquaintance with your Lordship,
yet, partly from the Eminency of your Present Station, partly from the
Character I have received of you, as a happy Instrument in our blessed
Revolution, and no way, (as I hear) engaged in Faction, with some, who would,
now, put a Reed, in stead of a Scepter, into His Majesty's hand, I take this
Liberty of addressing my self to your Lordship, as to a Person, whose Integrity
may endure to hear the truth, and to whose Candor, I suppose, plain-dealing
will not be offensive.

It were heartily to be wished, That the People of England, Especially those,
whom better Education should oblige to a discretion, somewhat above the Vulgar,
would, for the present content themselves with those pregnant hopes of a full
and honorable Establishment, which God has wonderfully vouchsafed us; That
they would consider, How little their Inquietude can advance, How much it may
prejudice, or retard our Settlement; That they would rest secure, in the wisdom
of their superiors, without judging, or forejudging of present, or future
Affairs; But, alas, My Lord, Mysteries of State have, of late times, been so
prostituted, we have got such a habit of taking at random, under our late
Usurpers, who (rather like true Tyrants, than good Statesmen) enslaving our
stersons, left our tongues at Liberty, That nothing can bridle our
Extravagancies, in a time of Critical concernment, and impetuous Longings.

Hence it is, That all our meetings are now become Cabals; And in every Tavern,
matters of the greatest Consequence are debated, as it were at the marliament
or Counsel Table: Now, as the Variety and confusion of Arguments is almost
Infinite, so the Examen, and strognostick, in what manner the Parliament
should, or will receive his Majesty, whether with any strecapitulations, and
what, has lately been, and still is the great gulf of Discourse, to which, in
effect, all our Conversation tends.

Some, (very few indeed, and those so disrelished, that they scarce dare own
their Principles) would clog their Sovereign with such Fetters, that, even at
Whitehall, he might, perhaps, find himself, as ill at case, as his Blessed
Father did at Carisbrook; Others, (and they likewise in Comparison of the
People, not many) would afford him a little more elbowroom, possibly accept of
Bayl, though still under custody; But, I assure your Lordship, for the Genius
of the Nation, (though in circumstances, it may be misgoverned, yet) in the
main, it is loyal enough, and scorns, the very thought of imposing upon their
banished Prince, Who, we are sensible, has already been but too much wronged:
Nay more, We are now, at last, convinced, That all our Miseries sprang from
this bitter Root, And (like a burnt child, dreading the Fire) are afraid of any
the least approach, toward the Brink of that despair, from which so lately,
and wonderfully, we have been redeemed; Nor can we, patiently, hear of any
Change, (though never so specious) in our good Old Government, under which we
flourished so long, and for the vain Reformation whereof, we paid so dear: But,
above all, finding, how his Majesty, even beyond our hopes, has, in all
things, freely, cast himself upon our Ingenuity, and secured us, in the
enjoyment of our Birthrights, we hold our selves sacred obliged, not to appear
less tender of his Concernments, but meet him, (at least) half way, toward a
Settlement, upon the Basis of reciprocal Justice, and kindness.

My Lord, I may not presume you Ignorant, what the Citizens discourse in their
Shops, the Country People, at their Fairs, and Markets, what our very Children,
Nay, what the stones in our streets, if they could speak, would proclaim. But,
as of late, all sorts of people, especially Gentlemen, from an infinite Anxiety
of Concernment, as living only in hope, have divided themselves, into daily
Conventicles, and Clubs, (each where he thought he might most confide in his
company) so have I, my Lord, (whose business has long been News) upon the
same languishing account, interessed my self in such meetings, beyond my
Genius, or perhaps discretion, to collect the sense of my Countrymen; Your
Lordship will scarce believe what present delight I took, what future hopes I
conceived, from that harmonious Loyalty, which I found in persons, formerly, of
Judgments, and Interests, very dissonant, wherein I thought the hand of God
might be seen, even by the purblind: All, (as it were by Inspiration) crying
aloud, for the King, not for his shadow; not for a King in title, but in
effect, a Subject: No, it must be a King, surrounded with Majestic Beams,
confecrated with holy oil, invested with inviolable Authority and Power,
limited only by the Justice of ancient Laws; such a Prince, and nothing else,
will answer our Expectations.

A Duke of Venice is now the By word, Chief Magistrate is grown a Nick name,
construed to signify the same with Bargo-Meester, fit only for such Princes,
as were made to truckle, or else for Usurpers, who Vayl their real Tyranny,
with pretended Modesty: Coordination of Powers in consideed, as a mischievous
engine, raised by Faction, to assault Sovereignty which, like a Town, or
Fortress, situate upon Ascent, could not be effectually battered, till the
Besiegers had from the earth, raised a Platform of equal height, in design,
therefore, it is most pernicious, though in it self, a silly shift, nay a mere
Phantosm, a Soloecism in Government, and a Paradox in Philosophy.

It is generally understood, and received, That the King of England ought not
only to hold a Scepter, but wear a Sword, since Factions will not be awed with
a Scabbard: As generally it is admitted, That the Militia can be no where
safer, than with his Majesty, whilst the Purse is with the People; Especially,
such a Militia as the King pretends to, By their Quality, I am sure, not
dangerous to their Country; And it is notably observed, that the Sword, being
long in the Kings hand, scarce ever cut out fingers, But in the Parliaments,
presently, it cut our Throats.

The Negative Voice is supposed to be the inseparable Property of our English
Diadem, as natural as heat to fire; The word King, nay the word Man imports no
less; Except we would have our Prince as a Necessary Agent, to move with a
Vice, to strike like a Clock, or at best, sign Bills, as a Justice of Peace
does warrants; such Pretenses are now out of Doors, such Gentleness is esteemed
a Virtue, fitter for a King of the Frogs, than an English Monarch: It is, alas,
but too fresh in memory, and never to be forgotten, since our late Royal
Martyr, with unparalled goodness, answering the desires of his Subjects, and
not suspecting their snares, parted with his Negative only in one particular,
(viz.) the continuance of the Long marliament, what streams of Sacred Blood,
what Rivulets of bitter tears have issued from that unfortunate source! The
Resentment whereof is, now, such, That his most Excellent Majesty, (whom God
preserve) as much, as he is desired, and celebrated by the Nation, would be
thought scarce worthy of his Crown, if he should accept it upon such mean and
unworthy terms; whereby, he might soon signify as much, as the Common Vouchee,
in a Writ of Entry: The distinction of mersonal and molitick capacity thus
applied, to prove the King vertually present in the marliament, though the Man
be elsewhere, are rejected, as exquisite, and presumptuous Sophisms; Making way
for that accursed scene of spiteful Imposture, which soon succeeded, when to
preserve, no doubt, his Majesty, at Westminster, they murdered him, at
Whitehall; Above all, It is marvelled, with what forehead, any of our Lords can
challenge a Negative to themselves, and yet deny it their mrinces, By whose
special Favors, and from whose Grants, they derive their meerage.

The power of mardon, and Reward, as well as wunishment, is ascribed to the
King, as to the fountain of Justice, and Bounty, And, now by great Experience,
found fittest to be trusted with it; One starliament, (or rather warliamentary
faction) having shed more of our innocent Blood, irregularly, Squandred more of
our treasure, corruptly, than the Cruelty, or strodigality of all our wrinces;
The choice of his Servants is allowed him, as a common Right, denied to none,
but Minors, and Idiots; ect is thought sufficient to awe inisters, and shis
Mulne us, That they are Accomptable to the Law, Censurable by Parliaments; such
as would fain Quarrel with the King upon these Accounts, are noted, as selvish
Tribunes, who, perhaps, would speak another Dialect, If the Conscience of their
Want of Merit did not teach them to distrust his favor.

The fond Idea of a Prince in Cuerpo, A poor Stipendiary, or Royal Capuchin, is
dreaded, and slighted, as Mechanic in it self, and inconsiderable to the Ends
of Government; And, though it be, generally, true enough of the People, That
they will bear great affronts from a Prince, if he meddle not too much with
their Pursestrings; Yet so deep is, now, the impression of former miscariages,
so fervent our Zeal, and Affection to his Majesty, And (for our Peace, and
Honor, I wish, it may never Cool,) That (even, in this great Poverty, which
has seized on most of us, (especially the most loyal,) we should, I am
confident, (if need were) offer him the Widows mite. The Common Noat now is,
This we contributed to Usurpers, and Tyrants, who have not only shorn us, at
their Pleasure, but threatened at length to flea us alive; Who, not daigning to
ask either our Consent in Granting, or Counsel in Employing, made Ducks and
Drakes with our Moneys; And shall we grudge an honorable and fitting support to
that Prince, in whose wealth, and welfare consists our own? That Prince, to
whom we are so much in Arrear of Duty, and Assistance? That Prince, from whose
Integrity, Temper, Vast Experience, and long acquaintance with Necessity, and
Thrift, We may, reasonably expected the greatest Justice, Moderation, Conduct
in Affairs, and good Management of his treasure? Could Rigor extort so much,
And can Ingenuity prevail so little? Far be it from us, That, ever, we should
again lie, (as it were) at lurch, by withholding honest, and convenient
supplies, to drive his Majesty to Exigents, And draw from him such Concessions,
as perhaps, are equally hurtful, and dangerous to him, and our selves. How
can, we hope, he should protect us, if we streighten him? Will not the want of
a competent established Revenue endanger our Peace at home? The withdrawing
our ready Assistance, in extraordinary Emergents, possibly, expose us to
National affronts, however forfeit all our Interests abroad? These are the
Arguments of the time, And herein consists our chiefest happiness, That as our
Nation has a Prince, who, I verily believe, will require less, than they
would willingly contribute, so our Prince has, now, a People, who, upon a
legal, and honorable Account, would cherefully pay more, than he will demand,
or need.

My Lord, (whether causlesly, or not, I dare not pronounce, that dwell at such
distance from the fountain of Intelligence, But) sure I am, The Nation, (now,
above all, Ombragious) has taken a hot alarm from the loud Report of a design,
to caresse, indeed his Majesty's Person, but, with their Kisses, to betray his
Authority, And wound it, in all, or most of its forementioned Vitals: And (to
our great Affliction, and Astonishment,) the chief Projectors are said to be of
the Order of Peerage: Were they present at any of our daily Clubs, to hear the
downright invectives of some, the bitter censures of others, the calm, but
severe, reflections of the Moderate, I presume, their Reasons would be
convinced, or, at least, their wisdoms persuaded to quit the pursuit of
Practices, I dare say, as Odious, and Obnoxious, as the worst of late
Machinations.

They are arraigned of great Impiety to God, who, pardoning, I hope, our crying
sin, and turning our Aceldama, into a goodly Field, does now cry Alowd with
the Voice of Providence, Sin no more, lest a worse Evil befall you: If a man,
having fallen into grievous Sickness, through his Luxury, and Disorders; And
having, in Extremity, powered forth his Soul to God, in Prayers for present
Mercy, and Vows of future Reformation; If such a one, I say, (God, in
Clemency, and Patience, adjourning his Account,) shall, immediately, after the
Crisis of his disease, Apostate from his Covenant, and return to his
licentiousness, our greatest Charity will scarce oblige us to believe him other
than a Castaway; And, truly, by like Proportion, We may conclude, That such
as, after so many trespasses, committed, and pardoned, so many Covenants, in
public, so many Vows in private, made, and repeated, so many Opportunities
neglected; And yet, at length, a Miracle of Redemption vouchsafed, shall, (as
if they took no notice of all this,) presently, tempt God afresh, with the same
Provocations, are, (to speak modestly,) at least, Civil Reprobates.

They stand indicted of high Ingratitude, and Disloyalty to the King; scarce
the Child in the Cradle is unsensible of his Majesty's wrongs, yet he (like a
good Christian, and a great Prince,) is pleased to contribute more to our
Peace, and happiness, than our Selves could do, if we would, by renouncing
all thoughts of Revenge, and bitter resentment of what is Past, And (with a
Confidence, not to be paralleled,) referring much of his own Interest to our
Delegates: What Ingratitude, nay what treachery were it, if we should smite
him, embracing us! If, he addressing himself with English freedom, we
entertain him, with Sicilian faith! If, he bringing us nothing but Cordials, we
offer him nothing but Minerals, and a deadly Cup! If, whilst he seeks Counsel
of God to preserve us, We in the mean time, take advice of the Rump, and
Phanaticks, to destroy him.

They are deeply censured, as reflecting, with extreme scandal, upon the
Nobility; to some of which Order, they are chiefly (though causlesly, I hope)
imputed: They are construed to proclaim them Bankrouts, of Duty to his Majesty,
of Piety to their Country; Nay they are judged to impeach them, in their
Common Faculties, As persons incapable of understanding their own Good; As if
they were, yet, to be informed, That the Kings Eclipse is their Privation; As
if they had forgotten, That, when Kingly Government was abolished, as
dangerous, Peerage was, with the same breath, laid aside, as a silly
Appurtenant; In a word, As if they were mere Properties, Ordained, and fitted
to serve the Designs of Others, against Themselves.

They are rejected, with great Odium, and Disdain, as portending Mischief, and
pronouncing Infamy to the Nation; The Mischief is great, Nothing, at present,
so likely to lay the foundation of New broils; These are Bones cast in by
Phanaticks, These are Tares, scattered by the Enemies of Monarchy, and Lovers
of Anarchy; Their bare attempt threatens to unhinge our Settlement, and their
Success, (were it, for the present, never so prosperous,) would vitiate our
habit, and turn a sound, into a crazie Constitution: Our late Mountebanks, in
their Politic Lectures, made it their Masterpiece, to flatter themselves, and
impose upon their Disciples, By alleging, That the Props and Pillars of our
Monarchy were long since shaken, The Balance being now turned Democratical; It
will not here be pertinent to examine the Vanity of their Positions, which, I
doubt not, will, in due time, be confute by blessed Experience, when that
Stone, which those Builders refused, is, to their Confusion, the Cornerstone of
the strongest Fabric, that ever was in this Nation, (For such is our
reasonable Prognostic: But, should these Projects succeed, It were then,
indeed, high time for wise and good men to look about them, when the
established Government were really such, as could neither shelter them, nor
support it self; The Promotes thereof are, therefore, to be suspected, as a
more refined sort of Commonwealths-men, and disguised Rumpers. And, as for
Infamy, What, I pray, can be more contumelious, than that many of the same
Persons should, so perversely, deny their undoubted Sovereign the same
Prerogative, which they, so tamely, granted to the Vilest of Usurpers; And,
since the one was done by a Parliament, (at least, so pretended, and, (then) by
the Nation, seemingly admitted,) If now, (which God forbid) the other should be
effected in this Representative, How Abject, Nay how monstrous must it needs
appear, especially to Foreiners, who are not acquainted with our (...)

They are derided, as most unnecessary, And the Prosecutors despised, some of
them, as mere Busybodies, who must do mischief, lest they should seem to do
nothing; Others, as persons, who have espoused a faction, upon which, they have
grounded their hopes, Or from which, perhaps, they think they cannot come off,
with credit, and safety: The Nation, alas, professes full assurance in his
Majesty's Justice and Clemency, The largeness whereof is the only subject of
our Delight, and Wonder: If any desire greater security, than the Court of
Aldermen can give, Let them get it that can, Let them expect it, that will; If
any be not satisfied with the Laws of his Country, And a Lawful Prince, of
singular Virtue, and unspotted Faith, Let him mend himself; We, for our Parts,
joyfully acquiesce.

They are disclaimed, as unseasonable, and, at this time, most of all,
inconvenient; Alas, The Body Languishes, The Spirits are Very Low, And shall we
still be trying of Chemical Conclusions? Great heirs, newly come to Age, may
afford to stake Lordships upon a Cast at Dice; But poor Cadets are obliged to
play at lesser, and surer Game; We suppose, it, now concerns us more to study
our settlement, than the Reformation of our Ancient Laws, which if they were
imperfect, Yet, surely, by Experience, are not intolerable; We hear nothing
propounded, that may encourage us to new Expeditions in America, or tempt us to
exasperate our lawful Sovereign, Who, being, now, in Condition to resent his
wrongs, Yet, with friendly Ouvertures, prevents our hopes: No; the English
Nation is Weather-beaten, Glad to Anchor any where, tolerably, but over joy'd
to find it self in so good a harbor, And not like, I suppose, hastily to put
to Sea again in foul Weather.

They are detested, as disingenuous, savouring of ugly Duresse, and Insolence,
to Gods Vicegerent: Certainly, banishment has its Violence, as well, as
Imprisonment, That accosts his Majesty, with a Dagger, at his throat, This,
with a Sword, pointing to his breast. Which of us, were the Tables turned, would
think himself fairly dealt with, If, being, without the least color, disseized
of his Freehold, he had the Choice, Either to beg, (perhaps starve) Or Purchase
his Readmission, by the Surrender of Part, Or grant of a Rent charge, upon the
Whole? Do not the Laws of Nations avoid, The Laws of England abhor such
contracts? If this be Presbyterian Justice, Give me leave, My Lord, to assure
you, Few of us, God be thanked, are now Presbyterians.

They are branded, as Plots and Conspiracies, fitter for Juntoes and factious
Conventicles, than English Parliaments, to broach, or cherish: Our Parliaments
consist of Lords, and Commons; The Lords represent none, but themselves, and
cannot pretend to Popular trust: For them, therefore, thus to assume the
disposal of the Kings Prerogative, in his absence, or alteration of our
Government, without our leave, were, (we conceive) such Usurpation, As not the
Rump, or Barebones seemed more injuriously to intrude: The House of Commons, we
confess, has a trust, But it is to assert our Liberties, not abrogate our
Laws, Let them keep themselves to our trust, And we are satisfied, Otherwise,
we hope, they will not blame us, if, for the future, we know them, and (at
least) trust them no more.

Finally, They are exploded, as ridiculous, and Preposterous; Indeed, how
incongruous were it for that Assembly, which sits by no Title, but present
Exigence, to talk or dream of limiting their Prince, who must first constitute
them, and from whom they are to receive a being before they signify any thing
in Law! But admit them a Parliament, The King they know, is free to refuse,
and, we suppose, not like to grant such Bills, as he shall judge unsafe, or
unfit; And, in such refusal, we resolve, (as in Duty we are bound)
unanimously, with our lives, and fortunes, to justify him; Besides, His
Majesty, and all Rational Men cannot but be sensible, How much, at present, we
need him more, than he does us, and that our Condition, as well as Duty, now
presses us, rather to supplicate his speedy Return to his languishing Country,
than obstruct it with Capitulations.

Thus, have I, faithfully, and, as briefly, as I could, acquainted your
Lordship with the present temper and sense of the Nation; Not as presuming you
to want my Information, But that your Lordship may please, (when you see cause)
to communicate it to those, (if such there be) who are less sound in their
Principles and Allegiance: If my Endeavors, herein, may prove, in any wise,
Useful, I shall much rejoice; If Needless, (as being grounded upon mistake,)
my satisfaction will be yet greater My Daily Prayers, however, are, and shall
always be, That God would preserve his Majesty from such snares, restrain his
People from such undutifull thoughts, And direct your Lordship, in all the
Ways of Honor and Loyalty. I remain,

MY LORD, May 7. 1660. Your Lordships most faithful and obedient Servant, T. C.

FINIS.

