A Copy of a Letter Sent from a Gentleman in his Majesty's Army, to an
especial friend in London: Containing a true Relation of his Majesty's Army
since their removal from Oxford, to the 16. of this present November. 1642.

Published for the benefit of all those who desire to be truly informed.

Printed Anno Dom. 1642.

SIR,
I Shall tell you nothing of the Kings passage from Oxford to Abbington, Henly,
Redding and Maydenhead who expiated by furnishing the Army with necessaries,
besides Arms, which the fled Garrisons left behind them when his Majesty
came to Egham and Stanes, he summoned Windsor-Castle (kept against him by 1200
men under the command of captain Venne Citizene) but was denied entrance; His
Majesty thought it not worth the stay, or the loss of any man. From thence
marched to Colebrook where the Earls of Northumberland and Pembrook (for the
house of Peers) the Lord Wenman, Mr Pierpoynt, Sir John Epsley (for the house
of Commons) brought a Petition from the Parliament after long dispute presented
by them to his Majesty; the substance was to beseech his Majesty to concur
with His loving subjects to prevent the further effusion of blood, and to that
end to appoint a place for Commissioners on both sides to meet and treat of
Peace. To this the King answered, he knew no beter place then Windsor-castle.
After this Committee had been exceedingly well received both by the King and
the rest of the Court, they were dismissed and set forwards toward London. On
Saturday about eight of the clock in the morning, the King gave sudden charges
for the Army to march toward Brandford, and on Hountslow heath set the Army in
battalia, while the Lord General Ruthen led some of the Regiments of foot
toward the town, where the Regiments of my Lord Brooks, and Mr Hollys and some
other select companies, in all 2000 kept the works: These gave fire as soon as
the Kings forces were upon them, and were boldly answered by the Regiment of Mr
Bellows, some of whose men were slain out of the windows; but twenty of his
men got into the house, slew ten in the chambers, and at their descent took 80
prisonners in a yard, ready to issue out. When they had bound these and put a
guard upon them, they advanced so stoutly that they possessed themselves of the
first work, which was a battery of two Canons, and a Brest-work in the middle
of New-Braintford.

By this time the Regiment of Sir William Pennyman came up to the assistance of
M. Bellows, and here the dispute grew very hot from another work like the
former betwixt the two Brainfords (where the watermen used to ply,) at last it
was likewise won: the last work was about 20 score on this side the old
Brainford. Colonel Hapden was not far distant from it with a reserve, but
came not into their relief, and here many fell; at least 50 drowned; and the
rest ran away, leaving that work as the two former. By this time it grew so
exceeding dark that it was not wisdom, though I think safe, to have followed
the execution any further. The King lay at Hounslow, the body of the army and
all the baggage at Brainford. Upon strict and just examination the benefit of
this action was this, 6 pieces of Canon, 7 Colors, 443 prisoners, among whom
are Doctor Clayton minister of Putney, and Preacher to a Regiment. Lilburn,
once a Printer stigmatized with M. Prin, and now Captain, and one Ashfield
Captain, Lieutenant to the Lord Brook, besides many other inferior officers.

Their dead, I mean by the sword, are not above 200. Among them is Quarles,
Lieutenant Colonel to M. Hollis (whose Regiment is by this service utterly
defeated.) Of the Kings side there were slain near 30, none of note, but M.
Creswell, a Captain of foot, and a Lieutenant: M. La-Roch a great Engineer is
wounded in the belly, but without danger. The next day, being Sunday, the King
commanded service and sermon before the break of day, and about 8 of the clock,
went to Brainford, where he had scarce been half an hour, but a most violent
(because unexpected) Alarm was given, which was immediately discovered by the
garrison in Kingston to be 1200 men, Mariners that came in 12 great Lighters
with their Cannon, and designed to land at Sion-house to make that good, but
were prevented by the excellent industry of a Gentleman, no officer, who
rallyed 150 men and made good the House and garden just as they drew to shore:
from whom they were so galled that they lanched out again and moved down the
river, giving so much fire both with great and small shot, which was answered
again from the shore, that for the time, the greatest battle made not more
noise.

Diverse shot came through the House and fell nigh the Kings person at
Old-Brainford. Two Drakes were prepared ready to entertain them and not in
vain, for at the first shot a Barge was broken at one side; at the second six
men were slain; the third fell into the Boat, where half their Ammunition lay,
being 22 barrels of Powder, which immediately took fire and made the morning in
one part as dark as the preceding night: and yet by the rest, that appeared of
day, legs and arms were plentifully seen fly in the air. Amazed with this they
ran their Boats upon the shore of the other side and quitted them. The Kings
soldiers soon possessed themselves of the spoil, which was 11 piece of Canon,
22 barrels of Powder, much meal, bread, cheese, etc. For want of carriage, 12
barrels of Powder, by order were broken and thrown into the water, and eight
Canon nailed and sunk. In this action the King lost not one man and but one
hurt on the thumb. About one of the clock the Earl of Essex (with the help of
many City Regiments) stood in battalia near the Camp. But among so many trees,
ditches and hedges, that the Kings Horse could never come to Chardge. Wherefore
two Troops stood within less then twice Musket Shot of them; received 30
Canon-shot with the loss but of 5 horses and never a man. In the mean time,
the Army retreated part with the King to Hampton Court, and the other to
Kingstone. By this, if the Parliament forces had a mind to fight,
Hounslow-heath was an open Campagnea; besides Kinston was better Quarter, by
the benefit of the River, and the other Countries adjacent.

The Parliament was highly offended with what the King had done upon Saturday.
Imprisoned a messenger the King sent upon Sunday with a gracious message; but
released him the next day. They say the King fights while he treats of Peace.
To this it is answered that the Parliament forces advanced the same day toward
the King, before he marched. That they shot first. That the same day speeches
were made in Guildhall, that for all the Treaty, they did not intend Peace.
Lastly, that the King did not give, nor they ask a cessation of arms.

The King on Monday marched himself to Oatlands, the Army still lying at
Kingston.

The Lord Digby with his Regiment of horse and 2 Troops of Dragoneers lays at
Egham to hinder the incursions of Windsor-Castle, from whence on the same
Saturday (which is another reason) they issued and took two of the Kings
wagons of provision, slaying the carters. You may confidently believe this
narration; for you receive it not from my ear, but from my eye.


