RELIGION AND Reason UNITED.

By a Lover of his Country.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street,
and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-street, 1699.

PREFACE.
Sober Reader,
THE Design of the following Discourse, is, an Essay to allay, if possible, the
Heats and Animosities, with which one Party, or Religious Society, treats
another; that if they cannot Unite in Judgment, they might, for the Ease of the
Government, their own Interest, and Benefit of Posterity, Unite in Affection:
For as we have not all alike outsides neither in Shape or Complexion, no more
are our Intellectual Conceptions.

And as it would be Madness to Quarrel about the first, so it would be little
less to Persecute about the last.

It Is true, the Primitive Christians were of one Heart and Mind, but that which
made them so, was, the Sword of the Spirit, not of the Magistrate: And where
that Spirit rules, it will produce the like Effects; but without it, it is
vanity to think of bringing People into such a Unity; but much more vain to
think of Persecuting People into it: Since it is God that must Persuade Japhet
to dwell in the Tents of Shem; and till by him Men are so Persuaded, the
Magistrate loses his Labor to force into that Tent or Church, that at best is
but supposed to be the True One.

One thing I entreat my Reader (viz.) That he would endeavor Rather to
Re-examine his Conscience and Education, to know whether his Faith and
Practices are Reasonable, than value himself upon Church Membership.

Religion and Reason UNITED.
HAD Mankind no Innate Notions of a Deity, or of the Immortality of the Soul,
of a future State of Rewards and Punishments: It Is reasonable to suppose, that
the greatest part would avoid troubling either their Minds or Heads about what
is called Religion.

But this Language would be as universally heard and believed, as expressed
(viz.) Let us eat and drink, etc. for to morrow (there is an end of us) we must
die.

But since the contrary is most certain, and that all the Inventions of Men,
and Artifices of Satan, are not able to suppress, or totally silence, those
Dreadful Alarms we are made to hear in our own Consciences; it becomes our
Interest, as well as Duty, to apply our selves, with all fervency of Spirit, to
such a Course of Life as may first free us from that Perturbation of Mind,
which infallibly is (sooner or later) entailed on an Evil Conscience: And
secondly, obtain the assurance of a Lot in that future Peace, Kingdom and
Glory, that shall have no end.

Religion then is that Science, which perfectly to Understand and Practice, is
the only means for accomplishing the aforesaid end (viz.) quiet the Conscience
here, and assure the Soul of Blessedness hereafter.

True it is, the Word has often been abused, and the intent of it not seldom
mistaken; yea, to that degree, that what God designed in it (who is Just and
Reasonable in all his ways) for an universal Advantage to Mankind, has been
engrossed, and made the property of a Party, who have been so far from
Converting and Curing of Souls by it, that it has not failed of being the
greatest Stumbling to those that have taken reasonable ways to save their own.

And this has chiefly sprung from two Roots: The First is, the Immorality of
those pretended Doctors, whose pernicious Example have had this effect, either
to make the Observer conclude, there is no such thing as Religion in the World,
but that talking of it is only a Political Contrivance to subject the People,
that they may be the more unlike to give their Superiors trouble in Governing
them.

Or else that this Doctor is but a mere Quack, who prates about Religion no
otherwise in earnest than to get Money by it; which, what a vast Prejudice that
is to the Cause of Religion in general, is not hard to determine. For if he
that seems devoted to Religion, gives no better Proofs of the Power and Virtue
of it, than only to Talk of Curing others, whilst his own Distemper is so
notorious, no Marvel if others that are Afflicted despise both the Man and the
Means; the last as defective, as the first a mere fopp -- Thinking Men, who
have the use of their Senses, and believe the Service of God to be Reasonable,
as well as Religious, are of the Judgment, That it is impossible for the Design
of Religion to be answered, until by a Purge of the Law, these Blasphemers of
God and Religion, and Profaners of all that is Sacred, be totally ejected; and
a Bar set at the Church Doors, to prohibit every such Person from taking the
Name of the Holy God, or his Religion in their Mouths, under any such Character.

And that this seems to fall under the Magistrates Observation and Correction,
as well as Cure, is not hard to prove: For, if God will not hold him guiltless
that takes his Name in vain; ought not the Magistrate, who is God's Minister of
Justice, look to it, that none pass his Stamp of Approbation, that are so
absolutely Excepted against in the Declared Law of him, the Magistrate
Represents?

For if God says, I will not hold him Guiltless that takes my Name in vain:
And the Magistrate says otherwise; what account can he give of his Trust and
Stewardship? -- And if he that is an Immoral Ecclesiastic, don't take the Name
of God in vain, in the worst sense, pray what is the Sin and Guilt? Indeed
there is one case in which it is not in vain, and that is the same with the
common Beggars, (viz.) To get Money, whose Prayers and Blessings are the same
Minute turned into Curses, and their Light into Profound Darkness, if no Oil
appears to continue the Lamp.

But to proceed, if Men of Immoral Conversations shall be admitted (or connived
at) by the Magistrate, to be Pastors over the People, to feed them with Holy
Food, it is certain, that in a little time, Religion will be wholly lost, and
the People starved, instead of being fed; and destroyed, instead of being
saved; for how is it possible for him to feed a Flock that never had ought to
feed them withal? And that the Immoralist has nothing to feed them withal,
that is good, is evident; since himself to all goodness is a Reprobate.

Again, no Man can lead another farther than he goes himself; but how far the
Immoralist is gone in the Way of God, is not to be disputed. Again, the Blind
are fit to be leaders to none; and none but those that are so with a witness
can esteem them fit for it: But if such will follow them, our Savior tells us
where the end of their Journey will be. But who is a Blinder Creature than the
Immoralist? However none but the reverse to him can see God.

Therefore they that would go to God must have better Leaders, or else they can
never come to him.

The Second is Ambition, it is a Passion that, like Pharaoh's lean Kine,
devours all that comes in the way of it, and is nevertheless as hungry and
ill-favored at last as at first: That Kingdom or Commonwealth that is
infected with store of this sort of Cattle, shall never be at rest long, unless
they have the liberty to Gore those themselves have voted Heterodox, and to
furnish them with Tools to do it, Cum Privilegio. Nothing like Interweaving
themselves with the State: So that the Civil Magistrate shall be made believe,
it is his Duty and Interest always, either to confer more Honors and Profits on
them, or else to suppress their more virtuous Neighbors, under the Notion of
their being Heretics; which is not the least Prejudice to Religion in general,
as well as it is not seldom the like to the State; since the common People are
more inclinable to favor and unite with the Sufferer, than join with the
Persecutor, Suffering (generally speaking) rather making Proselytes, than
answering the end of the Persecutor; especially where the Sufferer has the
answer of a better Conscience than the Persecutor, which not seldom is the
privilege of Dissent. But if Virtuous Living under a Dissent from a National
Church Liturgy be interpreted Irreligious, and renders the Professors Obnoxions
to the Laws, whilst Immorality goes unpunished: How is it possible that the
Interest of Religion can be advanced, since the Sufferings that attend a
virtuous Man is greater than what falls upon the Irreligious and Profane? Which
shows, that whatever Pretenses are made for Religion, the Practice is
unreasonable; and therefore is no longer held for Truth than whilst the Rod
obliges the Fearful and Cowardly to say Amen, contrary to the Persuasion of
their own Minds.

But three things are the design of the Ambitious Clergymen (viz.) Wealth,
Honor and Power; all which renders Religion the more doubtful and
unreasonable: Since neither was the mark that the best Example that ever was in
the World aimed at, but his Doctrine and Practice the reverse to it all. And
that they can be his Followers and Disciples, and thus apparently contradict
both his Doctrine and Practice, is unreasonable to believe. And therefore that
Church that will indulge Ambition in her Clergy, is as remote from the Basis of
true Religion, as she that Connives at Immorality; and both, the reasonable
part of Mankind must conclude to be a great way off from Truth, and
consequently Irreligious and Unreasonable. Nor can it be thought reasonable,
that ever the Civil Magistrate should be able to allay those evil Spirits, that
such Ambitious Men are able to raise from the contrary Winds of Doctrine, that
will inevitably blow in a National Church, which will make more work for the
Magistrate to reconcile, than he is capable of performing, as many Instances
might be brought for Proof. Besides, till they all speak one and the same thing
at home, it is unreasonable to think, that Dissenters should return to that
Church which is not in Unity with it self.

But again, an Ambitious Clergy cannot bear contradiction: And therefore when
what they have stamped with the Seal of Orthodox meets with a Non-reception,
the Sword of the Magistrate must be employed to force its entrance; which is so
much the more Irreligious, for that it is so unreasonable.

Since it is reasonable Arguments, and not Blows, that must Convince the
Understanding; and till the Clergy can furnish themselves therewith, they are
never like to be free from Dissenters.

But if their Ambition will admit of no Competitor (as most certain it will
not) nothing but Persecution can follow their Venomous Doctrine, where the
Magistrate is become more a Party than the common Father of the People. Which,
that he may not, is the humble Request of all his Dissenting Children; that
though he has an Eldest Son, he may not, to Gratify his Ambition, destroy the
rest from enjoying their Natural Birthright. In short, to make an Image, and
then by the help of the Civil Magistrate, oblige every body to fall down and
Worship, upon pain of Corporal and Pecuniary Punishment, is what has produced
so much Irreligion, etc. in the World, and frustrated the design of Religion in
general, as well as been a Stumbling Block in the way of those Seekers that
would extremely rejoice to find the way that leads to Everlasting Blessedness,
(obscured by the Dust the Immoral and Ambitious Clergy have raised) which though
they, viz. the common People, know but little; yet know so much, that
Immorality and Ambition is never the way to it.

These things being premised, the following Considerations are Heartily Offered
to the Serious Thoughts of the Impartial, for Cure of our present Maladies,
that the just and reasonable design of Religion may be answered, that God may
be glorified, our Consciences eased, and Souls saved: That the Government may
be freed from unnecessary Trouble, and the People enjoy perfect Tranquillity.

First, That it is not Opinion, but Holiness is the design of Religion.

Secondly, That the Principles that lead to it are few, reasonable and plain.

Thirdly, That making of Creeds, not to be found in Holy Scripture, is at best
but Imaginary, and therefore not to be bowed unto.

Fourthly, That Liberty of Conscience is every Man's Birthright, and that it
cannot be invaded, without violating the Laws of the Land.

Fifthly, That Morality may be encouraged, since it is so great a part of
Religion, that without it none can be Religious.

1st. That it is not Opinion, but Holiness is the design of Religion.

It was the Condition of the great Charter, granted to him that was the
Patriarch of the Church, before the Law, on Tables of Stone, was given to his
numerous Posterity (see Genesis 15.1. compare with Genesis 17.1.) Walk thou before
me, and be thou Perfect, etc. No written Law now, consequently no Creeds; yet
the Law written in the Heart was Abraham's Rule, by which he was to walk before
God to Perfection.

Again, If without Holiness no Man can see God, Heb. 12.14.
without Holiness no Man can walk with him: But the first is true, therefore
the last. For want of it the old World was destroyed; because of it (and not
untelligible Creeds) Noah was saved, Genesis 6.9.

The Tenor of the Covenant in Horeb centered in it (viz.) to Implant Love and
Fear in the People to Godward, that thereby they might be kept from Sin, (
Exodus 20.20. compare with Deuteronomy. 30.) but what that Dispensation began the
Gospel finisheth; what that pointed out in Types and Shadows, the Gospel
Substantially and Radically compleateth: Which is to give Power to do, as well
as Light to know, what the good and acceptable Will of God is: Since on the
knowing and doing thereof our present and future Happiness depends; and this is
as it must be the only design of true Religion.

Again, Let us consider what the Institutor of the Christian Religion says
hereupon (Mat. 7.21.) It is not every one that says, Lord, Lord, but he that
does the Will of my Father, that shall enter the Kingdom of Heaven: From which
we are to take notice,

1. That acknowledgments to unquestionable Truths (such as calling him Lord,
that is the unquestionable Lord and God, and praying to him as the only Lord
and Savior) does not entitle Men to the Kingdom.

2. But doing the Will of God, is, not only preferred to the acknowledgment of
him as Lord, but made the only Condition, upon which admittance into the
Kingdom is granted. And in the next verse he adds, For many (says he) will say
to me, have we not Prophesied in thy Name, and cast out Devils, and done mighty
Works (Perhaps Built Churches, Hospitals, etc.) in thy Name, etc. All which was
not done by Infidels, but by them whose Judgments and understandings (as well
as Opinions) were strong concerning the verity of his Authority; yet for all
this Knowledge and Profession, and at some times Enjoyment, Depart from me,
etc. was the Sentence, grounded upon their evil works; for though they knew much,
and professed much, and enjoyed much too, yet they were unholy; hearers, and
not doers; knowers of his Will, but doers of their own; and therefore shut out
of the Kingdom.

Thus much from Christ himself, in Vindication of the First Proposition: Next,
let us hear what His Apostle (as well as the Gentiles) says to the matter in
hand, see 1 Cor. 13. where he tells of Gifts, as Prophesies, Tongues, Knowledge
of all Mysteries, Hospitality toward the Poor, and Faith to Remove Mountains;
yea, to lay down Life for Opinions sake; yet all this (he says) without
Charity (or Divine Love) is but an empty Sound, etc. I hope my Authority is so
far Unquestionable, that I need seek for no farther Proof for my Assertion,
(viz.) That it is not Opinion, but Holiness was and is the design of Religion;
for without it, Religion is no more than a Body without Breath or Spirit, which
will soon Putrify, to the anoyance of all that are near it.

Now if Holiness of Life was the universal Creed of all the Christian World,
and the Hearts and Heads of Men were as much taken up with thinking how they
might Practice it, as their Hearts and Heads are full of Matters of far less
Moment (I will not say what, though all the Presses in Europe has been filled
with it, as well as many Goals crowded, Goods spoiled, and Lives lost about it)
it would be a happy day for us.

But that I may be plainly understood, I add, that by Holiness I mean such a
Strict, Aweful and Circumspect Life, as with Detestation and Abhorrence, shuns
those Paths that leads to the Breach of Negative Precepts, as well as with
fervency of Spirit, suitable to the Nobility of the cause, is Studious to
approve it self in the Performance of what is enjoyed to be done, by the same
Authority; the other, as above, is forbidden; and in short is no other than a
Life conformed to the Will of God.

And that this is the great Design of Religion, is reasonable to believe, both
from Reason it self, Scripture and Divine Inspiration; and he that so lives
deserves the Protection of all Civil, Governments, being the best of Subjects;
for he never gives the Magistrate trouble: Since he that bears the Sword, is,
for a Praise to them that do well, and is only a Terror to Evil Doers, which
such a Man is not. From what has hitherto been said, these Considerations will
naturally follow.

First, That he that made us Holy and Good at first, and put us in a Capacity
so to continue, and sent his Son to break our Bonds by his Death, desires that
out of our Lapsed State we may be Restored, to Live in a perfect Union and
Fellowship with him again, to all Eternity, Ezekiel. 18.32. and 33.11. Romans 5.18,
19. 1 Timothy 1.15. and 2.3, 4, 5, 6. Titus 2.14. 1 John 3.7.

Secondly, Nevertheless, without doing his Will, it is impossible to enjoy that
Union and Peace, etc. Mat. 7.21, 22.

Thirdly, That his Will is our Sanctification or Holiness, Luke 1.74, 75. 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. and 4.3. Romans 6.19, 22. 2 Cor. 7.1.

Fourthly, That he which has ordained the End, has also provided the means,
Deuteronomy. 18.15. Ezekiel. 18.32. 1 Timothy 1.15.

Fifthly, That that means is Primarily the Second Adam, or Lord from Heaven, by
whom the universal Gift of Grace is bestowed on all Men; prejudiced by the Fall
of the First Adam, Secondarily by the Holy Scripture, and a Spiritual Ministry,
etc. Romans 5.18, 19. Tit. 2.11. Ephesians. 4.11, 12.

Sixthly and Lastly, This Gift so universally given, is Grace for Grace, Light
for Light, Spirit for Spirit, to Spirit or Quicken us to Holiness, and is as
much the Common Privilege of all Men, as all Men were damaged by Adam's Fall. (
Luke 2.27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. John 1.9, 16. 1 Cor. 12.7.) And, if so there is
no Reason for the Church of Rome, or any other Church, to impose Articles of
Faith on others, or Monopolize, Religion or Truth to themselves; since he that
Lives conformable to this Gift, is a Member of that Church that Jesus Christ is
Head of: And he that has Faith herein, has the True Faith mentioned in the
10th of the Hebrews; and is that Faith delivered to the Saints, for which they
are to contend (but not Fight nor Persecute, since the way of their contending
for it was by Argument and Suffering, and not Persecution) according as the
Apostle says, Gal. 5.14. The fulfilling of the whole Law, is in Loving our
Neighbor as our selves. And verse. 6. says, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision
avails nothing, but Faith that works by Love: But Creed making Works not by
Love, but Strife and Envy, and is almost always followed by Persecution;
therefore not of the true Faith, (though made up of never so true words) but is a
Fruit of the Flesh, (verse. 19, 20, 21.) and such Persecute those Born of the
Spirit, Gal. 4.29. In short, that Faith which works by Love, is the Immediate
Gift of God, that enables Man wholly to trust or depend (without any manner of
doubt, with respect to his Body as well as Soul) on the Invisible God; but such
an entire Trust and Depending cannot be where Purity of Heart is not: And a
Thousand Articles of Faith will not make one Heart clean, it being made so only
by that Spirit or Gift abovesaid: So that he which has the true Faith is not
without the true Love, (for they are inseparable) which works (like Leaven)
every Man into Humility, Patience, and all other Virtues; and against such
there is no legal Law: But to bring forth contrary Fruit (such as Immorality;
Ambition, Envy, Wrath, Persecution, etc.) as it is no part of the Christian
Religion, so it is very unreasonable to number any such among the Religious.
Thus, I hope, I have made it plainly appear, That it is not Opinion, but
Holiness that answers the design of Religion.

2dly, That the Principles which leads to Holiness are few, plain and
reasonable; and consequently all that are not so (or from unquestionable
Authority, such as is the Holy Scripture) may be rejected without censure:
Since what is not of Faith (in Point of Principles and Doctrine) is Sin; and
since we are warned not to suffer Sin to lie on a Brother (much more are we
forbid to force him into it.)

But to proceed, that there is a Supreme Being from which we derive ours, and
by which we are upheld and protected, is undeniable; that we are under strong
Obligations, both of Gratitude, Duty and Interest, to pay Worship, Obedience,
etc. To this Supreme Authority, is likewise unquestionable; that a defect in
Performance hereof renders us Culpable; and that a Violation of his Laws is of
that Provoking Nature, that Justice cannot remit; this we plainly saw verified
in the Persons of our first Parents, who were not only defective in their
positive Duty, but precipitated themselves into a Violation of that Negative
Command their God gave them; which Transgression cost them Dear ( viz. Loss of
Paradise) as the just Recompense of their Disobedience: Nevertheless when
Justice had thus punished for Sin, Mercy was ready to commiserate; when Justice
had wounded, Mercy was for healing: Thus he that was Infinite in Justice, was
as Infinite in Mercy, by promising and giving that Seed, which should bruise
the Head of him that had broken off poor Man from the true Root and Foundation
of his Happiness; and by the Operation thereof was he restored, made whole, and
united to his Sovereign Lord again.

And this Seed Solomon calls Wisdom, through which (says he) Men were saved,
and Adam restored out of his Fall, Wisd. 10.1. This Wisdom or Seed was no
sooner promised, but gave, Inwardly and Spiritually (though not outwardly 'till
the fullness of time, that Jesus Christ was born of the Virgin) and hereof all
good Men, through every Generation, partook, and were made so by the Power and
Virtue thereof: But when the unrighteous went away from her (and would not be
governed thereby) in his anger he perished, wherewith, he murdered his
Brother, verse. 3. Here was and is the Original of all Persecution about
Religion ever since: For by going from her, Men lose that Allegiance and Duty
that is incumbent on them, by which they first make themselves Enemies to God;
secondly to Jesus Christ, to whom all Power in Heaven and Earth is committed,
that he by his Authority might subject them to himself in Righteousness,
Holiness and Truth: And Lastly, by their Pride and Ambition, Enemies to one
another.

And this is likewise the true Reason there are so many Lo-heres and Lo-theres
in the World, and so much Irreligion, Unreasonableness, Immorality and
Hypocrisy, as there is. Nor can we reasonably expect it otherwise, till Men
come to that Principle in themselves, that will subject them to their Maker and
Redeemer. And then, as a Natural Consequence, will there be true Love and Peace
one toward another.

Now, as was said in the beginning of this Discourse, we are not left without a
Witness (viz.) We are not left to our selves, nor without some sense of a God,
nor of the Obligations we are under to him, according to Holy Writ; compare
Mal. 3.5. with Acts 14.17. And this Witness will be faithful to us, as well to
Testify against, as for us, according to our Deeds, etc. therefore called the
Faithful and True Witness, Accusing or Excusing us, Romans 2.15. Rev. 1.5. This
is the Law written by the Finger of God in the Heart of Man.

This is the Divine Logos, that speaks to and in the Soul, in which is hid all
the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; It is the true Light that enlightneth
every Man that comes into the World: It is the Inspeaking Voice that says,
This is the Way, walk in it, Isaiah. -- It is to the World of Souls as the Sun
in the Firmament is to Bodies, gives Light, and causes Production.

It is the Inward and Spiritual Appearance of the promised Seed, that Bruiseth
the Head of the Serpent, within us, as it did outwardly in that Blessed Person
(viz.) Jesus Christ, when he Triumphed over him in our Natures; for in him the
Fullness was, but in us by Measure, every one according to the good Pleasure of
God.

Finally, this is that One Vniversa^ Principle (though expressed after many and
by different Names) of Light and Life, which Impowers that Soul tha^ receives
it in perfect Love) for its Guide and Monitor, To Fulfill God's Holy Will, which
is our Holiness: And as he that resists it, incurs Damnation; so he that
Conforms to her Divine Instruction, will not fail of obtaining an Assurance of
that Incorruptible Crown of Blessedness, which God the Righteous Judge freely
bestows on every such Believing and Subject Soul, 2 Timothy 4.8.

By this time, I hope I have made good my Second Assertion, (viz.) That the
Principles that leads to Holiness are not many, nor perplexing the Brains or
Understanding, but plain and familiar, and answers the reasonable part of
Mankind: Since in it is nothing above the Reach of Right Reason to comprehend,
as in it is nothing below what is Essential to our Peace and Happiness here,
and Blessedness hereafter.

3dly. Since then it plainly appears, the Religion of God's Making is not such
a Mysterium Magnum, as by some Persons it has been Represented, for what
Reason I will not say, (though it is not hard to guess:) I say, since Religion
has so much Reason in it, and carries such clear Demonstration with it; the
making so many Tedious Unintelligible, as well as Unreasonable Articles of
Faith, with this Anathema at the Tail of them, (viz.) Without which it is
impossible for a Man to be saved, has been a vast Prejudice to the credit of
Religion in general; though it has gratified a Party, whose Consciences are
stretched so wide, that nothing that has the appearance of Profit or Honor
will make them Keck: Yet at the same time, the Man of Religion Indeed, who
makes Conscience both of his Words and Works, chooses rather to Suffer both
Reproach and Persecution, than Subscribe to what he cannot understand.

I cannot forbear thinking, that most Religious People know, there are many
Points of Divinity which are most certainly Believed; yet perhaps are rarely
expressed: And he that Believes them, has the advantage and benefit of his Own
Faith, by his so having it to himself, which ought not therefore to be imposed
on another; since all Truths, profitable for us to know, are not seen at once:
Nor are all Men a-like capable of understanding them.

Besides the common Prejudice of Education should be considered: And therefore
to dismember Persons from the Church, purely for Errors they cannot help, is
very hard: But to Unchristian them, because they cannot Subscribe what they do
not know, nor are able to comprehend, and which their Adversaries have only
Conjectures about, is so Barbarous, Irreligious and Unreasonable, that words
are too short to set it forth.

But in my Opinion, nothing can be more reasonable, or tend more to the
Promotion of Religion in general, than for all Parties in Conjunction with the
Civil Magistrate, to make that the Creed of all Persuasions, which all
Persuasions agree is Sacred, and of Divine Authority; to wit, the Holy
Scriptures: And where any Difference shall arise about the Interpretation
thereof, the Civil Authority should Interpose, to Oblige all Parties to Unite
in Interest (viz.) the Peace and Prosperity of the Nation; if he could not
Oblige them to Unite in Charity, the Christian and Religious Bottom. The First,
the Magistrate has Power to command: The Latter, if we are true Christians,
cannot be denied.

But where either Party which is uppermost (for the Wheel goes round) shall
exercise their Power, first to exalt themselves in Honor and Wealth upon the
Credit of Religion; and secondly, abuse that Power to make Traps for their
Neighbors, by cramming Creeds down their Throats, which cannot be understood
by them, and which the others have no Authority from Holy Scripture to impose:
Most certain it is; As it is to turn Persecutors for Religion, when Religion it
self forbids it, and is in it self both Unreasonable and Irreligious; so it is
of that Provoking Nature, that will inevitably draw down God's Righteous
Judgments, to the Desolation of that Kingdom, or Commonwealth, where such
Methods are taken, and finally prove the overthrow of that Church which
promotes such a Work. But without looking for a Stroke from the Hand of Heaven,
it is no good Policy; since it is the first Foundation to Schism.

For had not the Church of Rome imposed more than she had Authority from Holy
Scripture for; the Protestants could have had no reasonable Color for their
Revolt; but the first is true, and so is the last.

Again, had the Church of England imposed no more than the Holy Scripture had
warranted Her in Matters of Faith; nor any Discipline, but what might
reasonably be Collected from them: Nor any other Practices by her Clergy than
what was Honest, Just, and of Good Report, as becomes Ministers of Jesus
Christ; the Dissenters Separation had been a Ridiculous Thing. Whereas it
appears now to be so Grounded, that the Strength of the Church is not able to
Convince nor Confute them.

In short, if the 39 Articles were not half so many as they are, and more clear
than some of them appear to be. And if the Creed, commonly called Athanasius's,
were reduced to that of the Apostle's, or Nicene-Creed; which as they are less
Perplexing, so they are as Substantial, and would engage more to unite in the
Truth thereof, who are now too often rather Stumbled, than Excited to be
Religious: It would tend more to Peace, if not Unity.

Again, if the Presbyterians Assembly of Divinity had not made such a horrid
Blunder, in their Westminster Confession of Faith, as they did, by Asserting
such and such Principles for Orthodox, with pretended Authority from Holy
Scripture, which, upon Examination, no more answered their design, than the
first of Job proves the Divinity of Christ; they might at that time have
enlarged their Dominion and, like the Jews, made Proselytes of the Covenant in
abundance: But where People see, first, an Arbitrary Power to impose; and,
secondly, so much weakness in their Proofs, no marvel if they were left also,
as they left others.

Nor had the Synod of Dort any better success, especially in Holland, where the
Remedy proved worse than the Disease. Nor was England free from the dire
Effects thereof: But as W. P's Address to Protestants, page 62, and 63. says

The mournfullest part of that History is the ill Usage the Bishop o^ Landaff
and others had, who were acknowledged to be sound in the Faith of those Times (
viz. the Calvenist) yet, if at any time they appeared Moderate in Behavior,
and Gentle in their Words; desiring rather an Accommodation with the
Remonstrators, than to increase the Difference to the Prejudice of Religion in
general; Gomarus and his Followers, not observing the Rules of Debate in so
grave an Assembly, fell foul of the Bishop, etc. Reproaching their Tenderness,
and insinuating the Charge of Treachery, etc. against those more Virtuous, but
less Bitter and Stingy Persons than themselves.

But without Raking in the Ruins of time, it is evident, that the several
Councils, Convocations, Synods, etc. that have been called to settle Articles
of Faith, have rarely avoided Exercising such a Dogmatical Power, to the
straining the Principles of Religion, beyond, not only the Line of Holy
Scripture, but the Staple of Reason and common Sense: And therefore no wonder
if the World be filled with Schisms. In days of old, the Ancient Landmarks
were not to be removed without a severe Penalty; and most certain it is,
neither wider nor streighte^ must we set them, than the Holy Me^ of old did,
unless by the same Authority they had: And how that was, the Holy Scripture
plainly demonstrates.

And until That be our general Cree^ without far-fetched Consequences, w^
cannot reasonably expect to be fre^ from the trouble that attends, wha^ is
called, Schism; and where that is Persecution commonly follows; for
Nonconformity, though it be but t^ an Image, and not the true God: An^ what a
Prejudice that is to the State to be torn in pieces by Factions, woeful
Experience has taught us. This with the Immorality and Ambition o^ the Clergy
in King James the First Time, laid the Foundation for the Ruin of his Son, and
with him Thre^ Kingdoms, according to F. O. in h^ Observations on K. J's Reign:

Ou^ Divines (says he) for the generality, did Sacrifice more to Bacchus than
Minerva.

Again, nor did the notorious Debauchery of the Episcopal Clergy add a little
to the Rent, (made by those called Puritans.)

Nor did the sudden Translations of Bishops, from less to greater Fees, give
time to visit sufficiently their respective Charges; being more intent upon the
Receipt of such Taxes, as a long abused Custom had Estated them in, than upon
Reformation: For from the Pulpit came all our future Miseries; God not being
served there as he ought, etc.

I take the more notice of this, because himself was no favourer of Puritanism,
but of the other side.

For the Security therefore of the Government, Ease of the Magistrate, and
Peace of the People, Creeds not to be found in Holy Scripture, and an Ambitious
and Immoral Clergy, by the common Voice of Mankind, should be totally Rejected.

Which leads me to my Fourth Proposition (viz.) That Liberty of Conscience is
every Man's Birthright.

4thly, By Liberty of Conscience, is not meant a Liberty to Licentiousness; for
no Man that is Compos Mentis, will pretend Matter of Conscience to commit
Wickedness. But by Liberty of Conscience, I mean, for every Man to go to what
place he please to worship God, in that way he is persuaded is the Right Way,
and to hear that Preacher that he likes best. As for Instance. I cannot see any
Prejudice to the State to Indulge the Jews in the Exercise of their Religion;
which, of all Persuasions, has the least Reason to desire or expect it; yet, we
find our Superiors have thought fit to indulge them already, as well as other
States do; for they rarely suffer for their Religion: Perhaps it is because the
Blessing that attends Sufferers is none of their Portion. However, if they Sin
against their own Knowledge (but we cannot say they do) they will suffer for
it, from his Hand that knows their Hearts: But if they know no better, it is
unreasonable to Punish Men for what they cannot help. Therefore their
Synagogues, provided they do nothing against the State, can be no Prejudice to
the Government. Nor can the Worshipping Images, Praying to Saints, Auricular
Confession, Pilgrimages, etc. hurt the State; provided those that have the
vanity to think such things their Duty, may appear Publicly to perform it. But
if they are deprived thereof, no opportunity will be neglected to get that by
stealth; the Omission of which they firmly believe cannot be forgiven them: And
when such Persons get together in that manner, they are not only Encouraged to
continue that Practice, but are Warmed with a Belief, that these Rugged Paths
are the only Way to Glory; and therefore in time will be so inured to it, that
they will bid Defiance even to Death it self; which not seldom is the most
effectual Way to increase, and not suppress any Faction.

Add to this the Desperateness of those who are made so; first, upon the Score
of their Suffering for Religion; but now turned to Conspire the Destruction of
that Power, by which they are oppressed. Here it is Plots are laid, the design of
which is to render Vengeance on those that have not remembered Mercy, and to
ease themselves from Suffering. But let Men have Ease, and they will not Plot
the destruction of that Power that they owe their Ease and Safety to. But where
they, or any other, shall abuse this Liberty, (which is their Right peaceably
to enjoy) to the Prejudice of another in Person or Estate, the Magistrate, as
the common Father of the People, has Power to Interpose, and give that
Correction to the delinquent, as is his just Demerit: To which every Party,
except the Guilty, will say Amen.

That the Episcopalian should be Persecuted, because the first Reform from
Popery was to Presbitery, is so unreasonable, that nothing of Religion is to be
seen in it, unless you will call a Mad Fiery Zeal Religion. The Dismal and
Tragical Story we have upon Record, of the Madness of that People, since the
last Revolution in Scotland, as well as in the unhappy Civil Wars at home in
England, are so many, and so black, that it becomes highly necessary, that the
Episcopalian, who is now the National Church in England, lay a good Foundation
for time to come: Since what has been, may be. For no Man in his Senses can
think a Church governed by Bishops is such a Heresy as deserves that Evil
Treatment they have had for that only Reason: Nor are the 39 Articles so Remote
from Christianity, nor the Discipline of the Church of England so void of
Defense, that for believing the one, and practicing the other, they should be
exposed to Sufferings, when the Government is in other Hands: Let the Errors be
what they will, they hold or profess, (since no Body but themselves are the
worse for them) it is Unreasonable and Irreligious for the Presbyterian to
Persecute them, as now in Scotland.

Nor can it be thought Reasonable or Religious, that the Presbyterian and
Independent, etc. should be obliged to go to hear Common Prayer, when
themselves, in their own Opinion, have a more Lively Way of Worship. And if the
Elders of those Churches take the same Care, that a Bishop in the Church of
England is obliged to, (viz.) See that the Ministers feed the Flock with good
Doctrines, tending to Holiness of Life, and Peace amongst Men, and good
Examples: What Reason has the Church of England to be angry, because they do
not go all to one place, since both aim at one thing (viz.) The Promotion of
Religion, in General, and the Peace of the Commonwealth?

Again, What harm can the Anabaptist, by his Water-Dispensation, do? He may, by
his zealous and strict Living, and laborious Preaching, Influence many to the
reforming their Lives and Manners; if not, to the thorough Renovation of their
Mind: Nor can his recluse private Life be any Prejudice to the State, since
there are Hands enough besides to be employed. If he has any Principles that
are either Inconsistent with Religion or Government, so long as he keeps them
to himself, no Body is the worse for them besides himself: But when it appears
otherwise, it is time enough then to punish: For it is both Irreligious and
Unreasonable to punish Men for what we only suppose they will do.

Nor can the Quaker be left as a Sacrifice to any other Party with Reason or
Religion, because of his Singularity; since he pretends as much Conscience as
any of the rest, and ventures to come to the Text of Holy Scripture with the
most Orthodox: But let his Errors be what they will (for it is our Unhappiness,
that we are too apt to think too well of our own, and too meanly of our
Neighbors) notwithstanding his Hat lies in the way, we never found him to give
the Magistrate any Trouble, unless it was when forced before him, about his
Religion, which he cannot help: If he is mistaken, none will suffer for that
mistake but himself: And he is assured also, that one mistake is not like to be
corrected by another. But all those he has separated from, dare not pretend to
be free from Mistakes, even in the best part of their Religion: And since the
highest is upon Supposition and Conjecture, it is the more unreasonable to
oblige Conformity. But that the Quaker is for promotion of the design of
Religion (viz.) Holiness is undeniable; if he carries it too far, it is an Error
of the Right Hand, and his Zeal ought to be cherished by the common Father of
the People; since all his Proselytes ease the Magistrate of that trouble,
People of greater Liberty bring upon him.

Add to this his Industry; for as upon the Principles of Religion he is
prohibited the Diversions of Humane Life, which others esteem Lawful; so it is
certain the Mind of Man must be diverted with something: And therefore he, by
turning Quaker, turns the Stream of his Diversion to good Husbandry, as
Planting, Improving Land, keeping the Poor at work, etc. And for Trade, it is
demonstrable, beyond Contradiction, that he is not one of the least, or most
useless, both in City and Country: Nor is he one of the least Benefactors to
the Government.

Let every Man then be encouraged to Sow, to Plant, to learn Trades, to improve
his Stock and Capacity for his Own, for his Posterity's, and for the Nation's
Good, by an entire Liberty of Conscience, that no Man may suffer in Body or
Estate, for the Errors, or supposed Errors of his Mind, and that only in things
relating to another World: And so shall the Civil Magistrate have great Peace,
and the People have that Tranquillity that attends sitting Under their own Vine
where none can make them afraid.

To Conclude, he that is Born Heir to an Estate, is not Heir because he is of
such a Church, but because he is his Father's Son: And if his Inclination,
Education or Judgment, lead him out of the national Road to work out his own
Salvation, it is very unreasonable as well as contrary to the Fundamental Laws
of the Land, that he should therefore loose his Birthright.

And indeed great pity it is, that all parties are not hearty herein; for none
knows but that those that are otherwise minded, are making Rods for Themselves
or Posterity, to be whipped withal. But leave Conscience Uncramp'd; and by this
means, the Civil Magistrate will always be Umpire between the several Parties
that are under his Government; for as he protects all, so all will fly to him
as to their Common Sanctuary, where the Laws will decide all Controversies, or
Disputes, that may arise. And if the Civil Authority is pleased to make one
Party as the Eldest Son; that Elder may not have Power to spoil the Younger.
For this Reason I Conceive with Submission, that Holland has given us an
Excellent Example; in which, though they have no National Church, yet the
Magistrate gives a preference as he pleases, and therefore takes care to
maintain what he so prefers, out of the Common Stock, which is a Just and
Reasonable way, and by that means all Parties contribute to the upholding what
the Magistrate is willing to prefer; and here is no Imposition upon those that
do not think, as the Magistrate thinks, nor is A. B. compelled to pay B. C. for
what A. B. thinks were better let alone; But A. B. is obliged to render to
Caesar, what is Caesar's (viz.) Taxes, Tribute, etc. and if Caesar will out of
that Common Stock, maintain that Man or Ministry that he prefers, he ought not
to be disobeyed; for there are perhaps many Thousands of People under his Care,
who have not the Discretion, no more than Children, to choose for themselves.

And therefore it is but reasonable, the Magistrate should provide for them that
labor to Instruct the People in Religion and good Manners, over whom, in
chief, the Magistrate himself is over-seer.

5thly, That Morality may be encouraged, since it is so great a part of
Religion, that without it none can be Religious.

Were the foregoing Propositions well considered, there would be the less need
to say much upon this Head, since it would be for the most part actum agere;
for let but the Immoralist, the Ambitious, the Tenacious, the Persecutor be
discouraged; in short, let Vice be under the Displeasure and Correction of the
Civil Magistrate, and Virtue or Morality will naturally be encouraged. The
encouragement that is here entreated is, that no Man that is a Just, a
Temperate and Honest Man, that keeps himself clear of those Sins, that shut Men
out of the Kingdom of Heaven, may be either exposed to Contempt, Scorn or
Persecution; nor looked upon as a common Nuisance, nor as the 5th Wheel of a
Wagon, but that he may have that Respect and Preference by the Government,
that his virtuous Life has justly merited; for where a Man of a vicious Life
shall have the Smiles of Authority, whilst a Man of better Talents and a good
Life, shall be (for God's sake) slighted and despised: This is an apparent
discouragement to Morality; and how prejudicial that may be to the State in
time, as well as to Youth at present, is not hard to determine: For Young Men
will not apply themselves to the Study of Virtue, to recommend themselves for
the Service of their Country, when they see Examples of Vice before their Eyes
under Promotion: But if Virtue were the only Qualification to advance to
Honor, Power and Profit, and that none but those that were Educated in her
School, should be entrusted with the Charge of the Nation; the Nobility and
Gentry, as well as common People, would find themselves obliged to take care of
their Posterity, to keep them from every Vicious Path, since that leads to
nothing but Destruction both of Body and Soul, here and hereafter. True it is,
many good Laws we have in England, both against Swearing, Drunkenness, Whoreing
and Gaming, etc. now it is to no purpose to catch a Porter and make him pay 12
d. for an Oath; or send a Kitchen Wench to Bridewell for Twelve Months, for
having a small Child, whilst Persons of higher Rank shall by practice repeat
that every day without Censure, which these poor Persons must suffer for,
though but once committed.

But to stop the growth of Impiety, and to retrieve the Nation from that
Debauchery it is now fallen into; let every Man that is guilty of any manner of
Debauchery or Immorality, be marked out as an Enemy to the Peace and
Tranquillity of his Country, by being rendered incapable of doing any thing for
his King and Country, till he has repented, and reformed his Life: And if this
method were begun at Court, Virtue would grow in Fashion in the City, and so
should Morality be encouraged in all parts of the Country: With these things
God Almighty would be well pleased, and pour out his Blessings upon us: With
these things the King and his Great Counsel would find abundance of Ease, and
Great Wealth, as well as Immortal Honor. With these things the City and
Country would be safe, and eased of that continued Vexation and Charge, that
the contrary always brings upon them.

True it is, that although every One that is a Just and Temperate Man (in short
that is a Moral Man) may not be a good Man, for though his outside may be without
blemish, his inside may be too faulty, and very unclean; yet no good Man can be
so without the Moral Man's outside, nor will those lusty Believers, that
pretend to Church Privileges, and by Presumption (not Faith) lay claim to
Promises, find their account, but themselves irreparably mistaken, if there be
any Truth in him that said, First make clean the inside, and the outside will
be clean also.

By outsides we are known one of another, and to one another, and by outsides
we make our Judgments of each other, and if the outside is not fair, we are
sure we must lay by our Reason to think the inside can be otherwise than foul,
and how Consonant that is with Religion, is above declared; nor can it make any
better mixture than Iron and Clay.

Let Men that have clean outsides then be commended and encouraged for
Example's sake, and if they are not so, but Hypocrites, God will find them out,
as he did Annanias and Sapphira. -- But, sure I am, the Government will have
the Advantage of that Conformity, if it be no more than Hypocrisy in the
Conformist.

THE Conclusion.
ALL Mankind, that has any Sense of Religion, makes something the Foundation of
that Sense. Now that something must be either Tradition, Reason, the Holy
Scriptures, or Divine Inspiration: But he that has only the first, cannot be
said to be a Religious, but Superstitious Man, who cramps his own Reason, as he
would others Consciences.

Yet, even such a one ought not to be done by, as he would do by others; for
then we should be as bad and worse than he, because of our larger Knowledge.

True it is, he ought to be pitied, but not persecuted; and if his Eyes cannot
be opened, but he must die as blind as he was Born and Lived, we must even
think of him as of Idiots, (viz.) Leave them to the unseen ways of that God,
who is slow to Anger and of great Kindness.

Though I highly prefer Reason to Tradition in Religion, yet I cannot think
Reason, as commonly understood, a good Foundation for Religion.

Nevertheless, he that is moved by no Power Superior to that of Reason, from
Reasonable Considerations must of necessity be Silenced and Routed out of his
Traditional Religion: And if Reason conquers Tradition, (as nothing is more
certain) it will also discover its own Insufficiency, from whence an earnest
Desire and Search will be after something to make good that Defect.

And here the Holy Scripture without, and the Holy Spirit within, will come in
to the relief of every such Person, to the Impregnating his Understanding and
Judgment to Comprehend, as well as Desire and Will to Comply with what is his
Duty to God, his Neighbor, and Himself.

So, that Faith which comes by hearing the Word of God, and is God's Gift, to
render us Christian, and Reason which is his Gift likewise to make us Humane,
are like the Husband and Wife, no more to be Twain, but One. Nevertheless the
Man has the Pre-eminence; for the Head of the Woman is the Man, and the Head of
the Man, Christ, etc. as the Apostle teaches.

Therefore those that would endeavor to part what God has so joined together,
bring themselves under the Curse.

But Faith, which is the Foundation of Religion (for without it we cannot
please God) and Reason, which is Essential to our Humanity, God has United in
One, that so all our Beliefs and Works relating to God, our Neighbors, and our
Selves, may appear to be no more than really it is (viz.) our Reasonable
Service.

FINIS.

