The Copy of a Letter sent from the Committee at Lincoln, to the House of
Commons, directed to the Speaker of the said House, and subscribed with the
names of the said Committee.
Sir,
SUch is our earnest desire, to manifest our obedience to the Commands of both
Houses, That we cannot omit any opportunity to advertise you of our first days
proceeding, and success therein. The Lord Francis Willoughby appointed by the
Ordinance of Parliament, to be Lord Lieutenant of this County, had by his
Warrant, summoned the chief Constables to attend him yesterday, the last of
May, in this place, to give him an account concerning the Arms of the
Trained-Bands and Ammunition, within their several hundreds, and Wapentakes;
which service accordingly they performed with all readiness and alacrity, even
beyond our expectations, there being the fullest appearance of them that we have
observed upon any occasion heretofore, so as about fourscore in this great
County, not above two or three of them were absent; Neither did the Kings
Proclamation (published on purpose as we conceive, throughout the County, and
which some had officiously fixed upon the Gates of the Inn where we met;) nor
this enclosed Letter from His Majesty sent to the old (but as we hear new
re-established Deputy Lievtenants, under the Earl of Linsey, who likewise has
a Commission under the broad Seal, for the Lievtenancy of Lincolnshire, as we
are informed, any whit deter, or hinder them. We have already delivered forth
Warrants to those head Constables for Musters to be held (for the more
convenience) in several places of this County, at each of which, God willing)
we all of us intend to be assistant, the rather because we understand that our
presence here does not a little comfort and revive the spirits of all honest
and well affected persons in this County; whose forward good examples will (we
doubt not) be a means to draw the rest to a more ready conformity. In which
hopes we are further encouraged by this days trial in the City, finding,
besides the Trained-Bands thereof, a like number of Volunteers well and
completely Armed, who are ready to make tender of their Service, for the
defense of His Majesty's Person, the Parliament, and the Kingdom, according to
their late Protestation. These are our first beginnings in your service, which
we humbly submit unto you, and so remain

Lincoln, 1. Junii. 1642. Your affectionate Friends and Servants, W. Armyne,
Edw. Acsscough, Tho Hatcher, Christo. Wray, Antho. Irby, Joh. Broxolme.


Ordered by the House of Commons, that this be forthwith Printed.

June 6. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1642.


