The Copy of a LETTER Presented BY A MEMBER OF THE COMMONS House of Parliament;
CONCERNING DIVERSE PASSAGES AT Portsmouth.

Read in the said House, the 17th day of August, 1642.

17. Aug. 1642.

ORdered that the said Letter shall be forthwith Printed and published:

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed by L.N. and I.F. for Edward
Husbands and John Franck, and are to be sold at their shops in the middle
Temple, and the King's Head in Fleetstreet. August 19. 1642.

The Copy of a LETTER From PORTSMOVTH.
SIR,
I Sent you a Letter by the foot-post, which I hope came to your hands on last
Saturday, wherein was contained all or most part of Portsmouth news, and now I
herein send you all or most of what has happened since thereabouts: The
Colonel having caused the Bridge called Portbridge 3 miles from Portsmouth
entering into the Isle of Portsea, (in which Portsmouth stands) to be made
secure with a frame of timber work very strong, to hinder all from passing that
way but whom he pleased, and having built a little Fort or Bulwork of earth a
little within that Bridge, and planted four pieces of Ordnance there to defend
the Bridge, and having placed 10 or 12 horsemen to watch there day and night,
did on Wednesday last carry back to Portsmouth 3 of his Ordnance, and the
fourth also about a mile, but the wheels broke, so that he was fain to leave
that piece in the high way, all which he did for fear the Troopers which came
from London, would by force or some stratagem get them away, and then make use
of them to offend the Colonel: yet when the pieces were gone, he still kept
horsemen day and night at the Fort, and the timber work upon the Bridge, to
secure it as formerly, and all Wednesday Thursday and Friday last, he caused
diverse hundreds of cattle, sheep, and swyne, in the fruitful Isle of Portsea
to be brought into Portsmouth there, whether they were fat or lean, to be all
killed and salted up, and caused every house in that Isle to be searched and
all manner of provisions to be taken away from the owners, as corn, meal,
flower, beef, bacon, bread, butter, cheese, eggs, and all their poultry and
ducks, not leaving half loaves of bread, nor pieces of bread, nor pieces of
cheese, and drove away all cattle whatsoever, to the great terror of all the
people, especially women and children, forcing poor and rich to come away, and
beg about for bread to keep them alive, and he made such men as he could find,
help to drive their own cattle and carry their own provisions into Portsmouth,
and then kept many of them there by force; but the Kings Ships as soon as they
heard of these cruel intentions, landed some men at the East side of the
Island, and two pieces of Ordnance, and thereby kept off the horsemen, whilst
the ship-men got over many women and children into Hayling Island, and about
100. cattle, and about 200. sheep, they got ropes over the cattels heads, and
made them swim over after boats: Upon Friday last in the afternoon, I went
purposely to Portsdown to see and hear what I could, at which place all this
was credibly told me, and I then went as near the Fort as I durst, which was
dangerous to be fetched in by the horsemen which guarded it, in regard all the
Troopers were then in Havant Town and in Southwick, 4 miles distant where they
lay, and came not abroad all that afternoon, by reason of the extraordinary
rain which happened that afternoon: if the weather had been fair, as I was told
in the presence of the Council of war at Southwick, the Troopers had attempted
to have taken the Fort that afternoon, and then I had seen it: but in the night
time, that night some Troopers went down to the Fort, and were troubled to get
down the timber-work, it being so strong, and whilst they were getting it down
the horsemen rode all away from the Fort, and the Troopers after them, but
could take but one of the men, and two horses, so as now the Troopers have the
fort, and have set there four pieces of Ordnance, and blocked up that passage,
so as the Colonel and his company are all within the walls of Portsmouth as it
were in a pound, not daring to encounter the Troopers; Although they last
Saturday went almost to the Town Gates, to try if any dared to come forth to
them, the Colonel sent out two pieces of Ordnance charged with musket
bullets, and two gunners to guard the piece with the broken wheel, that the
Troopers might not get it away: But on Saturday in the afternoon, a valiant
Trooper alone adventured to go near them, and cunningly got on the back side of
the men, who could not suddenly turn about both or one of the pieces, so as the
Trooper shot off his Carbine at one of them with a brace of bullets, and
spoiled his running away, for he fell down dead, I believe that this day they
will attempt to take a Castle near Portsmouth called Southsea Castle, half a
mile from Portsmouth, and make no question to take it, and then to make use of
it to shoot into Portsmouth. Master Lukener, Master Bellingham, Christopher
Bird, and others of the County of Suffolk, I believe wish they were at
Chichester again, every night some of Portsmouth soldiers and gunners get away
down the walls and come to the Troopers, utterly disliking the Colonells cause
and usage of the Inhabitants of Portsea Island, by taking away their cattle
and provisions, etc. And yet scorn to be thought cowards, for they offer to go
in the forefront, and in most danger with the Troopers in any service
whatsoever. Since Chichester men came to Portsmouth there has been harder
usage of people by the Colonel and his company then before, and some think by
their or some of their advices, a young woman in Portsmouth being great with
child, who got leave to come last Friday out of Portsmouth, and whom I met by
the way, reports; that one of Chichester men, but not Mr. Recorder Lukener, nor
Mr. Bellingham, said to her that he would not have her go, because if the Town
should be so put to it, as to want victuals, then that in her belly would eat
as sweet as a young sucking pig, by which we may guess that they are inclinable
to show as much mercy as the Rebels in Ireland, but I hope that God will
prevent all their wicked purposes. The Troopers I believe resolve to banish all
fear of danger, and within fewer days, though with loss of men, to adventure
to scale the Walls, and take the Town, and prevent the doing of any more
mischief by them in the Town to the poor Inhabitants, or any others: there is
no great strength in the town of men, and but 80 or 90 horses, there being
about 240. horses, Troopers, and 500 foot, by the Parliaments directions; but
the Town is extraordinarily well provided with powder, and shot, and diet, by
reason of the fetching in so much from the Inhabitants, there was a horse and a
man taken on Saturday last about five of the clock at Havant, going to
Portsmouth with a suit of clothes for one Mr. Bellingham in Portsmouth, but not
Bellingham of Chichester, yet his kinsman, in which clothes, between the
outside and inside were sowed up 10 Letters; and about that time our Troopers
took a man, and a horse, and several Letters going out of Portsmouth from the
Lord Wentworth the^e, and diverse other Letters are taken, so as the bottom of
their plots are I hope discovered: This morning one of the Isle of Wight was
with me, and told me, All their people there stand right for the King and
Parliament, except the Captains of their Castles, and some of the Gentry; one
Sir Robert Dillington there would have sent over much corn to Portsmouth, but
was prevented by Master Bunckley a Justice of peace there, who stands very
right for the King and Parliament; there is in the Island much fear of the
Captains of the Castles, whether they will prove right or not; they are such
men as Col: Goring is; the people are in great fear of them, and wish that the
Earl of Pembroke were come, and that they might Muster, etc.

15. August: 1642.
FINIS.
17 Augusti, 1642.
ORdered that this Letter shall be forthwith Printed and published.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


