THE COPY OF A LETTER FROM A Commander in the FLEET with His Highness the
PRINCE Of WALES.

CONTAINING A true and exact Relation of the proceedings of His Highness and
His Fleet, with the Fleet Commanded by the Earl of Warwick.

printer's or publisher's device

September the 7. 1648.

Printed in the Year, 1648. Sept 20th

THE COPY OF A LETTER FROM A Commander in the FLEET with HIS HIGHNESS the
Prince of WALES. September the 7. 1648.
SIR,
BE pleased to receive this narrative of the latest Occurrents from the Fleet
with His Highness the Prince of WALES: His Highness landed at Helford-sluce
the last Saturday, and on Monday night was received according to His quality at
the Hague: The cause of His return so soon from Sea, was a general want of
Victuals of all sorts in the Fleet. The Earl of Warwick avoided two whole
days to fight with His Highness; which had he had either will or courage to
do, he might have done it at pleasure, the Prince having no means (the other
being continually in the wind of Him) to avoid it; and the last of those two
days the Prince got so near him, that both Fleets had been engaged, had not
God in that instant of time, sent so sudden and violent a storm, as the like
for the manner has not been heard of, so that both Fleets were forced to take
in their sails, and come unto an Anchor: The Earl of Warwick went
afterwarwards into the entrance of the River of Chatham: His Highness the next
day advanced, but finding the Earl of Warwick had no mind to engage without a
very great advantage, which was offered him among the Sands: the Prince next
morning being Friday, set sail, and with* as little sail as possible he
could, stood unto the Eastward, hoping to have drawn the Earl of Warwick
from the Sands unto the open Sea: Warwick being swollen to above thirty Sail,
by reason of all outward-bound Ships came in to him, set sail likewise; but he
first saw the Prince some three Leagues at least luward of him, the wind then
at West. Southwest, and South-west, he following with the same sail the Prince
still made, and when His Highness lessened sail, he lessened, and when His
Highness lay by the lee, he did the like, keeping always the same distance
until betwixt three or four a Clock afternoon, and then fell from Him, and
came unto an Anchor, 3 or 4 Leagues in the wind of the PRINCE's Fleet.
Certainly Warwick had all the reason in the world to have engaged in Fight,
considering all advantages were on his side, both of place and wind, and the
prize for which he fought; whereas the Prince (all things well considered) had
no reason at all, but His high courage drew Him thereunto, for when the Lords,
the Officers, and whole company of the Ship, had humbly on their knees desired
Him to betake Himself unto a place of some security for His Person, and
enforced the same by many strong reasons and persuasions: He only replied,
What does this concern mine Honor? and taking a scrued Gun in His hand, I am
confident with this Piece this day to shoot Warwick through the head, if he
dares in Person appear in the Fight: and so by His example, put a most
invincible courage into the hearts of all His People. The Prince had a fair
opportunity to make Himself master of Portsmouth Fleet, and that without blows;
for His Highness Ship made them before night, and knew them to be the same,
and the tide of ebb being come, they could not turn it up, the wind
West-south-west, but were forced to come to an Anchor, His Highness passed
through them, only giving notice to a catch to awaken one or two of them* and
command them to follow the Lord Warwick, the Fleet being put to luward of
them, and a strong tide of ebb bent, it was not possible again to recover
them, but the rear Admiral came in up the stern most Ship: finding them
(notwithstanding their former summons) asleep, awakened them with two or three
shot. The Prince at His coming from the Downs, which was Saturday the 26 of
August, had another design then coming up the River, out of a hot desire the
Seamen had to fight with Warwick, and I am confident, they would have spent
themselves unto the last man against him, such was their violent earnestness
to fight with him.

The business of force in Shipping, was I suppose equal on both sides, there
being not four pieces of Ordnance difference, the Prince had 17 Sail, 11 only
bearing Ordnance, the rest were Hoyes, Carches, and prize-Vessels unarmed.
Warwick at first but 13. 11 whereof were wel-fitted, the other two Catches,
but in courage and brave resolution of people His Highness far exceeded him.

Surely never did an higher courage, and more gallantry of resolution appear
in man then, did in His Highness, whose great affability with His People, His
readiness and clearness of judgment, and His exceeding confidence in all
appearing difficulties, prove Him of a most Martial constitution, and give us
visible, and infallible assurances, that with Gods blessing, He will prove with
a little experience one of the most able Commanders both by Sea and Land, now
in Christendom: and in Military prowess will equal the most warlike Pr^nces
that ever this Nation bred.

The next opportunity you shall hear more from

Your Servant.
Roterdam, September. 7. 1648.
FINIS.

