Redintegratio Amoris, OR A Union of Hearts, between The Kings Most Excellent
Majesty, the Right Honorable the LORDS and COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT, His
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army Under his Command; The Assembly,
and every honest man that desires a sound and durable Peace, accompanied with
speedy Justice and Piety.

By way of respective Apologies, so far as Scripture and Reason may be Judges.

By JOHN COOK of Grayes-Inne, Barrester.

The falling out of lovers is the renewing of love. London, Printed for Giles
Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop at the black spread-Eagle near the
West End of Paul's.

The principal matters are,
That 1. NAture is of Gavelkind Tenure. 2. All lawful authority is derived from
the people, who cannot by any Covenant inslave themselves. 3. Good Kings reign
by Gods approbation, Tyrants by his permission, till the people can free
themselves. 4. What Law is, what Rebellion is. 5. That Anarchy is better then
Tyranny. 6. That in quiet Kingdoms much Injustice is to be suffered rather then
to oppose the Governors till it be insufferable, and then it is ne resistance
of authority, because God never did, nor man can give any such authority. 7.
Some Scriptures answered and such reverence to be given to divine authority as
to believe that there was a reason for every thing, though we cannot reach it.
8. That Bishops for Religion and some former Judges, in point of Prerogative,
are of equal credit. 9. What und^d Lord Keeper Littleton and others. 10. Twelve
politic Judges to execute quick and cheap Justice, requisite to felicitate
this Kingdom, with an Expedient for it. 11. Essentials not to be lost for
Formalities. 12. The Law and the Prophets to be rather studied then law and
profit. 13. A Cause at first as plain as a bul-rush comes to be as hard as an
oak. 14. That Parliamentum is parium lamentum, and that Kings originally agreed
to refer the peoples complaints to whom soever they would choose, and that
Parliaments never dye intentionally. 15. The mixture of the three estates
commended, yet if one of three o^ligors fail, the other two must pay the debt,
for Justice must be d^n^. 16. That the Judgment of Parliament is inevitable for
all positive Laws by virtue of the fifth Commandment. 17 Kings are not less
free, by reason of Parliaments, no more then men are less safe upon Paul's for
the Rails. 18. To question the Justice of the Parliaments Cause is to doubt
whether Protestant or Popish be the true Religion. 19. Yet so as the King had
some color for what he did in Gods Ordinance, which the Parliament, if they
should break trust, have not, and his late party adhering to the letter of
Scripture and some Law cases, Touch not mine anointed, etc. had the same color
as Papists for transubstantion, by This is my body. 20. Mr Jenkins easily
answered and Dr Fearns matter combustible. 21. Reasons to induce his Majesty to
believe that the Parliament did nothing but in discharge of their great trust,
without which they could not have answered it to the Kingdom; and that his
Majesty would frame arguments for that purpose. 22. That the Parliament would
conceive that his Majesty acted according to his present light, for the
satisfaction of his Royal Conscience, his Royal Allies and many of his people
at home, and would frame arguments for his Majesty, besides that the Law lays
all the blame upon his evil Counselors. 23. That this is a principal expedient
to beget a right understanding and endeared and loyal Affection between his
Majesty and people. 24. How his Majesty is head of the Church, and one Argument
for his Majesty, when the several Parliaments in England and Ireland present
acts for establishing of the Protestant and Popish Religious severally, what
his Majesty is to do, and that the King of Poland swears to maintain both those
Religions. 25. That the Lords are entrusted by the people (though not elected)
as Guardians of the Kings Contract with the people, and that all subordinate
Officers are to mind the duty of their places, more then the desires of those
that preferred them. 26. Two things in the House of Commons questioned, the
Members not being sworn and their not Administering oaths, and Answered. 27. The
Lords supplicated to be indulgent to tender Consciences, being exempted from
the Presbyterian discipline. 28. Three Ordinances begged. 1. Redemption for our
poor brethren, slaves to the Turks. 2. Liberty for poor Prisoners that are
ready to starve. 3. Some speedy course to abate the price of corn, least poor
people be famish't. 29 An Apology for the Armies not disbanding, who have bin
true to the Covenant, and seek nothing but for what they first engaged, and
have been the breath of many of their nostrils, who would not have their breath
in the Kingdom. 30. The Declaration against them a Nullity, the Revocation of
it, a great honor to the Parliament and Army: What spirits the Armies opposers
are of. 31. The two great expedients for a substantial settlement of the
Kingdom, Reformations in Courts of Justice, and Liberty for tender Consciences,
cannot as men's interests now stand, be effected without the Continuance of the
Army. 32. That the main interest of this Kingdom, is to be as zealous for the
Protestant Religion, as Spain is for Popery. 33. The Interest of all honest
men, is speedily to Unite, specially for Gods people. 34. That the difference
was not whether the Kingdom should be Protestants or Papists, but Protestants
at large, or strickt Professors. 35. That should the Army disband til Liberties
are secured, they would be a ludibrium to all the world, and culpable of all
the sufferings of Gods people. 36. Some late Arguments against the Parliament
answered, and the Honor of that high Court in all things to be maintained, so
as the Honor of God do not suffer, nor the peoples liberties destroyed. 37. No
man to grow rich in a time of Civil War, Nor usury then to incur; some Usurers
within the statute de judaismo, and a provision that there may not be a beggar
in Israel. 38. God will not suffer any good Governors to be destroyed, so long
as they Administer Justice, but it is dangerous for the supreme Court to deny the
people their Just Liberties. 39, Foreign Negotiations against Protestants, and
the private Interests of some which are contrary to Public Liberties are
Grounds for the Armies continuance. 40 Religion introduced by blood every where
but in England, a Prophesy concerning the sword to that purpose, therefore
truths which cost dear are to be loved. 41. That war is lawful to defend
Religion, not to promote it; that the sword maybe imployd for Religion as the
servant of justice. 42. Who are the hinderers of Irelands Releif, and how
Antichrist with his left hand may fight against his right. 43. That H. 7. did
well to kill R. 3. and long may his Royal race inherit in our present Sovereign
Lord King Charles and his princely Progeny. 44. The Author loves the Assembly,
yet conceives that Liberty had been long since settled but for them, who make
the small differences between the Conformists and Reformists wider. 45. The
absurdity of that Common Argument, that if Independents be permitted, then
Papists must: Errors in Religion, to be tolerated, but not against Religion.
46. That there are more differences between the Papists then are in this
Kingdom; therefore we are to spend our wit upon them and our love upon
Protestants: Pope Joan, in the dark, as good as my Lady. 47. A moderate
Presbytery commended for restraining vice, and for external beauty, but a rigid
Presbytery dangerous to this Kingdom: men wiser in the South then in the North,
the danger of Coactive violence in matters not fundamental. 48. Whether it be
as lawful to fight for Christ's Kingly Office as for his Priestly Office, and
whether Christians may presume of Gods extraordinary power in case of Arms
without an extraordinary warrant. 49. What Liberty of Conscience is desired,
and that natural men know not what belongs to spiritual privileges, and what
use may be made of the late Common Prayer Book. 50. A request to the Assembly
to become suitors for just Liberties, and to the Army, not to mingle their
interests, by any means, with those that shall oppose the High Court of
Parliament.


Redintegratio Amoris, OR A Union of Hearts, between The Kings Most Excellent
Majesty, the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons in PARLIAMENT, His
Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax, and the ARMY under His Command, The Assembly, and
every honest Man, that desires a sound and durable Peace, accompanied with
speedy Justice and Piety.
AFter a shower how glorious is the Sun! The War being ended what endearments
should there be between all true-hearted English men? When hands are tied, the
great business is to unite hearts: It Is the wisdom of State, when the heart of
War is broken, to deal Honorably with the Conquerors, and gently with the
Conquered; It Is the glory of a State, as well as a man, to pass by an infirmity;
and far more noble to forgive him whom thou may kill, then to kill him whom
thou may forgive: The Title of this Treatise I hope will please every man but
such as feed only upon poison (which creatures soon after break in pieces) that
are grown rich in a time of poverty, or fear a Day of Account before the Day of
Judgment; some only can fish in troubled waters; the matter of it I hope will
relish well to wel-tempered pallates, that have the salt of reason; for my own
particular, it has ever been my hearty prayer, and what I have prayed for, I
have ventured to write for, though I know very few that have gained any thing
by the Press, besides their own contentment, but hard censures; but he that is
wise when men are fools, is true when they are liars; I am not in love with my
own conceptions, and yet will father them that they be not illegitimate; and
the mother conceiving them is a single heart, as an English man; the subject is
weighty and many ticklish points; but strong affections may be discerned by
weak performances, and I hope men are more merciful then formerly; those that
love, will excuse, let others bring reason for reason and I am satisfied; to
give the Reader rational satisfaction I must dig deep for these precious
truths, for taking too much upon trust, and that to be reason which only looks
like it, has occasioned our late mischiefs: And it is as hard to make some men
believe the Truth, as it is to dissuade others from Errors.

Wherein as it is said of Errors that to reduce them to their first original is
to refute them; bastards love any discourse but to hear of their originals, so
in all matters of Reformation by, the Interven-of the Sword the foundation,
Root, highest wel-spring, fountain, end, and grounds of all government is in
the first place to be sounded, fathomed, and discovered, which under favor
have been the great defect in many writers in this late Com^^stion, that speak
of obedience to higher powers, of the un^awfulness of resisting, and of the
Rights and Liberties of the people^ (...) drawing from the Fountain, but
following the stream^ of former Authorities, and practices of other times,
which have ^he ^^^^^nance of example, but not the least force of a Law (...)
striving to know by the Causes, why such a Government is appointed or Law is
made, as by the effects that so they find it to be. Which Impolitiques, is the
Reason why there are so many Practices to be reformed in Courts of Justice; the
Judges finding the course of the Court, which they say makes the Law to be so,
they never look further at the reason why it is so; for if they did but
consider the end and primary intention of all Laws, viz. the execution of
justice; which consists in giving every man his own, they would rather dispense
with 10000, formalities and niceties in Law, then neglect the doing of justice;
rather suffer all the courses of the Court to be broken and shivered into
attomes, then suffer one poor man to be undone by a mispleading or Error in the
proceedings, for justice is of moral, and of perpetual equity, but the course
of a Court is but Ceremonial, and the Ceremonial Law of God always gave place
to the moral: when it appears fairly to the Court, that the Debt is due, or
that the Plaintiff has title to the Land; if there be as many Errors and
mistakes in the pleadings as there are stars in the Firmament, the Judge must
break through all forms to make the Plaintiff master of his right; and to
object matters of form and confusion, is but to tyrannize over poor men, that
are not able to buy Justice, and to be more careful of the shoo then of the
foot that wears it; Resembling herein the stranger that admiring the height of
St. Marks-Tower in Venice, thinking the Foundation could not be deep by reason
of the water, was very studious to know, whereupon so goodly a Fabric stood:
the people said it was so, but how it came about was for the Senate to know the
reason; they troubled not themselves about it, but I must dig deep for this
precious truth and go to the ground of the point, which being ^ound in the
groundsels, the building is not to be suspected; and I conceive:

1. That by nature, all men are born alike free, as we hold all by
Frankalmoign, so nature is Gavelkind tenure, and there is no power natural but
parental, further then every man does expressly or implicitly empower other men
over him, and every Father is a King in his own family; Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob in Canaan, had no Government but Domestical, Parental, or Proparental.
And though I cannot agree with Learned Charron, that the Jews had power of life
and death over their Children, which he would prove by Abraham's offering up
Isaac, which he supposes Isaac being about 25. would not have suffered his
Father to have bound him, if by Law he had not had power to kill him; and that
the same Law continued amongst the Romans, which no Parents would abuse or
exercise only to keep their Children in obedience, yet this is clear that by
the Law of nature, the child is to be obedient to the Father, and when the
child is set to School or an Apprentice; it is the fathers power which he puts
into the Masters hands to correct the child; which commission the Master may
not exceed; and therefore that moderate correction which the Law allows to be
given to Scholars and Apprentices, is to be intended by the Fathers consent,
for if the Father shall indent with the Master not to correct his child; if he
strike him I conceive an Action of Trespass will lie against him, and this power
continues till the child be able to provide for it self, for by the civil Law
the Father is bound to provide for his bastard till it be 25. at which time it
is presumed able to help it self, grounded upon Natures Law, that beasts and
birds feed their young ones till they can cater for themselves and no longer,
and so it ought to be with us where the child is natural and not legal.

2. This Nature, which makes all alike free, apts and fits some with gifts to
command, others to obey; it is a ground in Nature that wise men should govern
the Ignorant, the Patriarchs were never empowered, but carried things so
sweetly that men freely obeyed them; for when people shall perceive that wise
and honest men aim at nothing so much as the public good, every man thinks
himself happy to be under such Governors, and indeed to prefer such men into
places of Judicature is rather a preferment to the people then to them; for as
by wisdom the world was made, and as it is enlightened by the Sun, so by Reason
the Lord will have it governed; and as in Nature he that is born blind must be
guided by those that can see, so must ignorant and ill-disposed people be
ordered and commanded by those that have the gifts and Spirit of Government and
such as are virtuously disposed. But all Government is to be ascribed to
necessity and reason: For the world becoming populous, vicious and licentious,
a Government was necessary; and though the primary Laws of Nature, as obedience
to Parents, to hurt no body, and to do as we would be done unto, be imprinted
in the heart of every man, and sufficient to condemn the Gentiles; yet they are
so defaced and corrupted by the fall of Adam and original sin, that God and
Nature, for the good of mankind, not only commended but commanded a Government,
for man is a sociable creature, and society is natural; for in Hermites Nature
is not changed but transgressed.

3. All just power and authority is either from God immediately who is Lord of
all and may appoint one to be sole Monarch over all the world, if it please
him, as formerly he appointed Kings; or in the people who empower one or more
over them. Saul and David had extraordinary Callings, but all just power is now
derived from the people, 1 Samuel ^.
yet in the case of Saul it is observable that the people out of pride, to be
like other Nations, desired a King, and such a King as the Heathens had, which
were all Tyrants; for they that know any thing in History know that the first
four Monarchs were all Tyrants at first till they gained the peoples consent.
Nimrod the great hunter was Ninus that built Ninivy the first Tyrant and
Conqueror that had no title, Genesis 10.9.
and so were all Kingdoms which are not Elective till the peoples subsequent
consent, and though it be by descent, yet it is a continuation of a Conquest
till the people consent and voluntarily submit to a Government, they are but
slaves and in reason they may free themselves if they can; for conquest gains a
title amongst beasts, not amongst men. In France the King begins his Reign from
the day of his Coronation, the Archbishop asks the people if he shall be King,
the twelve Peers or some that personate them say Yes, they girt the sword about
him, then he swears to defend the Laws: and is any thing more natural then to
keep an Oath? And though virtuous Kings have prevailed with the people to make
their Crowns hereditary, yet the Coronation shows the shel that the kernel has
been in* Samuel was a good Judge, and there was nothing could be objected
against him, therefore God was displeased at their inordinate desire of a King,
and it seems to me that the Lord declares his dislike of all such Kings as the
Heathens were, that is, Kings with an unlimited power, that are not tied to any
Laws; for he gave them a King in his wrath, therein dealing with them as the
wise Physician with his d^stempered and impatient Patient, who desiring to
drink wine, tells him the danger of inflammation, yet wine he will have, and the
Physician considering a little wine will do but a little hurt, rather then his
Patient by fretting should take greater hurt, prescribes a little white wine
wherein the Physician does not approve his drinking of wine, but of two evils
chooses the least: The Jews would have a King for Majesty and splendour like
the Heathens, God permits this, he approves it not, it seems to me that the
Lord renounces the very Genus of such Kings that have no Laws to govern by but
their own wills: Genesis 10.49
for if it be objected that God had promised them a King and a Scepter in
Israel: I answer that when God calls any man to such high honor he gives him
answerable abilities: when he places any man upon the bench of justice he never
sets himself besides the cushion; besides he told those Kings whom he anointed
what their duty was, not to exalt themselves overmuch above their brethren,
Deuteronomy. 17.
to delight themselves in the Law of God; out of which I infer that the Turks,
Tartars and all people that live at the beck and nod of Tyrannical men may and
ought to free themselves from that Tyranny, if, and when they can; to desire
too great a King is to have a River too impetuous; for such Tyrants that so
domineer with a rod of Iron do not govern by Gods permissive hand of
approbation or benediction, but by the permissive hand of his providence,
suffering them to scourge the people, for ends best known to himself until he
open a way for the people to work out their own infranchisements.

4. That no Government is divine, I mean, by Gods approbation, (for
extraordinary callings I know none in these days) but that which is just and
rational, for there can be no such conveyance of power as is destructive of
humanity; therefore for millions to be at the Command of one man, to obey him
universally in all things, is irrational; for wise men are but men, and the
best men are but men at the best, subject to the faults of the irascible and
concupiscible faculties.

5. That to assume a Government without a title and to act beyond Commission,
to the destruction of those whom they should preserve, is all one in reason;
and so King James (that Phoenix of his age for solid learning) agrees that
there may be a Tyrant as well by Maladministration as he that comes in by
Conquest: To speak of the several Conquests that have been made in this Kindom
by the Romans, Saxons, Danes and Normans, as also whether William the Conqueror
came in upon his Remittor by ancient title I judge impertinent, but this is
clear as Crystal that our Ancestors did voluntarily submit to Kingly politic
Government; that if the Conqueror were a Tyrant for want of title, the
subsequent consent of the people made him or his Successors lawful Kings being
equivalent to an election; as Leah by an after-consent became Jacobs lawful
wife though he was mistaken in the marriage; and an error in the person
nullifies the Matrimony. And the act of our Predecessors is as strong and
binding to us as if it had been our own personal consent: A Law being the act
and deed of the body politic in Parliament, voted by the whole Kingdom as the
whole men sees and hears, instrumentally performed by the eyes and ears; Pan.
anglium. Pan Ae^olium. Pan-Sicilium. The first Pa^liament.
wherein by intendment every man, woman, and child, is vertually present by
representation, or else a statute could not bind them; and a Law binds not only
their makers but their successors, for Corporations never die; as the River of
Thames keeps thought name the new waters perpetually succeed: And though it be
not so clear when this consent was given, yet we find that King H. the 1.
Beaucleark youngest son to William the Conqueror, in the 16. year of his Reign
called a Parliament at Salisbury; which I do not conceive so much to be derived
from the French word signifying Freedom of debate, as Parliamentum quasi pariam
Lamentum, the Complaint of the People* when there is any difference between the
King and his Subjects, his Majesty gives them leave to choose out of themselves
whom they please as Arbitrators, or Vmpiers to determine the matter, wherein
the Subject thought himself secure that he might choose his own Judges; and
this was but equal because the King chose the Judges of the Law; and though it
does not appear that this agreement between the King and people, was reduced
into writing (because that easy co^servatory of printing was not then invented)
yet who knows but that it was written and since defaced, or Imbeziled; for my
part I cannot imagine our Ancestors to be so ^rrational, that they would ever
agree that any man should reign over them as their lawful King, by their full
consents, but upon this condition, that when they found themselves oppressed
and burdened, his Majesty should be obliged to call a Parliament, and to agree
to such Laws (quas vulgus eligerit) as the Parliament should present unto him
for their happy Government, and not to dissolve them till they had done the
business they were entrusted to do for the good of the Kingdom; for Parliaments
never dye intentionally; and why may not such an Agreement be lost? As we know
the Records of many Statutes are not to be found; yet it is written in the
heart of every understanding man that so it was; for how irrational is it to
imagine that the King was not bound to call Parliaments, 36. E. 3. etc.
which by Statutes ought to be every year or oftener, as need shall require: and
if the King might disolve them when he pleased what fickle things were Kings,
what vain things were Parliaments; and though it have been strongly obje^^ed,
that when things have been well settled, the King is to have the negative voice
in making new Laws, though not in expounding the old; because a Kingdom may
subsist without making new Laws, but not without executing the present Laws: I
say that the objector is defective in stated Policy; for the alteration or
enacting of new Laws, is as absolutely necessary as to execute those which are
made; a Kingdom may be as well undone for want of the Kings negative voice, as
for not executing the Laws already established, for the wisest Parliament
cannot foresee what will be best for the Common good the next year; Such
Exigencies of State may happen, and I observe that what has been objected by
the Kings late party to the contrary, has been that the Law is otherwise, but
words are the least part of Reason; that which Mr. Jenkins writes is most true
according to the Authorities which he vouches; but what Authority is it; some
of the Judges of the Common Law; very good, by whom were they made Judges? By
the King. How came they by their places? The Echo is, buy them, for until the
statute of 5. E. 6. All judicial places were generally bought and sold, as
Horses in Smith-feild; for a chief Justices place, it may be 10000. has been
given, and how long to continue? during the Kings pleasure; was it safe for
them to argue for the Liberty of the Subject against the Kings Prerogative? the
Temptation was very great to be for the Kings side in all Arguments; besides,
Parliaments have been discontinued and shortlived: for my own part I do not
much value his judgment, In a question of prerogative, who holds his place at
the Princes pleasure; for to stand to my own judgment or the judgment of him
whom I elect is much alike; yet as there have been in all ages some that have
stood for the Honor of Christ, and resisted unto the death; so there have been
some that have argued for the Peoples Liberties. Bracton says, Rex non habet
parem in regno suo nisi Comites, Fortes^ue.
Barons, et communes in Parliamento, et hanc potestatem a populo effluxam Rex
habet. Another, that Rex est singulis major, universis minor, that the King
has no Peers in his Kingdom but the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the
King is greater then any Subject, but less then all his Subjects, and that he
derives all his power from the people. Fits Herbert and Shelley, that the King
is servant to all his Subjects; set over them for their good; and this is the
voice of right reason, it is impossible to imagine, that ever any man should
have the consent of the people, to be their King upon other conditions, without
which no man has right to wear the Diadem: for when the first Agreement was
concerning the power of Parliaments, if the King should have said, Gentlemen,
are you content to allow Me my Negative voice, that if you vote the Kingdom to
be in danger unless such an Act pass, if I refuse to assent, shall nothing be
done in that case? Surely no rational man but would have answered: May it
please Your Majesty, we shall use all dutiful means to procure Your Royal
Assent, but if You still refuse, we mst not sit still and see our selves
ruined, we must save the Kingdom without Your Consent, though we hope not
against it: But then says the Obiector, where is the Kings power? I answer,
nothing at all diminished: his Majesty has more power then he can imagine for
the preservation and happiness of the Kingdom, which is the end of all
Superiority, but nothing for the destruction and desolation of the people: we
say God is omnipotent, and yet he cannot sin nor do any injustice: shall we say
that the Kings power is diminished, because he may not hurt the people, or that
a man is less in health because he has many Physicians to attend him? nothing
less: for it is impotence and weakness to do hurt and injury: but the King is
empowered for the good of the people: true, but he may not say that is for the
Kingdoms good, which they say is for their hurt: what I do for my own good I
may undo. Methinks this should satisfy every noble Prince; let my Subjects in
Parliament propound what Laws they please for their own security, it is a great
ease to me: if the Laws be not good they may thank themselves, if they be good
the honor is mine, my consent being as the Master Builder that gives the form
and life to the Architecture; and if the Subject suffers I cannot be blamed;
but if the contrary should be Law what miserable things were Subjects; who will
trust his own father with his life? And who can be merry if a King or Governor
may divide his head from his body, or him from his dearest relations by
imprisonment, or otherwise, when he pleases; but here lies the root of all our
misery; we take all for gold that glisters, every thing to be reason that looks
like it, and every case to be Law which we find written in our Law books;
whereas Law is reason adjudged in a Court of Record, where reason is the Genus,
and the Court makes the difference from extraiuditial discourse which may be
rationally, yet is not legally just, if it be not reason the pronunciation of
10000. Judges cannot make it Law no more then the Venetian Madonnas can by
their huge high heels in reality add one Cubit to their stature; as for example
it is a Max me in Law that the King can do no wrong, therefore if he kill or
ravish it is neither Murder nor Felony; I say it is against reason, therefore
against Law; for if the King may kill one man he may kill one hundred, and what
Courtier dare give any faithful advice when the King may without control kill
him or strangle him, and so not be guilty of blood; as the grand Turk that
having promised to spare a man's blood, caused him to be strangled, and so shed
no blood: or something like the case of the Duke of Gloucester by King H. 7.
this was acknowledged by the Tyrant, who having a mind to kill his brother, his
Chancellor told him he might not by Law commit Fratricide, but, says he, is
there not a Law that I may do what I please? and let but Mr Jenkins answer,
whether those Judges, whose Authorities he vouches were not of opinion that
whatsoever the King did, it is in Law no offense, and then all that he has
written or can write against the Parl^ament will not bear the weight of a
feather: and I humbly entreat all indifferent men that read books more for
satisfaction then a desire to contend for any party, but to answer me this
question: Why should there be any more credit given to the opinion and
authorities of the Judges, specially such as paid dear for their places, in
matters of difference between the King and his Subjects in point of property,
then there was to the Bishops for matter of Divinity: were they not both the
Kings creatures alike? Was it the way of preferment by standing for the liberty
of the Subject to get great estates? Have not the Judges in many Countries been
the raisers and first founders of great and noble Families? And were those
estates got by pleading for the liberty of the subject against the Prerogative?
We know who it was, not long since, that got a vast estate, and thinking to
ingratiate himself with his Prince, said, he was seldom or never of counsel in
passing any Pattent but he reserved some starting hole to make it void in Law
if need were, which was as good as an act of Resumption. This is the grand
Error, that subordinate officers are accountable only to the King, and the King
to God, whereas all Judges and Magistrates are entrusted by the people: if the
people give power to the King to chose them, it is out of a confidence that his
Majesty will nominate such as shall most faithfully serve the peoples good, and
when Arbitrators are empowered to choose an Vmpire, he may be truly said to be
chosen by the parties litigant: this ruins Justice, when men in places of
Authority more esteem him that gives them their Commission, then the business
that they are employed about; when their eyes are more intentively fixed upon
the stars of their inclinations who preferred them, then upon the public good
of the Kingdom, for whose sake they were preferred: for when a Magistrate is
made great, the principal intent and meaning of the Law is not his greatness
and honor, but to advance public justice: I, but says one, he is such a man's
creature, raised by him E vilissimo pulvere, must not he requite his love, and
pleasure his Father? No, justice is blind and knows neither father nor mother;
the Judge looks not at the manner of the conveyance of his power, how he comes
by his Authority, but at the matter of his Commission, and the true end of
Judicature: the right understanding of one Scripture, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. makes a
good Judge, the words are plain, and being learned (for learning is a special
gift sanctified for matters of policy and government) observes, that Kings are
a humane Ordinance as well as Corporations and Societies, and concludes that all
those Scholastical discourses of Kings, being Jure Divino, are but trials of
Wit; and by Supreme he intends that the King is supreme to administer the Law,
not to make Laws, much less break them, and Governors sent by him are for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, the want of
this consideration ruined the Judges in point of ship money, the greatest part
whereof were very very learned men.

Haec est, creed mihi, cunctorum causa malorum
Scripturas Domini non didicisse sacras.
I know this Error in judgment undid the Lord Keepers, Finch and Littleton, men
of brave spirits, had they been for public liberties: Lord Chief Justice.
Banks a man profoundly studied: And Mr Jenkins being made a Judge thinks himself
bound in honor, Junare in verba: English men have ever been most thankful to
those whose favor has been their quickening spirit: it is pity any man should be
undone for his ingenuity, and though the Law be rather politic then moral, yet
I wish repentance may be expiatory so far as Salus be not endangered: O but,
says one, all the great Lawyers followed the King! Not so neither, I am sure
the politic Lawyer stayed behind: Ambition and Avarice make many a man argue
against their own liberties how many men in the world are content to be slaves
to some few, that millions may be in servility to them: it being demanded in a
Counsel why so many there present should be of opinion that the Pope was above
the Counsel, it being against themselves: Honest Verideus said, the answer was
easy, because the Pope had so many Cardinals caps, fat Bishoprics and rich
Offices to bestow, and the Counsel had none at their disposing. The Bishops
preached at Court to advance Prerogative above Law: saying, my Lord the King is
like an Angel of light: now Angels all accountable to God only: that the King
is Iure Divino, and are subordinate Officers Iure humano: whereas the Apostle
calls Kings a humane Ordinance, and there is not a man in the Army from the
most noble General to the lowest Officer, but is as much Iure Divino as the
Kings Majesty or the so much desired Presbytery: That David never offended
against Vriah, for he says, against thee, thee only, O Lord, have I offended:
giving the reason that Bathsheba was his subject, and that a man may do what he
will with his own: and that his Majesty was to repent of any oath that he had
made for doing Justice, for being entrusted by God, the oaths are void:
Poenitenda presumptio, non perficienda promissio: The Judges in like manner say
that the King is a speaking Law, and carries all the Laws in his breast and
might call Parliaments and dissolve them at his own pleasure: which if it were
so, what a foolish thing was it to send for Writs and trouble the Counties with
such Iudibrious Elections, like him that in the beginning of his Will devised
20000 l. to his wife, but in the latter end for diverse good causes and
considerations him thereunto moving, revoked the said Legacy, and left her
nothing: When Iezabel had a mind to Naboths Vineyard it was no hard matter to
get Judges to declare the right against the subject: In dark times of Popery
how easy was it for Princes to prefer such men to great places that would be
Instruments to execute what ever they would have to be done; but I have better
thoughts of the present times for now judicial places are well got, and by
consequence well used. I dare say there are not more honest men (the number
considered) the of any profession in the world, then are toward Law in this
Kingdom, and the Subjects would quickly find their usefulness to the state,
were there but one good statute to cut off at one blow all unnecessary delays
in matters of Justice, Root and Branch [which are far more hurtful to the
Kingdom, then ever Bishops were] which God and the Parliament grant. The
Emperor having a mind to a Subjects horse, said all is mine, therefore this
horse is mine: the 2 great Civilians, Bartolus, and Baldus were retained: one
for the King said, the property of all goods belongs to the Emperor; for he
that may command the lives may command the goods of his Subjects, and the
usufruict and possession only is the Subjects: the other Lawyer said for the
Subjects, that the property is in the Subject, and dominion only in the King
according to Law: the Chancellor being Judge said, all is the Emperors: who gave
the horse to his Counsel, and told the Subjects Council he should never be a
Judge so long as he continued of that opinion: but let no man object that I seem
to asperse those learned Judges which are at rest: I honor the memory of all
good Common-wealths-men: and my opinion of them is that according to the
Delatory forms of proceedings, they were good Justices between party and party,
but when the Kings Prerogative and the Subjects liberty came in Competition, I
affirm it confidently that all Judgments have not been according to right
reason: witness the case of the Shipmony, Knighthood money, Tunage, Poundage,
and Monopolies of all sorts, which they did not declare illegal: And how many
Gallant worthys have they suffered to live or dye in Prison, whom they ought to
have set at liberty by Habeas corpus? And he that looks into matters with a
single eye, may easily discern that the Fountains from whence these late
streams of blood have issued, were no other but the pride of the Bishops (a
Generation who hated to be reformed therefore justly abolished) and the
pusillanimity and cowardice of the Judges; for if the Bishops had been
indulgent to honest people, and not Lorded it over the Lords inheritance, (poor
souls they would have been content to have suffered much for quietness sake,
might they have but had the freedom of their Consciences in a peaceable manner)
and the Judges been courageous to have executed impartial Justice between the
King, and Courtiers and the Subject: and in doubtful matter to have inclined to
Liberty, the sword had never been unsheathed.

And for these present Reverend Judges, I have Honorable thoughts of them, but
this I must say (else I should be a Traitor to my Country) that they tie
themselves too much to old forms, and in Courting the shadow of formalities,
and conserving the course of their Court, they neglect the substance of moral
Justice, in not helping speedily every man to his due when the matter comes
fairly before them, for I must live and dye upon it, that he does not deserve
the name of a good Judge that when the right appears to the Court; does not help
the party to it: believe it there is not so great an enemy to the Liberty of
the Subject, as this over-doting upon old forms, as if the Ceremonial Law of
the Jews were to be revived in the Common Laws of England; If a Judge or
Chancellor, 300 years ago, delivered an Erroneous opinion, this must bind us
because he said so; and so if one Judge once err, this Kingdom must be undone
perpetually because the Law is so; Right reason is the wise man's president:
where Judges are learned and solid what need they search for Presidents? And
why may not we make Presidents for others as well as they for us? I never yet
knew a politic Judge in England that, considering the end of the Law is to
speedy justice, would dispense with writs to do right; lose formalities to find
essentials: twelve Such politic Judges would quickly make the Kingdom happy
for moral justice: Taxes we see are multiplied in all Countries, but what way
is there to make the Kingdom amends for all the precious blood and treasure
that has been spilt and expended? Truly one Ordinance for quick and cheap
justice would do it abundantly, that the poor may have justice for Gods sake,
and the rich for reasonable Considerations: The favorites of state have always
magnified the happiness of English men above all other nations in regard of the
Assizes that twice a year Queen justice rides her Progress, and Justice is sent
them home to their doors; but I profess the Kingdom is a great looser by it,
it is a mere sponge to suck away their moneys for little or no Consideration,
matters of the Crown only excepted, and why more have to hang a man for
stealing a sheep then to help a poor man to his just Debt? for what a charge is
it to try a Nisi prius? and when the matter of fact is tried the party is never
the nearer; judgment is far of, the Defendent may dye, or elss writs of Error
brought: that a man is not beholding so much to the Law as to a good purse to
obtain his right; therefore this I would humbly beg of the Parliament for the
present (because to settle a Court of Judicature in every County will require
time and much wisdom to foresee and prevent subsequent inconveniences) that the
Reverent Judges may every Circuit, if possibly to begin this Summer circuit, be
enabled by Commission to hear and determine, besides the Nisi prises, all
private differences between party and party throughout the whole Kingdom, the
matter to be brought before them by Petition the Defendent to have timely
notice in person, or at his dwelling house by Affidavit of two witnesses, in
case he appear not; both parties, to bring their witnesses and evidences, and
the matter being heard to be speedily ended, and execution by the Sherif
accordingly, unless it be very weighty, and then to be adjourned to
Westminster; whereby a difference may be ended in a months time, for 5. l.
charge at the most, which now costs 50, or 100. l. and is 3 years at the least
in deciding, and ends most commonly with the ruin of one party; and the other
gets such a blow that is long in recovering. I know this will be counted a
dangerous design tending to overthrow the Law, but it is only by such as fear
rather the overthrow of their own profit more then they value the Law and the
Prophets; for I am sure they cry out for quick and cheap justice: and I will
burn my books, nay venture my life upon it, that no man can render a reason nor
frame an objection against this, but that I can easily refute it, if this be
granted as a maxim of state, that the Public good and quiet of many is to be
preserved before the private profit of a few, say not that I shall hereby wrong
my own profession: it is all one if I did in reference to the Public good: but
this is a great mistake, Lawyers would get more by speedy Justice, for who had
not rather give his Council 40. s. to end his business in a day, then attend
many months, and give him 10. s. a time for motion upon motion, references and
references: besides no wise man will go to Law for: as matters are carried, the
worst end by Arbitriments is better then the best can be expected by the Law,
all things computed, unless in special cases; and so what is lost in the
hundred is found in the Shire: pray do not say this will prejudice the City, and
keep away Termers: suppose it were so, why should all the blood in the body be
drawn into one vein? When one member swells too much the body pines: but that is
another mistake: for men would bestow that in Clothes and Commodities which
they now spend in Lawsuits: but I hope time will make us wise: but then comes
the old objection, will you have all things arbitrary and uncertain? Nothing
less, but every Controversy to be ended according to reason and every former
President, and Judgment to be authentical and binding so far as there is reason
for it, and not otherwise: the contrary practice is as dangerous to the state
as implicit faith in matters of salvation: for I would but ask this question:
If a Judge beleives in his Conscience that former Presidents were against
reason, whether if he observe them he does not therein condemn himself, but if
he see reason for the Judgment, then it is his own Judgment that leads him, and
not the bare Authority of his Predecessors; but it will be alleged that reason
is malleable, and one reason may be brought against another: truly in matters
of moral Justice it is hard to imagine any great difficulty: that cause, which at
first is a bul-rush, comes to be a Giant: differences for the most part are
plain and very easy at the first beginning of the suit; but when by motion
upon motion, the cause is put out of its course, the matter grows so intricate
that a poor Clyent can scarce get out of the Labyrinth: but my meaning is not
that every rational man should be able to understand the reason of a Law-case:
but that, that cannot be given Law when there is a good reason to be given
against it: as put the case there is a verdict for a Just debt, now whatsoever
can be alleged that such a process did not issue regularly, yet reason says
that the Debt ought to be presently paid; and this can be no more called
confusion, then Mithridate deserves the name of Poison.

And now if I should proceed Methodically, I should argue whether the
Parliament have sufficient grounds to raise Armies as they did, but that is but
to argue whether the Protestants or the Papists be of the true Religion: and
next I should lay down what those just grounds and Arguments were: but that
would savor of Presumption, having been so fully and ungainsayingly declared by
both Houses, and might be unsafe if I should omit any: and at the best prove
tedious to the reader, my desire being not to build upon any man's foundation,
nor to bring Arguments which have been exposed to Public view already, though
I judge them better then my own, yet it is but a kind of cosenage to the reader,
to invite him to make several purchases of the same matter, a trick more Common
then Commendable in this Printing age: yet something I must say concerning
those matters; which is this, that the Arguments and motives which swayed me,
to adhere so cordially and constantly to the Parliament against the late Oxford
party, were rather Scripture grounds and reasons of state, and self
preservation, then Law-cases and Printed authorities; for I always conceived
that the King was obliged, to call Parliaments, as often as the generallity of
the people besought him, and to disolve them til the Parliament said, omnia
been was against his oath, and that he was to consent to all such Laws as
should humbly be presented to his Majesty by both Houses; and when I find in
our Law books, that the King is a God upon earth, as God is a King in heaven
(alas Mr. Jenkins speaks too meanly and lowly of the Kings prerogative) both
in those Incommunicable Excellencies of Infinitness and divine perfection; as
also his Majesty's power and perpetuity, that by a non obstante, he may
dispense with a statute Law: a pure invention to set the King above the Law: I
thought thus, that seldom did any man refuse to be a Bishop or a Judge, and when
I read those cases that it has been often adjudged that the King could do
wrong, I conceive the meaning is that the King should do no wrong; a letter will
much alter the case: for I find that when small offenses and trespasses are not
punished, a reason rendered that the Law regards not small things; the book to
warrant it carrys the sense, that the Law reckons not the minutes and the odd
hours, which make the Leap year; and I find Mr. J^nkins (though certainly a man
deeply learned in Law Cases, and in the Histo^ical part of the laws; I wish he
had so well studied the end of Government, which is the welfare of the people)
vouching Authorities by the halfs, for where he says that Bracton says, the
King has no superior or equal but God, he omits what the book adds, unless it
be the Lords and Commons in Parliament: and so a man might as well argue, that
our blessed Savior said, hang all the Law and the Prophets; because he said
upon these two Commandments, hang all the Law and the Prophets. When I read
that the King may pardon murder, specially if the word murder, be not in the
pardon, I find it contrary to Scripture, and therefore take it to be no Law:
and when I read that the King by his Prerogative may make a 20. s. piece by
Proclamation to go current for 40. s. or to be worth but 6. d. I conceive this
to be against reason, and so against Law, worse then that abominable project of
brass money, as the Honorable Commons were pleased to call it; for if I have
20. s. in my pocket and the King may proclaim this to be worth but 6. d. then
may he take 19. s. and 6. d. from me, and then where is the liberty of the
Subjects? Therefore I conceive that the Kings Prerogative in moneys is for the
well ballancing of trade, and equallity of exchanges between us and other
Nations: in case that other Foreign Kingdoms or states should inhanse or
debase their moneys, the King may do the like for the good of this Kingdom:
that our moneys be not exhausted and drawn out of the Kingdom, if it should be
much dearer here then there; but the purest fallacy that I have met with, is
that, how can the Parliament grant a pardon to others, when themselves sent to
the King to New Castle for a pardon: as if a General pardon which is usually
granted at the end of every Parliament, should prove the Parliament men guilty
of all the offenses thereby pardoned: A general pardon which is in effect as an
act of Oblivion, supposes no particular man guilty, but tollit reatum quoad
mundum: but a special pardon pre-supposes the offense: and must be pleaded: and
so reason speaks it out that the King has no Prerogative, whereby to hurt the
people, but wholly for their good, save only in matters of honor and pleasure,
and in a favorable construction of his Grants to be construed according to his
intention, and not deception: which Privilege every Subject in reason ought to
enjoy, and I wish heartily that his Majesty may enjoy all his ancient and
undoubted Royalties, and Prerogatives, that are according to Scripture and
right reason: besides which there is nothing that can judge between a Prince and
his people but the sword: and let his Majesty's Honor be superior by many
stories, then it was for the preservation of the Kingdom, in all things not
injurious to the Subject, which his Majesty says is all that he desires: and
God forbid he should have any less, but let him not have power to hurt his
Subjects, for he that by Law may do so, though he were the best man living, yet
he is a Potential Tyrant, and his Subjects may fear him, but they can never
love him: and the conceit of such a power, is enough to spoil the best Prince
living: I know some Hispanialized Courtiers and Common Lawyers that having
rested in the Letter of the Law, not looking into the true meaning of it, have
made his Majesty believe that the Parliament have done him wrong, and taken
away his Forts and Castles from him. What reason can Mr Jenkins, or any man
give why the King may not as well command all the money in the Kingdom as all
the strength in the Kingdom, or all the horses in the Kingdom in order to the
Militia? As the Pope commands temporals in order to spirituals, for money is
the sinew of War: Whereas his Majesty was never entrusted by the people against
themselves, but against foreign forces, and that I take to be the meaning of
the Oath of Supreamacy, which was intended against the Pope, that the Pope is
in no sort head of the Church, other meaning I know none in a spiritual way but
civilly, and so it was declared by that gracious Queen Elizabeth about the 13.
year of her reign, which is or ought to be printed: For did ever any rational
people put the sword into the hands of any man to have the point of it turned
against themselves? that 1 Samuel 8. proves that Kings are to fight the peoples
battles, not the people to fight their quarrels: and if it be objected that the
King never intended to hurt the subject with their own sword; I answer that
that is all one, if the people say otherwise, for they must judge, and because
all the people cannot meet together, therefore the Parliament must judge, for not
to argue the point concerning the power of the Militia, which is but to argue
whether a man be bound to kill himself. Put the case there were 20. men
traveling together in a dangerous wilderness, they entrust one as a Captain to
carry the sword, to defend them against all assaults, and command them in order
to their best safety, and make him Governor: at last they are of opinion that
this Cap. intends to betray them, they entreat him to redeliver the sword, he
promises to be faithful to them: now in this case if there were no apparent
ground of jealousy and distrust, the 19. are to be blamed for their levity and
disloyalty, but yet this Governor is bound in justice and common honesty to
restore the sword and not to make a war against the 19. to reduce them to
obedience; for if they will be destroyed, who can help it? God does not save any
man against his will, but of unwilling makes him willing: nor must a Kingdom be
saved against their wills: a Prince is not to lead his people by their noses,
but to open their eyes to see their own welfare and embrace it: which if they
will not, their destruction is of themselves, they do ill, but the Lord will not
have them cudgelled into obedience, for this we find an example in Scripture of
the 10. Tribes which revolted from Rehoboam their lawful King who had 180000.
chosen warriors to fight against them, 2 Chro. 11
but the Lord forbad; and though that be called a rebellion, in the last verse
of the former Chapter, the reason of that is, because Rehoboam was King by Gods
institution and immediate appointment, and in such a case might Rehoboam have
said, ye have not rejected me but the Lord; but now all lawful power is
originally in the people, and all lawful Governors chosen by them; A Conqueror
has Jus in re, not ad rem.
(for a Conquest is but a great ^obbery) good Kings reign by Gods approbation,
Tyrants by his permission til the people can free themselves; Kingdoms at first
were Elective till good Kings prevailed to have their children succeed them,
and certainly hereditary Kingdoms are best to prevent Factions: and therefore
the 19. will have their Captain command them no longer; he may not fight against
them, if he could procure any to take his part: nor will it avail to say that
the 19. are Ignorant or distracted; for he must not question the judgment of
his Electors: if the people know not how to choose a King, then the Election is
void, and so a defective title, but they that have judgment to consent, for
reasons best known to themselves, may alter and dis-assent, for this ease
stands upon a special reason, differing from all cases of bargains and
contracts, that rights vested cannot be divested, and what pleased at first may
not displease at last: the King is born for the good of his subjects, not they
for his good, further then to give him honor, reverence and recompense: this is
the will of God to prevent Wars, which must otherwise follow inevitably: and
it is a principle of right reason that as things are creat^d, so by the same
power they are d^ssolved; they which may institute may destitute; it
strengthens our faith in the resurrection, that the same power which made us of
nothing can raise us out of the dust. Mistake me not, I say if all the 19.
should so agree, if but 3. or 4. should adhere to the Captain, I d^liver no
opinion in that case: but I am against that opinion that if any County or
borough. Town shall send for their Knights and Burgesses to return home and
vote no longer, that in this case they ought to come back, because no man can
be represented longer then he pleases; this erew to destroy the frame of the
Government: For though every several Shire and Borough make their several
Elections, yet they are sent not only to vote for the good of their own County
or Town, but for the general good of the Kingdom; and they make not several
distinct representative bodies, but one entire representative body in the
nature of a joyntenancy: as the Soul is in every part of the body, so every
Member sits in the House for the good of the whole Kingdom, as if chosen by all
the people: the several Elections being by agreement for the more convenience.
But when B^rgesses are chosen for one Town, all the rest give their consents to
such an Election, and so in Law it may be called the Election of them all, as
between partners in a Drade, one brings 1000 l. the other as much, this is laid
out in Commodities as a common stock, now none of them alone has power over
any part of the goods, though it may be purchased with his money, but all
things is to be done by a joint consent, no dissolution to be by parts, that is
to dismember the body, otherwise this would follow, that if two Burgesses voted
only for that Town which sent them, if one voted in the Affirmative and the
other in the Negative nothing should be done in that particular: but that which
I chiefly intend in this discourse is not only that there may be a right
understanding but endeared affections between the King and Parliament: and
truly I know no way like this, to be persuaded of each others sincerity, that
they acted according to their judgments and that light which they had revealed
to them: that his Majesty would believe, as the truth is, that the Right
Honorable Lords and the Honorable Commons did nothing but what they conceived
themselves in Honor and Justice obliged to do for the safety of the Kingdom,
and that otherwise they could not have answered it to those whom they
represented: and that the Parliament would be persuaded that his Majesty did
nothing but what he conceived himself in Honor bound to do, without which he
could not have given an Account to God nor his people with comfort; for
possibly there may be an invincible Ignorance of one another right. The
Cananites were in possession of a lawful title, the Lord commands Joshua to
dispossess them; who having a Command from God may lawfully fight, and they not
knowing of Gods Command might lawfully defend themselves: now in this case if
the Lord had not intended a National Church and the destruction of the
Cananites, why might not an Israelite and a Cananite have been good friends,
and said thus one to another, truly what you did you had some color of reason
for it, at lest you thought you did for the best, it may be I should have done
so, had I been in your case: therefore let us do as we would be done by, as
there have been Arguments framed against each others proceedings, so I wish
heartily that the Kings Majesty and those evil Counselors who were about him
(he is now guarded with Angels in comparison) would argue thus for the
Parliament; the Kingdom petitioned both Houses to raise Arms for their
preservation; what could the Parliament do in such a case, having voted that
there was an apparent design to inslave the people? had it been sufficient for
the Members to have told the people; Truly we gave his Majesty faithful advice,
besought him to reform what was amiss, but he hearkened to his Courtiers and
would not; and so we left him to do what he pleased. What would the Kingdom
have said in such a case? would they not have exclaimed against their Knights
and Burgesses, as the French do against their twelve Peers which being
entrusted to oppose Tyranny prevaricated. Oh ye unfaithful men I was there ever
so great a breach of Trust in the world heard of? Did we Elect you to
infranchise us, and do you suffer us to be inslaved? Would you not put us into
a Posture of war to defend our selves, but suffer us to be destroyed insensibly,
since you will not deliver us, our freedom must come some other way; what can be
said in reason against this? And so that the Parliament would argue for his
Majesty, amongst others to use but this: What? must his Majesty give his Royal
Assent to all such Laws that both Houses shall present unto him? Put the case
then, that the Lords and Commons in England present an Act for the free
exercise of the Protestant Religion in this Kingdom, and the Lords and Commons
in Ireland present an Act to his Majesty for the establishing of Popery in that
Kingdom; what should his Majesty do in such a case? Must not his Majesty see by
his own eyes and make use of his own Judgment and discretion what is fittest to
be done therein? Are not the sinews of the Leviathan perplexed, as Job speaks,
is not this a ground to scruple the verity of that doctrine, that his Majesty
ought by his oath to ratify such Laws as shall by both Houses be agreed upon? I
have known many Clyents reconciled after tedious suites, and long endeavoring
the ruin of one another; but it has been upon this ground, that they have
verily believed that nothing was done by either of them maliciously, but in
order to the obtaining of their several rights; and that by Gods blessing has
been an expedient, not only to tie their hands, but to unite their hearts, that
it may be so between the King and Parliament, is my daily prayer: til it be so,
this Kingdom will not be settled in peace and tranquillity. The very truth is,
that by the Letter of Scripture and some Law cases, the King had a Color to do
what he did, as Gods Ordinance, having an undoubted right to the Crown by
descent, as his proper inheritance which no other Court in the Kingdom could
have the least shadow of reason to do if they should break trust with the
people.

I have but one stair more to mount before I come to the Army, and that is, how
far the Kingdom is to be obedient to the King and Parliament in all cases? And
herein I desire to be carefully observed; because the Kingdom cannot be
convened in it is diffusive body, therefore it is formed into an artificial body
in the high Court of Parliament, which without all question is the Supreme
Court, from which there is no appeal to any other, concerning positive Laws,
for the deciding, and determining of the arduous and most difficult affairs of
the Kingdom, both for titles of land when they please, and all the great
turnings and windings of state, it being most proper to determine the greatest
matters in the highest Court; in which cases though the judgment of Parliament
be not unerrable, because the members not impeccable: yet it is Inevitable; for
the Public judgment of state resides there; and it is the will of God that for
the preventing of wars and bloodshed that there should in every nation be some
supreme Court to whose determinations every private man is to submit, as it is
in Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 17.11.
possibly many of the Jews might conceive that the ju^gment of the Iudg^s and
Levites was not always right, yet it must stand to prevent a greater evil; I am
not of opinion with learned M Jenkins, that acts of Parliament, which carry a
seem^ng repugnancy are void, or that the Judges have power to control acts of
Parliament, and construe them to be void, for this is to erect a higher
tribunal; the Judges are obliged to expound the Statute according to the intent
of the makers, otherwise they that are at the Oars should row against them that
sit at the stern. The intent of the Legislators is the Empress and Qeen Regent,
which the Judges are strictly to observe, and therefore that objection of a
repugnancy in the countenance of this Pa^liament (for how can ther^ be a
Parliament every 3 year, if this continue 7 years) is but a flourish, for in
all acts, grants, and wills, such an Exposition is to be made that every word
may have its weight and be of force the meaning is pla^n, that after this
Parliament the^e shall be a Triennial Parliament, and some incongruity, no more
then when a man makes a Lease for 7 years and after from year to year, and no
ac^ shall be construed to be void when by any reasonable intendments it may be
made good; the Judges being Assistants in the upper House, cannot but know the
meaning of the statute if it should be penned obscurely, and by the same reason
they ought as well to take notice of every private act as those which are
general, and not to hazard the right of the Subject upon a nicity of Pleading
which is so fatal to many men's rights: but it behooves Mr. Jenkins to hold that
Judges may expound acts of Parliament to be void: when himself being a Judge in
Wales, nullified Ordinances of Parliament, made for the liberty of the Subject,
which he ought to look upon as an Ordinance of God, not to be disputed but
obeyed: but this is the fruit of his studying Law upon the Sabbath days:
whereof he was wont so much to glory, that he gained one year in 7, in his
study: but all the hurt I wish him, is, that he would now study the Law of God,
which is the only touchstone of all humane Actions, and the Archetype of all
Governments: and what is against it, is pure innovation. But this I agree, that
a statute against the law of God or nature is void, for man having no hand in
making the laws of God or nature, they may not intermeddle in the Changing or
repealing of them: but any positive law made by man, may be altered by the same
Authority: and therefore the meaning of that in Dan. like the Laws of the Medes
and Persians, which are unchangeable, is to be intended, either that those Laws
were only a ratification of the Law of God or nature: a^ the Counsel of Trent,
that gave Authority to the holy Scripture, or else that they might not be
altered by the Emperor without the peoples consent. In the next place I
conceive that no fundamental law of this Kingdom can be altered by the King and
Parliament: but my meaning is, that nothing is fundamental but what is for the
safety and happyness of the people: that which was no Law before it was
written, that may be altered; but the happiness of the people was a Law before
all written Laws. Magna Charta was Law before it was written, and collected but
for easier Conservation, being for the peoples happyness: and that statute in
42. E. 3. that every Law made against Magna Charta, shall be void, is no more
then the voice of Reason: for the Foundation cannot be removed, so long as the
building stands. It troubles me to hear, when I am saying that Lawyers ought
not to make the trouble and disquiet of poor men, the Basis of their Grandor;
And that it were happy for the Kingdom, if the Parliament would device some
expedient for summary justice: what says one, will you destroy all, and change
the fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom? As if the ease and welfare of the
people should be their destruction; I look upon it as one of the most necessary
works to be done in this Kingdom, and that wherein there will appear much
opposition, and if it be not suddenly done, it will not be done in this
Generation; our Laws are actually or potentially the best in the world, for if
any thing be amiss, the Parliament may reform it according to right reason,
which is the soul of al humane Laws without exception, and no Law ought to live
longer then the reason of it continues: away with all bugbear objections, and
after Naseby fight lets never distrust God for any thing: I mean let us have
such Laws as are not directly against Scripture: and for which some reason may
be given besides the course of the Court: for that, for which probable reason
may be rendered on both sides, is not fundamental; as the eldest son to inherit
the whole estate: certainly there ought in all reason some provision to be made
for the young Children, if the Father make none for them in his live time: but
true it is, that many positive Laws are fundamental secundarily, to alter which
would be full of danger and inconveniences, unless it were most evident, that
great utility would thereby arise and accrue to the Kingdom: but that is not my
present work, something I intend concerning Government in general rules by
which no man can conceive himself prejudiced: as by general rules of Physic,
no wise man can expect to be cured.

1. That the people girt the sword about the King, the King says our Law books,
is the fountain of honor, and it is true for the peoples good, therefore does
the King make Judges and Magistrates great, that they may not be afraid to do
right and justice to their brethren, so that indeed the state confers honors by
the King, as the King gives the Alms by his Almoner: they presume that the King
will make no Lords but such as shall be an honor to the Kingdom, in whom the
Kingdom shall be preferred: the Judges Robes are for the Kingdoms good, to
strick a terror into offenders; if the Kingdom or the Parliament which is the
state contract, can justly except against those which are honored, that is, if
they by their greatness oppress the people, and Lord it over poor men, the
honor ought not to continue, for all Privileges and Preeminences are forfeited
by abusers: no Privilege which is a private Law must oppose Public welfare:
Indeed nothing done without the states allowance is allowable, that is nothing
against the fundamental good of the people; and truly the main end of
Parliaments is, to supervise the Public Magistrates, to see that Ministers of
justice be just and execute justice impartially: If Kings did always prefer
good men and conferr the great offices of trust and judicial places upon the
most idoneous and best men in the Kingdom, which are Infra Causam meriti, that
best deserve them, there would be the less need of Parliaments; I mean officers
of the Kingdom, for there are officers of the Empire for the Administration of
Public justice, and officers of the Emperors as his Domestical servants;
answerable to our distinction of the Kings natural Capacity, and his politic
Capacity, art is always the perfection and never the destruction of nature. Let
me but humbly observe a little defectiveness in state policy concerning the
Kings Council: That the Regal heirs have not in their princely education,
Tutors to instruct them in that which most concerns the good of the Kingdom,
which is, Counselors to acquaint them in the fundamental laws of the land: how
improper is it, that the Kings Counsel should be least of Counsel with his
Majesty: but by per-audience to gain other Clyents, and be engaged in other
men's business, when they should be attending his Majesty, still presenting the
law before him, which is the golden rule of justice. Judge Fortescue holds it
necessary for the peopl^s happiness, that the King see with his own eyes, what
is for his peoples good, that so he may reward the most virtuous, the Fr^nch
King is enjoined to pray so much every day, to be exemplary to the people, how
happy would it be if the nobles and Grandees of state would study that
fundamental and true end of Government, which is the w^lfare of the people! The
young Prince of Persia has 4, Tutors for Religion, as many for the Law, but 2,
for Martial Exploits (for they said for the King to know how to ride the Great
horse is but half as good for the Subjects, as to know the law by which he
wears his Crown) and one Tutor for every moral virtue, patience, courtesy,
temperance, chastity etc.

2. Not to argue whether we live under a Government mixed and coordinate, or
simple and subordinate; it is a common Tenent that the Empire France and Spain
are merum Emperium, England, Sweden, Denmark and Poland a mixed Empire, the
Venetians a pure Aristocracy, Holland, Geneva, etc. Jurisdictio sine Imperio:
that, of the 6. Kings that be in Christendom, Fran^e and Spain have too much
power, Sweden and Poland too little for their title, England and Denmark just
enough to make themselves splendid and their people happy. All agree that the
King cannot make a Law without a Parliament, and I cannot but exceedingly
magnify the mixture of the 3. estates; the superlative trust by Law is in the
King, Lords and Commons; ('it is but loss of time to look back into the power of
the Bishops, for it is not much above 100. years since there were Statutes
enforced for the Popes supreamacy) yet so as if the Lords and Commons perceive
that the King by evil advice undermines the subjects liberties to the manifest
indangering of Salus, they must then necessarily suspend the operation of that
mixture; as when 3. men are to carry a weight, if one plucks back his hand, the
other 2. must bear it: for the consideration of public utility is always
equivalent to a necessity, Causae necessitatis and util tatis aequiparantur in
Jure: and therefore it is an error to say the people do not trust the right
honorable Lords because they do not choose them: Their Nobility was acquired
and is continued by noble actions; those noble Peers that have not deserted the
Parliament, but continued faithful and adventured their lives and honors for
the public safety deserve eternal praises, and in the multitude of such
Counselors there is much safety to this Kingdom; for all true Honor consists
in virtuous endowments and their improvements, the principal whereof is
faithfulness to the Kingdom, expressing their honorable endeavors after that in
works of m^rcy, justice, peace and love. The King is ever present by his power;
the Lords present in their persons, and the Kingdom represented by their
choycest members, who are empowered for themselv^s and the whole Kingdom, so the
whole Kingdom is figuratively present by a part taken for the whole (therefore
the words Comm^ssioners or Arbitrators, or Feoffees in trust, of exceeding
their power and such instances used by many, are in my opinion very improper);
now the honorable House of Commons being best acquainted with the Kingdoms
Condition, all good laws do move primarily from them, which being transmitted
to the Lords for their Lordships concurrence, it is no small security to this
Kingdom in peaceable times, to have the reasons of the Law solemnly debated and
perpended in the presence of the reverend Judges; for ever, amongst Eagles
eyes, two eyes may see more then one, and after their Lordships Concurrence,
the Kings Majesty desires to be satisfied of the reason and equity of the Law
before he gives his Royal Assent; by such wise and great deliberations Counsels
prove most mature and happy, as Corn that is long in ripening. I conceive that
the noble Peers were originally entrusted by the people as Guardians of the
Contract which the King made with them, and these noble Lords follow the King
as the Planets the Sun in the Zodiac, from whom they receive their light and
splendour for the public good; and the prevarication of some which have given
his Majesty pernicious Counsel, as Eve tempted Adam (that had been sufficient
to have undone himself and his posterity, but that the Law of England lays the
blame upon the evil Counselors) makes the fidelity and gallantry of the rest
more glorious and illustrious: I would but humbly beg from that noble body,
those great luminaries of State, that as their Lordships and their noble
Families are exempted from the Presbyterian Di^cipline, so they would be nobly
pleased to dispense with such who with any quiet of conscience cannot conform
thereunto; that no coactive violence may be offered to such as be religious and
peaceable in their differences, for that no rational doubt can be destructive
of State Policy, as that noble Pe^r says, Lo. Brooks.
who went to heaven in a fiery Chariot. And being upon my knees I would humbly
beg of our most honorable Worthies 3. things:

1. An Ordinance for the Redemption of our poor brethren in Argiers and Tunis,
which are Captives and Galley-slaves to the Turks: If money be wanting, oh, why
is there not more general Collect^ons for that blessed purpose, far better then
to give to free-schools, and because they are far of;

2. That in the interim the many poor slaves and hunger-bitten Prisoners, in
and about this great City and other places of the Kingdom, which are ready to
starve, and no more able to pay those moneys which they lie in for, then to
fly; and certainly to clap a man in prison til he can fly or pluck down
Paul's, would be a great blemish to the Government of this Nation: Reason
commands no impossible things, and a good Ordinance to be made for the sale of
men's estates for the paym^nt of their just Debts.

3. That some effectual course maybe thought upon to abate the price of Corn,
specially barley, that the poor might not starve, which might easily be done by
allowing fewer alehouses, and the statutes for selling a quart of beer or ale
for a penny, speedily put in execution. What a sad thing is it, that in a
plentiful Kingdom many poor people should be ready to starve: oh, where are the
bowels of English Magistrates? why should rich men have superfluities til poor
men have necessaries? Let the King and great ones feast and the poor many times
fast, but let no man starve; truly the ^ery Essence of a Parliament is freedom;
a new Pope kept a Gaudy day to rejoice, because all his sins were forgiven, and
that he was now free from the censure of all men: and being a Gentleman, ask't
a Cardinal, what shall I do now to show my love to the Romans? said he, pray Sr.
forgive us all our si^s, and make us as free as your Holiness. The Honor shall be
the Parliaments, the happiness, the peoples. And here I would humbly pray those
excellent Justiciaries to receive all complaints, Petitions, and Informations
from whomsoever they come: I have thought sometimes attending some clients
business, and hearing poor suitors complain of their long attendances, but if a
man had some Information to give of a new Spanish-Fleet, or some dangerous
^nvasion to be made against this Kingdom, he could scarcely be heard: in
Holland when the general states are in Council at the Hague, there are always
some appointed to come forth to receive any information that can be given for
the Public good, and if any man says he has business of Importance to
Communicate, he go^s into the Counsel house: if it be frivolous he is well
laughed at for his pains, and it may be fined: but to what purpose should there
be a freedom of debate in a Counsel* if there be not freedom of Information to
the Counsel?

In the last great frost the River near Anwerp (that beautiful town in
Flanders, which Charl^s the 5. said, was fit to be seen only upon Holidays) was
all frozen over as the Thames was: and about 2. a clock in a fair Sunshine
afternoon, there being at the least 1000. people upon the River, the Council
being sat, there comes an old fisherman running and sweating to the
Common-Counc^l door, and said, he must be admitted instantly about
extraordinary business, who went in and told the Council, that if they did not
use some policy to get the people of from the River, they would instantly be
drowned: for he perceived by the clouds, or some skill that he had, that the
Thaw would be so sudden, that the ice would break within a quarter of an hour.
The Council without any further dispute (for the matter had not been great if
he had been mistaken) Commanded instantly the bells to be rung backwards, and
the drums to be beat up, which the people upon the River hearing, thought it
was a fire in the City, or that the enemy was approaching or some other
extraordinary matter, made all possible speed From the river; yet not so fast
but that there were at the least 50 drowned, for it grew dark of a sudden;
there was a great shower the Ice broke, and the Thaw so unexpected that in
probability had not this poor man's information been received, the most of them
had lost their lives. How hard a thing is it for Clients and Counsel too to get
into many places of Justice? The Door-keepers are so hasty and angry if a man
do but ask them any question in the most submissive language, and many of the
Clerks so teasty and brinish, as if they were composed of that pillar of salt
that Lots wife was turned into, and so unaccostable that I profess a man may
far easier have success to a noble Lord, or a worthy Member then to them: it is
a shame to see how they make poor Clients dance attendance after their pipes; I
profess if they do not reform their currishness they shall be known to all the
Kingdom for their inhumanity; I confess the ingenuity, and readiness to give
content with all civility, of those which attend the right honorable the Lords
and Commons, and some others, is much to be commended: O but how difficult a
matter is it to get a motion in some places of Justice? if a man could be
dispatched after four or five attendances it were brave, and that which is most
lamentable, it is all one if a man's Client be a prisoner: whereas a politic
Judge would ask at his first sitting, Is there any motions concerning life or
liberty or dower for Widows or Orphans, and dispatch poor men first; and them
that can spare most Fees let them tarry; I know one that has been assigned
Council for 26. Paupers and could never be heard or above four or five of them;
it is a po nt of great ^ngenuity in Lawyers to m^ve first for hi^ poor C^^nt
without his Fee; I have heard many of my lea^ned Masters that they would freely
move for any poor man as often as, he should desire, if it might not hinder
them f^r their other Clients; it is a gallant spirit trul^, though it be t^
commend our selves, yet it is a truth, and a man may commend himself to be
commanded and employed as David did; but some are l^ke Rocks and will not be
moved. What do you to me with your Paupers at the latter end of the day? When
God knows he came two or three hours before the Count was sat. What! do you
think all to be heard? As if we came not to be h^a d bu^ to hear others.

3. That free people in their right wits never covenanted against the Law of
God o Nature, nor meant to inslave themselves to the lusts of one or more whom
they elected or consented to be their Governors; for the end of Government is
the welfare, peace, liberty, safety, propriety, and all kind of ha^piness of
the people; were it not for which there would be no end of Governors nor Laws,
nor can a Kingd^m be bound to any condition destructive to any of her own
Members. Law is but the rule, safety is the and of Government; now the end as
it is first in intention, so it is always more noble then the means, for the
means, as means, is always inferour to the end, as he for whole sake a garment
is made, is more honorable then the raiment; so health an^ strength are the
chief principal ends of diet, food and physic being the means, therefore are
inferior, so are all Governors subservient to the peoples welfare, as it is
declared in that most excellent Declaration of the 17. of May, 1646. which
deserves to be engraven in marble Pillars, that the welfare of the people, is
the suprem Law; salus pop^li, is the end of all ends, for whose sake all
positive Laws may be ended, and must expire like dead men; for the Law is but
Lord of particular persons, the C^^munity is Lord over it, nay, the^e is no Law
of G^d that stands in competition against the safety of the people; sacr^fic^
must do homage to mercy, the morality of the Subjects must be suspended to save
the life of a sheep, how much more for the welfare of the shep^erd; if it be
lawful to br^^k the 4. C^mmandment, in the Lett^r of it, to save a man's life;
how much m^re lawful is it to dispense with the fifth Commandment to save the
lives of mil^^ons? all must stay and Lady Salus must first be secured* the
Letter of the Law must not be killing to the people a whole Kingdom can no more
be ^u^ject to a dead letter then the Romans to their own slaves; and as the
Romans being a people full of generosity and courtesy never more expressed their
gentle disposition then by easy condescending to let their bond men at
liberty; so our Worthies in Parliament can never do a work more glorious then
to infranchise this Kingdom in their souls, bodies and estates; for which they
shall deserve immortal praises.

Q But has not the Parliament an unlimited power and Authority?

Resp. What agreement was between the Counties and the Knights of the Shire,
and the Corporations and Burgesses when Parliaments were first called, no man
can direct^y say; for my own part I do believe that there was some fo^mal
agreement reduced into writings, what power the Kings and Burgesses should
have, and specified in the Indentures of return made betwe^n the Sheriff and
Electors, and the Knights and Bu^g^sses; which trust the Parliam^nt men from
t^me to time, faithfully discharging and Contribu^ing to all Taxes and Charges
out of their o^n estates; the people at last were conten^ to le^ve all matters
indefinitely to their Knights, and Bu gesses, and in many Borough towns, there
was scarce a man that could write in those days; but the matter is not great,
for that which limits all Kings and Councels is the end of Government, which is
the prosper^ty of the people; and all agreem^nts are presumed to be made for
the welfare of the people; No unnatural thing can be presumed, Autho^ity is a
challenge of obedience, legally by such as are empowered by any people Power (to
speak properly) is an ability to put that Authority in execution; now all power
in the people; which they well knowing, were not so careful as they might have
been, to set limits and boundaries to Au^hority, because the strength remaining
in themselves, they could never imagine that any Governors would Command them
to destroy themselves, and therefore these Arguments about seizing upon the
Mil^t^a, and forts of the Kingdom are weak and invalid; if the meaning be any
other ways th^n this, that it is Rebellion for any or many private men to
resist the King, and contemptuously to oppose the supreme Court of the Kingdom,
because they are less then his Majesty, but that both Houses of Parliament can
commit Treason, acting for the good and by the power of the Kingdom, is to
argue that a man may commit Treason against himself, and that a man is bound
with his right hand to cut off his left hand; things which nature abhors.

Q. But what if a free people should make a general Letter of Attorney to some
Governors to make what Laws they please against nature and humanity? May not a
man tie himself to a post as the old Usurer that would bind the young heir to a
Table?

Resp. I answer, the authority is void and revocable, for no power can be given
that is destructive of humanity.

Q. But what if the Governors will not let it go, but act accordinly? for
Domination is a sweet morsel, not easy to be parted with.

R. I answer, that in such a case the people are bound by the Law of God and
Nature, by force to redeem their liberties, they which be empowered must be
overpowred, for free men can give away their freedom no further then as it
conduces to justice universal and paticular. Pha^aohs Law to destroy all the
Israelitish males, or Herod's cruelty, or Lycurgus Law to kill all weak or old
people, or a Law to eat but twice a week, does any man question, but these may
be resisted?

Q. But is not this contrary to Romans 13?

R. Truly 't^s very observable that that Chapter should be sent to that people
which are the only opposers of Civil Magistrates, but the mean^^g is that none
may resist Gods Ordinance; a people may resist all but the O^dinance; now no
Tyranny is Gods Ordinance, there is no such authority; if I be bound not to
resist authority, it is a good plea to say there is no such authority; therefore
all Tyranny is resistable, and that is but to resist the violation of the
Ordinance; if a King would kill any man against Law, there is no question but
he may resist to save his life, for self-preservation is by the Law of Nature;
for when I can have no Justice, the Law makes me a Judge in my own case, as if a
thief set upon me to rob me, I may kill him because there is no justice near to
help me; so if the highest Court in any Kingdom would kill the Kingdom, they may
kill and dissolve that Court because otherwise they can have no justice upon it;
for no man can give away the right of defending his life until he has
forfeited it. I assure you if Kings and Governors be cast at the Bar of Reason,
the Scripture will never relieve them; for God and Reason never differ but in
metaphysics; Did ever God empower any man to do injustice, or to erect a Court
to inslave their brethren? Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? God
f^rbid, the end of Governors is justice, safety and protection, which must not
be lost to preserve forms or private privileges, which must never stand in
competition with Salus. Substances must not be lost for formalities, Justice
must be done, God commands it, if the Commanders will not do it the people must,
have a care of the main is a good Proverb; the main of all is to prefer the
main; I speak all this while when Governors act apparently against their
Commssiions and the safety of the people; he is a Tyrant whom all the people
shall call so; and that supreme Court is Tyrannical, of whom all the people shall
say so, which is hard to imagine of any general convention; for it is not
possible to vassalize the people but themselves must likewise be inslaved.

Quest. But if in such cases blood be shed, who shall be said to be guilty of
it?

Resp. The neglective Magistrate is guilty of all following exorbitances and
extravagancies; he breaks the peace that constrains me to break it for my own
preservation; nothing is more lawless then that Law that would endanger the
Public welfare; not the Actor but the En^orcer rebels against right reason,
and ought to suffer for double enforcing and accusing.

Quest. But which is better of an Anarchy or a Tyranny?

Resp. I have read much for satisfaction in that particular, and truly I
conceive it far better to have no Government at all then a Tyrannical one,
as being better to have no Governors then to miss of the end of Government,
which is the peoples good; I agree it better to have continual sore eyes then
to be stark blind, and that is no good cure for the toothache to pluck out all
the teeth; but the principals of common Justice and honesty are still remaining
in every man, though much defaced, yet not quite obliterated: and that which is
sufficient to condemn the Gentiles, would be a better light to the people then
to give absolute obedience to the will of a Tyrant; for what difference is
there between being governed by the Devil, and a man that is possessed with
the Devil? if there were no Governors in a Kingdom, but every one stood upon
his guard, if a man were foiled at one time he might get the better at another,
if to day he were grieved, to morrow he may be relieved, and no man durst kill
for fear of being killed; for who is so strong but may meet with his match?
therefore less mischief certainly to have it so then a perpetual slavery.

Obj. But it will be objected that Magistrates are but in a dangerous
condition, if the people upon every discontent shall be mutinous and
quarellous, and upon a supposition of injustice done, presently take arms to
destroy Governors and Government.

Resp. Indeed this is diligently to be pondered, and this I take clearly to be
the mind of God, that in Kingdoms and States well settled, many Acts of
Injustice are to be suffered without resistance, and to be past by insensibly:
In a great building a stone that is ill placed must not be removed; certainly
when God commanded obedience to Kings, he considered that they were passionate
men, with like affections, and would have Favorites, as others.

As sufferance is counted by the Papists the highest point of merit; so
certainly sufferance is the greatest wisdom to prevent a greater sufferance in
matters which are sufferable; and I could be content to loose any thing, but my
Conscience and Liberty, and specially for Christians to suffer in matters of
common Justice, and the things of this world; truly, I should highly commend
it, because their Kingdom is not of this world, the loss of a Christians
outward estate is not the loss of his inward comforts; nor is every cruel
Government Tyrannical, it is much better to suffer much under the gracious
influence of Jupiter and Venus, then to live as Vulturs and Cormorants under
malignant Saturn and Mars, like Cannibals feeding upon one another blood: If I
knew that my Father would come into my chamber and beat me for nothing, I would
not resist him, but if I were persuaded that he were resolved to kill me, then
I should defend my self, and if it should come to that sad strait, that I must
be killed or kill, though possibly my affection might choose rather to lose my
own life, then to be the death of him that gave it me; yet my judgment would
prompt that it is self murder in me to betray my own life when I may preserve
it, and though I should esteem my self most unhappy, and rather wish that hand
that did it had been cut off; yet not despair, because it was against my
intention and my will: If I were asked, who was the most unfeigned lover of his
Country, and the Kingdoms best friend? I should answer in two things, He that
is most forward to go ways which are dangerous to himself, and safe to his
Country, whereby I exclude Neuters that will be sure to sleep in a whole skin:
it is not the Innocent Sheeps skin, but the Foxes skins; (when the King of
Sweden approached Frankford, the Citizens sent to him, that they might be
Neutrall till their Fair was past, what says he, Are your Faires dearer to
you then your Consciences?) by Solons Law Neuters were to be hanged.

2. He that is content to suffer, when his private sufferings may conduce to
the Public good; for every English man is a member of the body Politic, and
what is good for the whole, he must conclude to be good for him; it is true,
those that will not execute justice, deserve to be executed themselves; but
consider whether sufferance or resistance conduce most to the common good;
There are some Scriptures which seem I confess, to be contradictory, We read
in the Book of Joshua and Judges, how a suspicion of Idolatry causes Israel to
assemble to wars against Reuben, and Mana^seth, and against Benjamin, for the
Levites Concub^nes, all rising as one man, saying, Deliver us the children of
Beliall; and Jonah was cast out of the ship, that would have been the wrack of
them all; David took up arms against Saul in his own Kingdom, his King, his
Master, as in his house and of his Table and Family, fled to Saul's Enemy to
Akish, and offered to second him against Saul, fortifyed Ketlah one of his
Towns against him; and if Saul had stopped the Cave to have pined him, doubtless
he wou^d have used means to get out; and yet God was his Counselor by
discovering the Princes of Keilah their intentions; and the people cried all
with one voice, Jonathan shall not die for the good he has done to our
Country: and the Scripture speaks plainly, that tribute is to be paid so far
as the subjects may pay tribute to God, for this cause pay we tribute; I give
such reverence to the holy Scriptures, that when I find a president, for which
I do not understand the reason, I conceive there was a reason for it in those
times, which is now absolete; things were done by special inspi ation, which
are not exemplary to us, nor may we judge where the Scripture is silent whether
it was well or ill done; but I am clearly of opinion, that in a Kingdom well
composed, if one man or 100 men should suffer in the Kingdom, that the
subjects ought not to take up arms suddenly to right themselves, but expect
with patience till the Authors and procurors of injustice be brought to condign
punishment; for when an evil in State Policy cannot be removed without the
manifest danger of a greater to succeed, wisdom must give place to necessity,
(which all Kingdoms must make use of ordinarily) and people must studdy when
the best manner of Government is not possible without great danger to be
obtained, to make the best of the pre^ent; when the best things are not
possible, to make the best o those that are; as we say, to make the best of an
ill game, and not to throw it up, and say they will play no more, it is not the
part of a fair Gamster so to do; when all things are quiet in a Kingdom,
then consider how that which must be endured may be mitigated, and the
inconveniences countervailed; but if the State collective in the whole body of
it, or the State contract in a Parliament or Senate, shall upon good grounds
conceive that the point of that sword, which they put into the hands of their
Governors to protect them, is by evil advise turned against themselves, in
this case clearly the sword must be wrested out of the Trustees hands; if the
Master and the Mate be drunk, all the Passengers must save themselves; if the
Dogs will not bark, the Geese will cry when the Gauls are scaling the
Capitol: for no inconvenience can be greater; and this was the Parliaments
case for raising Forces; they wisely considered before they Voted any Army,
that in that condition the Kingdom stood, the remedy could not possibly be
worse then the disease, for the disease was the utter subversion of Laws and
Liberties, and the destruction of the Protestant Religion, at least in the
power of it; for truly to speak my thoughts freely, I do not think that the
difference between the late Oxford Party and the Parliament, was whether we
should be Protestants or Papists, but whether we should be formal Protestants
at large or Professors in the power of Religion: and God grant that this may no
longer be the Controversy in this Nation.

But because tediousness and delay has ever been an enemy to this Kingdom, I
shall say no more in a subject that has been so much controverted concerning
the late unhappy differences, but shall apply my self to the present juncture,
and first concerning the Army.

1 Pet. 3.15.
BLessed Peter bids Christians to be ready to make an Apology for their faith;
but truly there needs no Apology for the Army, unless it be for their too much
patience, in suffering the Kingdom and themselves to be so long abused bysome
Incendaries of State, who care not to set all on fire to warm themselves; For
had they come to the Houses the next day after they were declared Enemies, and
demanded Justice against the chief Promoters and Contrivers thereof, it had
been most just, by the Laws of God and man; and I am confident, that there was
never any former Army in the world, but would have done it. That such Gallant
men which have kept some of the chief Contrivers heads upon their shoulders,
for an humble Petition presented to their Noble General, (which all Soldiers
by the Law of Arms may do,) should be voted enemies and disturbers for that
which since has been acknowledged to be but just, was the most monstrous
ingratitude that ever was heard of under the Sun since the first moment of its
Creation; and sure they durst not so justly have provoked them but that they
knew they were acted by more noble principalls, that though they had the sword
in their hand, yet they durst not offend God, Religion being to them the
strongest bridle. But whom God will destroy for their great Provocations, he
first dementates; they have rejected the Counsel of God, and what wisdom is
there in them? Policy is a branch of wisdom, and all wisdom is from God:
but this I must premise, that that Declaration was not in judgment of Law any
Act of the Honorable House; for the most Honorable Houses being the
Protectors of our Laws, the Preserve^s, Surveyers, and Defenders of all our
lawful Liberties, and the Haven and Refuge of all that are oppressed, it
cannot possibly be imagined that they in their great wisdoms should (unless
misinfo^med) vote them enemies to the State, and disturbers of the Peace
thereof, which with the adventure of their lives have saved the Kingdom, and
preserved the Peace thereof. I say, under favor, we can no more imagine it,
then we can the Sea to be poisoned; but it was in Law a Declaration of their
malevolent intentions, who exceedingly misinformed and seduced, and did what
in them lay to poison the very fountain of Justice who suddenly contrived it in
an illegal way against express order, at an unparliamentary hour, and so a
mere nullity, rather a Nocturnall surprise then a solemn act of Consultation:
Livery and Seisin made in the night is void; if a man be robbed in the night,
there is no relief for him, it being no time for travel; no distress can be
taken for rent in the night time, but a distress for damage Feasant may, for
the necessity that else the beasts will be gone; and so by a general consent
our Noble Senators have broken their sleeps, and sat upon the Lords day in
cases of great importance; but was there any such pregnant necessity to vote
that night against the Army? I know that the supreme Court can never ty it
self to any times or hours; yet if forty Members shall go into the House at
twelve at night, when it was adjourned till the next day, and vote any thing to
the indangering of the Kingdom in a second and more bloody war, is not this
a pure nullity? but I shall say no more concerning that which has been sower
herbs to Gods people, that the walls and bulwarks of the Kingdom should be
looked upon by any as thorns and briars: because I consider that things
extinguished may not by Law be revived, but this I am confident that our Noble
Worthies and the Army are very great gainers by it; certainly no vote this
Parliament has more endeared the Honorable Houses to all ingenuous men then
the revocation and expunging of it; For though it be easy for the highest
earthly Tribunal to be mistaken by misinformation, it is the rarest thing in
the world not to justify an error. Every Court is more stiff to maintain
what they have done, then careful to do nothing but what in right reason may
be maintained; the magnitude of negotiations and multiplicity of votes, many
times like apples may hinder the maturity of one amongst 10000. which is not
the least dishonor to the great tree of life in our English Paradise the
Parliament, whereupon grows and which is as the very tree of life of all our
temporal liberties. Who but a David, a Job, a Peter, or a Paul, will testify
such a sweet Spirit of Christian Ingenuity? And St. Austin got himself more
love and honor by his book of recantations then all his other works besides,
and the Army undoubtedly has acquired much honor by that Noble retractation
and obliteration, being an actual and effectual justification, and lost none
by the publication of it, for no dust can stick upon pure marble: yet let not
the chief promoters of it pretend innocence, nothing but repen^ance can be
their vindication; Indeed our Savior says that they shall think to do God
good service by killing his servants, this is their case who are the real
disturbers and troublers o^ the peace of this Kingdom; they thought to
promerrit by Sacrificeing the Children in the sight of the Father; There was a
great King that was resolved to pardon all the Treasons, and Rebellions
committed against him, till at last he espies the blood of his son sprinkled
upon the Traitors garments, and then no further condonation; The Lord will
bear with tyrants and oppressors long, as in Turkey, Russia etc. against that
rule Nullum violentum est perpetuum, because the times of their Ignorance God
regards not, and they meddle not with the apple of his eyes which is
conscience: but that pretenders or professors of Religion, which had scarce
time to bless God for their own deliverance from Arbitrary power, and the
Bishops domination, should presently become oppressors themselves and
persecutors of their Brethren; as it is to me one of the greatest miracles in
the world, so it clearly prognosticates their ruin, for pride is the Harbinger
of destruction, as Thundering and Lightning are not far asunder, and
ingratitude is seldom punished in another world, What an high esteem and good
opinion had this Army of the Parliament and City? what abundance of love did
they express to them? dear souls! what needed they to have adventured their
lives so freely more then other men? their engagement was not mercinary as
Auxiliaries in France or Spain, who look not at the justice of the cause, but
the best salary, and prolong the war as coveteous Surgeons keep the wound raw
for their own advantage, and so drink the blood of poor innocents; but it was
an honorary service as lovers of their Country that were resolved mori pro
Patria, rather to die an Honorable death then to live a servile life, and
therefore did not make a truce when they had taken one Garrison, and give the
Enemy time to reinforce, like day laborers that care not how long the harvest
continues, but as if they had contracted by the great to save the Kingdom for
so much; surmounted all difficulties, run upon the mouths of the Thundering
Canons (which were invented to deter men from going to war) as if they had
been spirits and not bodies tangeable, or as if they had coveted nothing more
then active Martyrdom, and what wonders were wrought by them in the revolution
of one year requires a better memory and an exacter pen then mine to record,
that the generations to come may call them blessed; for by this Army the Lord
of Hosts has rescued and redeemed the liberties and properties of this Nation,
out of the jaws of all oppressors; to the end I trust that being so delivered,
we may serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness all the days of
our lives; so that I may truly say, that this Army (whom the Lord maugre all
opposition will make glorious Instruments of his praise) has been the breath
of many of their nostrils both in Parliament, Assembly, and City; they had not
long breathed but had been strangled or lost their heads, had not the Army
stood in the gap for them, and yet by these men's good or rather wicked wills,
the Army should not have liberty to breathe in the Land of their Nativity; was
there ever such a mass of inhumanity and ingratitute heard of? What a blemish
lies upon the State of Rome to this day, for their unthankfulness in the case
of one Scipio, and upon the Lacedaemonians, for not erecting Monuments of honor
for Alcibiad^s, and Socrates? Has not England sins enough to answer for, but it
must be guilty of ingratitude? How would not only Romans but Pagans have
erected Statues for the perpetual Honor of the Noble General, Lieutenant
General, and the rest of those Joshua's and Worthies which have been as the
second saviors of this Kingdom? and that which Crowns all, is their
self-denial and humility; willingly do they talk of their errors, but what is
well done the Lord has done it, and it would have been better but for them;
as the Master that guides the Scholars hand to make a letter, the
straightness is from the Master, the obliquity from the Scholar, without whom
it had been better; yet they, and the people of God in this Kingdom, cannot
but rejoice, that the Lord made use of their hands, in this great work of
Reformation; But that I may not only show my own affection to the Army, and
take the Readers affection, but convince his judgment and inform the
understanding in point of rational satisfaction, I shall endeavor, I hope not
without success, to make it very clear, that the proceedings of the Army in
not suffering themselves to be disbanded till the Honor, and the Liberties of
the King, and people, be settled and vindicated; Is clearly justifiable by such
demonstrative Arguments, that the impartial Reader cannot but in his judgment
inwardly assent thereunto. It cannot be denied, but that this Army was raised
to defend the just Liberties of the Subject from all Tyrannica^l U^urpation,
Arbytrary exorbitances and Irregularities, and all ^ppressive ways of
Government, to which end they have bin honest, faithful, and true, as the
Turtle to his Mate; for if all the malice in the world were infused into one
eye, it could not discern the least spot of injustice, or violation of trust in
this Army, for he that is true to his end, can never be said to break a trust;
let but every man consider whose actions have been most suitable, and agreeable
to the solemn League and Covenant, whether the Armies or theirs that oppose
them; and then tell me whether it be better to take the Covenant and to break
it, or not take it, and yet to observe it; whether is better to endeavor the
extirpation and weeding out of the precious corn under the notion of tares and
weeds, or to endeavor by all just means to hinder and prevent the slavery of
this Kingdom under the notion of Order and Uniformity. Read but the Preface to
the Covenant, which is as it were the key to open the mind of the makers [that
having in our eyes the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ] sure that
can be no other then to set up Christ in his Kingly Office as Head of his
Church, for temporal Kingdom he has none; and if man must reign over the
Conscience, where must Jesus Christ reign? and calling to mind the practices
against the Professors of the true Religion, what were those practices, but to
imprison and persecute the best Christians for their Consciences? and the power
of the Hierarchy was principally erected in the Consciences of men, therefore
all Domineering over men's Consciences is to be rooted out, and certainly the
greatest error and heresy in this Kingdom is to assume a power over the
Consciences of Gods people; and an unfeigned endeavor to amend our lives,
there is a personal reformation; and to go one before another in the example of
a real Reformation, that must be intended a public Reformation; not to wait
upon Authority whether we shall serve God or no; but the Cobbler to go before
the Doctor, the Sculler to out-row the greatest Scholar if he can, and not to
hamstring them that would go foremost in the power of godliness, for a man's
general calling of being a Christian does not depend upon the Magistrate. But
why should not such a Discipline be settled universally as the greatest number
of wise and Learned men shall agree upon? The answer is easy, because in very
many Counsels Jesus Christ has been out-voted by Antichrist, and the Assembly
do not say that they are privileged with the privilege of Infallibility: let
the rigid Presbyterians in the Assembly but answer me this Question, whether
two parts at the least in three of all the Ministers in this Kingdom, be not
for a moderated Episcopacy, and the Common Prayer Book? if ever it come to a
National Assembly, differences must be ended by the major vote; that which
they answer, that few or none will be chosen, but of the Presbyterian
judgment, I cannot believe it, for it is a violent presumption that men will
nominate those of their own opinions; if it be replied, that we see in many
places where the Electors have not been very religious, they have chosen the
most religious Professors for the Parliament, that was not for the love of
their Religion, but they knew they were the best Commonwealths men that stood
for the peoples Liberty; nor would that serve the turn if it were so, for the
elected ought in Conscience to vote according to the general meaning and
judgment of the Electors; we see in the Noble Horse of Peers, a Lord that
has a Proxy may vote for himself in the Affirmative, and for the absent Lord in
the Negative, if he send to his Lordship so to do: if four or more Ministers
were chosen by all the Ministers of a County, and sent to a National Assembly,
these men ought not to vote any thing against that which they know to be the
general intent, meaning, and desire of those that sent them; but whether the
general comportment of the Army in all matters universally, and their late
Actions, Remonstrances, and Declarations, be not more pursuant and prosecuting
to the true meaning of the Covenant, the firm setlement of this distracted
Kingdom in a substantial and complete manner, then any thing that has been
published by the contrary-minded, let all the world judge. But when will
heresy cease if there should be such an indulgence as you desire? This
question is answered by B^ccalino, Ragvagli di Parn^sso.
and it is worthy the reading; All the great ones came to the Oracle of Apollo to
enquire concerning themselves, at last came the Bishops exclaiming wonderfully
against errors and heresies, that the Roman Catholic Apostolic Church was
quite destroyed by them, and the Jesuits lamented the want of love and
charity, and said all was for want of order and uniformity; the Bishops
desiring to know when their errors and heresies would cease, and the Jesuits
desiring to know when there would be love and charity; great expectance there
was to know the Answers, at last the Oracle said that errors and heresies would
instantly cease if the Bishops and their Successors were abolished; and that
love and charity would abound when the Jesuits and their Accomplices were
extirpated: Observe two things, first, that persecution for Conscience sake is
the only brand of the Antichristian Church; secondly, that those that complain
so much of errors, are the greatest occasioners of them; and he that bids look
to your purse, is the most dangerous fellow in the crowd. I am sure, if Gods
glory were aimed at, no difference of opinion amongst Protestants could
possibly break the bond of love; may we meet in Heaven together to praise God
eternally, and shall not we live lovingly together under one King? Is there any
man in London but says he hopes to be saved by faith in Jesus Christ? or if
not, shall we send him to Hell unless he disturb the public peace? (which no
man must do, for a Kingdom must preserve it self,) as that precious King E.
6. said, when the Bishops would have had him burnt a Heretic; whither will his
soul go says that young, truly young S. Edward; to Hell said those bloody
Bishops; but he shall not if I can help it, says he; do you endeavor to
convince him; however, I will not send him thither before his time; it is
presumed Thieves and Murderers repent, he does not: Those are bloody butchers,
sons of that scarlet Whore, that would have many men (as free from errors
peradventure as themselves) in their days burnt for Heretics upon the Stat.
of 5. H 4. made against Protestants. Was not that H. 4. a Usurper? Who was it
that murdered, R. 2? Who but purpurated Persecutors and bloody wolves will
deliver poor Christians to death or to cruel jaylors, which is all one; for
there is no magis and minus in persecution. Matters of wrong and offense are
punishable, but not matters of Conscience, unless they be proditorious
positions. If Protestants had been guilty of a Powder Plot in France, I believe
they would never have been tolerated longer: has not England paid dear enough
for innocent blood? God has been reckoning with Us for the blood of Barrow,
Greenwood, Tisdale, Vdall, Cappinger, and Oyers: do but read that excellent
Treatise of that Worthy Author Sir Simon Dewes concerning this Subject, which
is sufficient in reason to end the great controversy of the Kingdom, and to
cast water upon, and extinguish all the flames of our present differences in
matter of error.

2. There is no other expedient left to settle the subjects liberties, but by
the continuance of this Army, for he that knows any thing of the temperature
and constitution of our Governors and Government must acknowledge that in
probability, a Reformation in Courts of Justice, and a meet liberty for tender
Consciences, two things of the highest concernment, cannot without the
intervention and assistance of this Army be expected, for who will consent to
prejudice himself, or derogate from his own profit for the public good: put
case the Bishops were sitting in the House of Lords and the greater part, what
hopes were there to pass an Act for the abolishing of Episcopacy? Let all
Histories be inspected and it will clearly appear that the heart of
oppression in any Kingdom or State, was never broken but by the mediation of
some strength, and therefore we should love those truths which cost so dear:
and this not only in matters of Religion (which was introduced by blood in
Germany, France, Scotland, Poland, Sweden, Holland, and all places where it is
established, save only in this Kingdom; yet the Prophecy was, By Grosted Bishop
to H. 3.
Populum Dei in Anglia non liberari a Papatu, nisi in ore gladii cruenti) but
in matters of Civil Right, and Common Justice. And now that God has prospered
our Worthies in Parliament and made this Army so succesfull, shall the Kingdom
be content with half their liberties? or remove the Court of Wards only, and
let the poor Client be plagued and perplexed in other Courts as he is, and no
hopes of redress? oh happy Indians that have no Law Suits, or suddenly ended.
Concerning both, I trust this Kingdom will ever magnify and reverence them as
the supreme Court; and as all the members of the body have a care of the head,
and venture all to save that; so must all the people of the Land, venture their
lives to maintain the Honor and just privileges of the King and Parliament;
my meaning is, that we ought to have this esteem, not only of this supreme
Court, and the constitution of the Government, but of every particular member,
until it plainly appears that the Acts and Votes against the liberty of the
Subject, and minds his own profit, gain, and the preferment of himself and
his friends, driving on furiously like Iehu amicable and peculiar interest, and
neglecting the public welfare of the people; that being privileged himself
from all suites, is not sensible of the Clyents sufferings. I have often
thought that it were to be wished that Magistrates had suffered in their own
private conditions, that so they might learn to pity others; certainly for a
Parliament man that is elected to guide the Ship of State, to look after the
Cockboate of his own private fortunes, and cares not whether the Kingdom be
Shipwrackt so as he may with the broken plankes build himself a habitation; as
it is the highest Treason that possibly can be committed, as being a breach of
greatest trust; so certainly such a man, to say no more, deserves expulsion
from the Honorable society. And if by the long continuance of Patliaments
(which I take to be the present case) some members shall join confederate
together to advance themselves and their own party, and d^presse all others that
shall oppose their ambitious designs; and by their active vigilance and
studied premeditations present matters so plausible in the House, and having
the moon and starre-light of natural parts and other politic advantages,
shall so prevayl to carry a Vote to the infringing of the peoples Liberties; if
such an extraordinary case happen, it will require an extraordinary remedy. I
confess when a Vote of great concernment is carried but by 3 or 4, the lesser
number is included in the greater, as 4 in 5; and when there is 203 vote for
it, and 200 against it, the Vote is not past by 3, but by 203: and as Solomon
said, two are better then one, therefore no better way has been devised; yet
it cannot be imagined that a fourth part in the Honorable House should ever
vote against the Liberty of the subject, if the design be rightly apprehended,
unless it be in a matter wherein they are exceedingly concerned in point of
profit, in which case they are to be entreated to be absent: but must a kingdom
be undone in such a case? his Majesty agrees that there is a power in both
Houses more then sufficient to restrain Tyranny, and that his Prerogative is
but to defend his peoples Liberties; sure then the Parliament will give me
leave to infer without any offense to that supreme Court (which is the honor
and glory of the English Nation) that there is in the people a sufficient power
reserved to preserve themselves from slavery and oppression, if those whom they
have chosen to infranchise them, should be the infringers of their liberties:
But here I shall be demanded, why should not the Army believe that the
Parliament will, as they declare, settle the just rights of the King, and his
subjects? Truly not to believe a Parliament, is moral Infidelity, specially
such a Parliament which has done such wonderful things for the good of the
subject as this has done; for our forces had not been so victorious abroad,
had not our Councels been most wise at home; but yet reason against sense is
sophistical. Nor can I believe what some of the Assembly pretend, that he
which is imprisoned for his conscience, has the liberty of his conscience; and
now I have named that which is the great Apple of contention in this kingdom;
for to speak my thoughts freely, though I believe most of the Assembly are men
regenerate, and good Christians, and therefore I love them; yet had they never
met, I am as confident as confidence it self can make me, that this kingdom
had long since been settled in a peaceable posture; for we may thank them for
their learned distinction of Presbyter and Independent, between whom lovers of
peace desire to make the difference very small, but contentious spirits study
to make it a wound incurable. For my own part, I confess it is very improper
for me, and unwilling am I to meddle with differences out of my proper element;
yet there being a great work to be done in this generation, and the only
plaster that is large enough to cure all the distempers in this kingdom; I
conceive after twelve years study, being inevitably put upon the study of it
by a special providence, and scarce knowing any other controversall point in
Divinity worth studying, the Priestly and Prophetical office of our blessed
Savior being in good measure (blessed be God) vindicated and redeemed out of
the hands of those Romish Hucksters; and whether the Inventions of men ought
any more to be mingled with the Institutions of Christ in his kingly office
then their good works in his priestly office, is now the great dispute. That
the difference between them is not essential but graduall (for I look upon
Presbytery as a step to Independency) not in the body, but in the garment; and
therefore undoubtedly time and wisdom may temper a Reconciliation; only
through pride and covetousness comes this contention concerning liberty for
tender Consciences. Truly, whether the sword can be any better employed then
for the defense of the true Religion, and whether it be not as lawful to fight
for Christ's Kingly Office against the opposers of it, as for his Priestly
Office against the Papists, it is not my intention to clear any particular,
but to give some general hints, hoping that all Gods people though of
different judgments in this particular, desire a sound and durable peace
accompanied with truth and piety.

What my opinion concerning a universal Tolleration of all Religions; whether
it be tolerable or insufferable I will not deliver any opinion of it, because
it is not the thing in question; I know none but Protestants that desire this
liberty, and that not so much in Doctrine as in Discipline. I think there is
scarce a Papist in the Kingdom but either actually or vertually in their
desires at least, has been in Arms against the Parliament; it is clear that
Antichrist fought for the late Oxford party, whether they fought for him or
not: it is much that Christ and Antichrist should pitch their tents in the same
field; and therefore certainly, it is a fond Argument that men make; If you
suffer Independents, then why not Papists? because those that have been
faithful to the Parliament, and are of the same Religion, may in justice and
equity have the liberty of their Consciences, not disturbing the peace of the
Kingdom; does it therefore follow that Enemies to the Parliament, of a
different Religion, whose Religion in the power and practice of it is flat
Rebellion, their Head Antichrist, their Doctrine Heresy, and worship Idolatry,
holding pernicious principles, destructive of State Policy, that theirs ought
to be suffered? If any Papist be better principled and will take an Oath to
be true to King and Kingdom where they live, in all points, and will not make
it their work to seduce others, and the number so small, that the State need
not probably fear any danger by them, as in Holland; I say nothing with it nor
against it: but I would feign break the neck of that absurd Argument, If you
suffer a Protestant you must suffer a Papist; does every diversity of opinion
presently make a different Religion? I will assure you there are more
differences between the Papists about those five little words, Hoc est enim
corpus meum, this is my body, then there is between all the men in this
Kingdom, and yet who more loving then they; before the Council of Lateran, it
was good Divinity to say at the Mass (which gets a mass of money) adoro te si
tu es Christus, I adore thee if thou be Christ; but since Transubstantiation is
settled by their Law, they are so fallen out amongst themselves, how to make the
body of our Savior to be there as it was when he Instituted the Sacrament;
that it is most admirable; and I think it better beseeming us that are
Protestants to laugh at those Antichristian fopperies, and to pity one another;
the strong not to despise the weak, nor the weak to oppose the strong: let me
instance in some of their differences concerning their Transubstantiation: Some
Papists hold that Christ is not in Heaven, because he is in the Host, others
that there are two Christ's, others are much troubled about the time that Christ
continues with them; some hold that his body goes not into the stomach being
full of humors, but then thinking there would be little fruit of it, they say
he stays till digestion, therefore they use not to eat for three or four
hours after; others hold the body never parts, but then no man needed to
Communicate but once, and they could sell their God but once, and the party
sins after, which could not be; then because this body cannot annihilate,
being as impossible here, as it is in the heavens, they differ what is become of
the body; some hold that it was gone to heaven, but that cannot be say others,
because it was there before, then the doubt is, how can accidents nourish the
body? some hold that so soon as the stomach has changed the form of the Wafer
cake, that God Creates a new substance of nothing; but against that some
Priests find that the wine does presently comfort them, and Priests have been
drunk with much wine; then they are much troubled where our Saviors head and
his feet are, least the Priest through ignorance should hold him with his
heels upwards, and some hold that the head is always upppermost, hold it how
you please; another Priest was very angry with me for asking him such a
question that he knew not how to answer, but says the face is always toward
the Priest for reverence; I know not how it is possible not to believe, but to
imagine such a confused Chymaera. Then they dispute how the Organicall Body of
Christ can be in a thing so little, therefore they say, the more wine the
better; But the Priest does not see the wine in the Flaggon, yet say some the
virtue of the words penetrates into it, others say it is Idolatry to attribute
virtue to words, and others hold that the Pope took away all the virtue from
the Greek words, and put it into the Latin; then they differ exceedingly
whether the body of Christ came at the first word hoc, or at the second word
est; some hold that there is much virtue in the word enim by virtue of the
Popes Unction, and that when the word enim is pronounced, if the Priest stop
there, then it is 3 parts flesh and 2 parts Bread, because the Lutherans that
hold Consubstantiation, say they are wiser then the Papists, for they eat
bread with their flesh, the Papists raw flesh without bread; some Priests would
pronounce the words with a very loud voice, thinking thereby to bring Christ
the sooner from Heaven; The people are angry with the Priest, and say it is an
incivility to invite a man to a Dinner and not make him drink, others hold that
no Article of faith can be contrary to a man's senses. The Lord knows that I
write not this out of any Irreverence to the blessed Sacrament, Dominicani,
Daem nic^ni, Franciscani, Fraudiscani, Carmelitani, Carnalitani, Mendicantes,
Manducantes, Cervi, Servi.
but to show that the Papists have more differences among themselves then the
Protestants, for he that will but read Mounseiur St. Aldegonds Table of d
fferences between the Papists, shall find that there are above 500.
differences between them about the point of Transubstantiation, which Trent
makes an Article of their faith; and they differ in above 20. several points
among themselves, the Jesuits contending for the Immaculate Conception of the
Virgin Mary; The Dominicans tooth and nail opposing it, every order of Monks
and Friars studying to advance themselves and commend their own Saint and
Patron, and debase others in comparison: so as if there should be as many
subdivisions in every point wherein they are divided, as about
Transubstantiation; which I think is no hard matter to make good: I might
conclude that there are 10000. differences among the Papists, and yet they all
agree cordially against the Protestants, and live as lovingly as if they were
universally of one opinion; and in Luthers time having a general meeting for
the reconciliation of all these differences, one of their Bishops, subtle and
politic, fearing that Luthers Arguments would take w th the People, to make
the Mass an arrant strumpit, desires to make one objection for his
satisfaction against it, the which was that either Christ held in his hand
bread, or his body, or the accidents of bread, or something else, or nothing;
if bread then the word, this must be taken for this bread, and that would be
repugnant, if his body, it had been absurd to say my body is my body, and they
say it is no body, till after the prolation of the words, if the accidents,
then the Transubstantiation was before the words, and to break accidents is not
to break bread, if any thing else, what was it? if nothing, the Scripture is
false, for he took, and to say that the word this demonstrates nothing as
present, but what shall be; this is to make our Savior a Iugler to deceive
their senses; concerning the Virgins conception without sin, he was likewise
pusled because the Scripture says all have sinned but only Christ, and how
then do they keep a Holyday for the Virgins Conception? for no day may be kept
holy for an unholy thing: Others said it was but tolerated not approved, but
says the Bishop, brethren you see these are rational doubts, and your jarring
will be the Lutherans uniting: therefore Pray, since we cannot all agree in
opinion, least our differences should advantage the common Enemy, let us live
in love, and banish all strife and contention: and I do here by Authority from
the Apostolic See, decree an Amnestia and Oblivion of all differences that
have sprung up amongst any Papists concerning variety and d^fferences in
judgment, the harkening to which advice as some Politicians observe, An Act
that all that differ in opinion shall li^e lovingly non obstante.
was a means to continue the greatest part of Germany in the Romish Religion;
I remember that at Paris going to see the Cardinals Library which was kept by
Doctor Smith our Countryman, a subtle man, and a great Scholar Bishop of
Chalcedon (alias terra incognita) he was very earnest with me to reconcile my
self into the bosom of the Roman Church; abusing that Scripture that the
Nation which did not serve her should be destroyed, and so must England. I
told him that mystical Babylon must be destroyed: and he speaking something
uncivily of England, saying he was persecuted for his service done to his
honored Mistress and dear Mother the Church of Rome: I made bold to tell his
Lordship that he Courted a foul Mistress, not because she was foul, but
because she was in the dark: and in the dark Pope Ioane is as good as my
Lady. Amongst other discourse, he told me, that the Protestants in England
would destroy themselves, and entreating his reason, said he, do not you see
how they persecute the Puritans in England, and Scotland, and at Geneva? And in
the French Church, Master Melletier Amarant, for small differences in opinion?
who being men more singular for zeal then the rest are disgraced; whereas in
our Church those which are most zealous are most honored, and the humility and
austerity of the Capuchines and Cordeliers help to make amends for the
luxuriance of other orders. I wish every understanding man would but ponder
this Argument: can that Religion subsist and flourish, where the most strict
and powerful professors of it are the objects of malice, and oppressed for their
Consciences? We allow says he, a greater latitude of opinions in the Church
of Rome notwithstanding the inquisition, then your Bishops will do in England;
I told his Titulary Lordship that is was the interest of England to be as
zealous for the Protestant Religion, as the Spaniard was for the Pop^sh; The
purity of the Gospel and the free exercise and practice in the power of it, is
now the interest of this Kingdom, and there is no such way under Heaven to make
this Kingdom suddenly happy as for all godly men though of different judgments
to unite cordially together against the common Enemy. I think no man will say
but that the Independants are as great Adversaries to Popery as any others are
in this Kingdom. But now says the Reader, I perceive you are for Liberty of
Conscience, that Babell of confusion, and monstrous Chymera, as men call it.
Stay good friend, if you be a spiritual man and a new creature, that have
found any mercy from heaven to thy poor soul, I shall speak a few words with
you about this business, for spiritual arguments to a dead heart are but as
warm water to a dead man; for a carnal man to argue of spiritual privileges,
is for a man to take out a hot Iron with his fingers. Conscience is a Diamond,
and only wrought upon by the dust of a Diamond; men that have no Conscience
know not what it is. The best argument that has bin brought against the
Congregationall way, is that which the Papists urge against Christ's Priestly
office in point of satisfaction, that it is more liable to Abuses and Heresies,
then the way of Classes; so says Aquinas, if good works do not merit, who will
do any good works? the prudentiall way certainly to move men to do good works,
is to tell them that they merit by so doing; but look at the Institution, what
is the will of Christ? I do not intend to argue it, but to the former
question, can the sword be better employed then to defend good Christians? what
injury has the Gospel of grace done to this Kingdom, this 100 years, that all
men should not venture their lives to maintain it, if any should unjustly go
about to deprive us of it? but did not the Christians in primitive times suffer
Martyrdom? It Is true, Christ Jesus had newly suffered, and ^od would have the
first seeds of Religion watered with blood, and Religion then was but a
novelty, and in its infancy; children are subject to be abused by every one,
which being of age will defend themselves; but for a considerable number of men
to fly or suffer death, is rather to be sheep then men: does Religion overthrow
nature? That example of the Theban Leaguer under Maximilian was mistaken by
Tertullian, for the Christians were dispersed and knew not their own strength;
and that Saint Maurice had 5000 in Arms, and would not fight against the King
of Thebans, is not reported by any credible Author, but that 20000 Christians
were martyred on Christmas Day under Diocletian, possibly it may be so; and so
it was in Paris at the S. Bartholomew 1575. ten thousand Protestants massacred.
But all these Arrows fall short of the mark whereat they are shot. It Is
certainly more valor and Religion to fight for the maintenance of the true
Religion established by a Law, then to suffer patiently; active Martyrdom in
such a case is better then passive, and this is no Hostility; they begin no
war, they provoke not, the persecutors may have peace when they please, let
them not strike, and give assurance of it to those which are in Arms for their
Religion, and they will lay down Arms presently, as the French Protestants
told their Kings. Will the Cardinals suffer an heretical Pope, as they call
heresy? no; will the Bishops suffer heretical Cardinals? no; will the Priests
suffer heretical Priests? no; will the common Papists suffer heretical
Bishops? no; do we not defend against God himself by physic, and by food
against sickness? If a man have a sword in his hand, it is absurd to tell a
Theife of Law and Justice, but fall upon him: Constantine fought against
Licinius in Palestine, and made him give Liberty to the Christians; to stand by
and suffer a brother to be killed is worse then the Murderer, for the one may
be through choler and the violence of a temptation, but not to help my brother
argues a base spirit: and is it not fratricide in me not to seek for justice
upon him that has killed my brother? I fear the death of Barrow and Greenwood,
etc. lay heavy upon some who might have opposed the Bishops. What must the
pillars of justice and truth be shaken for Uniformity? must rights be invaded
and violated for Forms and Ceremonies? tell me thou Believing soul, does thy
Religion consist in an ocular beauty and outside uniformity, or in a real
love and inward conformity to the Laws of Christ? is thy soul at rest, in the
enjoyment of thy God, in the face of Christ? and do thou vex and disquiet thy
self at Forms and shadows? do thou persecute thy poor brethren, partakers
of the like precious faith with thy self? imprison his body and vex his
righteous soul, because his eyesight possibly is not so clear as thine, and
yet pretend that Conscience is not enforced, but only the outward man, and so
mock and jeere at the calamity of thy brother? who possibly has greater
enjoyments of God, and lives more by faith and less by sense then thy self?
but says one, may not God sanctify this way to reclaim him from his error?
must it be an error because thou say so? and if it be so, will thou be
unjust because I am erroneous? I pray thee, which is the greatest sin? the
manner of Gods worship is no matter of justice; many Christians do not meet in
the public places, having been consecrated to Idolatrous uses, and there was
no natural use for them; and are not satisfied when I tell them that by the
same reason they may not worship in this Kingdom because dedicated to S.
George, nor upon any day in the week, every day having been dedicated to some
Saint or other; it satisfies them not, for of the days and times there is a
natural necessity, but none for the places and grounds, which by special
command were to be abolished; for my one part I conceive this to be an error;
but may any man therefore violate justice, the queen of moral virtues; the
supporter of Thrones and States, and commit palpable injustice, the queen of
vices, and supplanter of States and Kingdoms, by invading these men's houses
which are by law their Castles, and offer violence to their persons who are
praying for the Magistrate, that under him they may live godly and quiet lives,
and destroy all civil and natural relations; haling the poor husband from
his wife to a prison, and punishing the innocent wife and children, who are not
erroneous for the husbands error. if this be not injustice there was never
any done under the cope of Heaven. Can it be for the public good to imprison a
man because he will not sin? therefore, can this Kingdom be happy without such
a Liberty of Conscience? and is it likely to be obtained if this Army were
disbanded? speak plainly, did not persecution come on like an armed man? would
not cruel persecutors and Oppressors have had, if they might, the same power
over Gods people as the Romans had over their slaves, if they spared, it was a
courtesy; had not every man in the Army the next day after their disbanding
been in the same condition for his Conscience as the Papists are, if these men
might have had their wills upon them? And are not some which have ventured their
lives against Popery and Tyranny indicted upon the Statutes of Recusants? which
were made to distinguish between the Iesuited practicing Papist and the
peaceable Recusant? who till the eleventh year of the Queen repaired
constantly to our Churches, and after fearing least the Papists should be too
rich, the wisdom of State, imposed a penalty upon them of twenty pound a
Month for their absenting from Church: and what comminations have there lately
been to proceed against poor Christians upon the Statutes of Heresy made in
time of Popery against the Lollards, which were Protestants, and Wickliffes
followers, one of our protomartyrs of England? truly Superstition is an
unreasonable thing; such bloody opinions prove the Authors to be rather beasts
then men. Honest faithful men because they cannot in all things come up and
conform to the opinion of some Prelaticall spirits, must be denied the liberty
to breathe, and civil cohabitation; or if that favor be obtained, they must
be made hewers of wood, and drawers of water, as if the ten Tribes should have
been slaves to the Gibeonites, nay worse then slaves, their very Oxen to plough
for them, and reap for them; the honey by those men was not intended for the
Bees; sic vos non vobis, etc. Tell me now, is it not more mercy to kill the
wolf, then to let him go? is it not better to be nourished by a Thief, then
killed by a Shepherd? is it not better to be healed by an Emperick, then to be
poisoned by a Physician? But in the former Case that I put, where twenty chose
a Captain to command them (for he is as truly a King, though not so great and
glorious a King, that reigns over twenty, as he that reigns over twenty
millions. Many of the Kings mentioned in Scripture, of Sychem, Jericho, Sodom
and Gomorrah, never had so large a command as the Lord Mayor of London. No King
in Israel was Conductor of the people. Governor is the general word, and to
be a King is but one kind of Government: Florence and Muscovy, but Dukes in
name, have the greatest power of any Kings in Christendom) if the seventeen
desire to serve God contrary to the Captains judgment, with the Common Prayer
Book for the purpose; the Captain with the other two comes to the house where
the seventeen are worshipping, interrupts them, and will hale them to a prison;
they allege for themselves, that they do not any way disturb the present
Government of State, but desire freedom in their Consciences; the question is,
Whether in this case it be against the word of God, for these seventeen to
defend their own profession, and to destroy the Captain and the other two for
the liberty of their consciences, if otherwise they cannot preserve it? my
meaning is, after all means of entreaty used to the Captain, to be indulgent
to them in so precious a thing as Gods Service is, and flying b^ck to a wall,
as we say, as far as a man can when he is pursued, and so to make it but a
pure se defendendo. For my own part, I think that it is not only lawful, but a
thing most necessary, that if these seventeen men should suffer themselves to
be imprisoned for their consciences by their Captain and two others, that God
would be angry with them for being so unnatural and unjust to themselves. But
then the question will be, If the Captain and seventeen should be of one
opinion, and the other two contrary minded, and the eighteen make it capital,
and condemn the other two for Heretics; whether may the other two resist in
this case? I answer, they may save themselves by flight if they can, but for
two to take up Arms against the eighteen, I am doubtful whether it be
lawful, at least convenient, because there is no probable hopes of success;
and it is the mind of God, that these two should suffer patiently what they
cannot help; and this will fall within that excellent Rule, Of two evils the
least is to be chosen; the two are sure to lose their lives, therefore they
must suffer patiently rather then to endanger the lives of others with them;
for the God of peace does not delight in wars: and then an evil is judged to
be inevitable when there is no apparent ordinary way to avoid it, because
without an extraordinary warrant we may not presume of Gods extraordinary
power and assistance; as if an honest man with a sword be set upon by two
thieves with pistols; now in this case I hold it wisdom to deliver his purse
to save his life, because two are stronger then one. Nature is Gods Lieutenant
and efficient, by a power from God received, continued, and permitted; and in
humane affairs we are to look what the course of Nature may probably effect,
if not checked: when God says this shall be because I will not hinder it, then
Nature of its own nature produces such effects. What King with a thousand will
fight against him that comes with ten thousand? and as the use of lawful means
for safety, does not argue a confidence in the creature, but a subordination of
the means, that God without means can do it, but means without God cannot
do it; yet sometimes God puts more strength then ordinary into the creature,
and acts more immediately, by ten sometimes chasing a thousand, therefore I
pass it over: But my meaning is, that a war for desence of Religion is
unquestionable, but the manner is always to be pondered; and that in any
Kingdom or State where such a considerable number of people which are the
stronger part, shall upon good grounds be convinced in their judgments that
they cannot by reason of the prevalency of some proud, domineering, covetous,
or malicious spirited men, that had rather lose a Kingdom then that some men
should enjoy too much of heaven upon earth; and would set the Kingdom together
by the ears to get their Eare-rings; who while they exclaym against
Conventicles, and private meetings of honest people, are themselves the most
dangerous, and only Conventiclers that I know in the Kingdom; having their
constant meetings how to oppress and degrade all that stand in their way, both
in souls and bodies; it being such clandestine and factious Ends only, that
in judgment of Law makes a Conventicle; for a hundred men to assemble to carry
a Tree, is no offense; and will not let honest and peaceable men have freedom
and liberty to serve God, according to that light they have received from the
Father of lights, and to receive common justice, submitting for conscience sake
to every ordinance of man: in such a case it is not only permitted but
commanded that these men manfully defend themselves and their liberties, or
else they are in effect selfe-murtherers, and in such a case, the truth of God
is of that value, that his meekest servants will fight for it, rather then it
shall be endangered: what Doctor Fern obj^cts against it is but stubble and
combustible, and will not bear the weight of a feather in the balance of the
Sanctuary, for will any man that is sound in his intellectuals, (unless he
desire to be a Bishop) Imagine that ever Saint Paul commanded the poor Saints
in Neroes household to be subject to Nero in Church matters, that was an enemy
to them, or to Caligula, that wished that all Christians had but one natural
head, as they had but one mystical; I wish there were no Caligulaes amongst
us, that would be cutting off many heads at one blow. Indeed if any Court might
enforce men's consciences, what miserable things were Christians? Truth shall be
sure to be shut out of doors, for the most are seldom the best; Paul speaks of
legal, civil authority, the Saints in Rome are but a handful, and had no law
for their Religion. That there should be some government is Gods institution,
as in the fifth Commandment, which binds the conscience in positive Laws,
though hard and rigorous, but the manner of it is man's appointment and
constitution, of whose power and authority, good and evil actions are the
proper and adaequate objects. I willingly grant that the Magistrate who is a
good Christian stands upon the advantage ground, and ought to command the
people for Gods sake, to yield obedience to the Laws of God, and to be
exemplary in his conversation, and to protect Gods people by declaring against
errors, and that no man ought to bear with an error in his dearest consort;
but persuasion is the Gospellary way without all dispute in matters not
fundamental. My Lord Bacon was of that opinion, he that is not against us is
with us. Spiritual maladies must have spiritual remedies; in matter of
opinion I wrong no man; if he be offended at me, it is his weakness, I intend
it not, I speak of errors in Religion, not errors against Religion, with a
toleration whereof no State or Kingdom can subsist. It Is a fruit of the Turks
Religion, not to cousen nor steal, and to make conscience of an Oath, to do
no murder nor adultery: It Is against Intrinsicall rules of all government, to
permit any of these, nor must any error be permitted, that is a sworn enemy
to peace and policy. Man can give no power but what God gives, therefore it is
no resisting of authority when there can be no such authority given; matters of
conscience are not giveable nor takeable. If I bid any man kill me, and tie my
hands, yet I may break the cords; I cannot give power to enslave my self, nor
ought any man take it. If there should be any Covenant made to enforce
conscience, it is an unjust Oath, and to keep it is to add a greater sin to
a less, as if the first were too little, whereas the least is too great, and
should be lesned not enlarged,; and though I am bound to lose by my Covenant,
yet not to be undone by it. When the Lord visits us with sickness, do not we
defend our selves against his blessed Majesty by Physic, by food and raiment?
And nothing more lawful and natural then self defense, against which no
Canon can be of force, as it was resolved at Constance, that a Canon made in
favor of an angry Pope, that he might strike any man, and no man strike him,
was void by the Law of nature: for what is it but to arm sin against the Law?
did not Sweden, Holland, France, Germany, Poland, and Scotland, introduce
Religion by the sword? Calvin, Beza, Bellarmine, Carrerius, Junius, Turquet,
Bucanus, maintained the lawfulness of it, and Bilson in the Queens time wrote
a book in defense of it; not to invade the Turk because he is not a Chr^stian,
but for the freedom of their own consciences. King James in his Epistle to
Perron, justifies the French Protestants fighting for their Religion, calling
it a defensive War, that he which offers the wrong is always on the
offensive part, as he that denies the debt begins the suit, and such a wrong
doer cannot be wronged. Geneva in 1536 cast off the Bishop their Prince, and
Calvin s^yes, Populars may restrain all kind of tyranny, as the Ephori did the
Lacedemonian Kings, and the Tribunes curbed the Consuls; and if for bodies much
more for souls: the reason is because every people in the conferring of power,
reserve so much to themselves to attain that end whereunto they are ordained,
which is the glory of God and their own freedoms and welfare. Certainly God
never commanded any Magistrates to lay any clogs or Fetters upon the
consciences of his own people, that is the apple of his own eye; yet so, as if
by force his people be destroyed, they must take it patiently, dye like lambs
for the Lambs sake that dyed for them, but they may not suffer if they can
oppose it, that is to be guilty of self murder. The sufferings of Jesus Christ
were voluntary, and when we resign our wills to a thing enforced, we make it
willing and so the Martyrs were said to lay down their lives willingly, and yet
they could not help it. This fighting for Religion is not to fight to promote
it in others, not to kill any tyrants that oppose it, but to preserve Religion
and the professors of it.

All Magistrates are tied to the Laws of God and nature, and it is a less sin
for a private man to break those Laws then the Magistrate who is entrusted to
keep them. For a Commissioner to break a trust is the highest prevarication;
against which illegalities self-defence is lawful, if the party can help it;
men may free themselves from tyrants, if they can; if not, what remedy but
patience? the reason is perspicuous because no man can empower another over him
to command against both, or either of those Laws, and therefore the meaning of
those commands of honoring the King, our parents and governors, is to observe
all such lawful commands as are not contrary to God and nature, for God is the
God of order, which he should not be, if Governors were to be obeyed
disorderly.

If a King or Governor be mad, must all the Kingdom be fools to obey such a
Devil as that Duke D' Alva was, that made the Hangmans place in Flanders
better then the Chancellours. If such a Magistrate be drunk, and resolved to
kill whomsoever he meets, may not the people shot him up all night from doing
mischief? to take away a madmans sword from him, is not to take away the
property but to prevent the mischief. Many of H. 7. friends had sworn fealty
to R. 3. yet H. 7. did well to kill him, and we never read of my pardon
obtained from the Pope; the Royal race of H. 7. inherits still in our
Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, to whom God impart as many graces as to all his
Ancestors, that as he has made the heart of Gods people sad, so he may now
make it his royal study to set Jesus Christ upon his Throne, by whose gain his
Majesty can be no loser; and long may that Royal race continue to administer
and execute good and wholesome Laws for the prosperity of these Nations, by
which it is more honorable to command 10 free men, then to tyrannize over
10000 Gally-slaves. If the Magistrate in a Protestant Kingdom should introduce
Popery, as in Queen Mary's time, a particular man may not oppose; but the
Parliament might and by the Law of God ought to have opposed it: But if the
Lord had put a sword into the hands of the Smithfield Martyrs, able in
probability to have defended themselves, these could not have dyed with comfort
for their Religion; for I cannot judge him a good Christian that is not a
moral man, and he that will not do right to himself to defend his own life
will hardly do right to his neighbor, he that has but a little mind can be
but a little virtuous.

I affirm, that the Army may not disband in point of honor, till this
Kingdom be in a better way of settlement, for I ever thought that there was
more to be done for the happiness thereof, then the humiliating and
geniculating of the late Oxford party, whose s^^e rather then out reformation
might be the cause thereof, for do not their adversaries brag before the
victory? if many cruel men might have their wills, what could the Army expect
when disbanded? Therefore if they should hereafter suffer, they would
undoubtedly make themselves a Ludibri^^^ and derision to all the world; what?
20000 armed men victorious and veteran Commanders and Soldiers, (not flesh but
bone) that fear nothing but to offend God, neither the sons of Anak not the
sons of Cain, that speak big like Giants, and persecute their brethren ^an
Army that has the justice of heaven on their sides the prayers of Gods people
the good will of the whole Kingdom, that have been the Joshuahs that have led
Gods people into the spiritual Canaan, that are plainly told, that if they
were disbanded, they must not have a mouthfull of air in this Kingdom, but in
a prison; unless they will put out their own eyes, to see by the spectacles of
other men in point of Gods service and worship* that are called troublers of
the State, Heretics and Sectaries, that had been better, the liberties of the
Kingdom had been lost then saved by them, and all this to their faces with
their swords in their hands. For such an Army as this, I say, to think upon
disbanding as the ^ase stands, I must make bold to tell them, that if they
should, Jesus Christ would take it unkindly from them, and they would make
themselves culpaple of all the precious blood that should be spilt in a way of
persecution, and all the reproaches mockings, scorns, scourging^ banishments,
imprisonments, contempts, ignominies, disgraced and affronts, that shall be
cast upon any Christian, and the Gospel of Christ, which any of Gods people
shall hereafter in any wise suffer in this Kingdeme for their consciences and
sincerity in Gods service would be laid upon their score; and I solemnly
profess with words of sobriety, upon the Altar of truth, that Gods people and
this whole Kingdom would have cause to blame them as the greatest
prevaricators of all others; for to be treacherous for honors is
dishonorable: for a great Office to betray a trust is sordid and mercenary; to
betray a trust for fear is cowardly and servile; for flattery or insinuation
is weak, effeminate, and childish; for love or relation is not so great an
offense, because more humane (howbeit, all treason committed against a man's
Country is inhumane and unworthy:) but for one Christian to betray another, is
of all treacheryes the most abominable: and here let me make this argument for
the Army, will it be sufficient for them to say if persecution should arise
after their disbanding dear friends we cannot help you, the Parliament are all
for the Presbytery, many of the Assembly and City Ministers were so importunate
with many of the honorable Members to settle their Presbytery, that we have
left all things to them, would it not be answered; what, Has the Lord that
gave you courage taken away ^cir wisdom? did you begin in the s^irit and end
in the flesh? Is this the requit all we must expect for all our ^^^es for you,
who have prayed and believed you into all your victorior? You say it had been
most noble, and so indeed it had, for the Parliament before you engaged, to
have told you plainly, Gentlemen, We suspect many of you to be Independents, be
advised what you do, if you give us the victory we intend to settle a
Presbytery, and to suffer none to live in the Kingdom, but such as shall
conform to the present government; if you will fight to settle Presbytery,
well and good; but your victory will be your ruin for the King promises a
liberty and indulgence to tender consciences. Might not your friends in the
City and Kingdom, as well have expected as much from you, that you should have
told them, provide for your own indemnity, the Bishops being by our means put
down and abolished, and the Presbytery settled, we intended no more, as for the
freedom of our consciences and yours, and finding out an expedient for cheap
and quick justice to be administered in all places which might make the poor
Kingdom some good amends for all the charges they have been at, if the
Parliament please to do it well and good, we have that which we fought for, Et
gaudeant possidentes. It Is therefore but a taking of Gods providence in vain by
many, that looking only at the outside of things say, that this Army loses much
of their Honor they had gained by not Disbanding, it is quite contrary, they
had endangered the loss of their Honor indeed, if they had disbanded before
Laws and Liberties be settled; perseverance is the Crown of Action, to fight for
Laws and Liberties, and then to suffer an inconsiderable number of Intendiaries
to trample upon the Privileges of the Subject; this had been a stain of a deep
dye; the truth is, that the bellows are blown by some of the Clergy themselves.
Who knows not but that Divines (as they call themselves) have by their
Divinations almost infatuated all Christendom? but there is no Enchantment
against Israel, nor Divination against Jacob; says Luther, If Popery had lasted
but two years longer in Saxony the Priests would have made the papists to have
eaten straw with the Oxen; were not most Kingdoms in Europe, governed by
Cardinals, Bishops, Priests and the Clergy? who did not easily foresee in
England, but that it was an impossible thing to abolish Bishops without a War,
the Hierarchy had such a deep rooting, that without a great Earthquake it could
never have been shaken. I have heard when the Parliament began, some worthy
Members being in discourse about the putting down of Bishops, Master Pym, and
other gallant men said, It was not possible to be done; and when the Assembly
first met, they thought it impossible to take away the Common Prayer Book, but
we see what the Lord has done, for his people by his blessing upon the
Parliament and our Armies; mistake me not, I do not rejoice that the COMMON
PRAYER BOOK; is suppressed; for my part if the PARLIAMENT shall so please, let
those that are so earnest for it, keepe^ it still; much good it may do them,
though I think little good will it do to them: it never did hurt to Papists,
nor good to Protestants; unless it be to show them their dangerous condition:
for they pray that their lives may be more pure and holy, and yet many of them
scoff and jecreat purity and holiness; but though we be not all one in
judgment and opinion, yet let us be all one in affection and live lovingly
together as Brethren, for he that loves another only because he is of his
opinion, loves himself in that man.

A friend of mine too violent for the Classical way, seemed to be very angry
because his Majesty was permitted the use of the Common Prayer Book, I asked
him whether in case his Majesty would be graciously pleased to allow him the
use of the Directory, he would not think it fit that his MAJESTY should have
the liberty of his Conscience? he said, we had Covenanted against it, to take
it away as a branch of Popery; I told him the special point of popery to be
rooted out, is all domineering and tyrannizing over the conscience. Are we not
all the servants of God? why should we Lord it one over another in matters of
conscience? but he replied, that we were to bring all to the nearest
Uniformity; I answered, that nearest was not the same. Many ships sail near a
Rock that come not to it, the Common Prayer Book and Directory are very near of
kin; I know no reason, why they may not bear with one another, if his Majesty
and the Parliament please. I remember, being at Sedan, a passage not unworty to
be inserted; the Duke of Bullun Prince of Sedan, whose Ancestors and himself
had been special friends to the French Protestants, for the love of a
beautiful Romish Lady, changed his Religion and turned papist. The Town being
all Protestants, as good reason they had accordingly opposed it; He entreated
them that he might be married by a priest in the Town, they refused it: The
Duke left his Mother, the good old Madam in the Castle, went away and was
married, and returned with his Lady, but the Inhabitants shut the gates against
him, and so he went to one of his Summer houses, two leagues from the Town,
and there were several Treaties between him and his Subjects about his
Re-admittance. He alleging, that since he and his Ancestors had been the
procurers of their Liberties, why should they envy him the liberty of his
conscience? they said, He was a Star fallen from Heaven, and it would be
dangerous for them to be under his command. An Englishman discoursing with
Molinaus and Rambursius, two learned Ministers about it, assumed by way of
argument, that as that case stood with all its circumstances, for them to deny
him the exercise of his conscience, who had purchased their Liberties, was most
unjust in it self, and would be prejudicial to other Protestants by
encouraging Catholic Princes against them, and might bring mischief upon their
own heads; at last he had liberty to come into the Town; and the Lady Duchess
his wife, and Mass was said in the Castle, allowing her two priests and no
more: but not long since the French King made advantage of it against them,
that they denied liberty to their natural Prince, and they are now, I fear as
the Rochilers are, and no freer. But this I drive at, Rigid Presbytery is but
yet a Probationer, if it should be settled in this Kingdom^ in the height and
power of it, it would undoubtedly cost ten times more blood to remove it, then
ever it has done to abolish Episcopacy; I speak of a Rigid strict Presbytery,
that make their judgment as the Kings Royal Standard, to weigh and measure
all opinions by them* to walk by their rule, which will admit of no Exceptions;
if you would know what such a Presbyter is; you may take it thus; A Rigid
Presbyter is he that is against every man, and every man against him; he will
endure no man in the Kingdom but those that are of his opinion in omnibus; and
therefore no man in the Kingdom has reason to endure him; I assure you that
that grievous Disease called the Sudor Anglicus, the Sweating Sickness, which
lasted about forty years in this Kingdom, that swept away so many, that
Harvest could not be Inned in many places, was not so dangerous to this
Kingdom, as this Rigid Presbytery, if it should grow inveterate; there is a
Prophecy in Scotland, It began with Knoxs, and must end with knocks, my prayer
is, that the Rulers in that Kingdom would have a more favorable regard to
tender Consciences, and give free liberty to Gods people in their Native
Kingdom. There are many Scots banished into Holland and other places for
matter of Conscience, whom I verily believe to be precious Christians: some of
them told me that their parents had been principal Instruments in the
Reformation of Religion in that Kingdom, and therefore took it unkindly that
they should be exiled for some differences in opinions, no way fundamental or
destructive of State Policy; for why, in the name of God; should it any more
disturb the peace of the Kingdom, to permit Christians to pray together in a
private Chamber, then for others to meet there about their ordinary business?

I desire deerly to be conceived when I use the word Presbytery; the Lord knows
my heart, I use it only for distinction sake, not for reproach, I do not
oppose nor speak against a moderate Presbyter; but look upon it as an excellent
way to restrain vice; and for my own part I like it, for that which many fear
it. Namely, it will be a means to prevent many frivolous quarrels and
contentious Lawsuits: Certainly, there is an external beauty in that
Government in Scotland, Geneva, and the French Congregations, but truly the
power of Godliness is seen but little amongst them; I have known in a
Presbyterian Ministers house, that there has bin no prayer nor Family duties
performed twice in a year, and Examination before the Sacrament counted
superfluous, and if any thing have been questioned, no other answer; but the
Puritans in England will be under no Order nor Government. Is it not fit that
Gods people for whose sake the World continues should have a being in the World
if they can mayntain it? nor do I say any thing against moderate Presbyters; I
believe there are many godly men of the Presbyterian judgment, though not as
they are Presbyters; Saint Peter opposed Christ in the work of redemption, for
which our Savior said unto him, Get thee behind me Satan, and the devout women
opposed the Apostles in the planting of the Gospel: Amaziah and Jehosaphat good
Kings of Judah, yet took not away the high places; Hezekiah did, and Josiah yet
more and more; all godly men are not equally enlightened: Were there not some
godly Conformists (think you) in the Bishops time that opposed Nonconformists?
He that is the strictest Presbyter now, possibly seven years since was for
Bishops, and seven years hence, if God give repentance for keeping his Son
Christ out of his throne, may be an Independent. But this is the misery, that
those men which are the most zealous promoters of the Rigid Presbyterian way
are Politicians (whose greatest Religion is to be of no Religion at all) that
play their game so cunningly, that the godly Presbyterians not discerning their
ambitious aims, which is to make themselves Grandees in Church and State,
join and concur with them; as I have told you what the Rigid Presbyter is, so
I shall express whom I mean by the godly Presbyter; I am well acquainted with
many of them, and I verily believe, in my conscience, that he is such a one
who really intends the glory of God and the welfare of this Kingdom, and
fearing nothing so much as Errors and Heresies, concludes upon the whole
matter, having read all arguments pro and con, that it is better to suffer a
mischief then an inconvenience, better that many good Christians should be
imprisoned for their consciences, then that under the Notion of Independency
the peace of the Church should be endangered by Errors and Heresies, and gives
his vote though with some reluctance, that those that cannot submit to a
Government, let them go beyond sea, where they may enjoy their liberty, and not
having faith enough to believe that truth will at the length get ground of
error, nor clearly understanding that the sword of the Spirit must cut down
Errors, takes the material sword which was never sanctified to that purpose:
whereby it will appear how vain that objection is, that the Army hereby loses
all their honor in not disbanding upon vote, being commissionated by the
Parliament, as if a man that takes a Commission to fight for Laws and
Liberties, that concerns himself and others, has any reason to sheath his
sword till he has obtained what he fought for, since by Gods infinite blessing
upon, and gracious presence with our Noble Worthies in Parliament, and
victorious Army, the ship of this Kingdom, after many Herricanes is safely
arrived full fraught with those precious commodities of the Subjects Liberties
and properties, whereof Liberty of Conscience is the maine, so as no man
pretend a conscience to disturb the peace of the Kingdom, which every Student
of the Law knows when the peace is broken. Those men that by the Oars of their
pestilent Counsels shall be working to row this ship back again into the sea of
a second and more bloody war, are unworthy of their generation, unworthy to
breath in English air, be they reckoned the great Catoes for counsel, or any
other incendiaries in the Kingdom, who think they cannot stand fast and
permanent, but by the ruin of others more faithful then themselves: there is
no necessity for a man to be of this judgment or that, but there is an
absolute necessity of peace and preventing new troubles; it is absolutely
necessary to maintain the royal law of love; all Laws and Orders for
uniformity must do homage to the law of unity and brotherly love, we must not
cut men's toes and fingers to make them all of a length: if uniformity were so
absolutely necessary; then ought they to conform to those which out of
conscience cannot come to them, rather then the Kingdom should be destroyed;
for they may safely come to them, and what would not an honest man do to save
a Kingdom, that may be done with a good conscience?

Moses says, that they that forsake their brethren, shall never come into
Canaan: so Mat. 25. In prison and previsited me no^; his Army ought by the
equity of that Scripture to keep all honest conscientious men that offend no
just Laws out of priso^s: you may read in that Chapter that Jesus Christ is
that great Travailer who ^ this Ascension took his journey into a far
Country, and delivered his goods to his servants, as it is in the parable of
the Talents, and in a time of Reformation every Christian must help to
facilitate the work; for Christ appoints no Lord Treasurers to impropriate his
gifts but all steward^ o^^y out what God b^th given to every man for the good
of the Kingdom of heaven; that I take to be the meaning of Mat. 6. To set the
Crown upon the head of Christ; every man ought to serve God by serving his
Country in his lawful calling, the end whereof is not to multiply riches, but
to do good in his generation: men abuse their callings, Called Contra formam
Collationis.
and an action will be brought another day against many rich men in this
Kingdom. Take another Scripture Thou sh^lt love the Lord thy God with all thy
soul, toto cord anima and mente. with all thy heart courageously; for courage
belongs to the heart; the soul of religion is to be valiant for Religion, and
to fight against those that would rob us of it; not to kill them, but to
preserve it with all thy soul affectionately; for Anima is the source of all
the affections; what a man loves he will defend: Religion is a mistress well
worth fighting for her defense with all thy mind; the mind is the superior
part of the soul, spiritually and discreetly with zeal according to knowledge.
The thing I intend is that Christ must be honored with strength and power, as
well as with other natural parts, and abilities, and riches, or any other
gifts: some have written (which yet is so weak an error that I wonder it
should deceive any man) that the sword ought not to be employed for Religion,
that though I may fight to defend my clothes or my cattle, I may not fight to
defend my Religion; like some Indians that will fight for a pin but not for
gold. Possibly a man's pen and his heart may differ in opinion: I know there
were some in Germany pretended that no man ought to fight in Gods cause, but to
contend lachrimis and precibus; (as King H. 8. was wont to say, merrily: If it
be a good Religion it will defend it self, if a bad one, it is not worth
defending let God alone with Religion) but these very men did afterward fight
for Religion in pretense at least, and said their former opinion was good
unless God puts the Sword into their hands: It seems to me that the Revelation
holds forth clearly, that the Saints must have the honor to destroy
Antichrist, whose spirit reigns in all those that will domineere imperiously
over the consciences of their brethren, for therefore is he called THE
Antichrist. It would be an excellent work for some judicious Minister to
explain that in the Revelations, how the holy, faithful, and chosen, shall
make a war for the Lamb against the Beast, and prevail, and whether any of
the ten Kings shall hate the Whore; it might be very satisfactory.

Seek ye my face, and they answered, thy face Lord will we seek, and
sequestered two day at Saffron Walden to seek the Lord by fasting and prayer,
a thing unheard of in the Germane Wars; to see a Noble General and valiant
Commanders that had encountered with Lions and walls of brass, to lie grovelling
upon their knees, and pouring forth fervent prayers (the breath and voice of
God in them) asking counsel from heaven, begging light and direction from the
Father of lights, praying for wisdom from above; what a rare example is it?
how admirable is God in all his workings? And when they rose up to eat, and
their countenance was no more sad, the Lord had, by the powerful influence of
his good Spirit, given in a sweet return of Prayer for their continuation
together; and thereupon the souldery desiring a general Rendevouze, the horse
and foot met with such a general re^oycing, and such an unanimous resolution
to live and die together, for the just rights of King and people, that it is
most admirable to consider, such a wonderful conjunction of minds, and such
noble Principles, that money, which is the Loadstone that draws the iron hearts
of most Soldiers, is no more reckoned by them then dirt in comparison of just
liberties; who can say but that this is altogether of a divine offspring;
which to oppose, what is it but to despise the spirit of grace? I am confident
that they which kick their heels against this Army, will in the end break their
necks.

N^xt, I shall only ask the question, whether out of those quivers of
arguments used by the Parliament, to justify their raising forces, I might not
draw many, even take them all out one after another to justify the Armies not
disbanding; all was done by the Parliament for the public good. The
Parliaments Motto is pro salute p^puli, and the Armies, pro salute populi Dei,
and totius Angliae; no less can be presumed from the Army; for they who have
adventured their lives for the good of the Kingdom, will never do any thing to
endanger it. Certainly, he that saved my life, I owe it to him; I will never
distrust him: they have the character of God upon them, and of his
Consecration; the Parliament has lately voted them their Army, the whole
Kingdom favors them, and all good Christians have cause to love and honor
them, and yet there are some calumnious spirits that would rob Crystal of its
brightness, but the Sun of the Armies innocence will quickly melt the ice of
all these Calumnies.

It is not my design to improve those popular arguments formerly used, that
for Papists to maintain the Protestant Religion was a pernicicus contradiction.
What is it to hold, that to imprison men for their Consciences that break no
Law, is for the Liberty of the Subject; as some Kindle-coals affirm; that
honest Justices were weeded out of the Commission; has there been no honest
men, grand instruments of Liberty, displaced and divested of their trust, to
the grief of Gods people, for no other reason, but because they were not
Presbyterians? That many as bad as Arminians are preferred, and faithful men
disgraced and displaced; and all this by the cunning artifice of malevolent
spirits; nor what the Parliament said that his Majesty by his many Declarations
and Protestations, for the maintenance of our Laws and Liberties, intended no
more but that we should have such a Religion, and such Laws as his Majesty's
Bishops and Judges would afford us, and should conceive to be best for us;
judge whether that be not a blind implicit obedience to trust the Bishops
with our souls; what is the Law but every man's birthright and the rule of
life, and therefore fhould be plain and easy, that every man may know^? For a
guide to be blind, how unreasonable is it; if some men may have their desires,
shall we be in any better condition? I shall humbly crave leave, to vindicate
the high Court of Parliament and the Army from some Objections lately darted
against them. The lightness of some men's follies exceeds the weight of their
malice, they are content to be fools rather then to acknowledge the worthy
labors of that supreme Court; they are such ignorants, that they know not any
good the Parliament has done thi^ many years, saying, that they have made our
Religion worse, and they do not intend to make our Laws the better. No, let all
honest men ever bless God for this Parliament; how gladly would this Kingdom
have made themselves slaves for ever, had not this Parliament stood mightily
for their Liberties? I but (say some) the Parliament by imprisoning such as
have been faithful Laborers in the Vineyard for difference in opinions, are
undoing all that they have done, and we fear things will be as bad as in the
Bishops times: judge not rashly, there is no Ordinance yet to restrain Gods
people from private meetings, nor for suppressing of separate Congregations;
Compare what is past with present times, and it is very much that things are no
worse for former kindnesses, which Parliament and City have showed to honest
people: I trust the blessings of Heaven shall be upon them forever; however, do
not for the abortion of the twentieth child, kill the nineteenth: believe it,
this Parliament is the spring and conservatory of all our Liberties and
Properties, having removed old Grievances, and laid the foundation for
innumerable benefits and advantages to the Kingdom. There are in both Houses
most excellent Moses's, Nehemiahs, Jeremiahs, and Paul's, that have adventured
for the people; o, the infinite love of many of our finite Moses's, and
Worthies. What had become of Israel i^ he had forsaken his charge upon every
tumult and queremony of the people? What innumerable difficulties have our
Worthies in Parli^ment surmounted? Able to have daunted and stinted the most
noble resolutions, though the command of God lay heavy upon them ^o deliver
this Kingdom, and let the oppressed go free; as the Discovery of America by
Columbus a Genoa Merchant; though a rational man, skillful in Mathematics,
might have concluded that there was a Western part of the World not discovered,
yet the Enterprise was so transcendent, that few men would have had the courage
to have attempted it, though sure to succeed. And though there are sufficient
reasons publicly known to the Kingdom to desire the Army not to disband by any
means, till public Liberties be settled and secured: yet there is not the least
ground for the people in the least measure to withdraw their affections and due
respects from the Parliament; some Taxes indeed still, but for a short war a
long peace; it is not a years purchase now, I hope, for the absolute
inheritance. Now, hearken ye prudent Wisemen, and lovers of your Country;
that which is every Englishmans interest and business in this juncture of time
is, that the whole Kingdom as one man presently declare against a second war,
which is a sickness easily prevented, but hardly cared; not to suffer any
forces directly or indirectly to be raised against this Army, under any
pretense whatsoever; and in the name of God, let those whom the Army shall
accuse, come to a fair trial and receive justice with mercy, because we
profess Christianity. Let all Treasurers and Committee Men give a fair
account, and so receive an Euge, Well done thou faithful steward, or an Apage,
Depart unfaithful man: and let those that have swallowed the Kingdoms treasure
vomit it up again.

There are many that have got greatestates in the late Wars upon the ruins and
spoils of the people, but as we say proverbially, They that have stolen the
Kingdoms Goose, the feathers will stick in their stomachs. If a Town or City
be on fire, and every man is entreated to help; now for any man to carry away
his neighbors goods, and to enrich himself by a general conflagration; what
is this but to add affliction to the afflicted, and little better then Felony?
Nor is it to the purpose to say, I got it honestly; the law of God and reason
says that no man ought to get a great estate in a time of public calamity, by
any profession or trade whatsoever; I say, under favor, no man ought to
increase his estate in a time of a Civil War (unless he be a soldier) if he
get more then to mayntain himself and family, the overplus must go to the
State for the mayntenance of the War: to get 1000 lib. per annum, and to lend
500 lib. to the Parl. is but Sophistical. I know it was a high point of State
policy, for the greater encouragement of covetous men, to allow them
extraordinary gains for such moneys as should pass their hands, and that some
men should have offices and other places sufficient for four or five men: but
I hope these men make account that they are the Kingdoms purs-bearers, in the
former case that I put, it is a neighbourly part to preserve his goods, whose
house is on fire, but he ought in conscience to restore them, that many poor
country men that were enforced for the safety of their lives, being indebted,
should now be undone by use money; that old Usurers should thrive in a time of
War, and honest men that have ventured their lives for the Kingdom, should
now be made slaves to a company of greedy Usurers: what a horrible shame is it?
A friend of mine having borrowed 100 lib. which he laid out in cattle, was
constreined to forsake his house and goods for the safety of his person, his
house plundered and his cattle driven away, yet being returned home, procures
the 100 lib. and entreats the Creditor to remit the Interest, the Usurer
storms at the motion, and puts the bond in suit for the Interest: meeting with
him, I told him he should do very well to show himself a Christian, and to
take his principal; what tell you me of a Christian said he? I have nothing to
live upon but my Interest; but said I, your Debtor lost the Principal, will
not you abate the Interest, or rather then fail, half of it; not he. The Lord
deliver this Kingdom from such Jews, in whom there is no more mercy then milk
in a male Tiger: for my part I think their goods are to be confiscated, and
they ought in reason to be banished, as Jews, by the equity of the Statute; De
Iudaismo.
for the Jews did but lawfully rob the Kingdom in time of peace. I am not
against all taking of usury when the borrower gains by it. But can any man
imagine that if the late Oxford party had prevailed, they would have suffered
any of their friends to have been imprisoned for use money? The bloody Rebels
in Ireland had so much mercy and wit to ordain that no interest should be
paid in time of war, the Law of God is plain for it in Nehemiah, and our
Historians tell us, that after Civil Wars there were always commissions
granted to enquire who had increased their estates in a public calamity, and
out of their superfluities they were enforced to relieve the necessities of
poor men: I am persuaded that there are 100 men about the City of London, that
have got enough since the Wars began, to provide comfortably for all the poor
people in and about London. B^^e Law of Arms some professions are more
specially privileged (...) a time of War then others, as Priests, Surgeons,
Husbandmen, and those that keep Vineyards, and these ought not to be taken
prisoners on either side, because there is a necessary use for them, which
party soever prevailed: Yet in the Civil Law I find it adjudged that those
men must not make an immoderate gain of their professions, because every man is
bound to regard the public welfare more then his own private ends; and
therefore after the war ended, the Magistrates that govern by the Civil Law in
Italy, and other places, call these men to account and order them to restore
whatever they got during the war, maintenance for their Families being only
allowed them. What a gallant course might there be taken for the relief of
poor people in this Kingdom, that there might not be a beggar amongst us? But
pardon this digression, the thing I intend is, that there are thousands and
thousands that will be undone by this cruel Usury, if the wisdom of
Parliament do not prevent it: but let us not have so much as one hard thought
of the Parliament, for that Court is the Liberty of the Subject wrapped up and
conserved. How happy are Englishmen that cannot be made miserable but by such
whom they choose and elect to vote for them; If they be enslaved, they may
thank themselves. What a precious privilege is it for this Kingdom that the
Legislative power is in the Parliament, and what an excellent Constitution of
Government is it, that the King should take an Oath at his Coronation to keep
the Laws, when the people make their own Laws, and the King swears to keep
them? How free is that people, and yet (under co^rection be it spoken) there
are two things considerable in the Constitution of the Honorable House of
Commons.

That every Member is not as well sworn to Vote nothing but resolution for his
Oaths sake; I know there is a strong reason to be given why it is ^^^dless;
because in true policy Interests are, and better State security then oaths. The
Lords and Commons Vote for themselves, for their own goods as well as the
Kingdoms. If the Kingdom suffer they suffer in their private Estates, and
therefore the highest point of policy that humane prudence can reach unto, is
this, when a man cannot hurt me, but he must hurt himself, when he cannot
pluck out one of my eyes, but he must pluck out both his own: for our
Parliament Worthies are Elder Brothers, and have a double portion in this
Kingdom. In such a case I may safely trust them; for which reason the King and
Judges have been ever sworn, but the Commons not.



1 A violent presumption in Law, that nothing can be done in the Kingdom but
the House must have notice of it, for so the Law says, that every private man
must be presumed to take notice of every thing done in his own Hundred or
County.

2 For the great reverence every man is presumed to bear to that great
Assembly, that no man dares affirm an untruth before that Honorable Presence.
I am sure, that Legem dare, est summitas Imperii: They that have the greater
power, must have them less included. Nor do I l^ke those expressions, that the
Commons are the Kingdoms servants, and receive wages for their service by Law.
Magistrates do not so much serve the people, as the good of the people, and so
are superior: the Members Vote as well for their own Interests; they are the
most considerable men of parts and qualities in the Kingdom; the reason of the
Kingdom resides in both Houses of Parliament, to them I must submit my
Interest, though my judgment is not enthralled; the ultimate resolution of all
things not against the Laws of God and Nature (which only nterpret themselves)
is in Parliament. This principal of ultimate resolution which in settled times
is joint in the King, Lords, and Commons, may (under favor) be divided in a
Case of necessity without any change or destruction of the Government, and
without any prejudice to the mixture of the several estates, when that
necessity is removed.

Nor do I like several other expressions to the same purpose, as that of the
Potter and the Vessel, that the Counties are the Fathers begetting, and the
Boroughs the Mothers that conceive and bring forth the Burgesses; and that if
Absalon rise against David, it is high Treason. These are truths, but little to
the purpose for which they are produced; but many honest people are much
troubled at the burning of a Petition which was lately presented to the
Honorable House; and what greater mischief can befall a people in time of
Parliament, then that those which have ventured their lives for the Petition of
Right, should be denied the liberty to petition? truly I dare not presently
censure every thing for which I do not apprehend a sufficient reason. Many
grains must be allowed to reasons of State, so long as Governors have a
general Care, and aim to the public good; and do not of Commonwealths men
become private-Wealths men, nor turn the edge of that power against the people
which they put into their hands; certainly, there is no Counsel in the world but
may err: let the chief Incendiaries, who undoubtedly misinformed the House,
answer it. Our Honorable Worthyes which like the heavenly bodies have been in
continual motion for the good of this Kingdom, so many years, deserve all
possible veneration; and he that runs all day, and trips, it, may be, once or
twice, being wearied with multiplicity of business, it is no imputation amongst
wise and judicious men. For as God does not judge a man by every action but the
whole tenor of his life, so must the people judge of great Counsels: What has
the general bent and endeavor of the Parliament been since their first
convention, but the safety and liberty of the people? Had this Kingdom been in
a way to happiness but for this Parliament? it is true the Army has been
principal Instruments of our deliverance, but who raised this Army, and put
the sword into their hands? If Timotheus had not been, we had not had much
sweet Music; instead of singing Hosannaes to the most High, we might have
hanged up our Harps, and sung Lachrimae; but if Timotheus his Master had not
been, we had not had Timotheus. The Parliaments chiefest care has been the
safety of the Kingdom, and if in the carrying on of that, some of their own
private good has been too much involved, and many of themselves enriched in
this time of Calamity, and some Votes not authentic in the Court of Heaven; It
is not well done in right reason, it ought not so to be; but this does not
dissolve the Contract, nor so much as loosen the knot between the Parliament
and Kingdom; it should only put those Worthyes upon a Rectification of what
has been irregular. The husband promises faith to his wife, one unkind word or
action toward her, does not violate his promise for civil matters of
property; many Errors and great Taxations are to be cheerfully tolerated and
endured, so long as it appears that the highest Court in any Kingdom has a
care to make good their promise to the people; the greatest wisdom is to choose
the least evils, which is ever to mayntain the Honors of Parliament, as being
the glory of this Nation, the Fountain of all lawful Liberties, and the
Defender of all Civil Enjoyments: if the Ship be in danger, throw out part of
the goods to prevent a total ruin; let the Jonahs be cast out and the storm
will cease; when Sheba the son of Bichri was disprotected, Joab and the Army
made an Honorable Retreat. 2 Samuel 20.

I cannot but smile at some printed Pamphlets, that to ingratiate themselves
with some that are not the Kingdoms best friends, say that the Army has some
dangerous design; just as bloody Bonner said, that the way to destroy the
Kingdom, is (...) have the Bible in English. Does the Army demand any thing
but what they first adventured for? and was there any radical error in the
beginning? surely none; if they should, unlawful demands may be lawfully
denied; so far as the Army has the Justice of heaven on their sides; so far
they will prevail against all the world of opposers, and no further: what, will
any rational man be afraid of him that draws his sword in his defense? Put the
case that I. S. and his followers traveling through a dangerous Forest,
meeting with I. D. and his servants, should entreat I. D. to draw his sword for
all their defenses, who does so, and meeting with such as would rob them, I. D.
and his friends, most manfully and valiantly make good every passage, by
killing many, till they are past the most dangerous place; then says I. S. now
pray thee I. D. put up thy sword; nay, says he, there may be more wolves yet
^uickly start out of the wood, let us stand upon our guard till we be past all
danger; and discoursing, they differ by the way in matters of opinion, and some
of I. S. party tells him that he is not fit to live in a Common wealth, let him
change that opinion or he must be opposed: pray says I. D. since our way lies
together let us journey lovingly, let us live and bless God that has
preserved us all; says one of I. D. friends, better our lives had not been
preserved, then to be saved by such dangerous fellows as you are. I intend this
Treatise wholly for the Readers brain in point of explication, little to his
affection in point of application: but let no man be so grosely erroneous as to
say, that the Army is Anti-magistraticall, and Anti-parliamentary: what aim
can a House of Commons have but the common good? The Parliament being intent to
the true ends and noble grounds of their raising Forces, and the Army wholly
minding the reasons of their engaging, and both sincerely, really, and
constantly the Parliament, as the supreme Council of the Kingdom, and their
Army as the servants of Justice, endeavoring a speedy accomplishing of the
most honorable and glorious ends, viz. the just rights of the King, just
privileges of the Parliament, and just liberties of the subjects common
safety, just liberty, and equitable propriety, to which the Armies proceedings
have a natural tendencie and proclivity, as the stone to fall downwards; it is
impossible any differenc should arise: Counsel is the right hand of Policy,
and the sword is the left, which may assist and promote without any face of
opposition: the truth is, that there are some whose private interests are
contrary to the public interest of this Kingdom, they are the troublers of
the pure waters, that the people should not drink, they trouble and disquiet
the fountain, and then the streams must needs run muddy; they are men of the
same spirits from whence the miseries of this Kingdom did at the first flow,
that is, obstructers of the free course of Religion and Justice, and
consequently the obstructers of poor Irelands relief: But who must be Judges
of the matters in agitation? Truly the Parliament, in all matters judicial, we
must have no Judge of Scripture but it self; that point of Popery has cost us
dear; we must not light a candle to see whether it be day; who knows not that
every man ought to have his own without vexatious attendance? and that it is
injustice to make a man spend 10 lib. to recover 5 lib. who shall judge whether
those that have saved the Kingdom ought to have the liberty of subjects? who
knows not but that Petitioning is a way of peace and submission, and that for
Christians to meet in private to serve God, is no breach of the peace? The Lord
grant that this Parliament, by the help of the Army, may be the setlers and the
restorers of this divided Kingdom, the neck-breakers of all oppressions in
souls, bodies, and estates, the repairers and relievers of poor Ireland, which
was formerly called the Island of Saints.

Another Objection is, that the Armies not disbanding obstructs the relief and
indangers the loss of dying Ireland: Ah, poor Ireland, my soul is much
troubled for thee; I knew thee, not long since, Englands younger sister, but
thou art now the land of Ire: but he that runs out to quench the fire in his
neighbors house, when his own is almost burnt, I shall rather admire his zeal
then commend his discretion. I confess poor Ireland is on such a flame, that
nothing but Gods infinite blessing upon the wisdom and endeavor of this
Parliament can be able to quench it; but English liberties, which have been
bought at so dear a rate, must first be settled and secured. The Army declared
their resolutions, to have engaged in that service, in one entire body, which
was not thought convenient; if then the Army were hindered by any plot or
contrivement from going thither, not they, but the hinderers are culpable of
Irelands continued miseries; but as the Army has ever been observant to all
the just commands and orders of Parliament; so I hope that if hereafter they
shall engage in that service, they will be well satisfied in point of
conscience, what it is that they fight for: It is possible that Antichrist with
his left hand, may fight against his right. To fight against Popery further
then it is destructive of State policy, to introduce a uniformity in the
Protestant Religion, is, in my opinion, little better; but if it be to bring
those bloodthirsty Rebels to condign punishment, and not to spare a man that
has had his hand in blood, so far it is of God, and he will own it, but for
those expressions which some pulpits ring of, of rooting out that Nation, and
dashing the little childrens bones against the stones; I confess it makes my
heart to tremble to think of it, but those that will not submit to a general
Government must be destroyed.

Object. But we fear the Army will overawe the Parliament; and Counsels not
free stand but for Ciphers, and that Justice it self may not be forced, but
timely hastened.

Sol. 1. The Parliament has answered this Objection in his Majesty's Case. The
King says they refuse to treat, unless we deliver the Sword into his hands,
which is to yield the question; when any differences arise, all things must
rest as they are, until all be determined and concluded.

2 Inforcements are just, when just things are enforced, the sword is a servant
of Justice, and is never better employed. That which the Hollanders allege for
themselves is universally true: if a Magistrate will not do justice, the Laws
mayn intention for justice must not be lost; and King Philip not doing them
justice, was the Author of all the mischiefs that happened. Rebellion is, not to
obey a lawful Magistrate in a lawful Act, not contrary to the Laws of God or
Nature, besides which all Laws are Arbitrary by the Supreme Court of every
Kingdom; If the Army shall entreat any unjust things (as the Sun may be in an
Eclipse) Never were any just Rulers destroyed by force; there was a rising
against David, and great stirs in Edward the sixth's and Queen Elisabeths time,
but quickly hushed and subdued: I think no History can be produced, that ever
any good Magistrates were subdued by force, for God sits upon the Bench with
them; but many times Kings and Governors have refused to do justice, till the
people have enforced them. Hitherto the Army has had the justice of Heaven,
and so long as they entreat in the Kingdoms behalf things Honorable and safe
for the Parliament to grant, their Continuance is the best assurance that our
Worthyes in Parliament can desire: For what great King or Court but receives
honor by a faithful and victorious Army; who will exceedingly facilitate the
work, and prepare the way for our Parliamentary Worthyes? as John the Baptist
did for our blessed Savior. I hope I have satisfied every rational man, that
it is not possible in a prudentiall consideration; that without the
intervention and intercession of this Army, this Parliament, as things stand,
can never be able to settle the public Liberties, and happiness of this
Kingdom; for who sees not what a spirit of malignity there is st^ll working in
this Kingdom? Is all the malignant blood drawn out or dried up? Did never
Serpents reassume their poison upon occasion? Are not the Jesuits negotiating
a reconc^lement between the Catholic Princes hoping to eat up Holland at a
breakfast, England and Scotland for their dinner, and all other Protestants at
supper; and all to erect a universal monarchy, and what is their pretense? Mark
it I beseech you, to avoid disorder and confusion, for it can never be well s^y
they, till one man have the sole power over souls, and another over bodies and
estates, I am confident that before Rome's fall, there will be a general War
between Protestants and Papists, without any other ground of the quarrel. Is
it not the extremity of madness, for Protestants to fall out to maintain
Antichrists cause who is our sworn enemy? How lovingly do Protestants and
Papists associate in France, Poland, etc? The French Ministers preach that the
French King, Queen, and all are damned, unless they forsake their Idolatry;
the Priests quite contrary, that not a Hugonet can be saved: in the name of God
what ails us? cannot we like bees hive into one body politic because we
differ in opinion, yet are of the same Religion? shall small matters disjoyne
them whom one God, one Lord, one Faith, one Spirit, and one common cause, bonds
of such great strength and force have linked together?

Oh ye learned Presbyterians, such of you as are like dead flies in the
ointment of our good names, to make us unsavory to our No^le Parliament (which
yet I trust ye shall never be able to do) Will ye not take warning by the
Bishops? Did not they tell the King that the w^y to prev^nt errors was to
suppress the Puritans? The Rams of the flock are demolished, will not you
tremble? I tell you, that the way to make us all of one mind in the things of
God, is to grant liberty to all; in things not fundamental: possibly there are
some by whom the way of truth is scandalized; we may thank the Bishops and
their Successors for it, let the waters alone and they pass away quietly, but
stop the Current, and throw in stones, and the waters rage. An Englishman
scorns to have his Religion cudgelled out of him, but deal with him in the
spirit of Christ, show him where his feet slide, you take his judgment, and
affections prisoners. If the Bishops had not pressed Subscriptions and Conformity
to the Statute of 13 Eliz. they might have been longer lived, for any thing I
know. It grieves me that you should take such pains to destroy your selves, but
come, there is no falling from grace: true repentance is half innocent: tell
our Parliament Worthyes, that only a liberty to tender consciences can break
the heart strings of popery; that never any but Antichrist denied a freedom of
conscience to people of our quality and profession, who desire it no longer
then we are Protestants, and live in all dutiful Conformity to the Civil
Government; tell them that Jesus Christ will never prosper those that persecute
such as are humble suitors in the behalf of his Kingdom; Do ye think he will?
tell them that the free exercise of the Gospel for Doctrine and Discipline is
of so harmless and peaceable a nature, and carriage so far from wronging any
Magistrate in Sovereignty and Power, that the Persi^ns and the Turks admit it.
The Roman Emperors in policy gave leave to build Temples. Politic Charles the
fifth said, There was no other way to peace, but by a liberty for all
Protestants; so Maximilian that succeeded him: and H. 3. of France. Ah says
Philip the second, when he was dying, If I were to live again, my first thing
should be to grant liberty to Protestants: Ah says the Emperor, How gladly
would I grant a liberty of conscience if that would now serve the turn, and
that would have served at first. I beseech you mark me, when the King of
Sweden entered Germany, he propounded nothing but what was most just, liberty
for Protestants, banishment of Jesuits, restitution to the Palatinate; his
cosen Mechelburg, and some other oppressed Princes, with the Emperor would not
grant, but being victorious, nothing would content him then, but to be declared
King of the Romans, and so heir apparent of the Empire. Be wise in time. A
moderate, meet liberty will not satisfy every man, and you may proceed in your
own way; if hereafter you suffer in point of Tithes, you may thank your selves:
you know whose pride and covetousness has brought their honor into the dust.
Your ridged Presbytery is no more Jure Divino then Episcopacy was; you may as
well call Divinity damnation. Do not think that this Kingdom will suffer you
to be Judges in your own Cases. Your Ipse Dixit will not do it, your Votes
cannot make Heretics nor Schismatics; men are wiser in the South then far
North: the Sun cleers the judgment; to that Son of Righteousness I commend
you, desiring to walk with you in love and peace.

I shall conclude with a request to the Army: you precious souls, as ye have
been presidents to others for honesty and justice, so be a president to your
selves what to continue; continue just, be content with what you can get, and
take not the value of a pin from any man, but in case of necessity; it is fit
that you who have saved the Kingdom should not starve; injustice is a very
great sin, the want of morality excludes from Heaven. His Majesty was wont to
say, that there were none in arms, but Independents, Anabaptists, and
Brownists, who would destroy all Laws and Religion; the eyes of all the World
are upon you: you know best why you took up arms, was it not for Laws and
Liberties; stand fast in the Lord and in the power of his might; be true to
your first principles, as ye are Englishmen, as ye are Soldiers, and as ye are
Christians; treason is the betraying of the greatest trust, he that is true to
his end, cannot be a Traitor. The War first undertaken for the defense of Laws
and Liberties, has had a great influence upon Religion; and pray answer me
this Question, if the Parliament had told you at the first, that you should not
expect any Liberty of Conscience in case of prevayling; but that you must serve
God according to the precepts of men, whether you see reason for it or no,
would you have engaged so cordially upon a promise of freedom for your
temporal estates? What is all the World worth if a man enjoy not the freedom
of his soul? peradventure you will say that the world cannot deprive you of the
liberty of your Consciences, for the Saints are as free in prison to enjoy God
as if they were abroad, as sweet experience can testify, and the more we
glorify him by suffering for him here, the more conformable are we made to
our Head, and shall be glorified with him; and Jesus Christ is eminently all
Ordinances in himself; most true; but in the dark the best eyes have need of
Candles. We are not yet as we shall be, we live upon the beams here, and not
the body; and it derogates much from the wisdom and the love of Christ, to
reckon that as a shadow which he has appointed for a standing Ordinance;
Religion teaches nothing against nature: piety does not ruinate humanity, but
makes one man worth twenty. I assure you, Gods people hope that you will
deliver them from the Bishops successors, as well as themselves, by what title
soever they be called. I doubt not but you have both natural and spiritual
affection to this poor Kingdom; the poor Saints that are rich in faith, act
faith in Christ for deliverance by you: they say they care not what becomes of
them, so as the Crown may be set upon the head of Christ, and fealty and
alleagance sworn unto him, who is no enemy to any just governors; they are
persuaded that the Parliament of themselves intend no less, and that there are
very many in both Houses, most cordial servants to Jesus Christ, who are even
sick for the love of him, that dyed for the love of them: but here is the case,
there is a potent faction within this Kingdom, men that have enriched
themselves in these times of danger and calamity, (a base thing so to build
upon the ruins of our brethren) that count gain godliness; and these consist
of subtle, Atheistical, and depraved Politicians, on the one hand; and
devout, superstitious, rigid Zealots on the other hand: who by specious
pretenses, and plausible insinuation, work upon the candor and devotion of
many honest men; whose minds are virtuously disposed, to enslave this Kingdom
for their own ends, and this under a pretense of Gods honor, service, worship,
and uniformity; and this design so politikely carried on, that the wisest men
may be mistaken, for he that thinks no hurt himself is seldom suspicious of
others. The chief Religion of these Politicians is to have no Religion in the
power of it, but such a form established as is most suitable to his Grandor,
and they think it a sin to let any man live in this Kingdom, who will not eat
up, as sugar, all their Orders and Sanctions: our noble Worthies in Parliament,
would quickly be as wholesome, medicinable, restoratives to heal the wounds of
this Kingdom, but that they like biting corrosives study to make them greater
and more dangerous, setting up all sails to sail withal, and rowing with all
manner of Oars, but being discovered, will, I hope, be abhorred by all honest
men. Now to restrain the malice of these ambitious men, the Lord has preserved
you to this hour, and me thinks I hear Jesus Christ be-speaking you in this
manner: Hearken ye noble Army of Martyrs, in affection and resolution, who
carried your lives in your hands for my sake, and for moral justice, wherewith
I am delighted, I take it as kindly from you, as if you had given me your
lives, but keep them, I am preparing mansions for you, but your work is not
yet done, you must stand up for the liberties of your brethren, you must stand
up in the gap for me, who alone trod the wine press of my Fathers wrath for
you? why have I empowered you, but to purchase liberty for my people? Did I
preserve you from active martyrdom, that you should bring your selves to
passive? Would not I have taken your lives as kindly from you at Nas^bey*
Bristol, etc. as if after disbanding you should be imprisoned, and put to death
for Heretics, or Schismatiques? Is not my kingly government as precious to
you, and as well worthy fighting for as my Priestly office? But if you should
be disbanded before Gods people have their liberties secured I should have
covered my face, and only thought that you did not so well understand the
Doctrine of Christ's government, and dom^nion in his Churches and amongst his
Saints, as the Doctrine of satisfaction by faith in him.

Is it not most apparent that the day of your disbanding is in probabi^ity, the
Eye of the Kingdoms ruin? for does not this potent faction say, they will not
suffer an Independent, that they cannot live but by the death of the
Independent party?

Has God preserved you hitherto in times of War to be insensibly destroyed in
times of peace? Was not your Commission to fight for Laws and Liberties,
whereof Conscience is the greatest; has not the Kingdom sufficiently
dishonored Religion formerly in the Bishops times, but must they now under a
pretense of uniformity seek the life of her Children, and of Religion it self;
do they not aim at the life of Religion which is the heart of God, and the
lives of his children, which are the apple of his eye? The Me^curialists at
Court did but strike at the letter of the law in some things, but these
Phaetons would set all on fire, and aim at the power of Religion, the very
life of our Laws, whose humors are so corrupt, that the least scratch turns
into a Gangreen.

For I am confident, that these cruel men cannot bring one argument for
themselves, but what I may improve for the Popes Supremacy, which was pretended
to be for orders sake, to avoid confusion, but in reality has been the
occasion of all Tyranny. But many words are not proper to an Army, you have won
the heart of Gods people, in you is fulfilled that prophecy, Esaias 49. That
Kings shall be your nursing Fathers, Commanders, persons of Eminency: for what
the watchful Constable, worthy Justicer, reverend Judge, and all other
Officers of Justice do in punishing Traitors in times of peace, the same in
effect is done by Armies in time of War: every Soldier has been a judge to do
justice and execution upon the enemy.

I have but this request to make to you, that you hearken not to any Siren
songs, but be ever true to your first principles; let the Honor of Parliament
always be of most high account and precious esteem with you; your jarring with
that Supreme Court would be a pleasant melody to many that will pretend fair
to you, speak you fair to borrow your hands to take out the Chestnut for them,
that would have you crack the shell for them to eat the kernel.

It is reported of the Lioness or the Bear, that if a whelpe dye she will roar
in the Den exceedingly over the carcass, or else having got some gobbets of
flesh, hopes by continual clamor to put life into it; some such there are,
that by daily exclamation against the Supreme Court, think to vivifie their
dead Cause, and to put life into a carcass; that will not acquit our renowned
Worthyes from the highest Crimination; and yet will justify your station by
the Law of the Land. I beseech you, if the Parliament had no power to
Commissionate you to redeem out Liberties; what are you, that have acted by
their authority? I hate dissimulation; the happiness of this Kingdom will rest
principally in this, that all the godly, though of different opinions, favor
and assist one another, and that all honest peaceable men join together as one
man to break the neck of all oppression and injustice. Let every man contend
for the Honor and Privileges of the King and Parliament, in the preservation
of the Liberties and Birthrights of the people. And when the Kingdom is
happily settled, let us say, that God has done all, yet honor them whom he
has honored.

The End.

