A VINDICATION OF THE MAGISTRATES And Ministers of the City of GLOVCESTER, From
the Calumnies of Mr. Robert Bacon, in his Printed Relation of his usage there;
which he intitles, The Spirit of Prelacy yet working, Or Truth from under a
Cloud.

Together with ten Questions discussed, which tend to the discovery of Close
Antinomianisme.

By JOHN CORBET Minister, and Chaplain to Major General MASSY.

Prove. 18. 17. He that is first in his own Cause seems just: but his
neighbor comes and searches him.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Bostock dwelling at the Sign of the Kings Head in
Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM, LORD VISCOUNT SAY and SEAL.
My Lord,
I Find my self, with many others, represented to Your Honors view in as odious
Colors as Malice it self could deblazon, in Mr. Bacons Printed Relation of his
usage in Gloucester. Whereupon I conceive my self bound to maintain my
integrity both in respect of my person as a Christian, and of my calling as a
Minister. I have therefore published this Vindication, which (...) present to
Your Lordship, beseeching You to receive it as an humble yet necessary address
to Your Lordships Justice. Had I declined this Appeal, I might either be
thought guilty, or to derogate from Your equity and impartiality. But I know
that Your great and Noble Spirit highly disdains the patronage of the least
falsehood, and will condescend to a Vindication of the Truth from what ever hand
it comes. Let your Honor be pleased to conceive of me, as one who desires and
should joy in your favorable opinion. My prayer is, that according to Your
renowned Piety your Name may be precious and Honorable, for promoving a
blessed Reformation, and the fixed Ordinances of Jesus Christ: and for this the
Souls of the people of God shall bless You.

Your Honors humbly devoted Servant in the Gospel of Christ, JOHN CORBET.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of GLOUCESTER.
Gentlemen,
I Am constrained to publish an Answer to Mr. Bacons Relation, wherein both
you, and the Ministers of your City with diverse others, are vehemently
traduced. It troubles me that Gloucester should come in question or be spoken
of in such a slender business; yet since it is made public I cannot neglect
it. Besides, greater Events do take their first Rise from small beginnings: And
I know not what influence that vain Relation may have on the public, if it
pass uncontrolled. Unto you therefore I tender this Vindication, and cast my
self upon your Censure where these things were acted. I value my Reputation
with you, and I trust shall still behold my native place with comfort, and the
manifestation of a good Conscience, which I can never hope to do if mine
integrity fail me. The Lord make you valiant for his Truth, and according to
your power to avenge the Quarrel of His Covenant, and to contend for the Faith
which was once given to the Saints.

Your Servant in the Gospel of Christ, John Corbet.

THe present times do seem to groan under the multitude of Books, which are
thrust out into the world by a General opinion of self-sufficiencie. Insomuch
that the unskilful Reader is quite oppressed, and instead of making progress
in the way of solid truth, sits down amazed: Wherefore I should easily resolve
never to divert the very looser thoughts of men, by any object cast before
them, which according to Solomon's expression, does neither help to abate the
number of that which is wanting, nor to make strait that which is crooked; i.
e. neither to make up the defects of the state of knowledge, nor to cure it is
distempers. And for this cause I much bewail my unhappiness, that I am forced
to the public view in a business in it self mean and slender, but now to be
undertaken of pure necessity. Which I speak not to detract from the value of
the least material circumstance appertaining to Religion: but all inferior
passages are not worthy to trouble the world with a large declaration of
circumstances. Besides points of high concernment were then slenderly handled
in a subitaneous dispute. The reading of this Reply I challenge as a due from
them that are acquainted with, have heard of, or are any way interessed in this
Contestation, that the truth may be cleared. But for them that are strangers,
or have their judgments equally poysed, if they will be so courteous as to
behold, they may judge where the spirit of bitterness, and calumny does lie
under the insinuations of a sweet spirit of meekness. Let none expect things
of an higher nature then the matter it self will reach. And for my Reply, it is
the labor of six days without the advantage of my Papers, and the help of
others engaged with me, when the Relation has been written well nigh two years
since. Let this be accepted from one whose hearts desire is for the glory of
Sion in the Churches Reformation according to the genuine, not the constrained
and racked sense of the National Covenant.

The sum and substance of that whole business, which is styled by Mr. Bacon,
That great and public contestation had in Gloucester, July 1644.
MR. Bacon arriving at Gloucester as a mere stranger (whether upon a call to
supply the room of an absent Minister himself knows it matters not) was
permitted, and by my self once requested to preach there. His first Sermon in
public was upon the Monthly Fast before the greatest, if not the only
Congregation in the City that day. Diverse Ministers then present were much
troubled not only at particular Doctrines delivered, but at the whole frame of
his Prayer and Sermon, as being no way suitable to a solemn Humiliation. The
Magistrates and religious persons of a better understanding and temper, took
the like offense Sine Ira, and odio, for they knew him not, nor his former
conversation. After this, he preached other Sermons, to supply the absence of
Mr Heart; the drift of which Sermons shall be declared in the examination of
particulars. The serious people had thoughts of heart concerning this thing,
others discoursed, and the whole City was quickly filled with this business.
The Magistrates were as much troubled as the Ministers, and that chiefly upon
their own judgment, not others information. The Mayor stopped the course of
his preaching (as himself relates) which restraint was taken off by the
Governor for a further trial. The general offense was heightened. Whereupon it
was moved among the Magistrates, that he should depart the City: but this
motion was again let fall, and 'twas ordered that he should come to a dispute
or Conference in the Governors Chamber the next Lords day after the Evening
Exercise. The Mayor, Governor, Committee, and many principal Citizens together
with the Ministers met at the time and place appointed. The result of our
Conference was to be penned, that there might be no shifting on either party.
And because Mr. Bacons preaching was full of affected ambiguity, we desired in
the first place to propose certain Questions concerning fundamental Doctrine,
and those only upon which his preaching did immediately reflect. And though he
pleaded this dealing to be the way of the High Commission Court, yet the Equity
thereof shall be made good. For the debate of these Questions, Mr. Bacon was
allowed about three days preparation: But he instead of accepting the Dispute,
brought in at large his own stating of the Questions, and his Judgment upon
them. And when the Errors and impertinencies thereof were clearly argued, he
utterly disclaimed all dispute, referring us to his Paper, and requiring our
Answer in writing, in which way there could be no end of the Controversy. Yet
he received from my self an Answer in writing. Nevertheless his own party
made great outcryes of palpable injury in the manage of the Conference.
Whereupon for a general satisfaction a public Disputation was had in the
College between Mr. Bacon and my self. Which being ended, the same day the
Committee desiring the Ministers to be present, drew up an Order injoyning him
to quit the Town. This Order was disobeyed: whereupon a second was drawn up
more vehement then the former, but that also slighted, in pursuance whereof the
Governor commanded a small party of horse to be his Convoy through places of
danger to other quarters of the Parliament, and from these he received civil
usage according to his own testimony. This is the truth of his remarkable
Story, which he brought forth in so large a Declaration, professing that this
Argument might have swollen into a greater Volume, but that there is no end of
Disputes.

An Examination of the particulars in Mr. Bacons Relation of his usage in
Gloucester.
Wherein if many trivial circumstances shall nauseat the serious Reader, let
him take notice that I am bound to follow an extravagant Adversary step by
step: And for my faithfulness herein, first let him look back upon my Appeals.
Secondly, that these things were acted before many witnesses, to whom I am well
known, and with whom I value my Repute. Tbirdly, I am assured of the
concurrence of godly Ministers; but am now constrained to appear alone, because
haste is my greatest advantage.

I Cannot pass by the frontispice without observation, which would raise the
thoughts of the Reader to expect some great and admirable discovery. And what
is it? The spirit of Prelacy yet working, or truth from under a cloud. What an
incongruous beginning yet proportionable to the rest! If the latter part of the
Title be an explanation of the former, as such connexions would import; then
the spirit of Prelacy yet working is Truth from under a Cloud. What then is
entitled unto this great mystery. A Relation of that great and public
Contestation had in Gloucester. July 1644. Certainly this Relater will abate
nothing of his value. Such Titles are fit for some general meeting of eminent
persons, a dispute before the representative Body of a Kingdom, or some famous
result and notable periods of the debates of a National Assembly. Besides it is
called that great Contestation, as if the whole Kingdom either did or were
bound to take notice of it.

In the intimation to the Reader what greater advantage could I wish, Quam quod
accusatori maxim optandum consitentem reum. He does freely confess, that
nothing was done in this matter, but in the eye of Authority, and by their
order. Let it be considered that this Authority was the joint consent of the
Civil and Military Government of Gloucester, a place famous for it is fidelity
to the Kingdoms Cause in the greatest strait, that the Parliament was as yet
ever cast into since the beginning of the War, a place which was a refuge and
Sanctuary to godly Ministers and people in their distress, which they that
were refreshed will at this day acknowledge.

He desires to give an Experiment of the seasonablenesse of Mr. Colemans
caution to the Parliament, that the Clergy (ut vocant) may not carry on their
own self designs, that is in plain English, to hinder the settling of
Church Government. It is well known that they who retard or hinder the
Reformation, must needs drive on self designs.

He speaks also of my Reply, and a Rejoinder made by himself at that time. In
this point I accuse him of palpable injury in publishing his own stating of the
Questions, and concealing my Reply, which was not only given in to him in
private, but was read at the public Disputation. Thus has he prevaricated in
a main part of his Relation. Then such partiality what can be more unworthy of
an ingenuous Adversary? As for his Rejoinder, I never saw it, nor remember that
I heard of it. What is this more then to think a Rejoinder, yea a mere nothing?
For, de non entibus and non apparentibus eadem est ratio.

Of the Relation it self.
IT is said, that an offense was taken, but non given at a Sermon preached by
him on the public Fast day. Ans. An offense may be given, and justly taken not
only at things unlawful, but at things unexpedient. As for this particular
case, the whole frame of the Prayer and Sermon was no way fit for a public
Fast, Confession of sin almost wholly omitted, the work of Humiliation
disparaged, the Doctrine of Repentance, and Contrition or brokennesse of heart,
as it is taught by our Ministers of the good old way of the Non Conformists,
was condemned for Popery, although through many circumlocutions, mazes, and
ambiguous terms. An instance was given in an Allegory taken out of the Crumbs
of Comfort, called A Remedy for a sin-sick Soul, and is inserted in the close
of his Relation, which he has termed a ridiculous and soul-killing Medicine.
This Medicine was composed by an eminent Divine, and though it may be
questioned whether it be sightly so to allegorize, yet it follows not that it is
either ridiculous or soul-killing: and being divested of its party colored
coat to appear in proper and plain terms, it will be found to carry no
disproportion to the Analogy of Faith; Though he calls it rather the language of
Rome then Canaan. But this was not that spark which was blown up into so great
flame, but was only an instance selected by him on purpose, because most easy
as he conceived to be made odious. Neither was the Fast-Exercise the sole
ground of the Controversy, but each Sermon increased the fire.

The first Charge is given in against Mr. Marshall, Mr. Holford, and my self
for soliciting the Mayor to suspend his preaching. As for Mr Marshall whether
he did so I know not, neither does it much concern the business, but I must
tell the world, that Mr. Bacon has traduced this able, painful, and godly
Minister with a gross untruth, that he lived and preached among the Cavaleers.
For he has lived within three miles of Gloucester for many years before the
War, and never removed from his own Charge, and whereas he had sometimes a
weekly Lecture at Berkly, he discontinued it when that place was possessed by
the Kings Forces. For my self I remember not that I made known any grievance to
the Mayor concerning him, before he was publicly questioned: but I know
assuredly that I never solicited that he might be suspended, neither did I move
one syllable against his second liberty of preaching obtained from the
Governor, as I might easily have done. Besides, the Mayor sent for me to the
Town Chamber at several times complaining of this Man. And once meeting Mr.
Bacon in the Tolsey I appealed to the Mayor, and others present, whether I had
been his accuser. Mr. Holford is accused of laboring to keep in with both
sides. This is one man's report; but thus much I can say for my Brother in the
Ministry, that he was an open, and earnest opposer of Sectaries, and it is hard
for me to conceive (let others judge) that a knowing man should seek reputation
or advantage by underhand dealing, or comply with that party, whose spirits
were imbittered against him.

His restraint being taken off, and he applying himself to clear the Doctrine
of Repentance (though indeed he muzzled the truth thereof) he tells us, that one
Wheeler set himself to take Notes of his Prayer and Sermon to stir up
adversaries by giving information, which we are said to receive with all
readiness. What a remarkable and worthy passage, as if we had need of Spies to
pry into that which was delivered before so many witnesses: or that one man's
information were the ground of all the following trouble, which was raised by a
general complaint. But Mr. Wheeler professes that he was once resolved not to
hear him, having been at Gloucester for the space of three weeks before, but
was persuaded thereto by the urgent importunity of many of Mr. Bacons
followers: and he upon whose report this aspersion was grounded, has since
acknowledged before witness, that he had done Mr. Wheeler wrong. And the
Sermon Notes, which were read at the first Conference Mr. Bacon acknowledged to
be true. As for the Ministers readiness to receive information, we acknowledge
that we undervalued the business too much, and were blameworthy in neglecting
the truth and our selves.

He imputes to Mr. Holford, Mr. Hodges and my self the cause of his summons to
the Covernors Chamber on the Lords day. Whereas it was concluded the day before
by the Magistrates, when they had once thoughts of sending him out of Town
without more ado. And of this I had not the least intimation, till the meeting
was resolved upon, and the report thereof spread about the City, though he
says he never heard of it till the time came. And thus does a veyn of Calumny
run through the whole Relation.

He observes that he was sent for by a Soldier as a transgressour. What a
trivial circumstance, and absurd collection? Is it not well known, that
Soldiers under the Command of a principal Officer are like the Centurions
Servants, who said to one come, and he comes; to an other go, and he goes;
and to a third do this, and he does it?

This meeting consisted of men of quality, common fellows were excluded, except
some of his own party who were admitted by our consent; among whom a young
preaching Pewterer.

An other Aspersion is cast upon the Ministers behavior in time of the
Conference, That they upbraided him with much unbeseeming and reproachful
language, rushing upon him with a torrent of evil words, till that
unseemlinesse was remedied by the Governors command. This is a mere slander,
having nothing of truth, and herein we can appeal to the Governors own
testimony. A greater Acrimony might easily manifest it self in a serious
Contest, but without bitter invectives; and if some did inveigh against
Heretics and Schismatics in general, yet not against his person. Or if a
stream of words might flow from diverse men, the cause of it was his refusal of
a positive Declaration. And if one man at that present had nothing to charge
him withal, yet there were many Ministers, and the Controversy did not depend
on the Judgment or manifest of one Man. And whereas he speaks of their laying
heads together, let him know there were such men as scorned a Combination, who
walked not in the dark, and can offer themselves with much boldness to be
judged by man's judgment, although he that judges us is the Lord.

But here is the main grievance which he labors to display, That not finding
sufficient matter of accusation, we began to examine him upon certain
interrogatories: against which he protested, because it favored so strongly of
the illegality of the High Commission Court. Wherefore to justify our
proceedings, we offer these things to be weighed by the judicious. Mr. Bacon
was looked upon in the notions either of an Erroneous, or of an obscure, and
ambiguous Preacher, not by reason of his profound; but his wavering and
doubtful Doctrine. First, he was considered as ambiguous, and therefore
suspected and dangerous. Which appears in that he did always pretend unto
something extraordinary, beyond that which the people had been formerly taught,
even concerning the substance of fundamental Doctrine: every mindful hearer
took it for a new way, especially his own favorers, and then the terms of
legal Preachers, and Preachers of Christ began to be rolled upon every tongue.
Besides, in the explication of any point, he would heap up an infinity of words
passing to and fro in a constrained way, that one might easily believe, Male
res agitur ubi opus est tot remediis. There was still an expectation of some
great thing carried aloft in the Clouds, which a while after fell down in a
plentiful shower of words. And in such a case who can blame the jealousy of a
Minister; who must watch over the Flock, as one that must give an account of
their souls? Insinuations of Error slide into the minds of people, when the
violent approach of corrupt opinions begets horror, and saves them by fear.
Secondly, Mr. Bacon was looked upon as an erroneous Preacher: some things are
hinted already; and the rest are to be made known, when I come to discuss the
Questions. Nevertheless it is worthy observing that he was more liberal in
private then in public, the mysteries were unvailed, imis penetralibus,
because al was not thought fit for a promiscuous, and unprepared Auditory. One
instance shall serve, which will be made good by approved testimony if need
require. In private he disputed against habitual graces, not in the way of
Argumentation, but according to his proper Judgment; but in public such a
design must be carried on through a maze of intricate and perplexed words.

But we are charged in compelling Mr. Bacon to a self accusation, and therein
with reviving the abolished tyranny of the High Commission. To this it is
answered, that we did not require him to betray himself, nor to disclose any
secret concerning him or his, that might make him obnoxious to any mulct or
penalty. And had he refused to Answer, his danger was no more, then the
scandal of his Doctrine. We did not assume a liberty of proposing Questions in
infinitum, but such only as immediately reflected upon his preaching, whereby
we were scandalized; yea and such things as did arise out of his Sermons. And
that not so much to know his opinion, as to lay down some groundwork upon
which the debate might rest. Moreover, did ever any that were examined by
Authority (suppose of the Prelates) in the principles of Faith, account that
Examination a Tyranny, or a means to ensnare them? Besides a Minister is bound
to declare his judgment in the principal matters of Divine knowledge, if
merely desired by his fellow laborers, whenever they are publicly offended,
yea though unjustly. But there is more yet in this case. Mr. Bacon came as a
stranger, and though he had the power of a ministerial calling, yet he had
neither power, nor call to exercise his ministry against the consent of the
Magistrates and Ministers of that place where he sojourned, And it is provided
by Order of Parliament in their Instructions to the Committees of some
counties, as in Sommerset-shire, that every Minister placed by them in any
Sequestered living, shall undergo the examination of three Ministers in the same
county. Thus much for the first meeting in the Governors Chamber.

The Questions were not propounded as we in our wisedoms (according to his
phrase) thought meet; but as his preaching and practice did require. A Debate
upon them was reserved for Wednesday following, in that place where the Council
of War was wont to be held.

His tedious mention of many idle circumstances, I pass by, as unbeseeming a
grave Relation. At the place appointed, Mr. Bacon brought in an Answer in
writing to the ten Questions, as himself pleads, according to a former command.
But he fails in the truth of the business: For an Answer in writing was not
required, but a Verbal dispute; though it was thought meet that the Arguments
urged on both sides should be then written, that we might not lose our selves
in a Chaos of words. The reading of his Paper, I undertook of my own accord;
for the Governor intended a dispute, and then challenged Mr. Bacon for
refusing. I gave off reading in the midst, not (as he says) because unwilling
that the company should hear altogether; but partly, because I was tired with
many tedious impertinencies, and longed to make answer; partly, because the
bare reading of a large Paper, containing sundry things, could give no
satisfaction to the people. Nevertheless I examined his stating of the
Questions one by one, by clear argument discovering his errors and nullities,
to which he would give no answer, but referred all to his Paper, which was then
Refuted. If there were confusion of language, that was caused by his obstinate
silence. For who could endure so gross a tergiversation, accompanied with a
self-justification to the highest?

2. Master Bacon here and elsewhere complains of reproachful language from the
M^nisters. But I must answer him, In generalibus versatur dolosus. Let him give
an instance of such Reviling. I can justify my self, neither do I remember any
railing accusation that then fe^l from the mouth of a Minister. But if any of
them did vehemently charge him with the shame of a self-baffle, shall that be
called reproach? Those Ministers are more ingenuous and of better spirits, then
this R^later desires to render them. I could not observe, nor remember every
passage that fell from those in Authority, or from the standers by. Neither do
I justify their threats, if there were any. But his person was no more
endangered then ours, whatsoever be may pretend or intimate. As for that
Gentleman whom he reports to be of no mean command, though his Military-Office
were not in the Garrison, I can say little to his words what they were. He has
been an ancient professor of Religion, and of approved integrity. But if it be
said that the people called him Bonner, it must be the greater part, or the
better part, or at least a considerable part. But the speech of one Woman, he
is pleased to attribute to the people. So greedily does our opposite catch at
every circumstance, though strangely misrepresented. He adds, that besides
diverse Ministers, one a Cavalier openly jeered him. This is a malicious
slander: let him name the persons. That Minister which was taken in arms
against the Parliament, had voluntarily taken the Covenant, and thereupon
obtained his liberty: but he had no hand in the manage of this business, being
a spectator only: and for his open jeering, if it be true, as I question,
others could not prevent that incivility.

In the close of this unweldy Conflict, a writing was drawn up, That Mr. Bacon
had divulged certain erroneous Opinions, in which at a Conference he had given
no satisfaction: The Auditors were to Subscribe if they pleased. But he
declares, the reason of this Subscription was, to send him up to the Parliament
or Assembly the next day. I profess that I knew not of any such thought, and
am assured, that the Governor did not intend it; but I conceive that he
grounds his assertion upon some wandering speeches scattered among the people:
But this is the truth of the business; We have had great experience of the
vain boastings of Sectaries, who to wound the Reputation of those that
encounter them, proclaim a Victory and sing the Triumph, what ever the
success be. This was then feared from that Party; to prevent which mischief, a
Subscription was then thought upon, and first hinted by a moderate man, no
Minister, nor at that time a Magistrate. And to this none were compelled:
only, when we had a meeting, for satisfaction, we desired to know the opinion
of the Auditors. And of those Six persons that refused to Subscribe, some
pretended that they did not hear, others that they were not present at the
whole Conference, one or two would give no reason: but none of them did avow to
have received any satisfaction.

That the manner of our proceedings were generally complained of (as is
related) and accounted neither Christian nor justifiable by the Law of civil
Society, is a gross calumny; and herein I appeal to the Inhabitants of that
place. What one man, namely, Mr Shepard, might in private acknowledge is
nothing to our purpose. Thus much for the second meeting.

The Mayor with others are said to spend much time in persuading him to depart
the City: affirming, if he were the most Orthodox Preacher in England, he were
not fit for Gloucester. Thus they speak upon bare supposition. And the
consequence drawn from hence is most absurd, namely, that an Orthodox Preacher
should be a burden too heavy for Gloucester to bear. If Mr. Bacon supposed to be
an Orthodox Preacher, be not fit for such a place, does it therefore follow
that no Orthodox Preacher is fit? Is Mr. Bacon and Orthodox Preacher
convertible? Experience witnesses, that not only Orthodox, but some good men
may not be fit for some Congregations. Besides this thing does assure us of his
importunate contradiction, who would stay in a place where he had no interest,
when the Magistrate desired his absence, and persuaded his departure upon this
ground, that he was not a man fit for Gloucester. But he says, He feared the
desertion of his own or rather Christ's Cause. Answ. Is the Cause of Christ
maintained by a troublesome presence in despite of the Magistrate? It Is enough,
that a man makes answer in a free confession and submits to the censure of
Authority.

The Relation proceeds to the public Disputation; for which purpose there was
an Order from the Governor directed to the several Ministers to be read in
the Pulpit, That if any doubted of the approvednesse of the proceedings in the
two former meetings, satisfaction should be given in a more public way. This
Order I received as I was going into the Pulpit, without the least intimation
or thought thereof before, though the Dispute would rest upon me. The Governor
was moved hereunto not to terrify Mr. Bacon as he does imply in the
expressions of his great thoughts of heart; But upon the advertizement of false
Reports raised by his followers. Here as in many other places a heap of
circumstances are brought in being more fit for an idle Romance, then a serious
discourse.

The Governor, and Mr. Bromwitch of the Committee are said to engage
themselves to protect him from slander and wrong, which the one heard, and the
other saw he formerly sustained. He makes it the sense of the Governor that he
had sustained wrong, which is known in Gloucester to be a manifest untruth, and
cannot be rationally conceived by any that knew that business.

He speaks of a Marshall standing at his elbow with a Halbert though he
perceived it not, of purpose, if it might be to daunt him. I observed no such
thing, standing opposite and likely to behold his attendance: the Governor
protests against it; and to stand with a Halbert, is not a Marshal's posture.
Besides, it was so much invisible, that Mr. Bacon observed it not, which could
not well have been if any had stood there in terrorem. And is it not a childish
conceit, that a Minister should be terrified by a Marshal with a Halbert; and
an exploded folly to bless God for his assistance that he was not daunted
thereby?

The way of the Dispute in general, was on this manner. I proposed the
Questions; Master Bacon affirmed or denied, and read the stating of them: I
read my written Reply, thence drawing concise Arguments, to which he made large
Declarations. It seems we must give him leave to proclaim and glory that his
Adversaries fell before him, to the great contentment and satisfaction of the
believing and more sober-minded people. But it had been better that his
neighbors mouth had praised him. Does he not arrogate very much, that all the
believing people should rejoice at his clearing? Let these absurdities confute
themselves. He speaks of Discontent that appeared in the faces of his
adversaries. Who made him a judge of our thoughts?

But it is said, Master Corbet confessed before all the people, that it had
been better never to have begun such a task; for the people will run after him
much more then before. Answ. It Is impossible to remember every word that
passes in the heat of disputation. But my complaint, whatever it was, was thus
grounded. Master Bacon would dispute neither in a formal Syllogism, nor
Enthymeme, nor in any Argumentation trussed up in a Logical way; but ran through
many Ambages, and seemed to make Speeches with an affected deliberation; and
still he craved leave to explain himself: which prolixity spent the time, lost
the Argument, and confounded the Hearers.

He tells us that the evidence of the truth had for the present struck a deep
silence in all his opposers. Here is an absolute falsehood: For unto his Answers
I still made Reply, till we were taken off, and caused by them that moderated
to pass to another Question, according to the Law of Disputation.

He relates that some were complained of by witnesses to have vowed to be the
death of him. Here is an high Charge given in; but to whom the complaint was
made, or by what witnesses, or who those were that had so vowed, it is not
signified. In this he deals deceitfully, lurking in generals, and maliciously,
in leaving doubtful not only the persons, but the conditions of them who
should so vow: the world might suspect Magistrates, Commanders, Ministers, and
men of quality. I am not now in Gloucester to enquire into this passage: Let it
therefore be thought upon, that I stand upon great disadvantage in this Reply,
whereas a longer time of examination would display my Antagonist much more; but
that I hasten to crush this bird in the shell: yet having no more, then what I
know to be firm truth at such a distance both of time and place, I doubt not
but to make a sufficient discovery of his many Untruths, to all indifferent
judgments. Wherefore I know that men of any value would highly scorn such an
Imputation; nor were any incensed or encouraged by us so much as unto violent
speeches. And if this were true, doubtless Master Bacon, who has stuffed his
book with so many idle passassages, would not omit to give some character of
the persons guilty of so great a crime.

Thus ended the first days Dispute: The morrow after, we came together to
discuss the residue of the Questions. But our Relator gives out that the
remaining part of my Reply, i. e. to the five last Questions, contained little
else then invectives against his person. Wherein I charge him with a notorious
slander. And if my charge be false, it is in his power to shame me: For my Reply
was delivered in to him, and had now been printed, had my papers been by me.

Master Bacon had no more discountenance the second day then the first; only
he was required to contract his speech according to the law of Argumentation;
and even then, he spoke many words for my one.

But he says that the Committee being Judge, in their name (as he supposes)
Master Bromwitch drew up the result of each days dispute, and gave the whole
Ass mbly notice that nothing was proved against him, but what was according to
Orthodox opinion. To this I make answer, That the Governor, the Mayor, and
Aldermen, were Judges as well as the Committee, and that Master Bromwitch, as I
conceived, did not speak in the name of the Committee, but in his own name,
being a quick and a nimble Disputant. Besides, this Gentleman did not take off
the charge of Error: but when M ster Bacon running to and fro in doubtful
terms, came near to our Tenants, he read it to the people, rather to his
conviction then clearing; by which all men might take notice of his Vacillation
or halting. Whether the Committee did so clear him, I refer the Reader to their
second Order for his removal, which is inserted in his Relation in these words.

We the Gentlemen of the Committee gave out our Order upon a serious Debate,
not of our selves, as according to our Instructions we might have done, but
with the ingredients and consult of many godly and learned Ministers by both
parties, and emergent Reasons our Votes were concluded, and (in a more civil
manner then Master Bacon deserved) were sent unto him: yet, although he has
rather arraigned, then entreated the Committee to alter their Judgments, we
are resolved not to alter our commands, as rather engaged to gratify so many
Orthodox Divines then his fancy.

He remarks the word gratify. What greater reproach could he fasten upon the
Committee, then thus to insinuate that they did injure him to gratify us?

But it is said that Master Corbet with all vehemence exclaimed that Master
Bacon had another meaning, though his words were justifiable. It is answered,
that I did not justify the greatest part of his expressions, though some of
them might admit a fair construction. But I complained of the ambiguity of his
expressions, which were not fit for Dispute, though they may suit very well
with Exhortation. And when a man shall absolutely disclain such terms as are
necessary to Disputation, it is no fair dealing, nor sign of a good cause or
sound Doctrine. To make instance; at that very time he would by no means meddle
with the terms of the habits of grace, or inherent holiness, because they were
not Scripture-terms.

That the Ministers got themselves into a committee that afternoon, is utterly
false. For they had no meeting among themselves. Wherefore that Master Heart and
Master Close were exc^^ded by consent, is as false. As also, that we should
resolve among our selves (as the Relation imports) that he must depart, or we
would leave the city, is a gross untruth. We had no such Debate, no such
circumstances, no such meeting. But the Ministers were required to attend the
Committee of Parliament. And if Master Heart and Master Close were not there,
their own unwillingnesse was the cause of their nonappearance.

The Committee are able to justify their own Orders, and their manner of
proceeding. Threatenings, if they were, or whatever they were, were provoked by
his obstinate disobedience.

What a train of egregious stories brings up the rere of his Discourse, of
things done upon a Saturday at two a clock in the afternoon, by the Governors
Captain Lieutenant with a party of Troopers, and their discourse with him; with
his several Horses; the Captain Lieutenant's leaving him at three miles
distance from the city; his guidance by the Head-corporal; and that Captain
Massy did not go in his company to Sudely, but came after late in the night,
etc. Such strains will help to swell the Volume of a jesting Romance, or Book
of Knight-Errantry.

But I observe that Master Bacon does not so fairly alight from off that horse
that was taken up to convey him to some other of the Parliaments Quarters; nor
does he sufficiently clear himself from that fraud he says was laid to his
charge. This is the truth of the story: Master Bacon disliking the first horse,
was furnished with another more able. Himself reports that his guides having
brought him to Warwick, told him that they had no order concerning the horse,
but that it was at his own disposal. This was either their neglect or
dishonesty. And could he think that those Soldiers had power to give another
man's horse taken up for that particular service? or did he conceive that the
Governor would either defraud the owner, or pay the price that he might be
quit his company? But this horse was challenged at London on the behalf of
Colonel Okey, at that time in Sir William Wallers Army, at the instance of
Colonel Okey's friend, by Master Wheeler, who had an interest in that Army: and
imported as much to Master Bacon. But he refused to restore it: and being
demanded to declare his interest therein, he replied that the horse was at his
disposal, and that he had endeavored to put him off or exchange him at
Northampton. Hereupon he was challenged for a fellonious detainer, and still
urged to give him back, even by the owners wife, till for mere shame, and the
importunity of his own friends, to avoid further scandal, he was compelled to
deliver him. This passage at London, is avowed by Master Wheeler in all the
circumstances.

Lastly, he calls God, and the consciences of those that were present, to
witness the truth of his Relation. I also can appeal to heaven for the truth
of my Answer; wherein my adversary is convicted of so many falsehoods and
impertinencies; and am also assured of the Attestation of the Magistrates and
the Ministers of Gloucester, which was the Scene of this Action.

Concerning these ten Questions, let it be considered, first, that they were
propounded without any premeditation; and many of them were not expressed in
such searching terms, as might prevent all evasions. Secondly, that we
condescended to Mr. Bacon in the wording of them, because he would not be
gained to declare himself, except he apprehended some advantage. Thirdly, that
Master Bacon has published his stating of them, and that with a plentiful
Commentary upon some; but omitted my Answer not only given in private, but
debated upon in public. The copy thereof I have not by me; and the necessity
of a quick dispatch permits no delay. But the substance thereof is faithfully
delivered: if not, my opposite having the Paper put into his hands, may
discover it if he please. Fourthly, the Affirmative and Negative affixed, is
Master Bacons Judgment. Let ours be collected in the discuss of each Question.

Q. 1. Whether the Moral Law be abrogated? Neg. according to Master B.
IN the terms we agree, but he states the Question by several Aphorisms,
that scarce approach the true meaning thereof; which is, whether we are bound
to the Moral as a rule of righteousness.

He says first, The Moral Law was revealed from heaven of God himself on
Mount Sinai, and in that consideration is to be had in high honor and account.
This does not resolve the question.

2. It Is a part of the holy Scriptures, and therefore not to be slighted. So is
the Cerimoniall Law.

3. It Is the image of God, so that by the Law we may see the holiness and
righteousness of God. Neither is the doubt here resolved, whether we are bound
to observe the Moral Law, as a rule of righteousness.

4. Christ was shadowed out in the Law. The Ceremonial Law was a shadow of
Christ, not the Moral. Secondly, grant this, and the Moral Law has herein no
more privilege then the Cerimoniall.

5. All the world shall be judged by it. This does not come to the state of the
question; for the Reprobate shall be judged according to the rigor of that law;
and the Elect by the same law as fulfilled in Christ. But this satisfies not
whether it remains a binding rule of obedience.

6. Those, that believe in Jesus, walk more freely in the things enjoined by
the Law, then they are without Christ. Still from the purpuse. Secondly, those
that without Christ do nothing truly and sincerely, which is contained in the
Law.

7. The Law is exceeding useful to take men off from the damnable opinion of
their own righteousness. This does neither declare that a Christian ought to
humble his soul by reflecting up the holy Law of an holy and jealous God, nor
that he is bound to the Law as a Rule.

8. The Law in the Hand of a Mediator is a rule of life; for what the Law does
command in the letter, that the law of the spirit of life does work within,
which is therefore called the Law of Faith, or the Law of Christ, or the Law
written in the heart. Here he seems to speak something, but all dark and
confused. The Law in it self, and not as considered in the hand of a Mediator,
is the rule of life: But the Law given in the hand of a Mediator does show that
the exact righteousness thereof is not required unto justification. Secondly,
he brings a reason which has no connection in these words, For what the Law
does command in the letter without, the law of the spirit does work within;
except he does mean, because the Gospel inableth, the Law binds. Is this to
state a Controverted question. Might not an Antinomian grant these positions if
he would study to conceal himself?

Besides, at the Dispute he did reject this Conclusion, viz. That the Law does
bind a Christian to obedience; for, said he, the Gospel does enable him. Which
the understanding hearers remember (I doubt not) that I refuted, by replying,
that it is the nature of a Law to bind; and where the Law binds not, there is
no sin. Have we not reason to suspect unsoundnesse in this Point? And as there
is a distinction made between separation and semi-seperation, so it is necessary
to distinguish between gross and close Antinomianisme.

Q. 2. Whether good Works be a means to obtain Salvation. Neg. according to
Master B.
HErein we differ. But this question was at first proposed in other terms.
Whether good Works may be called a Way to Salvation; which Master Bacon had
formerly denied to my self and another Minister, and at the first Conference
more publikly disclaymed the distinction of Via ad Regnum, and Causa Regnandi,
affirming that Jesus Christ is the only way: Whereas we mean by a way, such a
course as God has appointed them to take, whom he will bring to salvation,
without which salvation does not ensue. As the narrow way in the Gospel, and
the undefiled in the way, Psalm. 119. And by good works we declared to
understand not only the fruits, but the principles of holiness, namely,
inherent grace. But to indulge our adversary in an expression, the Question was
thus propounded, Whether good Works be a means to obtain Salvation: By which
we understand not the only, or the chiefest means; for I then declared in my
Paper, that Christ alone by his super-abounding merit has purchased salvation
for us; and now further add, that according to his pleasure he dispenses his
grace, and by his power preserves his people to eternal life. But holiness
is so necessary, that if supposing an impossibility, a man might be justified
and not sanctified, he could never appear before the face of God in glory.

But this expression is rejected as unsavory; whereas a means does imply no
more, then something aptly disposed and designed to a certain end.

Thus Gods Ordinances are a means to obtain salvation. But holiness is
absolutely necessary; follow peace with all men, and holiness without which no
man shall see the Lord. But the word obtain is most remarked, which is the
Scripture phrase, 1 Cor. 9.24. So run that ye may obtain. Consider other
places, Phil. 2.12. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling. Phil.
3.14. it is called (...), the reward of victory, 2 Cor. 4.17. our light
affliction which is but for a moment, works out for us a far more exceeding
weight of glory. That holiness is a way to salvation is clearly proved out of
the Text which Master Bacon urges, Ephesians. 2.10. We are created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained that we should walk therein:
for if we walk in them they are a way; if a way, there must terminus ad quem,
the end of our walking, which is salvation.

But says he, to affirm that good works are a means to obtain salvation,
is to deny Christ the only means. I answer, Christ is the only means
meritorious, and the only means principally efficient; but this does not
exclude other means subordinate unto Christ, as the Word and Sacraments, and
such things as flow from Christ by inevitable consequence, as good works being
ranked in their own place.

Q. 3. Whether God be displeased with his people that are in Christ for their
sins, we mean such a people as are in the Covenant of Grace: Neg. according
to Master B.
HEre we differ in opinion; but this question was at first propounded in other
terms, viz. Whether God be displeased with the sins of his people? which
Master Bacon affirmed: Whereupon we urged his own Doctrine publicly taught in
these words: You know that when we please men, they will be pleased with us,
when we offend them, they will be offended with us; they are up and down, but
far be it from us to entertain such thoughts of God; whom he loves he
loves to the end, he is not as man to be displeased; the Lord help us, that we
rather consider, that we are not sinners so much because of the acts of sin,
but rather because of the sinfulness of sin: It is true, to the natural
man, to our understandings, God is pleased with us this hour and not that
hour; but you must come up higher to the knowledge of God, that he is the same
to day and for ever. Here he plainly denies the pleasure or displeasure of God
for this or or that act; and hereupon he brought forth this subtilty; That God
is displeased with the sins of his people, but not with his people for sin;
of which people he exacted so much explanation, as that they are in Christ, as
if we conceived Gods people out of Christ; but this is not enough, he exacts
more, viz. we mean such a people as are in the Covenant of grace, as if it
were possible to conceive that Gods people which are in Christ are out of the
Covenant of grace: He states the Question on this wise:

1 When we affirm that God is displeased or angry, we speak after the manner
of men, for God is not subject to passion: Answ. to say that God is angry is
spoken after the manner of men; yet dispeasure is no passion, but agrees with
God in the highest perfection of his nature; for God is equally perfect in the
dislike of sin, as in the love of good.

2. When we are chastened of the Lord, it is a sign of his love, not of his
displeasure: Answ. Gods love is not opposed to his displeasure, but to hatred:
Yea, the more love the more displeasure when we sin against love; This in
Parents is the fruit of paternall affection.

3 It Is most peremptorily to be affirmed, that God hates sin in whomsoever: This
is true; but we speak of displeasure not of hatred.

4 So far as the children of God live off from Christ, and walk unworthy of
the Gospel, so far they lie under the sense of wrath; insomuch as the
Apostle says, he scourges every son whom he loves; it is impossible that a
man should have peace in the ways of sin: Answ. Here he contradicts and
refutes himself, and runs out beyond our desire: The children of God walking
unworthy of the Gospel, do not always in such a case lie under the sense of
wrath, which is the apprehension of the guilt of sin binding them to eternal
vengeance; and which is as far distant from the bare apprehension of
displeasure, as the spirit of Bondage from the spirit of Adoption: Where the
Apostle says, he scourges every son whom he receives, he does not mean
the sense of wrath: But he adds, it is impossible that a man should have peace
in the ways of sin; whence I infer, where there is no peace, and so ought
to be no sense of peace, there Gods displeasure must needs be apprehended (for
when God is not displeased, there is peace in the soul) and if we must
apprehend the Lords displeasure, he is really displeased, except we are bound
to apprehend a falsehood: Many times the Saints apprehend displeasure when God
is pleased, but they are never bound so to do, but when God is actually
displeased; therefore it does necessarily follow, that if there were no peace
in the ways of sin, God must needs be displeased with his people for sin.

5 The fifth paragraph is answered in the former.

6 The sixth is exceeding tedious and confused; the substance thereof I collect
and examine: That a natural man looking upon God in the Law, apprehends he
pleases God so far as he keeps the Law, and so far as he comes short of
obedience to the Law, so far he apprehends he despleaseth God: But a
spiritual man seeing himself accepted of God in Christ, ought not to conceive
that God is up and down with him in his love, for whom he loves he loves to
the end. Answ. Gods love is opposed to hatred, not to displeasure; the love of
our persons and a temporary displeasure conceived against our persons are well
consistent, as in the case of paternall affection: Secondly, God is said to be
angry with Moses.

I demand whether Moses, being in the Covenant of grace, was bound to believe
Gods displeasure upon Gods own manifestation, or whether he did dishonor God
by believing, that he was displeased with him (as Master Bacon imports a
believer does in such a case?) That same (...) Mat. 3.17. is the everlasting
love of God, abounding to the acceptance our persons and performances, yea the
love of complacency, which does not exclude the particular acts of displeasure,
and the way of atonement and redintegration after our falls.

7 The seventh proves nothing, but that being reconciled, we are saved from
wrath, viz. divine revenge, which we grant.

But in the last place, he does extremely subtillize his Notions; he is
contented that God should be displeased with sin, but not with the sinner: It
is true, that in some cases God does hate sin, but not the sinner; as a father
hates the disobedience of his son, but hates not his son in disobedience; for
hatred is the extremest alienation; but displeasure is an act of dislike not
of alienation: Now a man may dislike his friend, but never hate him in the
notion of a friend; and he must needs dislike him when he offends against the
bond of friendship, though that bond be not broken; and a father that is
displeased with his child's rebellion, must needs be displeased with his child
that rebels.

To conclude, if God be in no case displeased with his people, they need not
confess that by sin they have provoked him to displeasure: Under most
grievous falls their condition is as good toward God as ever; they are bound
even then to apprehend the light of his countenance, and the brightness of his
glory shining upon them, and by consequence David was as much accepted with
God, and might have conceived as much spiritual joy in the bed of adultery
with Bathsheba, as after that great humbling of his soul.

Q. 4. Whether those in the Covenant of grace are to try their Justification by
their Sanctification, Aff. according to Master B.
HEre we agree in the terms, but whether in the thing it self it is very
doubtful. When we propounded this question we did conceive that Master Bacon
would put no other meaning upon the term Sanctification the inherent
holiness: But we justly suspect some other sense; first, because he does here
interpret holiness to be that seed of God which John says abides in every
one that is borne of God, 2 John 3.9. and at the disputation, by this seed, he
did understand the spirit; against which interpretation I made reply, that the
seed of God must be the work of the Spirit, and not the spirit it self:
Secondly, in that he says, That which is done in foro Coeli, in the Court of
Heaven, is done also in foro conscientiae, in the Court of Conscience by the
Spirit of Christ, and where the spirit of Christ is, there are the fruits of
the Spirit, goodness, righteousness, truth. This is true in it self; but it
does not clear unto our understanding, but that he means by Sanctification,
the inhabitation of the Spirit, by whose sole testimony our justification must
be evidenced, and that goodness, truth and righteousness are the immediate
workings of a supernatural spirit by which we are over-acted, and not of
habitual graces: I do not directly charge him with this meaning in these
words of his, but they do not evince the contary; and the passages
forementioned hold forth grounds of jealousy: Besides, I know that those of
his party do much undervalue, if not wholly deny the use of Marks and Signs
in this Trial.

2 In the second Paragraph I assent unto him in this, That when I do some good
actions, I must not therefore believe my Justification: but I dissent from him
in the other part, wherein he says, when I fail in some works to suspect my
justification, tends to overthrow the glorious work of Justification: Had he
said that a Christian is not thence absoluetly to conclude, that he is not
justified, he had said right; but to say that he must not suspect his
justification when he fails in some works (as to instance David in adultery,
Peter in denying Christ, which were failings in some works) is no sound nor
safe Doctrine. That height and glory of faith, believing in hope against hope,
is not exercised in the slighting of our sins, but in a great desertion, and
the want of a spiritual fight to behold the brightness of the Lord shining
upon us. Or when Faith revives a man from under the sad apprehension of his
fall or backsliding, it is done, when he has made search after his former
evidences, and discernes at lest the root of grace alive in the soul.

Q. 5. Whether Faith be a condition of the new Covenant, Neg. according to
Master B.
1. HEre we differ in opinion. Master Bacon thus differenceth the Covenant of
works and the Covenant of grace, That the one promises life upon condition,
the other gives it upon free promise. Answ. The difference of the Covenants was
wont to be made by their conditions. In the first, life is promised upon
condition of works; in the second, upon condition of believing. The same place
which works had in the first Covenant, faith has obtained in the new. There is
a law of works and a law of faith: Faith is the Gospel duty, and unbeleefe is
the maine Gospel sin. But let us examine the difference made by him. The
Covenant of works promises life upon condition, the other gives it of free
promise. Answ. A free promise does not deny all conditioning; as, To as many as
received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name; neither does the free promise exclude the condition
of Faith; for the Law of Faith is free of the highest grace* and does exclude
boasting and bondage.

2 We are not required to the ratification of the Covenant to bring faith to
God, but the new Covenant is to give us faith to bring us to God (...) Answ.
Neither to the ratification of the first Covenant were we required to bring
works to God, nor did any works before the Covenant merit or make way for the
promise of life upon condition of works. But God in the very making of that
Covenant gave man ability to perform the tenure thereof. On the same manner
supposing Faith to be the Condition of the new Covenant, it does not infer,
that we must bring faith to God, but it is most necessary that God work faith
in us to the ratification of the Covenant. Faith is not pre-required in the way
of merit, or previous disposition, but at the very instant, when God strikes
Covenant with the soul, faith, though freely given, is requisite to the
existence of that Covenant. And whereas he says, The Covenant does not depend
upon our believing, but upon Gods promise and faithfulness. I answer: The
Covenent does depend upon Gods promise as the ground, and upon our believing as
the Condition. To prove that the Covenant does not depend upon our believing as
a Condition, he urges 2 Timothy 2.13. If we believe not, yet he abides
faithful, and cannot deny himself. If he will draw thence any thing to his
purpose, he must thus expound it, if we believe not, yet he will give life unto
us because he abides faithful, and cannot deny himself. Whereas the sense is
manifest, if we believe not, yet he abides faithful, and will make good his
promises to them who by faith receive them.

3 In the new Covenant God ties himself, and not the Creature. Ans. The
essential form of a Covenant requires the binding of both parties. But how
does he prove this paradox? Because we are in Gods keeping, and not in our own.
Is not this sound reasoning? We are in Gods keeping; therefore God ties us not.
Or because God does uphold us above the power of falling away, therefore we are
not bound to persevere in believing. And if God ties not the Creature, he has
let loose the rains to all licentiousness. In the last clause he says, That
faith is urged in the Ministry of the Gospel, and given to them that shall be
saved, because no man is justified in his conscience before God till he does
believe. Ans. Here we have an Antinomian principle, that Faith does not receive
and apply our pardon, but serves only to read our pardon. Secondly, he
confounds Justification before God, and that before Conscience, which are
distinct notions.

Qu. 6. Whether godly sorrow for sin be required of such a one as is the
Covenant of grace. Aff: according to Mr. Bacon.
We agree in the terms of the Question: but first I shall observe that Mr.
Bacons preaching did rather tend to undermine godly sorrow. He had these
passages. Pharisaicall Repentance does consist in Contrition, Confession,
Humiliation, and Satisfaction. First in Contrition, (i.) brokennesse of heart,
thus the great Pharisees of the world speak of it. That there must be in those,
that do repent before they be accepted of Christ, Contrition enough (i.)
brokennesse of heart, before they come to Christ. Now I would fain know when we
should come to brokennesse of heart enough, that we may be judged fit to come
to Christ. I think none of them are able to give satisfaction. And a little
after. You must not think to get a broken heart before you have got Christ, but
having Christ he will give you a Broken heart. Here he makes Contrition a part
of Pharisaicall Repentance, and accounts them the great Pharisees of the time
who require Contrition enough before men be accepted of Christ. But those
Preachers who in Mr. Bacons esteem are Pharisees, do teach that true Contrition
is wrought in respect of time neither before nor after the receiving of Christ:
but at the same instant, without which there is no coming to Christ; though he
says it is wrought after. When Christ proclaims, Come unto me all ye that are
heavy laden, can any then come to Christ till he has a Broken heart? And
Contrition enough is required not in respect of quantity and measure, but for
quality and kind, which is wont to be set forth by quantitative terms, because
it is a solid, deeper, and more piercing sorrow then all worldly mournings, and
the greatest howlings of Hypocrites.

2. Whereas he now says, that godly sorrow is required in case of sin: he has
expressly declared the contrary in the forementioned Sermon in these words.
Humiliation, for we speak of Pharisaicall Repentance, for these things are
spoken of those that repent to Salvation but in an other way, is a certain
casting down of a man or woman because of sin, or the evil that does accompany
it. This is found in Hypocrites and unbeleevers. Genesis 4. Matthew. 6.16. Isa. 58.
By this dejectment they think to come into the favor of God; but by it may
come into the disfavour of God. I shall describe that Humiliation, that is
approved by God, and found in the Saints. It is a dejectment of a man's self
upon the sight, and knowledge of the glory, greatness, power, and goodness of
God in Christ Jesus. So that as the knowledge of God in Christ does increase in
the soul, the soul is abased, as Isa. 6. four first verses. Thus he declares
Pharisaicall humiliation to be a casting down of a man because of sin: the
Saints humiliation to arise from the sight of the glory of God; where as now he
says, godly sorrow is required in case of sin. How can he reconcile this
contradiction? We hold that the soul is graciously humbled in the sight of sin,
together with the reflection of the glory of God. Which the Text in Isa. 6.
would have cleared unto him, had he took in the latter part, viz. I am undone,
I am a man of unclean lips, and dwell amongst a people of unclean lips. Now let
it be well considered whether this be to handle Gods Word sincerely.

Qu. 7. Whether Confession of sin (i.) of ur original corruption, and sinful
actions reckoning them before the Lord be required in a Christian. Aff.
according to M. B.
HEre we agree in the terms at least, but in the stating of the Question I
shall briefly observe some impertinencies, and so pass on. First, that
Hypocrites are wont to confess their sinful actions, but not their
sinfulness: the Saints confess not only their sinful Actions, but their
sinfulness. Now by sinfulness he does understand their unclean natures. But
know we not that Hypocrites as well as the Saints confess their sinful
natures, as their sinful actions? and in this they differ, that the one
confess both these in hypocrisy, the other confess both in sincerity.

2. He adds, The Confession of the Saints is grounded upon the knowledge of
Gods love in Christ: but the confession of the Hypocrites upon some other
information. Ans. Is not the Confession of the Saints grounded also upon the
knowledge of sin, and of the glory and holiness of the Lord, as upon the
knowledge of Gods love in Christ? Is there any difference between them and
Hypocrites in this point, but that they confess upon all the former
considerations with sincerity, and resolution of amendment of ways: but
Hypocrites upon the same considerations do not confess from the bottom of
their hearts, and with a full purpose of Amendment?

Qu. 8. Whether you hold communion with the Church of England (i.) in our
Parochial Assemblies to be lawful? Neg. according to Mr. B.
IN this we differ. First against Mr. Bacon I reply, that this Question is not
a matter properly concerning discipline, except matters of discipline can deny
Communion in the worship and ordinances of Christ. Also the defects of
Reformation is no ground of Separation.

2 A supposition of the peoples not having repented them of their false
worship, is no ground of separation.

3 That he shall communicate with any people in any Assembly so far as reformed
according to the Word of God, is no determinate answer.

4 His Collection from this Question, That every Parish should bear the name of
the Church of England is very absurd. Because we speak of a Church in
Parochial Assemblies as the whole in it is parts, must every part bear the name
of that whole?

5 That the Church of England does cease, because discipline is for a while
suspended, is a conclusion not worth the refuting.

6 To understand by the Church of England, all of all Conditions that have
indeed faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and so are of the Church in the eye
of God, and are of a suitable conversation toward men in practice; is to give a
character of a great part of the invisible Church Christ's mystical body to a
particular constituted Church. What more confused notions then these?

Qu. 9. Whether Repentance be necessary to the Remission of sins. Neg.
according to Mr. B.
HErein we dissent. We understand Evangelicall Repentance, and that so
necessary, as that God will never forgive our sins until we repent.

Mr. Bacon is very subtle in remarking the particle To. I cannot understand but
a thing that is necessary in any determinate case must be necessary to that
thing. But he is afraid that this same To would bring in Repentance as
something actually existent (for so I conceive him) before the Remission of
sins. But this follows no more then that we must bring faith to God before the
Act of Justification. But if he will say, that we are justified by faith, and
yet that faith is not necessary to Justification, I must confess his
subtilties are beyond my comprehension.

1 For that charge of bordering nigh unto if not agreeing with that of
Bellarmine, who affirms, that Repentance is a way to faith and justification in
the remission of sins: If he understand it according to Bellarmine in the way
of a previous disposition, I utterly disclaim it; Neither can it be collected
from the Doctrine of Repentance as necessary to the Remission of sins. And
this answers the next Objection, that we make Repentance to go before the
Remission of sins. I give this Instance, to have a reasonable soul is
necessary to the being of a man, does it therefore follow that a reasonable
soul is before that being? We say, that Repentance and Remission are
coexistent. For at the same instant, when God does forgive sin, he confers the
grace of Repentance, that the soul might be capable of receiving forgiveness:
Act. 3.19. Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. Whereas
Mr. Bacon will have Remission of sins to go before Repentance in order of
nature. He cannot reduce it to either of those two ways mentioned by
Aristotle. After one way, that is said to be first in nature from which the
consequence does not return to some other thing, from whence the consequence is
drawn to that former. To instance one is in nature before two. For suppose two,
and one is presupposed; but suppose one, two does follow. Therefore that is said
to be first in nature, a quo non retro sequitur consequendi ratio. Now in this
manner Remission of sins cannot be before Repentance in order of nature, for
then upon the supposal of Remission, Repentance does not follow. The second way
is in respect of causality. But remission is not the cause of repentance.
Besides it should be said, your sins are forgiven you, that you might repent,
and not repent that your sins might be forgiven. Wherefore Remission of sins
does require Repentance, as a means absolutely necessary, and that not
pre-existent, but coexistent.

Qu. 10. Whether there be a real change in the person that is saved. Aff.
according to Mr. B.
WE agree in the terms of the Question, but we have no satisfaction therein.
Truth is, we were too short in the manner of propounding; we understood a real
change not in opposition to intentionall only, but to a relative change also,
and that none only a change of condition but of nature. Such a change Mr.
Bacon did never publicly clear among us. And in the close of this Dispute he
did peremptorily refuse to declare whether there were in a believer the habits
of grace, and inherent holiness.

FINIS.

