A RELATION Of the State of the COURT OF ROME, Made in the Year 1661. at the
Council of Pregadi. By the Most Excellent, the Lord ANGELO CORRARO, Ambassador
from the most Serene Republique of Venice to Pope Alexander VII. Translated out
of Italian By J. B. Gent.

London, Printed by T. Mabb, and are to be sold by Michael Young at the Blew
Bible in Bedford-street in Covent Garden; and John Playfere, at the White Bear
in the Upper Walk of the New-Exchange. 1664.

Imprimatur

Sept. ult. 1663. Roger L' Estrang.

To Mr MATTHIAS Van BEUNINGEN.
THIS Relation, which cannot but divertise you may serve for Instruction, to
many people, who talk at present of the Court of Rome, and torment themselves
to discover the Causes and Consequences of the Murder committed on the
Ambassador of France. Truly, that act was very strange: a great King to be
outragiously wronged out of a Frolic, and those Sage Worldlings seem to have
renounced both their Honor and Judgment, since they yet speak of it
scoffingly; they fancy and say, all will be made up again; that the business at
last will come to a Negotiation, where the French cannot fail of having
satisfaction: How can those wise Heads ponder so long upon one thing? they will
cut themselves out some other work; they will evaporate their Choler in
singing fine Songs of us, their fury will vanish, and he that had the blows may
bear them; the King shall be satisfied with the hanging up of three or four
Catch pole Sergeants; and if at last, those rash ones should put the business
home, the Emperor and other Princes, whom the Pope is sure of, will not fail
their Holy Mother at her need: and then do they count it nothing to have Eight
Red Hats to bestow, and with the which they might --; But let those Ministers
stand fast? If the wound can be healed with words, so much the better, those
Bagatels will serve. However, Sir, I do not think I acquit my self of what I
owe you, nor do I pretend you should be obliged to me, when I present you with
a Book that comes from your own Closet, and can teach you nothing new. You are,
Sir, of an Illustrious Family, where Virtue, Science, Politness, Riches,
Reputation, and the most Refined Judgment in Affairs of State, are Natural and
Hereditary. I cannot be suspected of flattery herein, since I have Crowned
Heads and Sovereign Princes for my Witnesses, whom, as I may say, have found
themselves honored by the Embassies and Employments wherein your Eldest
Brother acquitted himself with no less praise to him, than satisfaction to
them: this is no more then was said by the Queen of Sweden, and is yet spoken
of in France. Nevertheless, I believed this Treatise, which is no less curious
than solid, deserved to bear the name of a Person that has acquired so much
Reputation by the Commerce of all the Learned, by Travail, by choice Books, by
his good Nature, and the welcome Reception he gives to all Studious men. The
Authors name speaks his commendations, it is the Illustrious Senator Corraro,
for whom there are no Employments too high in Venice, that Politic
Astrologer, who judges of the Minds of Men with a Subtilty worthy his
penetration, and the judgment of a Man thoroughly versed in the affairs of the
world, and with that liberty of truth natural to all Republicans. I beseech
you, Sir, to accept of my respects, and give me some tokens of your good will
by honoring me with your Commands.

A TABLE.
AQuaviva 62 Aldobrandino 65 Astalli 70 ALbici 71 Azzolino 72
B
Berenice 16 Bichi Card. 23 Bichi Prior. 24 Bandinelli 33 Barberino Fran. 38
Barberino Ant. 41 Brancaccio 44 Barberino Char. 63 Boromeo 69 Bagni 74 Bonvisi
76
C
Corrado 32 Colonne 42 Carpegna 45 Costaguti 57 Cibo 62
D
Donghi 58
E
Este 56 Elci 75
F
Fagnano 33 Franciotti 43 Filormarini 46 Facchinetti 48 Farnese 76 France 83
G
Chigi Augusta. 24 Chigi Mar. 16 Chigi Flav. 17 Chigi Augustine. 20 Chigi Sig.
23 Ginetti 40 Giorio 48 Grinaldi 50 Gabrieli 58 Gondi 62 Gualtieri 66 Genois 98
H
Harach 44 Homodei 59 The Cardinal Lantgrave of Hesse 72
I
Imperiale 69 Empire 80
L
Lugo 58 Ludovisio 60
M
D. Mario 14 D. Medicis Charles Cardinal. 38 Maculano 47 Mazarin 50 D. Medicis
John. 60 Maldachino 67 Modena 100 Mantoua 101
O
Odescalco 67 Ottobuono Ib.
P
The Pope 3 Pallavicino 30 Pallotta 45 Pio 64 Paulucci 75 Pologna 95 Parma 99
Q
Queen of Sweden, 78
R
Rospigliosi 29 Rossetti 49 Rondanini 57 Raggi 59
S
Spada Virg. 34 Spada de Bresi ghele. 39 Sachetti 40 Santa Croce 61 Spada of
Luca 66 Sforza 73 Sagredo 77 Spain 89 Savoy 96
T
Triumvirat, vide C. A. I. Toscany 97
V
Vrsin 55 Vidman 65 Venice 102
A RELATION Of The State of the COURT Of ROME.
I Cannot but acquit my self of what is due from all those, who having finished
the employment wherewith your Serene Republique has honored them, returning
back to their Country, bring home with them the Fruit they have gleaned in
their Observations on the Forms of Government; the Designs and Maxims of those
Princes near whom they have resided, together with all such other things as
they esteem most worthy to be known, and noted by your Excellencies.

I shall be brief in the quantity of things I have to say, reducing them to
what is most essential, that thereby they may be the more firmly imprinted in
your Memories, and shall make but three Chapters of them.

In the First, I shall treat of the Nature, the Qualities, the Passions, the
Inclinations, and the Designs of Pope Alexander VII, the Kindred of his
Holiness who have part in the Government, and his other Confidents, to whom he
is accustomed to communicate the most important interests of the Papacy.

In the Second, I shall speak of the College of the Cardinals, and give an
account in short of the Interests, and the good and bad Qualities of each of
them.

In the Third, I will declare the reasons, by which one may conclude, whether
the Pope have any inclination to love one Nation more than another; And I
promise your Excellencies, the same Sincerity and the same Indifferency, which
in so many years Service as I have rendered you, may have made you know is
become natural to me, and without which I can undertake nothing, without
putting a constraint or force upon my humor.

I should never have entered upon the particulars of the Behavior, the
Passions and Qualities of the present Pope, if any other had done it before me:
But seeing the Lord Sagredi left Rome in the first year of this Pope's
Assumption, at which time his Holiness professed to have Sentiments quite
contrary to what appeared the years following: and that the Lord Girolamo
Giustincani, who was able to have exactly observed, and sounded all these
secrets, deceased a few months after he had begun his employment, and so could
not therein show the height and sagacity of his Wit. I find my self obliged to
undertake so important a Work, so much the more difficult, as being extremly
nice, and very easy to be mistaken, because of the profession every one makes
at Rome to keep his inclinations so concealed, that it should be impossible to
discover them.

BEginning then with the Exterior parts, which are most easy to be known, for
I shall penetrate into the Interior afterward. Pope Alexander the VII, who at
present sits in the Chair, was born at Siena, the sixth day of February, in the
year 1599, so that he has passed the one and sixtieth year of his age on the
same day of this present year 1660. It is now the sixth year of his being Pope,
which began on the seventh day of this present month of April. This Pope does
not enjoy a health which can be called perfect, because it is subject to diverse
such alterations, as do not ordinarily give us any hopes of a long life. The
first is a great Humidity of the Brain, which obliges him to keep his head ever
very Hot. Nor does this suffice to hinder the bad effects of it; since his
teeth being spoiled and lost by the continual defluxion which fell upon them,
he has so few left, that if he had not supplied that want, by causing
Artificial ones to be set in their stead, it would be a great hindrance to his
speech: Nor does he speak plain with all this Art, and not being able therewith
to chaw sufficiently, he is necessitated to eat only Liquid things, which have
no need of being chewed; and although they should naturally be of a more easy
digestion, yet experience tells us, that they do not always succeed with him,
since he is subject to indispositions and qualms in his stomach, which can be
attributed to nothing but indigestion, the debility of his natural heat
hindering the concoction of such nourishing meats as they ordinarily feed him
with. Exercise, however, does him good, for he walks in the Gallery, and in his
Garden, and sometimes a foot in those Streets that are the least frequented
about the City. He finds ease likewise in Purgations, for which purpose he
ordains the Retreat he makes in the Campagnia of Rome, both Spring and Fall.
From all which it happens, that being assaulted on the one side by the weakness
of his Complexion, and upheld on the other hand by all that the Art and
Industry of Man can invent, he may hold out possibly to the three and sixtieth
year of his age, which will be his Climaterical, for at that time are those bad
humors principally increased and stirred up. He is not free from the pain of
the Stone, which is so ordinary at Rome, being very often tormented with the
difficulty of making Urine by certain little Stones, which are soonest bred in
those of a delicate constitution, and who apply themselves to business. For it
is certain, that none can tie themselves to it more than the Pope does, who
hardly lets pass any morning without giving audience, employing the remainder
of the day in the discussion of the most knotty affairs. And although he does
sometimes divertise his more troubled and wearied thoughts by Entertainments of
Literature, as of Poetry, History or Policy amongst Learned men; it is
nevertheless impossible but his Spirits must then likewise be very busy and
intent, in making reflections on the choice discourses have been held before
him; to which must be added such things as sometimes disquiet him; so that it
is no wonder, if with all this a complexion of it self but feeble, cannot
suffice to all that is necessary for the functions of his natural life.

The Pope is of a stature rather low than midling, of a black hair, which never
till now began to turn gray, and, which is a sign of the debility of his
natural heat, his skin is white, inclining a little to the Leaden color, which
is likewise another convincing proof of that disposition I have before noted.
He loves neatness, and indeed an extraordinary decency in all things, but
particularly in his diet and clothes; and therefore the care and industry of
those that cover his Table, and make ready his Viands, is so great, that they
omit nothing imaginable, for the least fault, either in the Meats themselves,
or the Dressing of them, were enough to anger him. But for his Clothes, he is
as curious of the best Linen, as if he were yet in the flower of his Youth;
nor does it suffice him to be clothed in the most exquisit Cloth, but he must
have his Garments enriched with all the Adornments that can give them most
luster and price: as it is well known that when he goes into the Country, he
wears some that are garnished with little Diamond Buttons, and other Ornaments,
both Costly and Magnificent. He has the same curiosity for the Places he
dwells in, and pleases himself wonderfully in fair Houses, which are so
contrived as to bring in the Light on every side, and where nothing more can be
desired either in the Structure or the Ornament; which is the cause, that in
the House whether he retires in Spring and Autumn, he was not contented with
what Urban had done, but has added new quarters to it, and changed those that
were there already, that it might be magnificent and Royal. He has enlarged
the Palace of the Quirinal with fair and long Apartments, for the use of such
as belong to the Popes House, having had as little regard for the great
expenses required in the construction of those Edifices, as if he had Mines of
Gold, or as if the Security of the Ecclesiastical State had consisted therein.
But the Popes pleasure is not bounded with the enlarging and embellishing only
of the Papal Palaces, he shows the same passion for the whole City. And thus it
being in his thoughts and design to embellish it in the same manner, as those
Roman Emperors formerly with much care and heat endeavored to do, to wit,
Augustus, Vespasian, Domitian, and others, he has given full power to the
Magistrate, who has the office of surveying the Streets, to pull down Houses
and Palaces, where he judges the convenience and ornament of the City does
require it. So that, in effect, one may see them very busy every day in
demolishing of ancient Structures, either to make some places the more spacious
and uniform, or to open a fitter way to some new streets, and to that purpose
there is a Tax imposed on the neighboring Dwellings, which obliges the
Proprietors to pay to those, whose Houses have been pulled down, a sum
proportionate to their value. And the Pope does so much delight herein, that as
long as his time lasts, he will not abstain from making these changes, there
being never want of occasion, either to remove, or to rebuild in a City, where
in the time the Barbarians possessed it, the Houses were raised without any
Symmetry, only for the convenienee of the Inhabitants; and from this arises so
many complaints in the City, that without any necessity, only for the fancy
and pleasure of the Pope, and sometimes of his Ministers, many Families, that
have but mean Fortunes, should feel the weight of such grand Payments, which
brings them neither benefit nor convenience in return. But that which exceeds
all these excessive Expenses, is, what he has bestowed upon that great and
vast massy Portico which he has undertaken to raise round about the place of
the Basilique Vaticane, for having changed the Design that famous Architect
Michael Angel B^onarota had formerly laid, who wrought with so much success at
the same Temple of St. Peter's, and reduced this work to one range of Porticosi,
which without any excessive expense would have made it an admirable Structure,
and very commodious for the Coaches, either when it rained or shined having
changed this design, I say, he follows that of some Modern Architects, who have
made it of an extraordinary greatness, for it is to be of a Circular form, with
three Walks or Alleys, and all of Stone of Tivoli. And although the Architects
have found by their Calculation, that the expense will not exceed five hundred
thousand Crowns; yet if we reckon according to what the little that is finished
already has cost, we shall find, that what is proportionably to be done,
cannot be completed hardly for a million of Crowns.

These high and great designs are very certain marks, that the Pope has a Soul
truly Royal; and truly he makes it appear in all the public actions he
undertakes, as may be seen by the reception he made of the Queen of Sweden, in
which he omitted nothing that might add any glory or luster to make it proud
and equal, if it were possible, to the Ancient Roman Triumphs; and by his
Magnificence he incited the whole Court to show the complaisance they take in
following and imitating herein the inclinations of his Holiness: But when we
consider on the one side, that the Apostolic Chamber is drained by the
insatiability of the preceding Popes, and on the other side, that the times are
miserable and had, the profusion of so much Treasure appears to the world to be
ill husbandry and not in season, since it might have been employed with more
praise and merit, and to better purpose, for the most pressing Necessities of
Christendom, who looking upon Rome as the North-Star to guide them, and the
Pope as their Tutelary God, cannot but be afflicted to behold him, instead of
healing their wounds and composing their distractions, amusing and pleasing
himself in raising and adorning of stately Walls. However, it cannot be denied,
but such great Spirits do extremely thirst after Glory and Renown. The wisest
men, who perceived it from the beginning, always scoffed at the Popes
sparingness in the first years of his Reign, as not being willing to see his
nearest kindred, much less enrich them: nay more, it was their opinion, that he
affected this little glory of renouncing his particular Interests, thereby to
acquire himself a greater afterward, as if already he had the ambition to do
those things, which Popes of a most holy life could never do before: But since
that the world has found the Pope extremely glad to be induced by the Cardinals
and the Ministers of other Princes, to call those of his Family to Rome, while
in so doing it might appear, that he was rather prompted to it by the earnest
entreaties of all the Court, than by the flatteries of his kindred. Rome is too
subtle, and can dive too far into the designs of those that command her not to
perceive this, and how rigorously soever they forbid them from judging the
actions of their Princes; yet would they not forbear it on this occasion. And
to say truth, they could not apprehend how the Pope, who has so much ambition
to revive the memory of his Ancestors, could suffer it to be buried in the
oblivion of his kindred yet living; these were contradictions that could not in
any wise be reconciled. But, however it were then, certain it is, that at
present they are so well at their ease, that should the Pope die, they will
have no cause to envy others riches: anon I shall give the reasons more
particularly. But e're I go further, I will not omit to let you know the
Original of this House, and by what degrees the Pope could rise to so high a
Dignity.

His Nobility is as considerable as could be in the City of Siena, where they
are registered in the number of those ancient Families, that have been honored
with such Commands as that City is wont to bestow upon her Members, and have
maintained themselves by their Alliance with those Families that were nothing
inferior to them. But this is not the first time that they have made themselves
known at Rome. In the time of Julius the Second the House of the Chigi had
employments in the Court, not of Prelature, but Offices in the Chamber, which
spreads the names of those that exercise them over all parts; and at that time
the Chigi made theirs the more known, because they happened to serve a Pope both
passionate and turbulent above all others. Whence follows, that because of the
profusion of moneys those that are thus rash are forced to make use of to
maintain the Wars they undertake. Augustine Chigi, who managed the Treasury,
had a fair opportunity to play his part, being naturally active. But though he
were very stirring, and that there was much jealousy about the administration,
yet Julius never had the least distrust of his integrity, on the contrary he
testified the good opinion he had of him by those marks of Honor he bestowed,
in adopting both him and his Heirs into the House of the Rovere, whose Arms
they bear to this day.

Since that, in the time of Paul III, (as great employments are exposed to
great dangers) those of the House of Chigi found themselves eclipsed a little
of their first splendour, which was cause that the best of their means being
alienated, and especially their delicious Garden on the Tyber, just opposite to
the Palace of Farnese, which remained to the House that held the Chair, they
returned to their Country, where in a moderate, but honorable condition, they
quietly passed their time, till an opportunity offered it self to Fabius Chigi,
who is Pope at present, and who was then a young boy of great hopes, to
reinstate himself in a better fortune, as he was encouraged by his Parents and
Friends, who believed, that a person adorned which all manner of virtues would
much wrong himself, should he hide those rich Talents, and let them lie buried
in idleness, by not going out from the gates of his own City. But he was
hindered by the little wealth he had, and also because his friends had not been
able to advance themselves during the long interval that those of his Family
had been kept from the Court: Nevertheless, where power is wanting, his
confidence in putting himself forward by what means soever showed it self. For
being come to Rome, he got acquaintance of the Marquis Pallavicino, at that
time a young man of great virtue, and for that cause ever very welcome to
Urbane. This is he, who since made himself a Jesuit, and who having been
promoted to a Cardinalship sometime since, will oblige us to speak somewhat of
him hereafter.

This Marquis then brought him to the Pope's feet, and presented him as a
person capable to bring any business about with honor, when ever any occasion
profer'd to serve the Holy Chair. His manner of deportment pleased the Pope, so
that how mean soever his establishment were at first, it was not long ere he
was appointed to be Inquisitor at Malta, in which employment he having made his
worth appear, was shortly after sent in quality of Vice-Legate to Ferara. There
it was, that what had been conceived of his virtue being made known, he was
sent Nuncio to Collen, in a time when the divisions of Christendom were at
their height. And although in this employment he did not succeed so well as to
conclude the Peace, yet he performed his part and devoire admirably well. But
because the Protestant Forces prevailed, with whom he could have no
communication, being Minister to the Pope, it was not sufficient that he had
induced the Catholics to make a fair and just accommodation, whilst the
others stood stiffly on their excessive pretenses, so that he could not act as
it might have been hoped he would have done, had he been to Negotiate between
two Parties of the same Religion: but what is wonderful, is that the Spaniards
and the Imperialists, who were both tired and discontented, being brought to
this pass to make the best accommodation they could, the first with the
Hollanders, and the others with the French, not only without any advantage,
but even to the prejudice of Religion, and the Nuncio having expressed a great
deal of his displeasure to both of them, he did it yet in such a manner as left
no ill impression on either Party, but on the contrary they were much edified
to find nothing but zeal in him, judging thereby that he was so much a better
Minister to his Prince, by how much he disapproved what they had resolved to
do, rather out of necessity than any good will, only to preserve both
themselves and their Religion from greater danger.

He behaved himself with the same prudence when he returned to Rome, for being
called to the charge of first Secretary, though he succeeded the Cardinal
Pancirolo, in whom Nature had assembled all the circumspection and craft that
could be desired, and that he was to serve a Pope so difficult to be pleased,
as Innocent was; yet did he carry things so well, as that Pope was fully
satisfied in all matters that he negotiated; and above all things he shunned as
a precipice meddling with the interest of the Pope's Niece, who would have all
the Ministers to acknowledge she was both Lady and Mistress of that Prelate; and
the Pope had so great a consideration for him, that being at the last
extremity, where the heart speaks more then the tongue, and where all
dissimulation is laid aside, he recommended him as a man very worthy to succeed
him in the Papacy; so that it was not without reason that your Lordships from
that time conceived for the Cardinal Chigi, that good opinion that ever since
they have had of him, and amongst those you recommended to the Lords Cardinals
Bragadino, Vidman and Ottobuono, I remember that he was the first named by
those that represented you in Germany, as having all those merits requisite to
fill the vacant Chair: which also has very happily succeeded. And truly, if we
consider the good conduct of his life, the integrity of his manners, and his
knowledge of the Interests of all States, which are all qualities that meet in
the Pope's Person, there is no cause you should repent your wishing it, or your
having labored to raise him: but the mischief is, that what goodness and
integrity soever the Cardinals have, they no sooner begin to taste the
sweetness of being Masters, and having no Superior but God, but they change
their natures, and think themselves no longer obliged to follow those Maxims
they said were rooted in their Souls whilst they were Cardinals.

Who would believe that Pope Alexander having so great a capacity, whereby he
can truly judge of the dangers Christianity is in, should have assisted the
Turk to advance and establish an Arsenal in Candia of all his Forces, and that
he should have showed himself every way so obstinate, as he did, in refusing
those benefits which might serve in this conjuncture?

Who would ever have thought, that a Cardinal, who, before his promotion to the
Cardinalship, breathed nothing but zeal, and seemed to languish with sorrow, to
behold the miserable estate that Christendom was going to be plunged into by
that obstinate War between two of her greatest Crowns, should not, being raised
to the Holy Chair, burn with the like ardor for a general peace?

Who would have believed, that when the most essential matters were agreed upon
for the healing of our present miseries, he should seek to quarrel for very
slight reasons, which have no other object, but either to amplify his
jurisdiction, or maintain his own Opinions and Sentiments? I shall hint at many
of these changes in this discourse, that your most serene Lordships may
consider, as they have ever done, what confidence they may put in the words and
promises of these Cardinals before and after their Elevation to the Papacy, who
because they cannot at first gainsay, what they have so lately declared they
would do, afterward by degrees lay aside all manner of respect during their
Reign, and only knit themselves to what their own proper interests, or the
suggestions of their flatterers inspire them with. But, in the mean time, not
to omit what I promised at the beginning to make known, concerning the Pope's
nearest kindred; those toward whom his Holiness bears the greatest affection,
are the Lord Don Mario his Brother, who married a Gentlewoman of Siena of the
House de la Ciaja, and the Lord Flavio his Son, at this time Cardinal, and
surnamed the Cardinal Padrone, that is to say, Master. He has a like, and
perhaps a greater affection for the Lord Augustine, the Son of another Brother,
who was named Augustine: and this was he who having two years since married the
Prince Borghese's Sister, remained Head of the Family after the death of Don
Mario. I think it therefore necessary to give an account of all these to your
most Serene Lordships, since, as I have already said, the diverse accidents that
happened, did not permit your Ministers to relate any thing to you of certainty.

The Lord Don Mario, who is five years elder then the Pope, is beloved of his
Holiness, as much as the tie and relation of kindred between them, and the
respect he has ever had for him does require, without having, however received
any other favor: because the said Lord Don Mario having for the most part had
but a mean fortune, could not assist him, being young, any otherwise than by
wishing he might arrive to that grandeur, and by presaging his felicity, the
little wealth that came to his share being allotted to other uses. And as he
nothing at all resembles the Pope in visage, so likewise are their manners and
genius very different The one is lean, and the other is fat: the one is great,
and the other little: the one is slow and mild, and the other is prompt and
severe: the one is addicted to study and learning, the other never applies
himself to it: the the one is of a high spirit, and ever undertaking great
things, the other burns with covetousness, and pleases himself with nothing but
in seeking out the means to amass much Treasure: And because the Pope has a
good opinion of his integrity, he has given him the Government of Rome, in
what concerns the means to maintain abundance or plenty, and to content the
people. But instead of that, there is nothing else heard over all the City but
complaints against his Ministers or Officers, who buy and ingross before the
season, to retail and sell it to advantage, and who have other Monopolies, not
only of Profits, which none till his time had ever thought on or practiced,
but likewise all those which custom had allowed under other Popes, whose
nearest kindred ever managed them. In the present Government there is this
besides, that they do what they can to improve the Offices more than ordinary,
which are used to belong to the Pope's kindred, by such ways and subtilties as
were never heretofore made trial of.

In the Government of Borgo, where the Lord Don Mario exercising his
jurisdiction, makes that of Governor of Rome to cease with a notable
augmentation of the Profits of his Tribunal, he makes use of so much rigor,
that every day one hears nothing but lamentations, and by his inexorableness to
show favor, he makes the present Government to become more and more odious. It
has seldom happened to me to have had any affairs with his Excellency, because
it belongs not to his Office to meddle with any matters which the Pope treats
of with other Princes, unless he have an express Commission; yet did I not omit
to wait upon him at those times we are wont to renew our complements; and I
ever brought away particular assurances of the great esteem he has for your
most serene Lordships.

The Lady Berenice his Wife, although she were born in a City where they
seldom live after the Court fashion, has so admirably fashioned her self to
it in the short time she lived at Rome, that she is able at present to teach
others: which we must not wonder at, since whatever she speaks is naturally
accompanied with such a certain kind of modesty and affability, as gains the
affection and attracts the respect of all those that converse with her. She may
be about 48 years of age. She is rarely admitted to the Pope's presence; nor
does she seek very much to crave his favor, it being so enjoined her at her
first appearance in Rome, that so by her abstaining to intermeddle in things
not concerning her, the Court might perceive how odious it was for the Niece of
Pope Innocent to delight in the management of all affairs; wherein he that
suffered it was much more blameable than her self.

The Cardinal Flavio Chigi, is a young man of 29 years, of a mean height,
black hair'd, and his visage round and fat, of a constitution mixed betwixt a
Sanguine and Melanchollique. He would enjoy his health more perfectly were he
but moderate in his diet, wherein he exceeds: for he eats much, and very
nourishing meats, without regarding the precepts given him for the preservation
of his health. It is said likewise, that he is not so moderate as he ought to be
in his pleasures of the flesh, which obliges him oftener than might be expected
from his youth, to keep his bed: but the Physicians, because the Cardinal
forbids them, do not tell the Pope the true reasons of his confinement, for
fear his Holiness should have an ill opinion of him, and look upon him as a
debauche', that loves both Wine and Women too much. I cannot affirm any thing
with certainty of his ability in affairs, because if he be able to do no more
than he does, I must say, that he can do but little, since one gets nothing
from him but complements, fair excuses, or promises, which in the end turn to
nothing, making all his answers speak either of the repugnance he met with in
his Holiness, or some other motive, that was occasion of the refusal, or delay
of an Affair. And for this reason, I thought it far better in any thing of
importance to go my self directly to the Pope, than to make use of the
intercession of the Cardinal, who being for the most part diverted by his
Pastimes, either forgets some of those circumstances which are very essential
to a business, which might make the success the more easy, or else acquiesces
with the first denial, or difficulty the Pope makes in it; and this brings
afterward a double trouble, first to inform him quite anew, and then to take
off some prejudice or misconstruction it may before have left on his spirit. I
have been forced to steer the same course, when I happened to have any Petition
to present, to obtain the provisions of some benefits for any such person as
had deserved well, either of the State or the Embassy it self, because if I
reli'd upon the promise of the Cardinal, I commonly found my self deceived. He
would send me back to the Cardinal Dater that Signs such Writings, assuring me,
that the Pope referred himself wholly in matters of Collation of Benefices to
him. So that perceiving it was pure weakness of judgment it proceeded from, or
the little care he took to do me any courtesy, I never afterward made any
great account of his mediation; when I had occasion to treat of any thing that
required dispatch: because this Cardinal, who is called the Master, does
exercise his Mastership more in spending his time merrily, and avoiding the most
he can all troublesome affairs that disturb his mind, than in rendering himself
considerable, as he might be, in an employment that gives him the greatest
authority. This Cardinal does not show any great desire of heaping up riches,
because, perhaps, having no Nephews issued from Brothers, and finding his
Branch ends in him, he little cares to acquire much Treasure to enrich the
Descendants of his Cousin Don Augustine, on whom otherwise all the advantages
that Fortune can bestow on a Man, will fall. In things indifferent this
Cardinal has ever treated me very civilly, and has showed me a particular
affection; and truly I believe, if he had but more courage to undergo the part
he acts, by his means, one might receive greater favors of his Holiness, than
those which now come from him ordinarily but by little and little. He shows,
that he is versed in our History, for he relates from time to time our happy
success, and he says freely, that Italy would be very unhappy, had she not had
this Republique for a Bulwark, which has bounded the ambition of Strangers,
and repelled the rage and encroachments of Barbarians. When I took leave of his
Excellence, I could not desire greater expressions of his affection than those
he used, accompanying them with protestations, that he would pass the bounds
his Holiness had prescribed him, to give all kind of satisfaction to your
Excellencies in the matters then in hand. These are his own words, It is not
reasonable that the discontent for particular affairs should cause a prejudice
to that which concerns the General, which is, to maintain the Grandeur of that
State inseparable with the splendour of Italy.

The Lord Don Mario has no other Son than this Cardinal, but he has besides
two Daughters, married at Siena in noble Families, that have but moderate
Fortunes, proportionate to the condition of the Family of the Chigi, in the
time they were married: and these are they that showed themselves not long
since at Rome, where they were exceeding well received and carress'd by their
Father and their Mother, and the Cardinal Chigi; but they were not received
with so many tokens of affection by Don Augustine, for the reasons that I shall
declare. I cannot certainly tell, whether they obtained a competency from the
Pope to maintain them in the condition they are in, because things were carried
with a great deal of circumspection in not making known what was done, for fear
the Court should think that the Pope wasted the Demesns of St. Peter, to put
his kindreds Wives in a handsome condition; and for fear likewise of giving
some cause of jealousy to Don Augustin^, who expecting hereafter to be Chief
of the Family, could not but with trouble behold so many others, that were not
of the Pope's Masculine Line, thus gratified or enriched: It is certain
however, that the Lord Don Mario and his Wife, did not let them return empty
handed, but gave them a share of what they had stored up, and do endeavor to
increase with so much Art and Industry.

But let us proceed to the other Branch descended, as I said, from Augustine
Chigi, which consists of two Lords, Don Augustine and Sigismond. As for the
first, who may be about 24 years of age, he is naturally merry, very pleasing
and amiable. He never applied himself at all to study, but in those Exercises
as befits a Gentleman. He loves to pass his time as well as any man, and cares
very little to heap up any thing, because he knows there are those that do it
for him. As soon as ever he came to Rome, they thought of providing a Wife for
him, and cast their eyes upon the best Match in the whole Court, to wit, the
Granddaughter of the Prince Mark Antony Borghese. But they could not bring it
to pass with that facility they imagined, because the Prince, being a man that
was very wary, especially when it concerned the interest of his Family, scoffed
at the Proposition, saying, That he should take that Alliance for a very great
honor, but first desired to see Don Augustine have greater wealth and dignity,
that so his Granchild might at least be able to keep a rank suitable to her
quality and merits.

These excuses the Prince made were not very pleasing to the Pope, who at the
first word would have had him made more account of his Alliance than any other
consideration whatsoever. For this cause the business hung a long while in
suspense, but still with repeated applications of Love and Courtship from the
Lord Don Augustine, who followed it with the more heat, as having the Constable
Colonnes for his Rival, a young man of most excellent qualities, and toward
whom the Princess seemed to have a greater inclination than for himself. But
the Prince Borghese's death happening thereupon, and the Tutelage falling to the
Princess her Grandmother, in a few days, by the mediation of the Princess
Rossano her mother, this Match was concluded, considerable for her great Dowry,
which was one hundred and fourscore thousand Crowns, besides what might
hereafter fall to her by succession, the House of the Borgheses having but one
more Heir, a young Lord of a somewhat melanchollique constitution, who
nevertheless about the same time, out of diverse good considerations, would
needs wed another young Lady, having more regard to her Beauty and Virtue, than
her Riches. Don Augustine, as well as his Holiness, thought, by the contrivance
of this Match, which was celebrated with all the Pomp imaginable, that they had
established the happiness of their Family on the best foundation that could be;
In effect, the Lady being an extraordinary Beauty, and brought up under the
Discipline of her Grandmother, a very Religious person, there could be nothing
more desired upon that account; and he has already begun to taste the fruits
of it, the Princess having given him the marks of her fertility by the birth of
a young Daughter she has brought him. This does not, however, hinder Don
Augustine from diverting himself elsewhere according as his temper and fancy
leads him, and his great inclination to pleasure, when it comes in his
thoughts. This fullness of all content making him forget his first condition,
has so puffed him up with pride, that he seems to take no notice of those who
passing by salute him in the streets: which likewise makes him not so much
beloved as his other fairer qualities deserve. Nay, it is not long since he
made show of the little respect or regard he had for persons of great
condition; for having taken some distaste at the placing or sitting of the
Constable Colonnes, he appointed the Cavalier de la Ciaja his Uncle to do a
very disobliging act, by thrusting the Constable out of his place at a Comedy,
whereat the Colonnes being offended, the Pope was extreme angry, and would have
it taken up by any means whatever; as it was afterward done, but in the name
of the Cavalier, who was but an instrument in that action: but this insulting
left a great deal of discontent on the spirits of the Colonnes against Don
Augustine, who was the principal author of it.

A while after his Nuptials, he purchased in the Province of the Patrimony, for
seventy thousand Crowns, the Principality of Farnese, which is said to be a
Fief of the Empire of four thousand Crowns Revenue. He has also purchased a
considerable Palace for his Family: but besides these, he purchases little,
living at vast expenses, but upon hopes that the Pope's long life will furnish
him with ways enough to enrich and raise his Family to as brave a height as
the greatest of the preceding Popes.

I have had diverse occasions to speak with him of his Marriage and other
affairs; and he has ever given me testimony of a great esteem and particular
affection, which proceeded, as he told me, from the Pope's good will, from whom
I truly never heard any thing, but what was much in praise of this Serene
Republique.

I have observed likewise, that the Princess his Wife, though she were but a
Novice in the way of treating the Ministers of Princes, has now informed her
self so far, as to let them know what satisfaction she receives by the devoirs
they render her, and how much she is obliged to their civility.

It remains now to speak of Don Sigismond, who arrived at Rome but a few weeks
before my departure. He is a Youth of twelve years of age, and seems to have
much of his Brother's way, and, forasmuch as can be noted in him at present, is
very fair conditioned, and of so much judgment, as promises he will in time
prove somewhat. As soon as ever he came, the Pope delighted to reason with him
sometimes, thereby to discover his vivacity; and was ever well satisfied. Don
Augustine will do all he can to have him made Cardinal. But if the Pope follows
his own Maxims, he should not favor him therein, having affirmed it a horrid
thing to behold such Under-Branches in the Sacred College. However, we may
believe there is nothing but he may do, since he has already begun to exceed
all that he at first propounded to have done. In the interim, this little
Nephew has already several Pensions, and if the Pope survive his Infancy, it
may then be easier to obtain a Cardinals Hat for him.

There are two Nephews by the Pope's Sister, who married into the Family of the
Bichi; the one is he that was made Cardinal at the last promotion with the
Father Sforza Pallavicino, and the other is the Prior, who having resided
somewhile near your Excellencies, in quality of Receiver for the Religion of
Malta, and having likewise been three times with the Squadron of the Popes
Galleys at Candia, in quality of Lieutenant General, has made himself fully
acquainted to your Excellencies As touching the first, I have no great matter
to say of him, for having not been long at Rome, I could not perfectly know
him: It is said, however, that he would have been a better Bishop than a
Cardinal; for he has made it appear that he can govern a Church well, which is
that of Osime, where he is Prelate, but he has not yet shown that he has the
Talent to go thorough any great affairs; nor did I trouble my self with any
further information. I did reverence him as I ought, when occasion profer'd to
complement him, and I also took my leave of him at parting, very well satisfied
with the manner of his reception, and the sentiments he has for this
Republique.

But as for the Prior, whom common Fame commends as a man of great merits, he
never made me so happy as to know wherein that Virtue consists, since it is
restrained within a perfect obedience to those that can do him good, or raise
him to some degrees higher than he yet stands; for he is observed to make such
profound reverences to the Pope's Nephews, that the lowest of their servants
would not perhaps do the like. But as for his knowledge in commanding at Sea,
and taking his advantages either to attaque, or hotly pursue an Enemy, or in
distributing the public Treasure ordained to that end, I shall not need to
waste time in relating it to your Excellencies, since it was your selves
informed me how little benefit had been reaped by the Popes Galleys in these
parts, when commanded by this Cavalier. It is certain, that the last year there
was a great deal of Treasure put into his hands, and it is as certain by the
accounts that have been calculated without his knowledge, he cannot have
expended the one half. But there are none so confident as to advertize the Pope
of these m^sdemeanors, because he having so good an opinion of him, would think
it all to be only spleen and envy that could be alleged against him: and
therefore you commanded me very prudently to abstain from all complaints, for
fear of withdrawing the Pope's good will and forwardness in pursuing the
succor you demanded of him, which, though it were not dispiseable, became so
notwithstanding, by a not executing of the Pope's true intentions therein.
Which made me (though the Cardinal Chigi perceived somewhat of these
miscarriages, to whom I might have opened my self with much freedom and
assurance, and neither Pope nor Prior should have known what I said, that
Cardinal having so little inclination for him) obey your Lordships most
punctually in what you commanded. But the common complaints having not been
kept so close, but they came to that Cardinal's ear; he one day, perhaps to
oblige me to speak, told me, That he admired that the Prior, who so much
desired to gain honor and renown, had not made some enterprise of himself,
since he found it unfit to undertake any jointly with others: But lifting up my
shoulders, I only said, That it might be, the bad fortune of the Republique
hindered such men, though very skilful in the Art of War, and valiant, from
showing any marks of their great courage; The Cardinal perceiving he could get
nothing else out of me, said smiling, That the Prior had had the good luck to
be prized more than he diserved, but yet was unhappy in not being able to
maintain that good opinion had been conceived of him. The two Branches of the
House of the Chigi, who otherwise do not agree very well, united together to
hinder his being made a Cardinal, and it seemed to them they had done much in
obtaining their ends herein, they judging the Prior to be a man of a great wit,
and one who, as soon as he could have had the power to have spoken freely,
would have made a division in their House; they have more acquaintance with him
than my self, and by consequence may know him better. As for my own part, I
never could find any eminent virtue in him, nor do I believe, he deserves to
rise to any great honor, to which he pretends to mount by his dissembling
humor.

There is not among so few kindred as have command, and who are in a direct
line, so great concord as there ought to be, and this proceeds from a vain
spirit which makes every one of them aspire to rule. The Lord D. Mario
pretended, that he, as the most ancient, and next to him, his Son at this time
a Cardinal, ought to be head of the Family, and that by right it belonged to
him to increase their number by marriage. But the Pope, who had a greater
affection for his disceased Brother, than for him that is living, was of
another mind, and from hence arose the ill will that has still increased
amongst them. The Pope never did any good to any of D. Mario's Family, but D.
Augustine interpreted it partiality. He said, It appeared to Cardinal Chigi but
a small matter to have the quality of Patron, and the supreme Superintendence
of the greatest affairs, unless they allowed him together with this the
Authority of granting all Acts of Grace as he pleased. He added, That it was
little benefit to him to be the Son of a Father, who with his purse had raised
the Pope to that height of honor, if now, whilst he was in possession, he
might not receive the profits and rewards deserved for his Father's former
readiness and liberality. What will become, said he, of the heaps of of money D.
Mario gathers up, unless to enrich the Houses of Strangers? meaning his
Daughters who were married at Siena, leaving those naked and unfurnished which
are of the blood of the Chigi, who ought still to abound in goods and riches.
To which the Cardinal Chigi replied, That the Authority and Superintendence
they had given him stood him in no stead, but to trouble his brain, for which
he had a very great aversion, whereas they had left to the other the enjoyment
of all the delights and applause of the Court: That D. Augustine tasted more
content in the freedom he lived in, being disengaged of the management of all
public affairs, than himself could meet with amidst all that power and
authority they had invested him withal: And thus neither of them, because of
these contentious pretenses, which though but whispered, are apparent and known
to all, do enjoy that entire satisfaction they might, were their minds but
united, and they contented with those degrees of eminent Dignities which
Fortune has lifted them too. The Pope knows nothing of all this, they fearing
very much to give him any cause of displeasure; and from this consideration his
Holiness does sometimes confer favors upon the one, sometimes upon the other,
thereby to keep them from all kind of jealousy. He permitted D. Mario to let
his Daughters and their Husbands come to Rome, and would have them there
attended and served as became those of his own blood. He consented that D.
Augustine should send for his little Brother to abide with him; but neither of
them will remain contented when their Authority ceases, which disquiets them
far more than a necessary servitude would do.

The Pope has now at Siena, as I have already said, many others of his
kindred, who are not considered much as yet, because they are of more remote
degrees. They may, after the others are sufficiently enriched, hope for some
good from his Holiness, if he continue long alive, he being naturally much
inclined to favor those of his own Country, by employments proportionate to
the abilities of his fellow-Citizens: there are already some that have
principal Offices at Court, who are designed for Cardinals, and there are other
places reserved for others, when an occasion presents: To which nothing can be
said, but the Pope deserves a great deal of praise, in that he forgets not to
do well for his own Country, to which, next to God, we owe our selves; and in
that he does not imitate the pride of such, who being once absent loose the
very remembrance of it, and never take the least care for any one that had a
being there.

But forasmuch as the Ministry of the Pope's kindred serves only for splendour
and state, and not in any thing essential; and that in pressing and weighty
affairs it is requisite he be fortified with the assistance of such as have a
clear insight into the management of great Negotiations, from whom, upon
occasion, prudent and solid council may be taken. I have esteemed it fit to
join, to the Pourtraict I have made of his Holiness kindred, a Character of
those who are made use of, in the most important interests of the Popedom, and
such on whose will depends most commonly the resolution of what is of the
greatest consequence.

THe first that presents, is the Cardinal Rospigliosi, born at Pistiose, who is
Secretary of State; One cannot speak so well of him, but he will deserve more,
nor can I think there could be found a man worthier of that Office, and the
Pope, who knows him well, has often said, that he had found a Secretary
according to his own heart. He has a great deal of judgment, and is sincere
and disengaged from all interests; He is not obstinate in his opinions; when he
has delivered them, he takes pleasure in having them moderated and censured;
according as the service of his Master does require; He is indifferent in his
sentiments, and although it be the common belief, that having been Nuncio in
Spain, where he became extremely beloved of the King and Court, he might bias
that way, and cherish some inclinations for the advantage of that Crown; yet it
is false, because in my time there were some troubles in that Court, which
might have been appeased by the Mediation of a Minister so much in credit; but
the more they believed he took the Spaniards part, the more he abstained from
meddling with their interests. He did all he was able not to give audience, not
desiring any other employment than his own charge, to which he applies himself
with all the exactness possible, carrying every night to his Holiness all his
affairs digested, and taking himself the pains to examine the Letters, which
relate to any interest that may be any way considerable. I can say, that he
never seemed to be displeased or unwilling to hear me speak; But it is true,
that I had a care never to demand audience of him, but in pressing and earnest
occasions, and always had the satisfaction that could be expected from a
Minister, obliged to swerve the least that possibly could be from the will of
his Prince. Now this ought to be the more considered, because if the Holy Chair
should happen to become vacant at this time, I esteem his hopes very well
grounded, having the Spaniards and the Great Duke on his side, and probably too
the Heads of the Factions that would predominate in the Conclave, that is to
say, Barberino, who in Urban's time first moved the wheel of his fortune, and
Chigi who cherishes him most, as being his Creature.

The second is the Cardinal Pallavicino, of whom the Popes make great esteem,
as well for the reasons I pointed out before, as because of the very good
opinion he has of him, holding it for certain, that he would never give him
any counsel, which were not good and advantageous for the Church. To tell the
truth, he is a man that has very good intentions, and knows much, but he fails
in what all those ordinarily do, that have devoted themselves to a solitary
life, and who profess a different way of living from those of the world, being
extremely obstinate in their opinions. I have discoursed with him on several
occasions, even when he was a Jesuit: and although for the interest of his
order, which is now received into the favor of your most serene Republique, he
seemed extremely desirous to do me some pleasure, yet I never could truly
obtain any thing from him. He has a thousand excuses to defeat one of those
good offices he might do. Since he was made a Cardinal, though it were expected
one might hope for somewhat more, yet I have found him standing upon his guard
more than ever, pleading the pretense of some command the Pope had laid on him
not to intermeddle in any affair that were not agreeable to him. In a word, I
am not satisfied with him, although he often mention the deserts of his
Ancestors from this Republique, and the obligations, which those of his Order
do in particular owe unto him. The Pope refers much to him in matters of
Theology and Conscience, and confers with him, too, about those of State, but
rather to know than to follow his advice, because most times he looks upon
things according to the rigor of the Ecclesiastical Laws. The Spanish
Ambassador was not very well pleased with him, who when all the other
Cardinals had been to visit his Wife, he would not, upon a pretense, that
although he had changed the habit of his Order, yet he has not changed the
Rules, which prohibits them to be amongst Women but in cases of great
necessity. This kind of behavior, which is an affected singularity, renders
him odious to a great many people. He did not oblige your Lordships, when he
put forth his History in answer of the Book of the deceased Padre Paul of the
Order of Servants, wherein speaking too freely of a Minister whom you have so
much cherished, he gave you cause to oppose him, as you did at the publication
of that History, of which having said something to me by way of excuse, I
presently shifted the discourse, that I might not obliged to enter upon such
tetchy subjects, upon which if we had proceeded, he might have alleged many
Metaphysical distinctions, which it is not my profession to answer; but had he
treated of that business in a way more suitable to that subject, I am confident
I should have been too hard for him, and put him at a stand.

In diverse things the Pope makes use of the Cardinal Corrado, a Ferrarian, and
principally in those differences which Secular Princes have concerning
Ecclesiastical matters, wherein his Holiness is but ill served, for that
Cardinal is a pure Legist. that has no knowledge in the affairs of the world,
who alleages a decisive Text on any matter in question, without any regard to
the decency or respect is to be had toward a State, or any moderate
interpretation where required; for he never makes any account of this certain
Maxim, Summum jus summa injuria. This man has, and does continually give
distaste to the Cardinals and other Ministers of Princes, because he keeps
himself still to the rigor of the Canons, and will distribute the Benefices
according to his own fancy, and always upon pretense that it is the Pope's
will, which he turns as himself pleases under a fair appearance of Sanctity.
But the disgusts he practices, and is accustomed to put upon all the world,
does more hurt to himself than to any one else, for having been so unadvised as
to discover his base humor, it has drawn the hatred of all upon him: So that
for the Chair there is nothing to be expected on his part. I never had but
little satisfaction from him. And indeed, since I began to know his defects, I
never took the pains to do him any courtesy that might acquire his favor,
those kind of persons thinking they do in some manner sacrifice themselves,
whenever they do but in the least act against their own opinions to a man a
little pleasure.

I must also bring into this number Signior Bandinelli, of Siena great Master
of the Apostolic Palace, an old Courtier, refined in the Great Duke's Court,
from whence the Pope called him, and took him to his own service, knowing the
noble manner of his acting. He is not a man of a very profound knowledge, but
of great experience; which makes the Pope take great delight in conferring with
him, who is ordinarily well satisfied with his advice. Amongst other qualities
that makes him considerable, there is one that is a very particular, which is,
that he is descended from Alexander III, who having been forced to fly, and
quit his ordinary abode, made his retreat in this Republique, who received him
in their bosom, and gave him their protection, which he made use of to repress
the audaciousness of the Emperor Frederick, that persecuted him. He glories
more in this, than in any thing besides, and has a particular veneration for
the merits of your Serene Lordships. There is no one more certain of a
Cardinal's Hat than he. It is due to him, for having quitted his own Country,
where he was very much in favor, to go to Rome. When he has a Cardinal's Hat,
the whole Court, who already believe he deserves the supremest degree, will be
ravished for joy.

Signior Fagnano, of the State of Urbin, a Prelate well known at Court for his
being blind, but much more for being so clear sighted in the Superintendence,
which the Pope has given him over the affairs of the Regulars, deserves that I
should make mention of him in this Treatise, because through his means, I have
sometimes made an end of a difficult business, which otherwise I should scarce
have overcome. This Prelate has a great deal of affection for this Serene
Republique, as having been the first that found out the invention to draw money
from the suppression of the unprofitable Religious Orders, as also from the
Scandalous; so is he likewise still of opinion, that since the same necessity
still remains, they should make use of the same means of supply, there being
possibility and reason enough to continue it. But that design having been
interrupted by certain zealous persons, upon some other pretexts which they
found out; he endeavored to seek out some other projects to assist your Serene
Lordships therein. And truly he might have found out something effectual, did
they as well see the dangers at Rome, as they do in these places that are so
near bordering unto it. However, I did not omit to give this Prelate many
thanks for his great good will, and I believe it will be very fit that you
should return him thanks likewise: I think also, that his Excellency Sagredi,
who carries several Curiosities to present to the Pope's Family, should bestow
some part of them on this good man, who has, and may yet render upon all
occasions, all those good Offices which can be expected from the confidence his
Holiness puts in his advice, and the great credit he gives him.

The Father Virgilio Spada, one of the Order of the Congregation of St. Philip
Neri, and Brother to the old Cardinal Spada, has some power with the Pope; and
upon this persuasion I have sometimes endeavored to get him to serve me upon
occasion, but I found him armed with a thousand excuses to evade doing me any
good: whereat I did not afterward very much wonder, knowing he only sought
the advantage of his Family, being very greedy after his own interest, and more
ready to put the Pope in mind of filling his own purse, than seeking any
largess for others: This made me forbear to solicit him, guessing the little
profit that was like to redound, to make trial of other ways which your
Lordships are not unacquainted withal, although they all proved fruitless, and
too weak, when it concerned his Holiness to disburse any moneys, which is not
kept closer in his own Coffers, than it is by all the Court Prelates, who think
to gain credit and repute from his Holiness, by exhorting him to preserve that
Metal, which above all things makes the Ecclesiastical Principality be highly
esteemed, as if it were not rather the Dignity and Sanctity of the Sovereign
Priesthood that rendered the Papacy Majestic, than the reputation of having
great riches, But we need not doubt but their abuses being arrived to the
height we find them, the Ecclesiastic Authority would be very weak and
languishing, were it not sustained by a Temporal Power; whereas if those
Priests would lay aside their vanity of agrandizing themselves, and only make
good their just degrees and privilege, the Church would soon be lifted above
all other Powers whatsoever. For to say truth, Whosoever beholds the Court of
Rome surpassing in Magnificence and State, the Courts of all other Princes,
cannot but wonder by what means, upon so slender a foundation, and so far from
the design and intentions of her first Founders, she should have raised her
self to so proud a height. And although every one knows it proceeded from the
Liberality and Magnificency of Temporal Princes, yet it cannot but appear
strange to see the Roman Church turn those Benefits, she has received from
them, against themselves to their prejudice; the Canonists and other Emissaries
of that Court studying nothing more, than how to strengthen and extend their
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and abase and diminish the Secular, if they
possibly could. This point, wherewith you have been so often entertained,
deserves yet still to be put into your memories, because without any diving
into the depths of a profound Speculation, it may be observed, that considering
the by-ways the Popes do tread, and withal reflecting on the sincere conduct of
Secular Princes, of necessity it must follow, that the Ecclesiastical Monarchy
will become Mistress of the World, and the Secular fall and become her Servant.
Your Serene Signiory has a great deal of Piety, and a particular Veneration
for that Holy and Apostolic Tribunal; who likewise has a singular good will
toward her: but yet she knows well how far she ought to show her veneration;
and herein she carries her self prudently, being very well advertised of those
things which do insensibly lead the Court of Rome to enlarge her Phylacteries
more and more: And this Note shall suffice by the way.

And since we are now upon the discourse of the Grandeur of the Court of Rome,
it will not be amiss to show what it is, because as it appears great by looking
only upon those things which makes the Courts and Dwellings of other Princes
considerable, yielding, in effect, neither for number of Ministers or Officers
to none in Christendom, it will seem yet far greater, by having for Assessors
and Counselors seventy Kings, for they give that Title to the Cardinals in the
Act of their Creations; and therefore it is that they are vested in Purple, and
are served almost like Kings: and when together with this Dignity they have
acquired a great Reputation, their Amity is sought by the most puissant
Princes, who by public or private Pensions endeavor to make them their
friends, because of the privilege they have of Electing a Pope, and what by
consequence must follow thereupon, the Sovereign Dignity lights upon one of
themselves; and this is in short the cause of all their arrogance, which
otherwise is often reduced to contempt enough, besides the vexation of not
being able to obtain any grace, unless they be the Pope's Favorites. It may be
expected that a Pope, who has so excellent a judgment to discern how those
persons ought to be qualified that are fit to be aggregated in that Sacred
College, as Pope Alexander has, should promote none but persons worthy of his
choice: and, indeed, the Court hitherto has no reason to complain, since he
has admitted none but such as deserved very much, and it is hoped it will be
so still for the future. Now, though it would be needful to make an exact
search and inquiry into the quality of the present Cardinals to know them
thoroughly; yet that your Lordships may have some knowledge of him; that shall
one day be raised to the Chair, I shall make no difficulty to undertake it; and
I shall acquit my self with much brevity, because there are many other things
to be examined, which your Serene Lordships will be glad to know.

The Cardinal Charles de Medices, Uncle to the Great Duke of Toscany, is the
Dean of the Sacred College. He never shows himself at Rome but when the Chair
is vacant, he takes more pleasure at his own home, being free both from clamor
and expense. He leads the Spanish Faction, not without a great deal of hopes
from the Great Duke, who longs for nothing more than to have a Pope that may
favor him, because of the troubles and traverses the Popes put him to, who
little consider him. He was not at the Court whilst I was there. But the
obligeing humor of that Prince is not unknown to your Lordships by other means,
as likewise the great joy he ever expresses at the least news of your
prosperity. He is a man that speaks little, has a good wit, and ardently
desires the advantages of his Family: to serve whom he rather suffered a long
while in the Conclave, then gave way to elect any person that might not be
pleasing to the Great Duke.

Francis Barberino, who in the time of Urban and his Domination made some
escapes, being hurried thereto rather by the impetuosity of his nature, than
out of any evil intent, perceives at present that it is in vain to trouble the
world, having extremely prejudiced himself by discovering the violence of his
passions. He has lost all his hopes of ever attaining to sit in the Holy
Chair, which his Uncle Urban held, though otherwise both for his knowledge, and
the candor of his mind, he is worthy to be placed therein. Which evidently
shows, that innocence of life is no sufficient motive to oblige the Cardinals
to choose a Man for Pope, it happening very often, that together with the greatest
Sanctity there may be joined some other such defects, as were able to put the
whole world in a confusion. Nevertheless Barberino has a little recovered his
credit under Innocent, they having noted the inconveniences happening in that
Popes manner of Government, which they also found in Urban's time; but with
more moderation. Although his Family inclines toward the French, yet he has
ever showed that he has more regard for the Spaniard, his humor suiting better
with the Genius of that Nation. As for the affection he has for your Serene
Republique, I cannot speak so fully of it, but I shall leave somewhat untold.

Spada de Bresighele, which is a place in Romagnia, is a man more considerable
for his Virtues than his Birth, and who for this reason deserves more applause
than he yet has. But it seems they do not look upon him with so good an eye
because of the prosperity of his Family, who are lately in possession of much
riches, which some of the oldest amongst them have acquired by their Farms and
Marriages; and which have also been since multiplied through the industry of
this same Cardinal, and the Father Virgilio Spada his Brother, who has not
been wanting in striving to acquire wealth, and raise his House, though he make
profession of a retired life. This Cardinal has many very good qualities
besides, which make him worthy of a higher degree? but that which hinders him
from rising, is the envy many have against him, and the great number of Nepveus
he has, which are like to be increased by those Marriages they have of late
contracted. I must add to this the little confidence the Spaniards have in him,
who think him a very subtle man, and one that has a great inclination toward
the French. He has a high esteem for this Republique, and has as much
resentment in all her troubles and dangers as any one whatsoever.

Sachetti, a Florentine, has entered Pope twice into the past Conclaves, but
still came forth again Cardinal, to the great regret of good people, and such
as are acquainted with his virtues. The Spaniards did not murmur so much
against his elevation, as the Florentines, who endeavored all they could to
thwart his Election, and I believe it now proceeds from no other cause, but
only they having been once engaged to exclude him, imagine that he will for
ever resent the injury they had done him, although he may have served them much
since. Indeed, there are few in the College so worthy, if we consider all his
good qualities. He has made himself the more fully known, by that constancy
wherewith he has undergone those disappointments, and the solicitations he
made to Mazarine, to lay aside all those jealousies which might make him oppose
the exaltation of the Cardinal Chigi, whom he esteemed more worthy of the Chair
than any other, in a time wherein his own hopes were not desperate. He keeps
the same reputation still at Court which he had formerly, and if his advanced
age would let him survive the present Pope, he would ever have the same
applause as formerly. He is commonly very indifferent in his affection to other
Nations, seldom favoring one more than another; but I dare confidently say,
that he is partial for your Republique.

Ginetti of Veletre is a Cardinal, who though he be rich, and have a great deal
of experience, yet does nothing that gains much commendations, or that makes
him esteemed worthy to be raised higher than he now is. There is no other
reason than the poorness of his spirit appearing in all his actions, and his
insatiable desire to enrich himself; whence they draw this consequence, that
should he be mounted higher, few should partake of his Grandeurs or Bounty; add
hereto, that having been one of Urban's greatest Confidents and Creatures, he
is entirely possessed with those Maxims which are nothing convenient for the
good of Christendom. He omitted nothing his power to make himself Pope the
last times the Chair was vacant, but although he found some Cardinals his
friends, who listened to him in hopes of partaking of his favors, yet he found
no body for him amongst the Princes, who cannot promise much good to themselves
from a person so wedded to his own interests, and so little inclined to favor
others. I know not, indeed, what to say of him. He makes profession of much
devotion, but I should hardly ever trust a man, who besides his other defects,
has the reputation of perfectly knowing how to dissemble.

The Cardinal Antonio Barberino is a man, who all his life time has ever been
even gentility and generosity it self. He is engaged as much as can be possible
to France, but in such a manner however, that he does not make himself odious
to other rival Nations, because he speaks of all the world with a huge deal of
respect; and brings his affairs so about, that none can justly complain of him.
He reaps many advantages from the Crown of France, which nevertheless does not
make him the richer, but rather the contrary, since he consumes more money for
them than he receives, as well in entertaining his friends perpetually whilst
he is in France, as in advancing the interests of that Crown. And by reason of
the great inclination he has for that Country, where they live according to
his humor after a very free manner, he would rather make his residence there
than in any part of the world; but it is observed, that Mazarin does not look
on him with a good eye, perhaps out of jealousy, because his carriage, which
is so fair and pleasing, might be a disadvantage to him, while he is more than
any man alive in favor with his King. He was the first who, at the publication
of the Peace, manifested the good will he has for France, and that in such a
noble and splendid manner as was thought worthy of his generosity. The
affection he bears that Nation does not make him, however, forgetful of what is
due to the Princes of Italy, and particularly to your Serene Lordships, whose
merits he never mentions but with admiration.

Colonne, a German, is the Head of his Family, by the disposal of the deceased
Don Philip Colonne his Father, who having cleared his debts by his good
husbandry, thought fit to recommend the direction thereof to that Son who
seemed to be most wary and sparing: Nor was he deceived in his choice, since
this man, considering his riches, which are great, especially if we reckon what
he has from the Church, is so reserved, when any money is to go from him, that
is presumed, during the long time he has managed their Estate, he has heaped
up a very great quantity, taking much delight in hoarding up continually, but
never expending any thing in a superfluous manner. To which the Suits he
opposed by Law, which the Spaniards and Ministers of that State had for a long
time maintained till his Fathers death, have not a little contributed, who
thinking themselves most unjustly deprived of those Honors pretended to by his
Family, disputed it very obstinately against him, but in the end yielded up all
his ancient prerogatives to him, which much augmented his Revenues, and has
gained him a very great esteem. At that time when his Holiness exhorted all
those that were rich, to contribute somewhat toward the assistance of your
most Serene Republique, he was the only Cardinal that excused himself,
alleging the damage which the Plague had done him in his Estate: Nay, it has
been propounded to him only by way of trial, to give out Money at the highest
Interest, as your most Serene Republique is wont to allow, but all was in vain;
although he seems to glory his affection toward you, by which profession he
thinks he has fully completed his devoire.

Franciotti of Luca is an honest man, and of some understanding in most
affairs; but these kind of honest people do not succeed so well when they have
the Government in hand They take a license in all extravagant opinions, and
become obstinate and punctilious, not caring how they trouble the world,
provided they can but maintain their own fancies. This man imagines that he
should behave himself well enough were he in command, although he show himself
but of a mean ability in ordinary matters. He was born in a Republique, and the
Prelateship of his Country lighting on him, he soon put them in a condition of
falling out with him, yea, and of contesting and quarreling with the Pope too,
and that for very slight reasons. In the end, all these brovilleries ve
disputes having constrained him to quit his Church, he left his Family involved
in such troubles as have much perplexed, and brought many great losses upon
him. To repair this, he lives in hopes of being Pope, but he expects it in
vain, for I do not know any one that desires it.

Brancaccio, a Neapolitan, though he were made a Cardinal when he thought not
of it, and, as it were, by an unexpected accident, does not for all this omit
any possible endeavor to mount higher: He is reconciled with the Spaniards, to
whose shame he attained that Dignity: He has made a strict Amity with the
Great Duke, and is on good terms with Barberino: in a word, he does all he can
to make good, and increase his credit, which is as yet but small, because his
thoughts soar too high. Some have said, that there was nothing resting but a
good understanding with the French, but that being equivocal, I shall take it
in the best sense, from whence one may infer, that he treats with them in such
a manner as may dispose them not to be against him, if he should happen to be
mentioned. He seemed to me to be passionate for you, nor shall I believe he
dissembled much therein, having wit enough to know what your most Serene
Republique has done for the liberty of Italy.

Harach of Behemia comes to Rome only when the Chair is vacant: There are few
other things can oblige him to stay there, all his interest depending on the
Kingdom of Bohemia, and the Imperial Court. And being a Cavalier of a very
frank Nature, he makes it appear, that the arts and desimulation, used
ordinarily in the Court of Rome, are not pleasing to him. He has ever
testified a great deal of affection for your most Serene Republique, for ought
that ever I could learn from those that preceded me in my employment; but
having never been at Court in my time, I cannot tell what judgment I should
have made of him, had I been acquainted with him my self.

I cannot affirm any thing of the Cardinal Palotta of the Marcha: those reports
which I have heard of him being very various: Some have told me that he has
strange fancies, which being paliated with the zeal of Reformation, cannot but
cause a great deal of trouble and disorder. Others describe him to be a very
honest man, of a good conscience; yet all this is the same only diversifi'd,
because the resolutions of these kind of spirits, or their whimseys rather, do
still clash themselves: And therefore he was very little looked upon in the last
Conclave, where he concealed as much as possible his desire of being Pope, yet
could he not carry it so close but his Confidents discovered the extreme
passion he had for it. The Pope makes no great account of him, although he have
had some Legation: and there is some likelihood of reason for it; because those
that are lifted to the dignity of Pope, can better judge of the defects of
their inferiors, than such as are their equals in authority or degree. In his
Legation of Ferrara, he gave some occasion of contest to your Signiory, and
therefore although he spoke much of her commendations, I should never confide
in him.

Carpegna, of the State of Urbin, had reason enough to hope in the last
Conclave, because the Great Duke and Barberino did not reject him, nor are his
qualities to be despised. But, in a word, when a Cardinal wants a certain
credit which is given by popular approbation, he seldom ever attains to the
Chair It cannot be denied, but that both probity and simplicity of manners do
meet together in this Man. He understands and can do as much as is required in
the managing of public affairs, but as for the pressing of them on, or, if I
may so say, the refining of them, he is not much applauded for being happy
therein: nor during the last Conclave was there any one that could promise
himself more than very mean resolutions for the public service, under his
Government: and therefore as soon as ever he was spoken of, they found that he
had not a spirit great enough for so high a dignity. Nevertheless he showed
himself worthy of praise, in that whatever his hopes, and the resolutions of
the Conclave were, he never seemed to trouble himself. He loves your most
Serene Signiory well enough, which I have gathered from the discourses he has
held with me, as also from the reports of such as have heard him in particular
conversations, when mention has been made of public affairs.

Filormarini of Naples has made known his authority in those disputes he had
with the King's Ministers, during the last troubles in that Kingdom. He showed
an invincible courage upon the threats which were like to have succeeded to
effects of violence against him, to make him quit that Country. But he likewise
showed a very great humility toward the Catholic King, thereby to let him
know, that he was disturbed wrongfully; and his plea herein carried it against
all that the greatest Ministers of that Crown could oppose against him. But by
how much he has increased his reputation thereby, so much has he also therein
prejudiced himself, as to the thoughts he might have had of hopes and greater
dignity, through that obstinacy apparent in him not to change, or remit any
thing of his first resolutions, how dangerous and violent soever the attempts
are against him. He was a confident servant of Barberino's in the time of his
prosperity, whose services have been very well rewarded. But I do not know what
thanks those can promise to themselves that should help him to be made Pope, he
being a man that has a marvelous good opinion of himself, and one that
believes every thing is due to his own merits. I never treated with him, he not
having been at Rome in my time.

Maculano, or St. Clement, a Dominican, is a small Brother, who under his poor
mean Frock huggs ambitious and high thoughts. He builds fine Castles in the
air, fancying, that as he came to be a Cardinal without meriting of it, so he
may as well rise to the Pope's Chair. There is no quality to be found in him
that can distinguish him from the vulgar. He has little or no experience in
State Affairs. He is learned as a Monk, but excells not their ordinary
capacity, and has some skill in Fortifications: But with this he is very
covetous: and loves his Nepveus exceedingly, who are young people of very ill
behaviors: if he had the command, which God forbid, there would be matter
enough of scandal. This was taken notice of, by him that could have assisted
him, to wit, Barberino, who hating a licentious life, would never speak one
word for him, though Maculano had friends to second what he should have said,
and were aged enough to pretend to the Place. Nevertheless he may live very
well at his ease, if he will content himself with the condition he is in
possession of, which truly ought to satisfy him. He has named himself for
Candidate, which is to say, he aspires to the Chair, though amongst those of
his own Fraternity, he could never have attained to be General of their Order.

Giorio de Camerino, a servant to the House of Barberino in business of small
consequence, found a way by his handsome manner of serving, to gain so much
upon the good will of his Nepveus, and afterward on Pope Urban, that having
gotten much riches in his long service, he was reputed worthy to be a Cardinal.
He is very little esteemed at Court, his behavior not being noble enough to
correspond with his dignity. He keeps closely united to Barberino his Sovereign
Benefactor, and in that shows he deserved to be advanced. He has never been
nominated for to be made Pope, nor is there any great hopes he should be in
election, because, besides the meanness of his birth, those qualities are
wanting in him which should make him worthy to stand in the rank of such as
pretend to that Supreme Dignity, unless they should push him forward purposely
to make him fall, and get time in the interim to negotiate another's preferment
with more security.

Facchinetti, of Bologna, has been employed in the highest Offices of the
Court, and Nunciator of Spain, with a constant reputation of an honest man, and
very able. This is a Cardinal, of whose reputation they have very advantageous
opinions, which when time suits will make them willingly reflect on his good
qualities; and this fair opinion they have of him he preserves, by making his
ordinary residence at his Church of Spoleta; and avoiding all occasions that
might forfeit it, by not concerning himself with the present Court interests,
for fear lest in meddling therein, instead of increasing his reputation, he
should give some cause of disgust and rupture; He is a Lord of a very sweet
conversation, and speaks passionately for the interests of your Signiory, from
whom I dare promise effects corespondant should he attain to a higher degree.

Rosetti of Ferrara is a creature born, bred, and advanced in the bosom of
Barberino, who loved him by accident, and after helped him to employments,
which raised him up to be a Cardinal. He was in danger being in England during
those troubles, which have increased so long as to arrive to the strange
height of misfortune they were then in: But a more wary Minister might have
withdrawn himself without forfeiting his devoir. Being at Collen in quality of
a Nuncio, he could not avoid being suspected of partiality toward the
Spaniards, and did together with them, breed some disorder in their affairs. At
Rome he did not show himself very grateful to his Benefactor, having subjected
himself to the Spaniards. In the Conclave he was almost the only man that
disapproved the Election of the present Pope. So that all these things being
heaped together, one may infer, that he is not a Cardinal of any eminent
virtue, although he has been wise enough to make such good use of his time, as
to have freed his Family from those inconveniences which attend a mean Fortune.
He keeps himself at his Church at Faense, without any design of showing himself
much at Rome, where till those evil impressions are taken off, or forgotten,
he would not be looked upon with any great good will:

Grimaldi, a Genoese, shows by his looks, that he is a man of great
undertakings, from whom no other effects can be expected, but such as usually
proceed from pensive spirits, which are quarrels, jealousies, bold and daring
enterprises, with all kind of subtilties to make good his designs. This man
has had some great designs on foot already, to the prejudice of the public
peace, and that only for some advantages to himself, without regarding the
inconvenience of others: and this was the cause, that finding he was mounted as
high as he could pretend, which was to have a good Church in France, where he
might say, Here is my rest; imagining that he should be a second Mazarin, he
was deceived, Mazarin desiring to reign alone, that the world might know they
owed the good success of that Government to his direction. He was not at Rome
in my time; those that were acquainted with him have described him to me, to be
as crafty a man as any one, but yet a person wanting that address or
discretion, which like Salt ought to season all the parts of Policy. I should
not confide in his words, when he commends this State, because we ought not to
give belief to such men, as propound no other end but their own interest.

Here I should speak of Mazarin, and there might be much said of him, but your
most Serene Lordships are so well informed of the Person and Maxims of this
great Minister, that I could say nothing which would not fall short of the
knowledge you have elsewhere had of him; yet shall I not omit to let you be
acquainted in what esteem he is with the present Pope; which I believe is a
thing worthy your knowledge, because you may from thence guess the true reason
of the difficulties in those affairs which must necessarily be treated of in
either Court.

The Pope had very ill impressions of the Cardinal when he was Nuncio at
Collen, for observing attentively the reasons the Mediators alleged for a
General Peace, he found the French had always some reservations in their
answers, which did not correspond, as he judged, with the equity of the
Spaniards propositions; which made him fully persuaded, reflecting on some
other inconveniences happening when they came to confer, that all the obstacles
which retarded so great a happiness for all Christendom; proceeded from the
Cardinal Mazarin. But, as the ends he then propounded required him not to
discover his opinions therein to those Nations that were interess'd, so he
negotiated still with so much caution, that few or none knew what was in his
thoughts. Being returned afterward to Rome, and the place of Secretary of
State being given to him, he was fortified more than ever in the ill opinion he
had conceived against the Cardinal, being thereto induced, not only by an
increase of the difficulties in the Treaty on the French side, but likewise by
the injurious speeches of Pope Innocent, who had a particular aversion for
Mazarin, and who always blamed him as the only cause of the damage and ruin
which Christendom suffered under. Which made Alexander, being raised to the
Papal dignity, (although he had some reason to forget his hatred, since Mazarin
condescended to his Exaltation) to become more envenomed, because amidst the
hopes he had, that his mediation might produce some good toward a General
Peace, he understood, that the ways leading thereto were more blockt up than
ever, France being Leaged with England without any respect to the interests of
the lawful Successors of that Kingdom, or any consideration that they were of
the Blood Royal of France, not minding, as the Pope said, the Reputation of the
most Christian King, which by this base alliance was even trod underfoot;
whence followed, that laying aside all the Moderation he had till then showed
in speaking of Mazarin, one could not so much as mention the affairs of France,
or those that treated of them, but his Holiness would fly out to stinging
injurious expressions, discovering what he had with much art concealed so long
before; That he took him to be the fountain and spring of all the miseries in
Christendom, That in him alone had the Heretics founded all their hopes to
predominate over the Catholics, And that there was a just cause to apprehend,
that from him would arise a general disturbance against the public Peace:
That this doubly displeased him, because of the wrong he did to that Dignity
which he unworthily sustained; And though his Predecessors had not considered
the shame that reflected on the Sacred College, in suffering this man to be the
first Author of all those mischiefs, he hoped that God would give him both
courage and power enough to resent, as he intended, the prejudice that was
thereby done to Religion, and the advantages the enemies thereof had procured.
If some body, under the pretense of seconding the Popes Resentment at that
time, had not by a discourse suitable to his humor, endeavored powerfully to
moderate his passion, it is to be feared he would have proceeded to some
greater violence and anger: But he that heard the Pope's complaints made a very
prudent use of them, endeavoring to wipe all those evil opinions of him out
off his thoughts and memory. As for my own part, though at the beginning of my
Embassy, I found the wound yet open, I omitted not, on every occasion, when I
thought it convenient, to insinuate to his Holiness, that these times often
required, that particular persons should in their counsel oversway Princes, and
that it was an effect of great prudence to lay aside all bitterness when we
treated with them, unless we would have that wound, which perhaps would heal up
of it self, to become incurable by often rubbing of it: that he might have his
reasons likewise, which being heard, would justify or, perhaps, expose him
less to censure for such resolutions, which sometimes do not depend on his will
alone, but the result and inclination of other Ministers, with whom his Maxims
would not suffer him to disagree. And if it were otherwise, yet however, France
did not enjoy so great a happiness as to desire a War, unless it were apparent
that those who counseled it had very powerful motives to continue it, till
they could find out a certain way to make both a good and lasting peace. These
reasons sufficed to moderate the Pope's complaints a little, yet was he not so
well satisfied, but rejecting him he said, That when ever he had a mind to
obtain any thing of his King and Council, that concerned his particular favor
or interest, he knew how to obtain what ever he fancied, it being known to all
to what a height and grandeur he had by his subtilties raised his Family, and
those that had joined their interests with him; but, when ever it was required
that he should act for the good of the Public, his power was weak and
languishing; which was a very clear argument, that he saw the augmentation of
his fortune depended on a continuance of the War, which afforded him a thousand
opportunities to make new friends and creatures by the distribution of Offices,
which he bestowed, according to his own will, upon such persons as gave him
much applause, which he preferred, though it lasted but a moment, to the
immortal glory he might have acquired, by delivering Christendom from so great
and continual troubles, as put it in danger of being at last made the prey of
Heretics and Mahometans. In the mean while, the times of Audience appointed,
were wasted in these and the like Discourses, which troubled me exceedingly,
because I foresaw, that from this Antipathy, which daily increased, we could
not but expect some great and notable prejudice would accrue to the Public.

After this, upon the first slight rumors, which were whispered of the Peace,
the Pope suspected it was some new artifice of Mazarin's to lull the world
asleep, and take off his hatred against him, with intent to renew the War
afterward, when during the Truce he had justified his pretenses; but having
been certainly informed that the Peace went roundly forward, and that things
were brought to such a pass, that none could doubt of a good success from this
Treaty; then he declared both to me and all others that he was highly pleased;
but every one knew this content of his was mixed with an allay of
dissatisfaction to see that Mazarin had made himself the Arbitrator of Peace
and War by this act, and attributed to himself alone the honor of doing both
the one and other. I shall reserve what I have to say hereupon, till I come to
treat of that Chapter which shall treat of the Intelligence betwixt the Pope
and France. But all the aversion the Pope made appear against Mazarin, did not
take off the Court from admiring the capacity of so great a Man, who if he
truly did embrace more than the natural heat of France could well have digested
(and in that respect some of his designs cannot be excused of temerity) yet it
is observable, that Fortune has ever been his Second, who fighting for him, he
can never be wanting of means to overcome the greatest difficulties; For the
world has taken notice, that those Parties he has sided with have rarely
miscarri'd, which makes diverse confess, That how great a Statesman soever the
Cardinal of Richelieu was, yet he never had so much skill and policy in
discovering and countermining the designs of Strangers, and bringing whatever
he designed to pass, for the advantage of the Crown of France, as this Man who
was his Scholar and Successor; who if he succeed as well in times of Peace as
he has done in time of War, his name will be so much the more immortal.

Ursin, a Roman, is of a Family known to your most Serene Lordships, as for the
Services which his Grandfathers have done for your State, which has ever held
them in great consideration. They are, however, a little declined from their
former Reputation, by the misgovernment of some of the Successors of those, who
by their brave actions had raised it. That which has caused no small
diminution to their Honor, was, their bargaining for more or less with those
who made use of them to invade the liberties of others; to which may be added,
that the number of their Family is diminished. The Cardinal of whom we speak,
is more addicted to his pleasures than to any serious business, which makes
some desire he had that ripe and staid judgment which shone so in his
Ancestors. The Family does however but begin to recover it self, at a season
wherein it may happen to come to its period for want of issue; for having taken
Wives rather rich than fruitful, out of a desire to repair their losses, they
are in a way of losing their name by an oversight greater than the former. They
all make profession of continuing still in the good affection they have so long
preserved toward your most Serene Republique. But they are worth little, and
can do less.

Este, Uncle to the Duke of Modena, has made the world speak of him, both in
Peace and War. I cannot tell whether he were much pleased to see me at Rome, by
reason of the little satisfaction his Brother had of me, whilst I was
Commissary for your most Serene Republique, at the beginning of the War you had
with the Barberino's. Although he can dissemble, and is well enough skilled in
the Art of concealing his resentments, yet cannot I believe him satisfied with
what I did, though the thing went not on so far as those of the House of Este
pretended for their interest. The Pope, who has not been very well satisfied
with the Duke, who studi'd to observe the will of Mazarin in every thing, as if
he had been his slave, and perceived that this Cardinal is of the same
inclination, looks upon him as a person more inclined to trouble than
quietness; which he does not however divulge, because he has greater pretenses
than ever to that portion of Estate which was not annexed to the Duchy of
Ferrara, when it fell to the Church, as I shall show in another place. It will
be difficult for him therefore to be looked on favorably by the Pope, who has
made it appear, that he can right himself by the Sword, when they deny him
Justice. This Cardinal keeps a Palace at Rome, where there are much People and
Nobility, that are punctually paid: which evinces, that the late Wars has
impoverished the Subjects, and very much enriched the Master.

Costaguti, a Roman, but born of a Genoan Father, is one of that sort of men
that can easily heap up wealth, by which they have raised this House to its
Nobility and Purple; but to judge of their fortune, as we are wont to judge of
all new begun prosperities, one may say, That so great riches acquired in so
short a space of time, are hardly compatible with any lawful means of obtaining
them. But notwithstanding all this, the Cardinal is a very agreeable man, and
he did hugely satisfy me, in showing me he was so well informed of the
interests of this State, and had so full a knowledge of the merits of your most
Serene Republique.

Donghi, a pure Genoese, came forth of Genoa, when he was not expected, with a
very considerable stock of riches, which has since opened the way to his
greatness; having been much furthered by those qualities he has, which are so
deserving, that he that raised him has no cause to repent the doing it. The
Court does generally praise him: But he was ever absent all my time, so that I
can give no judgment of him, but from the reports of others, which however do
tend to allow him the quality of a Man of merits, and one that is very
affectionate to your most Serene Republique.

Rondanini, a Roman, though he be originary of Romagnia, is worthy of the
degree he stands in for the goodness and simplicity of his manners. But he is
otherwise no great man, for he has but a weak judgment, which would easily
lose it self should he apply himself to business. He deserves, however, the
good will of your most Serene Signiory, for the many things he speaks in her
praise, and for the many Services his Family has done your State, whereof the
blood of the Marquis his Brother was a testimony, who would needs signallize
himself in an Employment as worthy as a War for Religion and Liberty.

Gabrieli, a Roman, is a man that endeavors to conceal what is in his heart;
for instead of discovering himself, he makes a great Apology of Complements.
There are some of opinion, that his Artifice may help to raise him higher, but
I do not believe it, because the manner of acting of Pope Innocent, which is
that of the Romans, has opened the eyes of the world too much, the present
times requiring rather a person that will prefer the public good than his
own. He abides the most part of his time at his Church of Ascoli, feeding
himself with this Maxim, That the less a Cardinal is at Court, the easier is it
for him to get into the Pope's Chair. But, though that may be true in general,
yet it holds no water amongst the cunning and refined Roman Wits, who by this
very retreat discover his mind soonest that would thereby hide it, and who ever
prefer that Man first, who is most skilful in the management of great affairs.

Lugo, a Spaniard, and Jesuit, is a man very learned in Divinity, but since he
forsook the Pulpit he has showed himself no less skilful in State matters. He
acted with great success in the Conclave for the election of the present Pope,
and though Barberino were cried down for desiring to make him Pope, out of a
certain fancy that came in his head, yet did he use his utmost endeavor to
advance Chigi, whom he knew to be very favorable to his Congregation, as he
has since showed himself. He can do no more than he now does to make it appear
to your Signory, that he has a great esteem for you, and that he is extremely
troubled to see her oppressed by such fierce and potent Arms. I believe he
speaks frankly, being a conscientious man; but perhaps, too, the great desire
he has to make those of his Order more acceptable amongst you, prompts his
tongue to say more than is in his heart.

Raggi, a Genoese, who succeeded Raggi his Uncle, was made a Cardinal by the
Genoeses means, who to raise him to this Dignity expended twice as much as is
usual. But it is very just that the money, which they squeeze from all the
world, should be afterward turned into that smoke which the Court of Rome
daily sells. This Cardinals endowments are very proper and fit for a Minister
of the Chamber, as he has been a long time: and indeed, there are few that do
succeed better in that employment than the Genoeses, who are most active in
running about to fill their purses. I am told, that since he is made Cardinal,
he has showed himself somewhat more gallant, and has pretty well studied the
affairs of the world, which may be soon learned having a very present wit, if
he do but apply himself as much to it, as he did in his Office of the Pope's
Treasurer.

Homodei, a Milanois, chose rather to follow the Prelacy, and attain to the
Purple, than to preserve his Family, which is in hazard of perishing for want
of Issue. It is nevertheless considerable, full of wealth, and allied to the
greatest Families in Spain. He has obtained what he pretended to, after he had
made himself known to be a man capable of every thing, tying himself strictly
to the things that belong to his profession. He is of a very free disposition,
as the Lombards generally are, so that one may confide in him. He let something
fall in the Conclave which did not please the Spaniards; but there were several
in the Conspiration, so that they could not lay the fault on him singly. He
says plainly that he is a Venetian, as much as his fidelity to his King will
suffer him, which is to say in good English, he is a good Italian.

The Prince John Charles of Medices, Brother of the Great Duke, is ever
inseparably united with the Cardinal Charles his Uncle, the Dean of the College;
in this, however, his reputation is the greater, as having carried himself with
much heat to the exclusion, and with much skill to the inclusion of those, who
being either partial, or his friends, were included There can be nothing
expected from this Lord, who is perfect in Reasons of State, but such actions
as shall be favorable, and for the good of Italy, wherein likewise the good of
his own Family is comprised.

Ludovisio, of Bologna, who was grafted into that Family by the Mother of the
Prince Ludovisio, has the reputation of an honest man, but he has those
defects to which all such kind of men are subject; for they are obstinate and
indiscreet, and sometimes too they have a grain of folly. It is difficult to
Negotiate with him, for if in any business it come once into his mind, that
there is some case of Conscience in it, it makes him so obstinate, that nothing
is ever able to make him change his opinion, and that most commonly without any
reason, as the Officers of the Penitentiaries themselves have confessed, of
whom he is the Chief: Whence it follows, that although as a Sovereign Minister
he might dispatch business, seeing he has the power, yet one must necessarily
return to the Pope, and be at a double trouble to obtain his command for the
expedition of it. I dealt the least with him I possibly could, it being hard to
come fairly off with such men, on the contrary, there is nothing to be gained
most commonly from them but ill will and discontent.

Sancta Croce, a Roman, agreed with Pope Innocent's genius, in the easy and
clear method wherein I have heard him express the most difficult and knotty
affairs, and that was it which gained him the favor of Innocent: for although
that Pope were a great Lawyer, yet he did not very readily understand a
difficult case; and therefore he loved those that made things out easy and
clear to him, and fit for his apprehension: besides, he had taken a fancy to
raise the somewhat depressed ancient noble Families of the Roman Nobility, as
was this of Sancta Cro e, that they might owe the obligation to him. He had
accomplished this design, had not his Niece with her much importunity diverted
it. It is certain, that the inclusion of this Cardinal was highly praised, he
having added both Virtue and Merit to his Nobility, which good opinion he
confirms by the daily proofs he gives of his good will in all public affairs.

Cibo, who is one of the Lords of Malta of Carrara, has a great reputation at
Court, because of the integrity of his mind, his good life, and great knowledge
of the interests of Princes, in which he has signalized himself in two
Legations. He is adored, if I may say so, in the Church of Jesi, where he
resides, and the Pope, who otherwise would have need of men of his parts, does
not call him thence, as unwilling to deprive that City of so worthy a Pastor.
And were it their rule to reward Merit, there is nothing so great and good but
would fall to his share, but private interest denies it him. I should readily
give him my vote, were it required, knowing I should therein at the same time
both satisfy my conscience, and serve my Country, which I understand how
really he loves.

Aquaviva, a Neapolitan, was preferred before another whom Pope Innocent
desired, for some considerations represented to him by Donna Olimpia, who
foreseeing the Pope could not long survive, thought it good policy to
strengthen her Family by the advancement of such noble persons as might protect
her on occasion But she deceived her self, regarding only the merits of the
persons, and not considering whether she should receive all those
acknowledgments and retributions which men of honor are engaged to return at
need. He has, however, a popular applause, but I cannot tell whether the
Spaniards are satisfied with him, since he did not seem to give them any
content in the Conclave. But I am very much taken with his expressions, which
ever tend to the public good.

Gondi, or as he is called at present, de Rets, has made the world talk of
him, both before and since his promotion to be Cardinal: before, because he was
as it were the Scourge, that excited troubles in all occurrences, that admitted
of the least pretense to thwart the present Government: and since, because his
authority being increased, he presumed his importunities against Mazarin and
his Partisans would become more effectual, and that only for his particular
interest, and to make himself famous in the administration of affairs. It
cannot be denied but Mazarin was in a kind of dream when he named him for that
Dignity, and committed a very great error therein, not forecasting the event of
it. And indeed, Pope Innocent reproached him highly for despising and dealing
unhandsomely with one of that Dignity, whom both himself and all France had
presented to the Court of Rome, by their recommendations. But this does not
make good the too bold pretenses of the Ecclesiastical power, which presumes,
it is unlawful for great Princes to restrain the exorbitancies of a Cardinal,
that endeavors to trouble the peace of the Country. There were diverse
Assemblies at Rome to consult a way, whereby, without prejudice to the Cardinal
Dignity, they might allay his discontent, but it was very difficult, since
those of France required security that he should breed no disturbance, and
those in Rome could not resolve to do it, because the means propounded was to
give away his Church at Paris to another, and keep him out of France, without
leaving him destitute of what was necessary for his maintenance.

Charles Barberino is the third Cardinal of that Family, which is rarely seen;
but that which deserves more admiration, is, that this excess of favor
proceeded from a Pope, who had made it his task to eclipse, not to say destroy,
that House; so evident it is, that self-interest over-sways the minds of men,
making those that were the most inveterate enemies to become the most endeared
friends. This reconciliation, and the alliance that was made betwixt these
Families, was the work of Donna Olimpia, who prudently considered, that if the
Pope suffered this enmity to continue, he would be exposed thereby to the same
inconveniences they had brought upon others. This reflection pleased, and was
seconded by a most advantageous reciprocal union. Nor was there any cause of
scruple that the Pope joined Purple to Purple in the same Family, considering
the excellent qualities of this young man, who showed an extraordinary wit and
modesty to all men, and who applying himself wholly to the noblest studies,
renounced his birthright in favor of his younger Brother, to make himself a
Churchman; and indeed, he is a very good Clergyman, who never medles with any
other kind of business. He depends absolutely on the Cardinal Francis, and
conforms himself wholly to his manner of life.

Pio, a Ferrarian, is of a Family known to your most Serene Lordships for its
Nobility, and the merits of its Branches, which shall make me say the less of
him. He does not enjoy his health perfectly though he be but young, and may
perhaps leave his Church at Ferrara, because the air of Rome better agrees with
him, where he has acquired a great deal of wealth, and intends to settle
himself altogether. He glories in the natural affection he has toward your
most Serene Signiory, as of a thing he much values and most highly esteems.

Aldobrandin, a Roman, but originary of Florence, is the only remainder of a
Papal Family, founded upon seven Great-grand-children, Nepvews of Clement the
VIII, who were so extreme robust, that one would have judged their Line
eternal, and yet this Branch is withered. To find a Cardinal of this Family, as
the Princess Rossano desired, who is the sole Hegress of all that Estate, they
were fain to seek out this small Courtier, who springs from the same Stock
indeed, but by reason of his poverty was neglected even of his own kindred.
This example, together with many others, should make the Pope's clearly know,
as well as their kindred, that what ever care and pains they take to raise
their Family, it never succeeds or continues long, God not being pleased to
suffer those Grandeurs, which are founded on the Church's Patrimony, to stand
as they would have it. And who ever would be pleased to look over the History
of the Popes, where their Families are registered shall find this an infallible
Truth: for one shall discover, that either they were quite extinguished, or
such as were left remaining became reduced to a condition below a mean Fortune:
This Cardinal does acknowledge, that all he has came from that Princess, who
was willing to show her acknowledgments to the blood of the Aldobrandinos, and
now, by showing himself worthy, as he has done, of the honor conferred upon
him, and gaining a good opinion of every one, upon all occasions, he patiently
expects the time which may prove more favorable to him.

Vidman staid longer here than he said he would do when he went from Rome,
where he was surprised with the immature death of Count David his Brother, for
whom the whole Court was very sorrowful; because those Lords, besides the good
fortune they have had to see their Family so well stored with all sorts of
riches, do so win the affections of all people by their sweet converse, that
there is none but are ravished at their prosperity. The Cardinal is also an
excellent natured man, who, to all his other good qualities, adds a most tender
love toward his Country, which is reciprocally obliged to make their
acknowledgments to him upon every occasion.

Spada of Luca, is a Prelate who was emploi'd in Urban's time in the affairs of
greatest confidence, and he held the same credit in the time of Pope Innocent,
which is an evident testimony that he has excellent qualities. In his Legation
to Ferrara he did you all the good Offices that you could expect from that good
Neighborhood; and when your Ambassadors were received in that City in their
passage to Rome, he out-did all the Ministers of the Apostolic Chair in
expressions of civility; whence I draw this consequence, that he very perfectly
knows your Lordships worths, and the great obligations which are due to you
from the Court of Rome.

Gualtieri D'Orviete is Donna Olimpia's Creature, who having power to do what
she would, brought this man and another that depended wholly upon her, to
promotion, by casting dust in the Pope's eyes that he might not see what she
did, not caring whether he were pleased or not, after she made him commit the
fault. This Cardinal was not at Rome during my abode, he resides at his Church
at Fermo, where he can yet, himself, hardly believe he is awake, and really in
possession of what he holds. There is little good to be said of him, and that
you may judge this a truth, it may suffice to tell you, it was a work of the
Brain of that Woman.

Odescalco de Como has the Lombard way of acting, which is to say, ingenious
and franck, and truly he is held to be without malice. He does not profess any
skill in Politiques, but wants not for judgment, and makes good use of it; in
time and place convenient. I have nothing to allege against him, since the
Court finds no fault with him; when this man is mentioned they speak briefly,
without making any reflection of his good or bad qualities, which is a
convincing proof that there is more good than hurt in him, because at Court
they pardon none they can except against. I believe your most Serene Signiory
may confide in a person of his humor, when he makes protestation of his
affection toward you, as he has done every time I was with him.

Our Ottobuono for his sweet and charming conversation is beloved of all the
Court, nor are there any but do wish him a greater dignity than he has: and
truly he has rendered himself worthy of it by his continued labors and
vigilance: and the rather, because by his actions, accompanied with so much
civility to all the world; and his judgment in managing business of
consequence, he has made it apparent that he deserves one should confide in
him. The City of Brescia is too narrow a limit for the exercise of his Virtues:
and the expenses he makes would have been better employed in some Legation, or
some considerable employment at Court, where, to speak truth, such weak men do
reside, that either for the success in an affair, or for want of choosing the
readiest and safest ways, they do even displease those whom they most favor.

But as for his exile from Court, which we may term honorable, the cause
thereof can be attributed to nothing else, but the knowledge they have of his
eminent virtues, as well for that ordinarily Virtue is looked upon with an
envious eye, as because he did in the Conclave endeavor earnestly to unite the
opposite parties, who wavered and obstructed all other designs. All I can say
to your Excellencies of this Lord, is, that the affection he bears his Native
Country is the most tender and hearty that can be desired in any of your most
Serene Republique's Subjects, and whatever favors you bestow, you can never
place them better than on a man, who, like this same now mentioned, is wholly
disposed to prefer the public interest in all occasions before his own.

Maldachino is very well, the Pope was very careful to make him go and take the
air of the Campagnia for a good while, whence he returned at the entreaties of
the Cardinals, who took that absenting for an exile: The Spaniards were not
much alarmed at his change, and declaration for France. Yet must it be said in
his praise, that he did very wisely, in seeking the support and gaining the
favor of a great King. Nay, there is some generosity in it, because there is
no appearance he was moved out of interest; since Mazarin is not a person
likely to bestow any great reward upon him, whether it be out of his natural
inclination to parsimony, or some fixed design to regulate and reduce the vast
expenses of that Nation, drained by so long a War, or some more hidden and
refined politic consideration, it being certainly a pure folly to waste the
Exchequer in Pensions for the Court of Rome. Besides, nothing is more apparent
than this, that the way to gain those people is to neglect them. Interest and
Fear would soon reunite them, and make them look toward France for succor,
did they fear they were abandoned to the dreadful power of Spain: all the
humility of submission, and art of compliance would then be put in practice to
make sure of, and draw the French to their side to oppose that ambitious
Neighbor, who surrounding the Pope with Millan and Naples, may devour him when
he has the mind to it. I have visited him upon some occasions, but never much
regarded his discourse, which still tended to make me believe he is very much a
servant to your most Serene Lordships.

Borromeo, a Milanois, a Lord of a considerable Birth, has ever given
testimony in those employments he has had, of a strict secrecy, great modesty
and sincerity, which are qualities rarely lodged together in a man that is in
power or command. He does at present exercise the charge of Legate in Romagnia
with much praise, not giving any cause of complaint under his Government. I
cannot but give a fair judgment of his Sentiments for the public good, on
which that of your most Serene Republique is necessarily depending, which he
assured me of the last time I visited him.

Imperiale, a Genoese, is a man fit for Government, who quickly apprehends
where any evil is, and has capacity enough to apply the remedy. He has also a
free heart, which will not easily yield when he finds on which side there is
more reason. Yet cannot I tell whether he would succeed well if he had the
Sovereign command, because he is a Genoese, and prepossessed with the Maxims of
his Country, which pretend to attain to that in a short time, to which other
Potentates could not arrive but by a succession of many ages; and this may
perhaps be one of the causes will exclude him from any higher advancement. In
the mean time, he makes very powerful protestations, that he will ever side
with those who stand for the Liberty of Italy, which is to say in good English,
that he will side with your most Serene Republique.

Astalli, a Roman, has acted several parts at the Court of Rome in a short
time. He was a Prelate of a mean Fortune; since that he was made a Cardinal. He
was of kindred, and supported by Pope Innocent's Niece, who would speak all,
and do all, at that time when he was made Cardinal He was in Pamfilio's Family
in quality of a Nepvew: a while after he was rejected as unworthy of that
Title, exiled from Rome, and almost cast into the Precipice: but a little after
the death of Innocent he somewhat recovered himself again, yet could not make
them restore what they had taken. In fine, he found relief in the protection of
the Catholic King, who has bestowed some Largess upon him, which has set
him in a pretty good posture. The History of the strange turns he has been
subject to, would be very curious, but it being too prolix, I shall pass it by;
because, likewise, ere this Writing appears, no doubt but the Relations of
those times will set forth the truth of it. There can be nothing more intricate
than the condition of that Family, which then governed; for on the one side,
the Pope's Niece and her Confederates were ever making some enterprise, and on
the other the Cardinal Panciroli, who was then the chief Minister of State,
countermined them, and either of these scoffed at that Pope before his face;
because, although he had wit enough, yet he had not the judgment or way to make
those stand in awe of him, who were the most obliged to him.

In the mean time, this Cardinal, after he had undergone so many different
Fortunes, attained to his ease and quiet, yet without any great repute or
esteem, being more addicted to follow his own inclinations, than to serve the
Public; and therefore I cannot inform you what his affection is toward this
Republique.

Albici, of Cenata, is a man, who finding he can raise himself no higher by the
ways of eminent virtue, is resolved to try what he can do by his
extravagancies; and this it is makes him speak so freely against the
corruptions of the times, which he is not satisfied in doing in private, but
taking delight to show his Eloquence, which is not the highest that ever was,
he discourses of it in public Oratories, and sometimes with biting
expressions, which seems to aim at the Popes creatures, who are in command.
This is ill resented at the Palace, but they let him go on, as if they
understood him not: and yet not being free from failings himself, it is
wondered he should be so apt to censure others. He has rather I know not what
kind of commerce with the world, than any considerable knowledge; and having
been chosen by Pope Innocent, as a person fit for Government, he made him a
Cardinal, having more respect to his being an enemy to Maculano, who was hated
by this Family, that so he might oppose all that favored him, than to any
merit was found to be in himself. He speaks very fine things against those that
show themselves slow and cold in their present assistance of this Signory; but
his importunate and tedious discourses are but little regarded, nor indeed
esteemed sincere, because they are always Satirical.

Azzolino de la Marca was brought to be Cardinal by those means that prevail
most at Rome, that is to say, by discovering the defects of others; I shall not
stand here to repeat the story of Astalli's fall, caused partly by the reports,
true or false, of this man. It is certain, there are no eminent virtues in him,
and if you except but some pretty little flashes of the Pen, which he learned
in the exercise of his Office of Secretary, I see nothing extraordinary in him.
He spends most part of his time in amorous entertainments, while all he does,
brings little benefit to the Public. I never much esteemed the great care he
takes to express the devotion he has for your Signiory, because I know any
thing pleases his mind more than thoughts of business, thinking all his time
too short to recreate himself.

The Cardinal Lantgrave of Hesse, who is a Lord of a high birth and a generous
spirit, might have made better use of his Talents, as it is believed, in the
profession of a Soldier, than of a Gown-man: not but that he has given some
good tokens, by proving himself a good Catholic, and a good Disciple in the
Maxims of the Court of Rome; but when it concerns his taking any advantage, as
he pretends much, reflecting on what he is, every one withdraws, even the
Spaniards themselves, who otherwise being wont to show their largess toward
those of his quality, are yet sparing to him, not well apprehending what
service they can expect at Rome from a Prince, who has laid aside his Armor
to take up a Cardinal's little Gown: and that which makes them perhaps more
distasted with him, is his leaving the Protestant Religion to become a
Catholic without any study or learning, which are most necessary Ornaments in
a Cardinal; especially a stranger, that intends to gain any credit near the
Pope. Nevertheless he does not despair but the time may come, when he may
settle himself at Rome in the condition others are in there, without any need
of seeking abroad for assistance, as he has been sorc'd to do when he staid
there after the creation of this Pope, being still put to his shifts, by reason
of the few assignations he had, insomuch that he was sorc'd to be gone for fear
of intangling himself. He is a Gentleman of a good judgment, who, following the
candor, so natural to his Country, either blames or praises as he finds people
deserve. He speaks of your Signiory in the same terms as a very good Italian
should do.

Sforza, a Roman, has given himself to the Spaniards, being easily drawn to
their party, not so much for the rich benefices they bestowed on him, as out of
the hatred he bears against Mazarin, with whom he could never have agreed, had
he remained for the French. There accrues no benefit to the Spanyard by the
gaining of this Cardinal, but only the reputation of having a man on their
side of a great birth, and a bold spirit: for he has otherwise no great gifts
nor any considerable adherents besides the Great Duke, toward whom he shows
himself very reserved. His genious ever inclined more toward the French than
the Spanish; yet has he molded his humor to the Spanish service absolutely,
since he found how much more certain the Spaniards assignments are than the
French, and more beneficial than the others could be. This Family has ever
professed to have a great deal of affection for your prosperity, and many of
them have had employments under you, which they have performed with a great
deal of applause from your most Serene Republique. This Cardinal does not
forget to profess oftentimes, that his affection has the same bias.

Here ends the old College. It remains now that I should speak somewhat of Pope
Alexander's Creatures, of four of which, viz. the Cardinals Chigi, Rospigliosi,
Pallavicini, and Bichi, having discoursed enough in the beginning, I shall add
what may be said of the other five, whom he has made Cardinals.

Bagni is a Cavalier, as noble as he is understanding in the things of Peace
and War. The Spaniards were doubtful of the Defunct Cardinal his Brother, nor
do I believe they put any great confidence in this, whom they know to be very
intimate with Mazarin, which they discovered by the reproaches of Pope
Innocent, who found by Bagni's Letters in reading of them, that it was Mazarin
had dictated them, for which he was very ill treated during his Nunciature in
France, the Assignments belonging to that Charge being then taken away from
him, as an useless Minister: But the present Pope, whilst he was Secretary to
Innocent, having more wit than he to judge of the actions of a Minister, had
still an esteem for him; and the time being come to discover his mind, he
declared it more by effects than verbal expressions, honoring him with the
Cardinal Purple, and admitting him amongst his Confidents, and that with
reason, because his Brother and he have served the Apostolic State the space
of threescore years. He is ancient and unhealthful, This Honor falling to his
share in a fit time to attend him to his grave.

Paulucci of Romagnia has attained to a great age, through many troubles and
fatigues, which have gained him a recompense in a time, wherein he has little
other advantage but his hopes, those advancements only excepted which his
friends have procured him: which happened very seasonably at this time, he not
being fit to perform the Functions of a Cardinal, as being blind. He was never
endued with much patience, and much retarded the progress of his Fortune by
often speaking publicly with too much liberty. Otherwise he is a good man, but
one that is more knowing in the Canon Law, than prudent in his converse in the
world.

Elci of Siena had nor the Title of Nuncio before he was a Cardinal, but he was
highly approved by the Pope, and besides that, of his kindred. And it was easy
to discover by the tenderness of the Pope's expressions to him, before he
brought him to promotion, that he was enrolled amongst those he most loved.
Your most Serene Lordships know him far better than I do, having had him there
as Nuncio a long while amongst you, with such satisfaction as you may well
remember. His qualities makes him worthy of the Purple and the Papal Mitre; and
I believe he may come to it in time, unless the Court grow weary of the
Sienans, whereof there being already three in the College, it is to be thought
the number may yet increase, if the Pope live as long as he promises to
himself. The thought this Cardinal has of your most Serene Republique could
not be more advantageous than they are.

Bonvisi of Leuca, has passed through all the Offices at Court, showing
sometimes a constant resolution of fixing there, and otherwhile an inclination
to quit it, as it seemed in his long absence he had intended. In this Pope's
time, his hopes renewed afresh, considering he had a respect to the merits of
deserving persons: and truly he called him of his own accord, without being
courted to it. He was at first Master of his Holiness Chamber, and in that
Office he improved the good opinion the Pope had of him, so that he was
comprised in the first promotion together with five other men, who had all
parts necessary to attain to the Dignities of Cardinals. He has none but good
qualities, and knows how to gain the love and esteem of others, as well as to
love and esteem others himself, and especially those Princes that deserve most,
in which number, to my knowledge, he places your most Serene Signory.

Farnese, a Roman,, was under Innocent for a time the fifth Evangelist. That
Pope followed his opinion in all things, and esteemed and made great choice of
them, as proceeding from a man very learned, prudent, and of great integrity:
afterward he disliked him, because he spoke not according to his fancy, and
made no more use of him, but spoke of him even in a kind of a despising way.
The present Pope, who judges of the merits of men perfectly well, raised him to
the Office of Majordom, in which he discharged himself exceeding well, although
he had a thousand other occupations, there being no Assembly held to which he
was not called, if they treated of any business of importance. He helped the
Family at present in command to the purchase of the Lands of Farnese, being his
jurisdiction, and suggested the means to exclude the Duke of Parma, who in
default of this Branch was to succeed therein: in fine, having had the Hat for
a reward, they committed the Legation of Bologna to him, which he performs to
the Pope's great satisfaction. He is a great Wit, and perhaps greater than were
fitting for the Public, were he Pope: but should he pretend to it, he would
find opposition, and the greatest would be the Duke of Parma, with whom he has
never kept any good correspondence for the interest of his Family; therefore
the Spaniards, out of a complaisance they have for the Duke, and because they
have prejudged he has some inclination toward France, will do all they can
possibly to obstruct his being made Pope.

The time of the promotion which is to be made in consideration of the Princes
approaches, and since it is already made known who shall be promoted, I leave
that care to the most excellent Sagredo to inform your most Serene Lordships of
their condition and qualities, and shall only add, that as for him that
pertains to your Republique, who is to be made Cardinal, I would not say any
thing of it to the Pope, knowing this favor lights still on those who are most
agreeable to his Holiness; it being sufficient that your Signory does herein
receive an honor equal to those other Crowns without pointing out the
inclusion, or the exclusion of any one in particular, provided you have no
diffidence of the person they shall promote.

I could here shut up the List of those that make up the grandeur of the Court
of Rome, but since the Queen of Sweden has made choice of it for her ordinary
residence, and that I happened to communicate sometimes with her Majesty, I shall
add some small matter which I have to say concerning this Princess.

At her first coming to Rome she had so little knowledge of the grandeur of
your State, that she thought it strange your Ministers should be treated
equally with those of the greatest Kings in Christendom: and therefore when it
was told her, that my Predicessor intended to give her a visit, she seemed in
the beginning unwilling to allow him the same Honor she granted to the
Ministers of other Princes; but being informed that she mistook, she
condescended to do it in the same manner as was usual at Court. She was
afterward fully acquainted with the great service this Republique did to all
Christendom, in opposing singly the dreadful Forces of the common Enemy. And
this made her show more complaisance in often conversing with me; and to have
the better occasions, not regarding her little power so much as following the
sentiments of her generosity, she proffered to find out the means to raise a
Regiment of Infantry for the service of this State, and gave the charge hereof
to Sentinelli her favorite. But afterward the difficulty of getting her money
out of Sweden being increased, the first great heat of her good will grew cool,
so that after the order she had given for the receipt of a thousand Doublons,
she made no other assignment; all the rest vanishing in smoke; as well through
the death of Sentinelli, who was usually there to pay the Soldiers, as the
disgrace of another who till then was thought to be in favor with her Majesty.
However, I omitted not to pay her my respects from time to time, in token of my
acknowledgment, to which she ever corresponded by actions of great civility.
But to say truth, that Princess is possessed only with vain speculations,
which are the foundation of those great undertakings she designs. And being
unwilling to venture the hazard of misfortune, hoping for all she desires, so
she thinks every thing that comes in her fancy is very easily brought to pass.
And if the news of the King of Sweden's death, which I heard of in my journey
homewards, proves true, her want of money will yet be greater. Indeed, Pope
Alexander voluntarily engaged himself in those great expenses were made for her
reception at Rome, but no man doubts but he repented him of it since, when he
perceived there was not that solidity of judgment in her as had been reported;
for she has made it appear, she is a Woman like others, and by consequence as
subject to defects as any other of that Sex. She has at present begun a course
of life somewhat more moderate, and therefore more durable; and if she would
have really persuaded the world, that it was a knowledge of the true Religion
which obliged her to quit her Crown and Kingdom, and pass into the bosom of
another Church and Country, she could not have taken a wiser resolution, than
to have made her retreat into some Monastery where she might have been at ease,
and lead a quiet life free from trouble, and suitable to her condition, not as
to the greatness, but the convenience of it, and with a liberty to have come
out again when she pleased. She did not much praise the Pope, but said, she was
promised by him, that he would put her in a condition to live handsomely;
whereas on the contrary she perceived, that his Holiness kindred had not that
esteem for her they ought to have. She added many other things, which shows her
to be of a querulous humor, that is, just like a Woman that cannot tell what
she would have. When I took leave of her, I found her pensive enough at the
news of the dangerous condition of the King of Sweden; which makes me believe
what I heard since his death, that she has left Rome and is gone into her
Country, the better to secure the payments they were engaged to make her. When
she has done that, if she return to make her abode in Rome, many people will
be glad of it, but, very few will have any cause to be jealous.

And now, having made known the internal and external qualities of the Pope,
and his Kindred, together with those that serve him, for aid and counsel in his
Government both Politic and Ecclesiastique, it is time to examine the
internal Sentiments of his Holiness toward Christian Princes, and so to
conclude by examining what his thoughts are concerning the good and advantage
of your most Serene Republique, upon which, having made a most serious
reflection, I dare believe that I shall be but very little or not at all
mistaken.

ANd to begin with him, who holds the first and highest rank, and has most
authority amongst Secular Princes, viz. the Emperor, we cannot say but the
Pope holds very good intelligence or correspondence with him, since at the
Election of his Majesty to the Imperial Crown, he did all he was able to
overcome those difficulties the Electors made, who would hardly comply, unless
some satisfaction were allowed them which they pretended were due to them: and
his Holiness had much ado to gain the favor as well of the Ecclesiastique as
the Secular Electors, not to name the Protestants, who being on the one hand
persuaded by the Solicitations of the French, and on the other withheld by
the certain knowledge, it was then the only time to make their conditions
better than they had been; for it was much impaired through the long continuance
of that great Dignity in the Austrian Family: and therefore the Pope speaks
very loud of the high services he therein did to his Imperial Majesty, having
just reason to expect he should in retribution do any thing for him again that
lies in his power: To which purpose it is evident indeed, that they take all
the care imaginable to please him. Thus at the beginning of this Pope's
Government, it was chiefly upon his solicitation that the Emperor attaqued
the King of Sweden, by the invasion he made upon Pomerania, notwithstanding the
many difficulties might have happened, by reason of the danger of breeding new
troubles in Germany upon pretense of a breach of the Peace at Munster, which
the Friends and Allies of the Swede might allege: and which, is most
considerable, this was undertaken in a time when the Court was empty of money,
which is a thing that ought still to be had in readiness upon any sudden
commotion. Nevertheless the Pope's persuasions prevailed upon the promise he
made, that if any urgent occasion required, and they called upon him, he would
remit them a good sum from Rome; but although they did much want it, and craved
it with much earnestness, they were put off with many excuses to evade the
promise, as it is the custom of that Court to disingage themselves, and leave
those others engaged who confide too much in them. And though this were hushed
up by the Imperialists, yet it has made them somewhat forgetful of the
obligation the Pope pretended from this Court, especially considering besides
this, that the Pope's endeavor for the election of Leopoldus, was not so much
to hinder the choice of any other, as out of this respect the Pope had, that if
the Imperial Dignity should fall on any other Prince, it were not certain
whether the Authority of the Court of Rome would be still continued over the
German Catholics, or whether the Pope's Constitutions would be observed with
the great reverence as now they are, under the Government of the House of
Austria, which has been ever very observant in the Customs and Manners of that
Court. I therefore hold it for true and certain, that the Pope and Emperor will
at present keep a fair agreement, and the more, because in the Treaty of Peace
between the two Crowns of France and Spain, their interests were little
considered, since amongst all those that were mentioned and comprised, these
were placed last of all, at which they were both displeased and murmured to
themselves; yet both dissembled this discontent, which did in some manner help
to tie them the more strictly to their former confidence, and made the Emperor
give ear more readily to the Counsels of the Pope, When the troubles in the
North increased. The Pope knows, that in the Emperor's Court perhaps he has
more credit than in any other in Christendom, which will make him put those
designs in execution, he has told me of more than once, which is, to put the
Emperor upon a War that will prove advantageous to Christendom by an easy
way, but wholly reserved to himself. Perhaps the present juncture of affairs
may render the thing more feasible than at another season; yet when his
Holiness told me his design, whatsoever reflection I made, yet could I not
apprehend either how or when it might be brought to pass. Nor do I believe he
would find much repugnance on the Emperor's part, having a lively spirit, and
great disposition to engage upon any good counsel: but if there should be much
money required to carry it on, it would be esteemed a Chymera, because the
Princes of this age have an aversion to all propositions of rupture that are
made, and the Emperor more than any, especially now his Coffers are drained,
and part of those under his power obey not their Superior very willingly,
whilst others would be glad to see him fall, and every one is unwilling to
disburse. The Emperor has no other Minister at Rome but the Cardinal Colonne,
who bearing ever a great respect to the Pope for the Interest of his Family,
cannot do his Imperial Majesty any great service in his Negotiations, but all
passes through the hands of the Lord Caraffe, Nuncio in the Imperial Court, who
exercises that Office with as great satisfaction to either side, as he did with
profit, when he resided near your most Serene Lordships.

The French Nation does, perhaps, best of any apprehend the Genious of the
Court of Rome, and knows the readiest ways to withdraw themselves out of such
inconveniences wherein other Princes do insensibly engage themselves. They
esteem and revere the Apostolic Chair in a Souvereign degree, and tender all
the respect that can be required from a Prince truly Catholic and pious; but
for all this they are very clear-sighted and wary to maintain their
Prerogatives, and prevent the Ecclesiastiques, who at present endeavor to
extend their power over all, from bringing any prejudice upon them. No sooner
is any decree made in the Sanctury of Rome which relishes of ambition, but it
is carefully examined by the Parliament, who oftentimes, without any
qualification, gives judgment against such decrees, and after lets the Court of
Rome cry out against them as they please. Many times also upon the discussion
and negative of what it contains they tell the Popes their Lesson, when they go
beyond their bounds in seeking to diminish the Royal Authority, so that they
are most commonly constrained to bow, and give satisfaction. Which happens very
rarely, when the Popes have to do with any other Princes, how great soever they
be, for out of diverse respects they dare not use that liberty of speech which
is natural to the French; which makes the Popes less hasty to innovate the
Prerogatives of that Kingdom, knowing that by bringing in some Novelty they do
not advance their business, but rather wrong themselves, at least in their
Reputation if no other way, they being still obliged either to relax, or not to
see that put in execution which they had resolved upon.

I could not find that the Pope had any aversion for that Nation, as some have
believed, I only perceived that he condemned their new form of Government,
because he thought it was invented by Mazarin, the only object of all the
injuries I ever heard from his Holiness mouth. But at the same time he
complained of Mazarine, he ever intermixed some praises of the King and Queen,
and somewhat in commendations of the flourishing state of that Kingdom, to whom
that unhappiness was befallen, as he said, to be governed by one single Man,
who, without any regard to the public good, sought only his own private
interest; but when the first news of the Peace was spread abroad, he was a long
time very pensive, and of opinion, that it was fit to take good consideration
of what passed; still doubting that Mazarin, by this pleasing and welcome news,
had a design to lull other Princes asleep, according to his usual policy, and
after some parade of his good intents, to avoid the world's blame, begin again
a War with more fury than ever. Afterward, finding there was really a Treaty,
and being confirmed in it by his own Ministers, he could do no less than
express some signs of content, and declare, that having never asked any thing
of God with more affection and desire than the making of this Peace, it was
indifferent to him whether it was brought about by his or any other means, he
having this comfort at least, that the Articles could not differ very much from
those, which he a long time before by his many consultations and cares had
framed to the same end. But, for all this, the Pope was somewhat netled, though
he would not show it, that it should be said, The Peace was now brought about
by that same person, he had in all companies accused as the only dissenter and
opposer of what he undertook to make them agree upon: and that the Spaniards
should now come to acknowledge him the Author of the peace and quiet of their
State, that had ever been their Antagonist, and oppressed them, to the great
prejudice of the Catholic Religion: And although the Pope made a large
discourse in praise of Mazarin, to the Gentleman that came to Rome about the
Dispensation for the Marriage, briefly running over all the particulars
therein, and making it pass for one of the greatest and happiest actions that
ever was effected by any of his Predecessors, or Ministers; yet upon some
occasions happening since, it was easy to take notice, that his Holiness still
retains part of his old jealousy; and were there no other proof, that which
passed concerning the Archbishop of Ambrun, Ambassador from the King of France
to your most Serene Lordships, were a sufficient one, which has occasioned the
great discontent that has lasted so long time, and cannot yet be composed. For
the Pope still pleads this, that although there were many other men in France
of greater probity, and fitter for that employment than he, yet Mazarin would
put it upon an Ecclesiastique, that so because of the integrity required
therein, and the inconveniences which would follow, he might be sure to find
out some occasion of discontent when he pleased. Your Lordships cannot believe
how much heat the Pope showed in maintaining this opinion, for although the
difference were a trifle, the action not being in it self so considerable as
the Churchmen would have it to be, yet I have been more puzzled about it than
in matters of the highest importance, having had much ado to persuade the Pope,
not to believe your most Serene Lordships took part rather with the French than
him; who by your refusing to receive his Nuncio in a habit different from the
ordinary garb, you showed how little you cared the Apostolic Chair should
maintain its Prerogatives, and that Authority that God alone can limit. I
omitted not to show his Holiness, most sincerely, that the end and only aim of
your Lordships was to prevent greater discontents that might have followed, and
to abstain from those kind of Novelties which in time might have been made
customary. I entreated some of the most confiding and judicious Cardinals, to
mediate about it, that so small a matter might not make dissension, but that
your Lordships sincerity might be looked on with a prudent eye. But the Pope
would not be satisfied with reason, who continuing his first complaints,
replied, That it was a premeditated business of Mazarin 's, who had not been
content to trouble the whole world by blowing the coals of dissension and war,
but would now, if he could, make them find bitterness, too, in the very
beginning of a Peace. He wasted a great part of the Audience before his anger
could be abated, in these and the like kind of discourses. And I doubt whether
things can stand long as they are, unless the French resolve to recall their
Ambassador from hence, as I think all the world is bound to do what they can,
to maintain the Peace by such common satisfactions, hoping that hereafter
things of so small importance shall not interrupt our greater joy and quiet.
However, I think, notwithstanding this I have related, I may truly tell your
most Serene Lordships, it is most likely, that although the Pope and the King
of France are not always absolutely satisfied with each other, yet they would
scarce be brought to such terms as should cause a rupture: they being likely to
keep and continue their amity, not only during the life of this Pope and King,
but of their Successors. And there are two reasons that oblige me to believe
so; the first is, that the Popes finding they cannot introduce their
Innovations according to their own fancies, by force and rigor, into that
Kingdom, to the prejudice of the privileges of the Gallican Church, and the
notable diminution of their Temporal Jurisdiction, will forbear it, that they
may not undergo the contempt of seeing their Decrees rejected, and their
Authority despised. Whence it will follow, that the Cause ceasing, those
Dissentions, which are the Effects, will cease likewise. The second, which is
purely Politic, may be reduced to this, That although the Popes have acquired
great power over the Spanyard, by their having several times extremely obliged
them, and do in their Country exercise an Authority not at all disputed,
nevertheless they cannot but have some jealousy and fear, lest that Monarchy
should one day open its eyes, and endeavor to ease themselves of those great
burdens the Clergy have insensibly laid on their backs; and because if that
should happen, it may be the thunder of the Censures, and Temporal power of the
Church, would prove insufficient to oppose that danger. The Pope's have
therefore made it their Maxim to keep the Amity of the French, as a means
thereby to help themselves in case there should any change or stirs happen on
the House of Austria. Some Cardinals have at times entertained me with
discourse on this subject, not in such plain terms, but however in such a way,
that I could easily perceive that they see clearer and farther then some
Princes imagine they do. When ever the French, laying aside their suspicion of
the Clergies covetousness, shall endeavor or desire to be at greater amity
with the Court of Rome, there is no cause to fear but it would succeed, because
of their conformity in Religion, and because of their own interest: who, if
they should trouble the peace of Rome, would compel them to unite themselves
more firmly with the Spanyard, a thing the French will endeavor to obstruct as
much as possibly they can.

If we should judge of things according to the interest of the Court of Rome,
and Pope Alexander's inclination, we need not doubt but the Spaniards possess
the affection of his Holiness more than any other. The interest of the Court of
Rome consists in this, that for the most part, the money wherewith it is glutted
above all the other Cities in Italy, comes in greatest abundance from the
States of the Catholic King, where the Ecclesiastical Tribunal is held in
Sovereign veneration, all the States of that Monarchy having their recourse
thither, to the great profit of the Officers, who have a share in the
First Fruits and many other things, according to their Quality, and their
Offices. And as for the Pope's inclination, provided he otherwise have a
general zeal for the good of Christendom, and the propagation of the Faith, and
that he remain steadfast in these two things, as I believe he does, I think he
may and ought to have a more particular affection for that Nation, whose Maxim
it is, Not to admit of any other Religion in their Dominions but the Roman
Catholic, and employing all the power they have to advance it: But in truth,
things are not carried thus, for whether the Court of Rome believes that all
the Spaniards do in pretense of Religion is rather out of self-interest, or
whether this Court is persuaded they ought absolutely to rule over those that
will never fall foul on her, how great soever the inconveniences are they lie
under, it is ever observed in all the differences arising betwixt Rome and
Spain, that after a great and long contest, the Agreement is most commonly made
to the Popes content, and the diminution of somewhat of the Catholic King's
pretenses; and when businesses have thus happened to the disadvantage of that
Monarchy, other Princes have also received a notable prejudice thereby: for
when the Pope or his Ministers have once carried so high a hand over the
Spanyard as to make him yield, they presently make use of the opportunity to
quell or confound those that would do otherwise, or at least to induce them not
to refuse that, to which so great a Monarchy as Spain has acquiesc'd. This
stratagem may be effectual when they treat with inferior Princes, who are not
able upon every contest they have with Rome to take Arms: but both the Pope and
his Ministers decline all these ways, when they have to deal with the French,
who, when the Clergy pressed them, by this example of the Spaniards, to
condescend to things which were prejudicial to them, soon gave them an answer
which stopped their mouths: Nay my self being once earnestly solicited to
press your Lordships for a revocation of the Ordinance, which prohibits the
Clergy from purchasing any immovables, upon an example alleged of the practice
of Spain, and the other Territories of his Catholic Majesty, did give for
answer, That the reasons which obliged that great and vast Monarchy to suffer
it, were not current here, because this Republique being but a petty or little
State, and the Clergy extraordinarily increased in wealth, if they were
suffered still to purchase and never to alienate, our posterity could expect no
other than to be one day driven out of this Venice is built on a Marsh.
Marsh, and and perhaps out of all her Territories on the firm Land. And to
this are all those Principalities reduced, who, not content with that
subjection they owe the Church of Rome, as the Universal Mother of Christians,
have submitted to, and followed the Pope's desires in things indifferent: not
that they do at once demand several things of difficulty, but sometimes one
thing and then another, and thus by little and little they gain so much as does
both diminish and limit the Temporal Power: and so when Princes shall think
themselves Masters, they will find their Authority so eclipsed and manacl'd,
that they will be astonished to see another master them at their own homes.
Those who are acquainted with their extortions at Naples, and perhaps in all
the other Dominions of Spain, of the Officers of the Roman Treasury, as well in
matters of A certain Fee levi'd by the Ecclesiastical Chamber at the death of a
Clergyman that has no power to make a Will.
Despoiling, as in the gathering up of what is raised for the Fabric of St.
Peter, which they also impose on mere Laics, cannot but admire, that the
Ministers of Spain should be so drousie, as not to observe with what Empire
void of all discretion, and with what insolency they treat the Persons and
Goods of their Subjects. Let your most Serene Signory, therefore, give thanks
to the Divine Bounty, that has preserved her from these confusions, and given
her the prudence and courage to defend both her self and Subjects from the
violence of such Strangers, confirming her ever in the ancient and true Faith;
but also giving her at the same time the judgment to discern what is due to
Caesar, and what to God. It is certain, that if the Spaniards still keep their
eyes as close shut as they have hitherto done, they cannot expect so great a
Tempest from any other part as from the Court of Rome, when upon any accident
there shall arise dissension amongst them, because those people that are
Subjects to the Austrian Family being hugely possessed with Religion, and fully
persuaded, that the Sanctuary of Rome is that alone which can either bestow or
deprive them of Eternal Salvation, if in the commencement of a rupture the
Popes should proceed to Excommunication, or a Revocation of Indulgences which
they have liberally allowed the Catholic Kings, it is beyond all doubt that a
general combustion would follow thereupon, which might occasion the revolt of
all the Subjects of that great Empire, and so the forfeit of the peace and
security of the Spaniards would flow from his too great obedience, wherein they
imagine their chief strength and power does consist. But perhaps likewise the
good Genious of those Kingdoms will suggest such means as may prevent these
inconveniences, and (the present Age not having been happy in that Monarchy,
by reason of the few virtuous Men that have been her late Souvereigns) future
Ages may produce more excellent ones, and compense her past disorders, by
preventing those which might happen probably to her hereafter. In effect, if
with attention we consider the present posture of things in the world, it
greatly concerns Christendom to have a Potent Prince, who in such dangers,
whereinto the power of the Turks may in an instant and unprovided cast her,
might suddenly make head against them without making of Leagues and expecting
Foreign aid, which cannot be compassed but by length of time, and is a great
retardment. And if Christendom had had in this present juncture of things a
powerful Prince to have thus succored her, perhaps your most Serene Signory
had not been reduced to the condition she is now in: And, notwithstanding, on
her security depends all what the Monarchy of Spain possesses in Italy. But to
return to what I said, Pope Alexander is not ignorant of all those reasons he
has to make him love Spain and her King; and does often tell this to the
Ministers of other Princes; but in such a manner however, as if it seemed that
the benefits which the Court of Rome receives from the Spaniards were not so
considerable, as to hinder the Pope from denying them from time to time those
favors which they crave of him, as having authority not to grant all to those
Children he most tenders what they shall desire, but only that which will be
for their greatest good, and highest, spiritual, advantage. His Holiness has
made complaint, for that the Spanish Ministers have been too reserved and
secret toward him, in not communicating to him the Treaty of Peace, pretending
that having ever believed the Propositions on their part were more plausible
than those which were shaped in Mazarin's Closet, they did him wrong in
observing so rigorously that Seal of Secrecy which Mazarin had imposed on
them: And although they endeavor all they can to calm his discontented
thoughts thereupon, urging that it was concealed in the same manner from the
Emperor, and even from the Republique, which had been so long time employed
about the Treaty. He is not, however, satisfied with this excuse, but replies,
That they ought to make a difference between Secular Princes and a Pope, who
aimed at no other thing but to find out the means to give that content to all
Christendom, and not have left that honor to a man who had studi'd all the
devices imaginable to obstruct so great a happiness. After all this, I
conclude, that the Pope has just reason to love the Spaniards, not so much
because they contributed to his Exaltation, as because their Arms have put a
stop to the fury of Heretics, and their Country brings in the Riches and
opulency to the Court of Rome; and I believe he does truly love them, but
having found that his Predecessors had taken the way to have most commonly some
contests with the Catholic Court, he will not swerve from it, esteeming these
disputes do in some respects increase the reputation of the Court of Rome, and
from thence has a fair opportunity to gain an esteem of other Princes; not
declining my former Proposition, That the more the Spaniards condescend to the
Pope's will, the more will they prejudice themselves, and the Obligations they
do acknowledge to be due from them to the Apostolic Seat, may one day produce
most dangerous effects, unless they fore-arm themselves by such precautious
means, as they shall judge most proper against the pretensions of the
Ecclesiastiques, thereby to put their Monarchy in a better posture of security.

The King of Poland subsists because God has affisted him: For otherwise, had
he reli'd on those hopes the Court of Rome had given him to supply him with
Money, his enemies had triumphed over him, and the total loss of that Kingdom
would have been such a leading to other Provinces, as might have wrought the
manifest danger of establishing a Power in those parts which would have become
formidable to all Europe. God be praised that we are so happy as to see every
one returning to his own home again, his neighboring Princes beginning to
stickle in that War, as they ought to do; whereas nothing to purpose could have
been expected from them, had the pressing affairs of Christendom summoned them
to the defense of their own States. The Pope talks loudly of the good Offices
he did for the Religion and Countries of the Catholic Princes at that
juncture. But the Polonians and Imperialists speak otherwise; they profess,
that at the height of all the War they found no great benefit in the
exhortations of his Holiness, which served for nothing else but only to
persuade their Enemies they had not so little amity for them, but that they
would send them succor from Rome. And it was this noise and nothing else that
made it believed, the Catholic Forces were so much greater than indeed they
were. In the mean time, King Casimir, a good Soldier and good Catholic,
finding at present his losses are nothing so great, as he had cause to fear
they would prove, gives the Pope thanks for what he has done, and to please
him the more tells him, That the very words of his Holiness were not
ineffectual for his assistance.

The Duke of Savoy has had no Minister at Rome since some discontent given him
in Pope Innocent's time: and, indeed, considering the little business he has
there, he needs not entertain any. The present Pope, who seeks by all means and
ways to add luster and glory to that Court, which he thinks does consist much
in the number of such Ministers as reside there on the behalf of other Princes,
has declared, that he should be much pleased to have an Ambassador from that
Duke, as from a Prince to whom the Church is much obliged: This he made known
obliquely to Madam and the Duke her Son, who found it fitting to content his
Holiness herein, who would be willing likewise to add luster to that Family,
were there any of them at present worthy of the Purple, to lay the surer
foundation for the posterity of the Chigi, upon which a certain Marquis, de la
Mojette, a very complete Cavalier, presenting himself at Rome in quality of
Ambassador, the Pope expressed a great deal of satisfaction thereupon.

The name of the Grand Duke of Toscany is agreeable to the whole Court, the
Pope esteems him, and in the Consistory has more than once spoken of his
Highness with a great deal of honor, perhaps because being born his Subject,
and the most part of his kindred being within his jurisdiction, he believes,
that as well out of the respect to his birth, as from the consideration of what
may happen, he ought to have all that esteem for him which he is worthy of. In
which this Pope is more praiseworthy than the three Popes his predecessors,
which were Clement VIII, Paul V, and Urban the VIII, who although they were
born in Toscany, did so utterly forget what they owed to their Country, and
those who were the Princes of it, that they could not be excused of
ingratitude; but because it is the natural vice of Priests, few men reflect
upon it; and nevertheless this is the cause that Princes themselves do not know
whether they ought to be glad that one of their Subjects is advanced to the
Sovereign Ecclesiastical Dignity.

These two Princes for some other kind of interests receive not that
satisfaction which they ought to have, he that commands at Rome never failing
to clash sometimes with one of them, and sometimes the other Prince, and that
perhaps to show they are treated alike, and so the one has no more cause to
applaud the Government than the other. But for all this they negotiate
confidently, and as both have the repute of being prudent, they communicate and
consult together when those two Courts have any thing of difference, which does
not a little serve to preserve and maintain their amity.

Although the Genoese, after they had been some time without a Minister at
Rome, because in this Pope's time they had been, as it were, excluded from
their pretenses, have of late sent one thither with some hopes of being better
heard for the future: yet I can hardly believe the Pope will inovate any thing
in their favor, for fear of causing some disturbance amongst the other
Princes, who not thinking themselves inferior, would not suffer them to enjoy
greater Prerogatives than themselves. Every one said at Rome, that this
Republique desiring more grandeur than she already has, would suddenly
disburse some great sum to obtain it, which might thereupon be granted, by
covering the Contract they might make by some specious pretense. All this may
be; but the fairest and the honestest way, in my opinion, would be to engage
them to succor this Republique with their Squadrons, provided they did not
require a greater acknowledgment for this than were due.

The Duke of Parma, after the fair words they have given him, finds they do in
effect deny the satisfaction due to his just desires, which tend to furnish him
wherewith to redeem his Estate of Castro again. I did not omit, having your
Lordships Orders, to acquit my self of those devoirs to which I was obliged,
both by the justice of his cause, and your commands. But after they had turned
me every way with ambiguous words, I found that somewhat more effectual was
required to bring it to pass. It cannot be denied in truth, but they do very
much wrong this Duke, for though in the Apostolic Chamber they have made an
Act which adjudges this Estate forfeit, if he redeem it not within a certain
prefixed time, yet this Pope, of a milder and more temperate humor than
Innocent was, ought rather to follow the rules of Equity than the rigor of the
Law, by considering, that this Estate is worth two thirds more than what it is
engaged for, and that it could not happen in a worser time for him to do it,
than since the Contract was made, all Lombardy having been in Arms, and he
moreover necessitated to secure that Estate at his own charges, although it
were a Feof belonging to the Church, which has been a very great expense to
him. But when one treats with those of the Apostolic Chamber of any thing
that concerns their interest, one can neither be heard, nor ever get any thing
from them upon the account of reason. It is is therefore the interest of all
Crowns, having considered the tenor of the clauses of this Contract, to find
out some way to relieve the Duke of this enormous grievance; and this would be
best done by the Spaniards, to take away all those seeds of discord from Italy,
which might arise from the like discontents: which should it happen, the
Spaniards would receive the greatest prejudice thereby, as having most to
loose. But one good word from the Pope makes them pass by any thing, and keeps
them from doing or saying ought that may displease him in the least: and I
perceive already, that the new Ambassador from Spain, D. Lewis Ponze de Leon,
is come with a design not to negotiate any thing but what shall please the
Pope; and for this reason will permit the Duke to owe the whole obligation of
this business to Strangers, who afterward, and that with reason, shall be
recompensed for it upon occasion.

This which I have said of the Duke of Parma may be applied likewise to the
Duke of Modena, who alleges the greatest reasons in the world upon the Subject
of Comacchio, and what is annexed to it. This process has been depending
before the Court Tribunals above sixty years, and yet they cannot obtain a
Sentence that the demands of the House of Este are unjust, although the
greatest Lawyers of our times have used all their Art to find out some plea
that might make them let fall their pretenses, or at least weaken and
invalidate them, and support the Chamber's claim. All that the Counselors
could do, who never want evasions to spin out a business, has been to prolong
this same. And it has happened several times, when they were brought to terms of
concluding it by some fair composition, at the very nick of time when they were
just ending, they have started some new exceptions to unravel it again,
insomuch that this Suit has lasted already, as I said, above threescore years.
But it were convenient, that at this time when the flames of an universal War
are extinguished, these sparks, which might perhaps bring all into a combustion
again, should be put out likewise: and it were reasonable too, those Crowns
should employ their authority and power to make them leave of that base and
vile avarice which is displeasing to the whole world. But unless they go about
it roundly, and speak to the purpose in express terms, laying aside all
civility, it will be difficult to bring this about, the affairs of the Chamber
of Rome being a Gulf that swallows all one has, and whence nothing can be
redeemed no more than from Hell.

The Duke of Mantoua is held in some consideration at Rome by reason of the
Estate he possesses, which should oblige all Italians to wish him prosperity,
as the Pope does, who does herein agree with the other Princes of Italy. But
otherwise he cares little for this Court, by reason of the little businesses he
has there. Nor does the Court on their side make any great reflection on his
person. They consider or look upon him as a Prince, who cannot do better than
to follow the stream with others, that is to say, accommodate himself to the
Gusto of those who are most puissant in Italy, and particularly your Signory:
for in keeping close and well to her, he does at the same time do well both for
himself and the general good.

We are now come to the last, but most important Chapter of this Relation, in
which I am to discover, both what is in the Pope's mind concerning the
interests of your most Serene Republique, and what good may be hoped for from
him, or what hurt may be feared, if it should please God to allow him a longer
life than his constitution seems to promise. And if from the Confident and
familiar conversation of a great Prince with the Minister of another, one may
make a certain judgment of his intentions, I cannot believe any other but that
your Signory may hope much from him, not things of that importance or quality
that you have just need of, but at least such things as may suffice to maintain
a peaceable corespondence, and beget mutual Offices of Amity, still accompanied
with the hearty desires of beholding each others prosperity; For, in truth, I
cannot say but his Holiness treated with me with all kind of civility and good
will; and as for those things which be judged blamable, as such actions, as
having been perhaps misreported, he thought worthy of censure; he has ever
done it with so much modesty and circumspection, that I fear I should err
should I think otherwise: because his Holiness has ever spoken of your sage
Government in fair terms, having declared it was guided and administered with
much Justice and Honesty. Yet I took notice that he every day made some steps
toward the design he had to oppose your Lordship's wills; and though he never
changed his tone of speech in treating with me, yet it was easy to see that he
had given place to some sinister impressions, which abated the good opinion he
was wont to have naturally for this State. His first words were upon my
representing to him the great and pressing necessities your Republique
underwent by the expenses of the War; That your most Serene Lordships would not
accept of those Propositions that might in part have eased you, as that in
suspending some useless Religious Orders, which being once effected had much
diminished the Public charge, there being yet a new way to bring about this
benefit, if the Republique would but suffer the Ecclesiastique Order by little
and little to repair the losses they now sustained by the alienation of their
Estates, which might be done by revoking the Ordinance which forbad that Order
to purchase any: upon which I shall not descant any more, having written so
much already thereof, that your most Serene Lordships have just cause to be
tired: But whatever I could say, it was impossible for me to persuade him, but
that this Ordinance would produce the bad effects he imagined. Sometimes he
would take occasion to complain, that there were such disputes and practices
between the chief Commanders of the Army, that it hindered the Republique from
being well served, and that the moneys were not well administered, for that
those that managed it made so much profit themselves, that it much damnifi'd
the Public, and that the same Commanders less careful of doing their duty
than of making advantage, by way of Trade, of those Commodities they
transported to the Levant, were the cause that the Public, which required the
entire application of her Commanders, received a great prejudice thereby. All
which things without doubt proceeded from the Mouth or Pen of the Prior Bichi,
who to hide or cloak his own defects, exposed those of others. From thence the
Pope took occasion to complain, that the Republique in her necessities made her
address to none but the Apostolic Chair, and he for his part had no greater
care than to furnish them with assistance, and that if every Prince, according
to the proportion of his power, would but do as much as the Court of Rome, your
Republique would be sufficiently provided both for the Defensive and the
Offensive: and hereupon he began to make a long enumeration of those Charges
the Apostolic Chamber was subject to, and in this discourse, which was full
of equivocations, as I sent word to your most Serene Lordships, he was larger
than enough to tire any one. He said moreover, that at present the Peace was
made between the two Crowns, and if they could formerly find out Treasure
enough for a War whereby to ruin one another, they might better do it to
assist this Republique, which was become the Frontier of all Christendom
against the Turks: That your Signory ought to have a great and particular
confidence in the French, seeing the partiality she had showed for them, when
she gave them all the satisfaction they desired, tacitly alluding to what I
related that happened about the Ambassador's Rochet. And thus we only lost time
in these discourses at the last Audience, with little benefit to the Public:
but it has now been certainly made known to me, that if the Pope has been
hitherto slow in performing that devoir, more incumbent upon him than any other
whatsoever, he will be yet slower hereafter, since he believes he has gone
farther than any other in his obligations of opposing the common Enemy. This is
that which makes him unwilling to hear of the sending an Extraordinary
Ambassador to Rome, imagining he would go with the design also of obtaining
some extraordinary succor: which, to say truth, I see the Pope very little
inclined to grant, not to say, obstinately resolved to refuse it, because,
indeed, there is no money. If they think he will erect any Banques to get it for
them, I do not believe it; for besides, his Holiness pleases himself in
expending what arises from the few there are in such things wherein he takes a
great delight, as in Buildings, and adorning of Churches, together with all
accommodations for his Dwelling House: and if he should dispose himself to do
somewhat more than ordinary, I do not think he would use any other liberality
but what costs him naught, which is an increase of the Impositions of the
Clergy of this State, which is known to be already so bare, that it has
nothing left but the bones: and that is just a helping of us with our own
proper goods, although it be not desired that we should say so at Rome; for
they would have us believe, that whatever belongs to the Priests in what
Country soever, appertains to them. When the time of my departure approached, I
found the Pope somewhat more mild. He gave thanks to God again for the
Conclusion of the Peace, and testified, that he had a better opinion of the
affairs in the Levant for the future, alleging the reason which I have noted,
which was, that his heart told him, that your Republique would never lay down
their Arms till they had defeated the Turks, and obtained some signal Victory
over them. I guess, that he said this to me, only to encourage your Lordships,
that so they might refuse any kind of Treaty that might be prejudicial to
Christendom; or perhaps he propounded some League to himself, either with the
Imperial Court, or that of Poland: I cannot aver this, but I incline to believe
the first rather, because the Pope would hardly find any Princes in those parts
that would confide in his promises; nor would they engage themselves in any
enterprise without a sum in hand, that might assure them not to be deserted,
when they were once entered upon it. At my departure, after he had stood much
upon my praises, wherein I had rather he would have been more sparing, provided
he had showed himself more liberal in his favors toward your most Serene
Republique, he enjoined me to remember, to represent these four things to you:
The first, That you should endeavor to suppress, or take up those differences
at the Tribunal of the Inquisition at Padua, which are still in contest, to the
great scandal of all those that hear of that matter: His Holiness told it me
just so, without any reflection on it. But when your Signory resolves to meddle
with those interests, there must be some important reason that shall induce you
thereto. This order was very unpleasing to me, because it concerns a matter not
suiting at all with my genious, and about which much noise has been made.

The second, That the security of the Navigation in the Adriatique Sea should
be more carefully looked after, for he complained, that there was no Trade in
the port of Ancona, the Merchants not being secure in their passage with their
goods, by reason of the Reprisals those Pirates of Dulcigno do make, who from
time to time rove about to make their robberies, allarming the whole Coasts of
the Marca. He added, that if during the continuance of the War with the Turk,
your Signory would suffer them to keep two Galleys in the Port of Ancona, it
should be done as soon as the Squadron returned from the Levant.

The third, That it would please your Lordships to forbear interposing their
judgments in matters Ecclesiastical, as they do from time to time, which
offends and infringes the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and makes them run
themselves imprudently into censorious inferences, not minding the disgraces
happening daily thereupon: He pressed me much to oblige you likewise to moderate
some of your Ordinances.

The fourth, that your Signory would favor the Father Jesuits with their
protection in those occurrences that may happen, because the seeds of that
hatred conceived against them, remaining yet in the hearts of some that do not
well know them, it may be easy, but it would prove no act of generosity, said
the Pope to me, to lay some ambush by calumny or impostures against them, which
are to be looked upon with an indifferent eye, and being found out should be
repulsed. I promised to observe punctually what his Holiness had commanded me,
and to represent what he desired to your Lordships. You may be pleased to see
and consider wherein you can favor his Holiness, having so great judgment as
cannot err; which concluded his last Audience, adding thereto his Paternal
Benediction which he bestowed upon your Lordships and my self, with his best
wishes, and a presage of victories and perpetual prosperities.

FINIS.

