A COPY OF Two Remonstrances, Brought Over THE RIVER STIX IN Carons
Ferry-Boate; By the Ghost of Sir JOHN SUCKLING. The one, to the Earl of
New Castle, and the Popish Army. The other, to the Protestants of England.
Wherein is many things mentioned worthy the due Observation of all those that
love God and King CHARLES; and desire Peace.

London Printed for a faithful Royalisti, Anno Dom. MDCXLIII.

To the Earl of NEWCASTLE, and his Popish Army.
MY Lords and Gentlemen and the rest of this Popish Army, I beseech you be not
acashed to behold the raised again from the dead in the world, since the
sights and tears of poor England, have broken up my Tomb, and the cruel
intentions of the motrous of my heart when I was living, have violently drawn
my poor Soul to cry aloud to you, but alas I fear that my admonitions will
prove as unprofitable as charitable.

Do but call to mind our former Treasons, when I was as active as any Papist.

1 To seize on the Tower, the Livetenant to have twenty thousand pounds, his
Son to marry with Sraffords daughter, with means to live on; Strafford to be
sent into IRELAND, an to send an Army hither and to go into France to prepare
an Army from thence: this you know god prevented, and straford was beheaded,
and yet Ireland Rebel'd. 2. to posesse the northern Armies of an ill oppinion
of the house, and to make them advance to London, this you know was prevented
also. 3. To deliver Portsmouth into Iarmins hands to be a Randevoues for the
french Papists but he was feign to fly as well as I. 4. The Bishops to Raise
two thousand horse. 5. The Lord of NewCastle to be made General of the
Northren Army, and to have met them with the Army at Nottingham.

It may be, you will boast of these two last projects, but I would you would
consider what I neglected, and not draw upon your selves murders, plagues,
famines, and other miseries; do you not here the voice of innocent blood, which
cries out and says that your cruelty are great crimes before God, and your
gniltinesse of cruel murder; you may one day feel that trouble of soul
whereof I am now to sensible, for the great disorder of those intentions which
we carry with fire at our backs, whilst we played a thousand crowns at Dice
upon a table after dinner etc. But whilst you are thus the murderers of
others, you shall also most assuredly bring destruction upon your own souls;
And you that are Protestants among them, this shall be the greatest favor that
some of you shall obtain, that you shall be the last that shall be devoured.

Were it not better then, that you should join your affections, your courage,
and that force which as yet you have resting, altogether to save and defend
your KING, Parliament, Religion, Law, and Liberty, from this sheeppracke; and
rather drown your Enemies therein. It may be that (...) Lords and Gentlemen
will say, that this con^^^nction is impossible, and in vain; and as (...) as
you should not be seconded by the Nobility. In may be that your fidility
formerly past and committed has much divided your affections, but now you
perceive and know the damage, and hurt that this infi^ility has done unto you;
and the great good from which it does with draw you, set upon the Papists the
(...) thereof. It is a sad thing that men should never cease to sin; and that
your confidences should never stir nor move you to Repentance; specially at
this day: when does one of your lives and good are interest therein, have we
not been affections now separated to be reioyned and united again, thereby to
withstand and oppose a common enemy: Dogs do the same against Wolves, to save
their flocks; and children against strangers to preserve their own houses:
Do it then to defend your Kings honor, your Native Country, Laws and
Liberty, Religion, Estates: In a word to save that, for the which you swear,
and are divided among your selves; if not, then hereafter do not pretend that
there is any life, dwelling state, quality, honor, or good whatsoever resting
to be sever for our England, I and no other way of safety for you: it is not
fight, nor desperate resolutions that can save you; I cannot see any hope
otherwise of any honest and honorable death, is the only grief that a man can
do nothing in this respect: do not cause the most courageous and best beloved
of God, to dye for sorrow, that is they may nor be kept as a pray to the
Papists Tyrany, and the object of their cruelty.

To the Protestants of ENGLAND.
YOu famous Nobility, the true Protestants of England, that have obtained your
great Privileges; for having so often been the Fundamental stones of this
state cimented with your blood: Infinite times the protections of our Kings,
bridles against usurpations of strangers, can you degenerate, or become
fainthearted, and bandon the ensigns of your virtues, so dearly woone and
obtained for prey to your enemies.

Suppose that an upstart Popish Army has those that discover their treason and
tyranny and are able to approove them for the same, it is much if the children
that are borne under it, may be sure of their lives the papists fearing will no
doubt be cruel against you then with a good will and courageous heart, follow
the good motious of your King and Parliament: I know that many there are in the
Kingdom, that have labored to cool the heart of your zeal, but let not them
hinder nor with draw you, in this worthy occasion, to join with those who
seek the preservation of your Country and your selves. And you my Masters of
the Commonnulty, effect this last work, for the healing of your disease, for
which purpose you have sent your representative body to stand for you in their
places in the high Court of Parliament, they are faithful to them, but you
procure your own sickness by being luld a sleep with false pretenses of the
Papists, thereby to pull the sky of from their backs: you are fedd with false
pretenses, to maintain and support your patience and to lay sugar upon the
long pills of poison which they make you swallow down, many of you are so
sick that you feel not your pain, and many that feel it can find no ease
but fighs, or at least some silent groans; it is not enough, you must cry out,
and that so loud that you may be understood, speak boldly and flatter not your
selves, fear not your enemies, you cannot be worse then you are, but you may
hope for change, tell them that you have seen your last liberty (if Papists
should triumph) and that you now feel the extremity of their treachiry,
unslpeeses be remedets, it is now time or never, to free the spirit of our
Royal King, and his state, and to pull away the foot that is ready to tread
upon his belly, drowned his enemies in your blood, I intend not hereby to make
or entice you to a greater comotion, or to stir up new disorders amongst your
selves, my endeavoring is clean contrary, you aught to loyne and remit all
your affection and interest together for the peace of distressed England, Then
altogether with one voice require that the Popish Army may be called in
questian to yel'd account of their Resuing and commission; they for their ill
doing are subject to the Law, and to justice, as well as now they openly
dominier in their Randevouz, as when they seduced in corners.

Is it not great reason that every one should yield account of their actions,
does not our Royal King himself gratify his Subjects with declarations, why
then should they that are subjects refuse to appear before the high Court of
Parliament before that honorable Senate at Westminster, where Papish has no
place, their they should obtain but too great honor to be tried and Judged by
their peers, if consience make them shunn and abhor their state, and their
courage persuade them (before they be accused) that they shall be overthrown,
they condemn themselves and so their can remain no more but their execution
behind, you have reason and power enough beside God on your side if you assist
this cause to do it by arms, they shall not so escape Justice but that she
will triumph over you God will hinder them from withdrawing them selves from
the law and from the example from which he has refered them, assure your
selves that the very consiences of their chief agents in their Rebellion
agatnst the King and Parliament which have faild them in their preteous
designs will also fail them in bringing them to punishment you must extend it
unto all the principal executioners of their design against the King and
Parliament, where the intyre execution to the Parliament let them reedify the
parmadies that is fallen down, and suffer them to drive away those plagues and
evil cankers of the state, those tyrant of men's spirits and consciences which
does daly induce athousand tyrants in England, would enable our King our
Parliment and liberties slaves and and Subjects to strangers

I have heard that the King of France this Kings Father when the Marshal' Ancie
died, said that then he began to Reign, if England deliver his Majesty from
these tyrants that have made us a thousand times morn like france for the
Marshaled Ancre, England will then give his Majesty great reason to say that he
begins to live in the resurrection of his state, make speed then to patten this
generous design, let every one of you both general and particular that are
true Britains be ashamed to be prevented, is it possible that of so great a
good which cannot be sound enough conceived, the execution should be deferred
until the morrow, for my part although I am but a Ghost, I have been as
violent an enemy against England as any of them, yet I am very sorry for it, and
with too late repentance cure it, and I will now withal speed go to assail
and torment their courages, and consienses, and tear them in peses with
continual fears and terrors, to all my good friends.

FINIS.

