The Copy of an Act for the abolishing and taking away of all Archbishops,
Bishops, Chancellours, Commissaries, Deanes, Deacons and Chapiters, Arch
deacons, and Prebendaries, Canons, and all other Under-officers out of the
Church of England.
WHereas the government of the Church of England by Archbishops, Bishops,
Chancellours and Commissaries, Deanes, Archdeacons, and other their
Ecclesiastical Officers has been found by long experience, to be a great
impediment to the perfect reformation and growth of Religion, and very
prejudicial to the civil government of this Kingdom. Be it therefore enacted
by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, the Lords and Commons assembled in this
present Parliament, and by the authority of the same; That from henceforth
there shall be no Archbishops, Bishops, Chancellours, or Commissaries of any
Bishops, Deanes, Deacons, or Chapiters, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, Chaunters,
Canons, or petty Canons, or any other their Officers within this Church or
Kingdom; And every person that shall hereafter use or exercise any power or
jurisdiction, Office or Authority Ecclesiastical or civil, by color of any
such name, title, or dignity, office, or jurisdiction, to incur the penalty
and forfeiture contained in the Act of provision of Praemunire, made in the 16.
of R. 2. And that all Acts hereafter done by any such Archbishops, Bishops,
their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deanes or Chapiters, Archdeacons,
Prebendaries, Canons, petty Canons, or any other Officers, by color of any of
their dignities or offices aforesaid, shall be merely void and of none effect
in Law, any Statute or Ordinance heretofore made to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And that all Mannours, Lands, Rectories, Impropriations, Houses, Rents,
Services, and other Hereditaments whatsoever of the said Archbishops, Bishops,
Deanes, Deacons and Chapiters, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, Canons, and petty
Canons, which they or any of them have in the right of the said Churches and
Dignities, shall be disposed and ordered of in such manner and form as the
Kings Most Excellent Majesty, the Lords temporal and Commons of the
Parliament shall appoint.

And be it further enacted by the Authority of Parliament aforesaid; That all
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction fit to be exercised in the Church and Kingdom of
England, shall be committed to such a number of persons and in such manner, as
by this present Parliament shall be appointed*

Printed at London, Jan. 26. 1643.


