MAGNA CHARTA: Containing that which is very much the Sense and Agreement of
the good People of these Nations, notwithstanding their Differences relating to
Worship.
Humbly tendered to those that are in Eminent Place, both in a Civil and in a
Military capacity, and earnestly desired that it may be by them also (in this
juncture of Affairs) speedily concurred with, resolved upon, and vigorously
Prosecuted, for the escaping of the sadest, and for the enjoying of the
joyfullest days and station, that England has seen.
By an unfeined lover of his Countries welfare, and a Sincere Promoter of the
Commonwealth and just concernments of all men.
As some further Essay in order to a well grounded Unity, Peace and Settlement,
of these poor shaken and shattered Nations, upon that sure and durable
foundation of Righteousness, which will without doubt, according to the wise
man's experience, not only establish, but exalt a Nation.
1. FIrst, Let it be in the fear of the Lord resolved; That singular care shall
be taken forthwith, and so from time to time, that the Arrears of the poor
Soldiers, the Pentions of the poor Pentioners, and the Public faith debts, of
the poor Creditors of these Nations, (whose straights presses them sore, and
makes them to sigh, and whose sighs and cries go up unto Heaven, and will have
their returns) may be speedily and out of the first receipts discharged and
cleared.

2. Secondly, That singular care shall be taken forthwith, and so from time to
time, that the poor in general thorowout these Nations, which are very numerous
now, (by reason of the decay of Trade, and other ways) shall be so provided
for, and in such sort, that all the Impotent shall be releived, and all the
able shall be employed.

3. Thirdly, That there shall be a speedy and effectual course taken to
rectify the Laws, and the Maladministration thereof, by bringing them into a
Brief, Plain, and easy Method and Form; and as near the Laws of that famous
Commonwealth of Israel, as the nature and Constitution of a Gentile State
(under the present dispensation of light and grace) will admit; and so, that as
much strife and contention between man and man as may be, by plain and brief
Records, Registers, and Peacemakers, might be prevented, and what by such a
Provision cannot be prevented, might be with as much ease and speed, and with
as little expense of Money and irritation of spirit as may be, fully redressed;
so that loving kindness, judgment and righteousness, which the righteous Lord
himself delights to be exercised in on the earth, may be found and felt in our
Land, to the great contentment and rejoicing of the inhabitants thereof.

4. Fourthly, That singular care shall be forthwith taken about that perplexing
business of Tithes, which being continued as now it is, stands but as a relict
of Monarchy, and as a witness against these Nations, as if they denied the
change of the Priesthood that was under the Law, or that Christ Jesus is come
in the flesh; is also a thing that looks much unlike the maintenance of a true
Gospel Ministry, and which is as some conceive the very fomenter, and nourisher
of a Persecuting, and imposing Spirit in these Nations; by reason whereof, even
under the greatest Profession of liberty, many tender Consciences have been
daily perplexed, and very much of the Land of the Nation has lain unimproved,
which is rendered by many, as a great reason of the scarceness of Corn, which
hazards a Famine often times in this Nation. Let this be done by altering the
Title thereof, and bringing it to a Pound rate, Sci. to eight or six in the
hundred, which may be from time to time without any further charge paid into
the public, and so disposed to the proper use and end to which it belongs.

5. Fifthly, That the very much decayed Trade of this Nation, both in these
famous Cities of London and Westminster, and other Places (so universally
complained of) and by the many sad effects, so fully Demonstrated, may now
through special care be forthwith revived, by easing the troublesome and
vexatious burdens that lies upon it, and by putting it under a good regulation
and Government; That the Seas may be so guarded, that being propounded as the
ground of the Customs; that the Trade, Treasure, and strength of these
Nations, may not so often fall into the hands of the enemies.

6. Sixthly, That all the Relicts and Props of corrupt Monarchy, thorowout these
Nations, which do but wait and serve for its return, and have entrencht upon
the freeborn Peoples Rights and Liberties, upon a Civil account, shall be
forthwith diligently enquired into, and speedily removed.

7. Seventhly, That all the Relicts and Props of superstitious Hierarchy
thorowout these Nations, which do but wait and serve for its return, and have
entrenched upon the Peoples Rights and Liberties, upon a Religious account,
shall be forthwith diligently enquired into, and speedily removed.

8. Eighthly, That all those horrible corruptions, abuses, and mischiefs, which
have crept into houses that have been erected and maintained by free Donation
of persons for Charitable uses, and also all those corruptions and abuses, That
are found in Prisons thorowout these Nations, and especially those of the Kings
Bench, the Fleet, Newgate, and Ludgate, shall be forthwith diligently enquired
into, and speedily removed.

9. Ninthly, That none shall be forced upon any Public employment in this
Commonwealth against his will and consent; and that whosoever is employed from
time to time in the management of the affairs thereof, from the highest unto
the lowest, shall receive out of the public Revenue, a suitable recompense and
encouragement for his service therein: and then in case any shall be found
taking bribes, either directly, or indirectly, or otherwise unfaithful in the
trust committed to him, he shall be severely punished, and forthwith cashiered.

10. Tenthly, that some substantial Laws, relating to Liberty and Freedom,
both upon a Civil, and upon a Religious account, whereby every man may be
preserved safe in his person, name and estate, from the violence of another,
under what pretense soever, may be laid as Fundamentals in the bottom of your
Government, as that which has been gotten in the late wonderful and hazzardous
engagements with very much difficulty, and is the price of very much blood and
treasure; Let these be known to be as the Laws of the Meads and Persians, that
cannot be altered, no not by future Representatives; and among other, let this
be one; That in case any Representative of the people, shall by the Major vote,
alter or make void these or any of these first Fundamentals, they shall be
looked upon as violating the trust committed to them, and such act and acts of
theirs, shall be deemed void and null to all intents and purposes, as if the
same had never been, and shall be no ways obleiging upon the consciences of
the good people of these Nations. And moreover, that the person, or persons,
who first moved therein, shall be judged Traitors to the Liberties of the
people, and of their country in the highest degree, and proceeded against
accordingly.

11. Eleventhly, That none of the freeborn People of these Nations, shall be
arrested, imprisoned, banished, condemned, or sentenced to the loss of Life,
Limb, Estate, or Liberty, or be any otherwise molested, or distressed, after a
very short time prefixed, but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by virtue
of, and according to some known, approved, published Law, or Laws of these
Nations.

12. Twelfthly, That all the Public Revenue of these Nations, shall from time
to time be brought into the Public Treasury, as entire and with as little
abatements and unnecessary charges and expenses as may be; and to the end it
may be so, among other things, That there shall be special care used that all
Persons who are or shall be employed about the customs, and all other places
relating to money, shall be such as have a clear and full character given of
them, that they are indeed able provident men, men of truth and hating
covetousness.

13. That for the more certain, speedy and through effecting hereof, whereby
deeds may demonstrate, that these are resolves by the finger of God set on your
hearts; Let it be in the fear of the Lord further resolved, That Seventy men
shall be found out, pitched upon, and set a part to be employed, of a suitable
Spirit to these resolves, with whom you will in the name and fear of the Lord
engage to stand, or fall, live or die together, in a through pursuit thereof, in
order to the putting of all sorts of men into a better and more flourishing
capacity then that wherein now they are; so that interest may engage them there
to remain, and as one man to rise up and withstand a return; and also in order
to the enjoying (as in ancient times) their free Representatives; That the
Persons shall be according to Iethro's Counsel, able men, fearing God, men of
truth, hating covetousness, and such as are in a good measure freed by the
Spirit of the Gospel, from imposing upon the consciences of others, in things
that relate to the worship and service of God, as having learned by experience,
that it is not by might, nor by power, that things of that nature are carried
on, and that the wrath of man does not at all accomplish the righteousness of
God.

14. That these Seventy Persons thus qualified, singled out, pitched upon; and
engaged to carry through the former resolves, in order to the bringing the
honest Conquering Party, yea, all the freeborn people of these Nations, into a
fit Capacity, to enjoy (as in ancient days) their free Representatives, shall
be called by the name of the great Council, and for the more speedy dispatch of
that business, which by the whole Nation in a very short season, may be made
sensible of the advantage thereby, they shall cast them into 10. Committees.
That the first, shall be for the preparing, well ordering, and managing of the
business that relates to the Poor; A second, for that which relates to the Law;
A third, for that which relates to Tithes; A fourth, for Trade; A fifth, for
finding out and removing the Relicts, and Props of corrupt Monarchy; A sixth,
for finding out and removing the Relicts, and Props of Superstitious Heirarchy;
A seventh, for the finding out and rectifying the corruptions, and abuses in
Prisons, and in donations for charitable uses; An eighth, for drawing up some
substantial, and fundamental Laws, which shall not be altered; A ninth, for
Considering of grievances, and ordering the public Revenues; And the last, for
the Receiving of all Petitions that relates to the former resolves, or
concerning any thing that may be presented, and to refer the Consideration of
them to the several Committees to which they belong, and what cannot properly
be referred to any of them, to let that be their care so to manage, and prepare
the same, as the rest of the Committees, for the Consideration, and
determination of the great Council.

15. That out of this great Council consisting of Seventy, Twenty one shall be
chosen, and called the Council of State, of the most able, and most eminently
qualified for this great work, wherein the Lord, his people, and this whole
Nation are so greatly concerned, that their work shall be to treat with foreign
Ambassadors, to have the management of the executive part of the Power and
Authority of these Nations, and of the Dominions, and Territories thereto
belonging; so that the placing, and displacing of all Officers, both Civil, and
Military (the chief of both only excepted) shall spring from thence, Reserving
notwithstanding a door of Appeal open to the great Council, in point of
displacing the next great Officers both in a Military, and Civil capacity.

16. That singular care shall be forthwith taken by the great Council, to
declare to the Nation, that these or such like, are the good things which they
have resolvedly upon their hearts, by the help of the Lord, with all possible
speed they can, to bring forth, for the putting the whole, and so far as is
possible, every Member thereof into a happy flourishing State, and there upon
to incite, and provoke the good people of these Nations, to a patient waiting
for the effecting thereof, and to a cheerful Concurrance therein, warning
withal the unruly Spirited, and evil Affected persons of these Nations, against
any tumultuous assemblings, risings, or actings to the disquieting thereof, or
to the hindering, and retarding of so good a work as is on the wheel, which
being perfected, will undoubtedly prove advantageous to all; adding this, that
in case they take not warning hereby, they shall be punished with exemplary
punishment.

17. That singular care shall be taken by the great Council, forthwith to put
the well affected in these Nations, in such a posture of defense, placing also
the Power of the Militia in confiding hands, whereby they may be encouraged,
and also strengthened, as one man to join together, not only for the
withstanding the common enemy (in case he prove turbulent) but for the bringing
forth of common Righteousness, so that judgment, and justice, and mercy, may
run down like a mighty stream, to the great refreshing and cheering of these
poor Nations.

18. That singular care shall be taken by the Council of State, that able men
so qualified as is above specified, shall be forthwith nominated, and appointed
for the Office of Sheriff in every County, thorowout these Nations, whose care
it shall be to keep the respective Counties to which they belong in peace, and
free from risings, and commotions, and for that end shall proclaim, or publish
the Declaration above specified in the most noted places thereof, and in case
notwithstanding this, there should be risings, or tumultuous Assemblings, that
then they shall call to their assistance, the County Troops, or the Power of
the County speedily to suppress the same.

19. That singular care shall be taken, that able men so qualified, as is
abovesaid, shall be forthwith, and so from time to time nominated, and
appointed by the Council of State, for Conservators, or Justices of the Peace,
in the several Counties thorowout these Nations, and that in case, such cannot
be found among those that have their thousands a year, they shall be chosen out
of those that have but their hundreds, and where such cannot be found among
those that have their hundreds, they shall be chosen out of those that have but
their tens, bearing in mind what the wise man says, sci. That a righteous man
[be he never so poor] is more excellent than his neighbor, [were he never so
Rich.] That their work shall not only be to preserve the Peace among their
neighbors, and to hear and determine their Controversies in the public
Sessions; but to be as Peacemakers, in a friendly way if they can by
themselves, or by others whom the Parties shall choose, to compose the
differences without any further charge or trouble, and before they be brought
to a public debate.

Lastly, That singular care shall be taken by the Justices of Peace, in their
public Sessions, that able men so qualified, as is abovesaid, shall be
nominated, and appointed out of every Hundred thorowout the Counties, to serve
in grand and petty Jnquests, who may be able to understand the matters brought
before them, and give in a speedy, judicious and just verdict in the case: Thus
shall judgment return to righteousness, and all the upright in heart in these
Nations shall follow it; which that the Lord of Hosts will graciously grant, is
and shall be the humble, earnest, and constant Prayer and Request of His,
Their, and Your unworthy Servant, I. C.

Jer. 9 23, 24. Thus says the Lord, let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
neither let the mighty man, glory in his might; let not the rich man glory in
his riches, but let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands,
and knows me that I am the Lord, which exercise loving kindness, judgment,
and righteousness in the earth, for in these things I delight, says the Lord.
Jer. 22. 15, 16. Did not thy Father eat and drink and do judgment, and justice,
and then it was well with him? He judged the cause of the Poor and needy, then
it was well with him: was not this to know me? says the Lord. Prove. 14. 34.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people. 2 Chronicles.
20. 20. Believe in the Lord, your God, so shall you be established: believe his
Prophets so shall ye Prosper. Consider what I say, and the Lord of Hosts give
you understanding, Resolution, and Courage to do his Will. LONDON, Printed for
Francis Smith, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Elephant and Castle near
Temple-Barre, 1659.


