A Copy of a LETTER Written to an OFFICER OF THE ARMY BY A true
Commonwealths-man, and no COVRTIER, Concerning The Right and Settlement of our
present GOVERNMENT and GOVERNORS.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, over against Bainards-Castle in
Thames Street. 1656:

SIR,
IF we look into our Stories from the Conqueror, (from whom the whole race of
our Kings since have derived their Titles and Claims) we shall find it
evident, that those that were originally the great Council of this Land, were
originally such as had been Commanders under, and had helped that first William
to the Sovereignty of this Kingdom: who, having now through his means obtained
so great a share in the wealth of the Nation, seemed most likely to be
regardful as well of his, as of the general safety and good thereof. To you
therefore I shall make this my humble Appeal concerning the reasonableness of
that Letter which I formerly addressed unto those that last of all sat as a
Parliament amongst us; leaving it to you to determine whether they had not
presidents, as well as reason, sufficient to have led them to the establishment
of this Government in a more settled way then now it is. For we shall find that
(all along) this great Council or Parliament have ever settled the succession on
him that had the present power, although others might in legal appearance have
a better title, and that confirmed by their own oaths also. Thus we find the
said William the First generally obeyed by the English after the conquest of
Harold, even as Harold was before; notwithstanding Edgar Etheling had the
indubitable right from both, according to the then established Laws. And so
again were the possession and hereditary right of his succeeding sons, William
and Henry the First, sworn to and maintained by the Peers and others;
notwithstanding also that these two, besides the claim of the said Edgar, might
be also justly reputed Usurpers against the right of their elder Brother Robert
yet living. The Sovereignty being next seized on by Stephen against the direct
lineal right of the Issue of Maud the Empress, unto whom the said Peers had
also sworn faith and allegiance; yet shall we again find them swearing to be
faithful to him and his issue, and both they and others of the Nation generally
taking his part against the said Maud and her children.

To instance in all, would be too tedious: But it is apparent through the whole
Story, that all Parliaments both before and after the addition of the House of
Commons, have ever confirmed and settled the succession in him whose Writs they
obeyed in their Summons, however a more apparent Title might seem to rest in
some other person yet living. In which doing it could not yet be expected, but
some mutterings and insurrections must arise from some particular persons, as
well such as had been of the same party with the present Prince, who (like sons
of Zerviah) out of discontent at their own smaller share of preferment, or the
greater favor cast toward others then they thought fit, will thereupon be
keeping the terms of War in time of Peace, and so dislike of their Princes
entertainment of any that have (like Abner) been of a contrary party, although
their usefulness and fidelity be now apparent: As also of some again, who (like
Shimei) out of some more particular love and relation to the deposed Family, 2 Samuel ^6.5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Samuel 20 14, 15, 42. 1 Samuel 2^.2^, 22. 2 Samuel 3.1.
will be prone to cast the odium of blood and usurpation upon the person
possessed; especially if from a mean degree he have come to the Throne, and had
also taken an oath of fidelity to the former Prince and his family, as in the
case of David to Jonathan and Saul; when as yet it was plain enough that Saul
was not slain by David, but by the Philistines: And for that war between their
houses, in which it is said, The house of David waxed daily stronger and
stronger, and the house of Saul weaker and weaker; it is to be looked upon as
the joint association of these of Judah also; who, having now submitted to
another Head, opposed the other as a common enemy.

And if we look into the latter times for the care taken by the then good
Commonwealths-men in settling this great affair, even to the time of Queen
Elizabeth, we shall find the first Parliament humbly to solicit her to marry
betimes. Annal. Eliz. fol. 25.
The Parliament (says Mr. Cambden) being to be dissolved, they all thought good
that the Third Estate or Lower House should advise the Queen to marry betimes:
yet would not the Temporal Lords join with them, lest any of them might seem to
propound it in hope to prefer himself. And it is like, both they and all former
Peers were also willing to have the Crown hereditary, lest they might also seem
to be ambitious of succession themselves; as though they had been rather Pares
as to the Sovereignty, then as a true Senate of Patres or Peers as to the
Nation. Some words then used by the Speaker I shall particularly set down, that
we may see how ancient Parliaments differed from some of late, they having as
great a care to build and to establish, as these to pull down. There is nothing
which with more ardent affection we beg of God in our daily prayers, then that
our happiness hitherto received by your most gracious Government, may be
perpetuated to the English Nation to all eternity. Whilst in our minds and
cogitations we cast many ways how this may be effected, we can find none at
all, unless your Majesty should either reign for ever, (which to hope for is
not lawful) or else by marriage bring forth Children, heirs both of their
Mothers virtue and Empire (which God Almighty grant.)

And in the Parliamnt held in the ninth year of her Reign, when, through
difference of Religions which then were, men began to propound to themselves
sometimes one, and sometimes another to get the Sovereignty, in case she should
die without a certain Successor: fol. 84.
Therefore (says my Author) the Higher House besought the Queen with all
earnestness, by the mouth of Bacon L. Keeper, their Speaker; according to the
duty which they owe to God, the allegiance to their Prince, and love to their
Country; that forasmuch as by her they now quietly enjoyed all the benefits of
Peace, Justice and Clemency, both they and their posterity might securely and
always enjoy the same by her. But (say they) they cannot enjoy the same, unless
she marry, and withal design a Successor. Above all things therefore they do
wish and pray her, that she will join herself in the sacred bond of marriage,
to whomsoever, wheresoever, and howsoever it may please her, to the end she may
have Children to be pillars of the Realm; constitute and appoint a Successor if
she or her children (which God forbid) should die without issue. That they
should so earnestly beg this, which is so mainly necessary, there are (say
they) many causes; to wit, the fresh fear which invaded all men, when very
lately her health was endangered; the opportunity of the times, when the
Estates of the Realm were now assembled, who would maturely deliberate of so
weighty matters; the terror which she should strike into her adversaries, and
the immortal joy wherewith she would replenish all her Subjects. They commend
the Examples of her Ancestors, which in such cases have prudently provided for
the security of their Posterity; condemning that speech of Pyrrhus, who said,
He would leave the Kingdom to him which had the sharpest sword. Moreover they
propound, how great a storm of calamities would hang over England, if she
should put off her mortality, designing no certain Successor; That seditious
and Civil Wars would break forth, wherein the Victory it self were most
miserable: That Religion would be abolished, Justice smothered, the Laws
trodden under feet, When there should be no certain Prince, which is the soul
of the Law; and that the Kingdom would fall as a prey to Foreiners. And other
calamities of that sort they reckon up and exaggerate, wherein all men would be
included, if she should die without issue. Out of the sacred Scriptures also
they modestly join hereunto precepts, counsels, and examples. At which time
also the Lower House were more vehement in their expressions to the same
purpose.

These things have been the more largely collected and set down, that we might
see the difference between Parliaments then, and since: For they were so far
from usurping authority to themselves to alter the succession of the Prince in
possession which had Heirs, under color of their power of Election during the
life of the Prince, that they claimed not a right to constitute an Heir or
Successor unto him that had Children of his own. Even as in the time of Henry
the Eight, they had (at his motion) settled the Crown sometimes upon the issue
by one wife, and sometimes upon another; and at last left it to such as he
should give it by his last Will and Testament. These Parliaments of Q Elizabeth
consisting then of Papists chiefly, might more justly then now have suspected
an aversness from the Religion professed or established, fol. 16.
especially in Fundamentals. But on the other hand (says my Author) she was
much troubled at the impatience of some Ministers of the Word, who chose rather
to forerun then expect Laws, and began to sow abroad the Doctrine of the Gospel
more freely, first in private houses, then in Churches; and the people greedy
of novelty, began to flock unto them in great numbers: It might have been
objected, that she was a Woman, and so unfit to be acknowledged Head of the
Church; which authority had been in the time of her Father settled upon the
Imperial Crown of this Realm; A thing scoffed at as well by them which seemed
more strictly zealous, as by the Papists themselves: And they might also, and
with more right have insisted upon an Act of Parliament, whereby she stood
disabled from the Government, and that as one declared illegitimate, and whose
Mother had been condemned and executed for Adultery, Even by an Act of a
Parliament consisting of King, Lords and Commons, and not made by a piece of a
piece of a Parliament only. Camb. Annal. fol. 18.
Whereupon (says my Author) some seditious persons afterward took occasion
thereby to attempt dangerous matters against her, as being not lawful Queen,
albeit the English Laws have long since pronounced, that the Crown once worn
quite takes away all defects whatsoever. And as this unrepealing of that Act,
and this Maxim of the Law, was then imputed to Bacons wisdom, (on whom as an
Oracle of the Law the Queen wholly relied in such matters) so (for further
satisfaction of men's minds concerning the undoubted obedience which is due to
the Possessor, in questions of like kind) I shall set down the determination
of him, who by Lawyers themselves is accounted an Oracle of the Law since,
namely my Lord Cook, who in the 3. part of his Institutes, f. 6, 7. in the
Title of Treason, expounding the words of Nre Seignior le Roy, says, that by le
Roy is to be understood a King regnant, and not of one that has but the name
of a King. And then also he alleadges the instance of Q. Mary, on whom, as
having indeed the sovereign power, the word le Roy was appropriate, although
she were a woman, and her Husband at the same time styled King of England.
Afterward he quotes in the margent the Statute of 11 Henry 7. enacting, That
none shall be condemned for any thing done in obedience to the present King or
Sovereign, (for so the words of the Statute are, King or Sovereign;) He further
says, This Act is to be understood of a King in possession of the Crown and
Kingdom: For if there be a King regnant in possession, although he be Rex de
facto, and non de jure, yet is he Seignior le Roy within the purview of this
Statute; and the other that has right, and is out of possession, is not within
this Act. Nay, if Treason be committed against a King de facto, and non de
jure, and after the King de jure comes to the Crown, he shall punish the
Treason done to the King de facto and a Pardon granted by a King de jure, that
is not also de facto, is void. By all which it will appear, that the Law
directs our fidelity to Nre Seignior, our Sovereign Lord; not confining it to
the style and title of le Roy or King, to whom it is only due, as being
actually Nre Roy, our Sovereign Lord the King. And indeed it would have seemed
strange, if what by the Law is due to inferior powers, (as Lords of Manors, or
the like) should have been denied to the chief: For in that case, the exception
of a Disseisor against the right Heir, is not available to abate any Service or
Acknowledgment which ought to come from a Tenant or Homager.

Having thus (Sir) as shortly as I could, cleared my way of some most material
doubts, I shall now crave your patience to peruse the following Letter;
beseeching God to direct and bless you in the settling of the peace and good of
these Nations. Which is the daily prayer of

SIR, Your most affectionate Friend and Servant.

SIR,
YOu may please to remember, that upon some late discourses which passed
between us concerning some things relating to the present establishment in our
Government, and of that question of Hereditary or Elective succession; I did
then trouble you with the relation of my opinion therein, and give you such
reasons and arguments as did then occur, for the establishment of both: And
which might serve by way of answer to those ordinary objections made to the
contrary, which in malicious Pamphlets or otherwise were vulgarly spread
abroad, both to disaffect the people, and to breed a distaste and jealousy
both in Parliament and Army against the Protector and his settlement and
proceedings. But having now since had time more seriously to consider of the
nature and consequences of the thing, both as it is in it self, and as it does
relate to the constitution of these Nations, and the present state of public
affairs therein settled, I found my self on all hands so thoroughly satisfied
with the inconveniences that would accompany Election, and with the fallacies
of all those specious arguments usually given for it, that I conceived it lay
upon me as a duty, as well for your own farther satisfaction, as for that
satisfaction you might herein give to others, both in the House and Army, to
give unto you a more full and regular account of my conceptions herein: To the
end that the prejudices of all unbiassed people may be herewith so far
satisfied, that through murmr and ingratitude we do not again provoke God to
desist in that course of establishment he has now put us, and suffer us again
to relapse into our former way of division and disorder; whilst, at once, we
should show our selves as well unjust and ungrateful toward him, as toward
that his Minister whom he has made so highly instrumental in so great a mercy.

So far as this design of Election savours of injustice and ingratitude toward
our present Superior, I shall desire you (Sir) first to consider, that as
ambition and covetousness are vices to all men more or less incident, so in
those or such like alterations of State as have happened to us, it cannot be
expected that the acquisitions of the prevailing party, either for honor or
riches, can be so equally or in such sort shared as to find general
satisfaction. For as each one is then ready to set the highest rate he can on
his own deserts and endeavors in the Common cause, even so must he
consequently as much repine at the portions of others above him, and which are
greater then his own, as to be thereby prompted to find out and promote all the
ways he can both for abating from them, and for reducing them to an equality
with himself: And if this cannot be effected, then at least to abridge them of
continuance herein, that he also, as in right of election, may have his turn in
those honors and estates which are highest. And this is also to be expected
from such as have for a long time together made to themselves a way of trade
and gain by means of that supreme and uncontrollable power and trust they then
executed: when now being debarred of the perpetuity of their misused power,
they are busy to vent abroad their angry and revengeful declamations as well
against his power that has done it, as his continuance therein; and to make it
take the better, to palliate it with the show of public good.

They say, that since all in the late engagement have run equal hazard, and
have jointly adventured their lives and fortunes, why should any one person or
family be suffered to ingross all the prize to themselves? That the Cause they
undertook was that which was common, and for the good of the whole people, and
to render them happy, not the single advantage and preferment of any one man or
his posterity. And if any one man should claim advantage or preferment above
the rest, as having been (for his part) most eminent and active in the
prosecution and danger thereof, yet why his son or posterity, who (perhaps)
were not all, or very little meritorious therein? Will not the same justice and
reason of eminent desert that preferred the Father to others of less desert
then him, claim precedence for other persons of more present deserts and hopes
before these also? Mark the dispensations of Providence and Nature; since they
entail not Virtue and Wisdom to a Family, what is it but on purpose to advise
us to a discreet liberty of choosing him that is best out of all, and not
servilely to subject our selves to such hazards and inconveniences as may
accompany any one? In such sort as sometimes a person notoriously wicked, and
sometimes (to the heightening of our woe) a Child shall be left to rule over
us. That it is the strongest allurement to undertake acts of Tyranny and
Injustice; since now they know they cannot be amoved, be they what they will:
Nor will they at all study the content and satisfaction of the people, since
they know they came in, and can continue therein without them. Whereas he that
considers that his election comes from, and is made by the people, will
probably, as in gratitude and kindness to them, study all ways to please and
oblige them

With these and such like discourses and arguments I find the ambitious heads
of some persons (disaffected to the present Government, or indeed to any
Government ar all) have of late sought, not only to estrange the mind of both
Parliament and Army one toward another, but to spread an universal jealousy
and disgust against him that is now our higher Power: That so as under the
odium and suspicion of that arbitrary Government which may be acted by one
person, themselves may, more certainly, and in greater numbers, both at
Committees and elsewhere, by ve^tue of the glorious title and countenance of a
Parliament, still retain to themselves an unlimited power to settle and dispose
of the Liberties and fortunes of others as they shall see good. And although,
for the present there may not be so much fear of impression upon a just
consideration of the approved moderation and discipline of the whole Army (the
like whereunto I may confidently say no story can make instance in) yet,
considering them as mortal in their particular members, and how that hereafter
the hope of succession (a contrivance purposely brought in to engage and
disaffect some of them) may work upon more ambitious and covetous heads, I have
thought good to offer these Considerations following, as highly considerable,
both in respect of Justice and gratitude to the person now in possession, and
also in reference to the future good and tranquillity of the three Nations.

First, I say, that in this great change in the face of public affairs which
has happened and been brought about, all that have been active have not run
equal hazards. For, as it is apparent that the Soldier has run more hazard
then others; so, amongst them again, although it be true, that as to the shock
of a battle, the common Soldier is in equal or greater peril of his life,
then his Captain or Colonel, yet since in the defeat of an Army, it is much
the lesser patt that perish in the field; but the rest coming to be made
prisoners, and so left to the usage of the Conqueror, it is not then to be
thought but that the leader and Commander is more in danger of severe and
exemplary punishment then the other. Besides which, in all Proclamations of
pardon, which are the usual forerunners of open war or set battles, an
offer of indemnity and grace uses to be made as to the body and ordinary sort
of the adverse party and army, and only some few, and it may be but the
General himself to stand excepted. And therefore I would desire those that be
now Commanders in this present army to lay these things to heart, and to
measure the case of their present General by that Gospel rule of do as thou
would be done unto. Do they not really believe that in case the King had
prevailed, themselves should have undergone higher Censure and Punishment then
those of inferior rank that served under them? and that, not only as having
greater fortunes then them to lose, but also as having been more eminent and
active against him then they. And do they not farther believe that their
present General, as having most of all been eminent and forward in this whole
enterprise, was not thereupon, proportionably in greatest danger of all?
Therefore if they think it reasonable that those states and honors which by
means, and as in reward of their public employment are come into their hands,
should now remain as hereditary to their posterity, in like manner as they did
to others before, they must, upon the same rule of equity determine that the
like is most justly due to the Protector and his family also. If any of them by
means of his own military and public employment, have increased his estate or
degree so far as to be brought up to the rank and title of Esquire, will he be
content that nothing of this shall descend to his son? Or if he have gotten
the propriety of some Manor, and through that the jurisdiction and Honor
which belongs to a Lord thereof, will they be content to exercise and enjoy all this but during life only, and then suffer both the acquired estate and
Lordship to rest at the dispose of the Tenants, or those that have served under
him? whereby these, as renouncing that their own former and proper relations
and conditions of Tenancy and Obedience, should now take upon them to dispose,
as they think good of the heir; and to share and distribute, as they please,
all that belonged to the Father? And all this upon allegation it was a joint
and public cause which they all undertook, and that these honors and
Revenews being parcels of, and belonging unto that Commonwealth, for which they
served, there was no reason that one should engross and appropriate that for
which all had run like hazard and service: If they think this Levelling plea
fit in this case to take place, there will then indeed be some equality though
little discretion. But if they on their parts, like not to be reduced to this
condition, but do rather judge it reasonable that since that Commonwealth, for
whose sake and safety they have undertaken all this pains and hazard, has
belonging unto it, and to the necessary support and management thereof diverse
hereditary Officers, preferments, and Revenues, it is but just that those
persons that have been most eminently faithful and active above others in the
support of it and them, should by good equity be estated in those places and
powers which are of greatest trust and benefit. For if this plea be not good,
there are examples and presidents enough to be fetched out of foreign parts both
for levelling of Gentry and Nobility, and also to make them mortal with the
parent, and to depend on the arbitrary disposal of others. But if they would
not, for their parts, have it well taken to have alterations purposely devised
and set on foot to take from them and theirs what they had so highly deserved,
so can they not but judge it as hard and unequal usage toward others. For, did
any of them ever hear or read that the Sovereignty of this place was ever
elective? If not, do they indeed think that this man that now has it, is, for
his part, so much the worst and most undeserving of any that ever yet ruled,
that, for his exemplary infamy and disgrace, a particular law must be brought
in to the prejudice of his posterity? I would fain demand of any of them that
are fathers of children; Was not the honor and advancement of their house one
great motive to this undertaking? Did they not beforehand know, that if they
had been overcome, the infamy and loss accompanying Traitors and Treason (ever
imputed to the weaker side) would have light on their posterity as much or more
then themselves? And therefore since these their children (especially of such
as have been eminent) have run their shares in the hazard of that shame and
loss which did attend the success, and the greatest share too in the perpetuity
thereof; they cannot therefore but conclude, that not only their own, but the
race of those also that are above them, must, by good right, claim to be
estated and settled in all such hereditary Offices as their father stood seized
of, in reward or acknowledgment of their past service. There can be no man so
weak of judgment or experience, but may easily conceive there would have been a
more high measure of contempt and punishment inflicted on the posterity of the
Protector then of any other, in case he had been overcome: Nor surely can any
be so devoid of reason or conscience, as not to determine that by good
consequence they do thereupon deserve also to be continued in the highest
preferment that does belong to that Commonwealth whose cause they maintained,
and for whose safety they were put into such hazard.

But to come yet nearer to them in their Proposals for Equality: Do they think
sit indeed, that every person and every family engaged in this Cause, should
enjoy an arithmetical proportion of power and advantage with that of their
superiors, both in electing and being elected? Why, then must the poorest
Cottager and Mechanic of all come in with their equal voice to choose, and
also with his equal turn for being chosen, without any put-off for want of
birth or breeding, or other personal endowment or fitting qualification which
was not at his hand to be expected But if they cannot think it possible that
this way could afford turns enough for the hundredth family in a Kingdom that have
engaged; nor do think it farther necessary to erect an Heralds Office to
register all that first ventured and acted in that Cause, with their several
discents and pedigrees; then do they proceed partially according to their own
rule, making an unequal choice amongst those that have equally engaged: Because
equality of honor and preferment being due to that first equality of desert,
and engagement in the Father only, how can it be forfeited by any accidental
inferiority or impediment in the Son happening since? Will they wave this
supposition of equal engagement and claim due unto all Families, and confine
both the Electors and Elected unto some rank or order of men, and so by an
exact pair of Sizers cut a Nation into two equalities; one that shall be
equally and altogether incapable of having voice or share in the Government,
and the other of being constantly and equally capable of both (as in all
elective Monarchies is practiced) then by the same rule of justice that they
observe a distance, and exclude those below from having an equality with them
in some places of command or profit; he that is uppermost of all, may, as I
said, exclude them again in that which is highest. For it may well be presumed,
that he is as much above them of the highest rank of equality, as they again
are above those that are below. If we look to the examples of Germany and
Poland (the two only places where there is a sovereign Magistrate elected with
any competent power) we shall find that Germany has scarcely made any choice
but out of their four great Families of Franconia, Swevia, Bavaria, and
Austria, still making choice of one of those Dukes for Emperor; which they did
not neither, till there was a failer in the family of Charles the Great, which
was above them all. And as for Poland, their Stories tell us, That they have
had Forty persons successively Reigning of one and the same Family: the like
whereunto cannot be said of any hereditary Monarchy that I know of.

And, Sir, if you would be satisfied with presidents as well as Reason, for
this hereditary succession amongst our selves, you shall find it adjusted even
from the Founders and Originals of our English Nation. For did not those Armies
of the Saxons that had helped the people of this Land against their Enemies,
think it afterward reasonable, that since themselves had shared in most of the
great places of Trust and Command, and that also in the same way of approbation
and hereditary right they found them possessed by others before, so also to
settle their Generals and their Heirs in that place and degree of power which
was highest of all? and this they did, although in their own Nation that Office
did then pass by Election. And it will be also found that both Dane and Norman
coming with their Armies afterward, did, upon their success, settle themselves
and their Chieftains in like manner.

If we look abroad we shall find, Sir, that as these Saxons did in England, so
the Francks (another people of Germany) did also settle their Leaders in the
Kingdom of France; and although they had called themselves Francks, as
impatient of the subjection of any other, yet did they most willingly submit to
the Head of their own party. And mark those several lines of Kings that have
therein swayed, and you will find that the several Families of Meroveus,
Charles the Great, and of Capet, were such as by their own policy and prowess,
and by the help of a powerful party had bin advanced from the degree of
Subjects to become absolute Kings, upon the expulsion of those that were their
former Masters, and had the Title. Nay, look to Italy, Spain, France, Germany,
Poland, Hungary, and all the world over, and you shall still find, that in all
those State-alterations that have been made by a prevailing party, either
domestic or foraign, the Head and Leader of that party has still had the
Diadem, or chief place of Authority settled on him and his Family. Neither
Goths, Vandals, Lombards, Huns, or any people whatever but acted accordingly:
and however they were Nations most fond of the name of Liberty, as it is
observed that all Northern people are, and might also be otherwise governed at
home; yet, in this case, they still held it equitable, that since themselves
had every one, by the conduct of their Chieftain, bettered his Fortunes, in
possession of the Inheritances of persons of inferior Ranks, so proportionally
should their General be settled in that which was highest. And as the examples
of Republics, or of elective Monarchies have been few, and also
inconsiderable, either for eminence or durance, in comparison of Monarchies,
and those hereditary (which in most places has always so continued without
alteration, whereas no one place that has been Republic or Elective, but what
has been longer and more eminent otherways) so is it farther observable, That
when Greeks, Romans, Germans, Poles, or any other have erected Commonwealths,
or made their Princes elective, it has never been done after a Civil contest,
and where one party has gotten the better of the other by way of conquest, but
was still done in peace, and by an unanimous consent of the whole Nation, and
when there was no alteration of private men's Fortunes and conditions; and where
also there was a failer in the Line of their last conquering Prince: at which
time it is not to be supposed, that the Nobles or Senators would in their
parity one to another, be content to submit to the constant Regiment of any
third person and family amongst themselves. For so in Greece they set up their
Commonwealths, when the Heraclidae, (that race of Kings amongst them that
descended from their famous Warrior and defender Hercules) became extinct. And
so they did in Germany and Poland, upon failer of the Lines of Charlemain and
Lechus. Or else (as in Rome) where the whole people did join in that
discontent, and in seclusion of their Kings, and had no precedent Civil war
thereabouts, or about the exercise of the Civil power. For had it so been,
that side that had under a Caesar been victorious, and thereupon seated
themselves and families in the honors and possessions of the adverse party,
would certainly, in honor and gratitude, have made him and his issue
Imperatores in the Civil State, who had all that while been Imperatores in the
Field. And if we look to our Neighbors of the Low Countries (a People that our
Nation has no reason to reckon as grateful to their Protectors) yet we shall
find that they having in their Union against their King the King of Spain,
been victorious through the conduct and assistance of the Prince of Orange,
have thereupon confirmed unto the same Family the chief Office of Honor and
Command heretofore executed among them: Under which, as they have hithetto
thriven, so is it highly probable that the seclusion thereof, may prove the
seclusion of all farther peace and happiness from that people,

And now, Sir, after all this travail in foraign Stories, to return home, and
home to your self too, let me appeal to you as a Member of a Parliament of
England; Did you ever read of any Parliament that did not settle the Government
on the posterity of him that was possessed, and whose Writs they obeyed in
their Summons? And therefore, Sir, since there is no competent example to be
fetched herein out of any foraign Story, and since no one sort of people at any
time inhabiting or possessing this Land, did ever in any age attempt to make
this Government elective; such a thing to be at this time attempted, and
toward such an one that has in particular so well deserved, will seem a thing
most of all unreasonable, as well as ungrateful.

When I have said so much to you (Sir) on the behalf of the General, to serve
as an Anti-Memento against the insinuations of such as would have the Army
believe that the power and settlement of him and his family would prove an
unsetling of them: I shall now on the contrary desire you to consider how the
establishment of this one person and his family will be, under God, the most
necessary and likely way to draw on their securities also; and that, even from
the aforesaid arguments of most prime and principal engagement of the same
cause. For since he and his have herein already so far adventured, as to be
most of all incapable of reconcilement and forgiveness, they may then be most
sure that both he and his in order to their own defense and security, (which is
no way else to be had but by the steady assistance of the Army) will be most
intent and studious of all and every one of their several preferments and good
wills, in such sort as not to make any the least alteration amongst them
without necessary and just cause. Whereas another person or family that may
hereafter be elected, and it may be contrary to their interest and liking,
cannot be presumed to carry so ready and great a respect toward them and
theirs, as experience does warrant this man to have done. For if the power of
election shall rest in such men as are not members of the Army, it is then
likely, out of that enmity which usually passes toward martial men, from such
as are not of like quality or descent, all their former services may come to be
forgotten, and themselves put off with contempt, as being now of no further
use. And farther, it may be such an one shall be chosen as has not been at
all, or very little active in the same Cause with them; in which case their
danger will also increase through that greater likelihood of his compliance
with the adverse party: For how easy a matter may it be for such an one to be
taken into favor there, and for some eminent breach of trust have such high
dignity and reward promised and settled upon him and his, as may by far
countervail that momentany title which he now holds? The which can never be
feared from him that is of the same quality and engagement with themselves, and
that is hereditarily fixed in this place; who being at the height already, and
so settled, nothing can be offered him valuable to his resignation. And having
so far spoken of these things as they carry a more particular concern to the
Army, in answer to those that would disaffect them from their own General; I
shall now answer those arguments whereby they endeavor to disaffect the whole
Nation against the present Settlement, under the pretense of the good of the
Commonwealth.

You are hereupon, Sir, desired to consider, That when you discover in any men
more then ordinary pretensions of zeal to the public good, and for
advancement of the Liberties of the people; and, on the contrary, as strong
invectives against Tyranny and Arbitrary government; and do withal find them
offering and giving in strange proposals for the establishment of the one, and
the prevention of the other, you may then, I say, be sure that that party from
whom all this proceeds is such an one as mislikes his present condition; and,
for the amendment of his fortune, does either expect to be bribed by preferment
from making any disturbance; or else he hopes, that, from the new shuffling of
affairs in the alteration of State, he may have a better game dealt him then
before. In the mean time all modest and judicious men do look upon mankind
under Government, as in all other his worldly conditions, still subject and
liable to many mischiefs and inconveniences. And therefore although each sort
of settled Government carry with it self a certain benefit, even as Government;
and that Monarchy and hereditary Monarchy, as the most settled form, is most
preferrible to the rest, in respect of Divine appointment and institution, and
of political practice and accommodation; yet, to suppose that any thing,
submitted to the managery and accidents of humane frailty, can be thereupon
found otherwise then liable to adverse accidents, beyond the cure of any
mortal contrivance, will (as I said) argue an ambitious arrogance in the
proposer, and also a credulous folly in the receiver. Besides, when I find God
both punishing and threatening to punish people by sending such Princes as they
deserve, what does this invention of Election but look like a contrivance to
defeat the decrees of Heaven in either of those ways of punishment, by a Child
or an evil Prince? and what do they deserve, that take this course either in
distrust of Gods providence, or in prevention of their own punishment, but to
find a remedy worse then the disease, and to be liable to certain evils, to
avoid contingent ones? For, let us suppose our selves even in the worst of
these chances, either fallen under an evil or a childish heir, and yet we shall
herein find it equal with that which is Elective. For, first, if a Child be
left to succeed, then is it perfectly in the same condition; because of that
person who is elected to rule in his stead, as his Protector and guardian. And
this apparent advantage is then also usually found, that being done by the
Father, who had more interest in the good of the public then any other, is
not only done without danger of Civil war, but with due and unbyassed respect
to the sufficiency of the person. In which case also the highest person and
nearest of blood, is commonly chosen. Whereupon, by reason of his native high
quality, the Subjects pay their obedience more readily then they would to a new
raised person: And then, he and his Family having greater and more certain
interest in the Commonwealth then any other, will, in that respect, be more
careful to advance the good thereof then any other also.

As for that inconvenience, That a wicked Son may be heir to the Crown, and so
leave a Kingdom necessarily subjected to such a Ruler; whereas in elective
Monarchies there is a liberty to choose the most virtuous and fit person out of
any family: It might be hereunto first answered, that in case of apparent
unfitness in the elder, the Father (who can better judge thereof then others)
will doubtless leave the Kingdom to some other son more fit, or else appoint
such as Tutors and Guides over him, that his Kingdom and Family (things to be
supposed of more concern to him then any else) shall not be hazarded by any of
his vices or indiscretion: and there are not wanting presidents of this kind.
But, to affirm that this course of Election is hereby made a constant way of
prevention of all those mischiefs that may come from the hands of evil
Governors, is a beging of the question, upon these and like suppositions. As
first, That each person has his abilities, inclinations, and moral habits so
apparent, as not to endanger those that are to make use of him, through
dissimulation. The next is, that all and each one of the Electors (to make it a
free and discreet choice) are not only endued with an infallibility for the
discovery of good and bad in the general, but also can distinguish and choose
according to such particular virtuous habits as are most fit for him that is to
execute the place of Governor in chief; and this as knowingly as the Carpenter
can by sight tell the nature and kind of that wood he is to make use of. Next,
and beyond this again, it must be presumed that, besides this knowledge, there
must be in all and each of the Electors so much conscience and integrity
adjoined, as to cause them constantly to choose each person for public regard
sake only, and not according to any particular relation, or private liking or
interest. Now since upon the failing of any one of these surmises, it is
apparent that the constancy of their promised benefit must fail also, so much
more upon the failing and uncertainty of all of them, (as is most evident they
do) there can nothing of certainty be expected from this their promised
benefit, as every man in his own judgment may presently conclude. For first,
there is nothing that falls out more common within our notice, then the daily
practice of the art of dissimulation; even so, that those that have highest
design and intention to gain to themselves any advantage by the overreaching
of others, are thereby also rendered the most studious and able proficients
therein, and this most especially where ambition bears sway; for as then the
aim is higher, so is this humor usually incident to persons of more then
ordinary abilities: The which cannot again but tell them, that as all men do
submit to Government but as out of necessity, and that since we cannot
absolutely avoid the being under the government of some, and so consequently of
being sometimes and in some things restrained of our wills, (to the end that
others that would else in this time of general liberty injure us, may thereupon
be restrained also) it comes therefore to pass that those that are most
desirous and like to prevail in the obtaining of places of supreme power and
command, do, for acceptance and general approbation sake, frame their outward
behavior in compliance to this humor: They not only put on a face of
sobriety, meekness and clemency, whereby vulgarly to please, but more
particularly to ingratiate with the Electors themselves, (who they know would
have been absolutely governing still, had it not been for the fear of others)
They make semblance to each party and person amongst them of a great sympathy
and liking they have to them in their several ways and opinions, in such sort
as in effect to persuade them, that to choose him to be their chief Ruler, is
but the same as to rule in chief themselves by his means. Even as Marius and
Silla, as they severally thought them most powerful to set them up in supreme
authority, so did they severally court and comply with the humors of the people
or Nobility; and during the time that the more popular part did bear sway, some
in that state, the better to ingratiate themselves and obtain their election,
have renounced their noble birth and quality, and caused themselves to be
adopted by some inferior person. So that, in a word, as every man is to the
world a dissembler in respect of his inward inclinations and faults, so from
men of the highest aims are practices of this kind to be most expected.
Whereupon it must fall out that he that can ( Tiberius-like) most dissemble,
shall be most sure of this honor: From whence it comes to pass, that it is
ordinarily a peoples happiness to be deceived in the qualities of the party.
For the vulgar sort choosing according to meekness and softness of spirit only,
are ready to conclude, that he governs all best, that governs all least:
whereas the Electors again, being divided by factions amongst themselves, would
have their opposites to be by him governed too much, and themselves not at all.
Whereupon it will appear, that this fancied benefit leaves us but at as great
or greater uncertainty then we were before; until they can prove that the art
of dissimulation and the art of Regiment proceed from the same ability, and do
always accompany one another in the same person. And if we look to our own
Story, it was certainly a happiness to those that then lived, that by the right
of descent they stood obliged to accept of Henry the fifth; one that neither
for his virtuous life, or any other apparent behavior, was so likely else to
have been elected, as was Henry the sixth his son, being a Prince of more meek
and pious behavior. So hard a thing it is to discover and distinguish between
those endowments and virtues, which are most proper to complete a good man and
a good Prince. For he that is most accomplished in his Ethics, may be as far
to seek in his Politics. Of which we have yet a more fresh instance in the
persons and reigns of Richard the 3. and that of our late King Charles. When
were the people in greater fear of severe usage, then at the entrance of the
one; or did express greater joy and expectation, then at the entrance of the
other? insomuch as I believe that there is scarce any one even of those that
have most opposed him, but had he been then free to choose, would have given
his voice for him. And yet it has pleased God so far to deceive humane
judgment and expectation, as to cause these Nations to undergo the greatest
share of Civil calamities and changes in the time of this last: whereas in the
time of the other the people enjoyed a continual security and quiet; and during
that shorter time he did reign, there were yet more good laws made then in the
reign of any Prince besides. Nay, I think I may boldly say, that upon the
examination of our own Chronicles, or any else, it will be found that those
persons that people have received or elected as their greatest darlings, have
in their governments proved to them most fatal; and, on the contrary, such as
they have been most afraid of, and have submitted unto only as out of sense of
duty, have proved most fortunate: As it were on purpose to instruct and advise
us, that the most high God and disposer of Kings and Kingdoms, will, as he sees
good, make them instrumental for infliction of his wrath, or of his blessing to
any people; and, by that usual deception of ours, in the judging of such as be
either good or bad, does thereby teach us, neither to trust in these things to
the arm of flesh and our own judgment and contrivances, nor to cast so much
distrust toward him and his care of us, as to refuse those persons he has by
his providence, and usual way of dispensation in that kind, set over us. For as
he did never set up any government but Monarchy, nor did ever give that, or any
settled office to any person, but he did withal give it to his posterity; so is
it to be left to him alone to find out the means to change the same from family
to family, as he shall really know the deserts both of the one and the other;
and not leave it to us to contrive and set up elective Monarchies upon any such
fond suppositions. For if such a consideration had been valuable to have made
places of supreme trust and power elective, then certainly the High Priesthood,
requiring far more personal execution, and that in more divine affairs then
that of King, (who was the first established Officer in Civil affairs) should
not also have been entailed to a single family. In which kind notwithstanding
it was still settled, and so to continue, till God by himself or by his
Vicegerent saw just cause for alteration thereof. In which case as there were
others ready still to supply those defects which childhood or other
insufficiency might occasionally make in the high Priest hood, so may there
be in the Civil Magistracy also, without running into danger of civil war
through the abdication of a family of known desert, and still be but at the
same hazard for goodness or sufficiency in the choice of another.

If we appeal from discourse and argument to matter of experience and practice,
in this question of the benefit of Election, we shall also find things to fall
out quite contrary to their imagination and promises; and that, upon
examination of foreign stories, and comparing the virtues and good government
of such as have ruled in places elective, with the virtues and good rule of
such as reigned in places heredit^ry; we shall truly find the people in a much
happier condition under the last then under the first. For where shall we pick
out any instance for a succession of Princes, so notoriously wicked, and in so
great a number, as was in the Roman Empire after the Soldiery and Senate would
there take upon them to make that Government elective, and neglect that more
direct line of succession and that hereditary right which belonged to the issue
of their brave and victorious Chieftain Caesar? What think we of Caligula,
Nero, Otho, Vitellius, Caracalla, Heliogabalus, and other unmatchable examples
both for ill life and ill government? And when we have pitched upon the best of
them, it will not be any encouraging example for Christians to set up their
Governor by election, since on their score we may justly lay the greatest part
of those most bloody persecutions made against them: which until the time of
Constantine the Great, who, with his Christianity, did again establish an
hereditary succession, and so somewhat more increase and settle the glory of
that Empire, the poor Christians found little joy or intermission. So easy and
usual a thing it is for dissimulation, force or bribery to prevail in this kind.

And if you will employ your thoughts upon the collection of such Princes as
have been highly illustrious and eminent either in sacred or profane story, I
do not think you will find any one that came in by election only, (in sacred
story I am sure you will not) that deserves to be put either in the first or
second rate. No, those Princes that were so glorious in conquests as to
establish the three first Monarchies of the world, were all of them such as
were hereditary: Nay, that which we call the fourth Monarchy, (because it was
longest a Monarchy, and under that government it was longest, and had under it
both rise and perfection, being from the Creation but 480 years a Commonwealth)
does owe unto hereditary Monarchy its chief and fundamental laws, and also that
warlike discipline by means whereof it became so great and victorious
afterward. For all which, Sir, there is a reason at hand: Even because the
foundation and achievement of greatness and empire, requiring a foregoing
design and council, and that which is made upon experience also; and requiring
a foregoing stock of Treasure, Navy, and other warlike ammunition and
preparations together with a well disciplined and obedient Amry and lastly,
requiring a good proportion of time for the prosecution and finishing thereof,
it is not to be supposed that the life of any one person can be sufficient both
to continue and perfect things of such length and difficulty: but rather, upon
these considerations, it is to be conceived that every elective Prince will be
discouraged from such attempts; not only because of danger and hardship, but
also because he shall venture and labor for what shall not accrue to his
family, and it may be that the glory and profit of all his works may come to be
enjoyed by such a successor as is his enemy. And so again, in case any such
enterprise should have been set on foot, it is as vain a thing to suppose that
the emulation that does usually attend Princes of this condition (and those
that are best of them too) will let the successor contribute toward the
accomplishment of any work begun by another, but rather to contrive one of his
own, and that contrary also, to the increase of his own glory by the others
disgrace. So that it being probable that his predecessor was not allied to him,
but of another party or faction, those that were Enemies to the other are but
so much the more likely to expect favor and protection, in stead of war and
conquest from him. And it is farther considerable, that it will also require a
good space of time for every new elected Prince to understand the state of his
own affairs; and both to settle them, and secure himself against those of other
parties and factions which he mistrusts, and have opposed him at home, before
he can have time and opportunity to think of, and make provision for conquests
abroad, (which then also must be supposed the more short, for that Princes are
not elected young.) So that we are then only to expect such glorious and great
acts to be achieved by any one such person as a Solomon or an Alexander, when
they have succeeded as heirs to a David or a Philip; who, as well in love and
care to their Kingdoms, as to their posterity that shall enjoy them, have been
so provident and industrious in laying up all sort of provisions, and making
such preparations and beginnings as are unto the accomplishment of so great
works necessary. And it is very observable, that when God has any great and
glorious act or change to make in the world, or in any one Nation, he does then
also not only raise up a new family, like those of Caesar and Pepin, (for the
greater manifestation of his power and appearance) but does also bless the same
with an Augustus or a Charlemain; such a famous heir and successor, as may
serve for completing and finishing the work: To the end that all the glory
might not be appropriate to one neither. In which consideration, Sir, why may
we not presume that as our present Protector has been by his power and
presence set up and made prosperous for some great and glorious end (of which
we have been prudent foundations already laid,) so also that the full
perfection and settlement of the work is to be expected from his heir. And more
apparent hope may we have hereof also, then could at first be conceived of
Henry the 5. lately mentioned; who yet succeeding a father, the first of his
family, and raised by the sword, did make so good use of that establishment and
those preparations he had made at home, that, to the great honor of this
Nation, he became the most renowned Prince of any before or since.

Where it is objected, Sir, that hereditary sovereignty renders men more
inclined to acts of tyranny and oppression, because he is not in fear to be
called to account: It may be answered, that he that fears to be called to
account, will be by so much the more provoked to destroy and oppress those that
he thinks will be most instrumental therein. For, Tyranny being nothing else
but Sovereign revenge upon such as may or have opposed and crossed them; and
Subjects being to be presumed more ready and daring in that kind against him
that was but lately their fellow, and whose anger they fear not (because of
that account he is to make) then against him that is their Prince born, who
thereupon is not so likely to conceive cause of hatred, and so to proceed to
acts of tyranny. Besides, from the very act of Election it self, there must be
cause of discontent and revenge administered to such like Princes; and that,
from all such as have not been of his party, or have opposed, or not so
strongly abetted his claim as he saw fit. Which provocations can never happen
to the other; who, as in hereditary right, comes in without any such
opposition. And it is also to be considered, that a Prince elected for term of
life is as little in fear of being called to account as the other, if he be a
Sovereign Prince: if not, he is (as I said) for that reason most like to
tyrannise and oppress. And we shall therefore find Tyranny to be most cried
out upon by the people under Elective governments, and Insurrection and Civil
war oftenest raised upon that score.

And lastly, whereas it is affirmed, that Princes elected, will, as in requital
of that courtesy, be more kind and loving to the people then such as are
hereditary; for that these, on the other side, may seem more neglectful of
them, as claiming their admittance of right, and not of favor: It may be
answered, that this very thing (if well considered) is also an inconvenience
which follows Election. For, unless they can suppose that any Kingdom has but
one person fit or ambitious enough to stand for this choice, they must then
next suppose, that the party chosen will be so far from being kind or grateful
to such as were not of his party and did not join in his election, as he will
be their enemy. Again it may be asked where they find these elections ever
referred to the people in general, so as to induce him to kindness and
acknowledgment toward them, and not still referred to some few certain
Electors, as in Germany to six, nor but to a few in Poland, the Commons in both
places being wholly excluded? Whereupon when the number of dissenting Electors
shall be taken out of the roll of kindness, it may well on the other side be
concluded, that Election does prompt Princes to be careless of the good of
their people in general, and to carry so partial a respect toward some few
friends and favorites that have helped him to his sovereignty, and can continue
him still in power, as to neglect and despise all the rest. So that equal
justice being not to be expected from him in his public administrations, it
were much better for a Prince to think he holds his power from and under God,
and is to him alone accomptable, then by such like devises to bribe or terrify
him that is to execute the place of a Judge, and so lay a stumbling block for
him that reproves in the gate.

By this time, Sir, I hope I have made good what I affirmed in the beginning,
That all their arguments were but the insinuations of ambitious and factious
heads, clouded under the specious shows of public good and equal justice. For
it plainly appears, that instead of avoidance (as they pretend) their Proposals
would necessarily bring us into slavery and oppression, by making our Princes
(as of course) partial, unjust, and tyrannical. If they be then to seek in what
they most rely upon, what will they answer to those more great and more certain
miseries which are so constantly attendant on the other form? all of which are
so necessarily leading to faction and siding, and to the unsetling of all
estates and conditions, that no man regardful of public peace and content,
and careful to avoid the danger of Civil war, Anarchy and confusion, can
deliberately carry a wish that way. For since there cannot be any Political
Government longer then there is an apparent Sovereignty somewhere abiding; from
whose residence in one, few, or more persons, it comes to be called of this or
that form; what shall we say of this Government, upon the death of the last
elected Prince? If the supreme power be in the Electors, then is it now an
Aristocracie: And why is it not to be feared that they may not proceed to
election at all; but, by a kind of complot, keep it in their own hands? To
think of setting up some other person or order to see them observe due time and
method herein, is again to suppose the sovereignty not in them neither: for if
they may be hindered from doing ill, so also from doing well, or not doing at
all. And then how could the deceased Prince have sovereign power derived from
his election, (supposing they gave it to him during life) if not they, but some
others then had it? If, according to the fancied way of Coordination, the
Sovereignty were partly in the Electors, and partly in the Third Order, then
must both agree in the election, or else it will come to nothing. And this they
will doubtless do in case they be friends and of one interest and opinion, or
else are afraid of each others power. In which case, as Coordination will at
best prove fruitless, because they are as like to comply in an ill choice as a
good, so again, if they be enemies, that Commonwealth must run these two most
certain perils; not only, through their contention, to be deprived of a good
choice, when it is made; but be drawn into the most dangerous condition of
Civil war, as being wholly engaged in two contraty parties. For, do greatness
and sovereign power use to be slighted and unregarded, as that those that have
it should be more ready to resign then increase it? Do men rather chose
subjection, then principality; to be in the condition of beggars for favors,
then be able to do them? Have we not seen a Parliament designing to make
themselves everlasting? and may we not hereafter fear that a Council may do so
too? And therefore it must needs be, that upon the death of every Elected
Prince, the whole State and Government, and every man's fortune therein, must be
left in tottering condition; whilst (during that inter-regnun) Every man may
do what seems good in his own eyes; and so be as in a state of Anarchy. The
which unhappy condition we find attributed to the Israelites before they had
the Scepter hereditarily settled (as was promised) in the Tribe of Judah, but
were subject to the like Chasmes in government. And if any would know how it
can be imagined that every man could be permitted to do what was right in his
own eyes, or be in a state of Anarchy, where there is a standing Law for
direction what to do, and standing Judges and Officers to see it done; and
where, lastly, there is a standing high Court or Council above all. So that
the Israelites having at that time all these, that is, the Law of Moses, the
Priests and Levites, and other ordinary Judges; and having also their Sanhedrim
or great Council of Elders, and prime men of their Tribes, we must therefore
conceive that by every man's doing what seemed good in his own eyes, is not
meant that every individual person did so to every man else; but the heads and
leaders in these several Tribes whereof the Sanhedrim consisted, being divided
amongst themselves by faction, and consequently drawing all those of their
Tribe and party severally after them, it thereupon came to pass that every man
being thus divided from every man, as under these separate associations, they
did every man unto every man, what seemed good in their own eyes. And this
befell them because there was no King or Judge in those days to judge between
blood and blood, and plea and plea; that is, such matters as happened to fall
out between the Elders and great ones; and so too hard in judgment to be
determined in the ordinary Courts, or reconciled in that higher Court either:
since these Elders were both judges and parties therein.

And therefore, Sir, if there be so muce danger of division and Civil war
dependant on Elective principalities (even because they are Elective) what may
we more justly fear to be the event of such things in this Nation; where now,
more then ever, every man stands from every man so much divided in Civil
interest, but much more in matters of Religion? If there were one man Micha
found amongst them, setting up a Teraphim and a Priest to himself, while there
was no King there; what think we of our selves, that have lately had so many
Micha's setting up their several Teraphims in every corner, and that with such
extravagant affectation of dissent from what is established, that they persuade
themselves, that to be heterodox is to be orthodox? Will it not in this case
highly concern us as we love our peace and quiet, to keep constant to one
person and family of most moderate principles, and which is well known to carry
a tender and universal regard to all, and so most likely in good time to bring
us to a happy union again; then, after his decease, to cast the Commonwealth
into the danger of a new storm and shipwreck, by awaking the hopes of all that
be heads and leaders in those several sects and factions that be among us, to
be putting in for themselves, or some great favorer of their party? for if we
find such packing and siding for election of Parliament men, or the like, what
stirs may we look for at the choice of a Protector? Out of which contest and
dispute, suppose we should be so happy as to wind our selves without open War,
and have one person at last chosen and agreed upon by the Major part of the
appointed Electors; and suppose yet farther, that the present Army shall
therein consent too, or else rest quiet; why yet since that person chosen must
himself be of some party or another, and could not therefore come in by a joint
or universal consent, will it not hence come to pass (as beforesaid) that he
being now in power, shall be naturally provoked to acts of punishment and
revenge toward such as have opposed, or have not, to his content and
expectation, taken part with him? Whereupon, all that are of different parties
from him must expect to live as in a state of persecution, or endanger a new
civil War by joining in opposition. So that, if we be not actually broken one
against another, yet advantage will be hereby still offered and increased; and
the whole Nation continually espoused into several feuds and factions, to the
overthrow of all charity and brotherly love. And if, to avoid this mischief,
some way of restraint should be thought upon, by having a third Estate (like
that in Poland) to bear a control over their Kings actions; this, although it
might, at some times, and for a while keep the sore from breaking out, yet
would it but increase the swelling and distemper against a fit opportunity, by
that increase of Opinions which should follow this general freedom and
toleration; as he experience of those many more Religions and Opinions in the
same Poland, then elsewhere, do witness to be the fruits of Elective and much
limited Princes. Which is a course that cannot at all allay the discontents of
those that live under his Government, and stand divided in interest or opinion.
For since he must yet have some power left him to Rule with, he will still be
as subject to be accused, by those that find themselves crossed for having
transcended his limits in that little Trust, as if he had had more. The which
jealousy will be also increased, as well from that insolence which does
usually accompany persons newly preferred, as also, from that degree of
impatience which uses again to be cast toward such as were lately but of
equal condition with us, and are by our selves set up. Whenas, in Princes born,
these things are not only patiently undergone, as out of sense of duty, but are
also more tolerable and mild; as coming from such as were from their Cradles
bred to sway Scepters, and had been accustomed to such like honors and
addresses.

As thus, Sir, Elective and limited Monarchies do nourish qarties and
factions, for want of a common center of Union amongst themselves, so the
generality of the subjects and people do in them live in the highest degree of
servitude. Because those that call themselves the Free Princes and Nobility (as
in Germany, Poland, Denmark, etc.) making it part of their freedom to debarr
their Emperors and Kings from intermedling in their Jurisdictions, or from
hearing the appeals or addresses of their Subjects (which they arbitrarily
govern according to their own private laws, and not after the common law of the
Empire and Kingdom) they must thereupon be by so much the more enslaved, as
their Emperor or King is less powerful. And that which yet makes their case
more hard, is, that since they are also liable to more Taxes then others,
paying not only to the support of their own Lords what they shall think fit,
but also to the support of the Empire and Kingdom upon all public Levies,
they are thereby unreasonably put to maintain a power that cannot protect them.

And from the foregoing grounds it is, found that, as Elective governments may
be observed more short-lived then Hereditary; so also, of those that have or
do continue, there may be a daily lessening and d^clension observed in them;
by suffering several parcels to be taken away by their Neighbors, or else to
stand upon terms of absolute independency; as may be seen by those several
petit States of Italy and elsewhere, cantoned off from the German Empire. For
why should those absolute Princes and Lords, that have their peculiar
Seignories and power, be so much concerned herein as to undergo the charge and
hazard of recovering those Territories and Dominions to a common Sovereignty
only, whereof themselves have so little honor or benefit? and why should the
Emperor or Prince (who holds but for life) endanger or impoverish himself
herein, since he shall still keep on the same rank and title; and have, it may
be, a good sum for his connivance.

And so again, for that very time they do continue, they come to owe their
preservation more to outward occurrences and good luck, then their inward
prudence or policy. As for example, the German Empire is beholding to the Turk,
and to the Christian Princes its Neighbors for their agreement; who, by their
continual fears from abroad, keep them united and in peace at home. And by the
like accident is the Kingdom of Poland often kept from Civil War also: and
also by keeping close to one family; which cannot afford many persons at once,
whereby to make civil disturbance about Election. Besides, the German Empire is
also kept in some agreement by that respect therein given to the Papal Sea.
For the Pope having, by much struggling and policy, pulled down the power of
those Emperors, and by his golden Bull settled it as now it is (having half the
Electors Bishops) has still kept up such a power and reverentiall respect
amongst them, as to awe any one there, from making himself so great and
absolute, as to be again in competition with him for mastery: or, (on the other
side) to suffer the Electors or other Estates to invade or diminish that
greatness and glory left him; least also that honor of his own should abate in
the loss of so honorable a servant. And since the time of Luther it has been
preserved by the policy of the Austrian family; who ever since getting their
sons settled in their life times, have kept it from those distractions which
might accompany new choice.

Another inconvenience attending elective Soveraignties, is decay of public
Revenue, and provisions of all kinds both for war and peace. For how shall it
be thought that those that hold but for his life, should either repair what was
done by another, or attempt the erection of such magnificent works and
foundations, which could not likely be in that time accomplished; and which, in
the doing also, must rob his family of so much in propriety, as that cost would
have come to? So that these things having their reasons apparent, I shall
forbear examples therein, as I have done in many things foregoing, and shall do
in most that follow; fearing also, Sir, that I have already made too great an
assault on your patience, and transcended the allowable bulk of a Letter. But,
Sir, since all men's reading and experience do inform them that money has been
and will be the usual purchaser of preferment, it must be presumed that the
person aiming at this greatness, does intend that the public stock shall again
make good his disbursment. But, may some think, the Princes and Nobles, or
those in power, will look to all exorbitance in this kind. No, Sir, they will
rather encourage it: for they were the persons that were first bribed for his
entrance, and so cannot in justice but see him (at least) repay himself again.
Besides, they being but few, and bearing no great proportion in their own
particulars, toward public levies, may be suspected less careful of what is
done therein, and may also have their good will purchased by part thereof. As
the necessity of compliance with the great ones that holp him in and do support
him, must thus exhaust the public stock, so also the care and thought for
preservation and maintenance of his own family and other dependents, must cause
him to employ that study and endeavor which should be intent to advance the
public stock as his own, to seek to take from it all he can, that it may be so
indeed. So that if we should still make change of families for our Governor,
and pick out of any according as one happened to have a fitter person then
another, it must be supposed that the same sum that would suffice for the
maintenance of one family, would not, by much, be sufficient to afford
proportions to advance and ennoble a great many, in such sort that they may
carry a continual show and rank answerable to that place which was once
executed by their ancestor. And if we think of putting the election and power
of comptroll in more persons (as in the people, in Parliaments, or the like) as
thinking a multitude of suffrages and consents are not so easily purchased; we
might yet be herein mistaken also, since we are informed that Caesar and others
could tell how to bribe whole Commonwealths (or those that bore the name
thereof) both to be elected and kept Dictators, or the like offices: And that
Senators or Parliament Men may be drawn by money, preferment, or other relation
or interest, is but too truly known. If, Sir, you should think fit to choose
but out of some few more Noble families, to avoid the impoverishing of the
common stock by enriching so many little ones, as they do in Germany; then how
will you do to pick out such in England, as now it is, without discontent and
danger too, to arise from those that are secluded? Will you keep to one family,
as they in Poland have done? why, this is yet better. But the best course of
all is to do as they do now in Germany, and as has been ever practiced in
these Nations, to keep not only to one family, but to observe the same order of
descent in this chief place of authority, as is by the law of God and the Land
observed in other families in the inheritance of all things else. Sir, when you
have thus done, you and the rest of the House may then, and not till then, rest
assured that you have answered that great trust reposed in you, The peace and
settlement of these Nations. For to settle us otherwise, were but to unsettle
us by that settlement.

And this, Sir, I may also press upon you as a duty you owe to those you
represent, even the satisfaction of the desires of the people in general,
which I may confidently affirm is strongly inclined to that only form of
Government they have heretofore so long and so happily lived under, And which
upon a just conference with that disparity which is between us and those other
places where Election is practiced, cannot with safety be altered.

For Sir, since we have no such standing rank of Gentry, Nobility, and free
Princes, as in Venice, Poland, Germany, etc. which should hereditarily make up
the body of a standing supreme Council; nor do not now so much as allow of
that ancient right of Peerage in our Parlaments, but have levelled all to the
order of Commons: and since we do not, like other places, cast any such
reverentiall fear toward Pope or any Foraign prince, from whom, as from an
Umpire our differences might receive ready reconciliation; and we being also an
Island, are not like other places, so much in danger of Foraign surprise and
invasion, whereby to be frighted to agreement, in case we should fall out about
the person or the power of the Prince to be elected. It is therefore much more,
on our parts, to be feared, that upon the death of every Protector, a general
jealousy and fear of what shall next happen will amuse and disturb every one,
as not knowing whether they shall continue under the same laws and form of
government they were before. For first, suppose it to be in the interval of
Parliament, and so the chief power and command being in the Council, may they
not by the same power they command them in all other things, forbid the Keepers
of the Great Seal for making out Writs, or the Sheriffs for making Elections?
What likelihood that either will oppose a power in being, and able to reward as
well as protect them; upon fear that a power may arise to punish them, but
cannot do it till they be called, nor be called till themselves shall think
fit? In which case to suppose the Army, such an one as may be then in being,
shall lay aside all consideration of advantages to themselves, likely to be
offered from such a Council as may be also, and on the contrary, to be ready to
compel those that are their legal Superiors to proceed to election, or calling
of a Parliament, is as far unlikely. Or suppose the Protector should die, the
Parliament fitting; why then this being the supreme power, is it not to be
presumed they will take to themselves as much power in matters of government as
other Parliaments have done, and so rescind what was before established as an
impeachment to their perpetuity, even the power of a Protector and his Council?
Now as these confusions and alterations of the Government as now established,
are more to be feared from us then in other places, both for want of practice
in the steering and dividing of our duties amongst such like Coordinate powers,
and for want of one only standing supreme Council to direct, without fear of a
dormant higher power to succeed; so is it much more on our parts to be feared,
that through that siding and intermedling which an Army may hereafter make
between these jurisdictions, both the government may be changed, and the
public peace hazarded. For it being evident, that in all those places where
the Sovereign Magistrate and the person of the highest rank is elective, and so
the Government subject to intervals, there those of the next Order are
hereditarily seized of the Sovereignty as in fee, until they shall again lease
the same out to another for life; and so again, where the Sovereignty is
hereditary in one family, there on the other side those next subordinate
Officers to be employed in the Government are elective and dependent on him: It
must therefore come to pass, that if this Council or Order of men that is to
have power in the interregnum should be elective also, then must that
Government depend upon contingencies; because there may not be enough of them, or
enough rightly chosen to complete such an assembly. Now since with us there is
not (as I said) such a standing Order or Council claiming power by birth, but
it is in some sort necessary and convenient that the Officers of the Army
should be taken in as members both of Council and Parliament, it will follow,
that in case the Council should consist mostly of such, there were no
likelihood that a Parliament should be called. But if the Parliament should
have more or other then those that made up the Council, then is it again to be
feared, that in order to the continuance of their own power, they would cause
both the power of Council and future Protectors to be voted down also. For how
can it be imagined, that in this vicissitude and sliding from one Master to
another, they shall be so equally favored and used by Protector, Parliament
and Council, in their several turns of power, as to stand on all hands so
indifferently engaged to all and each of them, that they shall not cleave to
the one, and hate and despise the other; but shall, to a man, be one day for
the Council against all other, and on the morrow when the Parliament shall sit,
do the like for them? If things do not happen just so, then will one Coordinate
overthrow the other, by their partial and unequal siding; Or that which is yet
worse, by their division hereabout they will involve us into a state of Civil
war. And truly, Sir, although from such an Army, such a Council, and such a
Parliament as we now have, encroachments and justlings on one another are not
to be much feared; yet, Sir, that there may be just ground given to suspect
such events for the future, will be very apparent to him that shall reflect on
those sad consequences which might have been the issue of such high and
turbulent agitations and endeavors as were by some fiery spirits set on foot
in the beginning of this very Parliament. You are not sure, Sir, that the
Protector and the General shall always be the same man, or that he shall be of
equal prudence and reputation with this; so as by his discretion and authority,
all such mischief may be pre^^^ted. And therefore, Sir, since our future peace
and estab^^^^ent ought chiefly to be provided for, I pray think in h^^
uncertain a condition you leave us, if you leave all to depend on election;
and that election to be or not be, to be well and orderly done or ill done, as
the parties therein entrusted shall be faithful and able, or biassed and
ignorant. For it is not enough in such a case to propound things fit to be done
by any, unless there be withal some others appointed to see them do it: the
which also may fail in their trust, and so need others again to see them do
their duties: and then it will come to pass that those that are last trusted
will be chiefly or first trusted, whereas that high tituled officer that was
first trusted will be least trusted, and so come to be lowest of all. And by
this settling of watchmen upon watchmen, you will bring all business to a
stand, whilst those officers that are to act shall have no power to act, and
those that are not to act shall have all.

But since experience does make it manifest, that at last some persons must be
trusted, and that for some time also; in order to reconcile public
differences, how madly does it look to take such a middle course herein, as
shall neither attain the good, nor avoid the evil intended? They that will
trust a man for his life, do run the utmost minute of hazard he has to do it
in; and do then set the gap open again, for Civil combustion about the next
Election, when as his heir may prove as good as another. And they that will not
afford their Prince so much power as to be in all causes, and over all persons
supreme, do not only still want a decider of quarrels amongst themselves, but
do also thereby add such new occasion of quarrels about power as they may
afterward have with him. And therefore since Election cannot assure us of
goodness; nay, since good Princes may change to ill (as Nero that for 5 years
was the best, and afterward the worst of any) it is best to make sure of that
certain benefit of public peace, by keeping close to one family, and by
allowing sufficiency of power, then increase the disease by those remedies of
election of persons, and limitation of his power.

Sir, there was a time indeed when Monarchy and Tyranny, Parlaments and
Liberty were thought to be the same, but the experience of our condition under
that long, long, long, Parliament, a and that little once since; has rectifyed
our judgments, and brought us to look on that Text as Canonical, and on him as
a wise man that said, For the wickedness of a Land many are the Princes
thereof, but by a man of understanding the state thereof is preserved, Prove.
28.2. We do acknowledge that in the multitude of Counselors there is safety,
Prove. 11.14. but we look for no such matter from a multitude of Controlers. So
that Vox populi being now Vox Dei, we hope you will, in your debates of
Government, Ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein,
that we may find rest for our souls, Jer. 6.16. In this Sir, we shall not
contend with you for names, but things. If you will have our Sovereign
Magistrate to be called Protector, we like it well: it is an Office we want,
and do therefore desire he may have that power left him as will enable him to
perform it: suffer him to wear a sword Sir, or else he can neither protect us
nor himself. And if again, you will have our former great Council called by the
Ancient name of Parliament, we pray you also, that the thing may be again
reduced: and made agreeable to the name; let them have freedom to speak their
minds, but not to do them. No more of that Sir. For it is a yoke which our
Fathers never knew of, nor are we able to bear. And therefore as you and the
rest do now represent us, and are to make known our grievances, we do desire
that you would take notice of this as a great one. For you may rest assured
that, were this Nation poled, not one in twenty but would desire their old
Government again.

But it is now time, Sir, to desire something for my self; namely, your pardon
for the tediousness and extravagancie of the passed discourses, and also your
favorable construction of my meaning in them, which was not to find fault with
any thing already done, or to instruct you what to do. No, Sir, as you have
always known me a quiet man under Government, and respectful to my present
Superiors therein; so I beseech you to believe that I am so far from intending
a Censure of any thing this way established, that my drift has been to defend
it against all others; especially that part which is most malign'd, as having
most tendencie toward Monarchy. For, finding (as I said) many Pamphlets of
late thrown abroad to render that Form odious and disadvantagious to the
people, that thereby you might be prejudiced and affrighted from making any
farther settlement that way, I have thereupon presumed it expedient, even for
your own and public satisfaction, that something should be also said on the
other side; that so you might be again brought to some even poize in your
judgments, before you come to determination in this great affair. And
therefore, as they would have had the World believe that you had not respected
the peoples welfare, if you had settled the Protector and his Issue; so have I
endeavored to make it appear, that you cannot do the Nation a better
courtesy then by so doing. The which coming from one so disinteressed as I am
to him and his family by any relation, will the sooner, I hope, find acceptance
as a word spoken in season: Nay farther, Sir, He is one that I never received
courtesy and encouragement from in the least kind; and as for his Children, I
know not the face of one of them. What I have said, Sir, has been that which
in my judgment is most for the general benefit: And has been the sudden issue
of mine own brain, as by the indigestion both of method and matter will be but
too apparent. The Author having nothing to boast of, but that he is

SIR, Your most affectionate Servant.

FINIS.

