THE Second Part OF THE Interest of England, In the Matter of Religion,
Unfolded in a Deliberative Discourse, PROVING, That it is not agreeable to
sound Reason to prefer the Contracted and Dividing Interest of one Party,
before the general Interest of Protestantism, and of the whole Kingdom of
England, in which the Episcopal and Presbyterian Parties may be happily United.

Written by J. C.

LONDON, Printed for G. T. and are to be sold at the Rose and Crown in St Paul's
Churchyard, 1660.

I Entreat the Reader to take notice, That in these Discourses I do not mention
Parties to maintain Division, but to procure Union; That necessity compels me
to use those names of difference, which I heartily wish might be no more
remembered: But whilst disagreeing Parties last, names of difference cannot
cease, and to forbear their use is to little purpose. My business is to take
things as I find them, and to state the Case between the Dissenters, and to
show how far they agree, and how little they differ, for this end, That Parties
(both Name and Thing) might cease for ever.

Moreover, as I use not the name of Presbyterian in way of glorying, so I use
not the name of Prelate or Prelatist in way of reproach, but merely for
distinction sake; and I have warrant for it from the friends of Prelacy, with
whom it is not unusual to mention the name of Prelate in an honorable Sense.

The Second Part of the Interest of England in the Matter of Religion.
THe former Treatise of the Interest of England in the Matter of Religion,
makes known the way of peace, in the reconciling of those two grand Parties,
the Episcopal and Presbyterian, which, if made one, would take in, and carry
along the strength of almost the whole Nation. The whole structure thereof
rests upon these Positions as its adequate Foundation.

That whilst the two forenamed Parties remain divided, both the Protestant
Religion, and the Kingdom of England is divided against it self. That the
Presbyterians cannot be rooted out, nor their Interest swallowed up, whilst
the State of England remains Protestant. That their subversion, if it be
possible to be accomplished, will be very pernicious to the Protestant
Religion, and the Kingdom of England. That the Coalition of both Parties into
one may be effected by an equal accommodation, without repugnancy to their
conscientious Principles on either side, in so much that nothing justifiable by
Religion or sound Reason can put a bar to this desirable Union.
Now for as much as political matters are involved in difficulties and
perplexities, by variety of complicated concernments, all which should be
thoroughly seen, and diligently examined and compared; and because the minds of
men are commonly pre-ingaged, or at least much biased in these matters, and
thereupon are not easily removed from their pre-conceived opinions, I could not
rest satisfied, as having done my part in this healing Work, unless besides a
firm and clear proof of things in general, I endeavor a deeper impression, and
more effectual persuasion, by searching on every side, by pressing up close to
those closest concernments and most obstinate prejudices that oppose
themselves, and by opening the passages, and making the way plain to this
desired Pacification.

It is a grave and weighty saying of the Duke of Rhoan, -- Princes command the
people; and Interest commands the Princes. The knowledge of this Interest is as
much more raised above that of Princes Actions, as they themselves are above
the people. A Prince may deceive himself, the Council may be corrupt, but the
Interest alone never fails: according as it is well or ill understood, it
makes States to live or dye. -- According to this saying it is matter of life
and death political to the Kingdom of England, as it does well or ill
understand its own Interest: In this deliberation two Interests exceeding great
and precious, offer themselves unto us. They are distinct, yet not divided; but
they embrace each other, and they both apparently belong to us, and are
undoubtedly to be owned by us. The one is Religious, the other Civil. The
former is that of the Protestant Religion, and the latter is that of this
Kingdom. Wherefore in this Inquiry, the main and fundamental point of knowledge
lies in discerning the true state of both. Now the true state of any Society
lies in the Universality, or the whole Body, not in any contracting or
sub-dividing part thereof: And the Interest lies in the conservation and
advancement of the Universality.

Hereupon this Question arises, which is the great Case and Question of the
present times,

Whether we should assert the contracted and dividing Interest of one Party,
before the general interest of Protestantism, and of the whole Kingdom of
England, in which the Episcopal and Presbyterian Parties may be happily United.

Be it here observed, That such is the joint stock of both Parties in things of
greatest moment, that by declining extremes on both hands, the Protestant
Religion may be strengthened, with Unity in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline,
among all its professors, and the Kingdom of England, by an inviolable Union
between these comprehensive Parties may flourish in peace and plenty: for those
discords that divide the members and distract the whole body, will cease; and
those common concernments which tend to uphold and increase the Universality,
will be acknowledged and pursued.

To turn aside from this common Interest of the whole body, to those inferior
partial ones, is to set up the trade of Monopolizers, which inevitably brings
this mischief, that a few grow rich by impoverishing the Commonwealth; and
this inconvenience also to them that follow the trade, that they grow rich upon
the sudden, but are not secure, because many are oppressed, and more excluded
from sharing in the benefit. In the present case, if the one Party be the only
exalted Ones, and the other trodden under foot, the damage will redound to the
Protestant cause, and to the Church and Kingdom of England. For whatsoever some
men think, this Church and Kingdom is concerned in the one, as well as in the
other Party. In the same case, though one side should rise suddenly to a great
height, yet their Estate would be more secure and lasting, if they held the way
open and secure to those of the other side, seeing they are willing to close
upon terms just and reasonable.

Moreover, those Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, and Societies of all kinds,
which are of the largest Foundation, are of the greatest potency. Now a
comprehensive Interest, that takes in vast multitudes, is indeed a large
Foundation, and a Society that builds upon it, shall become great and mighty;
but a contracted Interest, that draws all to a fewer number, is a narrow
Foundation; and if it exclude many, that should be taken in, it is too narrow
for the Fabric that should rest upon it. As a large house cannot be built upon
a narrow foundation; so a great Kingdom, (such as is the Kingdom of England,)
and an ample Society, (such as is that of the Protestant Religion,) cannot be
built upon a narrow Interest.

Let it be considered, that the adverse Kingdom, to wit, the Papacy, is ample
and powerful: Should not the Protestant Religion, and the Church of England aim
at enlargement, and lengthen their cords, to take within their line all those
that are entirely affected to them? Then might they send forth much more
numerous Forces of able Champions against the Armies of Antichrist: So should
this National Church become terrible as an Army with Banners.

Besides those reasons for Unity, which concern all Kingdoms and Nations in the
like case, there is one reason peculiar to this Kingdom, or rather to this
Island of (...) Br^ttain, which is a little world apart. It is a ^^^able
saying, which has been taken up. That England is a mighty Arrival, that cannot
dye, except it destroy it self. God has so sea^ed and placed (...) Island,
that nothing but (...) within it self can hurt it. (...) section do not make
(...) Country, and destroy (...) the hope of Foreign Enemies (...) for ever cut
off. Wherefore (...) s be the wisdom of this (...) ^^ther all dividing (...)
^^lish all partial Interests, (...) ^^^mon Interest of England may (...)
exalted.

I am not ignorant that designs of Pacification between disagreeing Parties are
liable to much suspicion, misconstruction, and hard censure; that the attempts
of Reconcilers have commonly proved fruitless, and sometimes matter of
disreputation to themselves: and no marvel that such cross effects should
commonly follow such attempts; for sometimes they are made to reconcile light
and darkness, the Temple of God and Idols. This was the way of a Great One,
even a Prince in Learnings Empire, who would make an accord between the
Augustane Confession and the Council of Trent; and also of a certain Romish
Ecclesiastic, who would make the like accord between the said Council, and the
Articles of the Church of England, than which nothing could be more absurd and
vain; for it could be nothing else but a violent wresting of those Decrees and
Articles to a forced sense, against the propriety of language, and the scope of
the whole matter, and the apparent judgment of both Parties; and so it could
never heal the breach: For if both Parties were drawn to subscribe the same
forms of Confession, but with meanings so far distant from each other, as are
the Doctrines of the Protestant, and Roman Churches, they would not really
advance one step the nearer to peace and concord.

Such designs as these sometimes proceed from lukewarmness or indifferency in
Religion, and an undervaluing of main Truths, together with a contempt of godly
Zeal, as a thing superfluous and impertinent. And sometimes they proceed from
vastness of mind, whereby some through too great a sense of their vast
abilities, assume to themselves a Dictatorship in Religion, to approve or
condemn, admit or reject, according to their own estimation of things; which is
a dangerous kind of ambition, and (as a learned man speaks) is to take up the
Office of an Umpire between God and men. But many times such a design is set on
foot with much craftiness, for the undoing of one of the Parties, as it has
been undertaken by some Romish spirits, for the undermining of the Protestant
Churches. A Divine of chief rank observes the arts and stratagems of some
Popish Preachers, even of those Orders that have been held most implacable,
whereby far otherwise than the accustomed manner, they extenuate the
controversies, and acknowledge that too much rigor has been used in some
points, and in others too little sincerity: yea, some Jesuits went about
making fair promises, yet in the mean time abating no point of the chief
foundations of Papal Authority, which standing firm, they knew that the other
Concessions granted for a time might easily be drawn back, and the opposite
rigors imposed on those that had been taken in the snare by a pretended
yielding to some reformation. Philip Melancthon (as the same Author observes)
being a most Pious and Learned man, and zealous of the Churches peace, at first
whilst he conceived that some Reformation might be hoped for from a General
Council, was free and forward in some points of yielding to the Papists; but
when he found that such a benefit was neither hopeful nor possible, he
testified by his writings how far distant he was from the aim of the
Conciliators.

But the Pacification here propounded is not by aggregating things
inconsistent, nor by devising mongrel ways and opinions, made up out of both
extremes, which can satisfy the consciences of neither Party; but by taking
out of the way such extremes on both sides, as both may well spare and part
with, being such as are acknowledged no part of the Foundation, nor yet of
divine Institution, but mutable, according to times and occasions, and
therefore cannot be of that importance as to break unity amongst brethren, that
agree in the Doctrine of Faith, and the substance of Divine Worship. This
desired Union is grounded upon the Apostles Commandment, and the pursuing
thereof is no other then the urging of St Paul's Doctrine throughout the whole
fourteenth Chapter to the Romans, That none judge or despise another about
things indifferent, or Ceremonious Observances, wherein as several men will
abound in their own sense, so it is meet that every one be persuaded in his own
mind concerning his particular practice, that nothing be done with a doubting
conscience. His MAJESTY'S Wisdom has rightly comprehended this Matter in His
Declaration touching Ecclesiastical Affairs, wherein He says, -- We are the
rather induced to take this upon Us (that is, to give some determination to the
matters in difference) by finding upon a full Conference that We have had with
the Learned men of several persuasions, that the mischiefs under which both
Church and State do at present suffer, do not result from any formed Doctrine
or Conclusion which either Party maintains or avows, but from the passion, and
appetite, and Interest of particular persons, which contract greater prejudice
to each other by those affections, then would naturally arise from their
Opinions. -- In old time there was a partition wall of legal Ceremonies and
Ordinances raised up between Jews and Gentiles; but when the fullness of time
was come, wherein God would make both Jews and Gentiles one in Christ, he was
pleased to take down that partition wall which himself had reared up. In these
latter times there has been a partition wall of man's building, namely,
controverted mutable Rites and forms of Religion, which have kept asunder
Christians of the same Nation, and of the same Reformed Protestant Profession:
Both reason and charity pleads for the removing of these offenses, that
brethren may dwell together in Unity. And to transgress this rule of Charity,
is not only to lay a yoke upon the necks of Christians, but also to lay snares
for their Consciences.

Nor will any defect in the State Ecclesiastical ensue upon the removal of
these matters in controversy: for the points of Doctrine, Worship, and
Discipline acknowledged by both Parties, are a sufficient and ample Foundation
for the edification and peace of the Church to rest upon; for which we cannot
have a fuller Testimony than what is given by His MAJESTY in His aforesaid
Declaration, -- We must for the Honor of all those of either Persuasion, with
whom we have confered, Declare, That the Professions and desires of all for the
advancement of Piety and true Godliness are the same, their Professions of zeal
for the Peace of the Church the same, of affection and duty to Us the same;
they all approve Episcopacy; they all approve a set Form of Liturgy; and they
all disapprove and dislike the sin of Sacrilege, and the alienation of the
revenue of the Church. And if upon these excellent Foundations, in submission
to which there is such an Harmony of Affections, any Superstructure should be
raised to the shaking of these Foundations, and to the contracting and
lessening of the blessed gift of Charity, which is a vital part of Christian
Religion, We shall think Our Self very unfortunate, and even suspect that We
are defective in that administration of Government with which God has
entrusted Us. -- These His Majesty's Words I receive with much veneration; for
they are a Divine Sentence in the Mouth of the King, and they fathom the depth
of this grand business.

It is therefore manifest, as from Reason, so from His Majesty's Testimony,
that those unhappy discords do not result from any formed Doctrine or
Conclusion, that either touches or borders upon the Foundation; and that
excellent Foundations are contained in those points, in submission to which
there is found such an Harmony of Affections; and consequently, that the laying
aside of all the points in controversy, would not cause any defect in the
State Ecclesiastical. What then is the root of these mischiefs of Division? Is
it the perpetual hatred between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the
Serpent? or is it an uncharitable and froward spirit of opposition, by reason
of irritated animosity, and deep suspicion or jealousy? or is it some
temporary carnal Design?

It is first inquired, Whether the root hereof be the perpetual hatred between
the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent?
Nothing is more certain from Scripture and experience, then that a form of the
true Religion may be with a kind of Zeal embraced, and the power thereof hated
and impugned by the same persons. The Scribes and Pharisees were zealous and
exact in the outward forms of the law of Moses, yet their hatred of the power
of that Religion appeared by their obstinate rejecting and persecuting of
Christ, and those that believed on him. Many do embrace a form of the Christian
Verity in the general Doctrines, and in some plausible yet superficial
practice: Nevertheless they cannot abide the genuine and spiritual explication
and close application of the same Verity, leading to the life and power
thereof. Now if this were the true state of the difference, that those of the
one persuasion only did urge the necessity of the New Birth, and of a holy and
circumspect walking in all Christians, and to that end seek the advancement of
such a Ministry as (with blessed Paul) travels in birth, till Christ be formed
in the Hearers, and such as is quick and powerful, entering to the dividing of
the soul and spirit, and discovers the secret rottenness, and destroys the
self-confidence of the deceitful heart, and drives the soul out of self to draw
it to Christ; such a Ministry as is assiduous and instant in the dispensation
of the word by instruction, reproof and comfort, and in all other parts of the
Pastoral duty, that as much as in it lies, it may present every man perfect in
Christ: And if those of the other persuasion account the urging of these things
sever foolishness, peevishness, pride, hypocrisy, affected singularity, and
suppose the way to heaven common and easy, and accordingly seek the
advancement of such a Ministry that is more smooth and plausible then searching
and faithful, more slack and cold in the public dispensation of the Word, and
in private admonition, indulging the peoples corruptions, and generally
temporizing with their carnal spirit; I say, if the case were so between them,
I could proceed no further; for in such a case to propose ways of
Accommodation, were to make proposals of Peace to Parties divided by an
everlasting enmity: but God forbid that the state of the difference should be
so deplorable. We trust that neither the one nor the other have so learned
Christ as to exalt a form of Godliness, and deny the power thereof: And that it
is not or ought not to be so, and that it is on all hands disavowed with
detestation, we take it for a principle or groundwork whereon to bottom our
whole design. The King Declares, That the Professions and desires of all those
of either persuasion, with whom he has conferred, are the same for the
advancement of Piety and true Godliness. Let the joint pursuance of these
professions and desires set both Parties agreed, especially since His Majesty
has thus Declared in these gracious words, -- Our purpose and resolution is,
and shall be, to promote the power of Godliness, to encourage the exercises of
Religion both public and private, and to take care that the Lords Day may be
applied to holy exercises, without unnecessary divertisements, and that
insufficient, negligent, and scandalous Ministers may not be promoted in the
Church. --

Is an uncharitable and froward spirit of opposition, by reason of irritated
animosity, and deep suspicion and jealousy, the root of these discords?
We fear indeed that too much tartness, if not bitterness of spirit, keeps the
Breach open. Differences of long continuance and settled prejudices do choke the
exercise of Charity. And the truth is, formerly the current of occasions ran
along to aggravare these differences, and to exasperate these passions. Let us
now at length take hold of the right means to stop this current of contention.
Remove the occasions, lay aside controverted matters, whereof there will be no
miss in the Church of God: Let forms of Worship and Government be so cut out,
that they may not pinch and gall the consciences of either Party, as it may be
done by men of sober and charitable judgments without any impeachment of such
order and decency, as agrees with the simplicity and spiritual Glory of Gospel
Administrations; so after a while the froward humor that works on both sides,
would spend and lose it self: Yea, I am persuaded that some spirits now
exulcerated through these distempers, would not prove incurable or implacable.
After a little experience of such proper healing remedies, both sides will find
themselves brethren that had mistaken one another, and forsaken their common
Interest.

Most serious thoughts of heart have often led me to contemplate and lament the
peculiar calamity of the Church of God in these Dominions, that from time to
time it has been afflicted with the most unhappy kind of controversies: for
they come not near the Foundation, nevertheless they are very pernicious and
destructive. They consist not so much in speculation as practice, and
particularly their immediate influence is upon the Churches interest, and
inevitably makes a breach in Church-Unity. For Ecclesiastical Offices, and
Church Privileges, and Communion of Worship both in former and latter times,
have been enclosed with such Forms and Rites and other needless rigors, that
the way thereunto was kept shut against many that had received with the heart
that Common Faith which was once given to the Saints. Hence proceeded despising
and judging one another, and deep censures, alienations and separations, which
will undo any Society of whatsoever Profession. The Papists notwithstanding
their great boast of Unity, are much more divided within themselves than any
Protestants from each other; for the rent goes through the main Foundation of
their Faith. With them the Head Cornerstone, or rather the adequate
Foundation, is their Churches infalibility; but where to place this pretended
infalibility, they can by no means agree: for upon the matter one half of them
place it in the Pope, and the other in a General Council. If you ask, How then
does that vast Building hang together? How does that Babylonish Kingdom stand?
Surely they have the skill to make that great point of difference a matter of
speculation more then of practice, and they hold fast two main practical things
which do hold both in one; namely, the Hierarchy, under the Headship of the
Pope of Rome, and the Communion of the Mass. They are all one both in Worship
and Church Communion, and also in the whole body of Ecclesiastics, compacted
by several joints and ligaments under one Papal Head. Thus the children of this
world are wise in their generation; and let the children of Light borrow this
point of Wisdom from them, which is to take care that our different opinions
do not brangle our Church Communion and Ecclesiastical Polity. And in as much
as Protestants have not that Popish way of quick dispatch for all
controversies, which is to acquiesce in the Churches infalibility; but
according to their Principles, they must seek their VVarrant from Scripture, by
the help of the Churches directive, and their own discretive Judgment, the only
way for them to hold themselves in the bond of Peace, is to avoid all
imposition of things unnecessary, in which it is exceeding difficult, or
morally impossible for all sound Protestants to be of the same persuasion.

Let us here take notice of another singular point of Wisdoms, followed by the
Church of Rome in the Council of Trent, which was to shun, as a rock, the
determining of such Doctrines as were controverted among the Catholics; and
according to this settled Rule the debates of that Council were governed: Often
times indeed there arose hot contests among the Divines about Scholastical
niceties, the several Orders of Friars being therein passionately addicted to
their several opinions; but the Prelates, who alone had the decisive Voice,
would always bring things to a temper, and the Decrees were so framed, that the
Opinions of neither Party were condemned. Let the Church of Christ mingle this
Wisdom of the Serpent with its dovelike Innocence, to wit, not to urge with
severity things disputed amongst sound and sober Protestants. But it has
seemed good to some Protestants to walk by a contrary rule, to heighten
differences between themselves, and those whom they called Puritanes, and to
judge them irreconcilable, and to lessen differences between themselves and
the Romanists, in order to a Pacification. We hope that this error is or may
be perceived by those that have been enchanted into it. I am informed by a
Writer of our Ecclesiastical History, who is of the Episcopal persuasion, That
an Episcopal Doctor of great note, and now a Bishop, did within these few years
use his utmost endeavors to gain upon the Sorbonists in Paris, and thereupon
that he complied with them as far as he could do ^n Christian prudence, and
with a safe ^onscience. Now the Sorbonists are the most moderate Papists, and
the said Doctor is known to be far enough from the least smatch of Puritanism;
yet not any Accommodation could be heard of between them; but rather the
contrary, even in the point of the Apocrypha.

Seeing these things are so, one might wonder that any learned men, zealous of
the Protestant Religion, should remain averse from the true way of Unity among
disagreeing Protestants, when the pacification between Protestants and Papists
is become desperate. One would conclude that Wise and Learned men could not be
so overseen, if there were not a deeper mystery in this business.

Whereupon I pass to a farther Inquiry, Whether the fomenting of these discords
do not proceed from a carnal design? And shall argue even upon the case of a
worldly Interest, Whether the way of severe Imposing, or of moderate
Condescending, be the more advisable?
If the settlement of the Churches Peace, by giving needful satisfaction and
security to the Presbyterians, and the enlargement of the Churches Interest, by
taking in the multitudes of that denomination, be neglected in this discerning
Age, we must needs believe that the root of this dissension goes deeper then
passions, prejudices and mis-apprehensions, and that some carnal and partial
Interest is that root of bitterness that bears this gall and wormwood.

Papists themselves have noted, that the Court of Rome had rather abandon the
hopes of regaining three Kingdoms to their pretended Catholic Church, then
declare it lawful for the English Papists to take the Oath of Allegiance. When
the Council of Trent was held, and most of the Princes that sent Ambassadors to
the Council were instant that some regard might be had of the Protestants, and
their recovery endeavored by moderation and reformation; the Pope knowing that
their return upon such terms could never be hoped for, without the diminution
of the Revenue and Authority of his Court, judged it most necessary for the
Interest of his pretended Apostolic See, to make the division strong and the
Parties irreconcilcable, that those Countries and People which continued in
obededience to him might be kept entirely Popish.

When men contend for the immutability of mutable Orders, and stiffly oppose the
due regulation of things exorbitant and excessive, and resolve to give no
ground for the gaining of dissenting brethren, it is not the love of Christ,
but perverse self-love, and the love of the world that constrains them. Such
interested persons are never good Counselors for the public weal.

Now in as much as some particular carnal Interest is justly suspected in the
impetuous and obstinate pursuance of the things in controversy, we are willing
here to make it a question of Interest, and upon that account to make an
address to the Reason even of those that are carried forth with greatest
vehemence in favor of the Episcopal, and in opposition to the Presbyterian
Party. All enterprises that have their beginning in judgment and not in
passion, are directed to a certain end set up as a mark, and that end is not a
business at rovers, but some particular steady issue of things certainly or
probably apprehended and expected: Wherefore let wise men consider the mark
whereat they level, and to what issue and state of things their actions tend.
Here is a numerous party, not of the dreggs and refuse of the Nation, but of
the judicious and serious part thereof: What will they do with them? and how
will they order the matter concerning them? Would they destroy them? I solemnly
profess that I abhor to think so by the generallity of the Episcopal
persuasion: I would disdain to mention such an unreasonable impiety, were it
not to show the inconsiderate and absurd proceedings of an unalterable
opposition, as that it cannot drive to any formed end and issue. That
Protestants should destroy Protestants for dissenting in the point of
Ceremonies, and sole jurisdiction of Bishops, is so dreadful a violation of
Charity and common honesty, that it is a most uncharitable and dishonest thing
to suppose it of them. What then? would they bear them down, or keep them under
hard Conditions? Shall all persons that cannot yield exact obedience to
Ecclesiastical injunctions concerning all the parts of the Liturgy, and
Ceremonies, be suspended and deprived as formerly? Shall Ministers of this
Judgment be cast and kept out of Ecclesiastical preferment and employment?
Shall all private conferences of godly peaceable Christians, for mutual
edification, be held unlawful Conventicles? It has been thought by wise men to
be against the Rules of Government to hold under a rigid yoke a free people of
such a number and quality, and intermingled in all estates and ranks, and
intimately conjoined with all parts of the body Politic, that it is almost
impossible to exclude their Interest from a considerable share in public
actions. Besides, is it for the service of Christ, and the increase of his
Kingdom the Church, that so many able Divines should be debarred the use of
their Lords Talents, that so many laborious Ministers should sit still in
silence; that when Christ teaches us to pray that the Lord would thrust forth
Laborers into his Harvest, those Laborers should be thrust out of his
harvest? Surely this would make a cry in the ears of the Lord of the Harvest.
Let me add this, It Is a hard matter to silence them that will preach virtually
in pious Conferences, whose occasional and table discourses will be a kind of
Sermon.

Let me offer a third way, Will they afford them liberty of Conscience, and yet
stave them off, as a divided Party, to stand alone in their Principles and
Interest? Verily I cannot think it is in their heart so to do. What then
remains but to prepare the way, and to make the path straight for a solid and
perfect closure, by laying aside those unnecessary occasions of stumbling.

If the neglect of brotherly Pacification hold on, and the Hierarchy resolve
upon their own advancement to the highest pitch, one may well conclude, That
they make a full reckoning to wear out the Presbyterians, and to swallow up
their Interest, conceiving they are able to effect it by degrees; and that
greater changes then these have been wrought without much ado. And we confess
indeed, that a great change in Religion was made by Qu. ELIZABETH without much
dispute or difficulty: The alteration was not sudden but gradual. Camden
writes, that in the entrance of the Queens Reign, for a whole month and more,
the Roman Religion stood as it did at the death of Queen MARY. On the 27. of
December the Epistles and Gospels, the Lords Prayer, Creed and Ten
Commandments, together with the Letany, were read in the English Tongue. On
the 22. of March the entire use of the Sacrament in both kinds was restored by
Parliament. On the 24. of June the Sacrifice of the Mass was abolished, and the
whole Liturgy restored into English. In July the Oath of Supremacy was given to
the Bishops: And in August Images were taken out of the Churches and broken or
burnt. Why may not the Hierarchical Interest swallow up the Presbyterian, as
easily as Protestantism prevailed over Popery? Surely I take these several
cases to be very different. And first, because Queen ELIZABETH had this
fundamental maxim as agreeable to her Conscience and the Interest of Her
State, to banish hence the exercise of the Roman Religion. But our Gracious
King in His Christian Prudence and Compassion seeks the uniting of His
Protestant Subjects, and the healing of their breaches by His Wise and Gracious
condescentions already Declared. Besides, in the beginning of the Queens Reign
the inferior Clergy of this Kingdom universally appeared to be but lukewarm
Papists, and many of them might be supposed to be Protestants in heart, and the
most of them very unlearned, and indifferent men in Religion. And a great part
of the Hierarchy were not more Zealous than the rest: For when at that time the
Ecclesiastical Promotions in England were numbered above nine thousand four
hundred in all, there were not more then fourscore Rectors of Churches, fifty
Prebendaries, fifteen Heads of Colleges, twelve Archdeacons, twelve Deans,
six Abbots and Abbesses, and fourteen Bishops that refused the Oath of
Supremacy. Also the English Service was so prepared that it might be no
abomination to the Papists, no positive thing therein occurring repugnant to
their Doctrine; for which cause they frequented the same for the first ten
years; and the Pope did not in many years send forth his thunder and lightning
against the Queen. And Popery being in substance a Religion contrary to what
was publicly professed, had no advantage for increase by public Preaching, or
Books publicly allowed. All these accidents did help forward to an absolute
settlement of the Protestant Religion. But we may find the state of things far
otherwise in point of disposition or inclination toward the Dominion of
absolute Prelacy, and the rigorous imposition of Ceremonies, and the
extirpation of the Dissenting Party: For there are now in England thousands of
Ministers dis-satisfied in the Hierarchy and Ceremonies, who are all
competently and many of them eminently learned. They are not generally of light
spirits, but steady and well resolved, and tenderly affected touching their
spiritual liberties. The way which in scorn is called Puritanism, is not
another Religion in substance than Protestantism, but the very same, or one
branch thereof distinguished from the other by an accidental difference.
Protestant and Puritan Doctrine and Worship, all men may know to be the same
for substance; and Puritanism will grow up with Protestantism, notwithstanding
all opposition, as I have manifested in the former discourse.

Commonly those people who try all Doctrines by Scripture, and are swayed more
by its Authority than by the Ordinances and Customs of men, do much hesitate
and stagger concerning the sole Jurisdiction of Bishops, the pomp of the
Hierarchy, and sacred mystical Ceremonies of Humane Institution. And therefore
let the Episcopal Party never look to be rid of these difficulties, till they
remove the matters in Question, whereat a knowing people are always ready to
stumble.

Neither in these times are the Presbyterians so hateful a generation as some
would have them: They are odious to none but those to whom they were ever
odious, or else to such Ignorants as follow the Cry, and speak evil of they
know not what. They have had no considerable loss of their number by revolt;
and what ever comes to pass, they think never the worse of their main Cause,
which I have expressed in the character given of them: And if some or many of
them have a liberty in their own judgments touching conformity, yet that
Conformity will not strengthen the designs of those Prelatists that are most
rigid in such impositions, and seek to tread down the Presbyterians. It was a
notable question which a Carthaginian Senator put to Hanibal's Agents, after
the great overthrow given to the Romans at Canna. When they had magnified
Hanibal's great Achievements, Hanno asked them, Whether any of the Romans had
come to demand Peace; and whether any Town of the Latins, or any of their
Colonies had yet rebelled against the Romans? The Agents denying the one and
the other, Hanno replied, Then is the War as entire yet as at the first. I
apply this, to show how easily men mistake the progress of their own affairs,
and think themselves to be ready for a triumph, when indeed they have gotten
little, and the state of the controversy is still as entire and firm as ever.

Hitherto I have asserted the Interest of the Universality in opposition to the
advancement of a partial Interest: I have endeavored to make it manifest, That
the several Parties by a mutual yielding and waving their partial Interests,
may be united to promote the Interest of the Universality: for I have laid
these ground-works, to wit, That the breach is not kept open by any formed
Doctrine or Conclusion of either Party, nor (as I trust) by the spirit of
everlasting enmity; but either by a humor of opposition, that may be qualified
and subdued, or by some carnal d^sign, which may and must be denied when its
error and danger is discovered.

In the remainder of this Discourse I am to show, That the Presbyterians are
fit and worthy to be imbodied with the whole number of the good people of
England; in the next place to persuade the Union by several Arguments; and then
to remove certain impediments, and to argue from the particular Concernments of
the King, of the Nobility and Gentry, and of the Episcopal Clergy; and lastly,
to offer some few essays concerning the paths of Peace.

Saint Paul was sometimes constrained by the weakness of some and the malice of
others, to boast on his own behalf, and to Apologize again and again for
speaking as a fool: I trust therefore that wise men will bear with that unto
which the like necessity compels me, on the behalf of the people that are now
denominated Presbyterian. In estimating the numbers of this persuasion, it is
not the right way to go by the Poll throughout all sorts promiscuously; but to
take a survey of the intelligent and active sort of the people, and in that
sort to compare their number with others. Howbeit in any way of reckoning
suppose them the lesser, yet they may be found a balancing number. But I am
willing to pass from number to weight. They that will not acknowledge them to
be sincere, cannot deny them to be serious persons; they that will not
acknowledge them to be sober in their judgments, cannot deny them to be sober in
their conversations. But we know they are both serious, and sincere, and sober,
as well in Religion as in Morality: and a few sober people are more valuable,
both for Religious and Civil concernments, than a multitude of dissolute or
vain and empty persons. One serious rational man will carry more in fit
opportunities, than all the vapourers in the neighborhood. Those that are ill
affected to the Presbyterians commonly despise them as an unlearned dull sort
of men knowing nothing. Truly we will not herein boast beyond our line, nor
magnify those of our own persuasion, in derogation to any others; but we think
that this disparagement is cast upon them because they are commonly no
vapourers: Surely they have amongst them both Divines and Gentlemen, who do not
use to turn their backs upon gainsayers, but have been and will be ready to
render a reason of their judgment and practice to any that shall demand it of
them.

We do not envy the learning of any Episcopal Divines, but gladly acknowledge
it, and desire to partake in the benefit of it, and wish that whatsoever gift
is received by any, may be more and more serviceable to the Church of God:
Neither are they an ignoble abject sort; it has not at all appeared that they
have degenerated from the English Virtue and Valor. They have for common
tranquillity and safety closed with the first opportunity for a general accord,
and so have knowingly made way for the reviving of the other Party, supposing
that the former enmity would cease. And they had reason to hope, that amidst
the joy of the Nation, they should not be left in sadness. The present
interruption and check given to this expected reconciliation, we attribute to
the hurry of men's minds upon this great and unexexpected change, by which it
happens that they scarce know where they are, and hardly contain themselves
within due bounds. But we trust that these passions will be over and the
spirits of all will settle in a calm and good temper. Hitherto the
contradictions may pass for the effects of passion, not of inveterate malice,
wherefore, dum res est integra, let second thoughts be milder. A quick passage
of Count Oli^^res touching the right way of Accommodation, may be pertinent to
this business. Our late Sovereign, when Prince of Wales, being in the Spanish
Court in pursuance of the marriage with the Infanta of Spain, and the
Negotiation being clogged with many interruptions, discontents and jealousies,
and all being like to fall asunder, Olivares whether in humor or earnest
propounded these three ways; The first, That Prince Charles should become a
Catholic; The second, That the Infanta should be delivered unto him upon the
former security without further Condition; The third was, To bind him as fast
as they could, and not to trust him with any thing. Of these three ways, he
said, the two former were good; but the last was a bad one. In like manner
might a discerning Prelatist resolve, that there be three ways of bringing
these disputes to an issue; The first, That the Presbyterians should
voluntarily become Episcopal, and thoroughly conformable; The second, That the
way of brotherly accord should be held open and secure to them by an equal
Accommodation; The third, That they be trusted in nothing, but bound up fast by
the hardest Condition that can be imposed. Of these three ways let him conclude
with respect to his own interest, that the two former are good, but the last
very bad.

Much partiality and prejudice has gotten the sway in those men that speak and
act, as if there were cause to fear none, to curb none, to provide remedies
against none but Presbyterians: Was England acquainted with no troubles, or
infested with no intestine broyls before this kind of men arose? Are these the
proper Enemies of England? Let them know, that the true intestine Enemies of
any State are those within it, that depend upon Foreign Interests, and on whom
Foreign States have influence.

A great Statesman makes it one fundamental maxim of Queen ELIZABETH to
banish hence the exercise of the Roman Religion, because it was the only means
to break all the plots of the Spaniards, who under this pretext did here foment
Rebellion. Upon the same ground the Law banisheth Popish Priests, that Foreign
influences might not distemper this Kingdom: But the Presbyterians can have no
temptation to tamper with Foreign Combinations; for their Interest is
precisely and perfectly Protestant, and for their unreconcilableness to the
Church of Rome, their greatest adversaries will bear them witness: And when
ever this Land shall have need of help against its chiefest Enemies, they will
be found so true to the Interest of England, as none more, and consequently
must and will be interessed in its defense. Wherefore let England have regard
to those that must be her fast friends, not only for good will, but also for
perpetual necessity.

Moreover, a wise State is busy in finding out, but not in making Enemies. Who
can produce one solid reason, that renders this Party Enemies to the
Government, or the Person Governing? They are lovers of Monarchy, and of the
Royal Family. From neither of these have they any cause of distrust or
dis-satisfaction. They have nothing to hold in derogation to His Majesty's
Authority, safety, or benefit; and His Majesty has nothing to hold that stands
in opposition to their security. There have been indeed unhappy differences;
but whence proceeding? Not from any thing intrinsecal to His Majesty's
Government or to their condition; but from things very remote from the Interest
of Sovereignty. The Kings Affairs do allow Him to extend Favor and Clemency to
them, as to any other of His Subjects; and His Condescension toward them will
work as happy effects to His satisfaction.

Some men resolving in all things to detract from the Presbyterians, have said,
That they promoted the Kings Return, not out of good will to His Majesty, or a
love of Order and Unity; but out of fear of being destroyed by the Phanaticks.
Upon the occasion of this surmise, and the evil design thereof, I am willing to
debate this Question,

Whether the Presbyterians closure with the King in all avowed subjection and
service be sincere and solid, that His Majesty may safely confide in them?

The pretended reason of their insincerity seems to me to add much to their
reputation in that behalf: For if the Phanaticks would destroy them, it is
manifest that they are none of them. Panaticks would not destroy themselves
willingly. The several various Sects will wrangle with each other in verbal
contests; but they never knowingly plotted or banded against each other upon
the account of their different Opinions, but did all unite in one common
Principle of pretended liberty of Conscience, and in one common cause of
Universal Toleration. Be it also granted, that self-preservation engaged the
Presbyterians by any means to obviate and overturn the designs of the
Sectaries, it shows that the Sectarian Interest and theirs are inconsistent, as
also that they are not unreconcilable to the Episcopal part of Protestants; and
that they had pacifick inclinations, willing to put a period to these
contentions. Let men surmise the worst they can of their intentions in
declaring for the King; yet in as much as they had a choice before them, to
turn this way or that way, it is evident they would betake themselves to that
way that had the lesser evil and the fairer show of good. And could any think
that they would knowingly make a choice of that which should destroy their just
liberty: wherefore were it no more than this, it might gain them some regard,
for that they hoped for some good in this way, when they could hope for none at
all from the wild ways and fancies of Phanaticks: But the truth is, they
turned not to a lesser evil, but to a thing in it self desirable; for it was a
clear case to men of sound minds and sober Principles, that there was no way to
lead us out of that wilderness wherein we wandered, but the uniting of all sound
and sober Protestants in things wherein all agree, and a mutual forbearance in
things not necessary to peace and edification. The Presbyterians knew their
single Interest would not settle the Nation: And the Episcopalians may know as
well that their single Interest will prove deficient. In such a case what
well-minded persons affecting the peace of the Church and Kingdom would not
promote the restitution of the Royal Family, that the King, in whom alone the
whole Nation can settle, may pare off the superfluities of particular partial
Interests, and make a Union in the general Interest of the Protestant Religion,
and of Great Britain? This was the scope of the Presbyterian design in that
particular: And as touching their cordial affection to His Majesty's Person and
Government, we have their own more affectionate and solemn professions for it,
which are graciously owned by His Majesty. And if any persist to gainsay those
expressions, seeing they are not searchers of hearts, it lies upon them to
prove this pretended disaffection by something discernable in the outward
behavior. But suppose that a peoples Conscience and good inclination and
disposition be called into question, yet this is a maxim unquestionable, That
the main ground of sure and constant benevolence between Prince and People, is
a firm persuasion, that they are the mutual Interest of each other. His
Majesty's Royal Person and His Princely Virtues are amiable to us; He is a
Crown of Glory to the English Nation: But that which got the mastery over all
difficulties, in restoring Him to His Dominions, was an undoubted knowledge
that the Nations Interest was bound up in Him our indubitable Sovereign Lord.
There is a necessity of mere compulsion that drives the unwilling, and there is
a necessity of Interest that draws a willing people: When this latter necessity
does bring a Prince and People together, ingenuous minds will turn this
necessity into a virtue; and so the joining of Interests draws after it the
joining of hearts. The Presbyterians enjoying the same protection and benefit
with other sober Protestants and Loyal Subjects, will see no other probable nor
possible way of repose and safety but under His Majesty's happy Government. It
is not therefore a necessity of present force, but of constant Interest, which
is here commended, as so great a bond of loyalty, and which Princes use to take
for their best security. The wisest way is, not to reject and slight a party
that are brought to hand, and made for a Princes Interest, upon a suspicion
that they may prove inconstant; but to use the known means of preventing such
inconstancy as is pretended, and to manifest that regard to their encouragement
and satisfaction, as that they may rest assured, that their own and the public
peace do run in the same channel.

From the Reasons aforegoing I conclude, That the Presbyterians are sit and
worthy to be imbodied with the whole number of the good People of England. I
proceed to persuade this Union by several Arguments.
England has endured conflicts of almost twenty years by Wars, Divisions,
Commotions, and manifold changes; it was abased, enfeebled, and brought very
low; all which do show that some great distemper had taken hold of this Body
Politic, before these things could break forth: There is at length by the
late Revolution a providential offer of rest and peace. After those sad
conflicts, and this happy offer of Providence, shall the seeds of discord lodge
perpetually in this Land? I fear passions of bitterness are too ready to stir
and provoke. Take away this fuel of strife, the urging of things to uphold
distinctions of Parties. Whilst things are at such a pass, animosities will
arise upon every occasion; discontents and quarrels will be ready to break
forth in every Town and Parish, and almost in all mixed companies and
occasional Meetings. But let the propounded Accommodation be accepted and
established, and the former mutual injuries will pass into forgetfulness, and
persons formerly engaged against each other, will be able to look one another
in the face without provocation and new quarrels. Where is our Charity and
regard to public tranquillity, if we reject the sure and only means of Concord?

Uniformity in Religion is beautiful and amiable; but we ought to consider not
only what is desirable, but what is attainable. There have been, are, and
always will be such points as the Apostle terms doubtful disputations. When
the severity of Laws and Canons enforce external Uniformity in things of this
nature, it exercises a tyranny over men's judgments, and holds them in a
servile condition, that they are not free, but captivated to the Authority of
men, or suppressed from making a due search into matters of Religion; yea, this
thraldom will inevitably reach to things of an higher nature, even the vital
parts of Christianity. That servile Principle which has the heart of Popery in
it, must be introduced, to wit, that the Laity should not search the
Scriptures, nor try the Doctrines delivered, but acquiesce in what their
Teachers say, without the Exercise of their own reason, or judgment of
discretion. Hereupon will follow gross ignorance and supine carelessness in the
things of God, and in those that any whit mind Religion (which is the best of
the matter) a blind devotion: And a people rude and servile in Religion, will
be rude and dissolute in Conversation, as we see in Popish Countries, and in
all places where spiritual tyranny prevails. This is so great an evil that it
cannot be countervailed by all the imaginable benefit of Uniformity: And the
truth is, all profitable Uniformity is mingled with sobriety, and stands not in
an indivisible point, but admits a latitude, and by a little variety in matters
of lesser moment, becomes more graceful, because it is more unstrained and
unaffected.

It is a chief point of knowledge in those whose work it is to mould and manage
a Nation according to any order of things, to understand what is the temper of
the people, what Principles possess and govern them, or considerable Parties of
them, and to what pass things are already brought among them.

Those who duly observe and regard the disposition and present State of
England, and the principles and affections of the several considerable Parties,
will be able to give the best advice for a happy settlement: For such a course
as is wisely and succesfully taken in one Nation, may in the like business
prove unfortunate in another Nation, or in the same at another time. A State
may probably root out such opinions as it conceives to be heterodox and
inconvenient, by using great severity in the beginning, when the opinions are
but newly sowed in men's minds, and the people are of such a nature, as to abhor
dangers, and aim to live securely, and when the Nation in general is devoted to
the ancient customs of their forefathers. But the same course may not be taken
when the opinions have been deeply rooted and far spread, by long continuance,
in a Nation of a free spirit, and zealous; and the generality of those, that in
a Law-sence are called Cives, do not detest them. At this day England affords a
multitude of Episcopal Zealots, and a multitude of Presbyterian Zealots,
ballancing the former; and between these two there lie a more indifferent sort
of people, whereof a great number care for none of these things; but others are
more intelligent and considerate; and these seem to approve some things, and
again to disapprove some things on either side: As far as I have observed the
indifferent sort of men do accord with the Episcopal way in affecting the
Common Prayer Book; and those among them, that are of any reckoning for worth
or honesty, do also according to the Presbyterian way, affect the constant
preaching of the Word, and the residency of Ministers in their Parochial
Charges, and disaffect plurality of Benefices. Knowledge has so increased that
the people in general will more observe their Teachers Doctrine and
conversation; and the impertinencies of the one, and the irregularities of the
other shall not pass without noting. The insufficient, idle, and scandalous
will fall into contempt, and be slighted by the common people. The profanation
of the Lords Day by open sports and pastimes is by the Civil part of the Nation
accounted scandalous. Furthermore, the present Age being more discerning, all
sorts affect a greater liberty of Judgment and Discourse then has been used in
former times. Whereupon the State of this Kingdom requires a temper or medium
between two extremes, to wit medium abnegationis, in those unnecessary things
wherein no accord can be expected between the Parties, by abolishing, or not
injoyning them, and medium participationis, in things necessary to Order and
Government, wherein the moderate of both Parties do easily comply with each
other. When the State like a prudent Mother, not led by the passions of her
angry Children, shall not engage in their quarrels on this or that side, but
settle such a temperament for their common good, love and peace may ensue
between the Parties, though difference of judgment still remains. When the
Nation shall not espouse to it self the interest of a party, but entirely
reserve it self for the good of the Universality, those hot disputes and
contests will of themselves fall to the ground; and men of different judgments
will be less fond of their own opinions, when they observe that the State does
not judge its happiness to rest upon any of them, and that the welfare of the
Church and Kingdom consists without them.

This Kingdom after the removing of foundations, is by a mavelous turn
re-established upon its ancient basis. And verily that which has wrought the
change will settle it; that which has brought such things to pass, will keep
them where they are, if we do not overlook and slight it. And what was it but
the consent of the universality, the Vote of all England? This did produce an
universal motion, exceeding vehement, but not violent: For it was not against,
but according to nature. All things having been out of place, and held in a
state preternatural, when the force was taken off, moved to their center and
place of rest, to wit, the ancient fundamental constitution. And for this cause
the change was not terrible, but calm, kindly and unbloody: Now as that natural
inclination, which carries things to their resting place, will keep them there,
until by violence they are forced thence; so this consent of the universality,
which produced a kindly motion of all things to settle in their own place and
order upon the right foundation, will keep them there, until such external
force shall come, as can break and dissipate the universality. Wherefore seeing
this great revolution has not happened by the prevailing force of one Party,
but by the unstrained motion of all England, what reason is there that one
Party should thrust the other out of its due place of rest upon the common
Foundation? When common consent has laid this excellent Foundation of peace
and quietness, let not the Superstructure of particular unnecessary forms, cast
off some as a divided and rejected Party; but let that which has made peace
keep peace; which by Gods help it will surely do, if timely observed and
followed.

We cannot gainsay but the composure of these differences has much difficulty,
and requires much prudence, care and patience in those that are at the helm of
Government: Nevertheless it may be effected, if the judicious on both sides
will give consent; and they will give consent, if they have a single aim to
procure the peace of Gods Church, and the increase thereof, and particularly
the increase and stability of Protestant Religion, Suppose the Roman, Grecian,
Armenian, Ethiopick, together with all the Protestant Churches, yea and the
whole Christian world might be drawn into one Church Communion and Order, upon
as easy terms as English Prelatists and Presbyterians may, if they have a
heart to it, were it not prodigious uncharitableness and fury of opposition to
withstand it? As all the Lovers of Christianism would pursue the Union of all
Christian Churches, upon such terms, so should all the Lovers of Protestantism
pursue the Union of all Protestant Churches, seeing the Doctrines wherein they
harmoniously agree will enable them to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond
of Peace, if the heart be not opposite to the power of those professed
Doctrines. To heal the wounds of the Protestant Cause, how glorious is it? But
to refuse and withstand this healing, how does it cause the Popish faction to
glory against us? Let not our adversaries rejoice, nor the uncircumcised glory
in our shame.

We have the examples of Christian Princes, even those of the Roman Faith, who
would gladly have made up breaches in Religion among their people, by yielding
in things of greater moment in the Church of Rome, then any of the points in
question are among disagreeing Protestants. In the Council of Trent, Ferdinand
the Emperor, and Maximilian his son King of the Romans, and the French King,
and the Duke of Bavaria made it their business by their Ambassadors, for
quieting of their Dominions, that the Communion of the Sacrament in both kinds,
the Marriage of Priests, and Divine Service in the vulgar tongue might be
allowed. These things are of greater importance among the Papists, then the
things now in question are among the Protestants of either persuasion, if we
judge by their declared Opinions, and not by some hidden design: And those
forenamed Princes would surely have taken that way for uniting their people,
had their power been independent in matter of Religion; but having dependence
upon the Sea of Rome, they could do nothing without the Authority either of the
Pope or the Council; from either of which they perceived after much instance,
that such Reformation could not be hoped for. Moreover those Princes being of
the Roman Faith, had a fairer pretense according to Popish Principles, to crush
the dissenting Part of their Subjects, by laying Heresy to their charge, and
so in time to root them out, then any Protestant State can have to extirpate
the Presbyterians. Likewise the Emperor Charles the V. after his great
Achievements, designing to establish an entire Dominion in Germany, conceived
that his way was to unite the German Nation in point of Religion, by a kind of
reformation or Accommodation; for which he labored so much in procuring and
upholding the Trent-Council; until at length dispairing of his Sons succession
in the Empire, he laid aside all thoughts of restoring the ancient Religion in
Germany, and by consequence all care of the Council, though he continued many
years after in the Imperial Authority.

Now though all these Princes were deceived in expecting such a Union by means
of that Council, which by reason of diverse and important Interests of Princes
and Prelates, could not possibly have such an end as was by some of them
desired; yet herein they took not their aim amiss, that the re-uniting of their
broken people, by using a Temper and Accommodation, was the best way to keep
their Estates entire.

I am the more importunate in pressing home the motion of brotherly Agreement,
considering the time, which may be the only time: For the present condition of
these Affairs seem like to the state of a sick body, which Physicians call a
Crisis, when nature and the disease are in the (...) of the conflict, to carry
it for life or death. Peace and Concord in Religion seems now to approach to
its Crisis, whether it shall prevail and live, or dye and fail for ever: It may
justly be feared that the time is now or never: For if after so long and sad
divisions and the calamitous effects thereof, an implacable spirit shall be
seen to bear sway in this time of restoration and expected union, it may beget
a despair of all future reconciliation. If after such and so long calamities,
all the concurring circumstances of the late Revolution will not incline men's
hearts to Peace, what will do it? This is a day of gracious Visitation. Happy
England, if in this its day it knows the things that belong to its Peace!

Having pressed the Union by these Arguments, I proceed to remove certain
impediments.
One great impediment is an erroneous judgment touching the times foregoing the
late wars. For as much as great and manifold distempers have happened and
continued in this Land since the beginning of these troubles, the defects of
former times are quite forgotten, as it commonly comes to pass, that latter
miseries, if drawn out to any length, do drown the rememberance of bypast
evils; but he who discerns only things at hand, and not affar off, is purblind.
I abhor to take upon me the defense of our late distracted times, the
distempers thereof I would not in any wise palliate. Nevertheless let this be
noted, distempers have their times of breeding as well as of breaking forth.
Certainly that dismal Tempest, which succeeded the long Calm in this Nation,
had its time of gathering in the Clouds. To heal the symptoms of a disease,
its rooted cause being neglected, is but a palliative cure. To take away the
irregularities of these latter times, and not to inquire into the former
causes, is to hide, but not to heal the maladies of this Kingdom.

Another error which turns away men's eyes from beholding the true state of
their own affairs, is a contempt of the dissenting Party, and of their
Opinions, as silly and irrational; with which is joined a vain conceit, that
the whole Party with their Opinions would soon fall to the ground, if a few
turbulent and factious spirits (as they pretend) were taken out of the way.
This makes men to bear down their opposites more with scorn and contumely, then
with any temperate and solid reasoning. This makes men wilful, precipitate,
unmerciful, and puts them forward by rigid injunctions and severe inquisitions
to suppress those with whom they might walk in one way, if they themselves did
walk in love: But there is as little of Reason as Religion in this
self-admiring humor. It is the part of weak and selfish minds to contract
Religion to certain modes and forms which stand not by Divine Right; but by the
wills of men, and which are of little efficacy, and very disputable, and if
supposed lawful, ought to be governed by the rule of Charity. To think that
none is a good Christian, a sound Protestant, a fit minister that cannot
subscribe to such modes and forms, proceeds from a narrow and ignoble judgment.
It is also as much pride as weakness to contemn the settled way of a knowing and
serious people, steady in their Principles and practices, as if they were
worthy of no regard, because they dissent in some points which in themselves
are of little moment. This is for men to think, that they only are the people,
and that wisdom shall dye with them. Noble and high capacities and judgments of
a large and deep reach, do know they cannot square the world by the narrow
compass of those conceived Principles that have possessed and seasoned their
own minds: But they look also without themselves, rightly judging, that as they
have their own peculiar Notions, so another sort have theirs, and that diverse
men are carried diverse ways, as they are led by natural temper, custom,
education, or studious inquiries. They know likewise that there is no
constraining of all minds to one persuasion, without imbasing their judgments
to perfect slavery, which we see put in practice in the Antichristian Kingdom
of the Papacy: Whereupon men of vastest parts and learning, and of true
nobleness of judgment have been ever favorable to those which dissented only
in such opinions, as amongst wise and sober men are not with one consent
determined, unless their peculiar Interest were bound up in those Opinions: For
this nobleness of judgment, which naturally inclines to allow ones self and
others this righteous liberty, is sometimes driven back and straightened by
politic Interests. Verily a judgment truly noble is truly Catholic; and
true Catholicism is most contrary to that which is so called by pretended
Catholics: For it is to maintain Christian Concord with all Christians, as
far as they hold Christ the Head.

It is incident to ruling men to cherish the passion of indignation against the
dissenting Party. Hence arises a great perturbation of judgment: For by reason
of the dominion of this passion, when dissenters modestly assert their
Principles, and do not instantly comply as much as is expected, it is taken for
petulancy and peevishness. When some degree of forwardness breaks forth, it is
encountered with that severity which hazards the undoing of the weak Part, that
should and might be healed: And their dis-satisfaction is judged the effect of
incurable pride and malice. This perturbation of judgment begets a great
distemper in public Councils. Wherefore let persons bearing Rule watch over
this dangerous passion, and dread its tyranny. First, let not perverseness be
always imputed to the non-compliances of the inferior Party. God has put it
into the Kings heart to extend compassion to multitudes of His Loyal Subjects,
in taking off the rigor of sundry impositions in matters Ecclesiastical; and
they think it good to make use of those His Majesty's Concessions, without the
prejudice of any part of Religion, or of order and decency in the Church.
Others that should have helped forwards His Majesty's design of Peace, are
offended, saying, The Presbyterians yield in nothing, the late indulgence has
made them more resolved against all points of Conformity; But why should their
eye be evil because His Majesty's eye is good? Have the Presbyterians abated
nothing, when, for peace sake they have declared a readiness to part with the
Presbyterian platform of Church Government, which is used in other Reformed
Churches, and to submit to a regulated Episcopacy; as also to wave the
Directory for Worship, and to accept a Reformed Liturgy? Indifferent men would
judge that this is a good advance toward peace, and that a closure is hereby
really intended. But what have the Prelatists done in testimony of their
moderation? Have they desisted from the use of any one of the former
Ceremonies, even such as be not enjoined by any Law or Canon? Suppose some of
the Presbyterians (be they few or many) do as yet forbear the us sing of some
forms, which they apprehend not simply unlawful; perhapsome reason of scandal
may cause this forbearance; otherwise to the judicious they might seem to
contradict their own Principles, out of servile fear, or for worldly ends; and
the malicious might take occasion, though none were given, to reproach them for
temporizing. Now it concerns Christ's Ministers to prevent, what in them lies,
not only a just, but even an unjust and causeless contempt of their Ministry.
Besides, they are not willing that some persons of good affections, but weaker
judgments, should take offense at their early and easy compliance, and so fall
into downright separation. The Presbyterians attend a good Reformation, and
all necessary enlargement that may encompass and gather together in one all
that are of sound belief and good life, who have been so long scattered abroad.
Nothing therefore appears but that they have hitherto conscienciously and
judiciously made use of His Majesty's Favor; and with great thankfulness have
they expressed their sense thereof, in their acknowledgments to God and men:
His Royal and Paternal Charity is precious to them.

But suppose that some of this way were guilty of some provoking forwardness,
should grave Patriots and wise Counselors thereupon destroy the weak Part, or
rather heal it? A prudent Father is not so provoked by the stubbornness of a
Child as to cast him out, and make him desperate whilst there is yet hope
concerning him. It is meet indeed for Princes to express their just
indignation, when Subjects presuming on their clemency do not contain
themselves within their duty; and the seasonable expression of such disdain,
wisely managed, is of great force in Government; nevertheless if it get the
mastery it is exceeding perilous. It was the Counsel of indignation that
proceeded from Rehoboams young Counselors.

But there is yet a greater mischief, when the cloud of this passion darkens
the Understanding, that it cannot distinguish between present dis-satisfaction,
and incurable pride and malice. When a peoples present dis-satisfaction about
remediable grievances, shall be deemed implacable enmity, commonly pernicious
counsels take place: Then it will be suggested to a Prince, that the Acts of
Grace bestowed upon such a people make them but the more insolent: For none may
hope to overcome pride by condescension, or inveterate malice by good turns;
which is indeed a true saying, but perverted by mis-application. In this case
to judge rightly of things that differ, let a Prince consider diligently
whether the present aversness proceeds from rooted Principles, and a fixed
Interest, inconsist^n^ with the security of his Estate; or from the pressures
of the grieved Party, in things which are not the necessary props of his Power,
and without which his greatness may well consist; and let him never question
the gaining of such a people whose Principles and designs are not against the
true and proper Interest of his Estate, whatsoever their present distempers be;
for the grievances being redressed, time will wear out those distempers: And in
that case a people will not less value their Prince, because he yields to
them with respect to his own concernments; for they will not judge it a forced
yielding, because that proceeds from force which is yielded for present
necessity, and against the main Interest; but they will cleave to him the more,
by discerning that his and their good do agree in one; for it makes them hope
that he will seek their good as his own. When Governors resent the
non-compliances of a party, their best remedy is to remove the occasions, when
it may be done without crossing the Interests of State or maxims of
Government; then will the honest-minded be mollified and molded; and toward
the residue of obstinate persons, if there be any such, severity will be used
more succesfully. It is the wisdom of rulers by all means to lessen offenses,
and to contract the number of offenders: For where there are many sufferers
upon a Religious account, whether in truth or pretense, there will be a kind of
glory in suffering, and sooner or later it may turn to the Rulers detriment.

Another great impediment of public concord is an erroneous confidence in the
more numerous Party, that they need not seek nor mind the way of peace; for
they reckon themselves sure to carry it by the major Vote in all Councils and
Conventions; they see wind and tide serving them: But they who consider but few
things, do make a sudden judgment, which commonly falls short. Great prosperity
ofttimes blinds the wise as well as fools; and great advantages divert the mind
from heeding many important circumstances of a business, that the judgment made
concerning it is most imperfect: Wherefore in the present case it should be
minded, that the dissenting party is not small, that it is not made up of the
rabble multitude, nor yet of Phanatique spirits, but of honest and sober
people, who act from principles of knowledge, and can render a reason of their
practice, in things pertaining to conscience, with as much discretion as any
sort of men in the Nation; that the instances which they make do not concern by
matters and mutable occasions, but matters of conscience, that will never cease
nor vary; that they are not a Party far distant, but very near; I mean not only
in respect of place (for so the Papists that live among us cannot be far from
us) but of agreement in Principles of Religion, that they cannot be well
severed nor kept in a divided State, nor yet be rooted out; but they will grow
up under the influence of the Doctrine professed in the Church of England; that
in many deliberations they may be able to put things to a stand, and in debates
of great consequence to lead the indifferent sort of men, and also many
temperate spirits of the other persuasion, by the apparent equity of their
proposals.

All these things and more of the like nature, do challenge a due regard from
those that would see through a business and make a perfect judgment. Besides,
the judicious should consider not only the bulk and corpse of a party, but what
spirit does quicken them, and with what vivacity and constancy their motions do
proceed, and their interest is pursued. It comes also within the compass of
this inquiry to know the intrinsic strength of the Hierarchy, and what they
can do when they stand by themselves alone, for their adventitious strength may
fail them. We need not tell them, that on their side at present the advantage
is very great, yet happily it may appear in show greater then it is indeed.
Though the English Nation appear to affect a stated Order in the Church,
nevertheless they may not serve the designs of the Hiearchy, nor yet be
conscious thereof. Upon the late great revolution, the multitude do easily run
from one extreme to an other, thinking they can not run too far from those
troubles and discomposures which last oppressed them. But as the prudent ponder
their paths at present, so the passionate multitude may at length know where
they are, and discern alike the evil of both extremes. Many that are lifted up
may give offense, and fall under great displeasure; they that are cast down,
may be better advised by their sufferings, and remove the occasions of
stumbling, and so become, if not indeared, yet inoffensive to the Nation. Such
vicissitudes of love and hatred do happen in every age, and there is no new
thing under the Sun.

An other Obstacle in the way of this conjunction is an opinion of many, that
the sure and only means of preventing schism, and maintaining unity in the
Church, is by multiplying Ceremonial injunctions and Canons, by requiring full
conformity to controverted forms which might well be spared, by exacting not
only submission of practice, but assent of judgment declared by subscription
to all particulars of Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, in ever jot and tittle
thereof. But in very deed this is the sure way of endless dissension among a
people that are not bottomed on this principle of believing as the Church
believes. This kind of imposing has discomposed all Christendom, and rends the
several Churches from each other, and makes the rent incurable. It is the way
of the Church of Rome, with upon this account is guilty of the foulest schism
that was ever made in the Christian world. It is a notable saying of
Chillingworth -- Not Protestants for rejecting, but the Church of Rome for
imposing on the faith of Christians, Doctrines unwritten and unnecessary, and
for disturbing the Churches peace, and dividing unity in such matters, is in a
high degree presumptuous and schismatical -- God is jealous for his worship,
and consciences well informed and duly tender are likewise jealous concerning
it, lest they should provoke God to jealousy. Minds truly religious do set an
high price on matters of conscience, and will expose all to sail rather then
cross their principles. Wherefore if in matters of perpetual controversy
between godly wise persons, the Church shall make peremptory decrees and severe
injunctions, it must needs dissolve the band of unity. But the best and surest
means of preventing and suppressing Schisms, is to prevent corrupt
administrations, and real scandals in matters Ecclesiastical, and seasonably
to reform abuses, and not to interpose in lesser differences.

Furthermore, a great prejudice is taken up against Bishops ruling in
consociation with Presbyters, and against Classical, or Presbyterian meetings
as inclining to Faction, and likely to produce alterations, which evils are
supposed to follow the distributing of the power among many. Whereupon the
Government of a single Person, or a Bishop having sole jurisdiction, is
apprehended to be the surest means of keeping Church affairs in a fixed state:
This prejudice having a great show of truth, we must stoop to pry into it more
narrowly. And first we have this political maxim to direct us in this inquiry,
that the condition of the people to be governed is the best rule of discerning
the aptest form of Government. And according to this principle we resolve, that
absolute Prelacy is the only Government to hold a people, that content
themselves with a customary service, and the Religion of their Country, and of
their forefathers, whatsoever it be. All Discourses, Debates, Disputations,
and all occasions of aontest touching Religion, and particularly that exe^cise
which is called prophesying, must be avoided. But this Government is not so
agreeable to a people that are given to search the Scriptures, and try
Doctrines. In England where the inferior Clergy or parochial Ministry is not
rude and ignorant, but in a great part learned and conscientious, where the
common people in a great part try all things, that they may hold fast that
which is good, the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction can not conveniently reside in
a Prelate alone governing by severe Canons, and denouncing excommunication
against all those that express any dissent from any particulars of the received
Forms of Worship and Discipline. For among such a people, this is a likelier
way to beget some great distemper, then to keep all in quietness and deep
silence. But a form of Government more free by distributing the power among
many, and regular meetings for free debates within certain limits will be much
more peaceable and succesful. It is here acknowledged that in such an order of
things dissentions may arise, and cause some interruptions. Nevertheless no
great inconvenience, but sometimes much advantage may follow. The stirrings of
warm contests may be unadvisedly condemned. For as Thunder purges the Air, so
these stirrings may purge the Church from Corruptions ingendering in it. Let
the frame and order of things be so established, that both parties may be made
hopeless concerning factious attempts of promoting this or that extreme, that
the contests may not be on the one side for Dominion, nor on the other side for
inordinate liberty, but on both sides for Truths due freedom, and then they
will end in peace. If great mistakes should arise in such meetings, and seem
for a while to pass currently, there may be found some persons of that
wisdom, integrity and reputation, as to be able to show the fallacy, and to
convince those of both sides that intend uprightly. In which case, if they
perceive an evil spirit on work, and an evil design hatching among some, they
will turn away with indignation from the contrivers of such mischief. Wherefore
let the frame of Ecclesiastical polity lean neither toward Tyranny nor
Anarchy, but be set upright for just liberty. Let good orders be kept, and
privileges not violated, and the greater number of those who mean honestly
will not be led into the snare of faction. And selfish ambitious pragmatick
spirits that trouble them will easily be detected and abandoned.

Unto this reasoning let the authority of an eminent pacifick Bishop be
superadded, concerning the way of order and stability in the conjunction of
Episcopacy and Presbytery. Bishop Hall in his Discourse, Entitled, A modest
offer of some meet considerations to the Assembly of Divines at Westminster,
commends the method of the Church of Scotland for prevention of Error and
Heresy by a gradual proceeding from the parochial meering to the Presbytery,
from thence to the provincial Synod, and from thence to the general Assembly
for determining any controversy, saying -- This bears the face of a very fair
and laudable course, and such as deserves the approbation of all the
well-willers to that Discipline. -- But let me add, That either we have or may
have (in this very state of things, with some small variation) in effect the
very same Government with us. Instead of Presbyteries consisting of several
Pastors, we have our combinations of Ministers in our several Deanries, over
whom the rural Dean is chosen every year, by the Ministers of that Division, as
their Moderator. This Deanery or Presbytery may be enjoined to meet every
month, or oftener, in some City or Town next to them; and there they may have
their exercise of Prophesying, as I have known it practiced in some parts of
this Kingdom, as it is earnestly wished and recommended by that Excellently
Learned Lord Verulam in his prudent Considerations; where if any Question fail
of determination, it may be referred gradually from the lesser to the greater
Assemblies, till it be brought to a National Synod. In the same discourse the
said Bishop commends one constant, prudent, vigilant Overseer, superadded to a
Grave, Judicious Presbytery, without concurrence of which Presbytery, the
Bishop or Overseer should not take upon him to inflict Excommunication, or any
other important Censure,

Having discovered certain general Impediments, I proceed to Argue upon the
particular Concernments of the King, of the Nobility and Gentry, and of the
Episcopal Clergy.
His Majesty's Concernment in this grand Affair transcends the particular
concernments of all others, whether Parties or Persons, and that beyond all
comparison: Others may advance themselves and Families by the present
occasions, and give over in time when they have builded their own houses. Many,
and perhaps the most, if changes come, may retreat and serve the Times for
their own security; but the King never descends from the Stage of public
Action, and can never cease to be interessed in His people. Others having much
to get and little to lose, may make themselves by present advantages; but the
King has little to get, but much to secure; and not the present occasional and
mutable advantage, but perpetual stability is His Interest. His Majesty has
worthily gained the Reputation of a Wise and Gracious Prince, of an excellent
spirit and temper for these times: And truly a Prince as wise as Solomon, has
no Wisdom to spare from the weight of these businesses. Let the God of the
spirits of all flesh, and the Father of Lights, continually give to His Majesty
a large heart, and comprehensive Understanding, that may see far and near, and
fetch within its compass all circumstances, consequents and moments that are
requisite to the forming of a perfect judgment concerning these great Affairs.

After so long a War between King and Parliament, and after all the changes in
Government, the King being at length restored to His full Power and Greatness,
and the people being satiated with Civil Wars, tumults and changes; it may be
concluded, that they will not easily run the hazard of abetting any Parties, in
contradiction to Him: But this is happily or unhappily suggested, as it is
turned to a good or a bad use: Though evil Counsels may turn it to a bad use,
yet it yields unspeakable advantage to the wholesome Couesels both of King and
People, for the good of both. The people knowing that acquiescence in present
things is their best security, will not be given to change; and the King
knowing the peoples indisposition to abet a change, will have little occasion
of jealousy. And their mutual confidence, which is the strongest bond of
peace, will lead them without rub or let into a settled mutual happiness. But
it is not good advice to neglect a peoples interest, or to use them with less
regard, because they are willing to hug their own peace in any tolerable
condition. The Sovereigns greatness, and the peoples freedom, are but one
frabrick resting upon the same fundamental constitution. If you shake the one,
you shake the other also. I detest and abhor the tumults and insurrections of
the people, and the resisting of the Sovereign power. Let wickedness proceed
from the wicked. But let none that seek a righteous end tread in unrighteous
ways: let no welminded person be drawn into such a snare of reproach and
ruin. I am persuaded that the generality of the Presbyterian denomination
would endure extremities, before they would revenge or defend themselves by
unlawful means, as rebelling against their lawful Sovereign. As I find my
own heart, so do I judge of others. Nevertheless let a wise Prince consider,
that the divine providence can by ways without number change the face and state
of things, when a dissatisfied conscientious party shall not stir one foot to
endeavor a change. Wherefore let Counsels of safety and stability take place,
that a Princes interest may stand firm against all assaults of unexpected
accidents.

It has been judged a Maxim in Policy, that to head faction is agreeable to
one aspiring to sovereignty, but not to one possessed of it. Also that to
uphold division is the way to subdue a people, but not to hold them in firm
obedience, when subdued. Machiavel shows the inconvenience that arises to a
Prince by holding a people under his Government divided into factions, because
he will be inclined (as all by nature are) to take part in any thing that is
divided, and to be pleased more with this then with that party, whereupon the
other is discontented. And he brings in a pertinent story, That in the year
1501. a Gentleman sent by the King of France into Italy, to cause restitution
of certain lost Towns to the Florentines, finding in every one of those
Fortresses men, who, when they came to visit him, said, that they were of such
a faction, much blamed their division, saying, that in France, if one of the
Kings subjects should say he were of the Kings party, he should be punished,
because such a speech would signify no less then that there were in the
Country people enemies to the King; whereas the King wills that all those
Towns be his friends, and united within themselves. Let me rehearse the
Counsel of our late Sovereign to His Majesty that now is -- Take heed of
abetting any Faction, or applying to any public discriminations in matters of
Religion, contrary to what is in your own judgment, and the Churches well
settled. Your partial adhering as head to any one side, gains you not so great
advantages in some men's hearts, who are prone to be of their Kings Religion, as
it loses you in others, who think themselves and their profession first
despised, then persecuted by you. Take such a course as may either with
calmnesse and charity quite remove the seeming differences and offenses by
impartiality; or so order affairs in point of power, that you need not to fear
or flatter any Faction -- Now if the case were such, that one party were the
Kings only Confidents, and that the other cannot be faithful to him upon
immutable grounds and reasons, then policy would advise him so to order things
in point of power, that he need not fear nor flatter the adverse party. But it
is evident that the Presbyterians love the King, and Kingly Government, and
account themselves happy in His Majesty's clemency, allowing them a just and
inoffensive liberty in certain matters of Conscience. It is also evident to all
impartial Judgments, that his Majesty's calmness and charity may remove the
seeming differences, and offenses on their part. They are ready to comply with
Episcopacy regulated, and Liturgy corrected; and they prefer union by
accommodation before Toleration with Division.

If it be objected, that the King by carrying an even hand between both parties
will insure neither, for both will remain dissatisfied; I reply, this argument
were of force, if the differences must remain uncompounded, and the parties
publicly divided into two opposite societies; but we lay this for a
groundwork, that these twain are to be made one as to public communion in
divine worship, and to an agreement in one common interest relating both to the
Protestant Religion and to this Kingdom, which his Majesty's wisdom may
accomplish by a prudent disposing of those things which indifferently belong to
both, and wherein they both agree; and in diverse things that are peculiar to
this or that side, he may gratify the one and the other with moderation, as
when the favors vouchsafed to the one are not injurious to the others peace.
In which case indeed, here may remain men of different persuasions, but not of
divided parties and interests. Besides if some on either hand should become
turbulent, and cry we will have all or none, yet the greater number, yea the
main body of either side may be found of calmer judgments and affections, who
together with a multitude of wise and well minded persons that are indifferent
between both persuasions, would cause the violent ones to keep within bounds.
And as many of those passionate men, as have any judgment, will discern, that
they are without hope of prevailing, and disadvantage themselves by opposing
the common interest and quiet of the Nation.

His Majesty is a great King, he is King indeed, and reigns in great power over
a willing people. He has in his hands the joint stock or common interest of
the whole Nation. Neither of these grand parties can subsist without him; and
this gives him assurance, that they are and must be both his. It is manifest
that his interest has gotten the pre-eminence over all partial interests, as
indeed it ought. For if the Prince be not in this regard transscendent, he is
ready to be laid low. Wise men inform us, that a Prince by adhering to one
Faction, may in time lift it up above his own Imperial interest, which will be
forced to give way to it as the lesser to the greater. And the prime leaders of
the potent Faction will sway more then the Prince himself. They will become
arrogant, unthankful and boundless in their ambitious designs. It is observed
by Henry the Third of France, that he would be taken into the League with the
Princes of his own Kingdom to root out the protestants, and after awhile the
same League was turned against him. A Prince may be so entangled, that he shall
not know how to wind out of those ways wherein he has so far engaged
himself; neither shall he be able to turn himself to the necessity of his own
affairs as new accidents arise. Then is a Prince truly potent when he has all
particular Factions lying at his feet, and can compel them to live in peace
with one another. This is the potency of our sovereign Lord this day. For he is
alone, and there is none besides him, on whom the Nation can have any stable
dependence. Wherefore let His Majesty's high concernments be the primum mobile
to carry about all the inferior Orbs in our political world.

His Majesty has gained his peoples hearts, and is glorious in their eyes, and
by his continued clemency he will not fail to hold them fast to himself. He
desires to govern well, and they desire to be well governed, and seek no
greater liberty. In some tender points of Conscience they wa^^ upon his
indulgence, and are willing to close with uniformity, not in rigor, but in
some convenient latitude and relaxation. There is an yielding that is no way
abject, but generous and advantageous, a princely condescension, whereby a King
becomes more absolute, and may have what he will from his loving subjects. And
they will no less fear him then love him, as knowing both his goodness and his
greatness. For he is great indeed to whom the hearts of three Nations are
linked; and it is morally impossible that so vast a people should at once be
lost to a King who continues to deserve well of them, and to make them his
favorites. And then what person or party shaldare to slight his Government,
whose interest and influence is of so large extent?

There is a saying, which by many has been taken up for a proverb. No Bishop,
no King. I do not well understand the rise of this saying, and therefore dare
not speak in derogation of their judgments who were the Authors it. But upon
the matter it self, I crave to make this modest Animadversion. And first it is
some degrading to the transcendent interest of Sovereignty, to affix unto it a
necessity of any one partial interest for its support: for independency and
self-subsistence, without leaning upon any Party, is a Prince his strength and
glory. Also it makes that Party over confident, and its opposite too
despondent: Such sayings as import a Princes necessary dependence on any
particular Party, may in the mouths of subjects be too presumptuous, and in
the mouth a Prince too unwary. But of this particular I dare not so speak, in
as much as I know not its rise and reason. Only this I humbly conceive, that
the coalition of Episcopacy and Presbytery, sets forth a Bishop in conjunction
with Presbyters, of no less dependence on the sovereign, and of more influence
on the people, then a Bishop having sole jurisdiction can have in the present
age.

As concerning the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, who for the greater
part are said to favor Prelacy, They cannot in reason be offended at such a
regulated Episcopacy, when they shall behold its order and harmony, and
tendency to ageneral peace. It seems agreeable to their Nobleness, to affect a
comely and venerable Order in the Church for the honor of Religion. And let
them judge whether the Worship of God be more holy and reverend for those many
Gesticulations and various postures enterchangeably used in parts of divine
Service that are of the same kind, and require equal Reverence. Whether a
grave habit of civil decency for a Minister, is less decent in sacred
Administrations then certain other Vestments which some scruple, as conceiving
that holiness is placed in them? Whether a Church settled by limited
Episcopacy, cannot attain to its due veneration without the Hierarchical
dominion and splendour. The reduction of absolute Prelacy to Episcopal
presidency here desired, may concern the Nobility and Gentry as well as others.
For as others may be oppressed, so these may be overtopped. Excessive power is
commonly exercised beyond their intentions, that are eager to set it up. And
they that thought only of crushing a party offensive to them, may at length
find themselves obnoxious, or at least neglected and undervalued. On the other
side, they have little cause to fear that which is commonly so much dreaded,
namely the excessive rigor of discipline from a president Bishop, and grave
Presbyters jointly governing. For it is supposed that no act of Discipline
shall be exercised against or besides the Laws of the Land, which cannot be
made without consent of the Nobles and Commons in Parliament.

Let the Episcopal Clergy admit an address to themselves touching their own
concernments: Peradventure they either suspect or disdain the counsel of one
that may seem an adversary; but whatever they apprehend, it is the counsel of
one who with his whole heart desires that they may not miscarry, who accounts
them too precious to belost to their brethren, if they will permit themselves
upon any reasonable terms to be gained; who would gladly walk with them by the
same Rule in things received in common, which are sufficient for Christian
concord, and should be so acknowledged by all that mind the things of Christ
more then their own things. Were I a true hater of that Party, or a right
Phanatick, I should wish for their violent irruption upon the Prebyterians,
even as vehemently as now I pursue the design of peace; and I verily think my
reasoning, however it takes with them, will convince them of my good intention:
If they decline moderate counsels, and resolve to run high, they may attain to
a lofty standing; howbeit they will always stand on a pinnacle: In a little time
they have greatly enlarged their borders and lengthened their cords; it were
good that now they should strengthen their stakes and make good their ground.
By moderation only can they be established. Some may say in their hearts, The
bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones; the Sycomores are
cut down, but we will change them into Cedars. Indeed their advantage is well
known; nevertheless let them consider their constant strength, and accordingly
limit their hopes; for this is an high point of wisdom. Let them that have
gotten a victory use it wisely, and take care that they lose it not in hope of
a greater. The issue of things often times have proved unfortunate to those that
have waxed insolent and unreasonable upon unexpected successes. There is not a
greater error then to refuse terms of Agreement that are proffered by a Party,
which cannot be rooted out, but will be always considerable either as friends
or enemies, especially when those terms do comprise some part of their victory
that should accept them. Let the Episcopal Clergy observe the spirit of the
Nation, and the condition of the Times, that they may rightly comprehend the
measure of their own hopes. The English are a generous Nation, and as they
delight in the Majesty and Glory of their King, so also in the splendid
condition of subordinate Governors, that their manner of living be in some
sort conformable to the dignity and opulency of the Nation: Accordingly they
seem to take pleasure that the Ecclesiastical State be upheld by a fair Revenue
and competent Dignity, yet with moderation: For if the Clergy do rise to
Princely or Lordly wealth and power, they may become the envy of the Nobility
and Gentry: Let them remember, they stand by Grace, not by their own strength,
but by their Prince His Favor. The Nation in general may be taken with a grave
and masculine decency in all Sacred things suitable to their spiritual Majesty;
but I make a Question whether in this noontide of the Gospel they will fall in
love with excessive gaudiness, pompous shows, and various affected gestures in
Sacred Administrations; and not rather esteem them vanities too much detracting
from the dignity and purity of Gospel Worship. In this noontide of the Gospel
the Bishops cannot magnify their Office but by other courses then what were
taken in former and darker times. Mere formalities will no longer dazzle our
eyes: We shall think they have work of an higher nature, then to look only to
the observation of outward Forms, and Rites, and Ceremonies: they must make a
nearer approach to the Presbyterian practice in the constant Preaching of the
Word, in the strict observation of the Lords Day, in keeping a true watch over
the Flock, and in correcting the real scandals that break forth in men's
conversations: And if they walk in these paths, the Prelatists and
Presbyterians will not be far asunder. Perhaps the friends of Prelacy may
imagine, that in this coalition Presbytery may at length undermine Episcopacy;
but reason shows, that Episcopacy will stand more firm in conjunction with
Presbytery, then by it self alone.

In the body natural there is some predominant humor, as sanguine, choleric,
melancholy, or phlegmatic; yet none of these do subsist alone, without the
mixture of the rest in a due temperament. In like manner the Body
Ecclesiastical may be of several complexions or constitutions, as Episcopal, or
Presbyterial, according to the predominant quality. Now if the Presbyterian
Churches would become more firm and stable by the superintendency of one grave
President, (and the truth is in all Presbyteries there appears some
Episcopacy either formal or vertual) so an Episcopal Church may be judged more
firm and stable by a Bishops superintendency in consociation with assistant
Presbyters. And to remove the fear of the encroachments of Presbytery, it is
easy to discern, that Episcopacy if it contains its self within moderate
bounds, will be always in this National Church the predominant quality.

In the Conclusion of this Discourse, let me offer these few Essays concerning
the paths of peace.
The glorifying and pleasing of the highest Potentate and universal Monarch,
and the eternal happiness of immortal precious souls, are the most noble and
blessed ends of Government. Let his Majesty's Reign be happy and glorious in
attaining these ends. A Christian King esteems it the excellency of his regal
Power to hold and manage it as the servant of Jesus Christ, to be a Protector
of the true Church, the Body of Christ the Lambs wife, for whose redemption
Christ dyed, and for whose gathering and perfecting, the world is continued. It
is the Character of this true Church, to make the holy Scriptures the perfect
rule of their faith and life, to worship God in spirit and in truth, according
to the power and spiritual worship of the Gospel, to walk by the rule of the
new Creature in spiritual mortification and crucifixion to the world, to study
holiness in sincerity, to strive to advance it in themselves and others, and
to have influence upon others unto sound knowledge, faith, humility,
godliness, justice, temperance, charity. The true Church lies in the middle
between two extremes, Formalists and Fanatics. They are of circumspect and
regular walking, no way forward in attempting or desiring alterations in a
civil State. A Prince does hold them in obedience under a double bond. For
they know they must needs be subject not only for wrath, but for conscience
sake. Indeed we will not conceal, that in lawful ways they assert that liberty
which is settled by the known Laws and fundamental Constitutions, the
maintaining whereof is the Prince's as much as the Peoples safety.

That being the happiest Polity that is founded in true Religion, and most
fully suited to men's everlasting concernments, it greatly behooves Governors to
mark and avoid those things, which bring Religion into contempt, and tend to
the increase of Atheism and infidelity. The many various Sects and absurd
opinions and fancies, and pretended Revelations of these latter times, have
much lessened the reverence of Religion in England. This is a great evil, and
much observed and decryed by the present times. There is an other evil no less
injurious to the honor and estimation of Christian piety, to wit, Ceremonial
strictness with real profaneness, or at the most but lukewarmness in the real
part of Religion. And this is the true state of the Papacy, by occasion whereof
Atheists have so abounded in Italy. Machiavel observes in his time, that
Christianity was no where less honored then in Rome, which is the pretended
Head thereof. Let this evil be seen, prevented and remedied, that the sacred
name of the Church be given to a society not carnal, but truly spiritual,
according to that of the Apostle, We are the Circumcision which worship God in
the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

It is the pre-eminence of His Majesty, as General Bishop of the Land, (for so
He is in a political sense) to visit His people of all ranks by His prudent
inspection: And it is worthy of His chiefest care and search, to know whether
every Pastor be resident with his own Flock, and does constantly on every
Sabbath teach them the good Knowledge of God; what Pluralists do seize upon
several Congregations, thrusting or barring out laborious Ministers, and
leaving the sheep in the hands of one who is a mere mercinary, and cares not
for them; whether Preaching in Cathedral Churches be more frequent since the
reviving of Deans and Chapters then before, when those places were supplied by
one or two stipendiary Ministers; whether the Precincts of Cathedrals be the
purest parts of the Land, and the Members thereof the purest parts of the
Clergy, as in reason they ought to be, In all His Majesty's superintendency
there is nothing of greater moment, then to provide that the Order and Frame of
Ecclesiastics have not a tendency to make the superior Party proud and
covetous, and the inferior poor and vicious.

A good Constitution or Frame of Ecclesiastical Polity is incomparably more
available to produce good effects, then good Canons or good Governors can be
where the Constitution is naught: For in such a state good Canons and good
Governors will not be able to reform abuses and correct scandals, and promote
the true end of Church Discipline.

In the Trent-Council the Papalins or the Popes Creatures held this for a
maxim, That the Decrees of Reformation could not diminish the profits of the
Court of Rome, as long as the Authority of the Apostolic See was not
impaired. The Council being ended, and the Decrees coming to be ratified by the
Pope, and the Officers of the Court representing their losses and prejudices by
the Ratification, and the Pope thereby perplexed, and the Cardinals divided in
their Opinions, one Bishop, a man well conversant in Court Affairs, said, That
he could not choose but wonder at this great fear, concerning the confirmation
of the Decrees, which he saw did arise without reason; for that Laws have no
power but what is given them by him that Governs; That the Pope by his
Exposition might give them a larger or a stricter sense; yea, and contrary to
that which the words do import, That he might ordain a particular Congregation
for expounding the Council, and effectually provide that none should be able to
allege the Decrees in prejudice of the Court. The Pope was satisfied with
these reasons, being persuaded that it would fall out as the Bishop had said:
And so the Decrees of Reformation proved of no effect to reform the enormities
of the Court of Rome. By this it appears, that new Laws and Decrees work little
where a corrupt Frame remains still in force. If in such a state of things
good men promoted to Government should do their utmost to rule well, they are
no more able to reform the Churches committed to them, then the two Cato's to
reform the Roman Commonwealth, when it was wholly corrupted and out of frame.
Besides, in a corrupt frame of Polity there are these two great evils, the
one, that good men will soon degenerate; the other, that bad men led by
ambition and avarice, will by Arts proper to the times more easily get
promotions: and a good Prince shall see it and not know how to help it. That
Polity, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, is well constituted, that in its
frame is apt to bridle humane desires; but that is ill constituted which lets
loose the reins to appetite. No function or calling is exempted from the
corruption that is in the world through lust. And the grandeur of this world is
not more perilous to any then to Ecclesiastical persons.

It is a singular excellency in any frame of Polity, that the power of doing
good be very ample, and that a power to hurt be as much contracted and
restrained as the ends of Government will permit: And verily no wise and
gracious persons would willingly be tempted with a power to hurt, if they be
sufficiently empowered to do good without it: Besides, it is an odious power,
and makes the Office hateful. Now the way to this happy Order of things is
obvious. Let not severe Laws and Canons, concerning things disputable and
unnecessary, which may ensnare the consciences of godly, orthodox and peaceable
persons, remain in force. The most zealous assertors and rigid imposers of
Ceremonies acknowledge, that they are not necessary parts of Worship: the
declaring, That holiness is not to be placed in them, is their best defense
against the charge of will worship. Therefore to suspend and silence able and
painful Ministers, to vex and punish other godly Christians that cannot submit
to those Ceremonies, is to procure much evil without a benefit to countervail
it. A power of doing much harm and little good, is unhappily placed in any sort
of men, but especially in Christ's spiritual officers, who according to the
Apostles words, have received authority from the Lord, for edification, and not
for destruction.

The most renowned Politician observes, that those Kingdoms, Republics, and
sects of Religions subsist longest, that are often renewed or brought back to
their first beginnings. For the beginnings of all these must needs contain some
goodness in them, by means whereof they rise to their first reputation and
increase. Now in process of time that goodness will ^e overgrown by corruption;
and unless something happen to reduce it to the just mark, those Societies
must needs be destroyed. And touching Religions, he proves these Reformations
necessary by the example of the Roman Religion, saying, -- If it had not been
reduced again to its principles by St. Francis, and St. Dominick, it would have
been quite defaced. For these by their poverty and imitation of Christ's life,
made a new impression thereof in men's minds, which was quite blotted out
thence, and their new rules were so powerful, and are now the cause that the
dishonesty of the Prelates and Heads of Religion do not ruin it, partly by
their living in poverty, and partly by the credit they have in confessing the
people and preaching to them. -- Indeed this Author does not hit the mark, (and
no marvel) touching the true principles of Christianity, and right imitation of
Christ, the reviving whereof he ascribes to those two popish Saints; but his
reason of Religion in general is solid and excellent, and his instances in
particular are right and sound, being applied (as they are) to the upholding of
the popish Religion. As for Religion truly Christian, the way to preserve it in
its power and glory, is frequently to reduce it to its first beginnings; for
then was its goodness most eminent. The primitive spirit of the Christian
Church was a spirit of power and glory, and the primitive order was most
spiritual and powerful. Let Christ's holy Institutions, let Apostolical precept
and practice be the pattern of our Reformation. What sound Protestant will deny
the holy Scriptures to be a perfect rule of all divine Institutions? To them we
appeal, by them would we stand or fall; and they mention no Ministers of the
Gospel, that were not Bishops ruling the flock. But in pursuance of peace,
touching the matter of Episcopacy, the moderate Presbyterians are willing to
descend to the times lower by one degree, and to come to the Ages next
following the Scripture-times, and to accept what they do present unto us, to
wit, a President-Bishop ruling in consort with Presbyters, and Officer not of
an other Order then Presbyters, but of an higher degree in the same Order. We
appeal to those times concerning this matter. And they that admire and almost
adore antiquity, should not deny our just appeal.

And wherein stands the power and glory of the Church militant? Does it stand
in the pompous shows of Ceremonious worship, with the glistering furniture
thereof, in the secular dignities and jurisdictions of the higher rank of
Ecclesiastics, in the implicit faith of the Laiks, and in a formal uniformity
in the outside of Religion? Or in the powerful preaching of the Gospel by able
Ministers of the New Testament, in the lively and spiritual manner of prayer,
in the dispensation of Sacraments after a manner most effectual to the increase
of knowledge, says, and virtue, in the exercise of discipline to correct all
contumacious disobedience against the known laws of Christ our King and
Lawgiver, and all performed in a comely order with a grave and sober decency?
Let all unprejudiced minds give judgment, which of these two different stares
of Religion does most express the Gospel-ministration, which is called the
ministration of the Spirit, and is incomparably more glorious and powerful,
then the Mosaical dispensation with all its outward and visible splendour. Let
them also judge which of these two is most conformable to the state of the
primitive times, wherein the Christian Church, not by an arm of flesh and the
wisdom of this world, but by weapons mighty through God, as the Evangelical
doctrine and discipline, the holiness of believers, the constancy of Martyrs,
overturned the Kingdom of Satan, and advanced the Kingdom of Christ, where
Satan's throne was, in opposition to the power of the Roman Empire, the wisdom
of the learned Heathens, the counsels of Politicians, the potency of ancient
Customs, the inveterate prejudice of all sorts of people; and lastly, in
opposition to the Devil reigning and raging in them all. Wherefore let us mind
the true way of restoring the Christian Religion to its primitive power and
glory.

It is a happy frame and order, when things are settled for general
satisfaction, that none or very few of the serious people desire an alteration,
but all, or most of them dread it; as also when things are settled for
stability, that none, who have a will to it, can encompass an alteration. It is
a happy thing to light upon the way that leads to this satisfaction, and to
this stability. In religion the general way of satisfaction is not to gratify
the humor and appetite of one or more parties, but to secure the consciences
of the judicious and sober-minded in general. For such on all sides will sway
most for continuance, and if they be satisfied, intemperate and unquiet spiri^s
would quickly be out of breath in their rash attempts. Likewise the way of
stability, that none may successfully project a change, is to prevent men's
running into extremes on either hand. For when one extreme prevails, a change
easily follows. In this case it fares with the Church as with civil States. A
principality heightened into Tyranny, tumbles down into Anarchy, and a Republic
too much cherishing popular extravagancies lifts up a tyranny. Now the way to
prevent extremes, is either to choose moderate spirits, or else a ballancing
number of the opposite parties to the managing of public affairs. In which
election a Prince does not appear as a Neuter, but as a moderator and true
Governor, that has the command of all interests.

And now having pursued Peace to the utmost of my small ability in these
pacifick Discourses, I hope this diligent search after the knowledge of good and
evil in this kind will not be judged an eating of the forbidden fruit, an
ambitious and bold inquiry into things not to be made known. For it is not a
curious or presumptuous intruding into the Counsels of Princes, and secrets of
Government; but a modest and sober deliberation upon things open and manifest,
and of public inquisition and discourse. Besides, it is an extraordinary time,
wherein there are great thoughts, yea great searchings of heart in men of all
degrees and all persuasions. It is true, that this Nation is not erecting a new
Kingdom, nor laying new foundations of Government; yet it is no less true, that
this restoration is as it were life from the dead, and we are in some sort
beginning the world anew. It is a notable Epoch, or period of time, giving
opportunity to cut off excesses, to make up defects, and to make crooked things
straight, before we be fixed and engaged in particular ways, from which though
never so inconvenient, we may not be able to draw back or turn aside. It is
affirmed by one of piercing knowledge in affairs of this nature, that it is a
profitable order in a Commonwealth, for any one to propose what is for the
public good. Surely the Kingdom cannot suffer by the proposals of the meanest
persons, when they touch not upon the fundamental Constitution, nor disturb
public peace and order. This Discourse offers no disturbance to such Forms and
Orders as have attained a quiet stated posture in these times. The Laws have
made some alteration in things of former use and practice, as the Act for
abolishing the High Commission. The times have made more alterations in men's
minds and ways; and his Majesty has observed a necessity, or at least
expediency of some alterations, whereby the minds of men may be composed, and
the peace of the Church established, declaring -- That he has not the least
doubt but the present Bishops will think, that the Concessions made by him to
allay the present Distempers, are very just and reasonable. --

Lastly, The scope of this Treatise does justify and defend it self, whereof
the bare narration is a full Vindication. For the sum of the whole matter is to
persuade a turning from the advancement of a partial Interest, and a turning to
the obvious and easy way of giving general satisfaction to all those that
acknowledge the Church of England to be a true Church, and are willing to abide
in her Communion.

FINIS.
An Advertisment to the Reader.
THere are lately Printed twenty two Sermons Preached upon several occasions;
By Edward Reynolds, D. in Divinity, and Bishop of Norwich, in quarto; None of
which are contained in his large Volume: And are to be sold at the Rose and
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

ERRATA.
Page 78. line 5. read frowardness. p. 80. l. 5. r. injudicious. p. 18. l. 8.
r. frowardness. p. 89. l. 6. r. sale. p. 90. l. 19. r. contest. p. 119. l. 7.
r. Clergy.


