A Copy of the pretended Letter, whereupon the Indictment against Hendry
Navile-paine is founded.
The 3d. of December, 1692.
I Am forced in ill for want of better paper; dearest Aunt, to let you know
that I am obliedged to change my bad Lodging for worse; being Relapsed into my
old destemper again. My Ph^sicians being resolved not to let any Breathing
visit me, till it please GOD to restore me to my perfect Health, They
alleging that my keeping too much Company, does great Mischief. All my
Consolation in this miserablc condition is that Mistress friend is just come to
the Neighborhood; And though I fear I shall not be so happy to see her, yet my
dearest Cusine, I doubt not, will do it speedily: For so it is contrived ^o be
by my dear and dilligent friends negotiation, who is the very Life and vigor of
all your Brothers affair here, and the prop of his family Running, going, and
spending her self to the last penny in his serviee, and but for hers in the
first place, and Mistress Mowat in the second; Your poor Nephew might have
perished long or this for mere want to no great Credit, no more then advantage
of your brother; for though he have many more, able he has not a faithfuller
Servant in the World! Oh GOD how can be be so despised amongst his Relations,
when there enemies consider him so much; And all other honest acquaintance,
that knows him, have some esteem at Least for him, This is all I will, and less
I cannot say, for all the strange reguardless usage he has met withal from
David, and Let it stand as it does since M^stris Mowat writes me word she and
him begin to understand one another better, and are like to be perfect friends,
which for your Brothers sake, I hope will continue real on that side, as I am
sure it is on this; she and Little-John has had a meeting to, where all things
have been so explained betwixt them, that I hope will produce a lasting
Concurrence in diligence for your Brothers service; To which sole End, all my
endeavors therein, have tended. And now I assure you, all things here, are in
perfect Order, for bringing in the Trial as speedily as your Brother pleases,
and the sooner the better (I am sure) for his Adversary is very dilligent in
seeking out new Agents, that are like to be more able and faithful to him, than
these he has hitherto Employed. And I asure you succeeds extreme well in his
Designs, and has in a manner united all the Mechanics by this means, to be
entirely his; So the Cause may grow worse, but cannot mend by the delay of the
Trial, and as for Compositions, and Bargains, with particulars. It is of little
or no importance, Since Men's several Interests and Designs are so Different,
that they are Impossible to be Reconciled before the Cause be ended, and he
walk the exchange again. In the mean time* care must be had, that his Letters
of Attorney be fairly and fully drawn, as me thinks is easy to be done, And I
would have sent you a draught as I told you in my last, but that I cannot with
all my diligence procure a Copy of the Last, to make a true Judgment why it
is so universally cried out upon, by those of the Creditors have seen it; But
now I must to bed, and mind no more Business, perhaps while I live, but yet
cannot die an honest man, if I do not with earnestness of my Soul recommend to
your Brother, Sister, and David, the diligent Gentle woman I mentioned before,
as the most useful person beyond all Comparison of any body they have here,
This Mrs Mowat, Littlejohn. The sick Minister and Nurses friend, Nay all other
Relations here not only continually allow, but by daily proofs will testify:
This makes me beg that since there is the Clerk of the Town she lives in; Newly
dead, the place may be procured for her Husband or Son, A line from your
Brother does it; and I am very sure it is impossible for him to employ his pen
more deservedly, the m(...) I assure you comes not in the least from her, She
being the most dissinterested Creature breathing, but was of her own accord
proposed by Mistress Mowat; Who also said she would write to secure the favor,
for fear of some bodies interposing betwixt your Brother and David to prevent,
so just a request in her behalf as this is: for GOD's sake propose it earnestly
in Mistress Mowat and my Name, to your Brother and David, and Interest therein
your excellent Sister; And if ever I was so happy to do or endeavor, any thing
was acceptable to her; May her memory thereof plead for me in this request.
Dear Aunt, lay all Nice or Timorous Reserves by, and press it home, as an
honest Matter, and the most earnest Desire of Your Dutiful Nephew. Adue, my
service to David and Nurse, join her in the Matter, I beseech you for her
Friends sake and mine.


