A COPY OF A LETTER, Written to Master STEPHEN MARSHALL Minister.

By a Gentleman a Parishoner of his, desiring satisfaction about the
lawfullnesse of this War.

To which is added An Answer by a vvelvvisher.

May. 30th LONDON, 1643.

SIR,
I Had almost fallen into the common complement, and saluted you with a
profession of my sorrow, for your long indisposition to bodily health; but
calling to mind your own and often instructions, that we ought in all things,
wholely to submit our selves and pleasures to that better seeing Providence,
who out of his infinite wisd^m works his own ends by his own means, and
prosecu^es his unlimited and secret will, by his own unsearcheable ways; my
timorous pen, guided by a trembling heart, changes that complement of grief^
for your present visitation, into a diale^t of prayer for your future happiness.
Every sickness is Gods Lecture, and every le^ture for our Instruction, and every
Instruction is a subject for our humble and s^ri^us Meditation, when heaven is
our journeys end, no matter whether, our horse trot or amble, so he h^lds it
out, it matte^s not, whether the ^un shine or the Wind blow, so our way be
right; Prosperity is a pleasant road but slippery and flattered with security,
is m^re dangerous; Adversity is less comfortable, but sweetened with pati^nc^
is more safe. Sir, I have always accounted you a good horseman in respect of
your self, and a trusty guide in respect of others; and my ambition h^th been
to ke^p pace, at least to follow you. Both on journeys have aimed at the same
end and for many miles we have both traveled the same way. But since these
National distractions and unnatural distempers, wherein the whole Church and
State is plunged and puzzled, your confidence and my fears have led us into
several paths* insomuch (to my great grief I fear) that one of us has lost
our way, yet give me leave to say without offense, you deviate and have lost
that road which formerly your steps have trod, whereby my zealous fears still
unconfident of new ways, intergreets you too bold so near a wilderness.

You cut down styles, leap ditches, trample hedges, and force a man thorough
other men's possessions: I keep the be^ten track, whereby our late peaceful
travelers, without the smallest damage, have safely, timely and sweetly,
attained their happy journeys end; you by the red Sea, pursue your obvious
foes, I by the quiet banks of lordan profecute my calm designs; in brief you
go the way of blood, wherein I fear your actions a little too much relish of
your name, and I the name of peace. True in that bloody and cloudy time of the
Law, God style himself the Lord of Hosts, you are a Minister of that Gospel,
you a Steward of that peace. When the Lord of Peace expired, He left us a
gracious Legacy of Peace, you are one of the executors of his last will: What
is become of this Legacy? we demand, you deny it; we appeal to equity, you to
the sword; He that smites by the sword, shall perish by the sword: Our blessed
Savior is the Prince of Peace, but where and all his subjects? Even making
war, and embrueing their hands in blood. But in the blood of whom? of Pagans,
Turks, Infidels? No, in the blood of Christians, nay, brethren of the same
Religion, wherein all relations both Political and Oeconomicall, both Civil,
Natural and Christiar, are dissolved and overwelmed: Sir, you have approved of
these wars; nay, being a Chaplain to this Army, have animated our brethren in
these wars: Men whose ignorance have pinned their salvation upon your warrant,
and whose blood you must justify in the great account, deal truly with me,
what is the occasion of these wars? the voice cries Reformation: Tell me, was
ever Reformation made in blood? the Epidemick voice cries truth or else no
Peace: What truth is it, of Doctrine or of Discipline? If we want the Truth of
Doctrine, Actum est de nostra Religione, or is it of Discipline? Must this truth
be propagated by the sword, must this Truth be bought with the price of blood,
and perchance with the destruction of those souls, which the Lord of Peace
sufficiently dyed for.

O dear, o bloody Truth, without warrant beyond president, did the fountain of
all mercy, peace and truth require such a truth beyond all merey and peace? Did
the Lord of the Sabbath dispense with the breach of a moral Law, the strict
observing of his Sabbath to save the life of an Ox or an Ass? And shall we
prefer the sudden abrogatio^ of some indifferent Ceremonies, before the lives
of many thousand Christians? nay, Ceremonies approved of by holy and learned
men, chosen and thought worthy to depose their lives in defense of true
Religion against that Church, whereof these our Ceremonies relish, Ceremonies
established by that pious Prince Edward the 6, and his religious and pious
Counsel in Parl. confirmed by that Illustrious and renowned Princess, the
Phoenix of her time, our late Q. Elizabeth; Ratified by the late learned
Defendor of our Faith, K. James, of blessed memory; the charge whereof (as a
holy legacy) he left to our Gracious Sovereign now laboring to execute his
will. Are these the Ceremonies that challenge so much blood, or is the sudden
abrogation of them to be balanced with the ruin of a Kingdom? Sure the
occasion of this bloody flux is neither truth of Doctrine nor of Discipline?
therefore not religion. Or is the cause of this unnatural and civil commotion
civil? is the Kings Prerogative too large, or the Subjects Privilege too
narrow? His Majesty's gracious offer is to regulate both by the known Laws of
the land; And having taken a Spontaneous execration to perform it; for my part
I dare not in my heart conceive such evil of the Lords anointed, as once to
distrust him.

Sir, as one that desires, yea prefers the glory of Almighty God above his
life, and the testimony of a good Conscience above a thousand worlds, I desire
you to satisfy me in these particulars. And as you shall answer it before the
great Tribunal of the Judge of Heaven and Earth, when you shall give account of
all your flock, where of I my self am one: deal plainly, clearly and truly
with me, concerning the lawfulness of this war, wherein as I shall direct my
prayers to Almighty God to direct you, so I shall require you, that he would be
pleased to make me capable of your directions, aiming at none other end but
Gods glory and my own salvation.

Vincat Veritas,
FINIS.
A Speedy Answer to the said Letter.
SIR,
I Know you will much wonder, by what fate it happened, that your Letter should
so miscarry, as to fall into my hands, you pretend it to be written to M.
Stephen Marshall, and your self a Parishoner of his; but whether true or no, I
cannot tell; but I believe the contrary, for surely had your ingenuity been
such, as became one of his flock, you would rather have first conferred with
him privately, than to be so ambitious of the Press, as to publish such a
Letter before you had acquainted him. And for my part I cannot be so ignorant
to conceive, that you should expect that so worthy a Divine would so much
forget his more serious employments, as to answer in public, such weak
objections, which must needs disparage his worth and abilities; Yet perhaps you
in your fancy much magnify your own notions, and it is possible imagine great
matters of this child of your brain* seeing now that any thing how silly
soever, if it be but bar^ly apprehended to favor the Malignants, how it is
hugged and received, though it be but an Apology for the Cavaliers, but lest
you should too much glory in your own conceit, here is a sudden reply to your
Letter, and if you should happen to discover your opposer, you will be as much
ashamed (being so confident of your own strength) to be wrestled with by such a
one, as that party will blush to be known to be in print, but leaving such
complements, I pass over your Preface, being as little to the controversy as
I shall find the rest, you confess, that both your journeys aimed at the same
end and for many miles you both traveled the same way: How came you to part?
was there any Malignant that overtook you, and whispered in your ear some
Court doctrine of the u^limited power of Princes and unconfind prerogative, was
there any such that carried you into another road? You te^l ^s indeed that
since these National distractions and unnatural distempe^s wherein the whole
State is plungea and puzzled, his confidence and you fears have lead you into
several paths and one of you has l^st his way. These distractions and
unnatural distempers are confessed, but it is expected that you should rest us
who were the first causers of them, or wherein M. Marshall has lost that road
wherein formerly his steps did tread. I cannot take your bare affirmation, and
abate your proofs in a matter of this consequence, I pray tell us, who first
disturbed our peace? not to speak of the late strange innovations both in
Church and State, the occasion of the difference with our brethren in Scotland,
the ground of the rebellion in Ireland; all these are sufficiently known, but
you think perhaps that we should have yielded our throats, and made no defense
against that inundation of Arbitrary power, both in Church and State, that we
should have betrayed our Parl. falsified our Oaths and Protestations, and
though the Law of God and Nature, and the Law of the Kingdom likewise, do
allow us to defend our selves, yet we should have wilfully ^ected all these;
What think you of the Rochellers, did they lawfully defend themselves against
the French K. or did K. Charles do well to aid and assist them? Yet show me
where the Parl. of France gave them authority to take up arms, and yet no
question they might lawfully do it. And what is all that you have said but
Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur; For, who more bloody and cruel than those
Malignants, You would seem to justify? who more bloody than those very men, I
say those Delinquents, who have seduced his Sacred Majesty, and detain him now
amongst the^^ are these they, who with a Popish Army will maintain the
Protestant Religion? can our Kingdom be to blinded, that after above 80 years
preaching of the Gospel, we should be so seduced to believe this, and that
Protestants should join with Papists to destroy Protestants, and that free
borne Subjects should join with Delinquents to destroy their Laws and
Liberties, and that the mere will and pleasure of the King should command
obedience against the Laws of the Kingdom, does the Parl. require any thing but
the being of a Parl. and if the being of a Parl. then surely the authority and
power of (...) Parliament* So that the Kings personal absence or refusal,
cannot disanull that authority, for he is continually there in his politic
capacity; these things have been sufficiently dilated upon by the learned and
ablest Pens. You say M. Marshall has approved of this war, and he will tell
you and so will as able, godly and learned Divines as any in England, that this
war by authority of Parl. is lawful; read his learned Letter, a book entitled
Scripture and Reason and those Answers to D. Fern.

When you talk of Reformation, is there not need, what our doctrine has
suffered by the erroneous expositions of the Arminians of late is sufficiently
known, if you but read that learned book of M. Chenel^ and how forward some
were for a reconcilement with the Church of Rome, is apparent by the Venitian
Ambassadors information to the State of Venice, which you may see in that
little Tract entitled the Popes Nuntio; You pr^ceed to the Ceremonys and tell
us, that they were approved of by holy and learned men, chosen and thought
worthy to depose their lives, in defense of true Religion against that Church,
whereof you say these Ceremonies relish, you confess then that these
Ceremonies relish of the P^pish Church, but speak out, dare you say that these
holy and learned men died in defense of these Ceremonies, we honor the memory
of those holy Martyrs in Q. Mary's days, and though some of them did approve of
the Ceremonies, yet others did not, and we can withal distinguish betwixt time
and times. For that pious King Edward the 6, and his sister the virtuous Q.
Eliz. their memories are precious amongst us, for the first he had but a short
reign and so could not make any perfect Reformation; and for Q. Eliz. what
Counselors she was necessitated to make use of, when she came to the Crown and
what power and authority the Bishopss there were in, is apparently known; K.
James who succeeded her, was, it is confessed, a most learned Prince, and but
read his Basilicon Doron, you shall find he was no great enemy to the
Government of the Church of Scot. but Bishops here did too much flatter him,
yet the Archbish of Cant. was never cordially respected by him, thoughby his
servile fawning on the D. of Buckingham, the K. great favorite, he obtained
some preferment. Your demand is the K. Prerogative too large or the Sub.
liberty too narrow. The Parl. ^ath not any ways lessened his Majesty's just
Prerogarive, nor the Sub. desired it, and for their Priviled. they desire none
but what are right; we know his Majesty has made many gracious offers, but we
know likewise, that until his Majesty forsake those all Counselors about him,
we shall see but small performance? how many Petitions has the Parliament sent
him? what disires of peace? could ever subjects be more dutiful, nay? how
loath to defend themselves, and after all this, what scandalous papers come out
to their defamations, I need not repeat, you know them better than my sel^; I
end, desir^ng God Almighty to prosper that Army which stands most ready for the
true Protestant Religion, the honor of the King and the Laws and Liberties of
the Kingdom.

Vivat Rex,
FINIS.

