PAPERS OF THE DESIRES OF THE Soldiers of the Army, dated June 9. at the
general Randezvouzes at Newmarket.

Also some passages concerning the King, and His Majesty's Resolution, and of
the proceedings of those who attend His Majesty, by order of both Houses of
Parliament.

printer's device, consisting of a central crown with a Tudor rose on either
side, situated in a rectangular display embellished with a floral motif

June 20th London Printed for B. A. 164 7

Some Desires of the soldiers of the Army, under his Excellency sir T. Fairfax.
1. THat the Parl. do speedily send down some moneys for their present
subsistence, for keeping of the Army in good order. 2. That his Majesty's
person may be still secured from danger, and all designs and attempts prevented
for the raising of a new war in this Kingdom. 3. That a safe and well grounded
peace may be settled through the whole Kingdom. 4. That the liberties of the
people may be cleared, and their persons and estates secured by a safe and
firm peace, according to the many Ordinances and Declarations, by which the
Army was invited to engage in the late war, 5. That all things may concuree
to a cheerful and unanimous disbanding of the whole Army together. 6. That no
prejudicats opinion may be had of the Army, to have any purpose to oppose the
settling of Presbytery. 6. That the army may be believed, that they do not
desire to have the Independent Government set up to uphold a licentiousness in
Religion. 8. That none be encouraged in the great affairs of State, to advance
any particular party or interest whatsoever, but that the great matters of the
Kingdom, be wholly left to the wisdom of the Parliament. 9. That Justice may
be done. 10. That all such who have served the parliament faithfully, may be
protected for the same.
FINIS.
PAPERS FROM THE ARMY
Worthy Sir,
TO give you the prrticulars of the state of the army, since my last, it is
briefly thus; that the King is still at Sir John Cuts his house, where is the
Lord Mountague, and the rest of the Commissioners for the Parliament, who
dispose of things there, as they did at Holdenby about his Majesty, Mr. Maxwell
is Chamberlain to the King, and the rest of the attendants appointed by the
Houses, are with his Majesty in their several places as they all acted at
Holmby.

The Generals Excellency has been viewing the ground for a general
Randezvouze, and the Regiments came up last night all near this place, and are
drawn to their general Randezvouze according to the order of the houses.

I find the Soldiers to have many things to present this day, those which are
most general amongst the Regiments, are these which I have sent you here
enclosed.

The Kings Majesty has no desire to go back to Holmby, but either (so far as
I can learn) to go to London, or be hereabouts: His Majesty has had some
discourse about Independants (as some call them) and some queries were made
what they would have, or whether they would have any government, which his
Majesty thought they would not have admitted of: the King is very pleasant and
merry, and sometimes walks, other times his Majesty rides forth with the
Commissioners, but the Guard are very vigilant about him.

The Commissioners are come from the Parliament, two Lords, and four Commoners
who are going to communicate their Message to the army at a general
Randezvouze, for their receivin whereof, the soldiers are in great expectation.

But before their meeting, the General called a Council of war, and the
Officers received Instructions, for the more orderly carriage of the business.

The Commissioners are received with much respect and honor, and I perceive a
great respect had toward them. God grant, that such a composure may be made,
as may settle this poor distracted Kingdom in peace.

There was a flying report hare, that some of the Scots should offer to send
assistance into England, and that some of the City of London should move for
raising of new Forces. But answer was made, that the Common Council refused to
meddle in any such thing, and that they only took care for safety of the City
of London, against Malignants and disaffected persons, and that there was no
fear of any forces from Scotland to engage with us, and that thesr things was
only raised to distract us the more, not that it is really so. I hope this day
will produce a right understanding both between the Parliament and the Army;
and also between the King and both. The soldiers, as I here, have some papers
this day, which the Officers have not seen, which some say they will present,
or not as they shall see cause. We are all now very busy upon this great work
of the day, God grant a good issue. Sir, I pray excuse the have of your servant,

Newmarket June 9. 1647. R. CORBET.


