A LETTER FROM HIS MAJETTIES COURT AT HOLMBIE WITH Advertisement of
Propositions from the King to the Parliament; in Answer to the Propositions for
Peace.

With His Majesty's consent to have the Presbyterian Government settled for
three years. And other particulars concerning the Queens Letter to His
MAJESTY.

C R
printer's device, consisting of a central circle flanked by the English lion
on the left and the Scottish unicorn on the right and containing the initials
of King Charles, all of these figures enclosed within a rectangle flanked by
angel on the left and right

London, Printed by B. A. May 21. 1647.

Right Honorable;
I Had thought to have been at London before this, but seeing that I have been
prevented, I shall make this use of my stay, to acquaint your Honor, that
about 3 weeks since, one (who calls her self the) Lady Cave (as she says)
received a letter for the King, which letter was brought to her from the queen
in France, by a French Gentleman, (but) he said, by her servant, perhaps he,
was so (in some sense.) This Lady Cave is a Gentleman's daughter about Stamford,
whether she has married some Knight, or Col. of the Kings party, or how she
comes to be a Lady, I know not, but it seems that upon the receipt of the said
letter, from the Queen to his Maj. she addressed her self to another
Gentlewoman who lives in these parts, an acquaintance of hers, who was to be
the Usherer of her business, thus.

The said Gentlewoman being as great a Royalist as her self, came (before the
Lady Cave) into these parrs, and visited Captain Abbots Landlady, some five
miles from Holmby House where he quarters, being one of the Captains who are
under Collonell Graves for this business of waiting upon His Majesty's Person
at Holmby, and (it seems) confiding in her, that she would be faithful to her
design, lay there some nights, until she had prevailed by her Laudladies
means with Captain Abbot, who is a very honest faithful Gentleman, but being
ignorant of any design (by her importunity) she prevailed, to procure with
him, to get her to kiss the Kings hand, which she did at Holmby.

After she saw how the way lay for the Lady CAVE (by doing the like to put the
Letter into the Kings hands, which she had to deliver to Him from the Queen,
she again addressed her self to the Lady Cave, having first contracted with
this Gentlewoman to lie at her house, end by her means to prevail with
Captain Abbot, to make way for her to kiss the Kings hand if she could.

The Lady Cave accordingly came, and lay there, with the Letter, and the
Gentlewoman had importuned Capt. Abbot to procure way for her to kiss the
Kings hand, which the Gentleman (thinking no harm, as any other, in civility
to his Landlady, desiring it would have done, was willing to try an offer of
it; in her behalf.

His Landlady conceiving that a business of so great weight was fit to be
imparted to her husband, to require his assistance, for the better carrying of
it on, acquainted him with it, and with the manner of the progress that was
made in it.

The man (however it is supposed, that he is so far a Royalist, that he had
a good will (probably) to have assisted it, yet) considering that if it should
be discovered, which by all likelihood it would, because of the Commissioners
about the King their vigilant eyes, he durst not run the hazard of secrefie to
the business, but acquainted Capt. Abbot with the business.

The time being come wherein thr Lady Cave should go to Holmby to the King
(she little thinking that Capt. Abbot knew her business) to Holmby they went,
and being alighted, the Captain addressed himself to the Commissioners, to
acquaint them with the design she had, to deliver a Letter to the King, and
that under pretense to kiss his Majesty's hand, she was then come to deliver
it.

Hereupon she was appointed presently to be taken into a room to be searched
for the said Letter. But notwithstanding all this care, and that she had the
Letter about her when she went into the room, yet she (they being by) had so
conveyed away her Letter, that nothing was found about her; but she said, that
she had a Letter to deliver to the King, and that it should be delivered.

So the Commissioners after they had examined her, sent her prisoner to the
Mayor of Northampton, she is a very handsome Lady, and wondrous bold.

Some 2 or 3 days after (upon an accident) the Letter was found behind an
hanging, in the room where she was searched, where it seems she had put it,
when she stood with her back to the Hangings, and conveyed it with her hands
behind her, whilst she talked with the Gentlewomen.

The letter is all Charactors, so that none can understand what they import.

After this, His Majesty was two or three days very private in writing, and
then told the Earl of Denbigh, and the rest of the Commissioners, that be
wondered the Propositions were not sent to him. And that he had drawn up
Propositions (from what was presented to him formerly at Newcastle) to be sent
to the Parliament, appointing them to be sent forthwith.

And accordingly on Thursday last, a messenger was dispatched, with a letter
from his Majesty, directed to the Speaker of the House of Piers, pro tempore,
to be communicated to the two Houses of Parliament at Westminster assembled,
and to the Scots Commissioners.

His Majesty told the Commissioners that He hoped, they would justify him to
the Parliament, the City, and the Kingdom.

The letter propound^ (by His Majesty) to consent to have Militia settled for
ten years, the Presbyterian Government for three years, the Public Debts
satisfied, His own paid, and many other particulars very large.

Concerning the question your Honor desires to be satisfied in, whether the
Army, or any from them, did send, or offer to send any Petition, or any thing
else to the King, or receved any thing from the King, I can assure you, that
there is not so much as any resemblance of such a thing, nor has his Majesty
spoken any thing relating to any business in that kind of himself, nor any
ways any shadow or color for such a business to be related; and therefore,
who ever report it, do much traduce, both the King, and also the Army.

His Majesty told the Commissioners the other day, that He could wish He was at
London, that the Church and Kingdom were settled.

And they told Him, that the Propositions would speedily be sent to Him, to be
passed for that purpose.

His Majesty is very inquisitive concerning the affairs of Ireland, the
Officers, and number of Forces. His Majesty writes all his own papers himself.
This is all that I have to trouble your Honor with at present, who am at all
times.

Holmby, 15 May 1647. Your Honors humble servant, ROGER CORBET.


