AN ANTIDOTE Against LUST: OR, A DISCOURSE OF Uncleanness, SHOWING

Its various Kinds, Great Evil, The Temptations to it, And most effectual Cure.
By ROBERT CARR, Minister of the Church of England.

Flee youthful Lusts, 2 Timothy 2. 22. By means of a Whorish Woman a Man is
brought to a piece of Bread, Prove. 6. 26. LONDON, Printed by J. Astwood for
John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultrey. 1690.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Was considering some time since of Tertullian's Discourse de Pudicitia, or,
of Chastity, though that piece I suppose is lost, and spoken of as tainted with
the Error of Montanus, against second Marriages; yet I doubt not but that there
were many things in it highly useful and expedient, because of the profound
Learning of that Father, and the great need of such Treatises in every Age of
the Church, but never more than in the present Age, highly debauched with all
manner of Uncleanness, which seems to have been the Master-sin that got into
the Throne, and reigned of latter years, not only among the blind superstitious
Papists, for their spiritual Fornication justly given up by God to these
natural Whoredoms, but even among Protestants themselves, to the great scandal
not only of our Religion in general, as it is Christian, but even as it has
the name of Reformed; for how can such vile abominations consist with a
Reformation? Are not practical Misdemeanors as bad as Errors of Judgment? or
rather, is not the worst Heresy that of a wicked Life? and is not a life of
Whoredoms and Adulteries, unpardoned, unrepented of, a wicked Life? and are not
the lives of many in City and Country both peccant in this manner? I suppose
the City will scarce wash her hands, and say she is innocent, or that she is
clean and pure from this sin; though I should be loath to make any unhandsome
reflection upon her, yet if her sins of this kind so prodigiously increase for
some years to come, as they have done some years past, it is to be feared she
will be superlative in the sin, and carry away the Name of the Mother of
Harlot^ (as Rev. 17. 5.) from spiritual Babylon. And ah! how has this
Abomination sprea^ it self? from City to Country, from Town^ to Villages, that
Innocence is scarce any where to be found; and we may as justly a^ ever any,
exclaim, O Tempora! O Mores! O the Iniquity of our times, and the corrupt
manners of our People! what suspiria^ lachrymas, gemitus, does it call for? an^
Humiliation for this sin? Blessed be God tha^ has raised up such a Prince as
is every way qualified to do his Work, by a single eye to God's Glory, and an
active Zeal for the Reformation of sin: Witness his Majesty's Letter to the
Lord Bishop of London; where, after his Majesty's Order to the Clergy for
Preacbing frequently against those particular Sins and Vices which are most
prevailing in this Realm, etc. And whereas there is as yet no sufficient
Provision by any Statute Law for the punishing of Fornication and Adultery,
that all Churchwardens present impartially all those that are guilty of any
such Crimes in their several Parishes; and upon such Presentiments, we require
you to proceed without delay, and upon sufficient Proof to inflict the
Ecclesiastical Censures, etc. So that it is not enough with our most Religious
Prince to see our Church rescued from Tyranny and Popery, unless it be also
purged from these foul spots and gross scandals: And because I could not hear
of any particular piece on this subject, this was the first Motive to me to
write, from the need of such Tracts. Another Motive to write, was a
compassionate concern for some particular persons who had fallen this way, and
an earnest desire to help them forward in their Repentance, so necessary a Duty
that they are lost and undone for ever without it; and so acceptable, that the
Angels in Heaven (to whom the filthy Lusts of Men are a great offense and
annoyance) rejoice over one sinner that repents: And he who truly repents,
by his Repentance is restored to all the Dignities of the Sons of God, which
were lost by sin; and Ezekiel. 18. 22. All his Transgressions that he has
committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him, in his Righteousness that he
has done, he shall live: So that no mention being made of his former
Iniquities, his Name shall be had in remembrance with God (and with men too it
ought by consequence) as if he had not fallen.

And I hope the World will have so much Charity for me, as to believe that I
make conscience to practice my self what I preach to others; and that though I
cannot shine among the purest lights, yet, si fenestratum pectus, if my Breast
had Windows, that men could see thorough it into my heart, they would find
there, that I take more delight in doing any good for God and the Church of
God, than the Worldling does in that which brings him in his greatest gain, or
the Ambitious man in his Honors and Preferments, or the voluptuous Epicure in
his sensual Embraces; and that I differ as much as light and darkness from that
Nobleman whom Luther speaks of, so wretchedly enslaved to this sin of Whoredom,
that he was not ashamed to say, that if he might live for ever, and be carried
from one Stews to another, he would desire no other Heaven. Though I carry not
so great a Figure in the World as others, yet I may have an heart as full of a
pious Zeal to promote Peace and Holiness, (which consists in the Purification
of Heart and Life) and the end of that man will be peace, though he may have
but little peace until then, through the envy, hatred, etc. and though he see
not that Purity and Reformation in the Church, nor a difference between the
clean and the unclean, yet he is sure to see God in those Mansions above,
inhabited only by the pure in heart, which shut out whatsoever defiles or is
unclean.

Here malicious wicked persons may load us with Reproach and Infamy, and
represent us amongst the vilest of men, they may throw dirt stoutly, (as the
Proverb suggests, (and I have found it true) Calumniare, fortiter and haerebit)
and it will stick somewhere; and in such a Case, though we ought not to be
wholly unconcerned at it, yet neither ought we to be over solicitous about our
own good Names, but to do our Master's Work faithfully, and trust in him that
he will clear the Integrity of his Servants, and bring forth their
Righteousness as the light; or however, if we be not delivered from the scourge
of the Tongue in this World, at least in the other World God will wipe away all
dirt cast upon us, and all tears at once.

I had this Testimony given me, at my departure from the University, in a
Letter of Commendations from that great Examplar of Piety and sound Learning,
Dr. L -- n -- t, of Tr. Coll. in Cambridge: To my knowledge he has carried
himself soberly, modestly, piously, and indeed every way commendably. In my
Testimonials for Holy Orders a little while after, -- Utpote qui ex ante-acta
vita magnam nobis spem praebuerit Ecclesiae and Reipublicae utilem fore, imo
pene and necessarium. The two last Ministers of Sussex, whom I served when a
Curate, Mr. J -- Dn. of Chapter and Mr. Bor. of Tw. gave me this Testimony under
their hands, May 10. 1689. That Mr. R. C. whom we have been acquainted with
these three Years, is a Person exemplary and unblamable in his Life and
Conv^rsation, Orthodox in his Faith, etc. My Conscience also bearing me witness
in the Holy Ghost, Romans 9. 1. (which is as Mill Testes, a thousand Witnesses)
that as God's Grace has ever preserved me from Whoredom and Adultery: Nor do I
know that my Will was ever corrupted to have once designed or intended any such
thing; and if I were to dye the next hour, I could not accuse my self of any
thing worse, which I speak without any Equivocation; so have I served God in my
Ministry, with a pure Heart, a good Conscience, and a Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy
1. 5. Do but judge according to Charity, which thinks no evil, and is not
forward to suspect the worst: Speak with Charity, which casts a Mantle over
others Infirmities; even as Christ terms the Church his Spouse, the fairest
among Women, Cant. chapter 1. v. 8. although she has many imperfections in her, as
Mr. Ager's Paraphrase on it; This, says he, is contrary to the practice of the
World, who if they see a Man that professes Religion to be filled with many
excellent Virtues that be worthy of praise, yet if they can (with thejr curious
eyes) but see any imperfection in him, they quickly set him upon the Stage,
etc. They are willing to behold his stains and blemishes, and to cover him with
infamy and reproach, but they bury all things that are comely in him in the
grave of Oblivion. I beg of the Reader so much candor and ingenuity as to
receive this Discourse (chiefly rational and argumentative) with the same
honest mind with which it was intended; that God would bless it to the great
end of doing good, and make it effectual for turning many souls unto
righteousness that now lie wallowing in the mire of all Filth and Uncleanness;
and that those who have been more lately washed clean in Baptism, and through
their tender years yet are undefiled, may flee youthful Lusts, and escape the
pollutions which are in the World, and be preserved pure and blameless for that
inheritance which is incorruptible, undefiled, reserved in Heaven for them, is
the hearty Prayer of

Theirs, Thine, and the Churches Servant, R. C.

A Discourse of Uncleanness.
COL. III. 5. Mortify therefore your Members which are upon the earth;
Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and
Covetousness, which is Idolatry.
THIS Chapter begins with an Exhortation to heavenlymindedness, that the
generous spirit of a Christian may be elevated beyond those terrene and
sublunary enjoyments and objects of sense, to the invisible things of Faith: v.
1. Seek those things which are above; prosecute them with might and main, use
all diligence by the most earnest and serious endeavors for the attainment of
those things, as St. Paul has it, Phil. 3. 12. following after, if that I may
apprehend, etc. or lay hold on eternal Life, and pressing forward for the prize
of our Calling in Christ Jesus, (...), our calling from above, or our heavenly
calling of God in Christ Jesus, v. 13. In the 2d. v. positively, Set your
Affections on the things above, the things of the other World, those better
things that you look for hereafter, according to the exceeding great and
precious Promises that God has made you in his Son. Negatively, and not on the
things on Earth, the base and mean Objects, the poor pitiful things here
below, as not worthy of your affections, of your cares, and your thoughts,
according to the original, (...), which signifies primarily the application of
our minds, our reason and understanding, sursum sapere, (as in the Latin) to
be wise for the things above, and not the things on earth.

The Reasons enforcing this Exhortation, are drawn, First, From their spiritual
Resurrection in conformity with Christ; If ye be risen with Christ, v. 1. or
have felt the power of his Resurrection, as Phil. 3. 10. or as Ephesians. 1. 19, 20.
the working of his mighty power which he wrought in Christ when he raised him
from the dead; if this power has quickened you, raised you from sin, if this
heavenly life and disposition be in you, then let the same appear by your
heavenly-mindedness.

2d. Argument, From Christ's residence in Heaven in his state of Exaltation,
where Christ also sits on the right hand of God, v. 1. in the lat. part. Is
Christ our Head in Heaven, and shall we the Members be grovelling here on earth?
should we not rather by our heavenly minds and affections ascend up thither,
whither Christ is gone before to prepare a place, and sits to keep
possession for us?

3d. Arg. Because (...), ye are dead from these things below, in the 3d. v. by
a death unto sin, as in our Baptism, renouncing and disowning the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil, to live no longer according to the course of this World,
the Lusts of ^he Flesh, or the Works of the Devil, in^onfistent with the
Christian Profession and Practice.

4th. Arg. From their expectation of a glorious life hereafter, at Christ's
second ^oming, v. 4. For when Christ, who is our ^ife, shall appear, then shall
ye also appear ^ith him in glory; that therefore we should ^ave our
Conversation in Heaven, from whence we look for that blessed Hope, and he
glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2. 13.

The Apostle having enforced the positiv^ part, or his Exhortation to
heavenly-mindedness with these Arguments, falls upon a farther prosecution of
the Negative; S^ not your Affections on things on earth; gi^ing the Colossians,
and us with them, a d^rection how to carry our selves toward them, even in a
Mortification of our Members which are upon earth, Fornication, and^ that is,
of our earthly and sensual Affection

Mortificare, or to Mortify in English, as much as mortuum facere, to make
dea^ cause to dye, or put to death; when applied to sin, it is a figurative
Speech taken from things which have life, and (probabl^ enough) from the
Sacrifices under the Law which were killed and slain by the Priest, before they
were offered upon the Altar; a^swerably to which we must kill the old man of
sin, before we can become a Sacrifice a^ceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

Killing the Old man, or the first Ada^ as 1 Cor. 15. 45. Not in respect of t^
Substance, but the Quality, the evil Disp^sitions, the corrupt Nature descended
a^ conveyed to us from Adams sin and ^ from God, and the Holiness of his fir^
estate.

Crucifying the flesh we read of, and Cr^cified to the World; an Allusion to
Christ's death upon the Cross, a painful and tormenting death, and so is Death
commonly attended with pain, the pains of Death at the last hour, and the
preceding hours, and sometimes days, which makes Nature look upon Death with a
great deal of horror and reluctance. And thus corrupt Nature looks upon
mortifying the fleshly lusts as a sore evil; it puts the flesh to a great deal
of pain and misery; it afflicts the Body in denying it satisfaction, crossing
it in its sinful desires, its evil lustings, and therefore it is compared in
Scripture to the plucking out a right Eye, to the cutting off a right Hand, or
a right Foot, and casting it from one; so difficult is it for a man to deny
himself herein, in the Mortification of his darling Lust.

This, to mortify your members, etc. (says one of the Fathers,) is the
hardest Text in the whole Bible, and the hardest Duty in Christianity that we
can go about. Mortification of sin is the giving a deadly wound to sin, to the
reigning and commanding power of sin, which is the Life of sin; subduing the
Corruption and wickedness of our Natures, the evil Inclinations and
dispositions of man in his saln sinful state, so that the heart is cleansed and
purged from the love of sin; sin disabled from lording it, and having the
dominion over us; every unruly Lust overmastered and brought under. This is
Mortification, or the giving a deadly wound to sin, even as a man is said to be
a dead man when he is mortally wounded, or when he is inwardly decayed as to
his vital parts, or the breaking some principal Vein in the Body, albeit in
some such cases they have some remainder of life, and that may continue
sometimes years after; or as when the main Body of an Army is routed and beaten
out of field, or dead upon the place, though there may be some striving and
struggling, or faint resistance from the remainder, yet it does not hinder them
from the Victory: Even so it is here, when the main Body of sin is subdued and
beaten out of the Heart of a Christian, though there be some Reliquiae or
remainders of corruption, yet sin is mortified; for this mortifying work i^ not
perfect here, it does not root out sin and dispossess it wholly, that we should
have no sin at all left in us, or sin no more and be pure from sin after
Mortification* For the most righteous man upon the ^ac^ of the Earth has the
seed of sin, the roo^ of evil in him, Flesh as well as Spirit, a^ Heart
deceitful and desperately wicked, considered naturally in and of it self, as
well as a new heart and a new spirit formed in Christ Jesus: And therefore the
unregenerate part has need to be still mortified, lest otherwise it break out
into those evils and abominations which we read of, in Lot's Drunkenness and
Incest; Jacob's deceitful dealing with Laban, Davia's Murder and Adultery,
Solomon's Idolatry and Carnality, Jonah's great Impatience and Murmuring
against God, and self-justifying in his so doing; Peter's denial of his Master
with Cursing and Swearing too, St. Mark 14. 71. Which are sad evidences of the
frailty of our Nature, and the abiding of sin alter sanctification, as Romans 7.
largely proves our indwelling sin to be soliciting, and tempting, and stirring
to evil; and we have need of continued Influences of the Spirit to carry on
this work of Mortification continually; it is not to be only for a time, by
fits and starts, but when we have master^d sin, and conquered its temptation at
present, it will renew its strength, and return upon you again; like that
Monster, Hydra's ^ead, it will repullulate, and find you work or repeating your
assaults, and reiterating ^our mortifying blows; like a conquered Nation, which
will be laboring still to recover its former power and sovereignty, and must
be continually kept under with standing Garrisons; so sin will be restless, and
striving still for the mastery, taking all occasions to soil us if we do not
hold up a constant work, killing sin when it is reviving, nipping it when in
the bud, least it sprou^ and grow up again, and bring forth its corrupt fruit:
But more of this in the Use for Trial of our Mortification.

Having shown what Mortification is, we come next to show what is meant by
Members, Piscator says of the Apostle, Cupidi tates vocat membra; and Mr. Leigh
in hi^ Annotations much the same, Lusts, some o^ which he names afterward.
Dr. Hammond understands it of our inordinate Affections. Dr. Preston says by
Members i^ meant Sin, or any foul Affection, or desir^ of the Heart, when our
Affections fix o^ settle upon an unlawful Object, as another Man's Possessions,
another Man's Wife, o^ any acts of Uncleanness, as those out of married estate
are all unclean; any Heathenish or Popish Antichristian Honor and Preferments.

Or when the Heart is set upon lawf^ things in an undue measure, an immoderat^
distrustful care of his worldly concern^ which otherwise were lawful, and must
b^ cared for with Faith and Sobriety: A Man may take some kind of Pleasure, and
use some sports, Hunting, Fishing, Hawking, Bowling, for his Recreation, while
he has the command over his Affections, but if he be captivated, and his heart
brought under the power of any, as 1 Cor. 6. 12. to love the World, to love his
lawful Comforts or his Child excessively; if his love to any Creature eclipse
his Love to God, and draw away his Heart from Religion, and deaden his joys and
delights in God and Duty, or be so predominant, that a man cannot resign up
that Creature, that Comfort to God, to bear the loss of it, it becomes sin, and
defiles the Man.

Our Lusts and corrupt Affections are called Members, because, 1. The whole
Corruption of Man's Nature is compared to a Man's Body, and called the body of
Sin, Romans 6. 6. and the body of Death; the latter not only because it was so
grievous to the Apostle, (as that lamentable Exclamation notes, O wretched Man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death, Romans 7. 24.) that
it was as death is to a natural Man, or worse than death to him; but a body of
death in that sense, as we are dead in trespasses and sins, being the cursed
fruit and effect of spiritual death, the remainder of that death, and called a
body because of its quantity, there being a mass, an heap of Corruption even in
the Saints, though it be overpowred by God's Grace, and hindered from breaking
forth in their Lives in that measure as it does in the Unregenerate. Now every
soul Affection is as a Member of this Body, every unmortified Lust a limb in
this old man of sin.

2. Lusts are called Members, because they do work in our Members, Iam. 4. 1.
Whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your
lusts which war in your members? and Romans 7. 23. I see a law (sin likened to a
Law, as claiming Obedience to be due to it, all Mankind being fallen under the
Dominion of sin) in my members, this Law, this Imperium, acting and stirring in
my Members, and warring against the Law of my mind, or the Law of God in my
mind, and bringing me into Captivity to the Law of sin which is in my Members.
Sin does as it were reside and dwell in our Members, according to the import of
these words; sin which is in my members, as inhabiting there, as well in the
Body as in the Soul: And though the Body does not always sin actually, yet it
is ne(...) pure from sin, but has an habit of sin in wicked men, the
corruption of the Soul having overspread the whole Man; but the principal sense
that I insist on, is that wherein the Members serve for the acting of sin, and
so they are called weapons of Unrighteousness, (or as the common Translation
has it) Instruments, fit Tools for to work and do the deed, when once sin is
inwardly conceived in the Soul, and has made its motion for the consent of the
Will, and gained the point; Voluntas domina Membrorum, the Will is the
Commandress of the Members, which are as Servants ready to do their Mistresses
pleasure in the execution of sin: you know Lust works in the eye gazing upon
Beauty, in the ear harkening to lascivious Discourse, in the hand by a wanton
Dalliance, and in the Palate delighted in the tasting of dainty Meats and
Drinks; so that in a secondary sense it may be understood of these to be
mortified, keeping the Body under by Fasting and Abstinence.

3. Our Lusts are called Members, because they are as dear unto a
carnally-minded man, and as well beloved a^ his Members, and therefore in
Scripture our Lusts are called a right hand and a right-eye, that is, they
s^ick as close to the Heart and Affections, and it is as hard to deny these to
part with a beloved Lust, as to part with ^^e of our dearest Members. I have
read o^ one who having sore Eyes, (it might have been better for Temperance if
he had had a sore throat) and being told he must leave off his Drunkenness,
else he must loose hi^ eyesight, said, Farewell then sweet Eyes so dear was
that Lust to him, that he would keep it with the loss not of one, but ever of
both his Eyes. And I have heard of ^ greater Person who (having had a fit of
the Apoplexy, and being much addicted t^ Women) was told, if he did not leave
of that ill-course, it would shorten his Life yet his Peccatum in deliciis, his
sweet Morsel, or as the Psalmist calls it, Psalm. 18. 23 his own iniquity would
not be denied, an^ proved eventually true of his untimely end Though Life is
sweet, yet you see a Lus^ is sweeter, so that Life, and Honor, an^ Conscience,
and Heaven, even all must g^ for a beloved Lust.

They are not only called Members, bu^ Members which are upon Earth. First,
Because they are exercised upon earthly things as Riches and Treasures, which
are as ^ were fetched out of the Earth, as our Golden Silver Mines, etc. afford
us our Money, and other choice Jewels, must not b^ referred to Air, Fire,
Water, but Earth as the Element to which they belong, an^ into which they will
be dissolved, into a more pure and refined Dust; or the delicious Fruits of the
Earth, which serve for Meat and Drink, and are abused to Gluttony and
Drunkenness; even the Bodies of Men and Beasts are Earth in their Original, and
in the Funeral Service we say elegantly, Earth to Earth, Dust to Dust; so that
the pleasure which the Glutton has from his Meat, and the Unclean Person from
his Lusts, are but earthly pleasures.

Secondly, Our Lusts and evil Affections are called Members upon Earth, because
they continue with us during our natural abode upon Earth. We here are in a
corruptible State, and so we gather soil and defilement by conversing with an
evil World; and the flesh will be lusting in us, and en^icing us to sin until
we come to Heaven and that blessed State there, more spiritual and refined from
the Dreggs of Earth, and the impurities of the Flesh.

Having handled in general the Doctrine of Mortification of Lusts, I now come
to particulars.

Fornication comes in the first place to be considered; sometimes it is used
more large^y for actual Uncleanness, as 1 Cor. 5. 1. The Incestuous Corinthians
act in marrying his Fathers Wife called Fornication; and this sense seems to
be the more common sense of the Word in Scriptures, as in Man 15. 19. 1 Cor.
10. 8. yet in 1 Cor. 6. 9* Neither fornicators, nor adulterers, nor eff^minate,
nor abusers of themselves with mankind; where the other sorts of Uncleanness
natural or unnatural are reckoned up, (a^ but Bestiality) which makes for the
other sense of the word Fornication, that of Whoredom, which is committed
between two single unmarried Persons, and in that it differ^ from Adultery,
because it is not against an^ Marriage-Covenant, and so has no Perjur^ of that
kind, and because the Married have the Remedy against Uncleanness, and
consequently the better may and ought to be satisfied therewith, yet the place
before mentioned, 1 Cor. 6. 9. assures us no Fornicato^ shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven not excluding Repentance, here as in other sins there
remaining some place for Repentance; and because we do not find in the Law of
God the Punishment of Whoredom to be absolutely Death as in case o^ Adultery.

This Fornication must be Mortified i^ those that have done thus wickedly, tha^
they do so no more, and sin not for the time to come as heretofore; but work
ou^ of their Hearts the love of the sin, and cea^^ the practice of it, until
they have got the victory to relapse no more into it, and loath themselves for
their former Abominations, bewailing that ever they were so foully spotted with
the Flesh. But the best way is to mortify or subdue the temptations to it, so
as never to sin the sin. None that carry Flesh and Blood about them, should
think it strange to be tempted to it, that of the Apostle being true herein,
that no temptation has happened to them ^ut what is common to men, incident to
^umane nature, to good as well as bad; ^en the best have found themselves
temp^ed, (and probable enough,) very strong^y tempted by* their youthful Lusts;
^hey are a sore temptation, if not the ^reatest in our whole Lives, and there
is ^s much difficulty in conquering these un^ly Lusts, as in breaking young
head^rong Horses, and taming of wild Beasts, ^r the like; and a great part of
peoples ^eligion must be placed in it, and they ^ust be very careful however
they fall by ^sser guilt and the corruption of their ^earts, to keep off from
this greater guilt, ^is deadly or damning sin, as Fornicati^n is named in our
Letany; and I am per^waded God does not give men up to this ^n, until they have
provoked him very much by long neglect of holy duties, (and then no wonder if
evil prevail, and corrupt so many, when there is little or no good to withstand
it; if they have little* or no grace to overcome the temptation where the means
of Grace are neglected or used very little, and but in a very careless
negligent manner;) or by much inward filthiness of long continuance, or great
wantonness, for nemo repent fuit turpissimus. And if thou be one who have
long indulged thy self in these, thou art prepared for further Guilt, there is
but a step between thee and this sin; and therefore tremble in a sense of thy
Guilt, and danger of more; but yet better these than the sin it self, or the
actual uncleanness* vastantia conscientiam, that lay waste and make havoc of a
good Conscience, o^ great gashes and wounds in the Conscience and sink men into
destruction, and commonly, ordinarily hold them fast in it, a Prove. 2. 18, 19.
spoken of a naught Woman: For her House inclines unto death and her paths unto
the dead: None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold o^ the
paths of Life; which is true in a proverbial sense, ( Proverbs being sayings o^
common observation, and so true by common experience, as it is here,) That the^
who go on thus far never return to God again, and usually perish, though not
ever without exception. Consider of this, ^or prevention of sin now in time,
least ^hou be forced to consider of it afterward, to despair for sin. A word
spo^en in due season, and received, how ^ood is it! The next word is
Vncleaness, (...), which does comprehend ^l sorts of actual sins of this kind,
those against the 7th. Commandment, and the ^ternal Lusts against the 10th.
Command^ent, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors ^ife, where in the Septuagint
it is (...), thou shall not have any lustful ^esire after her. What ever is
impure ^d unchaste, inward or outward, natural ^ unnatural Lusts, this word
being of a ^rge signification reaches them all, ^ough here it chiefly and more
especially ^spects the outward acts, there being ^njoyned in the same verse,
other words ^at signify Lust within us, as inordinate ^fection, and evil
concupiscence do. I ^oke already somewhat to the natural ^s of Lust, under the
consideration of ^e former word, I shall speak now to over unnatural acts of
Lust, that of peo^es corrupting themselves, and sinning a^inst their own
bodies. Ah how far has this abominotion spread it self! how many have
committed folly in this sort! Ah this single Fornication (as some call it,) how
soon have some began to practice it! out of a wantonness and lasciviousness to
taste of pleasure before its time! other some from their Parents fault and
negligence, staying their Children for a good Match so long, until their
patience is ti^red out. And thus they (who might and like enough would have
been satisfie^ with the true and proper remedy against Lust, and with the
lawful means) fall t^ unlawful, when they see their Parent^ provide no Portion
for them, and tak^ no care to dispose of them. Lust will no^ ever be shut up in
the heart, it will brea^ out; this fire will have a vent some wa^ or other. If
you find your Childrens inclinations strong to Marriage, the tempe^ and
constitution of their Bodies requirin^ it, their corruption stirring, and
temptations powerful, and their age competent^ deny them not Marriage. And if
the Match be not altogether so desirable ^ to this world, and so well as you
cou^ wish, yet all things considered it may ^ best, least they should do worse,
and tak^ such a liberty in this kind before Marriag^ as should either make them
unfit for Ma^riage, or at least both Soul and Body rue it afterward, and find
the sad and mischievous effects of it on themselves and their Children. But
because this sin may be involuntary, not only after one for some time has
given himself to it, to be given up thereto by God, as Rev. 22. 11. Him that is
filthy, let him be filthy still; but possibly (though very rarely,) it may be
involuntary in the first rise and occasion of it, coming upon a more innocently
minded person, in a manner secret and undiscernable by him, but then it is sent
as a punishment (perhaps) for some guilt upon the Family, a just God visiting
the sins of the Parents, (especially if they have been addicted to this vice)
upon their Children; or for some other more known and wilful sin, which they
overlook and say nothing unto, though it be highly displeasing unto God, and
provoke him to make them vile in this manner. But from what cause soever it
proceed, Parents must be very careful to prevent it, or check it betimes: And
because the Devil is most busy with such when they are solitary, most violent
in his assaults to excite their Corruptions, and set them a-work on this
wickedness, it is not so safe to suffer them in private, or trust them to be
much alone, especially these that know how to d^ evil.

There are other sorts of actual Uncleanness, as by Incestuous mixtures an^
Marriages, forbidden, as coming within the degrees of Consanguinity and
nearnes^ of Relation by the Fathers or the Mother side, as Lots two Daughters.
Genesis 19. 32. who said, there was not a Man in the Earth to come in unto them
after the manner of all the Earth, and so they made their Father drink Wine,
and lay with him when the Wine had overcome him. Judah and Tha^mar his daughter
by Marriage, or Sons Wife. Amnons inceit with Tamar his own Sister by Father. I
could mention that whole Nation among the Heathens stood guilty, the Persians
of lying with their own Mothers the Macedonians and Egyptians Marrying their
own Sisters; and this done even a^ Athens it self, the Queen or Mistress of al
Greece for Civility and Learning: their Histories were full of them, their
Plays and Tragedies which they frequented every day, and respected with great
applause represented them as lawful and commendable. Some that are more curious
tha^ sober in Religion, are very inquisitiv^ who was Cains Wife. Suppose we
that Adam had Daughters, (though their Names be not mentioned in Scripture,) as
well as Sons, God could dispense with the Marriage of his own Sister, at that
time when there were no other Virgins in the world, even as under the Jewish
Law, he did dispense with the Brothers going in unto his Brothers wife, to
raise up seed unto his Brother; but that would be no example for others to
follow when the world was peopled.

Besides these, we read of other unnatural Lusts, for Lust is so wild a
passion, that it flies out into all manner of Extravagancies; you read in Genesis
19. That two Angels came to Sodom at Even in the likeness of men, and Lot
entertained them for his Guests, but before they lay down, the men of the City
compassed the House round, both old and young, all the people from every
Quarter, and demanded of Lot to bring the men out to them, that they might know
them: even as you read in Romans 1. 26, 27. God gave them up, even the Heathens,
unto vile affections, for even the Women did change the natural use into that
which is against nature; and likewise also the men leaving the natural use of
the Woman, burned in their Lust one toward another, men with men working that
which is unseemly: and you find, 1 Kings 15. 12. Asa took away the Sodomites
out of the Land: in 2 Kings, you read of the Houses of the Sodomites, (so great
an abomination) by the House of the Lord* where the Women wove hangings for the
Grove: Which Houses good King Josiah in his general Reformation, brak^ down.

Socrates (as Tertullian, Apol. c. 46. p. 36.) the great Glory of the Heathen
world, (for the improvement of his natural Reason in Religion,) was condemned
at Athens, amongst other things for Sodomy and the corrupting of Youth. The
History of the Reformation tells us, upon inquiry into the corruptions of
Religious Houses, Monasteries, Abbeys, etc. many were foun^ guilty of this sort
of wickedness: and w^ are told, in Sicily, where the burning Mountain is, that
at some times, of latte^ years especially, it has overrun Towns an^ Cities,
with a torrent of fiery sulphurous matter, that their Sin as well as their
Punishment is that of Sodom, and tha^ common among them, as Mr. Vincent o^ the
three Burnings. Grotius de Relig. Chr. 1. 2. tells us, Apud Sinenses and Gentes
alia^ pro licito est. In the 18. of Leviticus, 22* 23. you read, Thou shall not
lie with Mankind as with Womankind, neither shall tho^ lie with any Beast to
defile thy self therewith* it is abomination. Which shows how desperately
wicked the heart is in this kind, that it has all uncleanness in it, as it is
said to work all, or all manner of uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 19. and
so you find our blessed Savior assuring us, Mark 7. 21. that not only evil
thoughts, but Fornications, in the plural number, as if it were all kinds of
Lusts, or at least several kinds of actual uncleanness come from within, out
of the hearts of men, proceeding thence: And indeed when men are so
prodigiously lustful, they will lose all command over their affections, and not
stick at any Lusts, that they are urged to with violence of temptation; neither
at Ravishments of Virgins, nor Bestiality it self, which History affords some
instances of; and they may be perhaps forsaken in such manner, for setting
their affections too much upon such Creatures, as the cause of some: other some
for their vileness in their vile Lusts, or abominable wickednesses, or sinful
curiosity to try and experiment all sorts of Lust. I have read as if this sin
among the Moors in Africa was oftener committed, and of one or two Relations
(which carry some Credibility in them,) of those who in the acting of this
strange kind of Lust, or this wildfire, have been punished with extraordinary
Judgments.

R. B. in his Wonderful Prodigies of Gods Judgments, citing it out of the
Adventures of Mr. T. S. an English Merchant, taken Prisoner by the Turkish
Pirates, and carried into the Inland Countries of Africa, we find this wonderful
Relation. That near Tezrim, this Gentleman saw the perfect Stature of a Man,
b-g-g his Ass, which was so lively, that at a little distance he thought it to
be real, but when he came near, he saw that they were of perfect Stone: Upon
enquiry, he was informed that this was never made by man, but that some person
formerly had been turned into that Image with the Ass, in the very moment of
the Act, by the mighty power of God, the fleshly substance of the man being
changed into firm Stone, as an eternal reproach to Mankind. Upon farther
search, he found the Stone to represent, not only the perfect shape, but also
the color of every part of the man and the Beast, with the Sinews, Veins,
Eyes, Mouths, in such a lively manner, that he was convinced of the truth of
it, and was told, that some who had labored to carry from thence that Monument
of man's shameful Lust, either their persons or their Cattle were struck dead
upon the place in the attempt, it being necessary the Moors should have such
signal testimonies of Gods displeasure before their Eyes, because of their
proneness to such filthy actions. He mentions another in p. 179. Printed under
the name of Sir Ken. Digby.

Next come inordinate Affection, and evil Concupiscence to be considered, which
respect the lusts of men as they are internal, though they never break forth
into acts of naughtiness. Some conceive (...) to be a general unlimited word,
that reaches unto all particular sinful affections, desires and inclinations
of the heart, all such as are disorderly, against the dictates of right Reason,
or the Word of God.

The word indeed may comprehend any violent strong passion; but so it is
besides my discourse: I shall take it in the other sense, for the passion of
Love or Lust; for it is spoken of here in an ill sense, as that which is to be
mortified, as Amnons passion, the fury of which passion preyed upon his vital
Spirits, so that he waxed lean from day to day. When a man's passion is so
mighty strong toward any Creature, and ungovernable, it argues that our love
to God is weak. For when our affection is carried out after him, it will be
predominant, and take off our inordinate excessive affection to the Creature,
so that it shall not continue long uncontrollable. Else the word may signify
such an habit of corrupt affection, as is in those who are given over to
lasciviousness; such a lustful disposition as is affected upon almost every
occasion or temptation; and hence Pathici vocantur molles and effeminati, (says
Pareus upon the place) quales fure Sardanapalus and Heliogabalus: Such as are
weak this way, as King Charles the Second in respect of Women: Of which Prince,
says an eminent Writer, our greatest kindness to him will be to forget him,
unless God cause us to remember him, and his sins of this sort by some
remarkable Judgment; as the sins of Manassah were remembered afterward in the
days of good King Josiah. Our way to mortisie this affection, will be to beg
the Holy Spirit to cleanse our hearts, and to expel the evil habit, and to
possess and dwell in our hearts, that so corrupt affections may not stir; and
to set our affections upon the right Object, even Almighty God, and then they
will be fixed, and like the House that was founded upon a Rock, stand firm, and
not be moved or shaken with temptations, which argues great lightness and
unconstancy, to be taken with every fair Object, and set on fire with every
spark of temptation.

Next comes (...), evil Concupiscence to be considered, taken sometimes for
Original sin and the corruption of our natures, our inherent Lusts, as Romans 7.
and the 7th. (...); I had not known Lust, unless the Law had said, Thou shall
not covet; coveting there in the 10th. Commandment, comprehending all those
irregular Appetites and evil Desires which proceed from that Lust within, which
is set as the Fountain of Iniquity, especially of uncleanness; and so in St.
James, chapter 1. 14. the word is translated Lust there, and Concupiscence,
according to the original of the word; being a Latin word, signifies more
especially Conjunctionis appetitus, a desire to be together, or a desire after
carnal copulation; and in this latter sense, shall I use the word for the Lust
of uncleanness, the internal corruption of this sort. The Original Impurity of
our hearts, or naughtiness that is in them naturally, that gives birth and
being to evil motions, and is as the Mother-sin to them, the Lust which
conceives them, when tempting objects present themselves, or upon the reading
or hearing of any lascivious speeches, or in the heat of Summer, or upon sundry
other occasions, and sometimes they are suggestions of Satan. These are of two
sorts, either filthy Thoughts and Imaginations concerning uncleanness, in the
Acts of it, or the Circumstances; or those things which have any concern
therein, or relation to them, whatever may stir up Lust in us: these must be
mortified, we must reject them at the first motion, cast them out as soon as
Satan casts them in, turn away from those objects which present these
corrupting fancies to us; take off our thoughts, and fix them upon somewhat
else, fall into discourse when you have company with you, and divert your self
some way or other to chase away these Imps of the unclean Spirit; or if you are
alone, with some place of Scripture, or with a Prayer in this time of
Temptation, if they be very urgent and powerful, and pressing upon you, for
then Satan, he is in them, working and setting them home.

Next come actual Desires or Lusts, not only after Whoredom or Adultery, but
all lascivious touches, or the company of such persons, or after their wanton
Wit, or any of those things which afford entertainment to the Lusts of men. I
distinguish these latter, evil Desires (as arising from the will,) from evil
thoughts belonging to the mind, a thinking faculty. To mortify these desires,
First, By a contrary desire and endeavor to serve God with a pure heart here,
and with the pure in heart to see God and enjoy him for ever hereafter: if this
desire were but strong and vehement, if this desire were but rooted and settled
in the heart, and that betimes, or indeed if the heart were but seasoned with
grace, it would work out unchaste desires, or bring them under in subjection of
the flesh to the Spirit.

Next, when the heart is purged, to desire Spiritual things above the pleasures
of sin; refer it to God, desire of God to choose for thee a single or a Married
life, as shall be foreseen in his Wisdom, to be most for his Glory and thine
Eternal Salvation: this should be every ones desire that has the gift of
Continency; if you have not that gift, and cannot attain it, you must desire
after Marriage, to quench the burning and flaming of Lust inwardly, though it
never come to action; and thou must beg of God that blessing, pleading before
him, that thou do not desire Marriage for any false ends, of Riches, Honors,
or to Indulge thy Lust and Brutish Sensuality, but as 1 Cor. 7. 2. a Remedy
against Fornication, to subdue thy Lusts, and keep thee from any sinful effects
of them, that thou may serve God with a more pure Heart, and that it is for
the Salvation of thy Soul (which thou fear is endangered by thy Lusts) that
thou desire it, or for the begetting of Children to be brought up in the fear
of the Lord; and seriously promise or resolve with Gods Assistance, upon the
Religious Education of thy Children, which God shall give thee in a married
Estate; and then thou have reason to hope God will give thee thy Request; and
pray for such an one as may be an help to thee Heavenwards, begging of God in
the mean time Repentance for thy past Sins, and Grace to preserve thee for the
time to come. As for those that are Married, their desires must be toward
their Husband, as Genesis 3. 16. and the Husbands toward his Wife, and be
confined within the Bonds of Matrimony.

But if these evil Motions and Suggestions of the Mind, and of the will, be not
rejected and mortifyed, they will be entertained with Complacency and Delight,
they will be hugged and cherished as the darlings and the dearly beloved, the
sweet and delicious danties of the Soul, and so corrupt the Heart and
Affections: there will be a pleasing our selves too in the Fancy of lust, a
good liking, and a friendliness unto it; and as he whose delight is in the Law
of the Lord, in his Law is said to Meditate Day and Night, Psalm. 1. 2. so on
the same account of our delight in these things, they will be our Meditation
Day and Night: When Sleep departs from us in the Night, and our rest fails
us, this will insinuate it self into our Minds, and fill up our thoughts, and
perhaps our former Sins return upon us with a contemplative uncleanness, and we
fetch over our old Sins, with all the pleasure that was enjoyed in them,
chewing upon the sweetness of those Sins (as Aholibah, Ezekiel. 23. 19, calling to
remembrance the days of her Youth, and v. 21. the lewdness of thy Youth, is
said to have multiplied her Whoredoms by so doing,) instead of a Serious and
Penitent reflection on them, with great regret and grief of mind, and loathing
our selves for all our Abominations. Thus to repeat our Sins, must needs be an
heinous Provocation, bring a double guilt upon us, and put us farther from
Repentance than before, if not bind up the punishment of those Sins upon us,
and Seal them under Impenitency, unto the Judgment of the great Day.

Our love then, which we naturally bea^ our lusts, must be turned into hatred,
an^ Sin must be bitter for sweet, with as much or more bitterness than ever we
delighte^ in it; such a remorse for this sweet Morse^ as estrangeth our
Affections from our ow^ Iniquity, argues indeed that we have gained the point
in Mortification. But, because there is a further step in this evi^
Concupiscence, as the Original, sending out its evil Motions, and then the
Complacency or Delight when it once becomes habitual, and evil thoughts, and
unchaste desires, to settle and lodge in the Soul, and make their Abode in it,
as they will, if they find such a welcome and Entertainment in the Soul, and if
the Affections be carried out after them; then the will is not like to hold out
long against the outward Arts of Sin, when it shall have let in such a
Multitude of Enemies, and such an Army of lusts have got possession, laying
close Siege to the Will, and almost continually Assaulting and Importuning it
to Surrender, and give up its consent; naturally to be sure it will yield, and
the Filthiness within abounding, grieves the Holy Spirit, and provokes him to
withdraw his Supernatural Strength, and leave it destitute; and when Sin and
Satan have beaten a Christian out of this Post, and overcome the Will, which is
as the walls to a City, the Strength and Fortification of it, and its Defense,
then the day is its own; when the walls are won, the City is taken, so when the
Consent of the Will is come over to Sin, but a step from the Will to the Deed,
a quick and an easy passage then for to work out Uncleanness, and to fulfill
the Lusts of the Flesh. For though the Spirit Lusts against the Flesh, and so
may disappoint it for once or twice in the sudden motions of the Will for
consent, as by stirring in the Conscience, and awaking it at the Instant when
it would have Sinned, or by denying it opportunity, or by presenting some
unexpected Let or Remora in the way of Sin, yet if the Will remain deliberately
in its choice, evil Inclination and Disposition to Sin, if it can have a fit
opportunity; opportunity will not ever be wanting, nor a Will to Sin, when
Temptation and Opportunity serve; and when once Men's Lusts break forth, they
are Fruitful, and Multiply to the working all Uncleanness with greediness, so
that unless we mortify our inward Corruption, and keep the Heart right, or bent
of the Will against Sin, we lose all: Hi^ labor hoc opus, here is the
difficulty in the work of Mortification.

The next thing to be considered is Covetousness, an Evil coveting after
Riches, for measure more than God gives us, a greater portion than his
Providence deals out to us in our Place and Calling; and i^ they be desired or
sought after in an undue manner, any way that is in consistent with our Duty to
God or Man, this Covetousness is termed Idolatry, Spiritual Idolatry, as you
read, Ezekiel. 14. 3. Of those that set up their Idols in their Hearts, the giving
that inward Worship to a Creature which is due to God, by loving our Wealth
more than God and Godliness; fearing the loss of them, more than the loss of
Gods favor, of Christ and of Heaven; taking Riches for their chief good and
comfort; Setting up Wealth for their strong Mountain and Defense against evil,
and putting their Confidence therein, or trusting in the multitude of their
Riches; seeking them more earnestly, or serving not God, but the World, with
all your strength. But this is somewhat besides my intended discourse, and has
been excellently handled as to the matter, by Mr. Richard Allen in his World
Conquered, or Faiths Victory over the World, to which I referr you against the
World. I come now to the general Duty contained in the words, that all
Uncleanness is to be mortifyed: God will have the Body of this Sin destroyed,
and every particular Limb or Member, Fornication, Inordinate Affection, evil
Concupiscence; Root and Branch, none of it must remain unsubdued, be stubbed up
by the Roots, as well as the Boughs lopped off: 2 These. 4. 7. God has called
us not to Uncleanness, but to Holiness; and he will have us to be clean, that
so we may be holy; that our Bodies be not abused to Fornication, because that,
1 Cor. 6. 13. The Body is not for Fornication, not designed by him that made
it, for such an use; and that our Souls do not resemble the unclean Spirits,
that they do not enter in and dwell there, but that our Souls and Bodies be
preserved pure and chaste, ( Jud. 28.) our inward and outward Man cleansed from
all Filthiness, Gal. 5. 24. and that we hate even the Garments spotted with the
Flesh, or Crucify the Flesh with the Affections and the Lusts thereof.

The first Argument for Mortification of our Lusts, is for to answer the Purity
and Holiness of the Christian Religion. Our Religion is pure and undefiled, in
respect (...) cuse us of them. Minutius Foelix, p. 24. Such infamous filthiness
which we do not care to hear, and may much less defend.

As to the Jews, their practice did not reach the purity of the Christian
Religion: Abraham had his Hagar, and Issue by her as well as by Sarah his Wife.
Jacob had his two Wives, Leah and Rachel, and their handmaids Bilhah and
Zilpah, Genesis 30. David and Solomon had their many Wives and Concubines, and no
doubt but they did offend therein, though it was not so plainly and undoubtedly
evil as it is now in the clear light of the Gospel.

As to the Turks, those whom they call Imailer, or Religious Brothers of Love,
are worse than Beasts in their Lusts, sparing neither Women nor Boys; they take
many Wives according to their Wealth and Quality, and the Grand Seigniour his
Seraglio full of Virgins for his own use: When Malachi, chapter 2. 14. 15. The Lord
has been witness between thee and the Wife of thy Youth, against whom thou
have dealt treacherously; yet is she thy Companion and the Wife of thy
Covenant; and did he not make one? One Woman for one Man, only Eve for Adam;
and wherefore one? that he might seek a Godly seed; an Holy seed or posterity
in Gods way, and according to Gods Ordinance in its first Institution in
Paradise, and not according to the depravation and corruption of it afterward
by Poligamy. I shall conclude this head with an excellent Relation out of
Eusebius his Eccles. History, lib. 8. c. 14. p. 312. When Maximinus the
Emperor governed in the Eastern parts, among other effects of his wild and
brutish fury and extravagance, he filled all places where he came with
Adulteries and Ravishments, abusing Women, and deflowring Virgins, which
succeeded well enough (says the Historian,) with all others except only
Christians, who generously despising death, made light of the rage and fury of
the Tyrant: The men underwent all sorts of Punishments which Cruelty could
invent; the Women bore up with a Courage no less manly and unconquerable, and
when any were drawn out to be abused, they rather submitted their Lives to
Death: which shows that the Lives of those Primitive Christians, was
answerable to the preceptive part of their Religion, and their practice above
all others.

Second Reason for Mortification of all Uncleanness, Because that while our
Lusts remain unmortified, all our Services will be rejected, Isa. 1. 13, 14.
Their (...)ings were vain, Incense an Abominati^^; their Religious days, their
New Mons, ^^eir Sabbaths, and their appointed Feasts my Soul hates, says the
Lord; their religious Assemblies too I cannot away with, it is Iniquity even
your solemn meeting; In the 16 verse. Wash you, make you clean, inwardly clean,
or as verse. 10 implies, cleanse your selves from the sins of Sodom, according
to those words, Ye Rulers of Sodom, Ye people of Gomorrha; and verse 21, How is
the faithful City become an Harlot! may be compared with that before, be
literally understood, and argue their guilt even in this kind. Further, the 2 Timothy ^. 22. Flee also youthful Lusts, but follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity,
Peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart; the words import,
as if none did follow after Righteousness, but such as call on the Lord out of
a pure heart, others are not mentioned in the number, nor their Services of any
account, not accepted as the works of Righteousness. If I regard Iniquity in my
heart, the Lord will not hear my prayers, says David: David was an Holy man,
God himself gave him that Testimony, yet while his Lusts remained unmortified,
after his Adultery with Bathsheba, and like enough some time before it, his
Prayers were not heard; it is plain enough by that instance of his Murder of
Vriah, adding Sin unto Sin. If his Prayers had been heard, (as no doubt but he
did pray in the Interim between the Adultery committed, and the Prophet Nathans
reproof of him by the Parable,) God would never have left him to fall further,
not into so crying a Sin as the Murder of the Husband. This seems too to have
been the case of Solomon, while his lusts remained unmortified, as during his
many Wives; all his religious performances availed little or nothing, as 1
Kings, 11. where you find him drawn away by his Women to Idolatry; in the 4th.
verse it is said, his Wives turned away his heart after other Gods, building
high places for their Idols. Even thus it is with Good men, while their lusts
remain unmortified, their Services remain unaccepted. In Malachi, 2. 13. ye
read of those that covered the Altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and
with crying out, but the Lord regarded not their offering, nor received it with
good will at their hands; yet they said, Wherefore? Answered, because they
dealt treacherously with the Wife of your youth; verse. 1^ explaineth it, the
Lord says that he hates* putting away. This I urge in no wise as an^ argument
against prayer and other duties, as if people should cease to pray and leave
serving God, because of the naughtiness of their hearts; for that were running
farther and farther from God, and that grace which should reform and better
them: But only for this end, that people should pray more, and even turn the
chief force of their prayers against their Lusts, and labor more to bring
their Lusts in subjection, that so nothing remain to hinder their prayers from
being heard, or to defile and pollute their Services.

Third Argument for Mortification, Unmortified lusts argue a man to be dead in
Grace, such as remain unsubdued, when constant and permanent, and not only
temporary, as in good men, Titus, 3. 3. For we our selves also were sometime
foolish, disobedient, serving diverse Lusts and pleasures; sometime, that is, in
their unregenerate Estate, 1 Timothy 5. 6. She that lives in pleasure is dead
while she lives, even as those, 2 Timothy 3. 4. Who were lovers of pleasures more
than lovers of ^od. And those, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. before they were quickened or
received the spirit of Life from God, were ^ead in trespasses and sins; dead as
to the ^piritual Life, the life of Gaace, which ^^ the most sad and deplorable
kind of death: they are said to have had the^ Conversation in the lusts of
their Flesh, fulfilling the desires of the Flesh and of the mind, and were by
nature, (or their corruption of nature since sin and the fall,) children of
wrath even as others; all others are while they walk in the lusts of the flesh,
( Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye,) stand Condemned by the
word of God, and adjudged to eternal death: But if ye through the spirit do
mortisie the deeds of the body, ye shall live. When any of Pythagoras his
Scholars had degenerated in their Morals, from the sober, modest and virtuous
precepts of their Master, and let themselves loose to all kind of Vice, and
brutish sensuality, there was set a Bier as for dead men's Corpse in his Room, to
signify that the man was dead, though the Beast was alive. Among those that
were invited to the Gospel Feast, Luke 14. 20. you find one made his excuse, he
had Married a Wife and could not come; not come and serve God in his
Ordinances, or at least not heartily, his heart was after his Lusts: Not to be
so taken, as if a Married State were inconsistent with Religion, or that they
did ill in Marrying, which is an Ordinance of God, but the laying Religion
aside then* as if it were not a time for Religion, and indulging their Lusts,
and giving themselves up to their Marriage pleasure, without any regard to God,
for to serve him, which must be our main business in every estate of Life.

Fourth Argument for Mortification of our Lusts, Because we vowed to God and
Covenanted in our Baptism, to renounce the sinful lusts of the Flesh: The
Devil, the World, and the Flesh, are the enemies of our Salvation, mentioned in
our Church Catechism, and in holy Scripture, as Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. St. James, chapter 1.
4. Lusts are said to War in our Members; and in 1 Epist. of Peter, c. 2. 11.
Abstain from fleshly Lusts which War against the Soul; and the Soul must War
against them for ever, renouncing all the sinful lusts of the Flesh, that is,
disowning, rejecting them, their motions and temptations, with an hatred and
abhorrence of them in our hearts, or at least such a dislike of them as may
prevail against them.

Now if Covenants made in worldly matters, as Bonds and Leases, bind their
Heirs and Successors, even the Children yet unborn; so in Spirituals, when
Parents Covenant for their Children in Baptism, desiring it for their Children,
and procuring others as Sureties to be bound with them for the greater
assurance of the Childrens Religious Education, and performance of the Covenant
Duties and Conditions, no doubt but it binds them as much in Spirituals, to
stand to, and perform the Religious, as well as the Civil Contracts and
Covenants. And he is Perjured who breaks this solemn Vow and Covenant, that
lives at peace and at friendship with the World or the Flesh, loving his Lusts,
without that hatred and enmity which he is bound to by Baptism, to strive and
struggle with them for the Mastery, to Watch and Pray, and use all good and
holy means for their Mortification; and so long as ye hold out this good fight
of Faith, resisting this Spiritual Enemy, and praying against your Lusts, so
long you keep your ground and quit your selves like men, and are Conquerours if
you are not Conquered, though you may not have that full Victory, that
triumphant satisfaction in your Spirit, and that inward peace which some others
have. But if once they work you off from Prayer, and you cannot pray against
them, or no otherwise than St. Austin before his Conversion, Domine da
castitatem, da Continentiam, sed non modo, Lord give me Chastity, give me
Continence, but not now. If people are loath that God should hear their prayers;
but if they pray really, and the heart truly desire what they pray for, so long
it looks well, and no longer; or if a man means to make a Truce or Cessation of
Arms and Hostility for any time, during the heat of Summer, or the presence and
Company of this or that beloved Body, he throws away his Weapons, he yields,
and is overcome; and if he live in a continual Peace and League with them, and
do not recover himself, and renew his Spiritual Warfare, he is utterly lost and
undone for ever.

Fifth Argument: We must Mortify our Lusts, or if you will, lustful Members,
according to the literal sense of the words, because our Bodies are Members of
Christ, and this Argument the Holy Ghost urges, 1 Cor. 6. 15. Know ye not that
your bodies are the Members of Christ: Shall I then take the Members of Christ,
and make them Members of an Harlot? God forbid. I must snew in what sense our
Bodies are the Members of Christ; and then how that argues for Mortification of
our Lusts. Christ and Christi^ns are one Body, one Spiritually, as 1 Cor. 6.
17. and Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. Christ is said to be head over all things to his
Church, which is his Body, etc. Christ the Head and Fountain of Spiritual Life,
Sense, and Motion; and Christians Members of that Body, influenced, acted, and
enlivened by one and the selfsame Spirit, which Christ received without
measure, or infinitely in perfection, that so he might abundantly communicate
it to his Members, enabling them to mortisie the evil Concupiscence in their
hearts, and the Lusts of the Flesh, that Flesh and Blood, or Bodies of Sin
which they carry about them. Now since there is such a Spiritual Union between
Christ and us, and we are taken into such a near Relation unto Christ, as
Members in that Mystical body, whereof he is the Head of Influence; should not
the Members bear a Conformity to their Head? If he was pure even to perfection,
ought not we to resemble him in that Purity, by a Mortification of Uncleanness?
And as it is in the Marriage Office, Keep your selves undefiled Members of
Christ's body.

Again, Our Bodies are Members of Christ, as they are Members of the same Flesh
and Blood, or bodies of the same kind with that which Christ ^ook upon him in
the days of his Flesh, as it is expressed, Hebr. 5. 7. Chap. 2. 14. For as much
then as the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also took part o^ the
same, and so exalted our Nature above the nature of Angels, by assuming it, and
uniting it to his Divine Nature. He was God-man, or God manifest in the Flesh,
1 Timothy 3. 16. And thus he honored it in the highest Nature, and made it
adorable in that Hypostatical Union with the Divine Nature.

Again, He honored it by the Purity of his immaculate Conception, through the
power of the Holy Ghost, (and not after the ordinary manner of men, in their
fallen and corrupt State, by a sinful Generation,) and by the pure manner of
his Birth, of a Virgin undefiled, and free and pure from men: The force of this
Argument consists herein, If Christ so highly exalted our Nature, above that of
Angels, shall we abase it to the Beasts that perish, by living to sense, and
the sinful cravings of the Flesh? Shall we make that Flesh vile by our Lusts
(and so contemtptible,) which the Son of God made Venerable by his Incarnation,
and which is glorified in Christ as in Capite, and which we expect hereafter to
be made like unto Christ's glorious Body? Can we expect this corruptible
(subject to corruption, in the worst sense of the words,) should put on
incorruption, unless it put off all its corrupt Lusts before it dies, on this
side the grave, that so it might be sit for that Inheritance which is
incorruptible, undefiled, etc.

Sixth Argument for Mortification of our Members or Lusts, Because our Bodies
are Temples of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God. Our Souls
and Bodies were Dedicated to God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in our
Baptism, and thereby Consecrated and become Holy, even Temples of the Holy
Ghost, through his gracious presence and Inhabitation.

But by Lust, these Temples are polluted and profaned, and become the
Habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage of every
unclean and hateful Bird, as it is prophesied of spiritual Babylon, Rev. 18. 2.
Conceive we of Men's Lusts flying up and down in their Minds and Imaginations,
as Birds do in the Air, or shut up in their Hearts, as Birds are cooped up in a
Cage, ready to fly out upon opportunity, and break loose, as the Lusts of Men's
hearts are almost upon every Occasion and Temptation.

You have heard in time of our Domestical Wars, of turning Churches into
Stables, and polluting them; but it is to tur^ these Temples of the Holy Ghost
into worse than Stables, if we prostitute them to our vile lusts. You read in
Ephesians. 4. 29, 30. a Caution, Let no Corrupt Communication proceed out of your
Mouth; and it follows in the next verse, And Grieve not the holy Spirit; noting
to us, that the pure and holy Spirit of God is grieved, afflicted, and as it
were made sad by naughtiness of our discourse, thoughts or actions, and so
provoked to withdraw from us, and to leave us. The most nasty Kennels or
Gutters, and Sinks, that receive the filth and off* scouring of things; the
very Excrements themselves, and the worst dunghils, are not such an Annoyance
and Offense unto us, as our vile Lusts and corrupt Affections are to the Holy
Spirit of God; these are more loathsome, and a greater Abomination unto him,
than the most stinking unsavory smells are unto us.

The last Argument shall be taken from the tremendous Judgments that the Lord
has Denounced and Inflicted on Sinners in this sort. Heb. 13. 4. Whoremongers
and Adulterers, God will Judge; and that severely too, punishing them commonly
in this World, and in the World to come. Genesis 6. 2, 3. shows you that it had an
hand in drowning the World: When the Sons of God (that is, the holy Seed of
Seths Race) saw the Daughters of Men (wicked Men, and the Children like the
Parents wicked too, according to the sense of the words) that they were fair,
they took them to Wives; their Lusts within, was smitten with the others
Beauty, and betrayed them to that graceless Match; then it soon follows, even
in the next verse, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man; and after it:
The wickedness of Man was great in the Earth, and it repented the Lord that he
had made Man: And the Lord said, I will destroy Man, whom I have Created, from
the Face of the Earth, both Man and Beast. And you know, the filthy
Conversation and unlawful Deeds in this kind of the Men of Sodom, as they vexed
Righteous Lot at the Heart, so they brought down the greatest sort of Judgment
that ever was inflicted on any Sinners, Fire and Brimstone from Heaven to
consume Sodom and Gomorrah, with the Cities of the Plain. And Numb. 25. 12.
when Israel began to commit Whoredom with the Daughters of Moab, and that led
them unto the Spiritual Whoredom of Idolatry, the Lord sent a Plague among
them; which in the 9th ver. swept away four and twenty thousand; with Zimri and
Cozbi slain. Deuteronomy. 22. 22. both the Adulterer and the Adulteress were to be put
to death by the Lords own Commandment; and if the tokens of Virginity were not
found for the Damsel after Marriage, Deuteronomy. 22. 21. Then she was to be stoned
with stones at the Door of her Fathers House: And so Numb. 5. 14. you find the
Trial of Jealousy; If the Spirit of Jealousy come upon a Man, and he be
Jealous of his Wife that she is Defiled, the Priest shall take Holy Water, and
of the dust that is in the Floor of the Tabernacle, and put it into the Water,
and charge the Woman with an Oath of Cursing, saying, The Lord make thee a
Curse, and an Oath among thy People, if thou be Defiled; and this Water that
causes the Curse, shall go into thy Bowels to make thy belly to swell, and thy
thigh to rot; And the Woman shall say, Amen, Amen: And in the 27th ver. it
should be fulfilled accordingly, and the Woman be a Curse among her people, by
that extraordinary Judgment. And in Jer. 5. 7, 8. When they committed Adultery,
and Assembled themselves by Troops in the Harlots Houses. Shall I not visit for
these things, says the Lord, etc. Go ye up upon her Walls, and destroy. Ezekiel.
16. 49. said of Judah, That the Iniquity of her Sister Sodom was in her, and in
her Daughters; called Sister to Sodom, because she was like her in Lewdness; in
the 58 ver. Thou have born thy Lewdness, and thine Abominations, says the
Lord, and that was in her Captivity, as the 58 ver. shows: So that it does
appear this wickedness had a great hand in the ruin of that Kingdom; and of
Samaria likewise, put for Israel in this Chapter. How strangely has this Sin
increased, at the ruin of Empires and Kingdoms! as of the Assyrian in
Sardanapalus his time, so effeminate and degenerated, that he lived altogether
among his Women and Concubines, not suffering Men to come to the sight of him.
The Ruin of the Famous Troy, was through an Adulteress Paris taking away, and
keeping Helen Wife to King Menelaus. The Roman Empire declined, and the
Emperors came to ill ends, when they became so prodigiously Lustful; Nero's
vile abuse of his Body with persons of the nearest Consanguinity. Commodus that
kept 300 Concubines, and as many Boys for detestable uses: Bassianus his
Incestuous Marriage of his own Mother in Law Julia; next to him, Macrinus given
over to Lust and Sensuality; after him, Heliogabalus, who appointed in Rome a
Senate of Women: The matters there treated of, were Inventions and means how to
practice their Filthiness and Abomination; at his removing from Rome, often
followed him six hundred Chariots laden only with Bawds and common Harlots: He
ordained Day-businesses to be done by Night, and Night-businesses to be done by
Day. Maximinian, of whom before. Maxentius, so Villainous in his Behavior, that
he abstained not from abusing the Wives of Noble Senators, taking them
violently from their Husbands. Not one of these dyed a^ natural Death: Besides
that the Kingly Government at Rome was ejected, upon Tarquinius Superbus his
forcing of that Noble Matron Lucretia. Herod (not Herod mentioned Acts 12. 23.
eaten with Worms,) and Herodias, that Incestuous Harlot, are said to have died
in great Penury and Misery at Lions in France.

And alas! How many Evils does this Sin bring upon the Body! How does it weaken
and enfeeble the strength of Men and Women that are much addicted to it!
especially those that are given to self-pollutions: Insomuch, that they bring
that Curse upon themselves, denounced in the Holy Scriptures, that the wicked
should not live out half their days: Which sad experience shows to be true,
that many of these Sinners (against their own Souls or Bodies, shall I say, or
indeed against both) dye in the midst of their Age, or young in comparison with
what they might have reached to in the course of Nature, had they no ways
shortened their days, and brought themselves to an untimely end, by their undue
or excessive Lust. And why should not Men be afraid of some ill Distemper, so
incident and common to those that make a common trade and practice of this Sin,
such a foul and loathsome Distemper, that they are an Offense and Annoyance to
others whither soever they come, and can scarce be endured above ground; so
infectious it is, that all shun such Creatures. And ah! How many have dyed
Martyrs to this Sin! Oh, England, that boastest of those that have been Martyrs
for thy God, be ashamed and confounded, that the number does so much exceed of
those that have dyed in this sort of Martyrdom! And O what more lingering deaths
have these been put to, rotting even alive, and dying by piecemeal, and that
with Pain and Torment too, burning with a consuming Fire, which their Lusts
have kindled here, until they come to dwell with that devouring Fire, or
fierceness of Gods wrath, and everlasting Burnings hereafter. And surely the
sense and consideration of* everlasting burnings, would have enough in it to
quench the flames of Lust, and make the unclean person tremble, and flee from
his impure and adulterous embraces, so short for pleasure, but in the pain and
punishment following them everlasting.

Besides what has been said, this Sin is no less mischievous to the Souls,
than to the Bodies of Men, by corrupting the Judgments of lewd persons with
dangerous (if not damnable) errors, and their Conversations with filthy and
abominable practices, scandalous to the pure Religion of Christian: Many
Instances may be given of this; as in the first Century, Cerinthus against
whom, and Ebion, denying the Divinity of Christ, some have thought the Gospel
of St. John to have been more directly intended, for Confutation of their
Errors. Cerinthus pretended to Revelations from Angels (and for ought I know,
he might be in the right, if he had Fathered it on the evil Angels, not on the
good:) That after the Resurrection from the dead, Christ should have an Earthly
Kingdom in this World, and that the Subjects of Christ's Kingdom should eat and
drink, and Marry, and keep Holy Days; for he himself was a Man given to fleshly
Lusts, and he imagined that the pleasures of Christ's Kingdom should consist in
fulfilling the Concupiscence of the Flesh. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 18.

The Nicolaitans also, mentioned Rev: 2. 6. of the Church of Ephesus, that she
hated the Deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate, says the Lord. Acts 6.
and 5 verse. Nicolas, one of the Deacons chosen by the Apostles (as Clemens
Alexandrinus writes, Strom. 3.) had a Beautiful Wife, and was accused of
overmuch jealousy: To purge himself, he brought forth his Wife into the midst
of his Brethren, and said, he was content any Man should Marry her. Of which
words, many took occasion to live promiscuously like Beasts, no Man having his
own proper Wife, but making them all common, as our Family of Love did in Queen
Elizabeth's days. The Gnostics also in the beginning of the second Century,
they were justly called Borbo i^ae or coenosi, because they were filthily
polluted in the mire of Uncleanness: By their unhonest and filthy Conversation
it came to pass, that the true Professors of the Gospel were vilely Slandered
by persecuting Pagans, objecting to Christians the Banquets of Thyestes, and
the Chambering of Oedipus. The Encratitae condemned Marriage in this Century.
In the third Century we read of the Adamiani, who had their Assemblies in
subterraneal places, called Hypocausta, because that under the place of their
meetings, a furnace of Fire was kindled to warm the same, where they uncloathed
themselves, when they entered into it, and stood naked, both Men and Women,
according to the Similitude of Adam and Eve before their fall. Apostolici also,
who among other things, rejected Marriage, giving out a Sentence against
themselves, that they were unclean, because they were procreated by Marriage,
and consequently they were for promiscuous Lust.

Origeniani and Turpes (as they were called) were vile and filthy Beasts, not
abhorring from Whoredom, but from procreation of Children, to the end, that
they might seem chaste, not unlike to Onan the Son of Judah, whom the Lord
destroyed. These are mentioned by Epiphanius, as also the Hieracitae, who
condemned Marriage, and Manichees, as Epiphanius contra Haereses, and Hist.
Magdeb. In the 4th Century, we read of the Priscillianists in Spain, that
renewed the Heresy of the Grosticks, who disallowed Marriage, and commended
Fornication: Some Bishops of Spain were entangled with this Heresy, such as*
Justantius, Salvianus, and Helpidius, whom Adygimus Bishop of Corduba Condemned
in a Council; but when Appeals would not relieve them, with Bribes they
solicited the Emperors Cubiculars, and were sent back again to enjoy their own
places. In the 5th. Century, we read of the first Council of Toledo in Spain,
assembled under the Reigns of Arcadius and Honorius, where we find Canons
concerning the prohibition of Marriage to some persons, and the admitting of a
Man to the Communion who wants a Wife, and contenteth himself with one
Concubine only. In the 6th Century, the Council of Tours in France, ordained
that a Bishop should count his Wife as his Sister, and that he should no manner
of way company with her; and the first Council of Maetiscon, that neither
Bishop nor Presbyter should entangle themselves with carnal Lusts: And not to
company with their Wives, was honest and chaste behavior, Satan bringing in
Fornication and all Uncleanness into the Church by this means, until at length
Marriage of Priests was called the Heresy of the Nicolaitans by Gregory the
7th. In Century the 14th. in Alberts time, the Emperor, in Lombardy, a sect of
Heretics which under color of Religion and Charity made all things common,
and they moved one another to Carnal Conjunction, alleging it to be a deed of
Charity.

I come now to consider of the Temptations or the prevailing Motives or
Inducements of this Sin, which are either, First the strong and strange delight
and pleasure of the Sin; our natures by Sin and the fall being as it were sunk
into Flesh, and brutish Sensuality; those things that carry with them the
greatest Gratifications of the Sense, are the most acceptable to our corrupt
depraved natures, as this Sin is upon the very same account, being a
fleshpleasing sensual Sin. What do those that commit this Sin promise
themselves but pleasure? To be sure, the pleasure of the Sin is always ti^ing
them, so that of all the Temptations to this Sin, this bids the fairest with
the Sinner to gain the point. The Remedy against this Temptation:

First, Consider, that Man as to the Soul (the more extellent part, that
animates and acts the Body in its Life and Motion) is a spiritual being, and
must have a spiritual good and happiness, called an Inheritance incorruptible,
und^filed, or pure and incorrupt, refined from Sense; when the pleasures of the
flesh cannot answer that noble End for which man is designed, nor suit with
such a being as Man is, being mer^ly accommodated to the Animal, and not the
Intellectual Angelical Life.

Secondly, Though some have said, that the pleasures of Lust, might vye with
the pleasures of Paradise; have you not heard too of a Paradise of Fools? For
indeed, this is such a Paradise, as only Fools and the worst of Men would take
for their Portion and Happiness: Good and Chaste, Virtuous and wise Men value it
but at a a low rate, being convinced of the poorness and meanness of a sensible
good, the emptiness and insufficiency of such good: After long enjoyment, such
pleasures grow flat and dry, perhaps ad nauseam usque, and Men's appetite to
them cease, as Amnons to Thamar, or leaves such a longing and hankering
after them, that they are still uneasy and in pain in the long intervals.

Thirdly, Look and aim at higer pleasures, the pleasures that are to be found
in the ways of God; for all his Ways are ways of pleasantness, and his paths
are peace. You read of those that call the Sabbath a delight, and, delighting
thy self in the Lord, taking delight in approaching unto God, and those fearing
the Lord, and delighting greatly in his Commandments.

Next the pleasures that follow and flow from a conscientious discharge of our
Duty to God and Man, such as the loving kindnesses of the Lord, in whose favor
is Life, or vita vere vitalis, the peace of Conscience, the comforts of the
Spirit, and the Hope of Glory, and those better pleasures which are at Gods
right Hand for evermore, pleasures in perfection, ever fatisfactory, never
cloyed therewith.

Fourthly, Consider though this pleasure be sweet in the Mouth, and the taste,
yet it is bitter in the end, and the present pleasure bought with future pain,
this Moment with Eternity. Ah! Nocet empta dolor voluptas; such pleasure costs
too dear, if there be no pain and remorse in the conscience, when the Sinner
reflects on his way and his doings: If the Body escape too that Painful and
Tormenting Disease, yet Soul and Body must both rue it in the other World, and
that not according to the time they enjoyed these pleasures, which would then
be short indeed, if their Misery could end so soon as their short-lived
pleasure, but momentum quod delectat, etc. the act of Sin is transient, the
guilt, and consequently the punishment diuturnum, and beyond that, aeternum,
not only long, but Eternity long.

Thirdly, Consider how unlike this is to the Purity of the Primitive
Christians; instead of finding pleasure, and being drawn to Sin under that
Notion, they looked upon it as one of the severest punishments to be
prostituted and exposed to the Lusts of Men, by Rudeness and Violence. This
Tertullian urges in the close of his Apology, c. ult. p. 40. While you choose
to Condemn a Woman that is a Christian to the Stews, then to the Lions, ad
Lenonem* quam ad Leonem, you plainly confess that the Violation of Chastity, is
accounted by us an heavier penalty, than any punishment or kind of death which
you can inflict upon us. St. Hierom relates an eminent instance hereof, Vita
Paul. Eremit. Tom. 1. p. 237. In the Decian Persecution, a young Man, a
Christian, in the Flower and Beauty of his Age, was carried into a Garden that
had ^^ things conspiring to make it a place for Pleasure and Delight, being
laid upon a Bed of Down, and fastened to it with silken Cords, the Company
withdrawing, a Beautiful Strumpet was sent in to him, who caressing him, and
treating him with all the Arts of wantonness, not consisting with modesty to
name, the young Man finding the Temptation beginning to prevail, presently bit
off his Tongue, and spit it in her face as she attempted to kiss him. Origin at
Athens, when put to this unhappy choice, either to Sacrifice to Idols, or
suffer his chaste Body to be defiled with a filthy Ethiopian, chose rather to
commit Idolatry, than Fortification, though that too was rather his enemies Act
than his own, they thrusting the Frankincense into his Hand, and haling him up
to the Altar. For which Fact, or the scandal of the report, he was
Excommunicated and Disowned by the Christians: However, this showed his
Abhorrence of Uncleanness, etc.

Oh! Then flee from, and fear the killing smiles, and flattering Lust, dally
not, parley not with them, least the deceitful and tempting pleasure of this Sin
beguile and corrupt thee. Give not place to the Devil, while he is feeding
thine imagination with the pleasures of the Flesh, and persuading thee to taste
of his sweet Dish: Resist the Devil, and then he will flee from you. Principiis
obsta, is a good Rule in this case, stop Sin in its first onset, then it is
weakest, but gets ground and gathers strength as you give way to it, and
entertain it in its motions. The pleasure of this Sin to a considering Man,
must needs be inconsiderable, such as commonly all things considered even in
this Life, brings more grief and disquietment than Satisfaction: Such pleasure
as we shall be more Spiritual and better without it, than with it; and such
pleasure, as to be sure will be bitterness in the latter end. Alas! we look
upon Sin only in its specious posture coming toward us, Fair and Beautiful to
behold, in a goodly dress, recommending it self to us with Profit, Pleasure,
Honor, or the like Allurements; but could we see the hinder parts of Sin, it
would appear like the Father of it, the Devil, when he is taking his leave and
Vanishing, ugly and Deformed: When Sin is going from us after the Commission of
it, it is black and Melancholy, hanging down its head with Sorrow, or hiding
its Face for Shame or Fear, or like those that gnawed their Tongues for pain,
or with gnashing of Teeth for very madness and Vexation of Spirit, with
Scorpion stings at the tail of it, to Torment the Sinner, and the Fire burning
toward him, to come at him, and catch him within its flames: This sight
indeed, would cool the Sinners Courage, and make Men flee from Sin as from a
Serpent. Again, some there are, to whom this Sin holds forth its two fair
Breasts, of Profit as well as Pleasure, to allure them within its Embraces:
These are chiefly of the other Sex. Those who keep public Houses, and so the
keeping of a naughty Woman, brings custom to the House, and they say increases
their Trade; and those who are kept as Misses to great persons, and I suppose
look upon themselves to have attained great Preferment, besides those that
prostitute themselves to the Lusts of any comers in a common promiscuous
manner, perhaps making a Trade of this Sin, and getting their Maintenance this
way. Other some perhaps by promiscuous Lusts to hinder Conception, and so for
prevention of more Children, and to save the charge and cost that is required
in the feeding and clothing and portioning of them.

To which I answer, First, how vile a thing is it to let out themselves to
hire, to fell as it were their Souls for the possession of the Devil that
unclean Spirit, and their Bodies to the filthy Lusts of Men. O shame upon those
that renounced the World (Worldly gain so far as Sinful) the Flesh and the
Devil, thus shamefully to Apostatize! How near does their Sin approach to that
wicked Ahab, who sold himself to work wickedness, and has it set as a Brand or
Mark of Infamy upon him, and whose Sin was so notoriously great, that it could
not be cleansed without the Destruction of his Family.

Secondly, Others there are that find this a very Chargeable Sin, putting them
to the charge first of a Treat or Entettainment, then for the Act of
Naughtiness, and a third charge many times for the Cure after it. The keeping
of lewd Women, and providing portions for their base Brood, Adulterous issue,
has wasted great Estates, and been the ruin of many Families, or at least
what vast expenses has it put many to, so that what the one party gets, the
other loses, and more besides. Even some among the other* Sex have been losers
in this World, sometimes by Marrying such as were too well known by them
before, in the days of their first Husband, and who has spent all, and brought
them to Poverty; or if of meaner Rank, by getting such a noisome Distemper, as
has made them abhorred by all, that none would employ them for a livelihood,
none Receive or Entertain them; or which made them unfit for work, or so
weakened and impaired their strength, that they could do but little when their
old Age came upon them, or their Trade failed.

Thirdly, All such Gain as is gotten in this manner, is accursed, it will
defile the rest of your Substance, even contrary to what is said of Alms; Give
Alms of such things as ye have, and behold all things are clean unto you; that
is, cleansed from Sin, Sanctified, Blessed, so as not only to have them with
Gods leave, but with his Love. But such filthy lucre (in the literal downright
Sense of the words) will make all polluted and unclean, all under the curse, if
such gain at the last will not be separated from the rest, even the clean from
the unclean. When did you ever know any enrich a Family by this means, with an
abiding Wealth? Is it not likely that some at least of the Posterity, should
spend and consume it upon their Lusts, in the same way that the other got it?

Fourthly, If you get never so much Gain this way, yet when you come to cast up
your accounts at the General Reckoning and great Day of Accounts, you will come
off a loser, an eternal loser, when all your gain will signify nothing, none
of it abide with you for your comfort. But what would it profit you, if you
gained never so much in this World? For what shall one give in exchange for the
Soul? That is, the Soul is of so much worth, that nothing in the World can
equalize it, nothing can vye with, or countervail the loss of an immortal Soul,
which is an infinite loss, being lost to all Eternity, and so irrecoverably.

Fifthly; As to those Married persons, who prostitute their Bodies to the Lusts
of Men, least they should conceive and bear Children, and bring a charge upon
themselves, by living honestly with their own Husbands:

I Answer, First, That does not always take effect. All that do or would keep
company in this manner, cannot have their end in this. For all are not so bad
and abominably wicked, as to rush headlong into such a damning guilt as
Adultery is: Nay, I hope, very few in our Country Parishes remote from the
City, but what would startle and boggle at such a wickedness, and what through
their necessary Employments in their Worldly business, and the fear of being
discovered, or strongly suspected, if they should Trespass, and ^e often in
such persons Company; and what through their Ignorance of these Women, that are
so evil and Adulterous, few even of these that would make no Conscience of the
Sin, do actually concur for the prevention of Children in these promiscuous
Lusts.

Again, Parents ought to trust God to provide for their Children, that God (as
the Prove^b is) who se^ds Mouths, will send Meat. He that feeds the young
Ravens that cry unto him, will not suffer little Children to perish for want of
Food. Psalm. 147. 9. When was it known? Scarce ever, that any Infant or Child
should be starved. You know the Law will allow them necessaries.

Again, Thirdly, Those that have many Children, above all persons are the
fittest Objects of Charity: For it is some sign that they live honestly and
chastely; and the charge which they are to their Relations, or to a Parish, is
such as God and Nature offer to them, and such as cannot be avoided well, nor
justly blamed. There have been privileges allowed by some Nations, (by the
Roman especially) to those that had four* Children. And in all doles or
charitable gifts, we should have a consideration of such persons especially, as
having more lets and hindrances from their work, than others, and by the
number of the Children, their strength somewhat impaired; upon which accounts,
one of our most useful ways of bestowing our Charity, is upon such as these
that abound with Children.

Fourthly, Children and the Fruit of the Womb, are a Gift and Heritage that
comes of the Lord: A Blessing of the Lord, who as Genesis 9. Blessed Noah and his
Sons, and said, Be Fruitful and Multiply, and replenish the Earth. Such a
Blessing it is to have Children, that many would give hundreds, thousands of
pounds for Issue; and how earnestly did Hannah beg it of God? Abraham and Sarah
prize their Isaac: And Rachel longs for Children: Who would not rather have
many Children, than none at all? Such Marriages where they have no Children,
are looked upon as Comfort^ess and Unblest. Children are the dearest pledges of
the Parents Love, and the joy and staff of their old Age.

Another prevailing Motive and Temptation to these Sins, is Honor; as when
they shall be Solicited to this Sin by persons of Quality, or those that are
above them, they more easily yield, who would have though scorn to have been
naught with those of Inferior Rank. To be a Miss or Whore to a great person,
has been looked upon as a piece of great Preferment, and ^or a Servant to be
admitted to this Sinful ^amiliarity with his Mistress, a choice Fa^our, if not
a Credit to him; so if a fine ^uffling Spark come, he shall more easily ^elude
a poor Country Maid, under the ^retence of Marriage, aspiring to be a ^reat
person.

In Answer to this, First, Whoredom is Whoredom, and Adultery is Adultery;
whether the person be high or low with whom thou sinnest, the sin is the same,
and stands sentenced to the same Condemnation by the Word of God. Therefore
flatter not thy self, that it will be any excuse to thy sin, or plea for thee,
that thou should escape the Righteous Judgment of God. You will not say then
it was the King, or some great Person, and I could not tell how to deny him, or
it would have been taken ill, and I should have fell under his displeasure, etc.

Secondly, God is the Original of all Honor, the pattern to take after, and so
much nearer as we come unto God, by resemblance and conformity to him, so much
the more of real worth and excellency is in us, and honor deservedly due to
us; but sinners in Scripture-sence, the lewd persons in particular, (as Romans 1.
26. vile affections,) are vile and dishonorable: Psalm. 15. 4. In whose eyes,
(that is, in the sight or esteem of the Righteous,) a vile or wicked person is
contemned, but he honors them that fear the Lord. All good Christians, chaste
and virtuous Heathens, honor those that resist, and withstand these
temptations and preserve their Chastity, but look upon others as contemptible.

Thirdly, This sin does really abase man ^elow the dignity of his Nature, and
level him with the Beasts: For the pleasures of the Flesh are but the same that
the Beasts have, and those who make these their choicest delights, and place
their ^ood in the enjoyment thereof, have lost themselves as men; and indeed
this sin ^akes away from men the use of their Reason; for no sooner shall a
temptation of ^his sort be presented, but Lust captivates and carries the
sinner away, as Prove. 7. 22. He goes after her straightway, as an Ox go^h to
the Slaughter, or as a Fool to the Cor^ction of the Stocks, not considering
what ^e does, nor whither he goes.

Fourthly, Consider, besides the false^ess, and unfaithfulness to thy Master
and ^istress, thou art certain to draw their ^ispleasure upon thee, if ever thy
Wick^dness come to light, and to break the ^eace of a Family, and that conjugal
love and affection which ought to be between ^he Married persons; and bring
base blood ^ to a Family, staining the Honor and ^redit of the Family.

Fifthly, Consider the shame that fol^ws this Sin when it is found out, the
^uilty persons being taken notice of by all, and upbraided with it, almost upon
all occasions. I say, if this shame were considered, especially in Virgins, and
youn^ Widows, it must needs awaken them to resist and withstand the Sin, if
they have any concern for their good Name. For what greater reproach and blot
can ther^ be upon them, than for them to miscarr^ and fall so foully before
Marriage, spo^ling their Fortunes, and bringing the Honesty into suspicion ever
after. S^ that if they have any regard to their ow^ Honor and Credit, the
Honourablene^ of the Soliciter will be of little for^ to corrupt them. And they
must have a Whores-forehead for Impudency, wh^ are not touched with the shame,
like tho^ mentioned, Jer. 6. 15. Were they asham^ when they had committed
Abomination? Na^ they were not at all ashamed, neither cou^ they blush.

Lastly, Consider of some Instances, of Joseph's rej^cting his Mistresses
imm^dest and unchaste desires, Genesis 39. 7. ^ lie with her, though she was Wife
to a gre^ and honorable Person, no less than Ca^tain of the Guard to Pharaoh,
as the wor^ seem to import. And Eusebius. Hist. Eccl^ lib. 8. c. 14. p. 312. He
tells us of a W^ man of Alexandria, the Emperor Max^minus often attempted her
by all the Ar^ ^f Solicitation, but all in vain, till at ^st, not being able to
prevail, he would ^ot put her to Death, but spoiled her being of Noble Birth
and great For^nes) of her Estate, and then sent her ^ Banishment.

The like he relates of a Noble Wo^an at Rome, Wife to the Prefect or Go^ernour
of the City, that Maxentius the ^mperour, being passionately in love with ^er,
sent Officers to fetch her, who break^g into the House, would violently have
^ized on her; of whom she begged only ^ much time, as to dress and adorn her
^lf a little, under which pretense reti^ng, she caught up a Sword, and by a
fa^l stroke-dispatch'd her self: They were ^ot so compliant as the Women of our
^ays, with the Lusts of Princes.

Another prevailing motive, and power^l Attractive to this Sin, is the
Beautiful^ess of the Person. An handsome man, or a ^andsome Woman, strikes the
eye as plea^nt to behold, and the eye being enamou^ed with the Object, or the
Soul (which ^eth thorough the eye as the Organon vi^s,) being delighted
therewith, corrupts ^e heart to a lusting after it, in an evil ^oncupiscence.
Those Women that are ^ept under the Name and Notion of Miss, are real or
fancied Beauties: and the r^port of a Beauty, (if she be corrupted, an^ so will
comply with lustful man's desire fets him on his March; when the app^tite is
dull, and another person will n^ relish with him, yet this comely person this
Beauty, will have its Charms, an^ such strong ones, that he is presently
ca^tivated; which made Democritus put o^ his eyes, because not able to defend
himself against the Charms of Beauty.

To which I answer, First, Scripture and Reason tell us, Beauty is vain, Pro^
31. 30. Vain it is, as being altogether useless in point of Religion, a
dangero^ snare and temptation to the person tha^ has it, and to others; an
hinderanc^ commonly rather than help to Religion Vain again as to emptiness, as
void of a^ real good, worth, or excellency, an^ consequently insufficient for
the comfor^ and happiness of man's Life. Vain, because Res^^est Forma fugax:
Beauty is subject to decay, and may be impaired or lo^ many ways, by a Cut or
Wound on the Face, by a falling fit into the Fire, as have known, or a fall
from an Horse, o^ otherwise hurting or bruising, blemishin^ the Countenance, or
by the Smallpox disfi^guring the face, or a tertian ague, the Palsy o^ the
like, being subject to many Chan^s; and if persons be not honest as well fair,
to somewhat worse, which will not ^enly disfigure, yet change the fair Co^ur in
time into a pale or black swarthy comeliness. But however, old Age ^ll impair
it; and if you look for it af^r Death, you will find but a Worm-ea^n Carcass,
all the Beauty gone and laid the dust. And if Beauty be vain, as ^u have heard,
who but vain persons will such foolish admirers of it? What ^se persons will be
so migh^ily in love ^th Vanity, to court it, and catch at it greedily? Or what
will its embraces ^ofit a man? Or vanity turn to any ac^unt in the enjoyment of
it? Besides, ^at other Creatures excel man in this ^pect, the brightness of
the Stars, and ^eral precious Jewels, the redness of ^e Rose, the White of the
Lilly, and ^odliness of the Flowers, exceed the ^i^e and red of the greatest
Beauty; and ^ne of them, as the precious Stones, ^ld their luster, when that of
Beauty is ^cayed; which should teach you to set ^re light by Beauty, not so
highly to ^ze and prefer it, to seek or pursue it, ^bless your self in the love
and society, ^ssession and fruition of such a Vanity.

Secondly, Beauty is not only vain, b^ worse than Vanity when vitiated and
^praved. As a Jewel of Gold in a Swi^ Snout, so is fair a Woman without
disc^tion, that is, without Wisdom to prese^ her Chastity. Well may she be
com^red to the Swine, because the Swine lo^ to wallow in the Mire, and nasty
di^ filthy places, defiling it self; so does Beauty, corrupted by a foul heart
a^ filthy lewd courses, pollute and defile ^ self, and make her self a most
loathsome a^ abominable Creature, with the worst, not indeed the only deformity,
beyo^ the greatest bodily blemishes. For as the Shape and Feature of the Body,
m^ or less Comely, every one is as God man them, who made every thing good, a^
so none as to their bodily shape, ought be slighted or despised, as an ugly
def^med ill-shapen Creature, much less man a mock and a scorn and matter of
derisio^ for that reproach falls upon their Mak^ whose Workmanship they are,
especia^ when they have that inward Beauty, a^ Spiritual Comeliness of Modesty
and C^stity, Virtue and Religion. But a ^ Face, with a foul Heart, it is but
Sk^deep Beauty, a goodly show and app^rance, or as a little flourish or gild^
outwardly, when there is the worst Ugli^ess and Deformity, the most vile
Nasti^ess and Filthiness inwardly, that if it ^ould but be seen, it would turn
the Sto^ack, ad nauseam usque, to the very loa^ing of the person that you so
much ad^ire for her Beauty. And indeed those ^at have the least of this bodily
Comeli^ess and outward Beauty, are to be pre^rred before her, not half so ugly
and ^eformed Creatures as she is: And if you ^ould not be naught with such
persons, because they have no form nor comeliness ^ them that you should desire
them, nor ^ould you with these, if you could dis^rn their Spiritual Deformity,
and ^ould set that against their Skin-deep ^eauty, much outweighing it, because
^e deformity is of the better part, such ^ is Spiritual, and will be an eternal
blot ^d blemish upon them without Repen^nce.

Thirdly, If Beauty tempt thee, no ^ubt but thou will meet with some come^
Persons who will not be corrupted by ^ee; some that are so well fortified with
^race, that all thy solicitations to Sin ^ll but return upon thy self with
shame ^d disappointment; and if thou can ^t withstand the pretended Charms of
Beauty, then thy passion will continue, ^ Amnons to Thamar, 2 Samuel 13. 2. A^
Amnon was so vexed, that he fell sick for ^ Sister Tamar, and grew lean from
day to da^ through the fury and violence of his pa^ on raging inwardly: and
then to wha^ sad Condition will thou be brought, p^haps like to Haman, through
the cont^ry passion of hatred and revenge, who^ Esth. 5. 11, 12, 13.
notwithstanding t^ Glory of his Riches, and the multitude of ^ Children, and
all his Honor, yet all ^ availed him nothing, said he, so long as ^ could not
be satisfied in his revenge up^ Mordecai; one passion unsatisfied, w^ put the
whole man out of order.

Fourthly, Thou may expect m^ comfort in thine own Wife, than in a^ other,
Eccles. 9. 9. God has comm^ded thee to live joyfully with the Wife wh^ thou
love, (or should love,) all ^ days of thy life. God gave her to thee ^ a
Comfort, and there is nothing to h^der but that her love may be sweet a^
comfortable unto thee, and answer ^ end of Marriage, for the mutual he^ society
and comfort, that each ought ^ have of other in Prosperity and Adve^ty. But an
Adulterous love, is* so ^ from having God^ blessing to these en^ that it has
such evils attending it, as do embitter the sweet of it with an accusing
Conscience, and the sense of Sin in so doing, and that the end of it will be
sad and dismal, with the fear of discovery, and the secrecy that is sought out,
and opportunity to Sin, which is hard to be found without suspicion; the long
absence and Banishment from each others company, ^inning only by stealth, with
the shame that follows such Lewdness when it is ^ound out. And what though she
be more beautiful, was not your own Wife ^ovely in your eyes when you Married?
And should she not still be precious in thy ^ight, and her love content thee?
Further, Beauty is either in a fair Complexion, ^andsome Features and shape of
the body; ^hese are only pleasing to the eye, and are ^ot at all concerned in
the Act of Whore^om or Adultery, which does not eye ^he beauty of the person,
nor can enjoy that; nor has its pleasures increased ^ore or less, according to
the proporti^n of Beauty in the person; and conse^uently, if the beauty of a
person be an ^gument to look, yet not to Lust, or ^ulterate with the person;
where beauty ^oth not reach, nor contribute to the ^easure of any of those
Acts, which may be greater in those that are void of beauty, and are not so
common to the Lusts of men, as your corrupted beauties are of all the most
sought unto, and consequently the most common. Besides, that it cannot be so
safe for any man to company with them as with his own Wife, if she be honest
and true to him, which cannot be expected of the other sort of Creatures, but
that they should serve for others as well as himself, if not for all comers,
with whom they make any gain and advantage by their Sin, by which means of
their commonness, they as commonly come to be infected. I shall leave a better
example of three famou^ Beauties, for others to admire, in their care to
preserve their Chastity, Domnin^ the Mother, Bernice and Prosdoce the
Daughters, in whose commendation St^ Chrysostom made an Oration on purpos^ Hom.
5. 1. de S. S. Domn. Bern. Pros^ Tom. 1. p. 557. They, eminent for the^ beauty,
and features of their bodies, were sought for as a prey to Lust, under the
Dioclesian Persecution, and fled for it, b^ being found out by the Soldiers
sent t^ search for them, begged leave to step ^ little out of the Road for some
priva^ occasions, and then drowned themselves parishing in the Waters.

Another prevailing Temptation and Inducement to the Commission of this Sin, is
the hope of Secrecy. The eye of the Adulterer waits for the twilight, saying,
no eye shall see me; and disguiseth his face. And therefore this Sin, like the
Works of darkness, flees the Light, and seeks for the most secre^ Chambers and
places of retirement to hide it self, and is very shy of all such places or
persons as may discover it.

To which I Answer, First, That this Sin often leaves such marks in the
Countenance as discover it; the hollowness of the eyes more than ordinary, and
more pale look than at other times, a great shyness of coming into presence,
and some fear and timorousness after the Commissi^n of this Sin, lest it should
be discove^ed; or sometimes by the gifts or presents made upon such account, as
Judahs Sin with Tamar, Genesis 38. 18, 35. By his signet, ^racelets, and his
Staff. Next, persons cannot long practice this Wickedness, but the Neighbors,
Children, or Servants of one ^r both the persons, will shrewdly suspect them,
and their over familiar converse and ^elight in one another Company, and the
love which they bear to each other, will ^iscover it self in Company, and their
^aunts many times are found out, and their

resort to this or that place of secrecy.

Thirdly, Those who are addicted to this Vice, in their variety are like to
meet with those of both sorts, Sound and unsound, and to get a spice of an ill
Distemper, and that will discover the Wife to her Husband, or Husband to the
Wife, and sometimes to all the Neighbors, and they become contemptible upon
that account to all that know them.

Fourthly, Though Married Women have got (as the Proverb says,) a Cloak for
their sin, yet you know the Fruits of this Sin discover themselves in those
Women that are corrupted before Marriage, and their shame comes to light. The
Tokens of Virginity were to be sought in the New-Marri^d Woman, as Deuteronomy. 22. 17.

Fifthly, The Providence of God works for the discovery of this wickedness
very often remarkably: He so disquiets the Conscience of some of the persons,
that they can have no peace until they discover it: if ever they come to any
sense of, and Repentance for the Sin, they must confess their offense and ask
forgiveness, especially if it can be done prudentially* without an open
publishing of their shame*

How often does the man in Drink, bla^ out and discover his shame, though no^
without the hand of God in it? Or how often does the Child prove the very
Picture of the Lover, and discover it, so that people read Adultery in the Face
of it, and can discern the true Father of it! Or when people come to dye, then
(...) least, the Conscience finds the weight of Adultery lie heavy upon it; and
those that are under suspicion of it, the Minister, according to our duty, may
put it to them, that if they find their Consciences troubled with any weighty
matter, (as it is in the Visitation of the Sick,) to make special confession of
their Sin, and not to go out of the World, with such a guilt upon their Souls
unrepented of.

Sixthly, If they should hide it from Man at the time of acting this Sin, yet
shall not God see it. I have read of a Woman, who being very importunate with
one of the Fathers, ( Paphnutius,) to corrupt him, he at last yielded to her,
provided she could contrive it so, as to be sure none should see them; and when
she had led him up into the most secret Chamber, she thought she had done the
condition: But, says he, are you sure that there is no one present? or to that
effect; does no^ God see us? If we sin, will it not be in his presence? And
upon the sense of being under Gods sight and presence urged home by him, she
was so effectually convinced, that she fetched a deep Groan, her eyes run down
with tears, she fell down upon her Knees, detesting her wicked Life, and
^^ntinued for her lifetime praying, Thou that made me, have mercy upon me.
Consider, thou that art afraid to commit Adultery in the Marketplace, or in
the presence of thy Husband, how art thou not afraid to sin in the presence of
that God, who is of purer eyes than to behold Iniquity? If men see thee, thou
would be ashamed, but God sees thee, and his Eye is upon thee, who beholds
ungodliness, and wrong to requite it, and recompense the sinner according to
his ways: He sees in secret, into the secrets of thy heart, and intentions of
Adultery, and into thy secret Chambers. Psalm. 139. sets forth Gods allseeing
eye, and Omnipresence. And you know God has appointed a day in which he will
Judge the World; and as Eccles. 12. 14. God shall bring every work into
Judgment, with every secret thing. Matthew. 4. 22. There is nothing hid which
shall not be manifested, neither any thing kept secret but that it shall come
abroad.

Again, lastly, Some are emboldned to sin with the hopes of Repentance; they
say it is but repenting and all is well; and though now their youthful blood
runs hot in their Veins, yet when the heat of youth is over, or when they are
out of their Time, says this or that Apprentice, and when they light of a good
Match, they will Marry and live honestly.

I Answer, I could heartily wish that you would repent at any time, but I must
tell you, you are not sure of repenting at all unless you do it now. There are
thousands in Hell who meant to repent before they dyed, but they presumed that
they were yet young enough, and might have time to repent hereafter, and so
sinned on until they were either hardened in their sin, and had no will to
repent; or put it off so long until Death came upon them in their unpardoned
and unrepented sins, and dying in their sins they perished everlastingly: And
tell me, would it not be sad to put off Repentance so long?

Secondly, Thy resolving to Repent so many years hence, is but a purposing to
sin in the mean while; and that must be a sin of knowledge, against checks of
Conscience, telling thee that thou ought to repent at present; and sinning
deliberately too, considering thy danger and the hazard thou runnest in not
repenting at present; and a sinning wilfully too, thou will have thy sin at
present whatever comes of it: and all these amount to a great measure of guilt.

Thirdly, This sin leaves little place for Repentance: First* Acts of Whoredom
and Adultery do not use to go singly, but to multiply in their kind. When has
it been known that such Persons have stopped at the first act, and sinned no
more, especially if they have opportunity for more? And you know that this sin
it self is great and deadly, (as St. James, 3. 8. uses that word, and our
Church, From Fornication and all other deadly sin, good Lord deliver us.) If
one single act of Fornication be such an heinous sin, much more will repeated
acts of the same sin harden men in sin past all recovery. Besides, the pleasure
of this Sin is of such a b^witching nature, that the first sin leads on to a
second, the second to a third, falling further and further still; as through
the pleasure (for stolen waters are sweet,) so partly through the love the
parties bear to each other; so that if they come into one another compa^y,
their Affections discover themselves, and they would fain have opportunity to
sin again: Nay, this Sin begets such a love in the Adulterous Persons, that an
Husband or a Wife must be left, if not (as sometimes it falls out) murdered,
that they may be the more free and undisturbed in the enjoyment of each other.
Upon which accounts, and because this Sin exceedingly griev^^ the Pure and Holy
Spirit of God, that proves true by common experience, which we find in Prove. 2.
18, 19. of the strange Woman, which forsakes the Guide of her youth, and
forgets the Covenant of her God, -- for her house inclines unto death, and
her paths unto the dead, yea, and to the damned: None that go unto her return
again, neither take they hold of the paths of life: Scarce any that go to her
return, or repent unto Life and Salvation, as those words import. Think of this
place of Scripture when you are tempted by a lewd Woman; think of it seriously,
and repeat it inwardly in your minds, and if there be opportunity speak it
openly in ^he hearing of others, and you will find the thoughts of Repentance
afterward, and the temptation to sin upon that account, vanish.

Lastly, Few can follow this Sin but that they will be tainted with such a
Di^temper as will engage and oblige them to ^in on, and give it to others, that
so (as ^he common speech goes) they may find ^ome case and cure to th^mselves,
(such as sin upon that account, should remember that they may come off with the
worst, and increase their distemper by sinning with some; this has been found
true) though such a (...) deeply infected, if they neglect a timely cure, will
be put under a necessity of ruining Soul or Body; of ruining the Body if they
forbear sinning, and that ruin to the Body by such a loathsome distemper as
makes them dread the thoughts of it, and rather to persist in the Sin, and
complete the ruin and damnation of the Soul, which they looked upon in a
manner as ruined, or half ruined before. And indeed, by sinning to Fornication
or Adultery, the Soul is fair for ruin; yet (with Clemens Alexandrinus, whose
error mentioned in Mr. Sympsons History of the Church,) Possibly God may grant
to them that have sinned (...), but if we sin oftener than once or twice, there
is no more renewing by Repentance, or pardon for sin, but a fearful expectation
of Judgment. Though Gods Mercy, which is Infinite, and can abundantly pardon,
must not be limited as if he could not, nor would not pardon those that have
repeated and multiplied their acts of sin, if they repent; and because Gods
Grace is freely given, (as an Infinite Being must needs be free in his
Operations,) therefore such Sinners are not utterly to be excluded all hope of
Repentance; yet being under such miserable circumstances of ruining Soul or
Body, (whatever hope there might be of their Repentance otherwise) this is like
to hold them fast in their sins, until they have sinned away their day of
Grace, and are forsaken utterly.

Thirdly, If ever you should repent, (which I must acknowledge a possibility)
yet you had better never sin than repent after sinning: For besides the
defilement of the Soul, and Guilt thereby, you will pay dear for sinning, if
ever you repent, you will smart for it even in this World; if you sin, be sure
your sin will find you out. And surely if you have but any true love to your
selves, that principle of self-love should avail somewhat for prevention of
^hese sins, and you would resolve the same as Demosthenes did with respect to
the Har^ot of Corinth, that famous or infamous Lais, who required so great a
price for ^he use of her Body, that several Gentlemen refused to company with
her, and ^he Orator Demosthenes said, He would not ^uy repentance at so dear a
rate. Let David ^e an example to you in that kind, 2 Samuel 12. 11. Thus says
the Lord, Behold I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house; and
I will take thy Wives before thine eyes, and give them to thy Neighbor, and he
shall lie with thy Wives in the sight of the Sun; and this punishment for his
Adultery with Bathsheba the wife of Vriah: And ^oth Verse. Now therefore the
Sword shall never depart from thine house, because thou have slain Vriah the
Hit^ite with the Sword. But you know that was but to cover his Adultery with
the Wife, or that he might take her to Wife; so that Adultery was the Mother
Sin, and Murder the Daughter of that, and consequently all the punishment of
them both must be charged on his Adultery. Read but the 38th Psalm, 2. 3, 4, 5.
and so on. Thine Arrows have stuck fast in me; thine hand presses me sore:
There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger; neither is there any
rest in my bones because of my sin: I go mourning all the day long: -- I have
roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart; -- my heart pants, my
strength fails me. Psalm. 102. 3. My days are consumed like smoke, and my
bones are burnt as an hearth: My heart is smitten and withered like Grass, by
reason of the voice of my groaning my bones cleave to my skin: I am like a
Pelican of the Wilderness, like an Owl of the desert: I have eaten ashes like
bread, and mingled my drink with weeping, because of thine indignation and thy
wrath, etc. Now you see how dear this sin cost David; so that you have little
encouragement to sin from David's Repentance after sin, if you consider all his
sorrow in his Repentance.

But because I would not hinder, but help forward so good a Work as Repentance
is, besides what has been said already, consider further, That there are some
Examples of Penitents in this kind, of Repentance, in 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8. For Lot's
Incest, Genesis 19. 31. Father Abraham, who had promised to him, that his seed
should be as the Stars of Heaven for number and multitude, Genesis 15. 5. and in
Genesis 12. 3. That in him (when he was married at that time to Sarah, as v. 5.)
should all the Families of ^he Earth be blessed, yet he goes in unto Hagar his
Handmaid, because that God deferred the fulfilling of his Promise, and ^e had
then no issue by Sarah, yet it is certain that he repented; and so we ^hink of
Jacob with his two Wives, and their Handmaids, that he offended herein; David,
and Solomon especially by his many Wives and Concubines that drew away his
^eart after their Idols; yet these repented in general to be sure of these
sins; an^ we have reason to think that God shewe^ them somewhat of sin in these
things, an^ brought them to a particular Repentance To be sure, the Lord did
not hold the^ sinless, guiltless in so doing; for in Ma^lachi, a Prophet of the
Old Testament chapter 2. 14. especially 15. verse. The Lord hat^ been witness
between thee and the Wife of the Youth, against whom thou have dealt
treacherously. And did he not make one? wherefor^ one? that he might seek a
godly seed: Therefore take heed to your Spirit, and let none deal treacherously
against the Wife o^ his Youth.

Again, In the New Testament we find some encouragement to repent, when it is
said of Publicans and Harlots, that they enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
(which I am sure they can never do without Repentance) before you; (that is the
self* righteous, self justifying Pharisees) they would sooner repent. I have
read in Mr. Mead's Almost a Christian, about Gifts, ( Anno 1523.) That
Speiserus, a famous Minister in Germany, preached fo powerfully, that many
Harlots were Converted by his Ministry, but he himself fell off in time of
trial to the Papists: Mary Magdalen is supposed to have been such an one, out
of whom it is said, Christ cast out seven De^ls. Luke 8. 2.

And after the Exhortation to Mortifica^on of Uncleanness, in the 7th. ver. of
this Coloss. In the which ye walked sometime, when lived in them: though they
were become ^enitents, yet time was, that they lived ^ the Flesh. And we have
an Example ^f the Incestuous Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5. 1. ^ecome a Penitent, in the
2 Cor. 2. 6, 7, 8. ^ Forgive him, and Comfort him, and con^m their Love toward
him. 1 Cor. 6. 9. neither Fornicatours, nor Idolaters, nor A^ulterers, nor
effeminate, nor Abusers of ^emselves with Mankind, shall Inherit ^e Kingdom of
God: Continuing such means. But in the 11th. ver. And such ^ere some of you;
but ye are Washed, ^ut ye are Sanctified, but ye are Justified ^ the Name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. So that you see they ^epented,
though I must acknowledge too that they had greater Advantage, and ^ere fairer
for Repentance at the first ^ublication of the Gospel, than those that ^ave
long enjoyed it, and turned the Grace ^f God into wantonness; yet it is
certain, ^ere is great Encouragement to repent from hence. It is thought most
of the ^orinthians were infected with this wickedness, because the City was
infamou^ (even to a Proverb) upon this account ^ (...) signifying Scortari, to
be Lasci^vious, Lecherous, or commit Fornication^

That you may improve this place o^ Sripture, repeat it often in your mind, an^
pray it over, earnestly begging of Go^ that you may be found in the number,
tha^ you may be washed, you may be sanctify^ed, you may be justified; and
mention before him, that the Lord is gracious, for giving Iniquity,
Transgression and Sin ^ who pardoned the Sinners abovementioned, and who is
the same Lord, an^ changes not, and can give Repentance to such a vile
Creature as you have mad^ your self by Sin. O rest not, be not satisfied
without it, ply it hard at the Thron^ of Grace, continuing instant in Prayer^
and take no denial from God, and tho^ wilt speed in great likelihood.

3. The Remedy of Gods appointmen^ is to Marry, and live honestly. It is not to
be denied, but that several have been reclaimed by this means, and never
returned again unto folly. And herein let them be sure to make choice of such a
Wife, o^ such an Husband, as they can heartily love* above any other, that so
the passionate (o^ at least real and most unfeigned) love which they bear to
their own Wives and ^usbands, may engage them the more ^werfully against their
former Courses, ^d forsaking all others (as in the Office ^ Matrimony) the Man
to keep only to ^ Wife, and the Wife only to her Hus^nd, so long as they both
shall live. We ^nnot find in our hearts to wrong the ^rsons that we dearly
love: And if a ^ife be beloved according to that near^s and Relation which she
has by Mar^ge, her love will so rule and overrule ^ others, that the Heart of
her Husband ^ll not depart from her: As King Charles ^ 1st. in his last words
sent from him to ^ Queen, bid them tell her, That his ^ughts had never strayed
from her. And ^s could proceed from no other princi^, but that conjugal love
which he bear ^er in the fear of God.

The Ancient Church was too inclina^ to offend against Marriage, by binding
^ple overmuch from it, tying them up ^ strictly to a single Life; which in^d
in those times of the Heathenish and ^ian Persecution, was highly convenient, ^
all had not the Gift of Continency. ^ur Church sets forth very excellently ^
Causes for which Matrimony was Or^ed.

First, It was Ordained for the Procrea^ on of Children, to be brought up in
the fe^ and nurture of the Lord, and to the pra^ of his holy Name. And this is
the gr^ end of Marriage, that which both G^ and Nature designed in it, the
propo^tion of Mankind, that human Soci^ might not fail; as Justin Martyr, Apol.
2^ 71. and Athenagoras, Apolog. pro Christi^ p. 37. Either (says he) we Marry
not at ^ but keep our selves always continent; or if do Marry, it is for no
other end, but the bri^ing forth, and the bringing up of Child^ Whoever among
us takes a Wife, accordin^ the Laws prescribed us, he reckons he do^ only for
the begetting of Children, within t^ his desires are bound and limited; as the
H^bandman concerns himself no further in Ti^ his Ground, and Sowing of his
Corn, tha^ bring forth the Crop at Harvest. Henc^ was, that they seldom Married
more t^ once, (as Minutius Foelix speaks, p. 26.) that merely out of a desire
of Child^

The Second end of Marriage was f^ Remedy against Sin, and to avoid Fornica^
that such persons as have not the Gif^ Continency, might Marry, and keep the
selves undefiled Members of Christ's B^ marry even to a Second Marriage, says
men's Alexandrinus, as more moderate Orthodox in his Judgment, Stromat. lib. 3.
428. And indeed, not only to a second ^arriage; for it may so happen, that a
^an or Woman may be left young, or of ^iddle Age, after the death of the second
^ third Husband or Wife, and may have ^ed to Marry; and therefore Marriage ^ust
not be confined for number to the se^nd or the third, but repeated as often ^
there is occasion for it, for this world or ^ the other.

There may be an abundance of Lascivi^sness in a married Estate, and dalliance
^th their Lusts to such a Degree, that Sa^ may Tempt them for their
Incontinency, in 1 Cor. 7. 5. and that which is intended ^ God and Nature as a
Remedy of For^ation, and other Sins forbidden in the ^. Commandment, by this
means does ^her heighten the Disease, and becomes ^re like Oil to increase,
than Water to ^ench the flame. And therefore our ^urch had great need to give
that Cau^n concerning Marriage, That it is to be ^ertaken Reverently, in the
Fear of God, ^ lightly, wantonly, to satisfy Men's Carnal ^sts, like brute
Beasts, that have no under^ding. And St. Paul tells us just before, ^s. 5th. of
Fasting, i.e. for Mortification their Lusts, and Prayer withal, as useful, if
not needful sometimes in the M^ryed Estate. If persons find themsel^
notwithstanding Marriage tempted to^ dultery and unlawful pleasure, the D^ease
increased, and themselves to be ha^ted with their evil Lusts more than f^merly,
it is a sign that they have not u^ the remedy aright, not in the fear of G^
with that due Modesty, Sobriety, Chasti^ which Morality and Religion require^
them as reasonable Creatures, and as C^stians. And here I find Mr. Steel, in
the S^plement to the Morning Lectures, spe^ing excellently to this purpose, p.
2^ second Edit. A Man may be a wicked Dr^kard with his own drink, and a
wretched B^ in his own Marriage Bed, and that an int^perate Man in Wedlock,
differs little from Adulterer. And to this purpose, the ^ man Orator Cicero,
de Senect. That in Predominancy of sensual Pleasure, ^ can have no Commerce
with Virtue: Voluptas Regno nullum omnino cum Vir^ Commercium. Directions also
must be ^ven, or some helps to them who have S^ned after Marriage, that they
may com^ Repentance.

Consider, That some of those Penit^mentioned before, for your Encoura^ment to
Repent, were such as had sin^ ^er Marriage, and against Marriage. A^ham with
Hagar, Jacob with his two ^ives and their Handmaids, David in his ^ultery, and
Solomon with his many Wives ^ Strangers, forbidden Nations; and ^se in the
Corinthians not only Fornica^rs, but Adulterers, that were washed ^ cleansed
from their Sin, Sanctified and ^stified; and for ought we know to the ^ntrary,
some of those mentioned, Ephesians. ^1. You has he quickened (with a Spirit of ^e
from God) or Sanctified, who were dead Trespasses and Sins: Wherein in time
past ye ^lked, according to the course of this World, ^. Verse. 3. In the Lust
of the Flesh, ful^ng the desires of the Flesh: The Lusts of ^sh in general here
spoken of, whether ^rnication, Adultery, or any other Acts ^ Naughtiness. And
in Titus 3. 3. For ^ our selves also were sometimes Disobedient, ^ving diverse
Lusts and Pleasures, (...) ^ the Greek, the Lusts of Concupiscence, as ^l. 8.
4. and so may comprehend Sinners ^ this sort among the rest.

Second Direction for the Married: Let ^ Guilty offending pa(...) Acknowledge
^e Wrong done, be it the Husband or the ^ife, and ask Forgiveness according to
^at, Luke (...) If thy Brother Trespass, ^. and turn again unto thee, saying, I
repent, forgive him; though it be seven times in day; upon serious profession
of Repentance, he is to be forgiven; and this is ^quired in order to obtain
forgiveness from God. This to be done only in gene^ words, if the Husband or
Wife ^ doubtful in point of Secrecy, whether ^ or she will publish your shame,
a particul^ Confession of the wrong done against t^ Marriage-Covenant cease
to be a Du^ then, unless it be at the hour of Death for then none ought to go
out of t^ World with such a Guilt upon their Conscience, and not confess it and
the Tr^pass.

Third Help to Repentance: App^ your self to the Person, or chief Person with
whom you have Sinned, testifyi^ your Repentance to them, and Exhorti^ them to
Repentance. And if you be y^ weak in your Repentance and Resolution do not
trust your self alone, least t^ Temptation stir and prevail in your p^vacy, but
write your mind, (which m^ be more fully delivered in writing, the by word of
Mouth or Conference) or ta^ a Serious person along with you, as a w^ness of
your chaste Behavior; and the bespeak your Fellow. Sinner, as that gre^ example
of a Penitent, the Lord Rochest^ did some of his Brethren in Iniquity. Re^mber
all the Evil that you and I have been ^ilty of together, and that before it be
too ^e; that you may come to the like Repentance, ^ich by the Grace of God I
have given me: ^ to this effect. You may intimate to them, ^at you are going to
give an Account, or ^lled hence to Judgment, and as ever they ^pe to find Mercy
from the Lord, and to ^pear before him with Comfort, so that ^ey would break
off their Sins by Repen^nce. How can any one hope for Mercy, ^at dies in these
Sins unrepented of? ^d if it be true Repentance, it will use ^ good means for
bringing others to Re^ntance, as well as bringing Guilt and ^ndemnation upon
them, by Sinning with ^em.

Fourthly, Call in help from the Prayers ^ others, thy Minister if he be a
discreet ^d Religious Man, or any eminent Chri^an; and take all opportunities
of pub^k Prayer, on the Weekdays as well as ^e Lord's Day, that the Prayers
there for ^rdon of Sin, and power against Sin ^ay be heard for thee, and the
Prayers of ^y Relation, thy Wife or Husband espe^ally, may more acceptably
intercede, as against whom thou have offended.

The first Means for Mortification of our Lust, is Abstinence, that is, a more
spari^ Diet and Fasting, much commended a^ practiced upon this account by the
Prim^tive Christians, in the hotter Countries, ^ keep the Body under, as St.
Paul speaks, ^ 1 Cor. 9. 27. to tame the unruliness of t^ Flesh, and bring it
in subjection to t^ Spirit: And Origin contra Celsum, lib. ^ p. 264. We in all
our Abstinences do ^ only to keep under the Body, and ^ bring it into
subjection, endeavoring ^ mortify the deeds of the Body, to e^pel and to
extinguish our Members whi^ are upon Earth, Fornication, Unclea^ness,
inordinate Affection, and eve^ evil Concupiscence and Desire. Sin^ the Holy
Ghost recommends it in t^ Word of God, (1 Cor. 7. 5. That ye m^ give your
selves to Fasting;) I need not ^ ashamed to mention it, though some man take
occasion to make it matter of spo^ and pastime: It is not a piece of Romish S^
perstition, not lying upon the cold groun^ nor rolling your selves among the
Thor^ or among the Nettles, nor Whippin^ and Scourgings until the Blood com^
nor eating Fish in Lent, that will do t^ work, to humble and subdue Men's Lust I
do confess the Abstinence in Lent amo^ the ancient Christians (as that in use
no^ among some Protestants) was to a good intent, as then the Summer drawing on
when Men's Lusts stir most, and the Temptation is strongest, to humble and
afflict both Soul and Body for past sins, and as a good Preventive of future,
to lay up a stock of Prayers beforehand to help us in the time of need, and
strengthen us in the ^our of Temptation.

On the contrary, high gluttonous feed^ng is known to add fuel to this fire, to
^ourish and cherish it: Jer. 5. 7, 8. When ^ fed them to the full, they then
committed Adultery, and assembled themselves by troops ^n the Harlots houses:
They were as fed Hor^es in the morning, every one neighed after his ^eighbours
Wife. And fullness of Bread you and among the Sins of Sodom; that is not ^o be
understood of mere Plenty and Abun^ance, but the abuse of these to Gluttony,
^ampering their Bodies that they might ^e strong for their Lusts.

2d. Means for Mortification, or at least ^ good Preventive and Preservative
from ^s of this kind, is Sobriety or Temperance, ^ to Drink as well as our
Meat, 1 Pet. 5. 8. ^ sober, be vigilant, for your Adversary the evil goes
about seeking whom he may devour, ^ make his Prey; intimating to us, that we be
not sober, (and sober we are not like to be, unless we be watchful to keep^
sober company) the Devil is like to have an advantage against us: And indeed
Drun^kenness makes a man fit for any wicked^ness, or lays him open to all sins
that the Devil or lewd Persons tempt them to. ^ have read of a sad Story, that
one of the Fathers of the Church had a Son, who i^ his Act of Intemperance
defiled his Siste^ murdered his Father or Mother who wou^ have hindered it.
Considering the Tem^tations and Opportunities that Men ha^ of sinning in
public houses, many of whi^ drive on a double Trade, and deserve mo^ the name
of Brothel-houses than Alehouse* And those that live by the sins of the People
in one sort, as Alehouses that se^ not for lodging and entertaining Gues^
Travelers, and the like, but to uph^ Drunkenness, who matter not how m^ People
drink to excess, if they do ^ spend their Money largely, may very ^ be supposed
to make little Conscience other sins, especially such as are thou to increase
their Trades, and bring cust^ to the House, as they reckon their na^ty Women
do. Considering the ho^ Oaths and Curses, the Sabbaths profa^ the great wast of
God's Creatures by sot^ness and intemperance, the many Wh^ doms and Adulteries,
lying and cheating by false Reckonings, and abundance of all sorts of
Wickedness committed in such Houses, one might expect almost that every stroke
of Thunder should tear them down to the ground, or every flash of Lightning
consume them to Ashes, or the Earth open her mouth, and swallow them up alive
for their wickedness, but that there is a great day of Accounts, when all these
things shall receive the recompense which is meet.

3dly. The keeping our selves employed in our honest Labor, or some good
Calling, with due diligence therein, is a good preventive and preservative
against Satan's Temptations in this sort, and a means to weaken and enfeeble the
strength of Lust, which is heightened by indulgence to the Body in ease and
idleness. The poor Horse that fares hard, and works hard all the Week long, is
not neighing after others, ^o game some as the Horse that lives at ease, and in
full Pastures. Idleness was one of ^he sins of Sodom, as Ezekiel. 16. 49.
Abun^ance of Idleness was in her, and in her Daugh^ers, and she abounded in
Lewdness, and is ^nfamous for it. Idle Persons you know are ^ll for their Ease
and Pleasure, and the ^ait and allurement to this sin is the pleasure of it.
James 1. 14. you read, Then is a man tempted when he is drawn away of his own
lust and enticed: The word (...) signifies baited, as Men do bait for Fishes
with somewhat alluring and pleasing to the taste of the silly Fish; so does Lust
ba^^ and allure idle voluptuous Persons wit^ the pleasure in it. This is the
reason why great Persons are more addicted t^ this Vice and Wickedness, because
the^ living idly, and loving their Pleasures, the Devil as he finds them much
at leisure t^ be tempted, and to hearken to his sugge^stions, so he knows they
look upon them selves as born for their Pleasures, an^ therefore he has
commonly more succe^ with his Temptations of this sort on s(...) as they are;
whereas those busied abo^ their honest Calling cannot so well tu^ aside and
leave their employ to follow t^ Works of the Devil, and be so ready ^ his beck
to fulfill his pleasure, they havi^ other work to do, their minds must be ^ a
great measure taken up with that, a^ so have not that opportunity; besides tha^
they have not that plenty of Money ^ spend upon their Lust, and are in Go^ way,
and in some measure in his protec^ on, while they are about their law^ works
and worldly business; but Tem^tations come with doble the force to idle ^ich
Epicures. If persons will not set themselves to work some way or other about
their worldly concerns, or the concerns of Religion, the Devil will be sure to
set them on work about that which is evil, God having made it the Duty of all
religiously or usefully to employ themselves and their precious time, so as
either God may be glorified, or the World benefited by them.

Another Means for the Mortification of our Lusts, or at least a good
Preventive and Preservative from sins of this kind, is ^o have a due regard to
Restraining Grace; ^abour to see your need of it, and to live ^n a sense of
your weakness, and in a con^inual dependence on God for his Grace; ^or scarce
any other means will take effect ^ntil Persons have learnt this lesson.
Igno^ance and Unbelief of Restraining-Grace, ^r disregard of it, hold People
under ^he power of this sin, and cut off from them the means of their Recovery,
and that power which should rescue them. They that think they have no need of
God and his Grace to keep them back ^om this kind of Wickedness, as if they
^ould keep from it of themselves, it is just that God should leave them to some
temptation from the Devil, or some alluring and ensnaring Beauty captivating
them, or in some measure let loose the Corruption of their Natures, that so
they may find that by Temptation, or sad experience in their own falls, which
they might^ and ought to have learnt from the Word, that they are weaklings in
the spiritual warfare, and their strength is not their own, that they stand not
alone, of themselves, but that it is God's hand that bears them up, and that
the frailty of their Natures is such, as without him they cannot but fall.

The Devil is much in Temptations o^ this nature; those that never discerne^
the Devil tempting them, never were thoroughly convinced of their need o^ Grace
to restain him. The Devil is called an Unclean Spirit not falsely, but because
of his instigations to this sin. The evi^dence from History is too apparent to
b^ denied, or satisfactory at least, that the Devil has taken up the dead
Bodies of some beautiful Women, and walked some wa^ with them, and when lustful
Persons have met them, and courted them, and lay^ with them, in the morning
when they a^wak'd they have sound nothing but a dea^ Corpse by them: And the
Devil, or D^vils (they being many indeed, but all conspiring as one) are
reported credibly enough in bodily shapes to have had carnal Knowledge of some
Witches; it is not new to talk of Incubus and Succubus Spirits. There is never
a Christian upon Earth but the Devil desires and labors all he can to corrupt
him, many evil thoughts rise up in your minds through his injections or
suggestions, though he conceals himself, that you can but seldom discern him
directly in the Temptation, and when the Temptation continues long, and you are
followed with it, and haunted with these Lusts from day to day, 2 Samuel 13. 4.
Amnons Case, that you wax lean, are ready to consume or pine away by that
means, then you may gather the Devil is in it, and sets them on, and hopes by
perseverance and long continuance of the Temptation to prevail against you.
When also the Temptation is very sudden, and unthought of, and unexpected, and
you are carried out to this or any other sin with double the force that at
other times, then he is in it that filled the Heart of Ananias, Acts. 5. 3. and
that works mightily in the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2.

As we have need of God's powerful restraint in respect of Satan, so in respect
of the tempting Objects, and the corrupting Beauties, as Genesis 6. 2. When the
Sons of God saw the Daughters of men, that they were fair, they took them Wives
of all which they chose: The Sons of God, that is, the holy Seed of Seth's
race; the Daughters of men, of wicked men, of Cain's race, or such as were
common and prostitute to men, as some think; the Sons of God were taken with
their Beauty, when they saw that they were fair, then they chose them, and took
them for Wives, and were corrupted by them, as the 12th. v. God saw the Earth,
and behold it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth.
Tamar was a fair beautiful Woman, and therefore Amnon loved her, 2 Samuel 13.

Our indwelling-sin is as ready to catch at a motion of Satan, Lust within to
be set on fire, as Tinder is to catch at a spark of fire lighting upon it, so
vile and corrupt is the Nature of Man, and exceeding prone to this evil, yea
carrying us out to work all Uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 19. And our
Blessed Savior tells us, From within, out of the Hearts of men proceed evil
thoughts, Fornications, Adulteries. Swarms of evil thoughts are naturally in
our Hearts. Out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks its corrupt
things, the Eye looks on a Woman to lust after her, and the Ear attends such
rotten and filthy Communication, and the whole Man acts. It is the evil within
that brings forth the Fornications and Adulteries, even all sorts of
naughtiness; therefore there is an absolute need of God's Grace to suppress the
evil of our Hearts; and great need have we to Pray, Lead us not into
Temptation; for no Temptation of this sort, whether from without or from
within, but what is common to Men, Saints as well as Sinners, their Nature is
unclean and full of evil lustings, but only the Holy Spirit that abides with
and in the Saints lusts against the Flesh, and striveth to over-master and
keep down its evil motions, so far at least as to purify their Hearts, and to
keep them back from accustomed sins of this sort, and bring them to a dislike
and some hatred of these sins in themselves or others, and bring them to deep
sorrow and Repentance ^f they fall into grosser sins of this kind.

And as you must labor to be thoroughly convinced of your need of Restraining
Grace, so you must be heartily thankful for ^t. When God has for a long time
restrained the corruption within, and the Temptations from without, and
preserved thee pure and chaste, he expects Men should give the Glory of it to
his Grace, as that which freed and preserved them from these Sins, and not take
it to themselves, as if by their own Power, Care and Wisdom, use of their
Reason, and Government over their passions, they had kept and preserved
themselves. We are taught in Galat. 5. 23. that the Fruit of the Spirit is
(...), Temperance, Continence elsewhere, 1 Cor. 7. 5. (...) rendered
Incontinency. In our Homilies it is rendered Chastity; And the Author of the
Whole Duty of Man, tells us, p. 135. Every Virtue is among the goods of Grace,
and therefore do we pray for it, because (as every good and every perfect Gift)
it comes from above, from the Father of Lights. As to our Power to mortify
our Lusts, or to keep us from being Corrupted by them, it is from God and our
Wisdom for the Government o^ this passion, it is from God; and therefore we are
taught where we should have it; If any Man lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, St
James, Chap. 1. 5. And as to the use of our Reason to any good ends, it i^ from
God and his Grace: For the Devil^ are reasonable Creatures, as well as we nay,
in a higher Capacity, but cannot improve their Reason to any good use, because
they are forsaken utterly. St. Austin (as I have read) brings in one speaking,
I have Sinned little, and yet love much. Who kept thee; who preserved thee,
says he, but the God of all Grace? To whom thou owe even this, that thou
have not Sinned much, not Sinned so much as others, who have the same corrupt
Nature with others. Holy Mr. Bradford, when he had seen or heard of any other
Christians falling into any Scandalous Lewdness or Wickedness, used to say;
There remains in my Nature, the Seed of the same Evil, if it were not
restrained by Gods special Grace. And if we look with one eye upon our Sinful
selves in the ^orruption of our Natures, and with the ^ther eye Gods Grace, it
will teach us ^he same Humility and Thankfulness. Is ^here any young Man or
Maid that God ^ath kept from these Sins, and given them ^ome measure of Purity,
let them learn ^is lesson to be Thankful, else they will ^rieve the Spirit of
God, and provoke ^im, not only to withhold further Grace, ^ut to withdraw Grace
given: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. ^e are commanded in every thing give ^anks; and so Phil.
4. 6. In every thing by ^ayer and Supplication with Thanksgiving, etc. ^uch
more for so great a Grace as this is, which is taken for Sanctification it self
in some places. Acts. 15. 9. Romans 1. 21. said of the Heathens, that when they
knew God, they Glorified him not as God, neither were thankful. 24th. ver.
Wherefore God also gave them up to Uncleanness, through the Lusts of their own
Hearts. Thus God leaves the Unthankful to fall back, and to fall foully when
they are wanting in observance of Gods Mercy and Grace in any respect. The
Saints of God have sound it so, that when God has given them a considerable
measure of some particular Grace, that they have been afterward to seek for
it, and almost as far from it as ever, and sometimes there is no other Reason
to be given for it, but their defect as to this thankfu^ Acknowledgment of that
particular Grace and not giving the praise of it to God, a^ his Work. As it is
not a Praying Frame o^ Heart, without Prayer it self, that is accepted with
God, as James 4. 2. not the desires after good, without actuating them and
u^tering them before the Lord, so 'ti^ not a thankful frame of Heart: that i^
not enough, without actual Thanksgiving for this or that particular Grace Our
M(...)i^s or Blessings are matter o^ Thanksgiving, as much as our wants o^
Petition, and our Sins of Confession.

Another means for the Mortification ^ our Lusts, or a good Prevention and
Pre^ervative from these sorts of Sins, is the Mortification of our Pride. If we
search out the causing Sin, why we are thus and thus Tempted by our Lusts, we
shall often find Pride to be the cause, though not by any Moral efficency, as
Covetousness is of Niggardliness and Uncharitableness to the ^oor, but
Meritoriously, as one Sin provokes God by way of Punishment to leave us to
another. And thus for our Omissions and neglect of good, we are justly left to
fall into Sins of Commission.

Thus Lust, and a Temptation to some ^aughtiness, is often a Punishment for
Pride, Pride of Beauty, Pride of Wit, Pride of Grace. Beauty is an outward
Ornament, the Excellency of Gods Workmanship in our Bodies. But Pride defa^eth
this, the Beauty even of Beauty it ^elf, and its Loveliness in Gods Sight, and
so provokes God to leave it to such Sins as pollute and defile it, and make the
Person loathsome and abominable with God. Further, Beauty, when it corrupts the
Person with Pride, that Pride aims to let out it self in all its Advantages,
that it may appear Ami^ble in the eyes of Men, and allu^e, if not excite the
Lusts of Men; and you know, Beauty is had in Admiration by the worst and vilest
of Men, b^ them especially who have no command ove^ their corrupt Affections;
and they being once captivated by it, seek to corrupt the person with the
strongest and most importunate Solicitations. But Pride not only lays the
Beautiful person open to Temptations of this hind more than another* but robs
the Soul of Gods Protection, an^ leaves it Spiritually Naked and Destitute and
so weaker to withstand the Temptation, than another: When Beauty has need of a
double measure of Grace, to preserve its Innocence, and to resist the
Soli^iters to Sin. A Proud Beauty will more easily be corrupted by those that
are High and Honorable, and such as she looks upon to be above her, however
she may look down with Scorn and Contempt upon those that are below her; and
refuse to Sin with them in point of Honor, though she valueth not the
dishonouring God by her Sin: Uncleanness, or T^mptations to them, carry great
shame along with them in the Eyes of the World; and therefore God makes use of
them to humble the Proud. The Wise Man says, Prove. 11. 2. When comes Pride,
then comes Shame. And again, Pride goes before a fall, Prove. 16. 18. Not only
in Worldly Matters, but even Spiritually, when good Christians shall at any
time be lifted up, or ^e in danger of swelling with the abundance of their
goodness, and think more ^ighly of themselves than they ought to ^hink, then
God gives them up as he did St. Paul, to this Thorn in the Flesh. So when
Christians shall begin to think themselves ^o good, and so holy, that they are
above ^uch filthy Sins and Abominations, or that ^hey ought not to be Tempted
to them, ^r, as some Quakers, that they are pure from Sin, or so strong, that
they need not ^ear any Temptation of this kind; and ^resuming on their
Spiritual Strength, ^row bold, and run themselves into Temp^ations, they are in
a soul way for some in of this sort, and the next news they ^ear, is, they are
strongly tempted, if not ^vercome, to fall under the Temptation. ^t is
remarkable what we read of Dr. ^ee the Famous Mathematician in Queen ^lizabeths
time, who aspiring after things ^oo high for him, prayed to God for an
^xtraordinary Wisdom, in effect, that God ^ould make him wiser than all the
World ^esides: And so God left him to the Buf^tings or the Wiles rather, and
Sn^res ^f the Devil. The Devils appeared as ^telligences or Angels fent from
Heaven, to Reveal this extraordinary Wisdom^ the Philosophers Stone, which
should tur^ all into Gold: He pursued this Wisdom long in the way these
Intelligences taugh^ him, with whom he daily, or very often Conversed; and a^
last was brought to the point, and promised it, but the condition of it was
promiscuous Concubitus between him and Kelly (who was Studen^ under him in the
same Art of Wisdom ^ and their Wives. The grave Docto^ (who had been with the
Emperor o^ Germany, and acquainted him with these Intelligences, and that they
would infor^ him of extaordinary Wisdom, and ha^ Audience of the Emperor)
failed here ^ point of Wisdom, and was very eager t^ persuade the rest, even
God could di^pense with Adultery, as with Cains an^ Seths Marriage of their
Sisters, Abraham offering up his Son Isaac: But great sti^ there was to
persuade Kelly unto it, an^ therefore there was a Paper thrown in among them in
a terrible manner, wit^ threatenings against Kelley, if he did no^ consent to
it, and that prevailed to such abominable Folly and Wickedness. Yo^ see here
the Pride ending in Lust, and a^ little enough to humble the Pride of Man
Uncleanness is such a vie, base, Brutish Si^ that it must needs very much
grieve, and ^dly afflict a good Christian to be Tempted ^ such a Wickedness,
that he should not ^ above that, who thought himself so e^inent in Grace. When
God would hum^e Christians, and abase the Pride of Man, ^en God lets Satan
loose to stir up the ^rruptions of their Hearts (as Mr. ^rkins, Dr. Gouge, Mr.
Capel, and others ^irm) and shows them what is in their Na^res, how vile and
corrupt and abomina^e they are, and makes them to sigh un^r the Burden of
their Corruption, and ^ath themselves for their polluted Na^res: This comes to
pass in that work of ^d, wherein he would discover the hid^n evil of our Hearts
(that the Heart is ^l of evil, swarming with evil Thoughts, ^rnications and
Adulteries) to humble us ^ Gods intent, to grieve and to soil us in ^tans
sifting and searching us, to see what ^il he can find in us, and stir up,
actuate, ^d work upon. Christians are most gene^ly subject to Spiritual Pride
after their ^st Conversion. And therefore St. Paul Ep. to Tim. 3. 6. Not a
Novice, (spoken ^ a Bishop) least being lifted up with Pride, ^ fall into the
Condemnation of the Devil. ^hile they are but weak Christians, and ^e but a
slender knowledge of Christ, and Grace, and the Truth of Gods Pro^dence, as the
giver and dealer forth of ^ good, Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal ^ his
Government of the World; and whi^ the work of Humiliation does not rea^ their
Hearts: The knowledge of the^ things will certainly humble a good Ch^stian, and
fill him with Grace: But Pri^ most troubles Christians in the days ^ their
Ignorance and Emptiness. Emp^ Vessels make the greatest sound. The have the
best conceit of themselves, w^ have the least, or but little Grace to d^cover
their Corruptions. Now there is ^ way of removing the Temptation to Lu^ until
the causing Sin be removed: A^ therefore that must be first found out, a^ the
force of our Prayers, and our Res^ance be set against it. In vain do we s^ to
be pure and Chaste, while we contin^ abominably proud: We may pray a^ cry, and
sigh too, and strive as it were ^ Heart Blood out, to get the mastery o^ our
Lust, and yet God not speed us, ^ we not find any success answerable to ^ Pains
and Endeavors, because we do ^ resist aright, nor see the Original ^ Principal
Evil: Even as a Physician, if ^ mistake, or discern not the cause of his
^tients illness, his Medicines are like to s^ ^d perhaps the Patient be as bad
or worse ^an he was before: Or even as in a Be^eged Town, there is in several
cases a ^lse and true Attack made, and then your ^esistance will not secure the
Town, un^ss it be at the right place, where the ^reat stress lies, and the main
force of ^e Besiegers. Here then your work will ^e to importune the Holy
Spirit, that was ^romised to Reprove or Convince the World ^ Sin, St. John 16.
8. that he would help ^ou to find out the causing Sin. In such ^ases, it may be
for some Sin past, present, ^r to come, or coming upon you, that you ^re
Tempted; the which Sin the Holy Spi^ according to his Office will show you, if
^ou be willing to know the worst of ^our self, and seek it.

First, For some past Sin, as Job com^lains, Chapter 13. 26. Thou make me to
pos^ss the Sins of my Youth: And David cries ^ut, O remember not against me the
Offenses ^ my Youth, Ps. 25. 7. and Ps. 79. 8. O re^ember not against us former
Iniquities, or ^r old Sins, as in the old Translation. and it is a common Maxim
in Divinity, that Sins before Conversion, or turning unto God, are punished
after Conversion: and so our youthful lusts may be punish^d upon us many years
afterward, even when we hate them and loath them; y^ through the Fury and
Violence of Satan Assaults and Instigations we may be haun^ed and pestered with
our lusts, and eve^ wonder what is the matter with us; an^ this is to humble us
for those former i^ quities, by confession of our sins, and P^tition for
Pardon. The guilt of past si^ remains upon the Soul even after the Power of
them is subdued. Althoug^ at a Man's Conversion, or the turning ^ his Heart unto
God, or when the Wi^ is determined for God, resolved for Godliness, against the
Riches, Honor and Pleasures of the World, so far ^ they cannot be gotten or
kept witho^ sinning against God, all his sins are so f^ forgiven, that he is in
a pardoned, j^stfied state before God; yet the tempor^ chastisement and
punishment is not forg^ven, (as is plain in the case of David's punishment for
his M^rther and Ad^ltery and Micah 7. 9. I will bear the Indignati^ of the
Lord, because I have sinned again^ him, until he plead my cause, etc. And wh^ I
visit, I will visit their sin upon them:) N^ the Spiritual Punishment so wholly
so^ given, but that those evil courses which a Christian was most addicted unto
in h^ days of sin, while he was unconverte^ may stick by him afterward, and
that ^ closely that they may fetch tears from ^is eyes, and signs from his
heart, and ^e the grief and hitterness of his Spirit, and make him cry out, Oh
wretched man ^at I am, who shall deliver me, etc. Yea he ^ay be ready to faint
under the Violence ^f his temptation, and be full of doubts and fears, as if
God had forgotten to be gra^ious, and shut up his loving kindness in
dis^leasure, etc. Psalm. 77. 9. Yea others, who ^ave seemed righteous, and as if
they ^ere returning unto God, when their past ^s have returned upon them, and
the ^^ght of Gods. Wrath for those sins lain envy upon their Spirits, have been
beat^n off from the ways of God; and though ^hey had as it were one foot in
Heaven, ^ave drawn that back; yea, some have ^een so far overcome of the Evil
One, ^s to have been swallowed up in despair, and concealing their guilt the
Distemper ^ath raged the more inwardly, until at ^ast they have made away
themselves. I ^peak this as one that passed through this ^ery trial, through
the Lords goodness, ^hen one and the other perished in it. and thu^ it will be,
and it must be, that ^here the Sinner sins most, and is ^ostdeep in guilt,
that there his Humiliation must be the greater: And for t^ very end it is that
God suffers the tem^tation to return upon him, though a ^nitent, and holds him
long under ^ temptation, until he be sufficiently a^ effectually humbled, and
smart for sins, and find that it is an evil and bit^ thing that he has sinned
so much. ^ must be punished either in this World, the other World; but for true
Peniten^ the future Punishment cannot reach the^ There is no condemnation for
them that are Christ Jesus; therefore their sins are grief and vexation to
them; their p^ and misery, and punishment to them h^ being chastened of the
Lord both corpor^ly and spiritually, (by the terrors of Lord let in upon their
Souls for sin) ^ so they should not be condemned with the wo^ 1 Cor. 11. 32.

Else in the second Place, it is for so present sin that we are tempted by ^
Lusts, either for our neglect of Pray^ and so we grow weak, and want that
s^ritual strength against these sins wh^ we used to have, and our Lusts gr^
strong, and get ground upon us; or ^ our lewd Company, or high glutton^
feeding, or spiritual Pride and Conside^ on our own strength; or for disrega^
^f Gods Word, when that is vile in our ^yes, and slighted, God may then give us
^p to some vile lust; or for indulging our ^ase and idleness, or for
Incontinency and ^sciviousness in Marriage; or defiling, ^olluting the Holy
Sacrament, or the ^ther Ordinances of God, by entertain^ng the fancies of Lust,
and contempla^ing them in the very time of Gods Worship.

Or Thirdly, It must be for prevention of ^ome sin to come: and thus our good
God discovers to Christians the corrup^ion and ^ickedness of their Natures, as
the Foun^ain-head of all their Lusts, for a greater Mortification of this
Heart-wickedness, and deeper humiliation for it: And this will be the best
means to prevent sins for the future, even when the inner rooms of the Soul are
swept und cleansed from ^in; for from within out of the hearts of men proceed
evil Thoughts, Fornications, Adulteries. The more the Heart is purg^ed, the
less will the life be corrupted.

That was partly preventive of evil, when St. Saul (2 Cor. 2. 7.) was tempted
(as he calls it) by a thorn in the flesh, least he should be exalted above
measure. God will make the best know how vile their Nature is, that they are
Flesh and Blood as well as other men, least their exaltation in Gra^ should
make them forget themselves, a^ their depravation by Nature: And po^bly, when
we begin to grow more sec^ and careless, more slack or neglige^ then some Lust
is let loose to awaken us*

Another means for the Mortification our Lusts, or a good Preventive or
P^servative from sins of this sort, is a d^ care to flee all appearance of
evil, not o^ such things as may corrupt Peoples Mi^ and Manners, but whatever
carries w^ it b^t a suspicion of lightness and im^desty; not only to shun such
speeches a^ actions, signs and ge^tures of the Bo^ and manner of Apparel, as is
transpar^ and next to nakedness, with such thi^ as have an apparent wantonness
and la^viousness in them; but avoiding the things which are commonly reputed s^
Places and Persons of ill Name, and those things that may bring an ill rep^
upon you, though possibly you may innocent, and in that respect it be
un^servedly. A Man would not only h^ his Wife be honest, but not to go in ^
Dress like to this or that Strumpet, t^ she may not so much as appear to be i^
modest: And thus our Church is not ^ly a pure Church, having the Gospel a
Translation incorrupt, and the Ordinances of God, Prayer and Preaching, and the
Sacraments in their Doctrinal Purity (though ut naevus in pulchro corpore, some
blemish in her neglect of Discipline) but has and must have a care not to come
too near that shameless Strumpet of Rome, if it be in appearance only. The
Doctrine of our Church against Transubstantiation, and Declaration in the
Rubric after the Communion, sufficiently clear us from symbolyzing with
Idolaters, in kneeling at the Sacrament; and wearing the Surplice without
consecraring it, from Superstitition and an Opinion of Holiness of the Garment:
And as to the sign of the Cross, some have wished it were left at liberty, or
the use of it forborne; if there be any appearance of evil in it unto the
People, it appearing lawful to the Minister, he should have his liberty allowed
him by them, to administer the Ordinance of Baptism belonging to him, and not
to the People; and so it has not the nature of scandal and offense as other
things, if not endangering the People, or ^rawing them to do the like, to whom
it ^ppeareth evil. But to return from this ^^gression, even as those that go to
the ut^ost of what is lawful, may justly be carried a step farther, and fall
into somewhat that is sinful; even so God may justly leave those to fall into
real evils, who go so far as to allow themselves in known appearances of evil,
under pretense that there is no hurt in them, and that they mean honestly: For
People cannot discer^ inwardly what is in your heart, but only judge outwardly
according to what is visible and appears. St. Cyprian, de Discip^ and Habit.
Virg. p. 167. justly chides, and that severely, with some Virgins, for being
present at Weddings, where the^ laughed freely, could not but hear loos^
Discourses, see uncomely Carriage^ feed upon luxurious Dishes, all which must
not only kindle, but add fuel to the Fire, and ^ill the mind with undecer^
thoughts and desires. St. Hierom on the other hand, does as much commen^ some
whom he knew, who always ke^ at home on Festival days, to avoid the crowd and
gazes of the People, and would never go abroad at those times, when they could
not venture into the Public^ without the greatest care and custo^ over
themselves. They were not willi^ to come within the shadow of a temptat^on;
such was the cautiousness of the Pr^mitive Christians; they stood at a d^stance
from whatever was offensive either to their eyes or ears; their ears they stopped
against all loose idle Songs, all filthy and obscene Discourses; their eyes
they shut against all uncomely Objects, all wanton and lascivious Pictures.
Clemens Alexandrinus expressly tells us, Not doing any thing that seemed to
carry an ill color with it. The 30th Canon in the Laodicean Council, did
forbid Christian men to use the same common Baths with Women. St. Cyprian
writing to Pomponius, charges him, that Men and Virgins should not only not
sleep near one another, but not dwell together in the same house, (Religious
House for Ecclesiastical Persons of whom he speaks,) least the infirmity of
their Sex, and the slipperiness of their Youth should betray them into the
Snare of the Devil. In the Council of Nice, can. 3. ubi vid. Zonar. it was
universally forbidden, and no Man within the Clergy was allowed to have any
Woman near him, unless his Mother, his Sister, or his Aunt, or such only of
whom there could be no suspicion. The Council of Antioch, Anno 272. condemned
this in Paulus Samosatenus among ^he rest, that he and his Presbyters and
Deacons kept these introduced Women, called (...), whereby horrible
inconveniences did arise; for besides the Snare and Temptation of it, although
they should keep themselves innocent, yet they could not avoid the suspicion
and scandal that would arise, and the danger of drawing in others by their bad
Example. So that it is not convenient for these to have such a familiarity in
their converse, especially not to be much together alone and in private; above
all, no^ any young or new-m^rried Woman wit^ any other, though they may have a
little o^ Religion in them, yet we know not wha^ may come of such a
familiarity, when the^ carry Flesh and Blood about them, an^ having opportunity
may be tempted an^ fall under the temptation: We kno^ the trusting Young Women
in secret wit^ the Priests of the Church of Rome, in o^der to their Confessions
of sin, has bee^ shrewdly suspected of sinning as well ^ confessing.

I shall here put in a word of Cautio^ Be not forward to entertain suspicions ^
others, and to believe ill of them in this kin^ Whilst Peoples naughty hearts
(whi^ are naturally too prone to it) receive a^ give credit to such reports of
Whispere^ (...) open Slanderers, they often offend against Charity: for you
know it has been the great Policy of the Churches Enemies to slander the most
Eminent Servants of God in this kind. The Primitive Christians, as Minutius
Foelix, p. 7, 8. That the Christians knew one another by certain privy marks
and signs, and were wont to be in love with, almost before they knew one
another; that they exercised Lust and Filthiness under a pretense of Religion,
promiscuously calling themselves Brothers and Sisters, that by the help of so
sacred a Name, their common Adulteries might become incestuous; that upon a
solemn day they met together at a Feast with their Wives, Children, Sisters,
Mothers; where after they begin to be warm and merry wit* excess of Wine, Flesh
is thrown for the Dogs, who being tied to the Candlesticks, begin to leap and
frisk about until they have run away with and put out the lights, and then in
the dark, the fit cover for Impudence and Villainy, they promiscuously run
amongst one another into filthy and incestuous Embraces. One would scarce think
it could enter into the Heart of Man to conceive such abominable falsehood.
Besides, the Arians suborned a Woman who accused Athanasius of Whoredom. or
Adultery with her, but in the Council Athanasius ordered one Timotheus a
Presbyter to speak, he himself being silent: She pointing out to Timotheus,
with clamours void of all modesty, affirmed he had abused her, so that all
present discovered the Forgery. The forged accusations also sealed with Oaths
and Imprecations against Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, in the third Century,
and God's Judgments upon the three perjured wretches, are well known: and the
Blessed Servants of God, Calvin and Luther slandered in Turner's Latin
Epistles (an^ English Apostate) for the most detestable Lust among other
abominable falsehoods, the Churches Enemies throwing dirt stoutly, that it may
stick somewhere. And I have found it true by sad experience. Charity obliges
not to suspect the worst of others, where you can prove none really and
effectually; they may be more innocent than you imagine: it is a great wrong
for a good Christian upon any slight surmise from his looks, or for hearsay,
the sly reports, whispers and suggestions of his Enemies, to be censured,
reported or reputed as naught, or for some small appearance of evil, a pleasant
look, smiling Countenance, or unhandsome jest, etc.

Another Means for the Mortification of our Lusts, or at least a good
Preventive and Preservative from Sins of this sort, is to abstain from lewd
Company; as Psalm. 18. 26. With the Pure thou shall show thy self pure. There is
a Proverb among the Jews, Tell me with whom thou go, and I will tell thee
what thou do: And so in Prove. 22. 24, 25. Make no friendship with an angry
Man, and with a furious man thou shall not go, least thou learn his ways, and
get a snare to thy Soul: The like may be said of every Sinner. And indeed we
are not only apt to learn the ways of the wicked, but we grieve the Holy Spirit
of God, by choosing his known Enemies for our Associates; by an intimate
Fellowship with such we lose the Fellowship of the Spirit, and in time shall
find our selves infected with their evil courses, whose Company we so much
delight in. Many a lewd Man has corrupted his Companion, drawing him along
with him to the impure and unchaste embraces of an Harlot, and involved him in
the same guilt and condemnation with himself. By the Company and Allurements of
ill Women, how many hopeful young Men have been ensnared and captivated, and
ruined Soul and Body for ever! This has been the undoing of thousands, and
has made them a grief to their Father, and a shame to her that bore them!
Christians are out of Gods way, and consequently out of Gods Protection while
they are in such bad Company, fall they may, and that foully too. And many a
Young Maiden, or Young Woman, more innocently minded, by the temptations and
continued solicitations of lewd Persons, whose Company they delighted in, have
been robbed of Modesty and Chastity at once: And when once they have
transgressed, they have thought there was no other way of saving their Credit,
but by multiplying their Whoredoms in a promiscuous Concubitus, whereby they
think to hide their shame from the World, as if they had not sinned; after the
way of an Adulterous Woman, that wipeth her mouth, and says I have done none
ill. And thus it comes to pass, that those who at first had some modesty in
sinning, and sense of shame in so doing, and were fain, as it were, to offer
Violence to their bashfulness; yet in time come to grow bold in sin, and from
being tempted fall to tempting and soliciting others, and make a trade of sin,
sinning their souls into desparation or an utter hardness and impenitency of
Heart.

Improve all the Ordinances of God to this end, to the Mortification of your
Lusts. I shall begin with Baptism. You know we are all born in sin, polluted
and unclean, as Job 25* 4. How can he be clean that is born of a Woman? Chapter 14.
4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? But Baptism is an Ordinance
for washing and cleansing us, Souls and Bodies, from this natural pollution and
defilement by sin. Christ is said, Ephesians. 5. 26. to cleanse his Church by the
washing of Water, etc. that is, by Baptism; and the Blood of Jesus Christ which
cleanses from all sin, St. John, 1 Ep. 7 verse. latter part of the Verse. As
Water applied to the Body, is of a clean^sing nature to wash away Spots and
Stains, so the Blood of Christ signified by the Water in Baptism, this Blood of
Christ in its spiritual and gracious Effects, is of great power and efficacy
for cleansing the Soul from Sin* And if Naamans washing in Jor^dan because it
was Gods own Command, was blessed to the curing and cleansing him from his
Leprosy, how much more shall the Blood of Christ, the eternal Son of God, (and
as Zech. 13. 1. the Fountain open^d for sin and uncleanness,) who through the
^ternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God; I say this Blood of Christ,
(through the Power of God working with it in his Ordinance,) purge our Hearts
and Consciences from dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14. and that
Service out of a pure Heart: Then there is (as has been showed) a power in
Baptism toward the washing away of sin, and cleansing the Soul from sin.

1. To washing away the Guilt or Stain that Sin leaves behind it upon the Soul,
even for a long time after the Commission of it: Acts 2. 38. Repent, and be
Baptize^ every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ for the Remission of
sins. Now whenever any true Penitent labors under the sens^ of his sins
past, and finds the guilt ly^ heavy upon his Conscience, or his pa^ sins
returning upon him, though he be dil^gent in the use of the means of Grace, an^
walk with God rather better than before let him know, it is a sign that his
past si^ of this kind remain unpardoned; an^ that there yet lacks that
particular R^pentance and humiliation for those sin^ (though* they were
committed a lon^time ago) and sueing out Pardon through the Blood of Christ,
and the Improvement of our Baptism to that ^ffect, which is Gods Ordinance, for
washing away of si^ as Acts 22. 16. said to Paul, Arise a^ be baptized, and
wash away thy sins: Baptism signifying and sealing the Pardon of their sins to
those that truly repent. Every Ordinance of God has a greater blessing working
along with it than every thing that is not an Ordinance. Mr. Calvin excellently
improves this Notion in his Institutions, in the Part de Baptismo. S. 3.
Quocunque Baptizemur tempore, nos semel in omnem vitam ablui and purgari.
Itaque quoties lapsi fuerimus repetenda erit Baptismi memoria. Puritas enim
Christi meo oblata est, jis tantam qui sub peccatis suis fatigati and desolati
gemunt, ne in desperationem ruant. To remember the washing away our sins: Now
the efficacy of Baptism is not to be tied only to Baptism, to keep us from
despair for sin in troubles of Conscience, in the very instant of Baptism, but
may be of force afterward: At what time soever a Sinner repents of his sins
in general, and after of any sin in particular, that he should find his sins
done away through the Blood of Christ, and the comfortable sense of Gods Mercy
pardoning him, sealed unto him in Baptism, conditionally upon his Repentance;
Pardon being conjoined with Repentance; as Acts 3. 19. Repent, that your sins
may be bloted out; with Luke 24. 47. So that the Blood of Christ, with Peac^
and Pardon by it, is never applied to an^ in their sin, but upon their
Repentanc^ and Purification from Sin.

And so as to the power in Baptism t^ cleanse from the filth of Sin: This may
b^ of some force and use afterward, no^ only monitory to us, that as we were
washed in Baptism, which we know is an Ordinance for cleansing from sin, so w^
should keep our selves, Souls and Bodies pure and clean, and not return again
wit^ the Dog to his Vomit, or the Sow that i^ washed to the wallowing in the
mire; but tha^ also afterward, when we come to year^ of Discretion, by Faith
to lay hold o^ the inward and spiritual Grace of Baptism, that we may then find
our Soul^ sanctified and cleansed by the washing o^ Water, or the mystical
washing away o^ Sin, of unclean to be made clean and pur^ from the spots and
filth of the Flesh. This Improvement of Baptism is to be made especially, in
the Interim between Baptism and that Age that is fit for admission to the Lords
Supper: Those tha^ are troubled with youthful lusts, tha^ they may find some
Power from this Ordinance, (for certainly there is a power in every Ordinance,)
and help against this sin, a great Power and effectual that cleanses from
natural pollution; and this is done in those lusts that shall die after
Baptism, in a state of Salvation; and so clean and holy, who are born unclean.
Because that our natural inclinations are so strong to this Sin, therefore it
is that our lives are so much stained with it: And if Baptism does cleanse our
Natures, (as when the inward Grace accompanies the outward Sign, it certainly
does) the efficacy of Baptism must needs be great, and the benefit of it being
great, we must in all humility seek it of God, and in Faith expect it, and
depend upon God for it.

Next Ordinance to be improved, is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; where we
may get some help also against this sin; against the guilt of this sin, in that
Christ's Blood was shed for the Remission of sin, and so he is said to bear our
sin on his own Body on the Tree, and Christ dyed for our sins; the Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world, St. John 1. 29. and putting away sin by
the sacrifice of himself: Christ's Death being considered in that Ordinance as
an Atonement for Sin. Against the Power of Sin, you know the Sacrament is a
strengthening Ordinance, according to that, My Flesh is Meat i^deed, and my
Blood is Drink indeed; that i^ Christ's Body and Blood being receive^
spiritually, the taking Christ in his Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King, is
^ real nourishment for our Souls, (spirit^al Beings requiring spiritual Food) ^
Meat and Drink is for our Bodies. Eating and drinking is for strengthening the
Body; and so this spiritual food is hearty food, of good nourishment, of great
strength: I can do ^ll things through Christ strengthening me, says St. Paul,
Philip. 4. 13* And in this Ordinance Christ strengthens, here especially. If
our Lusts b^ strong and powerful, so be it they have not the Dominion over us;
(for then w^ are not fit for this Ordinance, if we com^ with unmortified
reigning lusts) lo her^ is one that is stronger, and is able to bin^ these
lusts, to overmaster them, and kee^ them under in subjection: And thus man a
Soul plead with God at this Ordinance or as the Leper, Mat. 8. 2. Lord, if tho^
wilt, thou can make me clean, and he said, I will be thou clean. Lord speak
to my Soul tha^ powerful word, and I shall be clean. Tho^ that command the
tempestuous Winds and they cease, the troubled Sea and Water that cast up mire
and dirt, and they rest command my unruly lusts, and they shall be still, and
not send forth their filthy and polluted imaginations, thoughts, words, or
actions, to defile my Soul and Body: And as we receive Christ's Body, (pure from
Sin by an immaculate Conversion) that so our sinful Souls and Bodies may be
washed and made clean by his Body, as ^t was given for our sins, and through
his most precious Blood, and our Bodies continue pure and undefiled Members of
Christ, and not be made the Members of an Harlot. One thing too should not be
forgotten, that if you have formerly come to this Holy Sacrament with your
Lusts, and so polluted this Ordinance, and defiled the Body and Blood of
Christ, and made them vile by taking them into your ^ile Bodies, unclean,
loathsome and abominable, be sure your Soul be humbled for that; and perhaps
you will find your Lusts stir before the Sacrament, to put you in mind of it,
and call you to this Humiliation for polluting former Sacraments, that nothing
may remain to corrupt or hinder the efficacy of the present Sacrament. One
thing more also, in Ministers especially, may provoke God to leave them to sins
or temptations of this kind, when they allow a mixed Communion of the clean and
the unclean, not only in the Church, but in this Ordinance^ A corruption and
depravation (in the scandalous neglect of Discipline at present which the Holy
God disalloweth of, an^ complains that his Priests had profanc^ the holy
things, putting no difference between the holy and the profane, the clea^ and
the unclean, Ezekiel. 22. 26. 1 Cor. 5. 1 ^. and the Rubric before the Communion,
condemning this practice, etc.

Another Ordinance to be improved, i^ the Word: You know the Word is powerful;
and as in the 119th Psalm, v. 9* Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse hi^
way? by taking heed thereto according to the Word. Youthful Lusts they are
called, a^ if that Age above and beyond all other^ were most in danger by these
lusts; and therefore a Young Man has great need to cleanse his way, to walk in
clean paths* And how must this be done? it is said by taking heed, by a due
care to walk according to the Word of God: Psalm. 19* 8, 9. The Commandment of
the Lord is pure, and the fear of the Lord is clean; clean i^ its effects,
cleansing the Soul from sin* John 15. 3. Now are ye clean through the Word
which I have spoken unto you. When you hear the Word of God preached for
Mortification of Lust, Purity of Heart, ^r the like, take diligent heed to that
word especially, for that is a proper Word, a suitable word for your Soul: And
^f your own Parish Minister do not preach upon such subjects, or very little,
and ^ery seldom preach against this reigning ^n, if you hear upon enquiry of
Texts of any other Minister that preaches near ^ou on this point, go hear him
for one Lords day or two; for God works most with the Word preached, and that
Word which is preached is most proper, pow^rful too, when it touches your
conditi^n most, and comes home to your belo^ed Lust.

Besides this there is another way of ^mproving the Word of God to very ^reat
Advantage, and that by treasuring ^p such places of Scripture, as suit most
^ith the case of your Soul; as in this parti^lar such places of Scripture:
Psalm. 119. ^. Wherewithal shall a young man or maid ^eanse his way, etc. and 2 Timothy 2. 22. Flee so youthful lusts, but follow righteousness, ^ith, charity,
with them that call on the Lord ^t of a pure heart. Coloss. 3. 5, 6. Mortify
^erefore your Members which are upon Earth, ^ornication, Uncleanness,
inordinate affecti^, evil concupisence, etc. For which things sake the Wrath of
God comes on the Chi^dren of Disobedience. But, Mat. 5. 8. Ble^sed are the
pure in Heart, for they shall s^ God: And 1 Ep. of St. John 3. 3. Eve^ one that
has this hope in him, purifieth himse^ even as he is pure. Create in me a
clean Hea^ O God, etc. Ps. 51. 10. ( Lord if thou wi^ thou can make me
clean.) with Ezekiel. 37. 3^ Then shall ye remember your own evil w^ and your
doings, which were not good, and she loath your selves in your own sight, for
yo^ Iniquities, and for your Abominations. ^ bring you to Repentance,

These and the like places of Scripture being often Repeated in your Mind, eve^
day, or in the time of Temptation, w^ be of great use to charm your Lusts, a^
lay them asleep, to cleanse the young M^ way. If the Devil at the rehearsal ^
some words serviceable to the black A^ Charms people, how much rather do y^
think, that the Holy Spirit will work w^ the Word inspired by him? And w^
should it not be as powerfully and effec^ally, as the Devil does in his Char^
Works, if you be as much devoted God, and as skilful in the word of
Ri^teousness as they are in the Devils A^ and devoted unto him.

But if we reject the Word, as those Ps. 81. 11, 12. But my people would not
hearken ^o my Voice, i. e. the word of God: Where^ore I gave them up to their
own hearts Lusts. God will make those vile, in whose eyes ^is Word is vile, or
any other Ordinance ^f God. Romans 1. 25. Who changed the truth ^f God into a
Lie, and Worshipped and served ^he Creature more than the Creator, who is
^lessed for ever. For this cause, God gave ^em up unto vile Affections*
unnatural Lusts; and so, in the 23. ver. and all this for dis^onouring God in
his Worship. If thou ^alt lie like a Logg in the presence of ^od, in in such a
c^reless irreverent Bru^sh Posture, as manifests a downright ^ontempt of Gods
Worship, thou dis^nourest God in this Worship, and God ^ay punish and make thee
as vile by thy ^usts, and Dishonorable.

We read of polluting the Sabbath, Is. 56. 2. ^ the Ordinances of God, when we
al^w and indulge our Lusts in the very ^emple of God, and Acts of Worship, ^r
upon the Lords Day follow our Lusts, ^ do any thing which makes the Lords ^ay
vile, this may provoke the Lord to ^ave us to pollute our selves.

But as the Word of God, and the Or^nances of God duly performed, promote
Purity, so there are other things as contrary to it, to be carefully avoided,
as fearful Temptations and Provokatives to Lus^ such are lewd Ballads, Plays,
Stories, an^ Lascivious Songs of Love, (...), as Chrysostom calls them, Songs
of ^ Devils compos^re, which vitiate and co^rupt the minds of Youth; it being
nat^ral for the Heart and Mind to be wroug^ upon by those things which are much
^ the Mind and the Tongue, until they r^semble, and are made Conformable un^
them, as the word to work Purity; oth^ things frame the Mind into Wanto^ness.

The last means is Prayer, and this I p^ in the last place, because Prayer must
g^ Gods Blessing upon all the other mea^ Every thing is Sanctified by the Word
a^ Prayer. (The Word put in, as bringing ^ to the knowledge of Christ, in and
through whom all things are Blessed to us, Ephesians. 1. 3. ev^ our Prayers accepted,
being offered up ^ his Name, which the Word teaches us^ do;) but Prayer, that
especially begs a^ obtains Gods Blessing, Grace to flee tho^ Evils which may
Corrupt us, and to pr^ctise those things, attend those Ordinances which may
purisie us. It is not enoug^ to know our Duty, our Helps to Vertue^ and to this
of Chastity in particular, and our Temptations and Hindrances, but if we would
have Grace and Strength enabling us to practice accordingly, Prayer must
procure it. But besides, Prayer of it self is a special Help in this Case. Pray
that ye enter not into Temptation, Mat. 26. 41. that ye be not drawn away of
your own Lusts and enticed and allured with the pleasure of this Sit^. For then
are you Tempted, as St. James 1. Prayer is an excellent fence and preservative
against this Temptation: and therefore David Prays, Make me a clean Heart, O
God, Ps. 51. 10. and keep thy Servant back from presumptuous Sins; then shall ^
be undefiled, and innocent from the great of^ence; in the Church Translation of
the Psalms. However, David's great Offense was his Adultery with Bathshcba, that
cau^ed the Murder of Vriah her Husband.

A Praying Christian, may plead thus with God. It is for thine Honor, to kill
^very Corruption: It is thy work to San^tifie and Purify our Hearts. Christ
gave himself for that end, to redeem us from all ^niquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works; or that we may ^eny our
selves, and do Violence to our corrupt Nature, Crucifying the Flesh with the
Affections and Lusts thereof; Mortifying our Members, Fornication, Uncleanness,
inodinate Affection, etc. That our Bodies m^ be pure and undefiled Members of
Christ and not the Members of an Harlot. The our Bodies may be preserved everm^
chaste and incorrupt, Temples fit for t^ Holy Ghost to dwell in: That we may
escape the pollutions which are in the Wor^ through Lust, and adorn that pure
and u^ defiled Religion, which we profess: -- O Make us clean Hearts, O God;
and ren^ right Spirits within us, that we may remember our own evil ways, and
our doings that we not good, and loath our selves in our own sig^ for our
Iniquities and our Abominations: T^ is very fit to bring us to Repentance, e^
for a Personal use, or in behalf of the N^tion. And for young persons, that the
may have Grace to fle^e Youthful Lust And to follow after Righteousness, Faith,
C^rity, calling upon the Lord out of a pure Hea^ Prayer is a drawing nigh to
God: A^ God draws nigh to us with his Grace a^ Spirit, when we draw nigh to
him, he nigh at hand, ready to help us; but ^ stand at a great distance from
God, looks upon us too as a far off, when ^ make no Conscience of this duty of
Pra^er. When we absent our selves from t^ Throne of Grace, and are not seen wi^
God in Secret, then God hides his Face from us, and upon Gods withdrawing and
deserting, our Spiritual Enemies are present, the Flesh and the Devil, and the
Al^urements of the World, they Tempt, At^ack and prosper. How others find, it,
I cannot tell, but I am sure I find that the Devil is busy with me whenev^r I
neglect Prayer; some evil thoughts or other he ^ollows me with; but then my
Heart is ^ure, when I am most constant in Duty, and keep closest to God in
Prayer, which God never appointed in Vain, but as a means, and a very choice
means to fetch ^n Grace, and help against the World, the Flesh and the Devil.
But I think it is im^ossible for those Christians to have pure Hearts, or good
quiet Consciences, who ^ive in the neglect of daily Prayer. We ^all find our
selves strong in the Lord, and ^he power of his Might, or his Almighty ^ower
engaged for us, when we give God ^is due in Prayer, and then our Lusts will ^e
weak. But when we neglect prayer, ^e are weak, our strength is gone, our
sup^ort and our props drawn from under us, and nothing left to bear us up, and
keep ^s from falling. It is Gods usual course, ^hen People for a long time
leave God in ^ot Praying or Reading, etc. and doing the good they shall do in
Religion, not only to with hold his further Grace, b^ to withdraw the present
measure, and lea^ them first to Temptations, that they m^ awaken them, and if
they amend no^ then to fall under them, doing those Wic^ednesses and
Abominations, which shall b^ bitterness to them in the latter end. Wh^ Sin, or
the love to your Lusts work o^ Prayer; then you may Sin on in a cour^ of
Sinning, until you be hardened in Sin and past Feeling or Remorse for Sin. B^ if
you hold on in Prayer, which should ^ a mighty Encouragement unto you, yo^ will
weaken Sin, even strong Lusts, and ^ length get the Mastery. For Prayer w^
either work out Sin, or Sin will work o^ Prayer.

First Use, for Confutation of all D^ctrines forbidding to Marry, which t^
Apostle is so far from owning, as t^ Doctrine of the Gospel, and of Je^ Christ,
that he Censures it as the Doctr^ of Devils; 1 Timothy 4. 3. such as the Devi^
those unclean Spirits persuade Men in^ And surely there cannot be a more effect
al course taken to promote Fornicati^ and all Uncleanness in the World, the by
denying Men the remedy of Gods pr^viding, even the lawful use of the W^ man.
All such Prohibitions, whatsoever specious pretenses they may carry along with
them of Spirituality, and freedom from the Entanglements and Cares of the
World, are of Malignant Influence to Religion. The great Apostasy and Defection
from the Faith, was ushered in by the Reception of this and the other Doctines,
as St. Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. Prophesied. It began in the Council of
Ancyra, Anno Dom. 308. It was ordained that Deacons who at the time of their
Ordination, did protest that they had not the Gift of Continency, might Marry,
and remain in their Ministry; but those who professed Continency in the time of
their Ordination, if they Married, should be removed from their Ministry. This
Constitution was blameable, because those that had the Gift at their
Ordination, might not have ^t continue with them all their Lives, or at ^east
were not sure of it. In the General Council of Nice, Anno Dom. 330. or as
others, 333, several were of Opinion that Bishops, Elders and Deacons, who were
Married before their Ordination, should ^n time to come abstain from the
Compa^y of their Wives: Which showed that ^he Coelibacy of the Clergy was too
much ^n repute, though the Council rejected the Motion, and were persuaded to
leave^ Marriage as indifferent to every Man's Liberty, according to the Reasons
of Paph^nutinus: First, That Marriage was Honorable, and the Cohabitation of a
Man with his Married Wife, Chastity. Second Argument, That Coelibacy was a
difficult thing to be performed, and would open a door to unchaste living: And
certainly there he was in the right, as after Ag^ made it appear true in the
event. The Council of Carthage, Cent. 4th. reco^mended Continency, with
Abstinence from Matrimonial Society: Siricius Bishop ^ Rome, at the end of the
4th. Century, ^ joined Coelibacy to the Clergy; but oth^ Bishops Repealed it.
Particular Counc^ Established it within their Territories, ^ the first Council
of Toledo, Cent. 5^ Council of Tours, Cent. 6th. and the ^^ Council of
Matiscon, and the 8th. Co^cel of Toledo, in the year 671. Where Marriage was
utterly forbidden Bisho^ and Priests; and places of Scripture ^serably wrested
to confirm it, as Col. 5th. Mortisie your Members which are on^ Earth, etc.
Wretched ignorance, t^ counted Marriage to be Uncleanness, ^ a Member of the
body of Sin; which ^ Apostle commands to mortify. ^ Subdeacons that pleaded
against it, were in a most severe manner interdicted from the company of their
Wives, else to be thrust into a Monastery, to suffer penance to the last period
of their Lives. The Council of Mantua, under Pope Alexander the Second,
established it in the Churches of the West, which had received the Popes
Supremacy long before. Since which time it has been continued unalterably by
the following Popes.

The 4th. Century, furnishes us with instances how much the Monastic and
Nunnish life grew into request. Pelagii Laodicenus married a young Woman, and
the first Night after her Marriage, persuaded her to prefer Virginal Chastity
before the Married life. Aeas also, who married a young Wife, procreated three
Children with her, and in the end left her, and entered into a Monastery,
forgetting his Matrimonial Covenant. And Paula's building of four Religious
Houses at Bethlehem of Judea: One whereof, the Monks, Jerome governed, and Paula
the other three, being Nunneries for holy Virgins. In process of time, Kings
and Queens entered into them, as Theodosius Emperor of the East, Cent. 8.
resigning the Empire; and the Emperor Charles 5th. of latter years, and
Lotharius the Emperor, Son to Ludovicus Pius of the French Race, with some
Kings of the Goths in Italy.

The Ancient Church also was too severe against second Marriages, even some of
the Fathers. Tertullian sell into this Error, as his Book de Monogamia: Cyprian
also, and Hierom, with Minutius Foelix did inveigh against second Marriage with
too much bitterness and severity, violently pressing many places of Scripture
to serve the cause. And Athe^agoras in his Apology for the Christians, p. 37.
runs to a great height: Among us, every Man remains either as he was born, or
engages himself in one only Marriage. For as for second Marriages, they are but
a more plausible and decorous kind of Adultery. Minutius Foelix, We willingly
contain our selves within the Bond of single Marriage, and either know but one
Woman, or none. The Ancient Canons, as Zonaras tells us, in Can. 7. Council.
Neocaes. suspended such persons from the Communion for a whole year: And the
Council of Laodicea, Can. 1. though it determine not the time, yet it requires
that they should spend some small time at least in Penance, in Fasting and
Prayer, before they be received to the Communion: And by the Canons called
Apostolical, Can. 17. such an one was rendered by his second Marriage,
incapable of any degree in the Ministry; which seem to be much more genuine
proper Sense of the Canons, than of Marriage to another Wife upon Divorce of
the former, which had Allowance in some places from the Laws of the People:
Clemens Alexandrinus was more moderate in the Case, Stromat. Lib. 3. p. 428. We
admire the Gravity and Stayedness of those who content themselves with a single
Marriage; but yet say withal, that Compassion ought to be had of others, and
that of the Apostle, is to take place in second Marriages; If they cannot
contain, they should Marry: For it is better to Marry than to burn.

This Condemning of first or second Marriage, has been of Ill-Consequence to
the Church of God. Gregory the first called Magnus, made a Constitution,
forbidding the Marriage of Priests, but in his time was forced to Abrogate it,
because it was not only the occasion of Uncleanness, but also of secret
Murders of Innocent Babes: Insomuch, that I have read, that upon emptying of a
pond near the Religious Houses, there were found abundance of Infants Bones in
it. Whereas the Apostle said, it was better to Marry than to burn, Pope Gregory
was forced to say, It was better to Marry than to Murder. Another Evil
besides, was the taking Concubines instead of Wives, and so Whoredom instead of
Marriage, as the first Council of Toledo; where they made first Canons for the
Prohibition of Marriage to some persons, and then reckoned it a Virtue to
content themselves with one Concubine, or at least tolerate in admitting such
persons to the Communion. Instead of Marriage, also Adultery, as Pope John the
13th, who was killed in the very Act of Adultery by the Husband of the Woman
whom he defiled. And it is a common saying of the Romish Priests, That their
Children warm themselves by other Folks Fires.

The Vows of perpetual Chastity or Continence, have occasioned other harm than
that of Secret Whoredoms and Murders: even Marcion the Heretic had vowed
Chastity, but afterward polluted himself with Whoredom, and was cast out of the
Church, and coming to Rome, and being denied the fellowship of the Church, he
fell to Cerdon, and Augmented his Error of a Supreme Invisible God: Secondly,
a Visible God, Creator of all things: Thirdly, the Devil as a mid-thing between
the Visible and Invisible God. This Heresy spread it self in Italy, Egypt,
Palestina, Arabia, Syria, Cyprus, Thebaida, Persia, and many other places. They
denied also the Resurrection. Marcion called justly by Tertullian, Primogenitus
Diaboli, the firstborn of the Devil.

Now by way of Trial and Examination, whether you have attained to this Purity
of Heart, and Mortification of Lust. First, Mortification must be laid at the
Root of the Tree, a deadly Wound be given Sin at the Heart. It is not enough to
Lop off some of the Branches, to cut off some of the outward Acts of Sin, for
these will grow again in time. To cleanse the Streams will be to little
purpose, if the Fountain be left unscowred, that will send forth such foul
waters again, as shall make all Mire and Dirt. Thus the Heart must be purged
and cleansed from filthiness, else the Life will be polluted and unclean. The
labor at the Pump of the Ship in casting the Waters out, will signify little,
while they neglect to stop the Leak: The Heart lets in all these Evils which
defile the Man: Therefore the Heart must be rectifyed, and the abundance of
wickedness stopped and suppressed there.

First Rule to know when the Heart is purged and purified, is, when the Will is
resolved for Purity against all the Temptations to the contrary, and that with
a serious and deliberate, fixed and settled purpose and resolution. Sudden
Purposes, as they are taken up without consideration of the difficulties they
shall meet with, so they fail in time of Trial and Temptation; but when all the
hindrances are weighed, and all the allurements of the Flesh, and a Man finds
himself armed with a Christian Courage, and strong in the Lord and the power of
his might, what hardship and difficulty soever there be in this mastery of his
Lusts; (for the words mortifying and crucifying the Flesh with Affections and
Lusts, import that there is a great deal of pain and misery in the Duty, much
of Self-denial in this Purification of the Heart) then such a Purpose, such a
Resolution as this, is like to carry it; for Voluntas domina membrorum, the
Will commands the outward Man; and if the Will be fortified and fully bent
against Whoredoms, Adulteries, and also other acts of Lust, against corrupt
Communication, lewd Company, lascivious Songs, etc. the man is like to be and
act accordingly: for Men do not use to be forced to these grosser sins against
their Wills, though I deny not but that corruption is working in the Saints,
and stirring them up through the instigations of Satan to the doing the evil
which they would not do, and hindering them from doing the good which they
should and would do, in the Combat between the Flesh and the Spirit, as Romans
7. 14. Where, I am carnal, or corrupt, sold under sin, says the Apostle; that
is, a Slave to Satan, under the bondage of corruption naturally, led captive by
the Devil at his pl^a^ure, and by our own Lusts, 2 Timothy 2. 26. The evil which I
would not, that do I: Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it,
but sin that dwells in me, Romans 7. 19, 20, 21. In actual sins commonly at
least and ordinarily, God does not use to charge any more of sin upon us than
there was of the Will in the deed, even so much evil was there in it; yet here
we must distinguish between such sins as were voluntary at first, and
afterward Persons may be given up unto them and sin involuntarily, and be but
a spiritual Curse and Judgment from the Lord upon them; or when there is some
other sin which is voluntary and allowed of, sinning that sin knowingly and
wilfully, Persons may justly be punished with some other sin involuntarily and
yet culpably.

Next, when there is a real Hatred and Enmity between us and our Lusts. As,

1. When there is an effectual resistance of the Temptations to this sin, such
a resistance as prevails against the Temptations from without, and our own
Lusts, and overcomes and escapes the pollutions which are in the World
through Lust.

2. When a Christian holds out Praying against his Lusts, and that with a real
and unfeigned desire to be preserved from the evil of them, and uses all holy
means and Ordinances of God in Faith, and dependence upon God for this
preserving Grace. There is never a Prayer, hearty Prayer, but it gives a wound
to the Flesh and our Lusts, a mortifying blow.

3. When there is a Zeal against this sin in one kind as well as in another,
and that not out of an hypocritical pretense to seem holy and more pure than
others, but out of a sense of the evil, and a concern for the Honor of God and
our Religion. There is much of Anger and Indignation in Zeal, and that argues
somewhat to offend and displease, which we may apply to the Lusts* of Men; we
really hate and dislike this sin when we are truly Zealous against it. We are
commanded in the first of Tim. 5. 22. Partake not of other men's sins: keep thy
self pure. Every filthy speech, lewd Story, or unlawful Deed, and Act of Lust
of others, which pleases you and delights you; so that you dislike it not,
and show not your dislike of it by leaving the Company, or shaking your head,
or reproving and admonishing the Offenders, brings a guilt upon you: So that if
you would be pure, you must not partake of other men's sins.

The Third Rule for Trial of this Purity, by the spiritual sight and sense of
this Sin. A Man that has been used to live in a bad, foggy, unwholesome Air, he
discerns not, feels not any thing noisome or offensive in it; it is all one
to him as it were pure Air. Thus is it with one that has an Heart habitually
filthy and unclean, evil lustings are not evil to him or in his Account, they
do not afflict him or offend him, he sees no such hurt in them, but that if he
forbear the grosser acts he may be a pure Saint; and so they settle themselves,
and lodge in the Heart quietly and without molestation: But a Christian, that
has an habit of Purity in his heart, if at any time his Lusts do stir and are
tempting, and continue for a time (and it is but for a time only) thus
soliciting him, they are as a Disease, grievous to one that uses to enjoy his
Health; he is in pain and misery as one that has a bone out of joint; they are
as a wound to his Spirit, as an heavy burden; the Man is restless and uneasy,
and cannot be satisfied until he get rid of these unclean Spirits, and recover
his former purity again.

As for our own sins, so for the sins of the Nation, to bewail them and lay
them to heart, as it is a great help to the Mortification of Lust, so is it an
infallible sign (being conjoined with the former) that our heart is purified,
and the love to this sin mortified. In the 2d Ep. to Pet. 2. chapter 7. and 8.
Verses, you will find Righoeous Lot vexed with the filthy conversation of the
wicked; and again its said, in seeing and hearing, that he vexed his righteous
Soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds: And so Jer. 9. and 2. Oh that I
had in the wilderness a lodging place, that I might leave my People, and go
from them, for they be all Adulterers. Jer. 23. 9, 10. Mine heart within me is
broken, etc. for the Land is full of Adulterers. Psalm. 119. 136. Rivers of
waters run down mine eyes, because men keep not thy Law: And as David wept for
his own sin in this kind, his Adultery; so no doubt but it fetched tears from
him, to bewail the sins of others against the seventh Commandment as well as
the rest: 158. v. I beheld the Transgressors and was grieved, because they kept
not thy Word. Where the Godly have offended most, when they are recovered they
use to repent most, and to grieve most for sins of that kind, to manifest the
truth of their Repentance; and grieving also for the fearful Judgments that
this Sin must needs bring down upon this Nation. Oh but to what a pass is this
Nation come! That instead of grieving at the scandalous guilt, and trembling at
the fearful Judgments that these Abominations have denounced against them in
the Word of God, are so far hardened as to make it matter of Sport and Pastime,
their laughter and merriment with the Adultery, and the lewd Women of Great
Persons. How many abusive Jests are there upon the blameless Husband of the
Adulteress, to shame him! It would not be serious enough to mention them, nor
the Name which is commonly given him. He that would not partake of the
Judgments of God, and the Plagues Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal, when he
comes to take Vengeance on the Nation for this Sin, and other our Sins, which
without a further Reformation, are not like to go unpunished, must be in the
number of those that mourn in Zion, for all these abominations. Oh how
provoking a thing is it to make a mock of Sin!

This is one great step toward committing of the Sin, to have pleasure in it
when acted by others. And no wonder if this Sin break forth in their Hearts and
their Lives, who are such friends to it in the Discourse, and who are so much
taken with it in the Story, will be much more pleased in the acting of it, and
show plainly enough that they have not mortified their Uncleanness of Heart,
not the sweet, not the pleasure of the Sin. Consider the inhumanity of this
practice that makes it Diversion, Recreation, to toss about the sins of others,
from one to the other, until they go round the Parish, and afford jocular
Entertainment to all that hear and know the Offenders. If a Man fell into a
Pit, and lamed, or wounded, or grievously hurt himself, so as by that fall to
bring his life into great and apparent Danger, were not that Man to be pitied,
rather than laughed or scoffed at? and thus it is with the Adulterous Persons,
they fall into a pit and snare of the Devils, and of the Flesh; they wound
their souls most sorely and desperately, and bring themselves into such danger
of eternal Death and Damnation, as that but very few escape; and are not such
Persons Objects of pity? And should we not be compassionately concerned for
them, if we have any sense of that sad and wretched case they are in? Not as
many, laugh at their Calamity, and mock at their Misery, which is most
barbarous. You that can weep at the Death of a Friend, and are afflicted in any
great Affliction that befalls them, what, cannot you shed a tear for their
Eternal Condition, and the Evil which this Sin exposes them unto?

The last Mark for Discovery of this Purity, is from the Constancy of it. Sin
may be held in for a while by common Restraining Grace; and so the outward Acts
be forborne, until the Violence of Temptation comes to try and assault their
Chastity; and then it cannot hold it out without an inward Principle of Grace,
and an Heart set against the Sin with Resolution. If your Purity and Chastity
hold in the heat of Summer, as well as in the cold of Winter; when temptation
is present, and you have opportunities of sin, as well as when there are none
of these nigh you to importune you: If the manner and course of your Life be
chaste, if it be common, customary, without any relapses into your old sins and
Acts of Whoredom, or the like, for one such Act calls all your Repentance into
question, and may set you again into your old courses, and unmortifie all your
Morti^^eation, especially if it proceed to a second and a third.

Use. Hence we learn how sadly Christianity in the practice is degenerated from
the Precept; how much our Lusts have defiled the pure and undefiled Reli^^on.
Where shall we find the Purity and Chastity of a Christian? The Church of Rome
that boasts her self to be the Mother of all Churches, or the Metropolis of
Christendom, she is become the Mother of Harlots in a literal sense; as Rev.
17. 5. And as to their Doctrine, corrupted too, forbidding to marry, and
allowing Fornication before it: And that they may not want provision for their
Lust, several of the Popes have not only given an open Toleration of
Brothel-houses, but received Salaries from them. And though the late Puritan
Pope, as they called him, excelled his Ancestors, and would not suffer them in
his Territories, yet they removed but a little further, and set up their
Brothel-houses in the very next Principality.

As to our own Nation, that goes under the Name of Reformed, but has as much
and more need of a Reformation now in this particular, than ever in the Times
of Popery: We read of one or two of the Romish Kings that kept their Women, or
rather some particular Person for this ill use, but it was in corners and by
stealth: but has not our late King of the Reformation outdone all that were
before him in the number and multitude of his Women, and their open-fac'd
Boldness and Impudency. So that it has had too great an encouragement from the
Examples of Great Persons, and grown into Fashion at Court, Regis ad exemplum.
As to our National City, may we not take up the Lamentation of the Prophet, How
is the Faithful City become an Harlot! Isa. 1. 21. God was known in her in the
Infancy of our Reformation, and she was a Praise among the Nations for their
true Faith and Fear of God: But ah! how shamefully has she fallen from her
first Love, and her loveliness in Gods sight, and become an abomination for her
lewdness? Has she not spread it far and wide? corrupted all the neghbouring
Towns and Pl^ces? And if Innocence be any where to be found, it is in the
remote corners of the land: commonly so far off or near as places are to her,
so much the more or less corrupt are they in this particular.

And as to the Sacred Order, it is to be feared (and never enough to be
bewailed) that they also are infected with this Vice, and the very Fountains
and Nurseries of Learning corrupted; that temptations and Opportunities of
sinning abound even among them, which together with their youthful Lusts are
powerful, and almost irresistible inducements to sin. To conclude, all Orders
and Degrees, high and low, rich and poor, Magistracy, Ministry, and People,
have declared their Sin as Sodom, and have great need to declare and manifest
their Repentance as clear and as public as their Sin.

Next come we to an Use of Exhortation: Be we entreated and persuaded then to
mortify and reform our corruptions in this kind; for surely by what has been
said, you must needs be convinced that there is great need of a Reformation
herein. And to begin first with the Magistracy, we cannot but own it a
wonderful Blessing from Heaven, that we have such a Prince, over whom (as it
has been the common Observation) Wine and Women have no Power: Both King and
Queen unspotted in this particular, and most exemplary. And since great numbers
and multitudes have followed the Vices of Princes, why should they not be
followed in Virtue, but walk as it were in a path by themselves, single and
alone.

Besides, It were to be wished, that such Laws were made as might severely
punish Adultery, and other Persons that are infamous for their lewdness, or
that life were put into such Laws as are already made, and that the Magistrate
would see to the due Execution of them; and be very active and zealous to
suppress all such Public Houses as are notorious upon this Account, or to
reform them, if it can be done without it, else to put them down. Alas!
Whoredom and Adultery are barefaced, as it were in contempt or defiance of the
Laws both of God and Man; and Persons that have been found faulty, and that are
pointed at as they go along in the Streets, walking to pick up some of their
Comrades and Associates; such as these brazen-sac'd it out, and there is none,
or scarce any to discountenance them, or a terror to such evildoers.

And as to the Ministry, it is very necessary that such should fall under the
Lash of Discipline, and such as are known to live in Whoredom or Adultery, how
great soever they be, (Kings and Princes not excepted) that they be barred the
Holy Communion, according to the Cannons of our Church, which strictly forbid
it: And 1 Ep. Cor. 5. 11. I have written unto you not to keep Company, if any
man that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, etc. with such an one, no not to
eat: and in 2 Cor. 6. 14. For what Fellowship has Righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what Communion has Llght with Darkness? Verse 17.
Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, and touch not the
unclean thing, and I will receive you.

In one of the Exhortations before the Communion; If any of you be a Blasphemer
of God, and hinderer or slanderer of his Word, an Adulterer, etc. Repent you of
your Sins, or come not to that Holy Table.

Canon 109. of our Church: If any offend their Brethren either by Adultery,
Whoredom, Incest, or Drunkenkenness, or by Swearing, Ribaldry (a kind of Baudy
Speech) or any other Uncleanness or Wickedness of Life, the Churchwardens
shall faihtfully present all and every of the said Offenders, to the intent,
that they and every of them may be punished by the Severity of the Laws,
according to their Deserts: And such Notorious Offenders shall not be admitted
to the Holy Communion, until they be Reformed. Amongst all the Sins that were
punished in the Ancient Church, Adultery was one of the chief; whoever was
Convicted of it, was immediately cast out of the Church, and disowned as a
rotten Member. In those first times, the punishment of Adultery was very great,
perpetual Penance all a Man's Life, and scarce being admitted into the Communion
at the very hour of Death; till Pope Zephyrinus about the year 216. considering
the great Inconveniences of so much Severity, Persons hereby being often driven
into Despair, and others discouraged from coming over to the Christian Faith,
ordered that Penance in this case should be limited to a shorter time, which
being ended, such persons might be received again into the Bosom of the Church.
This Decree was opposed by the African Churches, as an Innovation. By the
Ancyran Council, Anno 315. it was Decreed, that whoever was Guilty of Adultery,
should be punished with seven years Penance for the first fault; and if he fell
afterward into the same Sin again, he was not to be taken into Communion, no
not at the hour of Death, Can. 7. p. 13. In the Synod of Illiberis: The same
punishment in Can. 12. they inflicted upon Bawds, and such persons as for gain
prostituted the Bodies of their Children, by selling them, (or themselves
rather, of whom their Children were a part) to Lust and Ruin. Gregory Bishop
of Nyssa, treating about the same Affairs, appoints Fornication to be punished
with no less than nine years Penance, and Suspension from the Sacrament; and
Adultery and all other Species of Uncleanness, with double that time; though
allowing a Liberty to the Spiritual Guide, to Contract this time as the
Circumstances of the Case or Person might require: And St. Basil the Great (his
Brother) sets Adultery at 15. Fornication at 7 years Penance. The Censures of
the Church did much vary according to time and place in this particular, yet
the mildest of them showed how detestable all filthiness and impuriry
whatsoever, was to those first Ages of the Church, and how much the looseness of
the latter Ages, has receded from the Primitive strictness in Discipline.
Indeed in Geneva, there is yet some Severity showed, punishing Fornication the
first time with some days (9 days to the best of my Remembrance) Imprisonment,
the second time with one years Banishment, the third time if they Relapse with
Death. It is well known (as Bishop Tailor says,) that the Civil Laws in the
Primitive Church, punished Adultery with Death, the Husband killing the Wife in
the Act with Allowance from the Law. I need not mention that Heathen Prince, as
punished Adultery with the putting out both the eyes of the Offenders, and his
Son being caught in the Crime, he put out one of his own eyes, and one of his
Sons eyes, to satisfy the Law. To mention but one instance more of this kind,
because of Civil, and not Ecclesiastical Relation. The Emperor Aurelian having
found one of his Soldiers to have committed Adultery with his Hostess, in his
Exercise of Military Discipline he commanded, that having bowed down the Heads
of two Trees growing nigh together, the Soldiers legs should be tied thereto,
which being suddenly let go, he was torn in two parts, the one hanging by the
one Tree, the other by the other. Some of the Brutish Creatures may teach us
Discipline, and Storks (a sort of chaste Birds) which are accustomed to beat
those Storks out of their Number, that having a Mate, join themselves unto
another: And shall not we Christians separate them from our Communion, who
defile other Men's Wives? And some keeping company with them openly, and leaving
their own Wives and Husbands for the Adulterous Lover: Others keeping their
Whores under their Wives Nose. Is there no remedy from the Civil nor
Ecclesiastic Censures against this lewdness? Or is there a lukewarmness and
indifferency among the Neighborhood, as unconcerned, and not offended at their
vile practices? Is there no Scandal in these things? Are they not a ^oul Spot
and Reproach to that Church which suffers them within its Communion? Is there
any Quaker, Anabaptist, and Independent, who does not make the Lewdness and
Debauchery of some Conformists, the chief reason and ground of his Separation?
Why are our Censurers (says Bishop Tailor, Epistle before Lib. of Proph. in
Collect. of Disc. Polem. and Moral,) so zealous against those we call
[Schismaticks and] Heretic, and yet great Friends with Drunkards, Fornicators,
etc. Let it be remembered, that the Apostle speaks as freely against Communion
with Fornicatours and all disorders practical, as against Communion with
Heretics, in 1 Cor. 5. 11. I am as certain that a Drunkard [or Fornicator] is
as contrary to God, and lives as contrary to the Laws of Christianity, as an
Heretic; and I am sure I know what these are, but I am not sure such a
Persuasion is Heresy or Schism, etc. and therefore the former are fit Objects
for a pious Zeal to contest against.

It were to be wished also, that Parents and Family Governors would do their
parts, and suffer it not in their Children or Servants to do so wickedly:
Though they cannot purify and sanctify, or work Grace in the hearts of those
committed to their care, yet they may check the first Motions to such evil
courses, and by their Authority rebuke them sharply, and restrain them from
such lewd Places and Persons, Books, Ballads, Plays, Songs, and the like, as
have any natural tendency to corrupt them, and those that are hardened in such
Practices, and incorrigible, they may send them going if Servants, and get
better in their rooms; and if Children, not to satisfy themselves in such a
faint Reproof as Eli gave his Sons, 1 Samuel 2. 22, 23, 24. Eli being very old,
heard what his Sons did unto all Israel, and how they lay with the women that
Assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and he said unto
them, Why do ye such things? for I hear of your evil doings by all this People:
Nay, my Sons, for it is no good report that I hear, ye make the Lords People to
transgress: In the Third Chap. and the 13 verse. I have told him, says the
Lord, that I will judge his (that is Eli's) house, for the Iniquity which he
knows, because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not.
Therefore the Lord expects that Parents should use their Authority, and
restrain their Children from filthy Speeches, etc. when young by Correction,
afterward by Rebuke, and a Sense of their Displeasure at their evil ways, and
all other good Means which can be used: And that every good Christian should
show his Zeal against this wickedness, frequently and powerfully reproving it,
to discountenance the sin, that it may be ashamed and confounded, and carry it
no longer in Vogue and Al-a-mode. And to this end, O that all manner of
Christians would bewail the present guilt of the Nation, in a self-abasing,
self-condemning Humiliation, as the Lord calls for in Jer. 3. 13. Only
acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy
God, and have scatiered thy ways to the Strangers, etc. In Building men use to
lay the Foundation low, that so the Work may stand firm and sure; and so must
we lay our selves low before that Majesty which is of purer Eyes than to behold
Iniquity, that our Reformation-work may hold it, when a sound Humiliation lays
the foundation for it; that we remembering our way and our doings which have not
been good, and loathing our sinful and polluted selves for all our
abominations, our sins of this king may not be had in remembrance against us,
as the sins of Manasseh and the Jews were in the days of Josiah, 2 King. 23.
26, 27. even to a decreee to remove Judah into Captivity. Though we enjoy as it
were another Josiah in our days, yet how deep in guilt the preceding Princes
were, you cannot be ignorant: And the Judgments of God declaring against this
sin, you may discern, Amos 4. 11. I have overthrown some of you as God
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrha: While our sin was as Sodom, and we burned in our
Lusts toward one another, no wonder if our Punishment was as Sodom upon the
great City of the Nation. Was not that place, Isa. 1. 10. Hear the Word of the
Lord, ye Rulers of Sodom, and -- -- ye people of Gomorrha, applicable unto us,
when our Lusts had so prodigiously increased beyond what was ever known before?

And last of all, O that the few living Names, as in the Church of Sardis, Rev.
3. 4. which have not defiled their Garments; or as Rev. 14. 4. which are not
defiled with Women; and those from whom the Lord has taken away their filthy
Garments, (as is said of Joshua the High Priest, Zech. 3, 4.) would inter cede
for a sinful and polluted Nation, as in Ezekiel. 36. 25. the Promise runs, I will
sprinkle you with clean wnter, and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness
will I cleanse you, v. 29. I will also save you from all your uncleanness: v.
31. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, etc. and shall loath your
selves, etc. For his Names sake that he would do it; as in the 22. v. I do not
this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine Holy Names sake; and for
his dear Sons sake: Tit. 2. 14. who gave himself for us, to redeem us from this
and all other iniquity, and purify us unto himself as a peculiar People,
zealous of good works.

A Prayer.
O Most Holy Lord God, the Heavens are not clean in thy fight, and the purest
Seraphims veil their Faces before the transcendent Purity and Splendour of thy
Glory; how much more may I sinful Creature, polluted and unclean, be ashamed
and blush to lift up my eyes unto thee, who can not behold evil, nor look
upon Iniquity, nor suffer any but the Pure in Heart in thy Sight and Presence.
Not only my Nature is exceeding vile and corrupt, and prone to evil, but I have
offended the pure Eyes of thy Majesty by the naughtiness of my Heart, in a
multitude of filthy Imaginations, and evil lustings, ( and as Guilty or not
Guilty, put in or leave out the following words,) corrup^ communication, actual
pollutions and uncleanness, multiplied Whoredoms and Adulteries; and it is in
my Nature yet to sin against thee, and to work all Uncleanness with greediness,
adding sin unto sin, until I have filled up the measure of mine Iniquity in an
utter hardness and impenitency of Heart: But as there is in me a Fountain of
Iniquity, sending forth evil Thoughts, Fornication and Adulteries, if thy Grace
be not ever present to restrain and prevent it: So thou have opened a Fountain
for Sin and Uncleanness, the Blood of Jesus Christ which cleanses from all
unrighteousness: Look upon me in him with distinguishing mercies, wash me
thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my Sin. Make me clean, O
God, purging out every corruption. It is thy work to sanctify and purify the
Heart, and to rescue it from the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, to thy Self,
and thy Service. By the mighty Power of thy Grace enable me to do Violence to
my corrupt Nature, to crucify the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts thereof,
to reject it is motions, resist its temptations, and remembering my ways and my
doings which have not been good, to loath my self for all mine Iniquities and
Abominations: And Lord grant, that I may never betray my Soul to sin by
Gluttonny or Drunkenness, Ease and Idleness, spiritual Pride, or any lewd
Company; but that I may ever escape the Pollutions which are in the World
through Lust; and Soul and Body be preserved chaste and pure, to be undefiled
Members of Christ's Body, and Temples fit for the Holy Spirit to dwell in: And
finally by thy Mercy that: may attain that Inheritance which is incorruptible,
undefiled, reserved in Heaven for me, through the Merits and Mediation of thy
Son our Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
FINIS.

