THE Court and City VAGARIES, OR INTRIGUES, OF BOTH SEXES.

Written by one of the fair Sex.

LONDON, Printed: And Sold by J. Baker, at the Black Boy in Paternoster Row.
Price Sixpence.

TO THE AUTHOR.
AT last, my dear Idalia, I have detected the fair Criminal, and found out your
little wanton Frauds, in concealing a legitimate Birth of your Brain from me:
But, upon second Thoughts, I am satisfied your Modesty has denied me the
Privilege of assisting your Labor, and congratulating you upon so hopeful an
Issue. Had I suspected you so near your Time, I should have attended the first
Cry, and looked upon the Offspring with all the forward and officious
Sentiments of a Friend. You could have no ways defended your self from a
Partiality to your Cause, but by maintaining a Privacy. Methinks I traced you
in every Feature; each beauteous Lineament confessed the happy Mother; but
still I was at a Loss. The kindly Stamp betrayed the innocent Original; and I
was often feeling the Goddess through the thin Drapery. You are so happy, my
charming Idalia, in your native Charms, that you will never covet borrowed
Ornaments.

There Is no altering your Charms; the least Manly Stroke, as it would take from
the Softness of the She-Pencil, so it would add a disagreeable Varnish to the
tender Colors you have laid on. The sole Fault I find in you, is, that you
have moraliz'd at an Age of innocent Liberties. It crosses upon Nature, to see
a young Philosopher in Petticoats giving Cautions against Experiments, that
every young Lady should be in some Measure acquainted with, to guard her
against future Insults. Such Adventures as you represent in your first Scene,
might be acted to Improvement, had not a dishonorable Bully been the first
Aggressor. The only Way to know the Artifices of perfidious Man, is to converse
with them at large; and the affected Vows and Tenderness of that Sex, should be
decently known, before the regular Attacks in an honorable Way for Life. Go
on, my fair Maid, in Pursuit of these amorous Mistakes; lash the barbarous Part
of our Sex, but indulge to the harmless Tenders of a well-natur'd Swain, and
make Damon and Pastora happy from Twenty to Thirty.

THE Court and City Figaries OF BOTH SEXES.
I SHALL begin with a remarkable Passage that happened very lately; which I
hope may serve by Way of Caution to all young Ladies, who are industriously
searching out the Knowledge of Ill, with a pious Design to avoid it.

Aminda and Ciladira, two very handsome, well-bred, religious, young Women, of
the first Rank in the City; I Will assure you, Ladies of the nicest Reputation,
which may be observed in their grave Looks and sedate Behaviors, and I believe
may justly deserve the Character of Women of Honor. They are kept under great
Restraints by their Parents; which, with a natural Desire of adding new
Conquests to a Crowd of Admirers, has put them upon an Humor of regaling
themselves in private, and, as often as Opportunity serves, to go in Search of
Adventures, by Way of Amusement; which Diversions they have followed for some
Time, with great Success, both at Home and Abroad, and never fail to return
victorious. This has encouraged 'em to proceed with greater Resolution than
ever, being obstinately opinionated of their own Conduct.

These Ladies are pretty often seen at Hide-Park, under the Custody of
Ciladira's Mother; but one Day having got the Coach to themselves, the Weather
being extreme pleasant, were resolved not to lose Time and Opportunity, but
gave Orders forthwith to be set down at a Relation's in Westminster; where,
after a short Visit, they dismissed the Coach, with a Message, that they were
obliged to stay there at Supper, and should take a Hack to come Home. They had
another Excuse as ready to the Lady of the House, for taking Leave in such
Haste; and accordingly make the best of their Way for St. James's-Park, where
they had not been long, before they had the Pleasure to find their Beauty
attract all Eyes; and no Doubt but they heard a great many Sighs and Whispers,
as they moved through the gazing Crowd of Beaux that fluttered around 'em: All
which passed for good Omens, though as yet none durst assume the Courage to
attack 'em. At last, one more daring than the rest, draws near, keeps Pace,
curiously surveys and attends their Motions. They took the Hint, views him as
strictly, and by his Garb, Air, and Deportment, easily perceived him, as they
imagined, to be of Quality. He had not waited long for an Opportunity to
introduce his Discourse, before one offers it self; which was, to resolve
something they were disputing on. The Ladies being bent on a Frolic, if they
liked the Person that should make an Attempt, were not very hard of Access, and
especially to so fine a Gentleman as this, endeavored to make themselves as
pleasing and agreeable as possible. The Hero is so absolutely charmed with
their Appearance and Conversation, that he believes himself no longer on Earth;
Or rather, said he, these are real Goddesses, descended from their Celestial
Habitations, not only to dazzle the Eyes, and inflame the Hearts, but to punish
all with Death, who have the daring Impudence to approach 'em. And being now
darkish, claps down on his Knees, closes his Hands, and implores Pardon for his
sacrilegious Attempt. The Girls, seeing themselves thus idolized, began to
think there was something in it. Immediately one fancies she is Diana, and the
other Pallas; but upon farther Reflection, found they had Reason to confess
themselves mere Mortals, and subject to Human Frailties; as indeed it proved in
the Conclusion. Damon was very difficultly brought to believe they were so: But
however, finding his Company did not displease, ventures from one Degree to
another, to come to a better Understanding with them. He knew the World
thoroughly, or at least the baser Part; and easily judged who he had to deal
with. Their Innocence and Rank, were visible in their Persons and Behaviors;
so that he needs not make much Search into that, but took Opportunity, on all
Occasions, to let them understand his Quality, as in this Manner; We were a
great many Noblemen at Dinner with the Duke of -- to Day; and when any Body
answered him, it was, My Lord, says he, or your Lordship may command me on all
Occasions, and so on, with a great many very entertaining Stories. After some
Time spent thus agreeably, the Ladies were obliged to think of returning Home.
Damon eagerly presses for the Honor to hand 'em into their Coach. They
answered, that was already dismissed, and should therefore spare him that
unnecessary Trouble. He then offers 'em his Chariot and Equipage that waited;
and to complete the Victory, he declared Aminda had gained over his Heart, and
that he himself would attend at her Chariot Wheels. This great Complement and
Condescension, in a Person of this Distinction, served to increase that good
Opinion and Esteem she had already received of him. However, this Offer could
not be accepted, for several Reasons, which he suffered himself to be convinced
of; but still persisted in his Design of conducting them safe Home, and
pretended he must step on one Side, and leave Orders with his Servants where to
wait on him afterward. He was no sooner gone, but Aminda began to extol his
Person and extraordinary Qualifications, to the highest Degree imaginable, and
said she found so much Difference between the Conversation of a Man of Quality,
and that of a private Gentleman, that indeed she believed she should hardly
prevail with herself hereafter, to make the latter a tolerable civil Answer, if
he should ever attempt to make Love to her. Whether Ciladira had really a truer
Taste, or whether it was Envy to her Companion, because he addressed himself
more particularly to her, said she could not believe him what he would appear
to be; and would have continued on that Subject, but Aminda would by no Means
encourage such dishonorable Apprehensions. By this Time Damon was returned,
and made what Haste he could to usher 'em into a Hackney-Coach he had provided,
where they were no sooner entered, but he began to entreat they would permit
him to treat 'em with some Jellies, and Ice-Creams, at White's Chocolate-house,
The Windows being drawn up, it was impossible to discover them. These, with a
great many other Persuasions, prevailed, and the Ladies grow easy, and
extremely delighted; upon whieh, the Spark takes Advantage to recommend
innocent Diversions above all Things, and rails at all impertinent old Women;
who, because they are past the Enjoyments of Life, are envious of those who
ought to possess 'em, and render Pleasures as dangerous and pernicious, with
frightful Ideas, devised to keep Fools in Ignorance, and so consequently under
their Jurisdiction; but that so much Beauty, with all the Perfection Nature
could bestow, was not given 'em with Design to be buried in Oblivion: And to
depart out of the World, just as they came into it, would prove to little
purpose. Those strong Arguments overcame all the weak ones they could bring in
Opposition, and at last were obliged to yield the Debate, resign to his
Discretion for that Time, and suffer themselves to be conveyed to a Tavern in
the Hay-Market. I beg the Ladies Pardon, for speaking so very plain; but
however, if they can keep their own Countenance, and refrain from blushing, it
shall never go farther for me. After a splended Entertainment, and abundance of
Compliments passed on all Sides, it grew late, and the Ladies were very uneasy
to be going Home. He said it was too early yet, desires 'em to take off their
Glasses with Cheerfulness, and be thankful. This Speech gave them the first
Allarm; but they did not know whether to take it as Jest or Earnest. He goes
on, and bids 'em consider between themselves, whether they would both or one go
Home with him to his Lodgings. Upon this, they asked, with a great deal of
Indignation, which sufficiently expressed their Surprise and Resentment, what
he meant, and who he took them for. He answers: Look ye, Ladies, ye may put on
Disguise, and give your selves what Airs you please; but at this Time ye have
missed your Aim. I know the World too well to be imposed on. You Will guess, by
this Time, Aminda began to repent her Choice of a Lover, and Ciladira as much
enraged to have her Judgment neglected, gave her Friend a severe Reprimand for
drawing her into the Snare, contrary to her own Inclinations, which perhaps
their utmost Care and Politics could not disentangle. Aminda falls upon him
with high Words, in Hopes to overpower him that Way; but finding this
Stratagem fail, (...) was obliged to alter the Scheme, and endeavor to sooth
him into good Nature. At last, with abundance of Difficulty, they managed it so
as to quit the House, but could not possibly get quit of the Rascal. He was
resolved to pursue 'em to Destruction, lays violent Hands on Aminda, dragging
her toward the Strand, pinching and tormenting her in a grievous Manner.
Ciladira pursued as fast as she could, and both joined their Prayers and
Entreaties in vain to this inflexible Barbarian; for all the Return they could
get, was, That when he met with such Jilts, he knew how to use 'em: That they
had urged him to spend a great deal of Money, he could employ much better; and
swore he would have Satisfaction one Way or other, before they parted; and
would therefore give 'em three Things to choose, viz. Go and lie with him all
Night, or be secured in the Round-house, or else return all the Money he had
deposited on their Accounts. Ciladira was glad to find they might have their
Liberty on this last Condition, and desired to know how much they were indebted
to him; he answered, Five Guineas. She was then at as great a Loss as ever,
knowing at that Time they had scarce one between 'em; but said, if he would let
them know where to direct, she would give her Word and Honor it should be sent
him next Day without fail. As this Scoundrel had no Notion of Honor, so it
proved to as little Purpose to make him such Propositions. He saw 'em well
dressed, and adorned with Jewels of considerable Value, especially Aminda, whom
he made his particular Ward; and, like a true Infernal, never ceased to torture
and afflict, besides tearing her fine laced Lappits and Ruffles all to Rags. He
observed Ciladira had only a Gold Watch and Diamond Ring, which he bid her
leave in his Custody, 'till she could perform her Promise; but not being
willing to do this, he ordered her to pawn 'em at a Tavern in St. Martins-Lane,
where he had dragged them with Design for that Round-house, if other Projects
failed. By this Time the Watch had Notice, and were hastening to secure them
all; which Ciladira prevented, by declaring their Innocence and Disaster in so
moving a Manner, together with a little Money to drink her Health, that she
prevailed upon them to withdraw. She runs in this Confusion, and procured the
Money, delivered it to him immediately, and demands her Companion, who stood
trembling, lamenting, and almost dying in the Hands of her Persecutor. He tells
her they had not adjusted all Matters yet; but for her own Part, since she had
defrayed the Expenses he had been at, he was content to permit her the Freedom
of going Home when she pleased; but for this little saucy Jilt, he had another
Reckoning to make with her, both for her Insolence, and his Loss of Time, which
she must account for before they part. This last Demand struck them into the
greatest Horror and Defpair imaginable, while he redoubled his Oaths to make
her a public Example. Ciladira, who has a Soul truly brave and compassionate,
disdaining the mean Considerations of Self-Preservation, chose rather to
undergo those present Inconveniences, together with the Hazard of future
Advantages, than to abandon her Friend in Distress, desired to know how she
must redeem her from Bondage. Bully answered, the Thing depended on herself,
that Diamond Cross which hangs, as a needless Addition, on her more illustrious
Bosom, will pawn for ten Guineas, to purchase her Liberty. Aminda was cut to
the Heart, with the Apprehension of losing her beloved Ornaments, to which she
is so extremely bigoted, that she would endanger her eternal Reputation, and
suffer all the Punishment he could inflict, rather than part with any one of
them. Ciladira knowing her Temper and Resolution, went and engaged her Watch,
as she had before her Ring, and was returning, when a Gentleman seized her in
his Arms, calling her Angel and Goddess, with a great many such Speeches. She
was ready to swoon at the Repetition of what had betrayed her to this; but
seeing some promising Appearances in him, she cast herself at his Feet, and
begged he would pity a distressed Maid. He was extremely moved with her
Request; and looking upon her with a more different Regard than those who are
accustomed to such Disorders, generously offered his Assistance against all
Insults or Affronts that might be offered her, and that he was resolved to
protect and defend her with the last Drop of his Blood. This Cavalier is a
Colonel in the Army, has a great deal of Honor, and real Courage, which he had
signalized on several Occasions. Ciladira was much comforted to meet with a
Knight Errant; but however, to prevent a Quarrel, least it might prove a Means
to expose 'em, clapped the Guineas into his Hand, caught Hold of Aminda,
returned him many Thanks, and so would have parted. No Doubt the Sharper was
well satisfied with this, especially when he saw a Gentleman who said he was a
near Relation, and suspecting something more than ordinary, took Hold of his
Hand, and desired to know for what Reason he had received that Money; would
have urged him in to drink a Bottle of Wine, and inform him how far he was
obliged to him on the Account of those Ladies. The poor Fellow, who durst not
contend with any but those who could not defend themselves, turned pale as
Death, shrunk back, and only said the Ladies were very welcome, bowed, and
wished it had been in his Power to have served them farther. Ciladira was glad
to let this pass, least he should discover any Thing to their Disadvantage, and
said, that the Obligations they had to this Gentleman, were for freeing 'em
from the Clamor of a Hackney Coachman, who had imposed a great deal more than
his Due, and not having Money enough about 'em, he had been so kind to lend 'em
a Crown, which was what he saw her return him. This passed pretty well on all
Sides, and the Spark made off as fast as he could, thoroughly glad of this
Night's Success. The Colonel begged to 'squire them Home, and did not fail to
make abundance of Complements by the Way, for the Honor they had done, in
admitting him rather than the other: But having cast his Eyes on Aminda, and
observing her Cloths so disordered, and her Looks so sorrowful, imagined she
had had foul Play, and with Difficulty brought 'em to confess their ill Usage,
though they carefully omitted that Part of the Story that reflects on their
Conduct. He chid 'em severely for not putting it in his Power to retrieve their
Losses, and chastise the Villain. At parting, he extremely importuned Ciladira
to honor him with a Line or two, directed to Man's Coffee-house; which she
promised to do, as a grateful Acknowledgment for the Service he had done them;
and I suppose went to Bed sufficiently mortified with their Adventure.

AMongst all my Acquaintance, I never observed any so completely whimsical, and
remarkable of herself, (and is that they call something so entirely out of the
Way) as Lady Tuneal. She is a Woman of Quality, a great Pretender to Virtue,
Wit, and Discretion, with a Mixture of Philosophical Notions, and may with
Justice style herself -- a Person -- every Way distininguishable; and though she
be a professed Man-hater, yet has nevertheless, through the Solicitations of her
Friends, been prevailed with to enter into a conjugal State, much to her own
Dissatisfaction; but had the good Fortune, after some few Years, to be released
from him to whom she causelessly bore so much Aversion, and placed as the
Center of all her Uneasiness and Disquiets. She is so far from playing the
Hypocrite on this Account, that she openly declares a Dislike and ill Opinion
of all Women, who do not agree with her Sentiments on the same Occasion, and
can never believe, but that a Woman of Virtue will always esteem it her
greatest Blessing to be freed from those filthy -- useless -- lumbering --
Male-Creatures. She has one only Daughter, Heiress to a plentiful Fortune, and
every Way deserving, but I think her Ladyship does not seem to place much Joy
in her, or indeed any Thing this Earth produces, excepting her most dearly
beloved Spinet; to which she is so entirely devoted, that she thinks every
Moment lost, that is not employed in the Improvement of this out-of-Fashion
Instrument of Music. She not only makes in the Business of her Life; but, as
though her future Happiness depended thereon, suffers nothing to intercept; but
if she be obliged sometimes, though with great Regret, to receive what she calls
impertinent Vists, she is forced to sit up very late, nay, often the whole
Night, before she can make a Repetition of all her Tunes; which she never fails
to do, before she sleeps. She has a singular Method in every Thing she says and
does, and is attended with an Imperfection, I suppose rather habitual, than
natural; which generally proves the greatest Hinderance to her Employment or
Diversion; that is, she can never speak of the least Thing, or give any
necessary Orders in her Family, without Multiplicity of useless Words, and will
fetch every Thing so very far about, that it is impossible to guess what she
aims to conclude in. Every one of those Words must be distinctly uttered, with
a Pause which lasts a Minute, or more, according as she requires Time to sigh
and breathe in; so that one has lost the Beginning of the Sentence, before one
can learn the latter End. It Is not long since a Lady called on me, to wait on
Lady Tuneal. We found her at her usual Pass-time, but in pleasanter Temper than
ordinary. She no sooner observed us in a Posture of going, but she began to
entreat our Stay, declared she was never better pleased in Company, and that
she did really esteem us as Persons of Discretion; and therefore hoped we
should dispense with her, as to those Formalities and Decorums, which might not
answer at this Time with her Convenience; for having been that Day much
interrupted in her Music, should therefore be obliged to sit up late, which
always proves extremely prejudicial to her Health. We begged her Ladyship to use
us with the same Familiarity she would her Daughter, or those of her
Attendance. After we had been agreeably enough entertained for some Time, with
several new Tunes, of which she is never unprovided, at the set Time, according
to her Custom, which is as unalterable as the Laws of the Medes and Persians,
she rings her Bell; upon which, Mrs. Smart, her Woman, desires to know her
Ladyship's Pleasure. She begins, Smart, -- I have called you with Intention --
to consult -- about Supper. -- Her Woman proposed several Things, which I
thought proper for Night; but my Lady looks frighted, turns pail, and protests
she has given her the Spleen to the highest Degree, in naming such gross Meats
at this unseasonable Hour, and at last recovers Breath to cry out, -- Smart, --
you are a Person -- of a hail Constitution; -- but when a Person -- has lived
so long with -- a Person of Quality, -- there might be gathering up -- some
Fragments of Sense, -- at least enough to -- distinguish them -- from the
Commonalty: -- But -- to speak yet plainer still, -- though with abundance -- of
Difficulty, -- for want of Breath, -- as well as Loss of Time, -- which to me
-- is always precious, -- very precious, -- though not so with you, -- and the
unthinking World; -- yet, I do say, -- you might have distinguished mine --
from vulgar Appetites; -- have spared me all these Considerations, -- and have
come with -- something ready projected, -- suitable to the -- Delicacy of my
Palate, -- and Tenderness -- of Constitution withal, -- by way of Cordial, --
to revive decaying Spirits. -- Smart answered her Lady, that she had named what
she knew of, to be proper in all those Cases; and that she dare say, if the
Truth were known, her Ladyship had herself projected the Supper she designed,
and only urged all this to try if she could divine; which in all Likelihood
might prove as difficult, as it was for the South-Sayers and Magicians to tell
King Nebuchadnezzar not only the Interpretation, but the Dream too: But if she
would let her have her Commands in a Word, she should readily be obeyed. The
Lady replied, Why, truly, Smart, -- I have observed you to be -- a Person --
always ready furnished -- with a Stock of Spirits, -- and so consequently
always on a Hurry; -- and since you will reduce me -- to the Necessity -- of
naming the Thing -- my self, I desire you will step down -- into the Kitchen, and
leave Orders -- with the Cook -- to make me -- half a Porringerof Water Gruel.
-- Smart, not a little glad to receive the Message, in Hopes to be dismissed
for that Time, was going in all Haste to deliver it, when her Lady calls her
back, with a Charge to let it be thin, very thin. She was no sooner dispatched
with these second Orders, but was again recalled to take a more strict one yet,
which was, that it must not exceed half a Porringer, but rather abate something
of half a Porringer, and to be sure that it be Poverty-Gruel. After this, she
falls to shaking her Fingers on the Spinet, with greater Vehemence than ever;
which put her into such Disorder, that she was obliged to desist, and recover
Strength, by sighing and gasping afresh. Smart finding her Lady in such
Extremities, proposed to have a Spoon-full of Sack in the Gruel, as a
comfortable Cordial, and might incline her to Rest: Upon which, she sinks into
her Chair, struggles for new Life, and professed that she was absolutely
overcome only with the Name of those -- strong -- stupifying -- adulterated --
debauched -- Liquors. After she had supped, we took our Leaves; but had the
Honor to receive an Invitation to dine with her the Week following; and said,
she hoped there was no need to make Apologies for our not eating with her then;
as being Persons of hail Constitutions, those Evening-Refreshments were
needless; and made no doubt but that we had already learnt to know, that when
Nature is arrived to its full Growth, and no visible Signs of Decay, those
superfluous Nourishments serve not only to create or increase the ill Humors
in the Body, but to raise and cherish ill Dispositions in the Mind.

Amongst the Failings that attend this Lady, and indeed several others of our
Sex, this one seems most predominant, through a mistaken Zeal to Virtue; they
make too curious Search into those Things they would appear to have the
greatest Abhorrence to; which I shall discover more particularly hereafter, and
is what every truly virtuous Woman ought to overlook, and endeavor to keep
herself in Ignorance of; but perhaps they agree with those Words Mr. Dryden
makes Lucifer speak in his State of Innocence: For to know Good, is good, and
therefore fit;
And to know Ill, is good, for shuning it.
No Doubt but these Words were very proper for his Design, and, amongst others
of that Nature, had their desired Effect; but, on the contrary, as to the
latter Part, were I capable to judge or advise, believe it more safe, as much
as possible to remain unknowing of all Things that tend to Ill.

HAving been a little indisposed the last Week, I had the Honor to receive
Visits from several of my Acquaintance, most of them being Persons of
Distinction and Merit, who, besides the Pleasure they gave me in their
Conversations, has encouraged me to entertain a little better Opinion of my
self than ordinary, as finding I am not wholly neglected; I mean by those of my
own Sex.

After the first Complements ended, and the Ladies placed according to their
several Degrees, Lady Quicksight broke Silence; Madam, said she, if it will not be
impertinent in me to entertain your Company, I Will tell you an Observation I
made just now coming through the Mall. I answered, Your Ladyship will lay me
under a particular Obligation, in doing it in a much more agreeable Manner than
I am capable of. She made a Return I did not deserve, and went on, I suppose
you know, or at least have heard of such a Gentleman, naming him, a Great
Statesman, though not so particularly addressed to in this present Parliament, as
that before the late Revolution in the Ministry. I observed him in a very
pensive Mood, taking several short Turns in the Park, and was as often met by a
Nurse with four or five Children, who missed no Opportunity of dropping him
Curtsies, but was passed by a long Time disregarded. At last she bethought
herself of another Stratagem, and ordered the Children so as to meet him in a
full Body, and attack him by way of Complement, while she lead up the Rear.
This unusual Salutation called him from his politic Contemplations. He saw
them very pretty, and well dressed, and was extremely pleased with their Manner
of accosting him. He asked the Nurse if she belonged to them, and said, he
never saw such fine Children in his Life; and imagining their Parents to be
considerable, desired to know whose they were. The Nurse answered, Sir, they
are your own, and live in the same House with you. Are they so? says the
Father: Indeed I did not know it, nor do I remember I ever saw one of them
before. But however, to let the Nurse see he did not disbelieve what she told
him, and that he approved of her Manner of Discipline, gave her a Guinea, and
ordered her to take them Home. It Is very strange to me, continued Lady
Quicksight, that a Gentleman, who is both a good Husband, and a good Father,
and makes it his Endeavor to raise great Fortunes for his Children, should be
so extremely bigoted to public Affairs, as to remain thus ignorant of his
domestic ones, and not know his own Children, though they live in the House with
him. Not at all, replied Delamine; I think it sufficient if he knows his Wife,
and converses with her. I know a certain Colonel of the Guards, of City
Extraction, but having a natural Inclination to what he calls Gallantry, went
two or three Campaigns into Flanders, in Pursuit of Honor, 'till he lost that
little he had; and at last came Home, and purchased the Commission he is now
possessed of. This Spark has a Wife and two Children, whom he has made such
Strangers to him, that he has now almost brought himself to believe there is no
such People in the World; and I believe scarce knows any one of them when he
meets them; but if by Chance any of his more considerate Companions would be
reminding him, he swears it is all Imposition; and knowing the Disadvantages he
has reduced them to, hopes, that he has hitherto bully'd them out of a just
Maintenance, makes no Doubt in a little Time but to bully them out of their
just Claim too, without giving any sufficient Reasons for what he says or does.
Certainly such a Man must needs be esteemed heroic, who can thus bravely
contend, and triumph over a weak Woman and young Children, because he has put
it out of their Power to defend themselves! and if he gains his Ends, I desire
we may all petition the Parliament to have him publicly acknowledged, and
treated as a victorious Conqueror. Delamine would have proceeded farther, but
the whole Company unanimously begged her to lay aside that Subject, he being
the common Theme of Discourse for that, or something equally as ridiculous;
though at the same Time all owned he had once been a very pretty Fellow, and so
might have continued, if he had not took those Methods to make himself despised
by all the rational World. While they were thus busy in Remarks on others,
striving who should be most heard, I thought it better Manners to give
Attention to, than intercept their Talk, 'till at last they told me I had not
spoke two Words since they came into the Room. I answered, that being conscious
of my own Incapacities, together with a due Regard to those who honored me
with their Presence, was certain I could reap much more Advantage by being a
Hearer, than a Speaker. However, rather than give any Disgust by my Silence,
I Will venture to draw a Censure of a contrary Nature; and for want of something
more agreeable, shall tell a very odd Thing that lately happened to my self,
and is one Cause of my present Indisposition. The Ladies all begged to hear
that, and Lady Quicksight cried, I hope you are not in Love; I never thought
you inclining to that Distemper. Not at all, Madam, said I. Your Ladyship's
much more discerning, than the vain Coxcomb that misconstructed me; though upon
hearing my Story, perhaps you will say I had as great a Share of Vanity, as he.
You must know here is a Gentleman come to lodge in our Neighborhood, who takes
all Opportunities to let me understand he is resolved to keep a very strict
Survey over my Actions and Behaviors; so that I am under the greatest
Restraints imaginable, to find that I cannot stir Abroad, move in my own
Apartment, or receive Company, but he must have immediate Information; and is
so perpetually lolling in his Window, with his Eyes fixed here, that it is
impossible for any Thing to slip his Knowledge. As to my self, there is nothing
worth remarking; but what perplexes me, is poor Amelia. She had appointed to
call on me for the Opera; and because we don't duly frequent those Places, she
was desirous not to miss any Part of the Entertainment. Having been dressed in
a very great Hurry, she took a sudden Whip from the Coach, to hasten me down
Stairs; but had the Misfortune to drop her Shift at the Door, which hung in her
Petticoats, and was designed to have been left at Home: Upon which, the Spark
took upon him to burst out into a downright Laughter, though he did what he could
to smother it, while her Servant took Care to deliver it into my Maid's
Custody. You Will guess, Ladies, at the Shame and Confusion this occasioned us;
which increased, when we 'sp'd him at our Backs, as soon as we had taken our
Places in the Theater, where I suppose he diverted himself at the Expense of
our Blushes. Amelia has never been here since; and for my own Part, I appear as
seldom as possible. And is that the only Cause? says Lady Quicksight. When you
first began to speak of your Neighbor, I apprehended something more than all
this. I found she would pump it out, and thought it more ingenious to do it
voluntarily. That is, Madam, said I, what I am going to tell you: This very
Gentleman finding me use all Industry to avoid him, and that it would continue
difficult for him to see me any where but at Church, managed it so as to be in
the same Pew with me every Sunday, and always places himself either next, or
over against me, incessantly ogling, and using several irreverent Gestures,
which gives me abundance of Uneasiness. If, to prevent being star'd at, I turn
my Head on one Side, he takes Occasion truly to dash his Foot against mine,
with Design to set it right again; so that I am obliged to keep my Eyes fixed
on my Fan, or look directly over him to the Parson; which methinks gives me a
very old-fashioned Air; for I have observed Ladies of the highest Quality, and
in the Royal Chapel it self, don't throw away a Look, or misemploy a Thought
that Way, but are at full Liberty to compare Jewels, receive and entertain one
another with as much Freedom, and as great an Air of Gallantry, as in the
Drawing Room, or a Ball at Court. The only Refuge I have under these
Restraints, is kneeling; but I Will assure you, my Spark is more a Gentleman, and
better bred, than to kneel at Church, or show the least Devotion; though at the
same Time I dare say he would not think it beneath him to adore and prostrate
himself at the Feet of an insignificaut Mortal, in Hopes by such Means, to draw
her to her Ruin, while perhaps he is only despised and laughed at; which indeed
is the just Reward of such Endeavors. When I am to rise, he is officiously
offering his Hand, and by that Means gains Opportunity to squeeze mine; and, in
short, has made all the Advances imaginable; so that it were impossible for me
to suppose him otherwise than a Lover, though he had not spoke one Word yet; but
that passed for want of Assurance, and I ever expected when he would gain
Courage enough to make a Declaration of his Passion; not that I had the least
Inclination to accept his Proposals, though he has a pretty Estate, and
considerable Place under the Government; yet there is no Enchantments lodged in
his Person, so as to make him amiable in my Eyes. However, I did not know but
he might expect I should take it an Honor; and because I would not seem to
lessen his Deserts, or value my own without Cause, I studied a long Time for an
Answer to that imaginary Letter he might send me, and contrived it so as he
could not think me imperious or fantastical, or that my Refusal was meant in
Affront to him, I thought it best to say, that a Sense of my own Imperfections
had occasioned me to vow Celibacy some Time since, as knowing I am unworthy to
be beloved. This Letter lay by me so long, that I began to despair of ever
having Use for it, and grew a little disturbed, least the Product of my Studies
should be lost: But one Evening I had Notice, that the Gentleman's Footman
over the way had brought a Letter, and would deliver it only to my self. Upon
first hearing, I confess I was in twenty Minds, whether to send this I had by
me, or not: At last, I found it would be a considerable Time before I could
accomplish another, and that I had no more to do with this, but to seal and
direct it, and by that Means gain the Reputation of a Woman of a quick Thought.
I took his Letter, said I would step up and read it, and send down an Answer
immediately. The Fellow told me very briskly, it did not require an Answer, and
was gone before I could say another Word. I suppose he had given those Orders,
because he was resolved to take no Denial; so retired into my Closet, and to my
Astonishment read this:

Madam,
It Is with infinite Regret I have prevailed with my self to disclose a Secret,
that I with Reason fear will cause you much Uneasiness; and withal to give you
this unwelcome Caution; that is, for your own Sake, I beg you will endeavor to
suppress your growing Passion for me, which has been apparently manifest by
those Tremblings and Emotions which naturally seize you at my Approach, and I
with so much Pleasure have discerned: But have the Misfortune, Madam, to be
engaged in an Affair my Friends put me upon, before I had the Honor to know of
you. It Is a just Consideration of your Merit, that will not suffer me to let you
languish under a fruitless Expectation of what may never be in my Power to
gratify. I hope you are so good a Christian, as to bear this Disappointment
patiently, and be assured, that though I cannot, yet there is nothing in the
World I covet more, than to be

Entirely Yours.


It was a long Time before I could recover from the Surprise this Letter had
thrown me into, and was really grieved to find, that one cannot blush for a
Fellow's Impudence, but he must misinterpret it to Love. At first I was in the
Mind to write, and undeceive the Puppy; but upon Consideration, found I should
but lessen my self, and increase his Vanity, by showing any Regard to it; for
the only Way to mortify such Animals, is to scorn and neglect them, and to let
the Fool see it was not in his Power to cause me the least Uneasiness. The next
Day, being Sunday, I dressed my self in the best Clothes I have, and went to
Church with a gayer Air than ordinary; where I had not been long, before I had
the Pleasure to find my Opposite had met with a greater Disappointment than my
self, and could have laughed at his Folly, if I had thought it worth while; but
to do Justice on both Sides, I cannot say I escaped altogether unpunished for my
Pride; for in leaving off my Hood that Day, the Weather being grown cool, I got
a very great Cold, which occasions me to keep my Chamber at this Time. The
Ladies fell a laughing at my Amor; and by this Time I suppose were pretty well
tired, and took their Leaves.

I Shall not undertake to give a circumstantial Account of the unhappy
Differences that arose not long after the Marriage, between Sir Bounce Sparkit
and his Lady: Though her Virtue, Beauty, and every Merit, were his chief
Inducements to enter into the matrimonial State; yet, through the Instigations
of his pretended Friends, and her Enemies, he soon grew to an Indifference, and
afterward to a Neglect, or rather ill Ufage, of the only Person in the World
that entirely loves, and maintains an inviolable Fidelity to him. Sir Bounce is
one of those who places his whole Felicity in himself, and does not require the
Additions a good Wife is capable of giving, to make his Life easy to him; and
as he never takes nor gives Reasons for any Thing, he thought fit not long
since to withdraw to a separate Apartment, and devote himself up to
Gallantries; while his forsaken Spouse has full Leisure to lament her
Unhappiness, or Time and Opportunity, if she pleases, to revenge her Injuries;
though I believe she never entertained a Thought of that Nature; but on the
contrary, has made it her utmost Endeavors, if possible, to retrieve her
Husband's fleeting Passion: In order to which, she went one Morning to his
Chamber, where she found him equipping in a riding Habit, and with all the
Sweetness in her Looks, and most obliging Terms imaginable, said she was come
to Breakfast with him, and to have the Pleasure of an Hour's Conversation, if
he would permit it. He answered with a very haughty Air, that she had made
Choice of a wrong Time to gain any of his Company, being in Expectation every
Moment of a Gentleman to call of him for Hide-Park; and that if she would show
him any Marks of her Duty and Prudence, she must immediately retire. The Lady
began to be a little enraged at her cold Reception, and his Ingratitude; and
briskly told him, those Cautions were needless, and that she wished he would
acquit his Duty, as well as she had done here is: Upon this, Sir Bounce commanded
her not to talk; but she still disobeying, he ordered his Valet to lead her to
her own Apartment. This Indignity was resented to the last Degree; and she did
not fail to tell him at parting, It is not long since you would have gone down
on both Knees, to have obtained the Blessing your self. Under this new
Discouragement, she flies to Olympa, a young Lady, her near Relation and
Confident, who lives with her in the House. It Is to her only she opens all her
Grievances. Olympa always endeavors to rally her, out of her Melancholy, and
tells her, a Husband's Love is not worth preserving; and as she is a true
Coquet, declares she can never value any Man farther, than to have the Glory of
a Conquest; of which she is so extremely covetous, that she cannot bear the
Thoughts of a Cavalier, who is not her professed Adorer; and never fails to
play the Tyrant, after she has once gained a Captive. She will needs have Lady
Sparkit Abroad to divert her; and being in the Morning, and not in an Humor to
dress, they walked in Dissabil, to make Choice of some Things they had Occasion
for at a Miliner's in the Pall Mall; where, after they had been some Time, were
returning Home to Dinner, when Olympa, whose Eyes are always open to gay
Appearances, 'spy'd a fine young Gentleman with his Head laid down to sleep in
a Tavern Window; the Sash being up, and another standing by with a Whip under
his Arm. Upon which, she cried, Look, my Dear, do you know either of those
pretty Fellows? Lady Sparkit immediately recollected she saw her Husband put on
that fine laced Coat to ride out in the Morning, and that this other was the
Friend he expected should call of him; so concluded they were now come back,
and would dine there together. While her Thoughts were thus employed, he that
stood, gave the other a Pluck, who soon waked, looked upon them, and smiled.
They both saw very plain, at that Time, it was Sir Bounce himself; and his Lady
was not a little revived at the pleasant Look he had given her, and began to
think it was not impossible but that his Mind might now change, as much as it
had done before. But however, least her too curious Observation might give any
Umbrage, she was going in all Haste; but Olympa having an Inclination to look
back, saw him beckon, and make all the Signs he could to have them stop, 'till
he was ready to throw himself out of the Window. She was extremely pleased with
his seeming Eagerness to join Companies, and had already doomed the Stranger
her Slave. She tells Lady Sparkit, that she is confident Sir Bounce is grown
impatient to come to a Reconciliation; and because she would not seem to have
any Designs, tells her, she has now a fair Opportunity to close with her
Happiness; which, if lost, may never be retrieved; and that as it is her
Husband who makes this pressing Invitation, she ought not to stand upon
Decorums, or raise any Objections against the Decency of the Place; especially
since she knew him to be a Man of that Temper whom nothing can oblige, but an
entire Obedience and Resignation to his Will and Pleasure, though it appear never
so unreasonable to the World. Lady Sparkit was very inclinable to comply with
those Reasonings, but again feared his Designs might not be so well, perhaps,
as they at first imagined. While she remained thus dubious, and slowly moving
homewards, Philaret, which was the young Stranger, pursued and overtook them,
who only bowed, and offered her his Hand to lead them back, without saying one
Word. She asked why Mr. Sparkit would not rather come himself? He answered,
Madam, I very difficultly prevailed upon him to permit me the Honor. By the
Way, she proceeded to ask him several Questions concerning the Park, and if
they had brought any other Company with them. To all which he answered very
Appropo. When they were come to the Tavern, she saw four or five strange
Footmen stand with their Hats off; but those she imagined might belong to the
Gallant who was 'squiring her up Stairs, while Olympa followed. They had not
quite ascended, before the other Gentleman came running to meet them; and
Philaret called out, My Lord Newlove, if you were sensible of the Blessing, you
would fly to assist me in usbering up these Ladies. Upon this, they immediately
found their Mistake, but too late. Olympa run down as fast as she could; but
Lady Sparkit not having Liberty to get away, clapped hold of the Banisters, and
fell into a Swoon. After they had brought her into the Room, they did not fail
to use their utmost Care and Diligence to bring her to Life, which was effected
in a little Time; but upon finding herself in the Arms of him she had mistook
for her Husband, she was ready to fall into a Relapse, had they not convinced
her by their Behaviors and solemn Protestations, she should remain in their
Company with as much Safety, on all Accounts, as with the nearest Relation she
had in the World. But all this would not satisfy the disappointed Lady; she
entreats, with the greatest Urgency imaginable, to have her Liberty; while
they, with an unresisting Air, and most profound Respect, solicit her Stay. By
this Time Olympa had recovered her Fright, and was returned, to make Enquiry of
her Friend. Philaret had Notice of it, and with abundance of Arguments and
Assurances, prevailed upon her to honor them with her Company; which she did,
in Respect to the other Lady. Lord Newlove was so enamored with the Beauty,
graceful Mein, and modest Carriage of Lady Sparkit, whom he styled his destined
Charmer, sent from the Gods to take Possession of a Heart unconquered; and that
he should esteem himself the most fortunate Man on Earth, if she would permit
him to devote it eternally to her Service. Lady Sparkit received these
Addresses with all the Coldness and Neglect that is natural to a Mind
prepossest; and though she had no other Obligations to her Husband, than that of
being so, yet she found her Virtue a sufficient Guard against the most powerful
Assaults. Lord Newlove is a young Nobleman, truly heroic, and graced with all
the Additions of Art and Nature, which can conspire to make him irresistible;
and has so peculiar a Method in making Love, which insensibly steals upon the
Hearts of those present, as well as the Person addressed to; and never fails to
make her envied, though it were by a Sister, or Bosom-Friend. In the mean Time,
Philaret, who is no less deserving, a Relation, and sworn Brother to Lord
Newlove, entertained Olympa with all the Respect and good Manners which becomes
a Cavalier to a fine young Lady; yet, though she is very desirable, he did not
find himself absolutely in Love with her, but kept his Eyes and Thoughts fixed
on Lady Sparkit, who always proves most attracting to the real Judges of
Perfections. On the other Hand, Olympa made him suitable Returns, and was so
transported between the Charms she saw in Lord Newlove, and that of a Rival's
Rage and Resentment, that she had not Leisure to mind the cool Application
Philaret made to her, which seemed rather through Restraint, than Inclination:
A Treatment she had never been accustomed to, and what was directly contrary to
the Sentiments she had of herself; but finds now, to her great Anxiety, it was
not impossible to love, even where she is likely to continue disregarded; the
greatest Mortification that can befall a Coquet. As these two Lovers sympathize
in all Things, so their Thoughts were equally employed on Stratagems to succeed
in this new Amor, with that Eagerness to persist, which is always observable
in a beginning Flame, both fancying he had the juster Claim, 'till they had
quite forgot the Intent of their coming thither, which was to dine with two
honest Fellows, who had undergone the Fatigues of a Camp some Years; one of
which was come off with the Loss of an Eye and an Arm, whom they had
accidentally met in Hide-Park, from whence they were just returned when the
Ladies first saw them, and had already bespoke the Dinner. But now the
appointed Time being come, the Brothers of the Blade had dispatched their
Affairs, and were armed: Upon which, they rushed into the Room in a most
surprising Manner; the first made but one Step up to Lady Sparkit, clapped his
Hat under his Arm, and cried, My Lord, give me Leave to kiss your Girl; while
the lame one accosted Olympa in as familiar a Way. The Ladies being
unacquainted with those Sort of Salutations, were astonished at their Manner of
proceeding, and were ready to die with the Apprehensions they received of them.
Lord Newlove soon perceived it, and with a becoming Anger, in Regard to the
Ladies Prefence, gave Camper a fevere Reprimand for his Insolence, though with
that Caution as not to put their Reputations in his Power by a Discovery who
they were, but gave them all honorable Assurances of his Protection and
Fidelity. By this Time Dinner was come upon the Table, which was with all
Magnificence the Place would allow of. It was in vain for the Ladies to think
of disengaging themselves, but on the contrary, were obliged to be as sociable
as they could. While the Courtiers were employed in officiating, and silently
admiring, the Soldiers were entertaining the Company with an Account of their
military Discipline, and begged they might be permitted to regale them with
their martial Music; which was refused. After Dinner, Lord Newlove and
Philaret approached Lady Sparkit, with all the Awe and Adoration they would a
Deity, from whom they expect their immediate Fate; all which she modestly
evaded; while Camper placed his Batteries at Olympae, and after several
vigorous Assaults, which proved ineffectual, he was constrained to raise the
Siege: Upon which, they both retired; so that Philaret, in Point of Breeding to
Olympa, is obliged to resign to his powerful Rival, and give him Opportunity
for all the Advances that is possible for such an Assailant to gain over a
Heart that cannot remain wholly insensible of his Merits; where, in spite of all
her Virtue and Reason, he so far prevailed, as to obtain her Consent for a
second Meeting; which, though innocently meant, had the Misfortune to be
overheard by Philaret and Olympa, who looked upon this Adventure to be a
Conspiracy against her universal Empire; and though before this unlucky Accident,
she dearly loved Lady Sparkit, yet, in the Height of Rage and Resentment, she
is ready to sacrifice her to her Revenge, it being entirely in her Power, as
she best knows the true Motives of her Husband's Indifference; and that if she
failed of her desired Success in an Attempt projected, she is already assured
of having him her Vassal, whenever she pleases to command it, though the
Affection she bore to her Cousin, had hitherto prevented her taking any
Advantages of that Nature, but always endeavored to conceal it from her
Knowledge, that it might not cause her any Disquietude. Lady Sparkit is now
desirous to be gone, when Lord Newlove, who is so transported with the Hopes of
future Happiness, is ready to obey her harshest Commands; and together with
Philaret, conducted them so far as they would permit.

It Is about three or four Months since a very worthy Gentleman, a Member of
Parliament, had Occasion to be at a Periwig-maker's Shop in the Strand, where
he chanced to 'spy a fine young Lady alight out of a Hackney-Coach from a very
handsome Gentleman, to make a Visit to an intimate Friend of here is, a Country
Lady that lodged at the next House; he seeing her walk up Stairs, followed by
her Footman, who carried several Parcels she had been buying, and came there
with Design to have her Friend's Advice in the making up the Cloths for her
Marriage, which was to be celebrated the Week following with that young
Cavalier who conducted her thither. Mirtilla, which was the Country Lady, would
needs recommend one Vainly, a finical Mantoa-woman that lodged up two Pair of
Stairs in the same House, and who had made it her Business to insinuate herself
into her Favor, to make the Cloths; which Clarinda willingly assented to, and
gave her Directions accordingly. But to return to our grave Statesman, whom we
left in the adjoining Shop, full of Contemplationon the late Angelick Vision.
He finds himself all on a Sudden plunged into a Passion he had never yet
experienced, at least to such a Degree, tho almost arrived to the Age of Fifty;
but since he is so transported with Love, is resolved to gratify himself on any
Term whatsoever. Accordingly considered on Proposals of marrying her with all
imaginable Speed; if his Person be not the most amiable, yet his other
Qualifications, with the Addition of a great Estate, and Title of Sir J --, he
knew were great Inducements to a prudent young Lady, especially if she had no
great Fortune, as he wished, to make his Address the easier, and begins to
think on no Objection, unless that beautiful Adonis that came Home with her, as
he imagined, might prove to be a Lover: But on second Thought, fancied so much
Resemblance in their Faces, that he concludes them Brother and Sister; so
scorning to ask any other Questions than what is the Lady's Name that lodges
next Door, he was answered Vainly, the People not knowing of any other in that
House. This was enough for the hasty Lover. He immediately flies into his
Chariot, and instead of going to the Play or Coffee-houses, gives Orders to go
Home, where he spent the Remainder of that Day and Night in contriving the
properest Means to introduce his Passion. Sometimes he is ready to go and throw
himself at her Feet; but again considers, that being wholly a Stranger, such an
Action might seem too rash and surprising; and at last concludes on writing
first, to beg Leave to wait on her; which he did next Morning in the softest
Terms that could be. He acquaints her with his Name, his Rank, his
Circumstances; and above all, his mighty Love and indefatigable Resolutions to
obtain her for his Wife; is impatient to know when he may be admitted to kiss
her Hand; and concludes himself the most submissive, whining Slave, that ever
Beauty made so. This was directed for Madam Vainly at her Lodging, dispatched
away in all Haste, and was accordingly delivered with a great deal of Ceremony.
You may suppose Vainly received all this very civilly, and returned the
Complement as well as she could, with her most humble Service; and that if he
pleased to take the Pains to come there next Day at Six in the Evening, she
would do herself the Honor to attend him. Never was Woman so pleasingly
surpised as she, at this welcome Letter. She perused it over and over, and
fancies every Thing in her Praise, to be substantial Truths; but upon
consulting her Looking-Glass more than ordinary, finds herself altogether
irresistible, and is ready to fly into a Passion at the rest of the stupify'd
World, that could not distinguish her Charms in six and thirty Years Time. She
now begins to consider her Admirer; and though she never saw him in her Life, yet
is extremely in Love with him for several Reasons. His Quality, Estate, and
honorable Intentions to make her great, are powerful Motives; but yet adores
him more, if possible, for his penetrating Judgment. The Title of Ladyship,
transports her to the last Degree. She concludes every Thing done, and is the
happiest Woman in the World, in her own Imaginations. She grows eager for the
Pleasure of relating her Conquest, and fixes on Mirtilla as the properest
Confident and Adviser in this Affair. Mirtilla was somewhat amazed, believe me,
at the Gentleman's Choice; but however, being a very well-meaning Country Lady,
was mightily pleased at her Neighbor's good Fortune, in Hopes to have a merry
Bout at this Wedding too. She offers her Apartment to receive him, if she likes
it better than her own; which was willingly accepted by Vainly, who employed
all her Time in making that, and herself fit to entertain so considerable a
Lover; but Clarinda, who had really the greatest Share in the whole Matter, was
ignorant of all that passed, and came very innocently next Day to visit
Mirtilla, and enquire if her Wedding-Cloths were almost finished, because she
had now few Days to turn in. She had no sooner entered the House, but she found
the Face of all Things changed, only Mirtilla was much the same Woman as
before; but Vainly was absolutely transformed into another Creature. She had
just been adorning herself to maintain an eternal Conquest; sat playing her
Fan with the awful Air of some great Lady-Visiter, now and then tuning up her
musical Voice to the softest Words she could think on. Clarinda was struck all
on a Heap in her Thoughts, at this sudden Alteration; but seeing Vainly look so
very stately, she could not take Courage to ask any Question, nor durst so much
as name the Work she expected to have seen done. Mirtilla observing her Look
surpised and studious, was as much in Pain to have the telling of News, as the
other was to hear it; so makes an Excuse to call her into the next Room, where
she unfolded the Mystery. Clarinda could hardly believe at first Hearing; but
Mirtilla asserts the Truth with, yea verily, and indeed. This happened as
Vainly wished; for she was often upon the Point of bringing of it out herself;
but deferred, in Hopes Mirtilla would save her the Labor. They were no sooner
come to her again, but she begins to return her Thanks; for though Clarinda was a
Stranger at present, yet she said she was much pleased with her Conversation,
and had no Affairs she desired might be made a Secret to her, and hoped they
should be better acquainted hereafter; for truly she should very often beg
their Companies in her Coach to Hide-Park; but indeed she has so many Things to
do and think on, that she does not know at which End to begin; and as they are
both going to enter into the same Circumstances, she says they must endeavor
to assist one another, and make the best Use of their Time. She will needs have
Clarinda's Cloths sent away just then to the Mantoa-woman she designs to honor
with her Wedding-Garments, and tells her, that in Return, she must make it Part
of her Employment to enquire out amongst her Acquaintance for a Lady's Woman,
that understands herself and her Business thoroughly, and knows how to keep due
Distance; for she is sure she can never bear a familiar Wretch. But now the
Time of Expectation draws near; the Ladies are better bred, than to be
interrupting; so take Leave together to spend the Evening at Clarinda's
Lodgings. They had not been gone half an Hour, before a fine Chariot and
Equipage, with a much more fine Gentleman, stopped at the Door. Vainly knew it
could be nothing less than her Adorer; runs in all Maste to meet him at the
Stairs. After the usual Complements to a Woman of her Appearance, he desired to
know if Mrs. Vainly were at Home: She told him Yes; and that her Name was so.
He supposing her to be the Mother, said it was the young Lady he meant, who had
done him the Honor to return such and such an Answer, upon his taking the
Liberty to write to her the Day before. She assured him she was the very Person
he meant; that there was no other of the Name in that House; and for farther
Confirmation, takes the Letter out of her Bosom. He then begged ten thousand
Pardons, said he was mistaken in the Name; for that Letter was meant to another
Lady about such an Age, had such Hair, Eyes, and every Features; and proceeded
to describe her very Dress; yet all this was not enough to convince Vainly: She
did not intend to be so tantaliz'd. She affirmed she was not above Eighteen,
had just such Eyes; and that if he will but come up to the Light, he will find
her every Ways as agreeable, if not exceed the other he talks of: But, alas! it
was not in the Power of all her Charms and Rhetoric, to draw him one Inch
farther. Poor Vainly was perfectly confounded at this unexpected Treatment, and
Labor lost; and what between Grief, Pride, and Resentment, was ready to break
out into loud Complaints, and offered to detain him by Force; which obliged the
mistaken Lover to take very abrupt Leave, extremely perplexed at the
Disappointment; but not without Hopes that a little more Caution and Industry,
may at last bring him to the real Object of his Admiration: But I understand
Vainly came pretty even with him afterward; which I Will refer to some other
Paper, when I am better informed of that Part of the Story.

FINIS.

