COUNCIL Humbly propounded FOR THE SPEEDY SETTLEMENT OF THESE LONG Disturbed
Nations.

WHEREIN Is offered such a King, such a Church Government, such liberty for
Tender consciences, as that the Royalist, Presbiterian, and persons of
different Judgments (the three great Interests of our Nations) may acquiess in.

LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons, for H. C. In the Year, 1660.

COUNCIL HUMBLY PROPOUNDED FOR THE Speedy settlement of these long disturbed
Nations.
I Have observed that generally books written for the healing of our breaches,
have looked to one single Interest only, when as in reason and religion also,
we ought to accommodate our selves as far as equity will give leave to the
minds of others, for self humor is a disturbing thing and we are not made to
swallow up one another, but rather to endeavor to our utmost power to give
satisfaction to all sober Interests, and this I conceive is the highway to
compose our differences, I have here propounded that which may in reason and
conscience, can but will comply, give content to the Royalist, Presbiterian,
and Congregational Interests.

It is certainly a good, though difficult work to unite parties, and to bring
2. if it be possible 3. into one; for my own particular I am little concerned
in affairs among us, so as to be bettered or worsted any other ways then the
Common weal shall suffer, and as I am pained with longing till I see my native
Country settled upon foundations of righteousness and peace, I have therefore
studied what may be abated of the humor of each side and party, and what
allowed to one another, and have taken into my thoughts, what materially
relates to our differences, and I find one vanity much abounding among the sons
of men, that they will take up something that one way or other suits with their
own convenience, and then are so weded to their own case as not to see the
least reason in another, be there never so much; and it is too much the
unhappiness of English men, that they like a thing upon a mere fancy, rather
then upon grounds in reason which puts upon earnest desire of change
continually. I have likewise considered this maxim, that that which in it self
is best, yet may not be best for such a people so and so qualified; And as good
food may be dangerous when a body is not rightly prepared to receive it, so may
a civil Government which may have many conveniences in it, prove the
destruction of a people, not constituted to embrace it, and that by the woeful
wars and force that must be to maintain that which men's affection opposes,
and now what ever the things I propound may be in themselves absolutely
considered, yet I am fully satisfied as the case stands, amongst us they are
the things only that can settle us, and are no ways repugnant to honesty and
conscience, which is chiefly to be preferred, I have impartially discoursed,
with all sorts and parties and watched where any strength should lay against my
affirmations, and finding none able to gainsay them in point of solid
argument, is that only which moves me to think them so reasonable, as to
present them to public view: I think not fit to insert here the grounds of
what I offer, because of their tediousnes and your ability at first sight, to
see into the reason of them more then my self; Upon long deliberation and much
weighing them, now I believe if at this turn prejudice and rigor be not laid
aside, and such moderation prudence and charity as to do good against evil made
use of by authority and wickedness be not suppressed among the people, that
our wounds will be only skinned over and shortly break out again to the great
danger of the whole body. First therefore the genius of the people of England
not yiedling to a Common-wealth-government, but requiring a Kingly one, let
moderate Monarchy be established, wherein the King may rule with Christian
Prudence and Policy, wherein the peoples real good may be had in regard, and
their true freedom secured, and the rights and privileges of the peoples
Representatives in Parliament maintained, and wherein also each estate may be
obliged to promote together good Laws for the Land. Some there be that cannot
be contented with Royal Majesty, as a title for the King, or great
magnificent excellent Sovereign, but dread and adore him under the terms of
sacred, infinite, as one that can do no wrong: but how this honor to man
tends to the honor of God, let the impartial judge. 2. As to
Church Government, let an Assembly besummon'd of English, Scots, French, and
Dutch, Protestant ministers, Episcopalians, Presbyteriant, and Congregationall
persons, whereof Dr. Hamond, Mr. Peirson, Dr Seman, Mr. Pool, Mr. Nie, Dr.
Owen, and Mr. Baxter would do well to be, seven being versed in the
Controversy, who may freely debate and consider what the Magistrates power and
business is in matters of Religion, and what government Christ has appointed
for his Church, and that we may have neither name or thing established, but what
the word of God allows of; and that tradition and custom may be no offense,
seeing the holy Scriptures are able to make the man of God wise to salvation
through faith in Christ; therefore if this golden rule allow of Bishops, let us
have them, or Elders let us have them, and such Pastors, Deacons, and Church
Officers, neither more, less, or any other, all made good by such clear proof
and sound evidence, and printed: that no conscientious person may be
constrained either to fly or suffer through a nonconformitie, and such only
left as will comply with any thing that shall comport with their ease and
profit, and if what be done in Church-affaires be fully proved, the gainsayers
mouth will be stopped, and the Churches be more pure and entire, giving no
occasion for separation from them. Now I do humbly conceive this following
course would do very well as to these matters, namely, if any place do want a
Minister, let any four of the Parish have liberty to bring in one to preach
upon trial, afterward let some good men in the Parish present one that they
do judge fit to Authority with desire to be admitted to be their Minister,
and to receive the maintenance allowed; but regard should be had as near as may
be to the generality of tose that are good in the Parish as to the choice, and
the Minister settled, his work should be to gather out of the Parish into the
Church all such as shall be fit, and to administer the Sacraments to them, and
to baptize their Children: and the Ministers further work should be on the
Lords day in the morning to begin with a short preyer for a blessing on the
whole day, or the Lords prayer, that those that do scruple forms may come in
afterward, and then to read a Chjapter in the Old Testament, often the 20 Exodus
and in the Psalms, and a Chapter in the New Testament, and then proceed to
singing a Psalm, prayer, and preaching, as usually, but not to be confined to
a form of words in prayer, but the substance only laid down as it is
excellently well by the last Assembly; and in the afternoon before Sermon to
have on one Lords day Catechizing, another a Chapter read in the old and New
Testament; and on the third, expounding of some part of Scripture; and so
constantly, the Minsters work should be also to bury and preach in season and
out of season. Thus far most sober good men of the Episcopalian, Presbyterian,
or Congregationall party might agree, and if the Scripture requires no more,
it is pity more should be imposed, but there is a difference which should be
decided with much wariness, and that is about Ordination: Some hold that a
Church constituted as I have before mentioned, should choose ruling Elders, who
should ordain, and that the Apostles being vertually Elders did upon this
account ordain; others hold the Apostles ordained as extraordinary Officers,
and so Ordination cease; but it is generally received, that laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery, is an Eldership of Pastors of Churches; which if it
may be made good from Scripture, then I conceive the ensuing expedient would
tend very much toward reconciling of Brethren, let eight Parishes be
constituted a Diocese or Classis, the Pastors of which to choose out one to be
Bishop, President or Chaireman, who with two or three or more of the rest of
the Presbyters may ordain: here is the Bishop that is without Lordliness, and
that has a flock to take care of.

Thirdly, As for liberty for tender consciences, there need be no more then
this, that none should be debarred merely meeting in private about the service
of God, I do not mean by private that the doors shall be shut, but in other
places besides the Church, and a penalty upon those that hinder them, for they
may meet for the purpose of good discourse, repeating of Sermons, besides its
hard to thrust out those that differ only in circumstantialls; and if I mistake
not, very Reverend fathers have highly approved that particular, Churches with
their Minister should choose out such as God has endeued to speak to
edification, wherefore let only such be suppressed as shall preach or publish
blasphemy, treason, or such gross errors as the Parliament shall think fit to
punish, this is not like to touch any truly godly, and then it is to be hoped
that men will spend their heat against fundamental errors, though retaining
good will and compassion for the infected, and that an agreement in greater
truths will swallow up differences about the lesser, and reconcile christians
in love to one another, these three forementioned particulars, are not only
very sovereign for the healing of our Nations, but I think I may call them the
essentialls of settlement, and they will gain all the three great parties
amongst us, and bind peace fast to us; but though these are the main things
necessary, yet there are two things more that very much conduce to the making
of our settlement such a complete and happy one, as is to be wished.

The first is, An act of Indempnitie and forgetfullnesse, for all words, books,
writings, actions Military and civil, in relation to our Wars, differences,
changes, extended as far as possible; this will turn anger into love, but as
for the war at first, it was a breach between the three estates, neither of
which alone had power to make a Law, therefore to make the war with the King
all one, as if it was undertaken by private persons, is to nullify the power
of the House of Commons, and an enslavery of the people, and for what has been
done since things have been out of course, christianity teaches us not
revenge, wherefore let reason guided with clemency rule herein.

Secondly, That the Nations mind may go on, and the Parliament not change from
the intentions of the people, that an act be made that on such a certain day,
every three years the Sheriff of each Country shall under a penalty, summon
the Country to choose Knights and Burgesses to serve in Parliament, who shall
sit on such a certain day, likewise as shall be appointed, and the foregoing
Parliament, if not dissolved, shall end the day before the new one comes to
sit, some general qualifications would do well, as to choose no Atheist,
Papist, Drunkard, Whore-monger, common swearers or profane person, these things
being done, other necessaries would be easy, you should not be daily in danger
of plots, our common enemy would not be of and in our own bowels, there would
be no more expectation of tumults or of more tossings, and things would be in
such a quiet posture as Military Officers may be turned into Civil, swords into
ploughshares, and every one may then set under his own Vine, eating the fruit
of his own labor. This will not only maintain peace at home, but defend our
peace from enemies abroad, then you will have a fair opportunity to set forward
trade, to hear complaints, redress grievances, to ease burdens, prevent
fraud, to take off oppression, to consider poor prisoners for debt, to equal
elections for Parliament men, to cause Justice to be administered impartially,
to suppress scandalous profane, and obsceen books, to regulate the Law, and
its charges, so as that the poorest wronged may have right, in all things to be
a terror to evildoers, but a prais to the^ that do well, then will
righteousness run down as a mighty stream, and God even our God will bless us,
but whoever has power given them and shall neglect the poor and needy, suffer
violence and wickedness, love their own ease, judge for reward: this their sin
will be bitterness in the latter end unto them: Now there be these three things
I would leave with you for the public good, Namely,

First, That a house be set up in every County, with three overseers for the
poor, that they which can work should, and the other be provided for, near the
Sea, if a trade was managed, busses for fishing may be used, and many lame and
blind employed about the nets in the mean time, the coining of Copper tokens or
Farthings, would much serve the good of the poor.

Secondly, That the art of Navigation may be strengthened, for through the
neglect and breaking of it Seamen and shipping, the walls of our Nation is much
lessened and decayed, and is in danger (if not looked after) to fall and come to
ruin.

Thirdly, As you would have God preserve us from the plague and sword, take a
more effectual course then ever, to prevent and punish swearing, cursing,
whoring, drunkenness, cheating, Idle and loose gaming, and all profaneness and
debaucherie, otherwise what peace on earth if heaven should fight against us? I
remember before our late troubles we was troubled with an uncivil wicked crew,
given up to gaming, drinking, violence, plays, and all manner of sensual
vanity, who cared for no more religion then to nick name those that was indeed
religious, and to vilify stricknesse and cry down and abuse those whose tender
consciences could not conform to imposed ceremonies.

FINIS.

