To the Priests and People of ENGLAND, we discharge our consciences, and give
them warning.
FRIENDS,
WE have no envy nor malice to any Creature, Priest or People, but are to mind
you of your conditions, without any partiality or hypocrisy, and wish your
eternal good: and what we contend against is your greatest enemy, and will be
your everlasting woe and torment, if it be not destroyed in you. For know,
there is the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent in the World, there
is the generation of Cain and righteous Abel. Now it lies upon you all to know
what generation you are of: for little did the false Prophets and that
generation that put to death the true Prophets of the Lord, think they were of
Cain's race; nor did the Scribes and Pharisees, that with their Priests put
Christ to death, think they were of Cain's generation, for they garnished the
Sepulchers of the righteous, and said, If they had been in the days of their
fathers, they w uld not have slain them; yet Christ Jesus told them, That all
the blood spilt since righteous Abel, should be required of that generation;
and, that they were the children of them that murdered the Prophets. Is it not
strange, that the learned Priests and Scribes, and Pilate that had the Hebrew
and Greek besides Latin, should not find out by all their high learning, the
original of the Scriptures of the Prophets, concerning Christ Jesus, that he
was the true M^ssiah: but that they that read the Gospel every Sabbath day,
that spoke of Christ, should murder and put him to death. Now Christ Jesus
himself gives the reason, and thanks his Father, that he had hid it from the
wise, and prudent, and revealed it to babes, because it was the Father's good
pleasure, and the Scriptures declare them to be ignorant, that had the Hebrew,
Greek and Latin, For had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord
of life and glory.

Now People, this was the same generation of Cain in them after Christ's death,
that persecuted the Apostles and put them to death; and it was the same spirit
in them that put the Martyrs to death, and of that generation were the Bishops
that perse^uted, and so it continues still to this day in the World; for
Cain's generation is now still envying, hating, and persecuting the righteous
Abel. Now the persecuting Cainish generation would never acknowledge they were
such, but in all ages persecuted the just under some false color, as they of
old said, The true Prophets were troublers of Israel; and Amaziel the Priest of
Bethel said of Amos, That the Land was not able to bear his words; and Haman
said, that the Laws of the people of God were contrary to the Laws and Customs
of all Nations; and of Christ they said, He was a Deceiver* and had a Devil;
and of Stephen, That he spoke against the holy Place and the Law; and, That
Paul was a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition: so that all along it was
on a false account, the just were persecuted: so in the days of the Bishops,
the Martyrs were burnt and butchered under the name of Heretics; so now the
seed of the Serpent is subtle, and will not persecute the Truth, as it is the
Truth, but under some false pretense or other, else all would see their deceit.
But the Truth is, it is from the first rise, because their own works are evil,
and their brothers good: they hated Christ Jesus, because he testified that
their works were evil. So now Cains generation hates the just and pure seed of
God, because it declares that their works are evil.

Object. But do not the Priests declare against evil works?

Answ. Yes, they do so: the Scribes and Pharisees spoke good words, they spoke
of the Messiah, yet they killed the substance of what they spoke: so the
Priests speak true words, good words, and yet kill, and persecute, pursue, and
imprison the substance and life of what they speak, for he that departs from
evil makes himself a prey to Priest and People; and sometimes when the light in
their consciences, tells them, when they are persecuting the just seed, That
they are innocent, yet they wilfully run on against the very light of their own
consciences, as did Stephens persecutors.

And is it not so? I speak to that in your consciences, That though the Priests
speak true words, yet Priests and people that live in Cains race, do pursue and
persecute even to the very death, the life and power of what they do preach.
And know you of a truth, that all the blood since Abel, shall be required of
this generation; for, as it grows to the end, it heightneth and ripeneth its
malice and wickedness, and so shall its judgment be, for double plagues shall
be poured out upon her.

Now to you all I speak, sin not against the light in your own consciences, be
not wilfully blind, but hearken to the light of Jesus Christ in your
Consciences, that you may come to see what generation you are of, whether of
Cain or Abel: and if you did abide in the light, you should come to witness the
life and power of what you profess, and so come to that life that gave forth
the Scriptures, and not wrest them to your own Opinions and lusts: One saying,
Lo here in Presbytery; another, Lo there in Independency; and another, in
Prelacy; and another in Baptism: but the Scriptures are not divided, they
agree, and hold out one thing; but you divide them, because you live not in
that life that gave them forth, yet you boast of your learning, that you have
the Hebrew and Greek, and know the Original: but you see Pilate and the Jews
had the Hebrew, Greek and Latin, yet knew not the Original, for had they known
it, they would not have crucified the Lord of life and glory.

Therefore know you, that you may be, and are ignorant, though you think your
selves wise: Silly men and women may see more into the mystery of Christ Jesus,
then you: for the Apostles, that the Scribes called illiterate, and Mary and
Susanna (silly women, as you would be ready to call them, if they were here
now) these know more of the Messiah, then all the learned Priests and Rabbis;
for it is the Spirit that searches all things, yea, the deep things of God,
you may know, and yet murder the just, and think you do God good service.

This I warn you in love, for I cannot but think that there are some among you,
that ponder on this day, and if you would hearken to the light of Jesus Christ
in your consciences, it would lead you from your own wisdom, learning, and
self-con^eitedness, into the simplicity of Jesus Christ, which is a mystery of
Faith hid in a pure conscience: for your own wisdom must be denied, if ever you
will come to witness the life and power of true wisdom, which the fear of the
Lord is the beginning of; for so did they of old.

Paul and Apollo were very learned and eloquent, says the Scriptures, yet Paul
counted all his learning dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ,
let his second Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians be a full
witness of this: and Apollo was willing to be instructed of his hearers Aquila
and Priscilla that were Tent-makers, and the learned that studied curious Arts
burnt their Books that were of great price, when they came to the knowledge of
Jesus Christ: so you now, would you hearken to JESUS CHRIST, and obey his light
in your consciences, you would come down to humility and the fear of the Lord,
to the true wisdom and understanding, that you would not need so many Authors,
and Books, you would not need to rent your heads with studying, but you would
come to see your Teacher in you, which now is removed into a corner, you would
come to live a preaching life, and witness that Faith you talk of, to purify
your hearts from envy, pride and malice, and to get the victory over the worlds
glory and honor that is so highly esteemed by you; and coming to see your
selves in the light of Jesus Christ, you will not Lord it over Gods heritage,
nor lift your selves up above your Brethren in pride and arrogance, but be a
servant to all in love.

Therefore, come now to the light, sin no longer against that in your
conscience; for Antichrist must be destroyed by the brightness of his coming,
and God is gathering his people out from idol-Shepherds into his own fold, to
make them one flock and to give them one Sheperd, that they may serve him with
one consent, for he has fulfilled this Scripture in thousands this day whom he
has gathered out of Antichrists Opinions to worship one God in one way, in
Spirit and Truth, speaking all the same things: if you speak with ten thousand
of them, they all agree, having one King, one Law giver.

Now fret not at this, you that live at Babylon in confusion, in divisions: for
the little stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, shall break Babylons
Idols.

Now consider Friends and people your conditions, for what good does all your
preaching and hearing do you? break your sleep, rent your brains, and as it
were, speak out your lungs, and alas who is bettered by it! was there ever more
pride, lightness, vanity, and wantonness, manifested in your Assemblies, then
now? you make it the place where you set forth your pride, and vanity to the
utmost: was there ever the like injustice, violence, falsehood and deceit in any
age? that scarce can a man tell what men mean by what they say any longer.

Men say in effect, That God has forsaken the earth by their wicked practices:
the people cry out upon the Priests, and say, That their Opinions have made
them so wicked; and the Priests cry out upon the people, and say, That the
fault is theirs: So that the Lord beheld, and in stead of righteousness, equity
and judgment, there is a cry. So your whole Religion is but a noise, the life,
power and substance is not in it.

On apostate England, what shall the God of mercies do for thee? what shall he
do unto thee? he has tried thee with mercies, and with the sword, and then
with peace again, and yet thou repentest not; he has given thee his witness,
his just one to reprove thee, to convince thee of sin in thy conscience, but
thou have slain the witness, murdered and slain the just: he will not always
strive with man, he will now roar from Sion, and the children of the West shall
tremble, those that w^rship their idols; he will redeem Sion with judgment,
and he will tear his flock out of the mouth of the greedy devouring shepherds,
that have made a prey upon them, and the idol-shepherds shall have their arm
dried up, and their right eye darkened.

Come down thou therefore that have built among the stars by thy arts and
learning; for it is thy pride and thy wisdom, that has perverted thee thou have
gone in the way of Cain, in envy and malice, and ran greedily after the reward
of Balaam, in coverousness, and if thou repent not, shall perish in the
gainsaying of KORE: for if a Son or a Daughter be moved from the Lord, to go
into the Assembly of the people, in a m^ssage from the Lord God, thou can not
endure to hear them speak sound Doctrine, having a guilty conscience, and
fearing they would declare against thy wickedness, thou incensest the people,
telling them, that they are dangerous people, Quakers, so making the people
afraid of us: and incensest the Magistrates, telling them that they must lay
hold on us, as troublers of the people, and disturbers of the peace, and so
makes them thy drudges to act thy malice, that thy filthiness may not be
discovered, and thy shame appear; but God will make them in one day to forsake
thee, and leave and fly from thee, though for the present thou Lordest it over
Magistrates, people, meeting house, and all, as though all were thine: and thou
sit as a Queen and Lady over all, and wilt have the pre-eminence, and haft
got into the seat of God, the consciences of the people, and what thou say
must not be contradicted: if thou bid them fight and war, they obey it; if thou
bid them persecute and imprison, they do it; so that they venture their Bodies
and Souls to fulfill thy lusts of envy and pride, and in thy pride thou
contemnest all others, thou tellest the people, Women must not speak in a
Church, whereas it is not spoke only of a Female, for we are all one both male
and female in Christ Jesus, but it is weakness that is the woman by the
Scriptures forbidden, for else thou put the Scriptures at a difference in
themselves, as still its thy practice out of thy ignorance; for the Scriptures
do say, that all the Church may prophecy one by one, and that women were in
the Church, as well as men, do thou judge; and the Scripture says, that a
woman may not prophecy with her head uncovered, lest she dishonor her head:
now thou would know the meaning of that Head, let the Scripture answer, 1
Cor. 11.3. The head of every man is Christ. Man in his best estate is
altogether vanity, weakness, a lie. If therefore any speak in the Church,
whether man or woman, and nothing appear in it but the wisdom of man, and
Christ, who is the true head, be not uncovered, do not fully appear, Christ the
head is then dishonored. Now the woman or weakness, that is man, which in his
best estate or greatest wisdom is altogether vanity, that must be covered with
the covering of the Spirit, a garment of righteousness, that its nakedness may
not appear, and dishonor thereby come. Here may thou see from the
Scriptures, that the woman or weakness whether male or female, is forbidden to
speak in the Church; but its very plain, Paul, nor Apollo, nor the true Church
of Christ, were not of that proud envious Spirit that thou art of, for they
owned Christ Jesus in man or woman; for Paul bid Timothy to help those women
that labored with him in the Gospel, and Apollo hearkened to a woman, and was
instructed by her, and Christ Jesus appeared to the women fi st, and sent them
to preach the Resurrection to the Apostles, and Philip had four Virgins that
did prophecy. Now thou do respect persons I know, and art partial in all
things, and so judge wickedly, but there is no respect of persons with God.
Indeed, you your selves are the women, that are forbidden to speak in the
Church, that are become women; for two of your Priests came to speak with us;
and when they could not bear sound reproof and wholesome Doctrine, that did
concern them, they railed on us with filthy speeches, as no other they can give
to us, that deal plainly and singly with them, and so ran from us. So leaving
you to the light in all your consciences to judge of what we have writ, we
remain Prisoners in Exeter. goal for the word of God.

Priscilla Cotton, Mary Cole.

FINIS.
Printed at London for Giles Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle, near the West
end of Paul's, 1655.


