THE COURT OF St. GERMAIN's: OR, THE Secret History OF The Late King JAMES and
Queen MARY.

From Their First Arrival in France, to this Time.

From the French Original.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXCV.

THE COURT OF St. GERMAINS.
THEIR Britannic Majesty's had no sooner quitted London, and dispossessed
themselves of Three Kingdoms, but ^^ey were received at Paris by all the
^^ourt. Where the French King, to ^^ssen their Sorrows, endeavored by (...)
the most engaging ways in the World, (...) assuage their Grief, which their
se^^ration from Enthronement might oc^^sion; and to that effect, after he had
^^ven K. James, and the Queen his Con^^rt, all the Demonstrations of Brotherly
Friendship, accompanied with an Extraordinary Generosity, 'twas His Majesty's
Pleasure to make 'em partakers of all the Pleasures and most Charming Pastimes
of his Court. Among the rest our Monarch proposed to the Q. now fled to him for
Succor, the Divertisements of Amorous Courtship and other Recreations, as the
most acceptable means to allay the Anguish of her Troubles. Nor did the Queen,
who had always an inclination leaning that way, make any great Resistance;
which extremely pleased the King, who was not altogether insensible of a
growing Kindness for her, and who had given her certain proofs of it since her
arrival in France. Some time after their Abode at St. Germains, which is the
place of their Residence, the King ordered the Archbishop of Paris, and the
Bishop of Meaux to visit their Majesty's, and to infuse into 'em that Patience
which was necessary for good Catholics. And that Illustrious Prelate employed
a World of Eloquence to make it out to the King and Queen from Examples in
History, that they were not the only Princes who had lost their Crowns, and
that it was a glorious thing to suffer the Crosses and Afflictions of this Life
with Constancy, and without Murmuring. Which done he took his leave, deeply
smitt'n with the Merits of that Princess who had made appear so much Solidity
in all her Discourse, and convinced him that the Court of France was not the
only place that monopolized all that was worthy of Esteem and Love.

It may be therefore said, That from that very Day the Queen knew how to manage
her Conquest, and preserve it: And in regard she is an Italian, as being the
Duke of Modena's Daughter, and nearly related to the Pope, she carried her self
with a great deal of Address and Artifice. Nor would the Reverend Fathers the
Jesuits be silent upon such an occasion as this; every one would go to pay
their Respects to their Majesty's, more especially the Fathers La Chaise and
Bourdalou made it a considerable part of their business, as they that took
great delight to report their Observations to the King. And indeed the frequent
Visits of our Monarch, the Dauphin, and all the Ladies, caused the Queen to
forget a good part of her Sorrows. The Princes of Conti, and Espinoi propounded
to her Hunting Matches with the Duchess of Orleans, who prefers Hunting before
all other Sports in the World, as being frequently at the Head of the Hounds,
Apparelled like the rest of the Huntsmen.

At St. Clou's it was, where first they tasted those Country Pleasures, which
were attended with a Ball, and a magnificent Banquet, the Violins and Hautboys
playing all the Night. The Fair Ladies who were the Ornament of that Festival,
appeared in all their Splendour. More particularly the Countess de Rourre
displayed all her Excellencies in that Charming Assembly, and in regard she is
none of the most Accomplished Beauties, she made the best of her pleasant
Humor, much more amiable than her Features. The Danphin, who has more than
ordinary kindness for her, never left her, and gave her to understand by many
pretty Amorous Intimations, how much he Loved her; but the Princess of
Lislebonne, and the Marchioness of Segnalay, who had a watchful Eye upon 'em,
ever and anon would needs be interrupting the Monsieurs tender and passionate
Expressions, which very much disgusted Madam de Rourre; insomuch that she made
her Complaint to the Princess of Conti, who is the Duphin's Confident, telling
her, That she was very Unfortunate to be so narrowly observed, even to the
slightest of her Actions, which caused the Princess to Laugh, who in that merry
fit went immediately and made the King acquainted with the Countess's
Grievances. The King made himself sport with it, and because they thought the
Dauphin far remote from any Violent Engagement, they forbore to watch him so
narrowly; wherein the Court was deceived; for they found by the sequel, that
the young Prince was as sensible of Love as other Men; which we shall endeavor
to show in the following Relations.

Let us return to the Queen, whom our Arcbishop had not the power to forsake,
without speaking of that Love which reigned so predominantly in his Heart. But
in regard that Prelates have not the Liberty which others have to express their
Amorous Thougths, the Archbishop was contented with enjoying the Presence of
her who had wounded his Heart: Only Sighs and Languishing Looks were the
Faithful Interpreters of his Passion, while he still observed those measures
that suited best with his Character.

But the Queen, who is expert in the Affair of Gallantry, soon Divined the
meaning of his mute Language, as having an Inclination sufficiently prone to
embrace the Sanctified Love of Men of the Church, which encloses within it
unknown Mysteries. She had not forgot the sweet Hours she had past away with
her dear Nuncio Dada, whom the Pope had sent into England, to manage his
Interests. For which reason it was, that she gladly and joyfully admitted
Monsieur the Archbishop's Visits, and went oftener in her Coach to hear Mass and
Vespers in the Convent of the Austin-Fryars, attended by her Confident the
Marchioness of P -- s. Love and Devotion were in her inseparable, through a
Secret Union; which usually happens in Italy, where the Churches are the places
of meeting for the carrying on of Love Intrigues. The Respect our Prelate had
for a Princess so haughty and so handsome restrained him from telling her what
he felt for her sake. But when he bethought himself that a Person of his
Character had been beloved, those Idea's fortified her Hopes, and rendered him
more undaunted in his Enterprise. On the other side the change of her Fortune,
and the Passion which a certain English Lord has for that Charming Princess,
and her Courtly manner of answering his Caresses, persuaded the Archbishop that
he had not long to sigh in vain. So that at last the happy Minute arrived, and
the Archbishop made known his Tender Sentiments to his Divine Queen.

One Day that King James was at Marly, with the Duke of Vendosme, Grand Prior
of France, the Count of St. Maure, and several Lords of the Court, the
Archbishop, whom the Qu. had made acquainted with it in the Morning, giving him
withal to understand, with a Graceful Air, That she should be glad of his
Company in the Afternoon, being all alone at St. Germain's, our Archbishop, I
say, upon these Encouragements, let her see by a profound Obeisance and a low
Bow, that his Heart was brim-full of Joy, and that he would not fail to make
the best of his Opportunity. To which purpose he ordered his Lacqueys to change
their Liveries, and being himself muffled up in a Scarlet Cloak, that he might
in some measure disguise himself, and deceive the People, who will always be
prattling, especially at Paris, he entered the Castle, and meeting the
Marchioness of P -- s, who was in the Antichamber with one of the Queens Maids
of Honor, he gave her a Smile, as he gently pushed open the Door of the
Cabinet, where our Princess sat Reading the Amors of Henry IV. very much
wond^ing at his Inconstancy, and the number of his Mistresses, which made her
Laugh, when she began to consider how little reason Ladies had to rely upon the
Passion and Affections of Men. Monsieur, the Archbishop, after he had Saluted
the Queen, opened his Heart, and gave her to understand some part of his pains.
To which the Princess, beholding him with a tender Look, made answer, That she
would see what might be done to render him less unhappy. Our Prelate seemed to
be ravished with the Charms of her soft Expressions, and presently throwing
himself at her Feet, embraced her knees, and kissing her hands a thousand
times, protested to her that he never was so deeply in Love in his Life before.
Then they laid their Heads together to consider which way they might fee one
another, without being discovered by the Court. But it was a difficult matter
to deceive the Hundred-Ey'd Argus's which our Monarch has prying about in all
parts, to the end that nothing may escape him that is transacted in the City.
At length the Queen told her new Lover, after she had pondered a while, That it
would be the best way for him to disguise himself sometimes like a Music
Master, for that she being a passionate Lover of Music, neither the King her
Husband, nor any body else would take any notice of him; or else like a
Bookseller that brought her Novels and Histories to read. This proposal was
well approved; but the Question was, How to carry the Business neatly. To which
purpose every thing was just concluded upon, when a Gentleman brought the Queen
Letters from the Countess of Tyrconnel, who had been one of her Maids of
Honor, and whom the King had Married to his Deputy of Ireland.

The Queen was overjoyed to hear Tidings from her dear Friend, who had served
her in several perilous occasions, no less sorry that she had her not then with
her to assist her in the present Intrigue, being well assured, That that same
Lady would have been a great help to her, as being one that perfectly knew how
to counterfeit Devotion, and talked of nothing else but the Holy Fathers of the
Church, and of their Sufferings. King James being returned from Marly, took
great delight in giving the Queen an Account of the Pastime he had taken in
that little Journey, and how kindly he had been entertained by the Duke of
Vendosme and the Count of St. Maure. The good Prince related every Passage with
the greatest Candor and Freedom in the World, never dreaming of the Amorous
Commerce of his tender Consort, who every way endeavored to fulfill the King
her Husband's Prophecy.

For one Morning that K. James, then only Duke of York, and a Widower, was
walking in the Long-Gallery next to St. James's- Park, with some others of the
Nobility: it so fell out that he met with an Astrologer in that place. The Duke
of York perceiving a great Throng of People-gathered together, and curious to
know the reason of the noise they made, went up directly to the Crowd with his
Company, and asked, What the matter was? At what time a Gentleman told him,
That they had got among 'em a Famous Astrologer, who saw in the Face of any man
what would befall him in his Life time. This created in the Duke a desire to
know his own Destiny, so that he commanded the Wizard to attend him after
Dinner, which the Old South-sayer did. He excused himself however as long as he
could, alleging the danger of telling Princes and Princesses their Fortunes,
for that being exposed to the Capricio's of Fortune as well as other Men, the
Truth was not many times to be spoken.

But the unwillingness of the Astrologer increasing the Duke of York's desire,
he pressed the Artist so much the more earnestly, and giving him his Hand told
him withal, That whatever the Planets had appointed for him, he would take it
in good part. Then the Astrologer looking steadfastly in the Duke's Face,
uttered this Oracle, That if there were any Truth in the Stars, he would be in
danger of Acteon 's Fate, whenever he should chance to see a Diana Naked in the
Bath. Upon which all the Nobility that were present fell a Laughing, and a long
time after in their Merriments made Sport with the Astrologer and his
Prediction. Some Years after this, when the thing was in a manner forgot, the
D. of York went to the Bath, either for his Health, or for his Pleasure, and
there, never dreaming of the Prophecy, by an Accident beheld a Lovely Young
Lady, and of great Quality, Naked in one of the Baths, who Chid him for not
withdrawing from the place, considering the Condition she was in. So that the
satisfaction which the Duke had in staring upon a Beautiful and Charming Lady
in the State of Innocence, concurred to make out the truth of an Unlucky
Prediction.

Let us now leave K. James II. to blazon his new Coat of Arms, and let us
endeavor to show how it was enlarged and beautified by the number of his Dear
Consorts Favorites. Monsieur the Arcbishop having upon a St. John's Day cast
several passionate Looks upon the Queen in the Church, which were observed by
the Dauphin and the Duke of Vendosm his Minion, those two Noble Personages, so
soon as Sermon was done, went to walk in the Louvre, Laughing all the while at
the Prelates Amors. A very fine Business, cried the Dauphin, You see the
Ecclesiastics are subject to the same Temptations as we are our selves. I
remember I have heard it said at Court, that the Abbot of Bois Robert shared
with Cardinal Mazarine, who was a Man of a wonderful Devotion, the Favors of
the Beautiful Marion de l'Orme. By my Faith, replied the Duke smiling, since
you assure me it is so, I Will try to be our Archbishop's Rival: We are good
Friends enough to have one Mistress between us. Go on, said the Dauphin to the
Duke, clapping him upon the Shoulder, go and push on your Good Fortune, if the
Conquest pleases you. This Discourse would have lasted longer, but the vast
number of People that meet in the Louvre, caused our two Sparks to take Coach
again, and drive from thence to the Princess of Turennes, whom they found
walking in one of the Alleys in her Garden. So soon as the Dauphin saw her,
What, Madam, said he, taking the fresh Air all alone? -- Yes, Sir, answered
she, I came out of my Cabinet to divert my Melancholy. What is the cause of
your Disquiet, Madam, that makes you so Contemplative, replied the Dauphin, if
we may be permitted to enquire. Oh, Sir, -- replied the Princess, the
Insensibility of your Heart will not give you leave to understand it. Monsieur
would have unfolded his Sentiments to the Princess of Turenne, when the Count
of St. Maure entered the Garden, who proposed a Game at Cards, which took up
the rest of the Day very pleasantly; only the Princess could not be reconciled
to her self for having gone so far in discovering her tender Affection for the
Dauphin, who so ill requited it. He was so taken up with the Favors Madam de
Rourre bestowed upon him, and whom he sincerely Loved even before she was
Married, when she was only one of the Dauphinesses Maids of Honor, that he
very little minded the Caresses of others.

Mademoiselle de la Force, now Mademoiselle de Rourre, was always so full of
her Wanton Tricks, and such a Cocquet with all, that every time she saw the
Monsieur, if he were not in Company with the Dauphiness, that Incomparable Lady
had still something to say to the Dauphin so divertising, that she made him
Laugh. For which reason it was that the Court gave her the Epithet of the
Witty Jester. But this Gayety included within it an Ambitious design: For it
was to ensnare the Dauphin's Heart that the young Artist laid her Springes;
wherein she has succeeded to a Miracle; since it is certain that the Illustrious
Dauphin has smitten her in the most sensible part.

But to return to the Princess of Turenne, she had taken another way to stop
the Career of the Prince's Affection. She had showed him the strength of her
first Passion, in telling him, That her Repose depended upon an Auspicious
Glance, an endearing cast of his Eyes, to which the Monsieur did not answer
like a Graceful Courtier, which drew upon him the Raillery of some Unlucky
Lampoons.

The Prince of Turenne desirous of a secret Revenge, had offered his Vows to
the Countess of Bourre, who had allowed 'em a favorable Reception, which
extremely perplexed the Count her Husband, who was a Good Man, that could have
loved an Honest Woman. I must leave the rest for a while, to find out our
Sorbonne Doctor, who was busily employed in composing a Letter as tender as his
Heart, to be sent to the Queen at St. Germains, whom he had not seen since the
Day before. We impart it to the Reader as it came to o^ Hands.

A Letter of Monsieur the Archbishop to the QVEEN.
Madam,
THose Hours which I waste remote from your Company, seem to me of an infinite
length. It would be my greatest pleasure, Divine Queen, to assure you, ever^
minute, of my Love, and of the strength (...) my Passion. Oh! What a Life
should (...) lead, could my Good Fortune but procure (...) so great a Felicity!
But I was not Born (...) taste so Heavenly a Happiness. I must therefore be
contented with the favor which I enjoy by your Permission, which is to taste
the Fruition of your Adorable Presence, as opportunity will give me leave.
Adien Madam, I will wait upon you this Afternoon.


Our Prelate sent this Letter to the Queen by one of his Lacqueys, whom he
ordered to change his Livery, and put on the Marchioness of Signalay's Colors,
who frequently visited the Queen, and sent her little Presents almost every
Day. And the new Lover of an Archbishop followed the Lacquey almost at the
Heels.

Monsieur the Archbishop had for that Day laid aside his Gravity and his
Pontifical Habits to Apparel himself like a Bookseller that furnished the Queen
with new Books. No Man in the World could have better disguised himself then
our Doctor of the Sorbonne. Mrs. Labady who is one of the Queens Women, knew
him not in that Disfigurement, but carried him into her Mistresses Cabinet,
without any Ceremony. Nor did the Queen give him any other than a cold
Reception in her rising up to Salute him. Whither it were that the Prelate did
not please her in that same Dress of a Citizen, or that the News which she
received every Day from England and Ireland, where Affairs went no way to her
satisfaction, had put her into an ill Humor, or whither it were that the last
Visits of this same Gallant, with his Spectacles upon his Nose, had cooled her
Ardour, not finding in him the Briskness of a Youthful Champion, nor the
Charming Vigor of her Adonis Dada In short our Adorable Venus could not endure
the Amorous Caresse of the Sorbonne Doctor, without some kind of Uneasiness,
which was a great trouble to^ him, and forced him to ask her the^ cause of her
coldness. Ah, Madam^ cried the Prelate all inflamed, I Lov^ you to that degree
that never Woman wa^ more beloved, Wherefore do you not answe^ the Violence of
my Passion?

The Queen who saw that her Reluctance had warmed the Heart and Impagination of
her Lover, and that he began to be impatient, granted what he demanded, most
tenderly embracing him Which overjoyed the Roman Patriarch, so that he Kissed
his Lovely Goddess a^ thousand times as she sat upon his knee^ Thus Charmed
with his Good Fortune, at length he took his leave of the Queen^ hearing that
Lewis XIV. was coming to give her a Visit. Alas! (said he in a great Fume) What
a World of Measure are we bound to observe? My Misfortune reduces me to keep
fair with a World of People for whom I have no kindness! Strange for of
Politics! Now St. Mary of Lorette^ have pity upon me. The Queen was also
making her Devout Lamentations, when the K. surpised her, and asked her with
whom she was talking so dolefully. Sir, said she, I was praying to our good
Saint of Loretto that she would vouchsafe to restore me to my Throne. Oh,
Madam, replied his Majesty, drawing his Sword, this same Steel shall revenge
your Cause in due time. The Queen seemed surpised and admiring the King's
Valor, Sir, said she, with a smile, put up your Sword against the time of
Battle; which the Hector of Tory did accordingly.

The Queen who was tired out with the Complacency which she had been forced to
show the Archbishop held no long Discourse with our Monarch, who could not
divine the reason of his Mistresses unequal Temper. As for the Roman Doctor who
was gone to one of his Friends Houses to shift himself, and ^eassume his
Sacerdotal Vestments, before he could return to his Palace, he was much
troubled when he understood by Mr. Vincent his Valet de Chamber, that ^e had
been stayed for all the Day at the ^orbonne about Business relating to the
Church, and that the Bishop of Meaux ^ad been seeking for him up and down ^^om
place to place to speak with him.

Aboutthe same time the Duke of Vendosme, who had told the Dauphin in
Merriment, that he intended to be the Archbishop's Rival, went to St. Germains
with a design to tell his Bale to the Queen, and found his Courtly Addresses
not ill repaid. But that same Crafty Gallant, who understood perfectly well
what belonged to Amorous ^amiliarities, found that Princess too deeply learned
in Love, which disgusted him, and caused him to return to his Amiable Nanon de
Bois, a Tailors Daughter in the Fauxburgh St. Antoine. Well -- said the Grand
Prior of France, the Favors of my pretty Nanon are worth all the Leavings of
an Italian that has parted with her Honesty. He therefore made the Dauphin and
the Count of St. Maure privy to the Secret, who took a more than ordinary
Delight to make sport with it, by causing several Satirical Lampoons to be
thrown in at the Windows and into the Porches of the Archbishop's Palace; among
which this that follows was one.

Reverend Patriarch,
YOur Altar has been lusted after; a Lovely-feather'd Bird designed to ^^ve
built her Nest thee; but finding it nei^^er proper nor clean, and too easy of
Ac^^^s, she flew to another place. You ought ^^hinder your Swallow from
Caressing all the (...) she sees, or at least to fasten the Wires (...) her
closer together.


This Reproach put the Prelate into ^^^ind of Fet, not being able to Divine
^^^m whence it came. But at length he ^^^^forted up himself, as being
accu^^^med to Coourtly Intreagues, which he (...) very private, never making
any (...) of 'em; such were those of the ^^^chioness of Bretonvillers, the
Abbess (...) Montmartre, the Pretty Sempstress, (...) the Beautiful
Embroideress, whom (...) went to visit so soon as it began to (...) Duskish.

This formal piece of outward Devo^^^ was afraid least it should be pub^^ly
reported, that he lighted his Ta^^^ before the Queens Altar; which ^^^ld have
rendered several She-Saints jealous of his carrying his Holy Water so far as
St. Germains. All these Pious and Moral Considerations somewhat slackened our
Doctor's Affection, together with the coldness of his Mistress, whose Politics
would not permit her to loose him quite, tho she cared not so much for
continual Lip to Lip with an Old Sanctified Fornicator. In short Monsieur the
Archbishop forbore to visit the Queen any more, unless it were to carry her his
Benediction upon noted Holydays, or to ferret the Evil Spirits out of her
chamber. On the other side our Princess who was a Passionate Lover of Amorous
Combats, and who could not forbear the having still some worthy Champions under
her Standards, soon after declared War against another Loving Enemy. It
happened then that this same tender Amazon had chafed her self to that degree
in the Field of Venus that she fell sick. For her Victory having enlivened, her
she felt some effects of the heat of the Combat, which caused her to keep her
Bed for some time: However she was visited all the while by the Reverend
Father, Jesuits and others in Religious Orders. But not one of those Holy
Fathers could comfort her with all their Learning. There was only one young
Curate of St. Martin, whom that Princess had heard preach, who could instruct
her, at least as well as the Life of Clement VI. which she frequently read, who
commanded the Angels to carry into Paradise those that Died coming in
Pilgrimage to Rome.

This Young Priest was a Marry Companion, well shaped, having a good Aspect,
very Fair, and much a Courtier. He needed no more to Charm beyond measure a
Woman of her Humor, who could not live without Square Caps, or Swords to guard
her from the Fears that her Husbands ill success inspired into her. For which
reason it was that the Lovely Patient in the time of her sickness mustered up
together all the rare Qualities of her Amiable Curate. She also told her
Confident the Marchioness of P -- s, that she could not forget the Sermon she
^ad heard at St. Martins; that ever since, ^er Heart had been warmed with an
Ar^ent Devotion, and that she should be ^verjoy'd to see, in her sickness, that
^owerful Preacher.

The Marchioness who understood ^er, looked upon her with a fixed Eye, and
falling into a Laughter, told her she would do her Endeavor that she should
have the Benediction of the Pious Curate when she pleased. Ah Marchioness,
replied the Queen, thou speak this merrily and laughing, but I assure thee I
am in love with his manner of Preaching. Madam, replied the Marchioness, I
believe he is much better at handling a Text of Love. It Is true, said the
Queen, for he is a Lusty Man, well turned, and whose Face speaks him to be a
Lover of Women; I would fain speak with him. That Is no hard matter to do,
Madam, replied the Marchioness, for I know his Sister who lives with Madam de
Segnelay, and is as good a Girl as any is in the World; I Will speak to her this
ver^ Day, and after such a manner that she shall have no suspicion of any
thing. Do so, my Dear, replied the Queen, thou do no^ know what a kindness
thou will do me to le^ me see the Curate.

The next Day the Marchioness gave a Visit to Madam de Seignelay, where she saw
Mademoiselle de Fontaine, to whom she spoke a thousand things in Commendation
of her Brother, and how highly the Queen was pleased with his last Sermon, and
that she would be gad to have some Discourse now and then with a Person so
Zealous and so Religious She added withal, That the Queen was a Woman of an
Exemplary Devotion, that she spent the greatest part of her time in her
Chapel, and that she rose every Night to say her Prayers, and to read the
Lives of the Saints, particularly of our Lady of Loretto, who is the greatest
Saint that ever was, and the most humble in all her Actions.

Mademoiselle de Fontaine was a little surprised at first to hear what a
Portraiture the Marchioness made of the Queens Piety. To which the Damsel
answered very civilly, that her Brother was very happy to have moved the heart
of so great a Princess, and that she would not fail to acquaint him with the
good Tidings.

After the Marchioness was gone, de la Fontaine gave Madam de Segnelay an
Account of her Brother's Good Fortune, and she related it again to her Husband,
who Laughed a long time at the Extraordinary Inclinations of the Queen,
frequently saying in Merriment, That he who would please that Princess, must be
of the Sanctified Order. I assure ye, Sir, said the Marchioness of Segnelay
Laughing, there are Persons sometimes to be me with of an Extraordinary Merit,
who retire from the World to mind nothing (...) the Great Business of their
Salvation. Yo^ may perhaps in time, Madam, replied the Marquess with a smile of
Derision, (...) brought to Love such Men in imitation of (...) Pious a Queen,
but have you a care of those subtle Serpents that know so well to sting Ladies
in their most sensible part.The Marquess farther told his Wife, that the Queen
had always been a Lover of Coquettry, and Amorous Intrigues before she went
into England. You know moreover your self that this Princess coming to the
Court of France, appeared so Excellent an Artist in all her Gallantries, that
the King himself had a tender Affection for her, and that his Majesty wrote in
her Favor to King James as of a Person altogether Charming, and one that
deserved his Heart. And (...) know my self that in Italy^ she was look^ upon as
one that held a private Commerce with Count Don Quixote, and the Baron of
Santifiori, who were both Rivals, yet agreed very well together.

The marquess of Seignelay, who wa^ Secretary of State, would have told his
Wife more, would the Orders which he received that Day from the King have
permitted him to have stayed longe^ with her, so that he left her at his
Castle, where she was not long alone however notwithstanding his Absence. For
the Chevalier de Nouailles, Lieutenant General, whom she Loved a Thousand times
better than her Husband, kept her Company like a Faithful Friend, and
divertised her to the utmost of his power. But that which interrupted the
Marchionesses Pleasures deserves to be here set down. That Lady had a Parrot
which one of the Pages, like an Unluckly Slipstring, had taught to say, I Will
tell Monsieur, Madam, if you let any Bod. open his Cabinet.

This prattling ^ar^ot disturbed the Loving Couple. For she was afraid the
Lacqueys had discovered something of her Amors with the Chevalier de Nouailes,
and least the noise of it should wake her Husband's Jealousies, who was Friend
to Coquets, and had no such Complacency for his Wife as to wear Horns because
they were of her making. These Reasons caused Madam Seignalay to return with
all speed to Paris, and desire her Gallant to forbear his Visits for some time,
to take away all suspicion of any such thing as an Amorous Intrigue. But it is a
very hard matter for us to appear what we are not, and they that would appear
otherwise then they are, must take a great deal of pains. To this purpose the
Marchioness went every Day to Mass with the greatest Devotion i^ the World, and
would hardly be seen of any Body in hopes to deceive the most quick-sighted.
But Love who never looses his Rights, and suffered her to play this Game for a
while, returned soon after more dangerous than ever, sparkling in the Eyes of
the Fair Lady with all his Graces, full of powerful Charms; which caused Madam
de Seignelay to fall into a deep Mela choly and a profound vexation of mind
that lasted a long time. Nay, she fled the sight of her Lover; believing that
Absence would Cure her: But alas! Time has let us see, that Love is a Mischief
which Absence cannot cure, and that it requires some more prevailing Medicament
than that feeble Remedy.

The Marchioness was sometimes troubled that she had listened to the Chevalier.
But being Young, she did not think that Passion was so cleverly conveyed to
the Heart through the Ears, as through the Eyes, and therefore that the
following Verses which her Gallant would be always singing to her spoke truh.

At first a Toy we think it, tamed with ease;
But every thing in Love is to be feared,
And she that would be faithful, one to please,
If once she listens, she is for ever snared.
The Marchioness of P -- s, who had told the Queen how neatly she had managed
the Business between her and Mademoiselle de la Fontaine in reference to her
Brother, extremely pleased that Princess, in hopes that the Complemental Priest
would come to wait upon her without being put to the trouble of sending for
him. These tickling Fancies rejoiced the Queens Heart, who was still sick, when
Monsieur the Archbishop, who could not as yet restrain his Affection for her,
notwithstanding the Reproaches he had undergone for her sake, and the little
Love which that Fair Venus reserved for him, tho she carried it fairly with him
by reason of her Misfortunes, flattering her self that the Head of the Council
of Lewis XIV's Conscience, together with his Majesty, might be serviceable to
her in her Designs and Necessities, came to give her a Visit.

The Prelate therefore being alighted out of his Coach, was by Mrs. Labad^^
conducted into the Queens Chamber, who received him very civily, and gave him
an Account of her Sickness, to which the Sorbonne Doctor answered with much
tenderness, tho he stayed not long with his Fair Minioness, which nothing at
all surprised her; for she was already accustomed to see a Lover who was grown
very chary of his Visits; a thing that nothing displeased her, seeing her
chiefest aim was only to preserve his friendship. On the other side, the Curate
of St. Mart^n, who had understood from his Sister and several others the great
Commendations which the Queen gave him, had conceived such a high Opinion of
himself, that for the fixing of his Happiness, he resolved to go and pay his
Devoirs to her Majesty, and to let her understand how much he was overjoyed to
hear himself applauded by a Person of her Illustrious Character and
transcending worth, which overloaded that Princess with a satisfaction not to
be expessed; and at the same time a Page came to inform her, That the Curate of
St. Martin's was in the Castle Court, and that hedesired, with her Majesty's
permission, to pay his respects to her.

At those words the Queen seemed to be in a strange discomposure of Mind, so
that she had hardly strength enough to conceal her joy, which was
extraordinary, as generally it happens at the beginning of fresh Amors. But
her Amorous Transports being a little calmed, she ordered the Curate to be sent
for up, who after several Pedantic Scrapes, Cringes of a Journyman-Taylor, and
affected motions of his Head, told her with all the Rhetoric, and the best
studied language that he had, how happy he was in having the Honor to please a
Princess of so great a Judgment, and whose Virtue made such a noise in the
World. The Queen ordered an Elbow-Chair to be brought him, which the Curate had
so much Manners or Discretion to refuse, but the Duchess of Portsmouth, who
was in the Chamber, told him very Complementally, that he ought to obey the
Queens Orders. That day there was nothing discoursed of but Devotion and Piety,
and Monsieur the Curate spoke like an Angel. Among other things he talked
Seraphi^ly of the Holy Exultations that were inspired into him by reading the
Blesse^ Works of Catherine of Siena, who for her infinite Merit, and her Devout
Life had rendered her self worthy to be the Spouse of Christ, who descended
from Heaven on purpose to Marry her.

The Marchioness of P -- s, by the aid of her Bigottry, prolonged the
Conversation with several other Tale^ of the same Nature: Insomuch that they
also chatted of the Arrival of St. Clement, who was to make his Entry into
Paris with all the pomp in practice among the Saints. At what time the Duchess
of Portsmouth pull d out of he^ Pocket a Letter which she had receive^ out of
Bretagne from the Nunnery o^ Joy, written to her by Madam de Plein her Aunt,
who was Abbess of that Sanctified place, wherein she set forth the Penances she
enjoined her Nuns, an^ how happy they were that mortify'^ their Flesh in this
World.

Such Godly Discourse began to offend the Queen, who broke off the Pious
Conversation, by talking of New and the Gallantries of the Court. Al^ which
time the Curate showed great Reservedness and Moderation by judging ^udiciously
and soberly of the Persons mentioned; which begot him so much ^he more esteem
among the Ladies. After which the Duchess of Portsmouth, and Madam P -- s
having other Business left the Queen and the Curate alone together.

The Queen thus finding her self at liberty, ordered Monsieur the Curate to
draw his Chair a little nearer, which he durst not do till after the Queen had
commanded him several times. Well, Sir, said she, you may now believe your self
the Most Fortunate of Men. The Curate blushed to see the Queen so eager upon
the business, but answered her only with a Sigh, which gave the Illustrious
Enamored to understand that her new Lover was not altogether insensible of her
forwardness. And the Curate also began to feel his imagination somewhat Warmed,
when the Princesses of Soissons and Conti came to visit the Queen, who had hid
her Curate between the Wall and the Bedside, where being tired with the tedious
Chat of the Visitants he laid himself gently down and took a Nap.

When the Princesses were gone, the Queen who thought the time of their stay to
be an Age, tript back to her Chamber, and drawing the Curtains of her Bed,
beheld her Lovely Adonis fast a sleep, which grieved her to the heart. For that
Princess was no Admirer of Drousie Galants; as she would often tell the
Duchess of Portsmouth, fetching a deep sigh with all, That indeed the King her
Husband went to Bed betimes; But why was it, my Dear, continued she, -- because
he Loved Sleeping the best of any Man in the World. The Queen therefore sitting
down close by her Lover, made a little noise, which wakened him, tho more doz'd
with shame than with sleep. Ah! My Dear, said she, presently, What a Coward you
are! -- Such words as those would have raised the Courage of any Curate that
saw the Shepherd's Hour at hand, and had had any Mettle in him. But the Great
Looby fetched only a deep Alas! Accompanied with several Complaints, which
could not pay that Princess the satisfaction she wanted. I know not whether it
were the Presence of a Person of her Character, or her too easy Condescension
which had rendered our Abbot, as it were immovable and void of sense; but
certain it is, he did not behave himself like one who was to receive such new
Favors from a Queen, being strangely nonpluss'd and quite out of order, tho he
were naturally a Boon Blade that never let an Opportunity slip, besides that he
was a great Lover of Nocturnal Rendevouzes.

The Queen, who was offended at the stupidness of her Lover, left him, and
retired into her Cabinet to ruminate upon what she had done. During this
Interval, our Monarch was earnestly seeking for her, to show her certain
Letters which he had received out of Ireland from Tyrconnel and Lausun, giving
him an Account of a supposed Victory, by the Death of ^arshal Schomberg, and
the Wound which King William had received by the brush of a Cannon-Bullet.

These Tidings overjoyed the Court to that degree, that they made Bonfires, and
revell'd in Extravagancies even to Madness for above eight Days together. All
the Ladies and Lords spent their time in Debauches, Balls, Comedies, Opera's
and whatever else might satisfy their Senses.

The Dauphin entertained the Ilustrious Assembly at Choisi, with an
Extraordinary Magnificence, and gave 'em all the Divertisements imaginable. The
Ladies went with the Princes and Lords a Hawking with their Feathers in their
Hats, and Accoutred in Scarlet Justacores. The Princesses of Conti, du Ma^ere
and Soissons, we Indefatigable Racers, which engaged the Dauphin, the Duke of
Chartres and others in the same sport, tho they were glad to yield the Victory
to those Amiable Heroesses.

The next Day the Queen, who had not yet well recovered her strength, struck in
with that same Troop of Gods and Goddesses, on purpose to take a little Air,
and share in the pleasure of that Princely Entertainment, attended by the
Duchess of Portsmouth, the Marchioness of Seignelay, Madam P -- s and several
other Lords and Ladies. His Majesty also, and the Prince's who saw that the
Presence of the Queen had angmented the Number of the Assembly, ordered the
following Night to be enlightened with Fireworks, as a Testimony how glad he
was to see her. Our Monarch also, who knew that the Quee^ was a passionate
Lover of Music, ordered a most Charming Consort, and Symphony to be provided
against the next Day, for her more splendid Entertainment. And the next Day
they returned to Paris, where they went to an Opera of Apollo and the Muses,
which was represented in the Palace, and the next Day to another of Cephalus
and Procris.

By this time the Curate of St. Martin, who had reflected upon the Queens
Favors, and his own want of Courage, was ready to Hang himself for having lost
so fair an opportunity. Coward as thou were, said the vexed Lover to himself,
that could not answer the forward Advances of so Adorable a Princess, nor
recover thy self into a Condition to improve thy Good Fortune! But I believe
the Great Merit of that Incomparable Lady bewitched me, since all that make a
Man to be a Man was Insensible and motionless within me.

These Reflections being over, our Galant resolved to show his Mistress all his
Valor, and to acquit himself after another manner for the future, or else to
be revenged upon his Carcass. As for the Queen, in the midst of all the
Pleasures wherewith the Court had entertained her, she had not forgot to ponder
upon the last Advanture that had befallen her. But in regard she had not spoken
a word of it, to any Body, she the more comforted up her self with making a
Mystery of her Amorous Secrets. On the other side, the Curate who burned with a
desire to show the value of his Parts, adventured to wait upon his Princess,
whom he found musing in a Gallery that led to the Pr. of Wales's Chamber. So
soon as the Queen beheld her Gallant, she fell a Blushing. But having recovered
her self from that dissorder, which was the effect of her desire, she requested
him to walk into her Chamber, where they presently fell to work about those
Pleasures which the sweetest of Passions infuses. Our Amiable Queen of Cyprus,
who appeared altogether Charming in those Delicious Minutes, soon forgot her
Sorrow for having discovered her Weakness to her Victor. So true it is that all
our Designs against Love are but of a short continuance. When a Heart becomes
sensible once of the Charms of that Passion, it always follows the Propensity
that beck us it along. The Queen has promised her self a thousand times that
she would never be in Love any more, the Pains and Vexations of which Passion
surpass all the Joys which that same Bandy-legg'd Deity infuses into us. But to
what purpose all our vain Reflections. Here is our Illustrious Penitent more
tender than ever, half Swooning away in the Arms of her Lover, and
acknowledging no other Felicity but that of Amoreous satisfaction.

But Monsieur the Curate, who held his Divine Queen fast locked in his Arms, and
Kiss d her tenderly all the while, was at his Wits end when Mrs. Labady calling
through the Keyhole of the Door, which was fastened within side, told her
Majesty, That the Duchess of Chartres and Maine were alighted from their Coach
at St. Germains, with an intent to Visit her immediately. The two Lovrs, who
had not a little towsed and rumpled one another with their Amorous Caresses,
put themselves to rights as well as they could: And that being done, the Curate
whipped away down a Back pair of Stairs, and went home, while-the Queen went to
take a Walk with the Dutchesses in the Galleries of the Lonvre, which are full
of Paintings, describing the Battles of Alexander and Darius, done by M. le
Brun. The Queen said, He was an Excellent Artist for that sort of Painting, but
that he was not so good for Drawing a Face. It Is true, Madam, replied the
Duchess of Main, that M. Migniart paints more naturally and to the Life then
M. le Brun, who is only for History. Thus our Princesses were disputing the
Business together, when the Dauphin, St. Maure, and the Princesses of Conti and
Listebonne Arrived.

So soon as the Princess of Conti beheld the Queen at a distance, she fell a
Laughing, and Whispering the Dauphin in the Ear, Yonder, said she, is the Duke
of Vendosme 's Amiable Mistress -- Oh my dear Sisttr, replied the Monsieur,
looking upon her with a Waggish Eye, our Prior has too dainty a Palate, to be
satisfied with so common a Dish. The Princess, who was that Day in a Good
Humor and resolved to be merry, was going to speak more of her mind, when the
Queen and the Dutchesses came to salut^ her, and they talked of nothing bu^
Paintings and Portraitures. At the same time the Count of St. Maure proposed
their going altogether to M. Migniart's, where they should see Accomplished
Beauties, and among the rest the Portraiture of a Daughter of one of the
Advocates of the Council, which was the Loveliest Face that ever he beheld. The
Dauphin approved the Design; so that all the Ladies took Coach immediately.

M. Mignart told the Company he would show 'em his first Room, which was full
of the Pictures of all the Lords in the Kingdom. There is one, said the Queen,
I know very well; which happened to be Lausun's, and which was done so well to
the Life, that it wanted only to speak.

After they had a long time viewed all those Pieces, the Count of St. Maure
desired the Painter to show 'em the Portraitures of the Ladies, which M.
Migniart did accordingly. At what time the Count drawing near the Dauphin,
showed him the Picture of the Fair Goujon, saying to him with a passionate Air,
Sir, the Original of this Copy deserves the Affection of some Gallant Person.
Monsieur found the Portraiture a thousand times Hand somer than the Count had
described it, but returned him no other Answer than only this, Do you believe,
said he, that there are any persons so Beautiful in the World, and that this
Damsel is so Charming as the Painter has Drawn her? Monsieur Migniart who
overheard him, made Answer to the Dauphin, that he had not flattered her in
his Painting, but that the Picture was like her, not she like the Picture.
Which last words made the Dauphin more carefully examine the Lovely Lineaments
of that peerless Minioness, which put him into a deep Study. But the Queen and
the Princesses, who had much ado to brook the Commendations that were bestowed
upon that Beautiful Portraiture, out of mere Jealousy and Despite, told the
Dauphin, That she had a Froward Wild Look, which made the Lords fall a
Laughing, who plainly saw the contrary. More especially the Princess of Conti,
Sir, said she to the Dauphin smiling, in time you will fall in Love with Women,
for you look veny wistly upon 'em. Provided they wexe like your self, Madam,
reply d the Monsieur, I could willingly consent to be in Love.

After this Illustrious Company had left the Painter, every one retired to
their own Habitations, except the Dauphin, who followed the Princess of Conti,
his Confident, Home, where he spent the remainder of the Day in telling a
Hundred Stories of the Court: And the Duke of Vendome and the Count of St.
Maure, who also met him there, had their share of the merriment.

The next Day our Monarch, who had not seen the Queen for some time, having
been taken up with the Great devotion which Madam de Maintenon infuses into him
by virtue of the Holy Water with which she besprinkles the Bolster of his Bed
every Morning, and a great Rosary which she makes him always wear about his
Arm, this Prince, I say, with his Pater Noster's, went to Visit his Mistress,
who received him very Civily, as she was wont to do. After some serious
Discourse, the King drew near his Princess to Caress her; and the first thing
his majesty did, was to embrace her tenderly, and kiss her several times; but
the Queen who spied his Rosary about his Wrist, asked him, Why he carried his
Pater Noster's so familiarly. Oh -- Madam, cried the King, there is an
extraordinary Virtue in this Wood. Yes, Sir, replied the Queen, there is no
question of it -- But do you know the Effects of this Rosary in the most
Amorous Minutes? It cools the most inflamed Passion, and terrifies the Heart
with those s^ings of Conscience that many times proves deadly. It Is very true,
replied the King, pulling off his Rosary, I have found my self good for nothing
ever since I wore it. But it is the Advice of my Confessor and Madam de
Maintenon, who have assured me, that by saying my Ave Mary's several times a
Day to the Holy Virgin with this Rosary, no misfortune shall befall either my
Person or my Kingdom. You know, Madam, continued the King, that Lewis XIII.
Rsigned his Crown to the protection of that Holy Patroness. Oh, Sir, said the
Queen with a mournful utterance, talk no more of resigning Crowns, the very
remembrance of it kills me. I would pray to St. Stephen and St. Lewis too a
thousand times oftener than I do, if they would but restore me to that which I
have lost. In the mean time, I find that the Saints are as great Cheats as Men
and that there is no relying upon any thing in this World. Why, Madam, reply
(...) the King in a kind of Astonishment, did your Saint ever make you any
promise? A^ others do, said the Queen, who assure us o^ their succor in our
Distresses. However* Madam, replied the King, the Saint^ have a great power,
and we rarely loose the Effects of that Devotion which we pay 'em. Some indeed
there are, Sir, said she, that when it is for their Interest, hearken to us in
pursuance of their designs.

Our Monarch, who perceived that a Devout Conversation did but render his Fair
Maistress insensible of the Pleasures of Love, changed his Discourse, and told
her with a passionate Air, That one Kiss tenderly imprinted by her fair Lips,
would restore Life to the Dead. The Queen who united Love and Devotion
together, made Answer to the King after a Languishing manner, That were it not
for the sweet Minutes that a person Enamored tastes, it would not be worth the
while to live one Day. It Is true Charming Princess, said the King, that is the
most sensible part. Alas! Sir, replied the Queen half in a Swoon, harp no more
upon that string, for I feel my self teady to faint. The King who perceived the
Queen in a Swooning Fit that caused her to throw her self upon the Bed, was
preparing to assist her; but the Company coming in prevented his Sedu^ity.

The Queen being come to her self admitted the Visit of Monsieur the
Archbishop, who found her a little heated, tho she had made use of her Fan to
cool her self; for the Vapors of her imagination heightened by the presence of
our Great Prince, were not so easily laid. The Venerable Apostle therefore,
when the King was gone, began an Amorous Consolation, vowing and protesting to
her whatever Love could inspire into him. On the other side the Queen a
thousand times assured him with her usual Address, that she lovd him better
than her self; which satisfied the Prelate, who pretended that all the
Affection of a Woman was due to him, since Nature had bequeathed him the
choicest of her Gifts.

Their Discourse was intermixed, for that between whiles they talkd of the
Affairs of England, and of King James's Return, who was then going into
Ireland, but was to return into France in a short time by the Advice of
Tyrconne and Lausun. Here, said the Queen, is a Letter from the Lord
Killmallock, which gives me an account of the Death of the Sieur de St. Ruth, a
French Officer and very Valiant, who was slain in the heat of the Fight. In
truth, Madam, said our Protector of the Surbonne, the loss of such a Worthy
Officer as the Sieur de St. Ruth, is a very great loss to France. It Is very
^rue, replied the Queen, but these are the fruits of War. I long to see the
Count of ^a sun; for I have a World of things to say ^o him. Madam, replied
Monsieur the Archbishop, I have heard you speak of the E. of Tyrconnel; and I
have heard he is an Irish Man. Yes, my Dear, replied the Queen, and of mean
Extraction to boot. He same into England young, where he was a Lacquey for ten
years together, and afterward met with a Catholic Master, who preferred him
to the Duke of York, in the nature of one of his Gentlemen. During which time
he did his Lord so many good Services, that he loved him so well as to favor
him with his good Will, and to entrust him with some part of his Secrets; so
that at last King ^ames thought good to make him Deputy of ^reland, in
recompense of his Fidelity. Such ^as the Eash of Tyronnel 's Fortune, which was
not a little to be admired. it is true, said the Archbishop, that people of mean
Extraction rise to the highest degrees of Honor; all things are governed by
Luck and Chance -- But I think I have heard say, that formerly his Wife had
been a very handsome Woman. I Will assure you, Sir, replied ^he Queen, I always
took her to be one of the most amiable persons in the World. First she had a
great deal of Wit, she was well-shap'd, her Conversation sweet und merry, her
Complexion incomparable, with large gray Eyes and very passionate; and then she
deserved the Affection of an Honest Gentleman for the sake of her Devotion,
which was extraordinary in a Woman bred as she was in the pleasures of the
World. The King of France was not insensible of her Charms, continued the Queen
smiling; I know in good part, that the King fell in Love with her, and the
King, my Husband, would have been dabling, finding her worthy of his Affection;
which made me Marry her to Tyrconnel sooner than I would have done, on purpose
to break off that Familiarity which did not a little trouble me. But since
that, we have been very good Friends, and if Heaven had prospered our designs,
we had been inseparable. But no more of this mournful Recital, it would carry
me too far. With all my heart, answered our Metropolitan Pontiff, embracing her
tenderly, telling her withal, that King James had no true reason to Love any
Woman in the World to the prejudice of such an Amiable Princess as her self. Ah!
My Dear, replied the Queen smiling, Men natureally love change, tho they can
give no reason for it. If the Duchess of G -- n would have listened to my dear
Husband, she had been one of his Mistresses; but she had more Virtue. The Queen
would have pursued the History of King James's Amors, but that she was
prevented by the Dutchesses of Orleance and Bourbon, who came to ask her,
Whither she would go to the Chapel Royal of vincennes, to hear the Abbot
Boileau, who was then a Famous Preacher. She consented, and the Archbishop
carried the Ladies in his Coach to the Chapel, and then went Home to give
Orders to his Official M. Cheron against the next day, touching the Surbonne.
But our Princess, who was prepossessed with the Merits of the Curate of St.
Martin, did not think the Abbot Boileau so Eloquent as he was reputed to be,
tho the Dutchesses of Orleance and Bourbon told her several times that they
never had heard so brave, nor so learned a Man. For my part, replied the Queen,
I look upon him to be too popular, and that he has not Fire enough in his
Expressions. I know not that, Madam, answered the Duchess of Orleans, but he
is admired by all the World. Oh Madam, said the Queen, had this famous Preacher
no more than your Approbation, it were enough to render him happy. The Queen
pronounced those words with something of an Air of Derision which no ways
pleased the Duchess, wh^ some Days after told the King that the Queen was so
proud that it was no wonder she was Dethroned. But the King who had a Kindness
for the Queen, mad^ it his Business to reconcile the Duchess and her together;
so that ever since they have been very good Friends.

The Dauphin, who still visited the Princess of Turenne privately, by the
cunning management of her Squire M^ du Mont, who found a way to introduce the
Monsieur at a back pair o^ Stairs, without any notice taken of him and who has
since managed all his Amorous Intrigues with that dexterity, tha^ the Court has
been kept in sgnorance This Squire advised the Dauphin never to visit the
Princess till about Ten a^ Clock at Night, when her Husband would be at play at
the Duchess of Nemours, which Monsieur, who loves secresiy in Love, carefully
observed to do; remembering the Custom of one o^ the Dukes and Peers of France
lately Dead, who hired a House in the stree^ Grenelle, the backside of which
joined close to a Palace where lived a very pretty Woman, for whose sake, that
he might privately enjoy her, he broke a door out of one House into the other;
by which means they met as often as they pleased, and no Body the wiser.

Madam de Turenne, who passionately Loved the Dauphin, staid for him one
Evening in her Chamber with great impatience. At length when the Dauphin came,
he found her somewhat melancholy; of which when the Monsieur asked her the
reason somewhat surlily, she made answer, That 'twas her Misfortune to have an
Amorous Delicacy quite opposite to the Humor and Genius of her Lover. The
Dauphin, whom the sport of Hunting renders a little Rustic, and who reserves no
great politeness for Ladies, answered her somewhat rudely, as he rose up from
her, That Women by their little Tricks, made Love Capricious. Upon which the
Princess, understanding the humor of her Gallant, ran to embrace him, saying
to him at the same time, Ah, my dear Prince, you have not wherewithal to
satisfy a Tender Lover, which words pronounced with an extraordinary passion,
made the Dauphin fall a Laughing, who told her that she knew that best. Upon
that, the Princess of Turenne perceiving she should never be able to alter the
Dauphin's Clownish Disposition, fell a Laughing as well as he: And so that
Evening was spent in Toying after the Monsieurs manner, and Monsieur having
uttered some agreeable Expression to the Princess, contrary to his Custom, she
returned him her Thanks after a very Courtly manner. But at length the night
being far spert the two Lovers parted well satisfied the one with the other.

The Prince of Turenne, who had been playing till it was late at Madam de
Nemours, being by that time returned, was desirous to go to Bed; but finding it
extremely tumbled, asked his Wife the reason of it, who was at her Wits end for
not having caused it to be made again before her Husband came Home. So that the
disorder she was in, confirmed the Princes Suspicions so much the more; but
being come to her self again, she told him, She had been very much troubled
with the Headache, and that she had lain down several times to alleviate her
pain. It Is very well, Madam, replied the Prinee, with a discontented Look, and
now you are Cured, I am sick. The Disconsolate Lady, not knowing what else in
the World to do, endeavored by all the most tender Caresses imaginable to
recover the Prinee into a good Humor, who for his part little minded his Wifes
Gallantries, as being engaged at least in Intrigues so far distinct; and not
having any kindness for Mademoiselle de Ventadour, whom he had Married for the
Interest of his Family only, as being the greatest Heiress in the Kingdom. For
these Reasons he treated his Wife but very roughly, as not having any
Tenderness for her, being wholly taken up with the Countess de Rourre, who had
lost her Husband in the Battle of Flerus.

That Lovely Woman had the knack always to obtain an infinite number of
Admirers. And all the Sparks of Venus that beheld her, burned with a desire to
be fettered in her Chains. We have said of the Princess of Turenne that she
Loved with a certain Delicacy and Curiosity, which consisted in a thousand
little Punctilios. On the other side, the Countess de Rourre little cared
whether a Man Loved her or no, so she could divertise her self, and provided
her Lovers sent her Magnificent Presents, she left them the Liberty to change
as often as they pleased, reserving also the same liberty to her self. And
therefore it may be said, That this Lady was a professed Coquet: But
notwithstanding this same Coquettry, the Dauphin allowed her a share of his
Favors as well as the Princess of Turenne, and many others. But this not being
to my purpose, I shall say no more of it but only thus much, That her Carriage
being none of the Modestest, nor so Discreet as it should be, vexed the very
Soul of the Count her Husband, who would frequently Curse the fatal Day that
had j^yn'd him to that sickle Wagtail.

The Dauphin, who after the Death of her Husband, had given the Countess du
Rourre a very fair House near St. Honore's Gate, went frequently to visit her,
and diligently waited on her, as one of the most Amiable of his Mistresses. On
the other side, that Charming Lady made use of all her Artifices, her Amorous
Dalliances and Tender Caresses, to preserve a Heart which had no great
Inclination to Love, as being more affected with sporting in the Woods than
between the Sheets.

It Is the Nature of Coquetts to force their Humor to a Compliance with that of
their Lovers: For by that means they always keep a good Correspondence with
them. So that the Dauphin who had not those winning satisfactions that season
the Ragoo's of Love, could not forbear the having an infinite Tenderness for
that Lady. One Day that she was in her Cabinet, and that she was sensible of a
more then usual tenderness, her Illustrious Lover came in, to whom she said not
a word. At what time Monsieur admiring at the silence of his Incomparable
Minioness, demanded the reason, and at the same time gave her a tender Kiss.
Ah! My dear Prince, replied she with a sign, I was mustering up all my Good
Luck, and that great Idea deprived me of my Speech. Madam, answered the
Monsieur, that defect is hereditary to your Ladyship, because you are half a
Norman. My dear Prince, said the Countess, you take me one way, and I mean
another: For my meaning was, that I was so Charmed with being never so little
beloved by so great a Prince, that at that very moment I had lost the ordinary
use of my Tongue. I understand ye, Madam, replied the Prince with a smile, but
by those words, never so little, you seem to mistrust that I am not wholly at
your Service. This is an injustice done to my sincere Love, and the real
Affection I have for ye.

Upon that the Countess rose from her Seat, and went to embrace her dear Lover
who is extremely pleased when a Woman that has a Kindness for him prevents him
with some little Addresses I know not what they did more; but believe that in
all probability Lover was not satisfied with only bare Expressions.

However it were, our Queen in Tribulation, who could not long endure the
Absence of Monsieur the Curate, sent for him by one of her Gentlemen, under
pretense that her little Prince of Wales was sick, and that she was extremely
afflicted for fear of losing a dear Child, upon whose Life all her Hopes
depended. Now the Curate either out of Respect, or for some other Reasons,
durst not so frequently visit his Princess, so that the Priest was over joy'd
to find himself sent for. To which purpose he called to his Remembrance all the
pleasures he had tasted in the Enjoyment of so Adorable a person, and the good
Fortune which he hoped to reap from his good Service. All these great Ideas
made the Lover to go up into his Chamber, where he rubbed himself from Head to
Foot with Essence of Jassemine, scoured his Hands with Past of Almonds to make
'em feel smooth, and powdered his Hair more than he was wont to do; and after
he had thus trickt and spruced himself up, he went to visit the Queen about Six
a Clock in the Evening. For at that Hour she sent him word she should be alone,
because her Court would be at the Opera, or at other Divertisements of the
Carneval Season.

Monsieur the Curate found his Charming Mistress and the little Prince's Nurse
bemoaning the Illustrious Infant, and scared at the thoughts of his Death Oh,
said the Afflicted Princess, must I loose the only Blessing that is left me in
this World! St. Winifred, accept my Offerings and hear my Vows, and sanctify
the Prayers which I make to thee, Divine Queen of Heaven.

During this Ejaculation, the Queen cast an Eye upon her Gallant, then upon his
Knees, that he might participate in the Devotion of the Frincess, who at the
same time took him by the Hand and led him into her Chamber. There she asked
him his Advice about the sick Prince, and what he thought of his Distemper. To
which the Curate answered after he had put her in hpes, that if he should
happen to Die, it was a Loss that might be repaired, since her Majesty's Youth
could not want Heirs to her Husbands Throne. Those words re-cheard the Queens
Heart, who seemed to be quite cast down; and at the same time giving the Curate
an Amorous Grasp by the Hand, she pulled him to her and made him write upon her
Altar the Prophetic Terms he had made use of to let her understand the
Fertility of her Arable Ground. After which she thanked him very civily,
telling him withal, that if all Men did but resemble him in Piety and Natural
strength, Soldiers would not be so scarce in France as they were. I assure ye,
said the Princess, I was in a Disconsolate Condition before you came; but you
have given me as much Comfort as it is possible for me to receive. Persons
Sanctified to that degree as you are, have something extraordinary above other
Men. I must confess, I find 'em a thousand times more engaging than your Court
Minions who boast their fine Complements to the Ladies, but have no other Merit
but that frivolous Excellency to commend 'em. Alas -- Madam, replied Monsieur
the Curate, with a great deal of Humility, we poor Abbots know not what
Courtship is; there is nothing in our Breviaries that tells us how to please
Ladies. No matter, replied the Queen, with a passionate utterance, Nature that
acts alone in you, is worth all the chicest and most Courtly Manner of forced
Ability. In a word, Madam, cried out the Transported Lover, embracing the Knees
of his Goddess, I may account my self the most fortunate among men, since I see
my self so highly esteemed by the most Adorable Queen in the World. Let us
have no Complaints, my Dear, replied the Princess, interrupting him, her Eyes
all sparkling with Love, they are now quite out of season. Let us make the best
of the precious minutes that are left us; let us loose no time, but employ all
in confirming to each other the mutual pledges of our Love.

The words were hardly out of her Mouth, when the Marchioness of P -- s came to
give her notice that King James was returned out of Ireland and come to Paris,
and that he was gone to the Convent of the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits. The
Tidings caused the Sanctified Gallant forthwith to Decamp, who was afraid of
nothing so much as to be taken Tardy in an Amorous Familiarity.

King James, who was at his Wits end to see himself so coursly handled by
Fortune, and hopeless of ever re-ascending his Throne, was so cast down, that
nothing could comfort him. So that he was no sooner arrived, but he ran first
of all to the Jesuits to tell the Lamentable story of his Misfortune to Father
La Chaise his faithful Friend. So soon as the Distressed Prince beheld the
Reverend Father, he cried out in a Lamentable Tone. Ah -- Father -- I am lost
beyond Recovery; Ireland is totally reduced, and my Enemies are Victorious. The
whole sacred Society of Jesuits, did all they could to cheer up the poor
Prince, who wept bitterly, and told 'em how King William had passed the Boine
and Routed his Army, and how he had afterward made himself Master of Drogheda,
Dundalk, Dublin, Waterford and Duncannon -- All Is lost, continued the King
sighing, every thing opposes my good Fortune, and my Stars shower down their
most Cruel Influencies uon me.

Upon this the Reverend Fathers La Chaise and Gerard carried King James to the
Fauxburg St. Antoine, to the end they might dispel some part of his grief, and
buoy up his Heart with a plentiful Collation. Monsieur the Archbishop also no
sooner heard of his Arrival, but he went to wait upon him, making him a
thousand Offers of his Service, and telling him, That his Majesty might make
use of his Purse as his own, and that he would never forsake him.

King James returned his thanks with an extraordinary tendrness to the
Protector of the Sorbonne, assuring him that whatever kindness he did for him,
should be returned him when it lay in his power. Those last words caused the
Archbishop to smile at the easiness of that unfortunate Prince, who was the
Cully and sport of the World. This Opinion which the Archbishop had of the
King, moved him to some pity, so that raising his Voice, Sir, said he, be of
good Courage, we shall find a way to succor your Majesty; settle your thoughts
a little, and cheer up your self with us. With that they drank about several
times King James's Health, and to all his Friends that should be instrumental
toward his Restoration. After which they talked no more of Melancholy stories,
but every one spoke of what was most divertising, and most proper to spend the
time delightfully and merrily. At length King James perceiving it was something
late, took leave of the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits; and the Archbishop
carried him to St. Germains in his Coach; which very much surprised the Queen,
who could not conceive how they should happen to meet together. The King being
thus got Home, was received but very coldly by his Domestics. For they began
already to look upon him as a King without a Crown, and as an Unfortunate
person; which extremely afflicted him. Our Monarch however dissembled the
Contempt which he had of his Cousin; considering it was more Generous rather
then augment his Sorrows to divert his Mind with some Courtly Employment, to
which King James at first was altogether averse, but then reflecting that all
his grieving and lamenting would not regain him his Scepter, nor the Dominion
of his Kingdoms, he banished all his Disturbances from his Thoughts for some
time.

King James went often to Visit Madam Maintenon at St. Cir's, and made her the
Confident of his thoughts, and of the Counsel which his Brother had given him
to Court some pretty Lady, which made the Marchioness Laugh; however she told
him, That the Remedy was none of the worst, and that Women were many times
great helps to Men in this Life. Yes, Madam, answered King James, the pleasure
of Courting 'em is not to be paralleled to those that have a Contented Mind;
but to a person in my Condition, Love is but an Unwelcome Guest. Upon this, the
Marchioness, who found she had a favorable Opportunity to revenge her self
upon her Rivaless and our Monarch, who had preferred the favor of King James's
Consort before hers, and was very sedulous in waiting upon that Princess, told
King James, That if he were resolved to undertake an Amorous Heart, she would
provide him a Lady, with whom he might spend many a Charming Hour. Madam, said
he, I begin, methnks, to feel my imagination somewhat warmed by the story you
have told me. But pray tell me, Madam, who this fair Lady is that you would
have me male my Addresses to, in this sorrowful Condition of mine. Sir, replied
Madam de Maintenon, Nature must reinforce her self, before you can think of any
such thing; the Business is not very pressing; besides that, I must have time
to work the Mind and Heart of the Charming Lady that I purpose for your
Embraces.

After this pleasant Conversion, King James took his leave of the Marchioness,
and returned to St. Germains; where he was no sooner Arrived, but Mrs. Laybady
told him, That the Queen had had several Swooning Fits that Day, and that 'twas
believed she was with Child. To which the King answered somewhat unadvisedly,
That it might well be so, but that he had been a long time Absent. But Mrs.
Labady was more discreet: For she presently withdrew without speaking a word.
However the Fainting Fits that still disturbed the Queen, very much afflicted
her petty Court. And the King, who dissembled his Disquiet, seldom stirred from
her. In a word the Queens Malady left her in a sort time, and all the
Physicians, after she had consulted them, concluded, That she was big of two if
not of three. A Midwife was also sent for, who confirmed the same, which filled
the whole Court with Joy, and France also, that had contributed so much toward
it, would needs partake in the Happiness of the two Princes, unfortunate in
every thing else. The Venerable Council of Lewis the XIVth's Conscience, were
overioy'd at it beyond the Expression of Words. For this second Offspring
raised the hopes of all the Jesuitical Assembly. The Reverend Father La Chasse,
and several of the Religious Orders, went to Congratulate the Queen upon her
Fertility, and the Blessing that Heaven had sent her. Oh -- Madam, cried the
Holy Father, Courage, you shall Ascend your Throne once more, in despite of all
your Enemies. For I find that the Saints have heard our Prayers, particularly
St. Vaubons, to whom I addressed a thousand and a thousand Vows, to the end her
Girdle might work the same Effect upon you as it has wrought upon so many other
Women that tried the virtue of it. In truth Father, replied the Queen, I
believe the Blessed Girdle of that Saint, to whom you paid your Vows, did me no
harm. For I frequently made use of it, according to your Reverences Advice,
with the usual assistance that begets Mankind. In truth, Madam, your Majesty
has too much Knowledge, to believe that the Girdle of a Saint only, without the
Company of a Man, can beget a Child. Nevertheless, Father, replied the Queen,
there are many poor Women, who are firmly of OPinion that they shall certainly
be with Child by wearing that Blessed Girdle about their VVasts.

As for your self, Madam, replied the Father smiling, you are Cured of that
Ridiculous Belief: What a dangerous thing would it be, continued the Father,
for Maids to touch St. Vaubon 's Robe, when the single Ribbon which she tied
about her Loins, being bound with Devotion about a Woman's Wast, could produce
the Head of a Family. After this manner it is, that Pope Clement relates the
story in his last Book of the Life of that Saint. Thus it was that Father La
Chaise let his Fancy ramble, when Monsieur the Archbishop, who had understood
the welcome News as well as the rest, came in. Every Gallant of that Princess
was extremely pleased to understand that the Queen was big with Child; for
those Illustrious Lovers every one ascribed to themselves the Honor of the
prosperous success of their Labors. There was only the Duke of Vandome who
swore the most seriously in the World, that he had never dipped his Pen in the
Queen Inkhorn. Which became the Sport and Raillery of the Court. The Dauphin
also Laughed at it, saying, That 'twas a better Pen than any of the Doctors of
the Sorbonne wrote withal; and that in time Fame would spread his Name far and
near. The Princesses of Conti, Lislebonne and Saissons spo ted after the same
manner. But that which ceased all these Railleries was a Pilgrimage which the
Queen undertook, wherein King James was also to be concerned together with
several other Devout Persons. But he had earnestly desired his Beloved Consort
not to carry any Woman with her; for said that pious Prince, Wherever they are
there can be no Devotion. Henry III. observed the same Policy, when he walked
barefoot to carry his Offerings to any Saint. Wherefore His Majesty was never
Accompanied upon those occasions, but by some of his Minions, clad like himself
in White Linen, and wearing large Rosaries, of which every Bead was carved
like a Deaths Head.

King James being returned from his Pilgrimage, found himself fully Comforted
for the Loss of his Three Kingdoms. I know not whether his Conversation with
St. Clotilde had over ruled him wholly to submit to the severe Decree of his
Malignant stars, but there was a World of Joy observed to glissen in his
Countenance. About the same time it was, that being one day with the
Marchioness of Maintenon, the Lady still desirous to revenge her self upon the
Queen her Rivaless, took advantage of that lucky tender minute to Talk to him
of the Affairs of his Heart; to which the King gave Answers very agreeable.
Some days afterward Madam de Maintenon sent for Mdemoiselle de -- to her
Chamber, who was the Fair Lady that she designed for the King and no King, a
Lady at the same time tenderly beloved by our Great Monarch. So soon as King
James saw her, he was Charmed with her Beauty, and all the desires of that poor
Prince, that lay, as it were, in a Swoon, revived at the sight of so, Fair an
Object; and his Fancy was heated after such a manner, that he had much ado to
Recover himself from an Agitation so extraordinary.

But the Fair Lady, who could not brook with patience the feeble Caresses of
that Prince, always contrived some excuse or other, that she might not meet His
Majesty; for as she said one day to the Duchess of Nemours, I know not the
meaning of Madam de Maintenon, to go about thus to Engage me to a Compliance
with King James. One might think, as this Lady orders her Affairs, that the
Race of Men were at an end. My dear Minion, replied the Duchess with a smile,
the Marchioness of Maintenon has her Ends, and you must submit to her. This
Answer afforded nothing of Consolation to our Charming Lady, who being at her
Wits end to see her self obliged to Entertain a Familiar Commerce with a Lover
already come to his Spectacles, who had more need of Repose and Ease, then of
the usual Agitations of Venus, resolved to feign her self sick, that she might
rid her self from the frequent Visits of the King of the Bass, and her project
took. For the King being Enamored only by Accident, soon laid asleep his Rapid
motions in their proper places.

However Madam Maintenon, who thought her self in some measure Revenged, for
the Inconstancy of her Lover, and the Queen's interloping, was not a little
glad that K. James's Amor had made some noise at the Court; and tho the
Consequences were such as she expected and desired, however she would not seem
to be disatisfy'd.

The Queen who understood that 'twas the Marchioness of Maintenon, who had laid
that Snare for her Husband, only made here self Sport with it, which nettl'd
the Marchioness not a little. But the Queen who is infinitely Witty and
Politic withal, under stood so well how to manage both the Marchioness and our
Monarch, that she has all along to outward appearance preserved her Friendship
with those Illustrious Persons.

All this while the Curate of Saint Martin, whom his Modesty had kept silent,
though he thought never a whit the less, imagined the time of his Absence too
long; and therefore so soon as the noise of the Queen's being With-child was
quietly over, he went to St. Germains, under pretense of paying his Devoirs to
King James, whom he had not seen since his Return out of Ireland. The Queen
returned him her Thanks, and in regard the King was not then at Paris, our two
Lovers made the Best of his Lucky Absence, by giving each other a thousand
Proofs of their Affection. Our Princess made known to her Gallant her great Joy
for being big With-child a second time, in hopes that this last Infant would
utterly overthrow all the Designs of the wretched Huguenots, who triumphed over
her Misfortune. Ah -- my Dear, (continued the Princess, kissing her
Ecclesiastical Adonis) had King James undertaken an Affair of that Importance
as to beget a Child, the Poor Man would have been at a Loss. You cannot imagine
how incapable that Prince is to beget his Like: So that the Marchioness of
Maintenon mistook in her Politics to choose out a Mistress for a Man that can
hardly make Water: alas -- poor Woman, she thought to make me jealous, but she
took a wrong Course: I knew too well my Husband's Merits, and that there is
never a Girl in the Town, if she be any thing handsome that will be baffled by
such a doting Gallant. But Madam, (replied the Curate) I believe that Lady's
Design was to fret and disquiet your Majesty, because she knows that our King
has a great Esteem and Honor for you, and usually the Mistresses of Kings are
jealous of their Rivalesses. It Is a strange thing (replied the Queen) that a
Woman of her Age should not be satiated with Love: yet you cannot imagine
perhaps how amorous this Antiquated Bigotess is. After she has turned about her
Rosary an hour or two, the good Lady goes to caress the King with a thousand
Grimaces, which no way suit with a Woman of her Character. In short, she loves
Pleasure better then her Life, and when she cannot please her self, she
produces others Younger and more Beautiful. This is the Genius of the Abbess of
St. Cyr, notwithstanding all her Devotion.

In truth Madam, I never took that Lady to be so given to the World, or so
addicted to Pleasure. However she ought to consider that she is in her wain,
and that it is time for her to leave off. Ah! Monsieur -- (replied the Princess)
she has been always a Wanton. A Friend of mine told me since I came to Paris,
that when Scarron married her, every body told the Poor Man but of Charity,
that he was going to ally himself to the Family of Acteon, To which the
Growthead Aesop replied, that he laughed at wearing Horns, since he was not the
only Man in the World that did so, and that he only took that Fair Damsel to
please his Eyes.

But the Arrival of the Count of Lau. sun, who surpised the Queen, caused 'em
to alter their Conversation: for now they talked of nothing but the Affairs of
Ireland, and the loss of Limerick. Ah! my dear Cousin, (cried the afflicted
Princess) what think ye of my Misfortune? I must confess, Madam, (replied the
Count, rubbing his Forehead) I am extremely troubled for all these Misfortunes.
There is nothing vexes a General more then to be foiled in his Enterprises. I
wish I had never been in Ireland for my Honor's sake. The Count of Tyrconnel
and I did all that could be expected from stout Soldiers. But it is in vain to
toil when Fortune is against us. You have given me a sad Protraiture of our
Condition, my dear Cousin, but I had thought that a great Soldier like your
self, had always reserved some Hope: nevertheless, I see that -- The Queen
could not conclude the rest, because a Torrent of Tears that fell from her Eyes
would not suffer her to proceed. Which the Count beholding, and sorry to see
her so terribly afflict her self, he took her in his Arms to comfort her,
Swearing that he would try the to'ther Bout, and do his Utmost to restore her
Majesty to her Throne.

After the Queen had dried up her Tears, looking upon the Count with a tender
Eye, My dear Cousin, (said she) how much am I obliged to your Kindness, for
interesting your self so much in my Concerns. 'Twas you that saved me out of
the Hands of my Enemies, as well as the Prince of Wales my little Son. Now that
I am big With-Child again, I have still more need of your Assistance, to the
end it may be published to the World that this Great Belly of mine is no Fable,
as they who bereaved me of my Crown believed and gave out. O Heaven! that
know the Injustice done me, prosecute my Revenge, and thou Saint Vaubons,
who have given Life to the Infant which I bear, be thou for ever on my side.
Prove but thou faithful to me, and I will burn upon thy Altar the largest
Tapers I can buy for Money.

The Count de Lausun, who had heard that the Queen was VVith-child, Madam,
(said he to her with a Smile) I find that you have not been idle in my Absence,
and that Love has been your Friend. Oh -- Cousin, (replied the Queen with a
languishing Air,) deride not an Unfortunate Princess that breathes nothing but
Grief; this Production is only the Effect of my Prayers to St. Vaubons. Had ye
no humane Assistance? Madam, (said the Count, proceeding still in his Jesting
Humor. None at all, (answered the Queen.) Then most certainly, (replied the
Count) St. Vaubons must be a Hermophrodite to get Children alone by her self.

You do not take the Blessings of Heaven in a right sense, (replied the Queen):
Let us find some other Discourse. How did ye like the Irish Ladies, are they
as handsome as they are at London? -- How many Mistresses had you, during your
stay in that Country? Faith -- Madam, I was so taken up with the War, that I
had no leisure to discern the White from the Brown; besides that I should
never court the Irish Ladies -- they are so little obliging that they will
never make any great Conquests. Then you have been Visiting 'em, Cousin,
(replied the Queen, laughing) yet you would make me believe you never minded
'em. I know that Mars and Venus have a great Sympathy together. For which
reason it is that Ovid shows us those two Deities surpised in an Amorous
Familiarity, and fettered in small Chains that Vulcan had Forged, to cure
himself of his jealous Suspicions.

The Count would have gone on with his Pleasantries in answer to the Queen,
when King James arrived. So that after some few Complements, the King and the
Count went together to the Fauxburgh St. Antoin, to conferr with the Reverend
Father La Chaise. At what time the Holy Father gave King James a Writing, the
Contents of which were as follows.

Francis by the Grace of God, and the Holy Apostolic See, Archbishop of Paris,
Duke and Peer of France, Commander of the King's Orders, Protector of the
Sorbonne, and Superior of that of Navarr, with the Assistance of our Venerable
Brethren, Deans, Canons of the Metropolitan Church, and the Pious Council of
Lewis the Great, our Incomparable Monarch, most humbly supplicateth the King
and Queen of Great Britain, James II. and Mary d' Este his Illustrious Consort,
to consent to the means which we have found out in our Holy Assembly, speedily
to restore Their Majesty's to their Throne; which is, to publish a Declaration
to their English Subjects, therein desiring 'em not to join with King William,
with Promise to obtain all their Privileges, and to give full Liberty to the
English Religion, to send back all the Foreign Soldiers so soon as he shall be
restored to his Throne: to let 'em see also that their manner of dispossessing
him, was unjust, by justifying his Conduct; desiring also the Lords of the
Kingdom to come to Paris to be present at the Delivery of the Queen, for the
Dissipating of all false Reports that ran about upon the Death of his Son, the
Prince of Wales, and that the Queen's time expired the 15th. of May, assuring
those that should come into France all the Liberty they could desire.

The King and Queen returned their Hearty Thanks to the Archbishop and all the
Holy Society for the Good Counsel they had given. Prayers were also appointed
to be made in all the Churches for the Blessing of Heaven upon all King James's
Enterprises; and Te Deum was sung beforehand, there being no Question but that
Victory would favor him.

Some days after all this devout Hurly-burly, the Court removed to Marli, to
divertise themselves, where the Count Lausun, always Courtly according to his
Custom, gave the most magnificent Regale that ever was seen. Balls and Comedies
were not omitted for the Ladies to spend their time with pleasure and delight.
The next day the Count carried the Queen, together with the Princesses of
Conti, d' Espiney, and Soissons, to an Opera, where the Queen, who is a
passionate Lover of Music, was charmed with a young Damsel's Voice, who sung
the last Airs of Baptist. The Countess of Rourre, who was one of those that
went to Marli, was one of the first that returned, that she might have more
time to taste the Sweets of her Engagement with the Prince of Turenne. At that
time it was, that he was so weak as to Sign a little Note with his Blood to
that same Charming Countess, wherein he promised to love her as long as he
lived, and never to change. On the other side, Madam de Rourre appeared so
charmed with his Promise, that she flung her self about his Neck, and tenderly
embraced him, telling him withal, That she would be as faithful to him as her
Strength would permit. For you know, my Dear, (continued the Cunning Coquet)
that Women, such as I am, are subject to strange Temptations: Nevertheless, I
assure ye, I will separate my self from the World, to the end I may give my
self up wholly to you. This was then the Opinion of the Fair Countess, who at
the same time presented her Illustrious Gallant with her Picture in a little
Box, and several other Toys as Pledges of her Love. The Prince also Signed
another Note with his blood, that she should never see the Picture again till
the Hour of his Death, which fell out to be as he said: for he was Slain at the
Battle of Steenkirk.

By this time the Queen being delivered, infused a general Joy into all the
Court for the Birth of a second Child. Our Pious Monarch had desired the
Duchess of Orleans his Sister-in-Law to be God-mother. But by Misfortune that
Princess who had a great Desire to have been at the Queen's Labor, came too
late, though she set forth from St. Clou, with all speed that might be. However
every Body congratulated King James for his good Fortune: and several Ladies of
Great Quality always stayed in the Queen's Chamber, by Lewis the Great's Order,
who tenderly loved the Princess, and took delight in thinking that by his
Tillage she had produced so fair a Crop. And indeed this Infant was composed of
several Essences; which in time will give it a most Admirable Odor in the
World, and be a means to perpetuate his Memory. Monsieur the Archbishop made
frequent Visits to the Queen, during her Lying-in, particularly to give her his
Benediction, and make her some other Presents of things necessary for the
Support of Life. Telling her withal, to divertise her, That he had ordered to
be carried to his Country House, upon the Road from Charenton to Conflans,
several sorts of Liquor fit to be presented to the Table of the Gods. Among the
rest a certain Brewage which the Archbishop had caused to be made at Paris; but
I know not the Composition. It Is sufficient to let ye understand, that the
Queen and several other Ladies, sometimes took a little too much of this
Nectar, when they went to visit our Apostolic; which caused 'em to sleep very
contentedly in the Arms of that Illustrious Gallant, who frequently laid aside
his Violet Cassock to put on the Habit of Madam President Bretonvilliers, whom
he had loved above all his Mistresses together. But in regard that Time is a
Thing that cannot be stopped, Age had worn away the Allurements of that Fair
Lady. Which was the Reason that Monsieur the Archbishop had a little neglected
her for more Youthful Play-fellows, and which were better worth his Trouble.
The Abbess of Monmatry also had the same Destiny, because her Nuns that were in
the Spring of their Years, far more delightfully charmed the Venerable Prelate.
For which reason he had always some particular Benediction to bestow upon those
Pious Damsels, who devoutly returned him Thanks out of a Religious Motive of
Gratitude.

The Report that was spread about Paris of the Descent that King William
designed to make into France, set all Tongues a talking of nothing so much as
of setting forth a Great Fleet for King James. For which reason Four hundred
Vessels were stopped to carry Twelve thousand Soldiers, as well Horse as Foot,
in defense of our Unfortunate Prince: and this Fleet was to be guarded by
Twelve Men of War, under the Command of the Duke d' Estrees, who had 'em ready
fitted out at Toulonne. In the mean time King James, who arrived at the Hogue
the 29th. of April, began to embark his Men: but by reason of the Bad Weather
which opposed his Designs, they proved abortive to his great Sorrow. Which
obliged him to write a Letter to all the English Soldiers and Seamen, wherein
he promised several Recompenses, if they would be faithful to him, as also to
maintain 'em in their Employments, with a great Number of Fair Words of the
same Nature. But no body came to take his part, so that the poor Prince,
unhappy in every thing he undertakes, was constrained to return with Ignominy
to Paris, after he had waited a long time at La Hogue for a Wind, that would
not blow him one King Blast, notwithstanding all his Vows and Prayers to St.
Barbe, who is the Protector of the Seamen, when they devoutly recommend
themselves to him for Succor. I know not whether King James prayed with a
Faith strong enough; but certain it is, the dogged Saint would by no means
hearken to the Cries of his Suppliant at that time. This was a terrible Blow to
the Court of France, and a Heartbreaking to the Pious Society of the Reverend
Fathers of the Company of Jesus. Every one in particular wished a thousand
Mischiefs to the Huguenots and their King: and the Jesuitical Cabal plunged in
despair to see that Fortune turned her Back upon 'em, laid several Criminal
Designs well known to all the World, which came to nothing. The Queen, who was
got abroad again, appeared every where with a Pensive Countenance, and took no
pleasure in any thing. She was always at the Convent of Mercy in the Fauxburgh
St. Germain, with Madam the Princess of Carignan a devout Old Woman that eat up
her Saints Images with Kissing 'em, and wore out the Lineaments of their Faces
with continual rubbing and cleaning 'em. But the Queen, perceiving the
Extraordinary Piety of this Reverend Piece of Antiquity, could not long agree
with her Humor. Those Pleasures to which our Princess was by Nature prone,
returned every Moment to her Remembrance; maugre all these Misfortunes, her
Lovers were always welcome to her, and her deep Affection caused her to forget
the Fatality of her Star. For which reason it was, that when our tenderly
enamored Princess did not see her dear Curate, she would say to her self, that
he knew not how to make his best Advantage of the most sensible Passion in the
World; and that of all Pleasures, that of being reciprocally beloved was the
sweetest. Just at the time when the Queen was in this Trance, so favorable to
Love it was, that Lewis the Great found her in her Cabinet leaning upon the
Table, with her Eyes half shut, and in such a Careless Dress as showed that the
Amorous Caresses of one of her Gallants would not have been displeasing to her:
so that our Monarch took his Advantage of the Shepherd's Hour, nor did the
Queen oppose him but very weakly. All she said to him, giving him a wishful
Look, was only this, Oh Sir, you wound me. In which part, Madam, (cried the
King, altogether surpised) I should be mightily concerned if any thing but
Good should befall ye by my means. It Is my Heart, dear Prince, which you have
so sensibly touched, that makes me Sigh. I always touch Ladies (replied his
Majesty laughing) in the most sensible Parts.

The Queen was about to speak, when she was in a strange Surprise to see Madam
de Maintenon come into her Chamber, the Door of which by Misfortune was left
open. But if the Queen were surpised, the Marchioness was no less astonished
to see the King lying upon the Queen's Bed by her side, and that in none of the
modestest Postures neither, which made her start two Steps backward. Sancta
Maria, cried our Abbess, (lifting up her Eyes to Heaven) what Sight is this I
see! Oh Sir, Human Frailty always overrules you, and you will never be wise
for your Health -- You know the wrong you do that little strength that is left
ye by making Attempts beyond your Power. The King who lay still upon the Bed,
not being able to recover himself from the Surprise he was in to hear the
Reproaches of the Marchioness, which at the same time discovered to the Queen
his Majesty's inability to undertake the Combats of Love, at length answered
the Marchioness very rudely, That she was too bold to reprove him like a Child;
that he was King and able to govern himself -- and then looking upon her with a
Frown of Contempt -- Be gone (said he) you will extremely oblige me. Upon which
Madam de Maintenon made a low Curt'sie, and retired out of the Room. The Queen
who feigned her self asleep all this while, and as if she had heard nothing
before her Rivaless, so soon as she was gone, I am lost for ever, (said she to
the King) this Lady has discovered our Familiarity, and she will ruin my
Reputation if she can. She dares not (replied the King) she is too great a
Politician to prefer the Pleasure of her Revenge before her Fortune in this
World: rest your self content for that: I am Master of my own Will, and I will
love whom I please. In the mean time Sir, (replied the Princess) I am deeply
concerned for one thing. How could this jealous Woman divine that Your Majesty
was here? I must confess indeed that Love has a Piercing Eye, when it lodges in
the Heart of an Old Woman, and who is not only concerned, but jealous to the
highest degree. Talk no more of it (said our Monarch, embracing his divine
Mistress) all will go well.

So soon as the King had taken his leave of the Queen, he returned to
Versailles, where he was a long time without seeing Madam de Maintenon, who
kept her Station at St. Cyr, during her Exile, not being able to recover her
self from the harsh Expressions which the King had made use of to let her
understand how much he was displeased. But at length, having considered the
Condition of her Affairs, and the Propensities of her Heart, Oh -- (said she to
her self) how weak is a Woman when she is in Love! but yet the Conquest of a
King is a Precious Thing which any prudent Woman would study to preserve.
Immediately therefore she went to the King, who was then alone in his Chamber,
and walking in a melancholy posture. Presently the Marchioness threw her self
at his Knees and begged his Pardon. The King, who is the greatest Courtier
living, could not endure to see a Woman, whom he had vehemently loved, so
submissive at his Feet; so that he took her by the Hand and raised her up,
saying to her no more then this; I am convinced of your Sincerity; but be more
discreet for the future. Oh -- Sir, (replied Madam de Maintenon) I am guilty,
because it is your Majesty's Pleasure I should be so. It Is true that I opposed
your Pleasures, but it was because I was too zealous for your Good, that I have
brought upon me your Displeasure. But the King, who was unwilling to rip up old
Stories, fell upon other Discourse, and asked her what News of the Princess of
Conti whom he had not seen for some Days.

The Marchioness, after she had given a full Account of what he demanded from
her, returned to St. Cyr; where she was no sooner arrived, but King James, who
was quite tired out with musing upon his Misfortunes, came to give her a Visit.
Nor was Madam de Maintenon at all disturbed to see him. For in regard she had a
Secret Intrigue with him, she made no Scruple to tell him the whole Story of
the King, and the Queen his Wife; which very much surpised King James. But
after the Marchioness had entrusted him with this Secret, and made him
understand the Danger of making a Noise of it, which was not convenient for a
Hundred Reasons of Policy, Sir, (said she to him) dissemble the Wrong your
Wife does ye, and Revenge your self by paying her in the same Coin. You
acknowledged to me, That the last Engagement you had, would have diverted ye
with a thousand Pleasures, if the Fair Lady that you loved would but have
answered your Passion: but there is no always ill Success in the Fortune of
Love; there is sometimes a Calm in Cupid's Empire, as there is Peace and
Tranquillity in other Dominions of the World. I have one of my Girls which I
intend to discard, because she begins to be a little wantonly inclined, and for
that she is too easy in her Love of Men, which is not proper for Saint Cyr,
where we must have nothing but Good Instructions and Good Examples for the
Youth that are under my Care. It may be said in Praise of this Damsel, though she
have this failing, that she is one of the most amiable Girls in the World. She
has lovely Eyes well enchas'd, an Admirable Complexion, a little Mouth, Teeth
whiter then Ivory, her Neck well built, and a Curious Shape; she is neither too
tall nor too short: in a Word, she has all to satisfy the most curious Eye.
For which reason the Count of St. Manre always called her his Delight; nor do I
believe that the Dauphin hates her; which is a Thing I cannot suffer; for I do
not like it, that he should thrust his Nose into my Business; besides that we
have not been Cater-Cousins ever since I said, that the Princess of Turenne and
the Countess of Rourre were a couple of Coquets.

Well, Madam, (said the King, interrupting her) if I should address my self to
the Lady you speak of, what likelihood of Success for me, since those brisker
Sparks enjoy her. Oh -- Sir, you go too fast, they have not had the handling of
her yet; for I verily believe this pretty Girl has her Maidenhead still, though
to her Sorrow. You will oblige me therefore to crop those early Flowers. For by
that means shall I revenge my self of the Queen your Wife, and upon the
Dauphin, who begins to relish Kissing of Women.

I am of your Opinion, (replied the King, laughing) I believe he will become
more gentle and civilized among the Ladies. Come, come, (replied the
Mardchioness) I believe him as sensible of Love as other Men, only he loves
Privacy in his Amors, he does not publish 'em by Sound of Trumpet in the City,
like Lewis the Great, when he makes any new Discovery. I remember when he was a
Young Man, and in Love with the Tapstry Weaver's Daughter of Versailles, and
the Fair Madelon Denis, who was also the Daughter of a Well-digger of the same
Place, he never cared that any Body should know he went to visit his
Mistresses, and if any Body that knew him, surpised him in their Houses, he
was gone presently, making as if he only came to look upon their Work. I
believe, Madam, all that you say of the Dauphin, (replied the King) but it is
true that the Count of St. Maure frequently visits Mademoiselle de Broisy, our
Charming Picardin. That Is nothing, Sir, there is no Danger, (replied the
Marchioness, that Spark of Venus never visits her but by Night; his Amor is
Nocturnal, of the same Nature as the wooing of Cats, that Court one another
upon the Tiles by the light of the Moon; provided you make your Visits in the
Daytime, you will never be interrupted with the sight of him. For this same
pretty Minion of the Dauphin's observes all his Methods. The King of Albion
having quitted Madam de Maintenon, went the next day, after he had spruc'd
himself up, to see Mademoiselle de Broisy, who had left the Marquis's Convent
and lived with an old Aunt of hers in the Fauxburgh Saint Honor. So soon as
the Young Damsel saw King James, she fell a laughing -- Sir, said she -- what
brings you hither? Surely Madam de Maintenon must have intruded upon your
Civility to make you thus the Messenger to deliver her Errands. Not so, Fair
One, (replied the King) it is only my Desire to kiss your Hands, that makes me
pay you this Visit. Sir, (said Mademoiselle de Broisy) I am infinitely obliged
to you for the Honor which you do me. After some Complements, King James would
fain have been Caressing her, after the Manner of the Court of France, where
they never make any tender Protestations to Ladies, but presently go to the
point -- which not a little surpised the Lady, who asked him what he intended
to be at? -- nothing but the sweet Game of Kissing, my Dear Minioness, (replied
the King) if you please. Oh Sir, (replied the Young Lady) there are so many
Kissers in the World now adays, that they put me out of Conceit with Love --
Recall your wandering Affections home again, and cease to tire your self with
Lustful Desires, which may warm your Imagination, but otherwise expose you to
Vexation and Sorrow. Such a dry Answer put King James into such a disorder,
that he had not a Word to say for himself. And the Charming Picardin, observing
how she had silenced the Poor King, left him with a Smile of Derision, and said
no more to him.

King James, who was troubled at the Ill Success of his Amor, made a faithful
recital of it to the Marchioness of Maintenon, who upbraided him that he had
neither the Means nor the Art to win a Lady's Affection, which were two things
very necessary for a Man, and also very pleasing. The Prince made Answer, That
however, he struck the Ladies in the most tender part, and took the most proper
way to warm 'em. But continued he with a Sigh, Love is no more favorable to me
then Fortune; those two Deities are my declared Enemies, though I never offended
'em. Madam de Maintenon put an end to the Discourse by asking the King, whether
he would go along with her who was going to visit one of her she Friends, and
so they took Coach together.

The Prince of Turenne, whom we left with the Countess de Rourre, finding the
Time drawing near that he was to go to the Army, made frequent Visits to his
dear Mistress, as if some forebodings of Death had hinted to him that he should
never see her again. And this was that which he told her every day, as she sat
upon his Knee. Ha! my Dear, my Adorable, I shall never return more, my Mind and
something within me tells me so. Yet all the Reluctance I have to leave the
World is only for thy sake. And so saying, he could not forbear dropping some
few Tears, which the Countess wiped away, fondling him with a thousand Caresses
-- Why should you retain such mournful Thoughts, my dear Prince, (said she) I
hope your Better Fortune will bring you back again. It Is not that which so much
disturbs me, but that which makes my Life happy, your Amiable Presence will be
eclipsed for some time from me. How difficult a thing it is to keep those
Blessings which we most delight in.

The Prince of Turenne who saw her somewhat dejeced by what he had said, took
her in his Arms to comfort her. Never did Lovers give each other greater Proofs
of mutual Affection then they two did; the Days were too short for 'em to taste
the Sweets of Love; and therefore they spent whole Nights together without
being tired, which rarely happens in Amorous Combats. But our Charming Countess
is generally indefatigable in the Sports of Venus; the more she tastes, the
more greedy she is. For which important Reason it was, that she always
entertained a Crowd of Lovers that were ready to serve her in their turns. Nor
do I speak this without good Ground. For so soon as the Prince of Turenne had
left her, and given her a thousand Assurances of his Fidelity, some few Hours
after, the Dauphin, who came to visit her, spent the remainder of the Day and
the next Night with her.

Her Inconstancy and fickle Humor is well known at Court, and the Princess of
Conti was in the Right When she upbraided the Prince of Turenne for his want of
Niceness in adhering so steadfastly to a Woman that was so prodigal of her
Favors to all Comers and Goers, and who many times unseasonably meets 'em half
way. The Princess of Turenne is not a Woman of this Character; for she never
cares to pester her self with many Sighers at a time; and it is said that she
never loved any Body so tenderly as the Dauphin who had not the same Sentiments
for her. What a folly it is for a Lady to love by her self? In a Man that
weakness is to be pardoned, because he is more capable of Love then Women, who
ought always to be the last and much more Circumspect in setting their
Affections: for nothing is more dangerous then to embark in an Amor. Alas!
it is a common thing to Shipwreck in the Port of Hope, when we think our selves
in safety: the surest way therefore is to love but slightly, and without
Vehemence of Attachment. What probability is there (said the Fugitive Queen
some time since to the Princess of Conti, who condemned Violent Passions) for a
Woman to preserve her Heart for Indifferency, which is the Winter of Love. Oh,
Madam, (replied the Queen singing the following Lines, When Tenderness moves,
in vain we pretend
To say where the tender Engagement will end;
When first an Amor is but newly begun,
It Is unknown what 'twill cost us at the long run.
Alas! for my Heart, it had still retained Its Primitive Innocence,
Had it growing Desire quite banished from thence
And a Stranger to Love remained.


It Is true, (continued the Queen) an Engagement sometimes cost us very dear;
but how shall we pass away our Youth without a little Love. That Passion is all
the Pleasure of Life; and the Days seem long without a little Employment for
the Heart, which delightfully spends our time. Monsieur the Archbishop, who
overheard all the Ladies discourse at the Door, fell into a loud Laughter,
which made the Princess of Conti rise from her Seat to see who was there; but
she was strangely surpised when she beheld the Illustrious Prelate. Thereupon
they changed their Subject, and fell to talk of Piety; which the Queen did
onpurpose, to the end they might not suspect her Intrigue with the Roman
Doctor; but 'twas in vain for her to play the Hypocrite; for her wistful Looks
declared the Contrary. Besides that the Princess of Conti has too quick a Wit,
to be ignorant of the Queen of Qlbion's Gallantries. The Queen also her self
observed that there was an Eye upon her; which made her leave the Company
sooner then otherwise she would have done; then which there could have been
nothing more favorable to the sanctified Prelate, who desired above all things
an Opportunity to make known to her Majesty the Excess of his Love. The Queen,
who still dissembled at her usual rate, feigned that all the Caresses of her
Lover were most acceptable to her, and that she preferred 'em before all
others; which greatly augmented the Prelate's Delight, believing himself the
most fortunate of Men, in possessing the Heart of so amiable a Princess
entirely to himself. But Men are frequently deceived in their Hopes,
particularly about Matters of Love, which promises more Felicity then it has in
store, and fills the Thoughts of those that Love with a thousand airy
Blessings. Thus it was that Monsieur the Archbishop flattered his Passion, in
caressing the Queen, who assured him on her part, That she would be faithful to
him as long as she lived, and that she could never love any other but himself,
for Reasons that her Majesty could not express.

All these tender Protestations being at an end, the Archbishop took his leave
of the Queen, and went with his Official to meet the Bishop of Meaux at the
House of one of the Presidents, who lived at Lisle Notredam. After he had
discoursed of Public Affairs, and of the Decrees which our Monarch had issued
forth, the two Prelates went to recreate themselves at Conflans about a small
League from Paris, where they drank so much of the Archbishop's good Wine, that
it warmed the devout Friends of Bacchus to that degree, as to tell what Favors
they had received from their Mistresses, which put them upon relating several
pleasant Stories that held 'em a long time. The Bishop of Meaux drank the
Queen's Health smiling upon the Archbishop, who pledged the Company very
courteously, telling 'em withal, That nothing was more acceptable to him, then
to hear 'em talk of that Princess, in whom he had observed an Extraordinary
Merit, and that Fortune was not just to abandon her Cause. What you say is true
Sir, (said the President) but we are not always rewarded according to our
Deserts; wherefore your Artists paint that Deity Blind. Upon that, the Bishop
of Meaux could not forbear desiring his Friends to drink a good Health to the
Archbishop's Inclinations, naming no Body. But in regard the Conquests that
Love makes, can be no more concealed then Fire it self, every Body knew that
Fair Ladies took up the greatest part of that Illustrious Prelate's time. The
President, laughing at the same time, said that Madam de Bourneville had a
great Share in the Joy that appeared in the Bishop of Meaux's Countenance. Nor
did that Prelate much gainsay it; quite the contrary, with a Courtly Air he
confessed that he was as sensible of the Charms of handsome Ladies as another
Man, and that his Character could not mortify his Passions, and that the
Prohibitions of the Church forbidding Matrimony, and the touching any Woman,
did but corroborate the Propensity of Men to that Sex. Every Body applauded the
Bishop's Opinion, which was maintained for Truth by several Glasses of Wine
which they drank off, and then threw over their Shoulders in honor of the
Ladies. Never was so much Incense offered to Bacchus and Venus as that Day,
which seemed to be one of their Festivals. After this Debauch was at an end,
which lasted a day or two, the Pious Fathers of the Roman Catholic Church
returned to Paris more serious then ever.

King James whom the bad Condition of his Affairs had cast into a deep
Melancholy, and who knew not how to employ himself to dissipate his Trouble,
and to divert the mournful Idea's that crowded his Thoughts for the Loss of his
Crown; spent his time in a thousand Trifles. Amongst the rest, he very
frequently went to see his Son, the Little Prince of Wales, to dandle him, and
hear his Prittle-prattle, which was very Extra-ordinary, considering his Years.
Mademoiselle de Bordage, a French Woman, who was placed about him to teach him
the Language, and to govern him in the Absence of his Tutor, always made a
faithful Relation of the hopeful Parts of the Young Prince, which made the King
often laugh at her manner of Expressing her self. But as it is impossible to
avoid loving handsome Persons, nor to let 'em understand as much, King James
resolved to make a Trial of his Skill, maugre his unwillingness to do it. For
the Poor Prince had so ill succeeded in his Amors, as well as in every thing
else, that he durst not attempt the making of tender and amorous Declarations.
Nevertheless the Posture of his Affairs required it, to the end he might
dispell the Troubles of his Mind, as we have said already.

One day, this solitary Prince said sighing to Madam Bordage, That he was the
most unfortunate of Men in all his Undertakings, and that he never prosper'd in
any thing, which reduced him sometimes to that Despair, that Death it self
would have been welcome to him. And indeed the King had no great Reason to take
any Pleasure in this Life; for every Body looked upon him with Contempt since
his Fatal Fall. Mrs. Bordage seemed to be compassionately moved with the King's
bemoaning his Affliction to her; so that she endeavored to comfort him up the
best she could. Wherein King James observed a great deal of good Nature, and
thanked her for her being so much concerned in his Troubles. His Majesty spent
some time in Acknowledgment which grw up to Love, and which he kept secret in
his Heart, without speaking a Word for above six Months. But in regard that
Passion cannot last long without bursting forth, the King, who was troubled
with concealing it longer, resolved to speak of it to her that had given it
Birth and Growth: but still in dubious and far-fetched Expressions, only to
sound the Ladies Intentions. The Fair Lady, who thought the King was talking to
her of some Advantageous Match, showed her self nothing Squeamish in her
Answers. Which confirmed our Amorous Prince in his Hopes. For which reason, he
urged her one day to tell him, Whether she could tenderly Love an Honest
Gentleman who should think himself happy to please her. Sir, (said she) I know
not what to say, you puzzle me with your Proposal, for I would willingly see
the Person you propound. You know, Sir, (continued she) that we must have a
Sight of the Objects before we fix our Love, that we may have some Foundation
for our Passion. It Is very certain, Madam, (replied King James) but true Lovers
are still afraid of being favorably heard; and therefore they are not so
forward to declare themselves at first. If this Person you speak of, Sir, be a
Person of Merit, for any thing else, you need not fear his being beloved. That
Conceit of Madam Bordage's made the King laugh, who replied, I find, Madam,
that you love handsome Young Men that have a great Deal of Wit. Yes, Sir,
(answered she) I have always had a Kindness for deserving Gentlemen. The King,
perceiving this Lady would never love a Person who had so little to recommend
him as he had, she ath'd up his Complements, without saying any more, leaving
the rest to Fortune; though there is no great likelihood that she will ever be
kind to that miserable Prince.

The Curate of St. Martin, who had not seen his divine Queen in some time, went
to the Convent of Mercy to visit one of his Kinswomen, with a design to meet
the Queen there, who frequently went to visit the Princesses of Soissons, both
Prisoners in that place. But so soon as the Curate saw her Majesty, he changed
Color, and seemed to be abashed, which the Company well observed, though they
thought him only dashed out of Countenance by the Queen's Presence. But they
were quite other Motions which caused that Disturbance in our Illustrious
Gallant. His Love for that Princess put him sometimes into strange Disorders,
which however he took great Care to conceal. But the Queen, who was not so
scrupulous, chid him frequently for so doing, though he begged her still to
dissemble their Intrigue as much as she could.

After they had been for some time at the Convent, and talked of several
Pleasant and Witty Things, the Queen took her leave of the sorrowful Sisters,
and went to take a Promenade in her Coach with the Curate of St. Martin, as
also to make two or three Visits, which by no means pleased the Abbot, who
loved privacy in Sinning, and who would have liked it much better to have been
Head to Head with his Princess in her Chamber. However Good Manners would not
permit him to leave her, and there was no other way but Patience; for he must
follow all the Dances the Queen led him.

At length the Sun beginning to Set, obliged the Queen to return to Saint
Germains with her Lover, who was weary of running from Visit to Visit, and
seemed to be glad of a little Solitude with his dear Mistress. The Queen
therefore desiring him to walk up into her Chamber, lay down upon the Bed with
her Soul-saving Curate by her, who several times assured her of his Love, and
his Tenderness for her Majesty. To which the Queen embracing him, made answer,
That she should have a perpetual Love for him, and that she would never change
her Inclination. And their Conversation was still upon the same Subject, when
Madam Bordage was sent to give the Queen notice that Supper was read. With that
our Lovers somewhat heated with their Amorous Dalliances, took time to cool
themselves before they went down. The Curate also would fain have been going
home, but the Queen desired him to Sup with her; to which, with much ado He
consented. For the poor Curate was always out of Order when he had been
caressing the Princess; which put him into a kind of Confusion when he came
into Company.

The Queen observing his Weakness, upbraided him before she left the Chamber.
What! (said she) my Dear, such a Novice to be thus out of Heart upon a little
Amorous Combat! you will never make a true Soldier of Venus, if you have not
more Courage and more Resolution. Come, come, (said the Queen, taking him by
the Arm) the Meat is upon the Table, and Supper will grow cold; two or three
Glasses of Wine will revive your Strength, and put ye ino a better Humor.
That said, the Curate could not forbear laughing at the sprightly Gaiety of the
Queen. However all the Suppertime, not a Word of any thing but Piety and
Devotion, which the Italian Ladies always observe to do, when they are with
their Gallants, to persuade the World that they have been doing no Harm, and
that their Familiarity goes not so far as Courtship, which requires great
Caution. But for all that, they may give Credit to outward Appearances that
please; we must needs say that the Fugitive Queen leaves nothing omitted to
divertise her self, and to forget her Misfortunes which would every day present
to her Eyes a thousand dreadful Idea's, did she not take care to remove 'em
from her sight.

After they had Supped, the Queen retired to her Chamber, where she played at
Cards for an Hour or two with her Gallant, who knew the King James was abroad,
and that he would not return home by such a Time. Their Discourse all the while
was extremely Pleasant and Jocular, and a thousand pleasant Things were
discoursed of to pass away the time. The Curate was never in such a brisk
Humor as at that Instant, his Eyes sparkling with an Amorous Fire, and the
most tender in the World, which extremely pleased his Princess, who was not
wanting on her part to supply the Conversation with a thousand Fancies and
Witty Jokes that naturally flowed from her, for which reason she is tenderly
beloved by those that are intimate with her.

And now the Night being far spent, the Curate took his leave, after several
Adieu's, intermixed with most passionate and sensible Assurances. For the Queen
who was weary of Saint Germains, has made a Match with a Lady of her Intimate
Acquaintance to spend two or three Months with her at her House about six
Leagues from Paris. Which was the Reason that our two Lovers had much ado to
part; and though the most tender Protestations were made use of, they could not
forbear letting fall Tears in abundance, particularly the Curate, whose Soul
was very sensible of the Absence of his Beloved, and who suffered the loss of
her with an Impatient Grief. As for the Queen, she was more easily rid of her
Sorrow, having a large and spacious Heart, which was the Reason that her
Melancholy had the more room; besides that she loved several Persons at a time,
which divided her several ways, and freed her from any vehement Attachment. And
now the Day for her departure being come, the Queen went to take her leave of
her Friends, not forgetting the Archbishop to whom she paid a Visit, under
pretense of consulting with him about Important Affairs, which infused an
extraordinary Joy into the Prelate, who splendidly regaled his Princess. Mean
while, the Duchess of Nemours, and the Marchioness of Seignelay, who were of
the Knot, waited at her Home with great Impatience, for it was high time to be
gone. But the Queen, who was well at ease with her enamored Piece of Gravity,
never thought of her Company; which constrained the Marchioness to send one of
her Pages to let the Queen understand that the Marchioness stayed for her. With
that the Queen took her leave of her enamored Father Grizzle, who waited on
her in his long Violet Robe to her Coach, tenderly Kissing her Hand at parting.

So soon as the Ladies saw the Queen, Wemust confess, Madam, (said they with a
Smile) that Religious Persons have a great Ascendant over your Majesty, and you
are so passionately in Love with the Fathers of the Church, that it is a trouble
to ye to leave their Company. it is true indeed, Ladies, that the Archbishop is
the most Complaisant Person in the World. He wants neither Discourse nor
Pleasantries to entertain his Guests. Nothing less, Madam, then our
Archbishop's Talents can merit your Eestem (replied the Duchess of Nemours.)
But let us lose no time -- we have a long Journey to Ride. Thereupon the Queen
and the rest of the Company, took Coach and left the Town, to the great Grief
of their Lovers.

The next Day the Queen being arrived at Lily with her small Court,
Hunting-Matches, Banquets, and a thousand other Country Divertisements,
afforded every Day new Supplies of Pleasure. But in regard that Mirth is never
perfect without the Masculine Sex, the Ladies, when they saw two or three
Cavaliers of their Acquaintance that came to visit 'em, their Pleasures
redoubled in seeing the Lords, who corresponded to the Best of their Power with
the Ladies Civilities. Among the rest, there was the Chevalier de Soissons, who
fell in Love with the Queen's good Humor and her Wit, which she can wind and
turn to Sport and Merriment as she pleases. I admire how this Princess could
harbor so much Jocundry, considering her Adversities, which would have cast
any other but her self into an Abyss of Grief, and caused her for ever to
renounce the World. Yet those mournful Idea's make no Impression upon her
Majesty. On the other side, the more our Italian is oppressed with Calamity,
the more she addicts her self to her Delights.

The Chevalier de Soissons, who left nothing omitted to second the Inclination
of his Princess, supplied her with all the most Charming Pleasures he could
invent; and because he knew she was a Passionate Lover of Music, and of
whatever was grateful to the Senses, he entertained her with the most
Harmonious Simphonies in the World of all sorts of Instruments in the middle of
a Forest; after which, there was a Magnificent Collation ready prepared under
a Shady Bower: All which Divertisements would have extremely pleased the Queen,
had they cost her nothing. But the Chevalier who never did something for
nothing, but expected that the Favors of the Princess should reimburse him for
his Expenses, never left her, perceiving in her Physiognomy that she was none
of the cruellest, and that she loved the Company of Men. Wherein he was not
deceived, seeing it was the Queen's weak side. She has also several times
confessed, that Love was the thing to which she was most inclined, and which
charmed her above any thing in the World. For which reason, Men that admired
the Female Sex were always welcome to her. But as for thy last Gallant, the
Princess had other measures to take. For the Chevalier de Soissons was the
Archbishop's Intimate Crony and his Confident. That Prelate entrusted this
Young Spark with all his Secrets, because he was the most discreet and faithful
of all that he had honored with his Friendship.

All these Considerations kept the Queen's Mind in suspense: she knew not what
to do, to satisfy her new Lover, who every day gave her a thousand Proofs of
his Affection, and who could not live a Minute absented from her. How shall I
dare to trust a Young Man, (said she to her self) who it may be after he has
received all the Favors I can bestow upon him, will make it his delight to
boast of 'em publicly in the City, as all Persons of his Age commonly do,
which would be an Extraordinary Trouble to me, particularly if the Archbishop
should know it. How would that Prelate bespatter me with the Reproaches of
Faithless and Perfidious, after so many Oaths and Assurances, as I have given
him! No Darling of Venus, that solicit me to Infidelity, flatter me no more
with your new Charms, since my Duty opposes your Pleasures. Thus the Queen
argued with her self at some times, and at others was even ready to surrender
to him the most precious Jewel she had, not being able to withstand the
Importunate Charms of her Victor. At length, one day that this Princess was
alone with the Chevalier, and that she felt her Heart very tender, and not able
to resilt a Violent Temptation, she would have gone away from him. But the
Chevalier stopped her, tenderly asking her the Reasons why she fled him. I know
not, (replied the Queen, with a troubled Countenance) I feel my self so feeble
and haunted with an Idea which perplexes me, that I cannot tell how to express
it to ye. Ah! Madam, (cried the Chevalier, who knew what it was that troubled
the Princess) would I might be so happy as to be able to alleviate your Pains,
and lessen your Sorrows. Oh, Sir, (replied the Queen with a mournful Tone) your
Presence does but aggravate 'em -- how troublesome a thing it is to Love -- She
stopped at this last Word, which she uttered notwithstanding the Opposition of
her Tongue. Her Heart no longer able to dissemble, spoke in despite of her
Reluctance, as usually it happens to Persons that would disguize their Love.
But the Chevalier who would not be put off with these little Shilly-shally
Tricks, ^hrew himself presently at her Feet, and Kissing her Hands a thousand
times, ^wore to her, That he loved her better ^hen himself, and that he should
be the ^ost unfortunate of Men if she had ^ot Compassion upon him in the
Con^ition wherein he was. The Princess, who was as much Embarrass'd as her
Gallant, said the same thing to him. Never was seen an Amor so languishing, or
which raised more Pity: To ^ell ye what they did to comfort themselves, I will
not undertake, because I ^now nothing but that the next Eve^ing it was observed
that the Queen ^as very Pensive and full of Medita^on, which the Ladies took
notice ^f by way of Raillery; telling her, That she had some Reasons for
quitting ^eir Company, for that as far they ^ould understand, the Advantage of
^e Promenade had redounded to her, and they had only fared the better for ^er
Company. The Queen made no an^wer to this and a thousand other Petty
^aillieries that were thrown upon Her ^^d the Chevalier, who appeared well
satisfied with his Good Fortune, and never regarded what they said. The
Duchess of Nemours could not choose but fall a Laughing to see the Queen sit
so gravely and soberly, who spoke very little at all that Evening, feigning her
self not well.

The next Morning the Princess, who had reflected upon every thing that passed
the Day before, found her self a little more Blithe and Gay. It seems the Night
which is the Counselor of all Men, had given her new Vigor and Joy. Which
pleased the Chevalier, who was troubled that his Love had occasioned her
Sadness. After this, they went to walk in the Garden to take the Air; at what
time the Queen, moving toward a Fountain to behold the Figures that compassed
it, and spouted Forth Water into several parts of the Garden, gave the
Chevalier an Opportunity to stop likewise, and to declare to his Fair Queen the
Condition of his Heart in the most Passionate Terms that might be, asking
withal how she had passed away the Night. Sadly enough, (answered she with a
Sigh) I am afraid my Weakness for your sake will do me an Injury. How! Madam,
(replied the Chevalier) can you mistrust the Fidelity of my Love? After the
kind Favors I have received from your Majesty, I should be the most wretched
of Mortals, should I betray the most amiable Princess that ever was. These
Assurances pacified the Queen's Disturbances, and caused her to return to Paris
with a full Tranquillity of Mind, not dreaming that her Young Gallant would
have so indiscreetly published the Favors he had received at her Hands.

However the first thing he did when he saw the Archbishop, was to tell him the
whole Story as it had been acted, and that the Queen was very Charitable. Why
say you so, Sir, (replied the Prelate smiling) no Body can have too much
Compassion for the Miserable. It Is very true, Sir, (answered the Chevalier de
Soissons, laughing outright) true Charity has no Bounds. The Prelate, in a few
Words unfolded the Young Chevalier's Enigma, and immediately went and told it
to the Queen, who was at her Wits end to find her self so basely betrayed. This
is your hare-brain'd Fop, (said she to the Sorbonne Doctor) that you value so
highly, who is so impertinent to tell the Greatest Lies in the World: his
Indiscretion deserves Punishment, a Bruit not worthy the Consideration of such
a Person as I am. But I shall tell him his own. This said, the Queen went into
her Closet, and in the Heat of her Anger wrote the following Lines.

The Queen's Letter to the Count of Soissons.
THings are reported in the World that no Body could know but your self and I;
but I am assured I never published 'em; and this will be easily believed, if
you consider the Nature of the Things that are divulged. This vile Report
proceeds then only from your Indifcretion. Nevertheless you have the Impudence
to make me the Object of your Raillieries, and to give it out That I am very
Charitable. Perfidious Man! not content to violate the Oath of Secrecy which
you swore to me, but perhaps daring enough to make me False Protestations of
your Counterfeit Innocence. But I know ye now; and you shall never triumph
more over my Tenderness; I am recovered from my Error, and find you altogether
unworthy to enjoy the least Kindness of such a Princess as I am. A Man cannot
be indiscreet without being perfidious, as I am fure you are. For which reason
I can no longer love ye; my Reason teaches me, that Men love only out of
Vanity, and that they act not out of any Principle of Honor. I am obliged to
your Infidelity for being so well instructed. Adieu, perfidious Man. Nothing
vexes me so much, but that I was so basely deluded by a Traitor.


I cannot express the Surprise that seized the Chevalier, when he had read this
Letter, He that thought to have diverted himself with his Good Fortune. He
presently judged it could only come from the Archbishop his good Friend. But in
regard that Rivals can never agree, the Prelate who was jealous to the highest
pitch, could not endure that any Body should speak reproachfully of the Person
that he loved above all others. For that reason he preferred the Princess's
Amity before the Chevalier's Friendship, who did but laugh at the Business, and
made a hundred Jests and Railleries upon it. Among the rest this was one of
his Lampoons, speaking in the Person of the Woman.

When we our Favors grant, in Love's hot Fury,
Men must Discretion use,
And in the Eternal Grave of Silence bury,
What we perhaps could not refuse:
Disclose not the Secrets of Female Desire,
It Is all the Reward that we Women require.
These Verses did but provoke the Queen, who after her new Gallant had carried
himself so indiscreetly, would no longer see any Body familiarly, finding 'em
unworthy of her Favors, since they had not the power to keep the Secret, which
is the main Act in Gallantry, that a Chevalier ought to observe. For Ladies,
whose Inclinations leads 'em to favor their Gallants, are mad when they meet
with Infidelity. These are the Important Reasons why the Queen sees no body
that belongs to the Court. She now reserves all her Tenderness for the
Religious Orders, and the Fathers of the Society of Jesus, who are not so
generally subjects to Human Frailties as others. These Reverend Fathers have
one Perfection which is not to be met with among secular Courtiers. They dare
not publish the Favors they receive from Women, out of a Maxim which is
hereditary to their Order. You see by this, what good Reason our Princess had
to confine her Love within the Cloisters. This is the way to have no more
occasion of repenting for having condescended to the fickleness of the
Chevaliers, who cannot sometimes forbear to set upon the Wings of Fame the
Kindnesses which they receive from their Mistresses.

However the Queen, after she had for some time taken up a Resolution to see no
Body, began to be weary of it, when Monsieur the Curate came to visit her. The
Princess was very glad to see him, and was extremely Civil, giving him an
account of her Troubles, and of the Distinction which she made between Him and
Others. The Curate far from contradicting her, agreed with her in what she
said, and convinced her, that there were no Men in the World that better
understood how to preserve a Secret then the Churchmen. What you say is very
true, (answered the Princess) for which reason, I renounce all the Gallantries
of the Court, that I may wholly devote my self to you without any Reservation,
as a thing that is very necessary; for I cannot shake off the Instigations of
my Heart; the time seems tedious to me, when I have not something to Love. I
confess, Madam, (replied the Abbot) that there is no Sweetness in Life without
a little Love; for the pleasure of Loving is that which seasons all things.
Yes, my Dear, (replied the Queen, embracing him) I know there is nothing that
lives which can forbear Loving. The most Innocent of Creatures make it appear
by their tender Caresses. All Nature loves, and there is nothing created but
for Pleasure. Oh, Madam, (cried the Curate) how I am Charmed, that you concur
with me in my Sentiments; Let us endeavor to unite our selves so closely
together, that time which wears out the fastest Ligaments may never separate
us. You stretch to Immortality, Mr. Abbot (replied the Queen, laughing) you
know that we cannot live always, and consequently our Love must have an end;
but let us Enjoy the Present time as much as lies in our Power. The Queen
pronounced those Words with an Air the most amorous in the World, which incited
her Gallant to push the Opportunity forward. So that his Enamored Lady
throwing her self saintly upon a little Bed made after the Italian Fashion,
there is no question to be made but that the Curate and his Princess tasted all
the Sweets of their tender Affection. Our Lovers were in the midst of their
Dalliances, when Word was brought 'em, that King James was coming up Stairs. I
leave you to guess how the Young Abbot was disturbed at this unexpected News.
In short, the Queen caused him to resume his first serious Countenance, and his
Cloak, and his Prayer Book in his Hand, making as if he had been studying his
Breviary for the Edification of our Princess, who is extremely devout, as your
may perceive by her Religious Conduct.

The King was overjoyed to find his Consort so piously employed. He caressed
her with a world of tender Language, and was mighty thankful to the Priest, who
acted the Hypocrite and the Saint the best that he could. The whole
Conversation rolled upon Piety and Morality. Never had the Queen so great a
desire to have laughed outright to see in what an unlucky Figure she had made
the poor Unfortunate Husband appear in, who is the most easy Man in the World,
for he believes whatever is said to him with the greatest readiness imaginable.

By this, it growing near Dinnertime, the King invited the Curate, who very
modestly excused himself, telling his Majesty, That he had Business of
Importance that called him home, and which he could not dispense withal; but
that he was infinitely obliged to his Majesty for the Honor which he did him.
Come, Mr. Curate, (said the Queen, interrupting him) you want such a world of
entreaty -- Come, come, the Offer's a good Offer, and not to be refused. oh,
Madam, (answered the Curate) it is my Misfortune, that it is not in my Power to
enjoy this Offer, but I hope your Majesty will not take it amiss. After several
other Complements, the Queen perceiving that her Invitation did but render her
Gallant uneasy, gave him his Liberty, letting him know however by a private
Sign, that she would be glad to see him oftener.

The Abbot, being thus disengaged from King James's Presence, was the most
overjoyed Man in the World, and went home to ponder upon the Kindnesses which he
had received from his Incomparable Princess. These Idea's infused a kind of
Pride and Vanity into him, which his Acquaintance took notice of. For which
reason his Sister Madam de Fontaine upbraided him, that he was grown so haughty
ever since his Admission into St. James's, that no Body was good enough to keep
him Company. You will not always be the Favorite of a Queen, Brother, (said
she) the good Fortune that comes from Great People, is as brittle as Glass,
which the least fall breaks in pieces. Oh -- my dear Sister (replied the
Curate) I can never believe, there will be a speedy end of the Caresses of that
Princess. Truly Brother (answered his Sister) you are a Man of an Easy Belief,
to think that you are the only Man that enjoys the Queen's Favors; she loves
all the Hats and Caps she sees; her Love knows no Bounds. The last Adventure
she had with the Chevalier de Soissons is no small Stain to her Honor, for
that same Lord makes Sport with it to her discredit. If you knew how they talk
of her at the Marchioness of Seignelays, you would not have so great a Love and
Esteem for her as you have. But Sister (answered the Curate) do you believe all
that is said; every body has the Liberty to Chat what they please. The
Marchioness lies no less under the lash of Scandal then the Queen. Many times
People report a hundred Things of which they know nothing at all, telling a
thousand Tales only to pass away the Time. Besides, the greatest People are not
exempt from the Tongues of Scandal and Calumny. A Man must set himself above
such Trifles, if he intends to live at Ease. Mrs. Fontaine who perceived that
her Brother was resolved to go his own way, left him, and went to visit the
Marchioness de P -- s who was much her Friend out of a Motive of Interest, for
that the Marchioness having a Passionate Love for Madam Fontaine, told her
every thing she knew. By which means she came to understand a good part of her
Brother's Business with the Queen, for that the Marchioness was every Day with
that same Amorous Princess, and was the Depository of her Secrets.

The Marchioness and Madam Fontaine being thus got together, had a long Chat
together in English, all upon the Subject of the Queen's Gallantries, and upon
the tender Expressions of the Queen, when she is with her dear Curate Little
do thou know, my dear, (said the Marchioness) how happy thy Brother is; the
Queen kisses and embraces him a thousand times aday, and talks to him a
hundred pretty things, the most endearing in the World. How came ye too know
these Circumstances so particularly, Madam, (said Madam de Fontaine laughing) I
know these things, my Dear, (said the Marchioness) because I often find 'em
together billing like two Pigeons. Oh! cried Mademoiselle de Fontaine, Has my
Brother pushed his Fortune so far? It Is very well, Mr. Abbot (continued she) I
find you are not always at your Books and your Prayers, and that your
Conversation is not altogether so Godly as you would make me believe. He were a
Fool (replied the Marchioness) if he did not make the Best of the Opportunity
which his kind Stars present him. In Sincerity, my dear Child, thy Brother has
a Physiognomy that shows him no hater of Ladies, and therefore his Character
and Function no way suit with him; besides, do thou believe he would refuse
the Favors which she bestows upon him; no, no -- he has more Wit then so.
While the Marchioness was thus talking, the Queen entered the Chamber, and
asked her if she would go along with her to pay a visit to the Duchess of
Orleans. Now Madam P -- s loved to accompany the Queen to the Duchess of
Orleans, because she would sometimes say, when she was in a good Humor, that
she admired that Prince for his Courtly ways above any other Person of the
Court, which often made the Queen laugh, who was particularly acquainted with
Monsieur the Duke, and would many times say that he had too Effeminate an Air,
and was too poor Spirited for a Prince of the Blood. But for all this the
Marchioness would be continually speaking in his Praise; and it was observed
that her Passion grew stronger and stronger. So that the Queen said to her,
laughing, one Day, Ah! my Dear, talk no more of thy Inclination; when thou
were Young, perhaps the Duke might have had some Tenderness for thee; but
alas! now, who would mind thee. It Is a sad thing when a Woman comes to the
Winter of her Age. The Marchioness seemed something mortified by the Queen's
Raillery, but modestly replied, It Is true, Madam, what you say; however you
must acknowledge that Ages does not destroy the Passions: Or if it make some
alteration in our Complexions, yet still we are sensible of some Remainders of
what we have been. All this while (replied the Queen) I am not arrived as yet
at your Years, however I begin already to disgust the Familiarity and Courtship
of the World. When I consider, my Dear, (continued the Queen) how little Men in
general deserve the Affection of Women, those Idea's set me at an Incredible
Enmity with that Inconstant and Fickle Sex, who for the most part only act by
Motives of Vanity, or by some other Principle of as little Value. No, no -- Men
love not now, nor did they ever Love. I have had several Woeful Experiences of
it. I find Retirement a thousand times more charming: the Pleasures of Sense
make those Impressions that grieve and perplex the Mind; whereas the Delights
of Solitude are more sweet and not so liable to Vexations. But Madam, (replied
the Marchioness) is it possible for us to spend our Days always in
Contemplation and Silence? Somewhat of Motion in Life causes all the Sweetness
of it. I have said the same thing as often as thee, my Dear; but I find by
Experience, (answered the Queen) that the Motion which charms Thee, is
sometimes very dangerous, and that it produces strange Effects. This
Conversation was interrupted by the Count of Lausun, who stayed a long time
with the Queen to divert her with Variety of Stories.

But let us return to the Visit which the Queen gave the Duchess of Orleans,
where she found a Crowd of Persons of the Highest Quality. They fell to Play
all the Afternoon, and then to the Comedy, which happened to be new and very
Witty. But all these Pastimes could not dissipate the Queen's Disturbances. Her
Thoughts were taken up with the Faithlessness of her Gallants, and the
Resolutions she was taking never more to listen to the tender Sentiments of her
Heart. She was making an Agreement with her Eyes never more to be sensible of
the deceitful Merits of her Adorers. Possessed with these Idea's therefore, the
Queen retired home with a world of Coldness and Indifferency, which extremely
surpised the Company, who knew her brisk and airy Humor: every one argued
after their own Fancies, and what their Thoughts suggested. Only the Duke of
Orleans and Madam Maintenon hit upon the true Cause, and publicly declared
that her Majesty was resolved no longer to keep Company with Men, because she
did not find 'em faithful. Woe is me, (replied the Princess of Conti) how long
has the Queen been troubled with this Qualm of Virtuous Sentiments? She was
angry with me not long since, because I laughed, and said, that Gallantry was
always attended with unlucky Consequences. Madam, (replied the Duke of Vendosm,
smiling) when Women cease to have a winning way, and become the Conquest of the
first that comes, it behooves 'em often to excuse their Weaknesses; but if Women
were wise that desire a Gallant, they would never change when they have the
Good Fortune to meet with one that is discreet: but human Frailty is so
prevalent in us, that we want Ragoo's to whet our Appetites. The Duke uttered
these Words with an Air the most Satirical in the World. Which the Duchess of
Orleans having observed, Pray tell me, Sir, (said she) are you always satisfied
with one Mistress? and have you never any desire to change? No, Madam, (replied
the Duke) were I so happy to enjoy one, I would no more leave her then the
Shadow does the Body. Ah! Good Man, (cried the Duchess) what Pity it is, that
so faithful a Lover as you should want a Mistress. How happy are you,
(continued her Royal Highness) that you are in Love with nothing but Honor.
Oh! Madam, (replied the Princess of Conti) if I may be thought to know, what
Monsieur the Dauphin told me the other Day, this Dissembler is embarked in a very
considerable Engagement. It Is Madam de St. Agreement who has now recovered his
Appetite; he is all on Fire for that Fair Lady. The Duke blushed to hear the
Princess declare so openly without any Reservation, and with a serious Tone,
Madam, (said he) where had you all this News? it is more then I know my self.
The Princess upon that, perceiving that she had disgusted the Duke, turned the
Discourse another way. But Monsieur de Vendosme could not for all that, forbear
to manifest his Resentment to the Princess, in forbearing to wait upon her as
he was wont to do. The next Day the Dauphin reprimanded him; to whom the Duke
replied with a serious Air, I entrusted you with the Secret of my Soul, and
you go and tell it again to a Lady who has much ado to conceal her own
Privacies. I must needs tell ye, Sir, it very much troubled me, and that was
the reason I did not wait upon her. Nothing vexes me more then an Amor
disclosed. On the other side, if Madam St. Agremont should come to understand
that there was the least suspicion of her being gallanted, I must never see her
more; which would be the greatest Torment to me in the World, for I am
passionately Enamored. I may say, without any Hyberbole, that she is the most
amiable Person that ever was born. Forbear to praise your Mistress, (sai the
Dauphin) before Persons that may fall in Love with her as well as your self:
Love enters into the Heart as well through the Ears as through the Eyes.

Oh, Monsieur, (replied the Duke of Vndosme) you are so taken up with your
Illustrious Mistresses, that you have not a Minute to spare to cast your Eyes
upon others. Be not over confident, (replied the Monsieur) Appearances are
deceitful; I love Change as well as you: Adieu, I must leave ye for a Moment.
Thus the Monsieur left the Duke of Vendosme, and went to see the Countess of
Rourre, whom he had promised to meet at an appointed Rendezvous.

Let us now return to the Queen, who has now no longer any Inclination to the
Gallants of the Court, or if she has, it is so indifferent, that she hardly
feels her self warmed by it. She is now fully resolved to observe the devout
Lessons which the Churchmen inspire into here, and which she finds more
pleasing to her Palate, because that this Devotion being well ordered, encloses
within it, unknown Mysteries that cover all Appearances of Pleasure and
Wantonness. The Convent of Mercy, in the Fauxburg St. Germains, is the Usual
Place where the Queen now goes to say her Prayers in the Daytime with the
Curate of St. Martin, who accompanies her in her Pious Exercise, and who
Preaches sometimes in terms so full of Piety, that his Hearers must be
insensible not to be moved with his Religious Oratory. It Is by that means,
(said the Queen) that this discreet Prelate has found the way to my Heart:
Devotion enchants me beyond all things in the World.

Thus you see what are now the Religious Sentiments of the Fugitive Queen: we
ought to believe that her Heart is sincere, and that she is too generous to
disguize it. Nevertheless, together with this Devotion she cannot avoid
reserving still, so far as I can find, some spare Hours to enjoy the Sweets of
a sanctified Amor; by virtue of which, the one half of her Sins is pardoned,
when they are only committed with the Fathers of the Church, who extenuate the
Crimes by their secret and particular Morals. I shall conclude, desiring the
Reader to believe me, as one that is pretty well Convinced of the Truth which I
have delivered.

FINIS.

