THE DANGER Wherein the Kingdom of England now stands; AND The Remedy for
the present safety thereof.

WITH The propositions drawn for sure defense of the same, and the annoying of
all the wicked Adversaries.

WORTHY To be read of all them that wish well to the prosperity of all true
hearted Englishmen.

BUT More specially for all Merchants and Seamen whatsoever.

LONDON. Printed for Richard Palmer, 1643.

The danger wherein the Kingdom of England stands: And the Remedy.
AS soon as the House of Austria had incorporated it self with Spain, and by
their new discoveries had gotten themselves the wealth of the Indies, they
began to affect and have pursued a fifth Monarchy.

The Emperor Charles who laid the foundations, ought in Italy by surprising
Rome be from this he was thrust by force and respect of Religion, H. 8. being
made caput foeder^ against him, he then attempted it in High Germany,
practicing by faction and force to reduce those petty States to his absolute
power, this H. 8. again prevented him by tying the Lutheran Princes under his
confederacy and assistance: his son the second Philip pursued the same ambition
in the Netherlands of Germany, by reduction whereof he intended to make his
way further into the other: this the late Queen of England interrupted by
siding with the afflicted people on the one part* and making her self that
head of the Protestant League, the Princes and others drawn in as a secret of
State, the countenance of France to give reputation and assistance to them, and
security to it self. Spain seeing his hopes thus fruitless by those unions
and strength, began first to break if he may the unity of France and England,
but finding the common danger to be a fast tie, he raises up a party in that
kingdom of his Crown, by which the French King was distressed, that had not
the English Council and assistance releeved him* Spain had then removed that
great and next obstacle of his ambition: his Council now tells him from these
examples, that the way to this great work is impassible, so long as England
lay in let in his way, and that the remove of that matter be the first of his
intents: these drew on those secret practices often against the Queen, and his
open fury in 88. which they following the advice of her free Council would
never after admit of peace, winning thereby the hearts of her loving people,
and ever found hands and money at home, and helping secretly her Alliances
abroad, securing to her confederates all her time freedom from fear of
Spanish slavery, and so ended her old and happy days in glory: Spain then by
the wisdom and power of that great Lady dispoiled, sole of his means to
hurt, though not of his desires, makes up witst her peaceful Successor of
happy memory, that golden League, that disarming us at home by opinion of
security, and giving them a power in our Council, by believing their
friendship and pretended marriage, gave them a way to cherish among us a party
of their own, and bereft us of power abroad to lead us into jealousy, and sow
dissension between us and our Confederates, by which we see they have
swallowed up the fortune of our Mrs. brother, the rest of the Imperial States
distressed, the King of Denmark by that quarrel diverted, the Swedens
assistance by the wars with the Poland, and moving them now with the offer of
the Danish Crown, and whether from the plot or our fatality, it has cast such
a bone betwixt France and us, as made themselves by our quarrel of Religion, a
fast confederate unto us, a dangerous enemy, so that now we have left no
assurance against their malice and ambition: but the Netherlands where the tie
of mutual safety is weakened by daily discontents, bred and fed between us by
some ill affected by both our securities, that from the doubtfulnesse of
friendship as we now stand, we may rather suspect from our domesticke actions,
if they grow too furious they will rather follow the example of Rome in her
growing, that felt it equal, honorable, and more easy, dare Regem quam
subjugare provinciam, considering the power they have in their hands, then to
give any friendly assistance to serve the private condition of our State, you
may therefore see in what terms we stand abroad, and I fear me at home, for
resistance in no better state, there must be to withstand a foreign invasion,
a proportion both of Sea and Land forces, for to give an enemy an easy passage
and a port to releeve him in* is no less then to hazard all at one shocke. It
is to be considered that no march by Land can be of that speed to make head
against the landing of an enemy, nor no such provision as to be master of the
Sea: to this point of necessity there can be no less then 240000. pounds for
the Land force, if it were of an offensive war, the men of less livelihood
were the best spared, and were used formerly to make such war purgamento
Reipub: if we made no further purchase by it: but for the safety of a
Commonwealth, the wisdom of all times did never interest the public cause
to any other then such as had a portion in the public adventure, and that we
had in 88. when the care of the Queen and of the Council did make the body of
that large Army, no other then of trai^ed bands, which with the Auxiliars of
this Realm amounts to no less then 24000 men: neither were any of those
drawn forth of their Countries and proper habitations before the end of May,
that there may be no long agrievance to the public such discontentments being
given to^, a more fataller enemy then any foreign forces, the careful
distribution and direction of the Sea and Land forces being more fitting for a
Counsel of War, then a private man to advise of, (I pass over) yet willing
when I shall be called humbly to offer up such observations as I form^rly
gathered by the former like occasion in this Realm, to make up this
preparation, there is requisite two things, money and affection for they cannot
be severed. It was well and wisely said of that great Chancellor Lord Burleigh,
in the like case, to the late Queen, win hearts and you have their hands and
purses. And I find that of late diffidence has been a defect in the one it
has unhappily produced the other, in gathering then of money for this present
need there are requisite three things, speed, assurance, and satisfaction, and
the way to gather as others in the like cases have done much by the path which
has been formerly called Via Regia, being more sound and speedy, for by
unknown and untroden ways it is both rougher and more tedious, and seldom
succeeds, this last way although it take place as it were by a supply at
first and receive no general denial: yet since it has drawn many to consult
with themselves and others in the consequence, and now I conceive pressure on
their liberties and against Law, I much fear that if now again it be offered,
either in the fame form or by privy Seal, it will be refused wholly, neither
find I the restraint of these refusaly have produced any other effect then a
stiff resolution in them and others to forbear: besides, although it went at
first with your assurance, yet when we consider the commissions and other
forms incident to such like services as that though long it hangs in hand, the
many delays that were, we may easily see that such a sum by Parliament
granted is far sooner and more easily gathered, if any will mark the
succession of times to produce inevitable necessity to enforce, if it be denied
either in general by excuse of impositions, or in particular of some select
persons, which is the customs of some Countries, and so conclude it for the
King, as for the public State, summa Regal. he must look for this to be told
him, that seeing necessity must conclude always to gather money, as less
speedy or assured then that so practiced, which cannot be fitter then by
Parliament, the success attends the humor of the headless multitude, that
are full of jealousy and distrust, and so unlike to comply to any unlawful
course of levy but by force, which if used, the effect is fearful, and has
been fatal to the States, whereas the Parliament rests principally, or the
Regal person who may with ease and safety mould them to his fit desires, by a
gracious yielding to their just petitions: if a Parliament then be the fittest
and most speediest assurance and a safe way, it is fit to conceive what is the
best way to act and work.

First, for the time of the usual Summons, reputed to be forty days, be too
large for this present necessity, it may be by dating the Writ lessened since
it is no politic Law, so that a care might be had that there may be a County
day after the Sheriff has received the Writ before the time of sitting, if
then the sum to be levied be one agreed of for the time, there may be in
the body of the Grant an Assignment made to the Knights of every County
respectively, who under such assurance may safely give security proportionable
to the receipts of such as shall advance in present for the public service any
sums of money.

The last and weightlest consideration, if a Parliament be thought fit, is how
to remove or comply the differences between the King and Subjects in their
mutual demands: and what I have learned among the rest of the multitude, I
will freely declare, that your Lordships may be the more enabled to remove and
answer those distrusts that either concern Religion, public safety of the K.
and State, or the just liberty of the Commonwealth: for Religion is a matter
that they say nearest to their consciencs, and they are led by this ground of
jealousy to doubt some practice against it: first for that against the Spanish
match which was broken by the grateful industry of my Lord of Buckingham, out
of his religious care, as he there declared, that the Articles there demanded
might lead some such sufferance as might endanger the quiet, if not the state
of the Reformed Religion here, yet there have (when he was an actor principally
in the conditions of France) as hard, if not worse to the preservation of our
Religion passed, then those with Spain, and the suspect is strengthened by the
close keeping of the agreements in that point there concluded, it is no less
an argument of doubt to them of his affections, in that his mother and many
other his ministers of near employments about him, are so much affected, they
talk much of advancing men popishly devoted, some placed in the Camp of
nearest service and chiefest command, and that the Recusants have got these
late years by his power more of courage and assurance then before; if to
clear these doubts which perhaps are worse in fancy then in truth he take a
course it might much advance the public service against the Spanish humor,
that have more of violent passion then settled judgment, and are not the least
of the opposite number in the Commonwealth.

2. The next is the misfortune and losses of men and munition in all our late
undertakings abroad, which the intemperate spirits impute to want of counsel
and the more sublime wills to practice.

Thirdly, they began with the Palatinate, and lay the fault of the loss there
on the imputed credit of G^ndemore, distrusting him for the ^aying of supply to
Sir Horace Vere, when Colonel Cicil was cast on that employment, by which the
King of Spain is become the master of the Kings childrens intelligence; and
when Count Mansfield had a royal supply of forces to assist the Princes of our
part for the recovery thereof, either plot or error defeated the enterprise for
us, for Spains advantage.

Fourthly, that Sir Robert Mansfields expedition to Argiers should purchase
only security and guard of the Spanish coasts.

Fifthly, to spend so many thousand pounds in Ca^es voyage against the advice
of the Parliament, only to warn the king of Spain to be in a readiness, and
so weaken our selves, is taken for such a sign of ill affection to him amongst
the multitude.

Sixth^y, the sending of so much munition and victuals and mon^y in my Lord
VVillowbies journey, is conceived an unthrifty error in the director of it to
disarme our selves in fruitless voyages made, to some over curious seems a
plot of a danger to turn off our quarrel of Spain, an ancient enemy, that the
Parliament petitioned and gave supply to support upon our ally of France, and
so after a new and happy tie gave much talk that we were not so doubtful of
Spain as many wished, since it was held not long ago a fundamental rule of
their and our security by the Lord Burleigh, that nothing can prevent the
Spanish Monarchy, but a fastness of the two Princes to make head against his
ambition, and we see by this disunion a fearful defeat has happened to
Denmark and that party, to the advantage of the Austrian family.

And thus far of the wastes of the public treasure in fruitless expeditions,
an important cause to hinder any new supply in Parliament.

Next another fear that may disturb the smooth and speedy passage of the
kings designs in Parliament is the late waste of the Kings livelihood, whereby
is like, as in former times, to raise this jealousy and fear, that when he
has not of his own to support his ordinary expense, for which the lands of
the Crown were settled unalterable, and called Sacrae patrimonium Principis,
that then he must of necessity rest to those assistances of the people which
ever were assigned for the benefit of Commonwealth, from hence it is like there
will be no great labor and stiffenesse to endue his Majesty to an act of
resumption, since such desires of the State have found an easy way in the will
of all Princes from the third Henry to the last: but that which is like to
pass the deeper into their disputes and care, is the late pressure they
suppose to have been do^^ upon a public liberty and freedom of the subject
commanding their goods without assent by Parliament confining their persons
without special cause declared, and that made good against them by the Judges
lately, and pretending a writ commanding their attendance in foreign war, all
which they are like to enforce as repugnant to maine positive Laws and
customary immunities of this Commonwealth and these dangerous distrusts of the
people are not a little improved by this unexampled course, as they conceive,
of retaining any Land Army in winter season, when former times of greatest
fear produced no such, and makes them in their distracted fear to conjecture
idly, it was raised more to subject their fortunes to the will of power, then
of Law, and so make good some former breach upon their liberties at home, then
defend us from any force abroad, how far such jealousies if they meet with any
usual disorders of lawless soldiers, or an apt-distemper of the loose and
^eady multitude which will easily turn away upon any occasion in the State
that they consider what is to a glorious pretense of Religion and publiqu^
safety, when the true end will be only rapine of the rich, and the ruin of
all, is worthy a provident and preventing care.

I have thus far delivered with what freedom you were pleased to admit such
difficulties as I have taken up among the multitude, which may arrest if not
remove impediments to any speedy supply of Parliament at this time, which how
to facilitate may better become the care of your Lordships judgments, then my
ignorance, only I could wish to remove away a personal distrust of my Lord of
Buckingham among the people, he might be pleased if there be a necessity of
Parliament to appear an advisor thereunto.

And what satisfaction it shall please his Majesty of grace to give at such
time to his people, which I could wish to be grounded by president of his best
and most fortunate Progenitors, and which I conceive will largely satisfy the
desires and hopes of all, if it may appear in some sort to be drawn down
from time to the people by the zealous care and industry that my Lord of
Buckingham has to the public unity and content of which there is no doubt
but he may remain not only secure, but merit a happy memory amongst them of a
Realms Patriot for to expiate the passions of the people at such times with
sacrifice of any of his Majesty's servants, I have ever found, as Ed 2. R. 1.
H. 6. no less fatal to them after, then to the minister in the end.

Propositions drawn for sure defense of the kingdom, and the annoyance of the
enemy of the same.
1 THat every Shire in England should be enjoined to set forth at the charge of
the County one ship well manned and victualled for seven months, and to be of
the burden of 500. 400. or 300. 200. 40. Tons at the least, according to the
ability of the Shire, in the opinion of the State.

2. Th^^ every Port or Sea Town according to the ability enjoined to do the
like, London may well furnish out 10. Bristol 3. and the rest according to
their ability; and such of the Sea Towns as are not of ability to set out
Ships of the burden aforesaid, to furnish out Pinnaces of 60. or 80. Tuns for
light horsemen or Intelligencers.

3. Those Ships will arise to about 80. sail, and to be divided into four
squadrons, adjoining to every squadron one of the Kings-Ships for their
Admiral.

4. The first squadron to lie off and on the western Islands, and as high as
Ca^arde for Brasil men, the Caracke, the Plate Fleet, and all other trading
that way.

5. The second squadron to lye-off the Southern Cape, and so low as the
Groyne, for here such shipping as shall go out of Spain or Portugal, and ^f
occasion be to join with the former squadron.

6. The third squadron to lie between the Groyne and the mouth of the Sleeve,
or Silley, to stop such shipping as trade in those costs.

7. The fourth squadron to keep the narrow Seas, awe the Dunkirker, take all
the French trade, and so northward, and this squadron to be still releeved
with fresh Ships, as the other shall grow foul, or come unto any mischance, so
that the squadron may continually keep the most part of the year.

8. That no master of any of those Ships be owners, or have any part in her
that he goes out master of, for they will be unwilling to bring their ships
into any sight or danger, and use many tricks and devices, especially if there
be any ignorant Captain, therefore it is expedient likewise that every Shire
shall nominate a Captain for the Ship it furnishes out, for the avoiding of
ignorant and insufficient Captains.

9. That in London, Portsmouth, or where else the State shall think fit, there
be storehouses appointed for the receipt of such prises as shall be taken by
any of the four squadrons.

10. That every County and Sea town that furnishes out the said shipping, may
nominate and have a Commissioner of their own election that may have power in
behalf of the Counties and Sea-townes as the other Officers that shall be
appointed for the King and the Lord Admiral for the opening of deckes of the
prize, receiving the goods into the said storehouse, and for the dividing and
disposing them accordingly.

11. That what prizes soever any of the four squadrons shall take, (...)
brought unto the Fort Towns where those storehouses are appointed, and the
benefits of all prizes what squadron soever of the four sends them in to be
divided, the Kings part and the Lord Admirals being deducted to the several
Counties and Sea Towns of the Kingdom of England according to the burden of
their shipping: and not particularly to such Counties or Sea Towns unto which
the squadron of ships belongs, that shall send in the said prises.

12. That it shall not be lawful for any of the said ships to break bulkes or
open the deckes of any prises they take, but nail them down fast until they
be brought in at one of the port Towns and then the Officers for the King with
the Comissioners for the Counties to open them.

13 That after the Kings part and the Lord Admiral is se^ with such allowance
over and above as shall be proportionable for the Kings shipping, being
Admiral, the rest to be distributed as aforesaid to the use and benefit of all
the Counties and Sea Towns in general, and not particular to each Counties
unto which any of the four squadrons belongs that sends in the said prizes,
the pillage above deck only excepted, which does belong to the Officers,
Sailors, and Soldiers of the squadron that took the said prize.

14. That for the present and speedy execution hereof, every County or Sea
Town that is not furnished with shipping, shall hire until they can build
them, which to be limited to perform within a certain and convenient time.

15. The charge that will fall on the subjects well (...) for the first year
to 200000. pounds, which God blessing them within the year these will
re-imburse, and by the benefit of the prizes afterward they will have stock
sufficient, with increase for new victualling and setting forth the ships the
second year, and so from time to time.

16. The kingdom will hereby increase their shipping, and breed and make good
store of good Sea men, and we shall hereby be masters of the sea, so as our
Merchants shall travel safely, and we shall much prejudice the French and
Spanish Nations, or any other that are enemies, or not in league with us.

Whereas I have set down the full charge of these four squadrons of ships
for 7. months to amount to the sum of 200000 pounds, it is not to be
understood that the subjects shall disburse so much more by two parts, for they
shall need to lay out no more for setting out of their Ships, then for the well
victualling of them, which will come but to a third part of this former sum
66666. pounds for the Sailors, Officers, and Owners of the Ships will expect
neither wages nor fraught until the coming in of the Ships, (and God blessing
our designs)

There may be taken in Shipping and Goods in 7. months space ten times that
value, before one penny be distributed.

FINIS.

