A Dissuasive from Murmuring. BEING A SERMON ON 1 COR. X. 10. Preached by SAM.
CARTE, M. A.

IMPRIMATUR,

May 14. 1694. GEO. ROYSE.

LONDON; Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
MDCXCIV.

TO THE READER.
IT is generally expected, that whosoever appears in Print, should give some
account of his Reasons for so doing. And therefore, though I have not presumed
to interest any great Person in this Discourse by a solemn Dedication; yet I
have thought good to acquaint thee, that the Publication of it was occasioned
by the false Representations which have been made of it by some, and the
Apprehension which others have, that it may be of use to the Public. The
mention of these may seem nauseous, as being the common pretenses of most, who,
without any express Injunction of those in Authority, commit a Sermon to the
Press. But their being pleaded so generally, is an indication that they are as
generally thought to be sufficient. And a little Reflection on the Subject of
this Discourse, and the various Tempers of the People in this Nation, may
satisfythee, that they are truly alleged by me.

A Dissuasive from Murmuring.
1 COR. X. 10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer.


IT is a Character that has long since been given of Mankind, That he is Animal
querulum, a Creature much given to complaining.

There is rarely such a Concurrence of Circumstances as that all of them please
us; and if any thing displease or be offensive to us, it usually so engages our
thoughts, that we scarce make any fitting reflection on the more favorable
Circumstances, how great and numerous soever. And whilst by this means one
Evil, Inconvenience, or Misfortune makes a greater impression on us than
hundreds of Mercies and Advantages which we enjoy, we are generally disposed to
be dissatisfied with our Condition, to Complain and Murmur when indeed we have
no just reason so to do.

This being a Malady so incident to mankind, the Apostle, one of the most Able
Physicians of Souls, has given us a Prescription against it in the words of my
Text; Neither murmur ye as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of
the destroyer.

In which Words we may observe, 1. A Relation of Matter of Fact, Some of them
also murmured. 2 dly. A Prohibition of the like Practice, Neither murmur ye, as
some of them, etc. 3 dly. An Argument to dissuade us from the Imitation of
them, drawn from the destructiveness of the Practice, evidenced by the Event it
had on them, They were destroyed of the destroyer.

First, Here is a Relation of Matter of Fact, Some of them also murmured. Some
of them. Of whom? Even of the Children of Israel. It would be no strange matter
to hear, that Heathens, that men governed by the mere Conduct of Corrupt
Nature, should repine and murmur upon slight occasions: But the Israelites had
been instructed in better Principles, which one might expect should have
restrained them from such distempers. Nay, the state which they were in before
was so very miserable, and it was by such a continued Succession of Miracles,
of Deliverances and Mercies, that they were arrived at that Condition at which
they murmured, that one might in all reason expect to hear of their Transports
of Joy, and Praise, and Thanksgiving, when on the contrary we find an
Epidemical Discontent and Murmuring among them.

For if you reflect on their Condition in Egypt, you may observe them laboring
under as great Oppression and Tyranny, as ever an ingenuous People underwent;
so that their lives were bitter unto them; and the sense of their Miseries made
them vent their Griefs in Sighs and Groans, which mounted up to Heaven, and
moved God in Compassion to reach forth his mighty Hand and outstretched Arm to
deliver them. As the Psalmist says, Psalm. 105. 26. etc. He sent to them Moses
his servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen, and they showed his signs among
them, and wonders in the land of Ham. He sent darkness upon their enemies, and
it was dark, and turned their waters into blood, and slew their fish. The land
also brought forth frogs in abundance, yea, even in their kings chambers. He
spoke, and there came diverse sorts of flies and lice in all their coasts. He
gave them hailstones for rain, and flames of fire in their land. He smote their
vines also and figtrees, and destroyed the trees that were in their coasts. He
spoke the word and the grasshoppers came, and caterpillars innumerable, and did
eat up all the grass in the land, and devoured the fruit of their ground. He
smote all the first born also in their land, the chief of all their sterngth.
He brought them forth with silver and gold, and (tho they were many hundred
thousands) there was not one feeble person among their tribes. And all along as
we go on in their History, we may observe such evident, such wonderful, such
seasonable Interpositions of the Divine Power and Goodness for their Defense
and Relief, that one would think there could not possibly be any room left for
discontent or repining among them. For, Were they persecuted? God set himself
for a Wall of Defense between them and their Enemies. Were they in distress for
a Passage? The Sea divided it self, and its Waters rose up on an heap, to
afford them a Path through the deep, as through a wilderness. Did they want a
shelter by day? He spread his cloud over them for a covering. Did they want a
Guide by night? He himself went before them in a pillar of fire. Did they want
Bread? He rained down Manna upon them, and filled them with the bread of
heaven. Did they want Meat to their Bread? He made the wind to bring them flesh
like dust, and feathered fowl like as the sand of the sea. Did they want Drink
to both? He opened the rock of stone, and the waters flowed out, so that the
rivers ran in dry places. Did they stand in need of Apparel? Their clothes did
not wax old upon their backs, nor their shoes upon their feet. Did they want
Advice? God himself gave them his Vocal Oracle from between the Cherubims. And
besides all these, there were many other occasions wherein God exerted a
Miraculous Power to supply their Necessities, or gratify their Desires. And
yet, as the Apostle here says, Some of them also murmured.

Hence then (my Brethren) we may observe, That People's murmuring is no
evidence that there is any good ground to do so. I take notice of this the
rather, because I have often observed, that many men, whose Temper and
Principles (as I have apprehended) did not at all dispose them to Murmuring and
Discontent, have yet been guilty of it, merely in compliance with others. They
observe many whom they converse with, and it may be, Persons of great
Reputation, that they make it a great Subject of their Discourse to censure,
find fault with, and complain of the state of Affairs; and therefore conclude
that they must certainly be grievously amiss, and that they themselves should
pass for persons of dull apprehensions, and very shallow capacities, if they do
not see reason to murmur as well as others.

Now if such persons would but observe in this History of the Israelites, what
little reason there was for murmuring, and yet how much they were guilty of it,
it would certainly be a Caution to them to take heed how they are so easily
misled by following others Examples. For whether they are led away by the
Considerableness of the Persons, or the Greatness of their Numbers, you will
find them paralleled in these unjust Murmurings of the Israelites; Numb. 16. 2.
many princes of the assembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown; nay,
sometimes the whole Congregation being engaged in them. Or if any pretend that
they are not prevailed on by consideration of the Persons, but by the Reasons
which they give for their Discontents; as no doubt they will: For when Persons
are disposed to find fault and murmur, they can never long want a Pretense; it
being impossible that in such a Multiplicity of Affairs as concern a Nation,
and depend on so many Persons, all of them should be so managed, as not to be
liable to the misinterpretation of malevolent tongues. But if you please to
reflect on their History, you will find that the Israelites themselves were not
without some apparent Reasons for their Discontents. For to pass by the other
occasions, to avoid Prolixity, there were two which Commentators suppose the
Apostle more especially reflected on; the first, Numb. 14. and the other, Numb.
16. At the one the great Grievance was, That they were engaged in a War with
such Powerful Adversaries, as they could never hope for a good issue of it; and
therefore thought it more advisable to return to Egypt, to their Bondage again,
than to proceed in it. In the other the Pretense was, That their Governors both
in Church and State were Intruders and Usurpers, and that Preferments run in a
different Channel from what they had used to do.

The first Pretense (I say) was, That they were engaged in a War with such
Potent Adversaries, that they could never hope for a good Issue of it: For if
you look into Numb. 13. you will find the occasion of their murmuring to be,
That the Spies who were sent to search the Land, V. 32. 33.
upon their return represented the people whom they were to encounter with, to
be strong, and the cities to be walled and very great; that the men were of
great stature, nay, that there were mighty giants there, sons of Anak, in
comparison of whom they were but as grasshoppers. And it was the concurrent
opinion of them all, excepting two, that they should never be able to withstand
them. This made the people despair and lament their Condition, and wish that
they had Numb. 14. V. 1, 2.
died in the land of Egypt, or in the wilderness. For should they still persist
in their Enterprise, they could expect nothing else, but that they should fall
by the sword, and that their wives and their V. 3.
children should become a prey; and therefore concluded, that the best course
they could take, would be to return again to the Bondage and Slavery from which
they had been so wonderfully delivered. And hereupon they began to conspire
together for carrying on the design, saying one to another, Let us make us a
captain, and let us return into Egypt, Numb. 14. 4. So strangely does a
discontented, murmuring Humor, deprive men of the use of their Rational
Faculties; blotting out the remembrance of all former Evils, either suffered or
feared; making them senseless of present Mercies, though never so pregnant with
future hopes and expectations; abusing them with imaginations of groundless
Terrors, and inciting them to run to a certain ruin, for a refuge from an
imaginary one.

The second pretense was, That their Chief Governors both in Church and State,
were no better than Intruders and Usurpers; and that subordinate Preferments
were diverted to another channel from what they had used to run in. For the
case was this; From the beginning of the World till Moses's time, the Royal
Power, or Kingdom, and the Priesthood, were vested in the Patriarch, or Head of
every Tribe; and from him descended Hereditarily on the Firstborn of the
Family: And this Succession was rarely interrupted that we know of, unless it
were in the case of Sem, whom some think not to have been Noah's Eldest Son;
and in the case of Abraham the Youngest Son of Terah; and of Jacob the Younger
Brother of Esau. But now at the Israelites coming out of Egypt, Moses, whom God
had made the great Instrument of their Deliverance, was advanced to the Supreme
Power, and made King in Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 33. 5. Aaron was Invested with the
High Priesthood, and the Tribe of Levi promoted to the Service of the
Tabernacle, in lieu of the Firstborn of their several Families, who thereby
were excluded from all hope of attaining to that Dignity. These things were
grievously resented by those whose Interest was concerned, and prejudiced by
this new Establishment: and they strengthened their Faction, and fomented their
Discontents, till at length they broke forth into open Sedition: Numb. 16. 1.
Dathan, Abiram, and On, were all Sons, that is, of the Posterity of Reuben, who
was the Firstborn of Israel, but lost his Honor by his Sin, 1 Chronicles. 5. 1.
which his Sons by unlawful means seek to regain. Ainsworth on the place.
Particularly Dathan and Abiram, the Sons of Eliab, and On, the Son of Peleth,
being the Principal Persons of the Children of Reuben, the Eldest Son of Jacob,
thought themselves extremely injured. For tho Reuben for his unnatural Sin was
indeed Deposed, and justly Deprived of his Right to the Primogeniture, Genes.
49. 4. and 1 Chronicles. 5. 1. Yet they would not allow of any Variation upon any
account whatsoever, from the usual way of Succession; a Succession which (as
they might plead) had been Established from the Creation of the World, founded
on the Principles and Laws of Nature, received and practiced by all Nations
then in the World. And by this so sacred a Right, the Royal and Sacerdotal
Power belonged to them as descendants of the Eldest Son of Israel. And besides
these, there were many other discontented Persons, especially Korah, who (as
Solomon Jarchi says) was offended that Elizaphan, the Son of Uzziel, the
Youngest of all the Brothers, was advanced to be the Chief of the Family of the
Kohathites, Numb. 3. 30. in prejudice of himself, who was of an Elder Branch;
and his Resentment fermenting his Pride, made him think himself as fit for the
Priesthood, as the best of them. These and many others, to whose Interest or
Ambition this change of Affairs seemed not favorable, being Malcontent,
joined together in traducing the Government; Charge Moses and Aaron as
Usurpers, Numb. 10. 3. and accuse them, that, instead of delivering them from
their former Oppressions and Miseries, they had brought them into a much worse
Condition; that there was nothing to be expected but Ruin under their Conduct,
and that they should be killed in the Wilderness; and that these things were so
undeniably evident, that they must put out the eyes of men before they could
expect to persuade them the contrary, Numb. 16. 13, 14. And we find that their
pretenses were so very plausible, and had such a mighty and general influence
on the People, that though Almighty God in a very Signal and Miraculous manner,
declared his implacable Anger against the Principal Malcontents, and their
Abettors, by a supernatural and prodigious Destruction; yet the very next
Morning we find the People crying them up as Martyrs dying in a good Cause, and
Murmuring against Moses and Aaron, as Authors of their Murder, v. 41. So
difficult is it for People to be convinced when their Errors are fortified by
Prepossession and Prejudice!

Thus (my Brethren) you have an account of the matter of Fact among the
Israelites; the unreasonableness of their Murmurings, with the occasions and
pretenses of them. It is time now that we apply our selves to the consideration
of the second thing observed in the words, viz. the Prohibition directed to us
by St. Paul against the like Practice; Neither murmur ye as some of them
murmured.

The words are sufficiently plain, and need little explication; for every one,
I suppose, must needs understand, that when men are ready upon every occasion
to signify their dissatisfaction with the state of Affairs; when they detract
from, and speak against their Governors; when they misinterpret their Actions;
when they aggravate such misfortunes as happen; when they are generally
complaining of Mismanagements, and suggest Evil things concerning them: In a
word, when they show themselves Discontented and Desirous of Changes, and
endeavor to make others so: These things (I say) and such like, tending to
Sedition, every one must needs understand to be acts of Murmuring and Repining;
And these things therefore does the Apostle here prohibit; and it were easy to
produce out of Holy Writ multitudes of other places tending to the same
purpose. But to avoid tediousness, I forbear them, as knowing that St. Paul's
Authority alone must be owned sufficient by all Christians, such as we all
profess our selves to be.

Therefore I shall rather address my self to you in way of Exhortation; That
you would take care to demean your selves conformably to this Precept, which is
of such undoubted Authority. And if one does but seriously reflect on our
Condition before the late Revolution, and represent to our minds the
intolerable Grievances and formidable Circumstances which we then labored
under, one would think there could be no doubt of Success. For alas! How dismal
did things then appear! How did men's hearts (as our Savior speaks, Luke 21.
26.) fail them for fear, and for looking after those things which were coming
upon us! When we saw the Laws, the security of all that can be valuable in this
world, professedly run down and violated; Men, by Law unqualified for any
Trust, thrust into all Offices of Trust; and those, who in account of the Law
were Traitors, to have the chief management of the Government; when the
Nurseries of the Clergy were assigned over to Papists; and the Ministers of
Religion were enjoined, contrary to the Laws in force, to proclaim Liberty to
their Parishioners to go to Mass, or what they pleased, and threatened with a
severe Prosecution for their noncompliance; and God knows what they might have
suffered if Deliverance had not come to prevent it: When a Petition drawn up
with all the Care and Caution possible, and presented in the Humblest and
Privatest manner, was Censured for a Libel, and the Fathers of our Church sent
to the Tower for it; when an Army was kept up in time of Peace, merely to
overawe the People, and deter them from asserting their Rights; and the
Soldiers were ordinarily permitted to act Arbitrarily, that they might be the
willinger to support an Arbitrary Government; when the Wolves, the professed
Adversaries of the Church, were entrusted with providing Pastors for it; the
Jesuits and other Popish Priests having the choice of our Bishops, and the
disposal of all such Ecclesiastical Preferments as belonged to the Crown; when
all such were turned out of the Court, Corporations, and most Commissions of
the Peace, and Lieutenancy, as would not engage to concur with the Popish
Designs; when many honest men were debarred of their way of livelihood, and a
resolution was about being taken to suffer none to exercise such an Employment
as required a License, unless they would make the like Engagement; when the
Parliament, which should redress our Grievances, were no longer allowed the
Liberty of Voting; but the Lords and all others that were likely to be Members
of Parliament, were Closetted, and all Arts used to induce them to betray our
Liberties; when the Nation was no longer permitted the free Choice of their
Representatives, but Threats and Menaces, and all sorts of Engines were used to
determine them to such Tools as the Papists should think fit to nominate to
them: When these (I say) and many other Grievances, too long to enumerate,
pressed us, Oh! what Trouble! what Anxiety of thought did they cause in us!
What great portions of our Estates would we then have given for the security of
our Religion, our Liberties and Properties! How zealous were our Prayers, how
vehement our desires of Deliverance! and with what transports of Joy and
Thankfulness did we reckon that we should embrace it when it should come!

But this is not all; for it is not only so great a Deliverance that we have
occasion to be thankful for, but the wonderful Manner of it likewise; That it
should be wrought to our hands, without any considerable Interposition of our
own; that it should be effected without undergoing the mischiefs of having our
Country made the Seat of War; nay, almost without any bloodshed: This was such
a Wonder as surpised the world with amazement. And every body owns, That the
Reduction of Ireland was accomplished by a continued succession of Strange, and
I may say, Miraculous Providence. And what can be expected from a People to
whom God has been so exceeding Gracious, but all the Content and Satisfaction,
nay, all the Joy and Thanksgiving which it is possible to express?

And yet alas! how different is it with us! What a strange Forgetfulness of
God's stupendous Mercies toward us! What a studious depreciating and
extenuating of them! And what a world of Discontent reigns among us! As if we
resolved to emulate and outdo in their Crimes that perverse and stubborn
generation of the Israelites who perished in the Wilderness. And if you please
to reflect on the Pretenses of our Modern Malcontents for their Murmuring,
though I have not time to examine them particularly, yet methinks it is enough
to bring them out of credit with any considering person, that they are so very
like to those which the Seditious Israelites made use of, as I have already
showed you.

Ay! but may some say, Did God himself interpose among us, as he did among the
Israelites; had we such Governors as Moses and Aaron, chosen by God himself,
and directed by his Oracle in the Conduct of them; then we would be far from
murmuring; then we would be the most satisfied and obedient People in the world.

Now to pass by other things that may be replied to show the Weakness of this
Objection, I shall observe at present only this, viz. That this Objection would
frustrate the Apostle's Precept; for it affixes the Criminalness of the
Murmuring of the Israelites, upon such Circumstances as are never to be
expected to happen again; whereas it is undeniably evident, that the Apostle
must speak of Murmuring in such a sense, and in such cases, as may and often do
happen in these Ages of the world, when Revelation is ceased.

And this, I suppose, may serve in some competent measure to show, That we, as
well as the Israelites, have no just reason to murmur, but rather to be
thankful for that great Deliverance which God has vouchsafed to us: But if this
will not persuade us, let the Apostle's Argument at least prevail with us to
forbear murmuring for the future, considering the Destructiveness of it,
evidenced by the Event it had on the Israelites, 2 Samuel 24. 16.
seeing they were destroyed of the destroyer; that is, by an Angel to whom God
gave it in commission, That he should destroy them. For as he is the God of
Order and of Peace, so nothing can be more repugnant and offensive to him, than
such Seditious and Rebellious Murmurings; insomuch that it is observed, (...)
Chrysostom. l. 5. p. 205. Ed. Savil.
That he has in his Laws assigned severer Punishments to such sins as tend to
the Disturbance of the Peace and Welfare of Human Society, than such as have a
more direct reference to himself. And as he justly expects our Praises and
Thanksgiving in return of the Mercies which he confers on us; so nothing could
be more provoking in his people than their ungrateful Murmuring and Repining
after such a Miraculous Deliverance as he had wrought for them. And therefore
his Wrath was so incensed against them, that he offered to have consumed them
all in a moment. And tho Moses by his Intercession prevailed so far as to
prevent the Total Destruction of them at once; yet he slew many Thousands of
the Principal Murmurers, their Abettors, immediately; and for the rest, he
swore they should none of them enter into his rest, but their carcasses should
fall in the wilderness; which accordingly came to pass. Now this is not to be
looked upon as a mere Historical Relation of what befell them; for the Apostle
urges it here as a Reason to enforce his Prohibition of our imitating their
Example: And therefore hereby insinuates a Menace of some Dreadful Judgment and
Destruction that will befall us, if we murmur and persist in it as they did. And
in the following Verse he tells us plainly, That these things happened unto them
for our Ensample, and are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the
world are come. Happened to them for Ensamples; the Word is (...), Typically;
whence St. Chrysostom infers, (...)
That we are threatened with still more direful Punishments than they underwent.

And besides these and other such like Threats which God has revealed and
published in Holy Scripture, there is another sort of Punishments that are
plainly legible in the nature of things. For the Divine Wisdom so contrived and
framed his Works, that there is a certain Nemesis interwoven in the Contexture
of them. So that by considering the natural tendency of many sins, we may
evidently discover the temporal penalty which by the Divine disposition is
annexed to them. And these are generally owned to be sins against the Law of
Nature. And such is this sin of Murmuring; there being nothing which has a more
visible and direct Tendency to the Misery and Ruin of a People, than it. For it
is its self a Plague to those who are guilty of it; its immediate effect on
them being, that it deprives them of the enjoyment of, or satisfaction in the
Blessings which the Goodness of God vouchsafes to them. It so sowres their
Humor, that it perverts and renders every thing offensive and irksome to them,
or at least diverts them from taking notice of any thing but what is so. And if
we consider it in reference to the Public Weal, its effects are still worse:
For it is directly contrary to that Obedience and Concord which are the Nerves
and Ligaments of all Bodies Politic, and whereon their Strength and Welfare,
and their very Being essentially depends. It creates mutual Jealousies,
Heartburnings, Strifes, and Contentions. It obstructs the successful Management
of the Public Affairs, discourages many able men from being concerned in them;
creates a world of Difficulties to those that are, hindering them from that
Vigor and Resolution which would conduce much to their Success. On the other
hand, it is a mighty Encouragement to our Enemies; they reckoning, that so many
Murmurers as we have among us, so many Favorers and Promoters of their
Enterprises have they. So that however our Murmurers are ready to urge the ill
Successes and Burdens of the War as a ground of their Discontent; yet in
reality there are none to whom they are more justly imputable than themselves.
And yet I have that good Opinion of the greatest part of them, that I am
persuaded, that if they did but once consider the mischievous Consequences of
their actions, they would no longer be guilty of them.

And if there be any such here, I crave leave to speak to them more
particularly: Brethren, I beseech you let me be so happy as to prevail with you
for once to lay aside your Passions and Prejudices, and to consider seriously
what you would have, and what you Design.

Here is cetainly the Welfare of a Church and Nation lies at stake: And can any
man here be so Unchristian, so Inhumane, as to trifle in matters of such
moment, and act inconsiderately, without any known end or design? Consider
therefore what it is you aim at: Is it to promote Discord and Sedition? To set
the Nation on a Flame? To stir up an intestine War and Rebellion among us? Is
it to weaken the Government that should protect us? To give our Enemies an
advantage to Vanquish us, to Invade us, and to Reduce us into the same fearful
condition which God has so graciously rescued us from? (though indeed it cannot
be the same, but it must also be much worse). Is there any one that can think
of these things, and the many intolerable Miseries necessarily attending them,
and is not ready to cry out with Hazael, Am I a Dog, that I should do this
thing? 2 Kings 8. 13. And yet if these be not your designs, What means your
discontented Murmurings and Repinings, which all wise men teach, and which your
selves must own, have a natural tendency to them? and which, if not timely
suppressed, will lead you from one Sin to another, till such Calamities
overtake you, as you never designed or dreamed of being the procurers of?

Wherefore let us all in this our day, mind the things that belong to our
peace; and reflecting on that dismal Condition which we were lately in, and the
wonderfulness of our Deliverance, and the mischiefs ensuing from Discontent:
Let us with all Thankfulness recognize the Divine Goodness to us, and
discarding our Murmuring Ungrateful Humor, let us study to lead quiet and
peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty.

So shall we secure to our selves the continuance of the Divine Favor, and
then through him we shall overthrow our enemies, and in his name shall we tread
them under, that rise up against us. Which God of his Mercy grant for Jesus
Christ his sake, etc.

FINIS.
Books Sold by Richard Baldwin.
PLeasure with Profit: consisting of Recreations of diverse kinds, viz.
Numerical, Geometrical, Mechanical, Statical, Astronomical, Horometrical,
Cryptographical, Magnetical Automatical, Chemical and Historical. Published to
Recreate Ingenious Spirits, and to induce them to make farther scrutiny into
these (and the like) Sublime Sciences. And to divert them from following such
Vices, to which Youth (in this Age) are so much inclined. By William Leybourn,
Philomathes. To this Work is also Annexed, a Treatise of Algebra, according to
the late Improvements, applied to Numerical Questions, and Geometry; with a New
Series for the speedy Extraction of Roots; as also a Converging Series for all
manner of adsected Equations. By R. Sault, Master of the Mathematical School in
Adam's Court, in Broadstreet, near the Royal Exchange. Bibliotheca Politica:
Or, An Enquiry into the Ancient Constitution of the English Government; with
respect both to the just Extent of Regal Power, and to the Rights and Liberties
of the Subject. Wherein all the chief Arghments as well against as for the Late
Revolution, are Impartially represented and considered. In XIII. Dialogues.
Collected out of the best Authors both Ancient and Modern. To which is added,
An Alphabetical Index to the whole Work. Complete sets of the Gentleman's
Jourual; or, the Montly Miscellany: Consisting of News, History, Philosophy,
Poetry, Music, and Translations: And single ones for any Month. The Works of
Francis Rabelais, M. D. Or the Lives, Heroic Deeds and Sayings of Gargantua
and Pantagruel. Done out of French by Sir Tho. Urchard, Knight. and others. With a
large account of the Life and Works of the Author; particularly an Explanation
of the most difficult Passages in them. Never before Published in any Language.
The Tragedies of the Last Age, considered and examined by the Practice of the
Ancients, and by the Common Sense of all Ages; in a Letter to Fleetwood
Shepherd Esquire; Part I. The Second Edition. A short View of Tragedy; its
Original, Excellency, and Corruption; with some Reflections on Shakespeare and
other Practitioners for the Stage. Both by Mr. Rimer, Servant to Their
Majesty's. A New, Plain, Short, and Complete French and English Grammar;
whereby the Learner may attain in few Months to speak and write French
Correctly, as they do now in the Court of France. And wherein all that is dark,
superfluous and deficient in other Grammart, is plain; short, and methodically
supplied. Also very useful to Strangers, that are desirous to learn the English
Tongue: for whose sake is added a short, but very Exact English Grammar. The
Third Edition, with Additions, By Peter Berault. Travels into diverse Parts of
Europe and Asia, undertaken by the French King's Order to discover a new Way by
Land into China. Containing many curious Remarks in Natural Philosophy,
Geography, Hydrography, and History. Together with a Description of Great
Tartary, and of the different People who inhabit there. By Father Avril, of the
Order of the Jesuits. Done out of French. To which is added, A Supplement
extracted from Hakluyt and Purchase; giving an account of several Journeys over
Land from Russia, Persia, and the Moguls Country, to China. Together with the
Roads and distances of the places. An Essay concerning Obedience to the Supreme
Powers, and the Duty of Subjects in all Revolutions. With some Considerations
touching the present Juncture of Affairs. An Essay concerning the Laws of
Nations, and the Rights of Sovereigns. With an Account of what was said at the
Council Board by the Civilians upon the Question; Whether their Majesty's
Subjects taken at Sea acting by the late King's Commission, might not be looked
on as Pirates? With Reflections upon the Arguments of Sir T. P. and Dr. Ol. By
Mat. Tindal, Doctor of Laws. The Second Edition. An Answer to the Late King
James's last Declaration, Dated at St. Germains, April 17. S. N. 1693. A
compendious History of the Taxes of France, and of the Oppressive Methods of
Raising of them. An Impartial Enquiry into the Advantages and Losses that
England has received since the Beginning of this Present War with France. A
Collection of Speeches of the Right Honorable Henry late Earl of Warrington,
viz. I. His Speech upon his being Sworn Mayor of Chester, in November, 1691.
II. His Speech to the Grand Jury at Chester, April 13. 1692. III. His Charge to
the Grand Jury at the Quarter Sessions held for the County of Chester, on the
11th. of October, 1692. IV. His Charge to the Grand Jury at the
Quarter Sessions, held for the County of Chester, on the 25th. day of April,
1693.

