THE Counterfeit Constable, OR, THE WICKED WATCH: BEING A Full and Perfect
Relation how some Persons pretending themselves to be a Constable and his
Watch, did enter into several Houses, and robbed the people of great Sums of
Money and Goods.

As also how the said Persons were at last Apprehended, and after a long time
remaining in Goal, sentenced the last Sessions to dye, but notwithstanding, by
the endeavors of friends, a Reprieve was granted, and they brought back from
Viborn, the 6th. of March, 1673/4.

Containing an exact account of their Facts and Trials.

Printed for M. S. in the Year, 1674.

THE Counterfeit CONSTABLE: Or, The Wicked WATCH:
TOO truly was it said more than fifteen hundred years ago by Horace Prince of
the Lyrick Poets, Aetas Parentum, pejor avis
Nos Genuit, mox Daturos
Progeniem vitiosio^em.
"Our Fathers who more wicked methods trace,
"Than did our Grandsires haste on a pace,
"For to get us a yet more wicked Race,


Though Sciences may be in the wane, and most good Arts Dwinling away by a
Retrograde motion, whilst each modern Author proves only an Echo to the
Ancients, and from their rich Storehouse of Learning pilfers a few scrops and
superficial besprinklings of knowledge to gain himself the reputation of an
Ingenioso; yet Villainy still improves it self to a higher pitch, and people
grow every day more subtle and witty in the contrivance of Roguery, so as to
contemn the dull common tricks of their Predecessors in the mystery of
Iniquity, and invent continually fresh Stratagems to accomplish their designed
Cheats and Robberies.

Of this, without turning over Chronicles, or searching the musty Records of
Antiquity, or (what is more poor) fobbing the Reader with an idle Romantic
Story, where the Scene is laid in some remore and unknown Country, to make it
easier to be believed than disproved, our present Subject affords us at home an
unhappy Instance.

A jolly Gang of the Town, who lived like brids of prey, or people in that
State of Nature, which some idle Philosophers have of late recommended so far,
as to justle out of credit the notions of good and evil, and those pedantique
terms, Meum and Tuum; having a fancy to drive their Trade in these dead times)
to the best advantage, and make themselves Masters of what they could get,
concluded there was no safer way to accomplish their designs, than to Masque
themselves in the mantle of Authority, hoping they might so unexpectedly commit
the greatest outrages with Indemnity, since it passed under the semblance of a
warrantable and securing Office.

To this purpose they dress up a principal and well experienced member of their
Fraternity, in his Gown, Cap, Staff, and all the formalities of a Constable,
the rest being put into a suitable Garb, and reverendly attending him as his
Watchmen.

In this posture they set out about Ten or Eleven a Clock in the Night, and
past in their rambling progress several Watches, giving and receiving the usual
complement, Good Night Brother, to the Constables.

This company knocking furiously, as with authority at a private house door,
they commanded the people to rise and open the Door, which being done, they
pretend a Warrant which they had ready contrived with the Name of a Justice of
Peace, and his Seal Counterfeited to it; To Inquire and apprehend if they
could, certain persons therein named and mentioned, as Clipers of Money;
Whereupon the People well knowing their Innocence from harboring any people of
that stamp, admited them very freely to search; But they pretending though the
persons were not then present, they ought to make diligent scrutiny for brass
and Clipped Money, claimed a Privilege of opening all Closets, Chests,
Drawers, and Truncks: Where at last happening to find fifty seven pound and
odd Money, they picking out thereof three or four narrow Clipped Shillings,
took the Confidence to acquaint the Folks that they must seize all the said
Money for the Kings use, till further Order; VVhereupon the same was deposited
in the pretended Constables hands, who pretendedly gave them a very fair
account of his Name and dwelling, which they seeing him thus attended never
suspected to be false.

Having in their first enterprise of this nature sped thus successfully and
dispatched away some of their Confederates to Lodge the prize; they march on
and give the alarm to an Alehouse, which soon surrendered and gave entrance at
the sight of the Staff and Halberts: Here they pretend to search for stolen
plate, and under that pretense carried away all the plate they could find in
the house, leaving another name and dwelling for the owner to enquire at for
it. This particular booty was worth above twenty pound.

Now going farther, they steer their course to an Eminent Shopkeepers House,
make them rise, and pretend they come to search for French prohibited goods:
under which notion they disburden his Shop and Warehouse of above one hundred
pounds worth of Commodities. But this Gentleman smoking the cheat when they
went forth, at first Dogs them, then gets before them, and causes the Watch to
stop them: In which Confusion some made their escape; but the counterfeit
Constable, and several of his pretended Watch were apprehended, and being
carried before a Justice of Peace committed to Newgate; where having fenced
with the Law for three or four Sessions. At last, Viz. The last Week of
February last past, the said Offenders were Condemned to dye, but
notwithstanding, by the Endeavors of Friends, a reprieve was granted, and they
brought back from Tyburn on the 6th. of this Instant March, 1673/4.

FINIS.

