The true COPY of a LETTER SENT To the KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
By W. COVELL Gent.
JEHOVAH our great Master commands me to speak to thee O King after this manner.

KING, thou have taken upon thee to Rule part of the King of Kings great
household, and if thou art his Steward, they that Rule our men must be just,
ruling in the fear of the Lord, as in 2 Samuel 23. 3. And they that are ruled
must fear God and the King, by whom Kings reign, which is Gods Order only;
therefore care is to be taken for the Poor and Despised and Oppressed, as well
as for the Rich and Mighty of this world; for our great Master has put a Law
in every thing he makes, to guide it according to its kind; without Counsel
the People perish, and his Counselors are the aged in Christ, for not many
Wise men after the flesh, nor many Mighty, nor many Noble are called, but God
has chosen the Foolish things of the world to confound the Wise, and God has
chosen the Weak things to confound the Mighty and Base things of the world, and
things that are Despised has God chosen, and things which are not to bring to
naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence; and as our
great Master is good to all, so must his Stewards and Counsel and Servants be,
for Christ will not be made a Slave and a Vagabond to Dag^n ^or ever; but the
poor penitent Souls have received of his fullness and goodness, and they that
are counted mad as Paul was, oftentimes speaks forth the words of Truth and
Sobriety, and the Wisdom of God in the Despised and Poor persecuted ones, is a
chief good and help to Rulers, who are Gods Deacons: Therefore thou art to
provide a Counsel of poor penitent Souls, and not to take Counsel of none but
Mighty men of this world, for the Ministry of Wisdom is in the poor Saints, the
worlds despised ones, Gods Cherubims at his Command, and his enemies
Deliverers, when they obey him in them; they are his enemies Coverings, when
the enemy combines with subjection to his Will, and be sweetly contained; it is
the wisdom of a King to conceal a matter, so do thou, and defend them in Peace
and Truth, and provide for them, and relieve them, and as a good Steward of the
manifold gifts of God, out of the abundance of the earth; in thy disposing,
dispense part thereof to set such people to work, who are willing to live
according to Gods Order in some place convenient for them, that they may be a
pattern of good works to the ignorant world, through Gods Wisdom outsighting
them, for the good of thee and of these people of these Nations; which being
settled in our great Masters Order, will bring Glory, Peace, Truth, Plenty and
Health to thee and them, and by degrees remove Ignorance, Idleness, Want and
Beggary out of the Land, and make thee great in our Masters Eye, and be loved
of him; without which, greatness in this world will make us miserable in the
World to come: But if thou do seek after the love of our great Master, and
own and obey him in thy Place, according to his Order, and not after the
Ordinances of men, which are not for the Lords sake, which ought to bear the
Emphasis and chief Rule in all Ordinances and Orders whatsoever, which he
offers to thy understanding by his mean Instruments; then shall thou be made
great, and the Nations of the world shall dread thee, for his power in thee and
them; those which are ruled by our Masters Law in them, are subject to his
Ministry, and are no trouble to his Stewards, but their trouble is most to rule
such as will not be ruled by Gods Law which is in them, and manifested to them;
and instead of following his Law and Order, do hearken to and obey such Priests
as have departed out of the way, and caused many to stumble at the Law; and
such Lawyers also as establish the Traditions of men for Gods Laws, after their
blind reasons, for the love of gain, which God has cursed by his Prophet,
Malachy Chap. the second: But thou must defend them, and provide for them,
which are obedient to our Masters Law and Order, and as a good Shepherd go
before them in the same, and that is it which will bring good to thee; and make
them thy coverings, and show forth our Masters glory and thine, and if thou
embrace the Truth, more may be communicated to thee as thou art able to bear
it, thy work and danger in the work being great, and my work is according to
our great Masters Command and Obligation to plead this before thee O King, for
the Poor and Oppressed People of God, our great Jehovah, Amen.

From a Beggar in bonds, who craves neither honor nor wealth, but a waiter
upon our great Master, and a Beggar to him for thee and the Nations with tears
and groans, that they may be saved from the Judgments which are sealed for the
Rebellious, and I am directed in thy behalf to the 12th Chapter of Job, for
thee to read, and consider of alone by thy self, and if thou be broken off from
the wild Olive Tree, and art engrafted into the good Olive Tree, and made
partaker of the fatness thereof, then thou will grow in the Spirit of
Knowledge, and the secrets of the Lord will be with thee, and shall see his
wondrous works; for which woe is me, that I cry, Will thou hear his voice?
Which if obeyed, I and others shall hear the Echo, and there will be coverings
to thee and them, which hear and believe; but if laughed at and rejected, Oh! my
bones shall be broken, and I tremble before our great Master, under whose
Ministry I am, the end whereof is known to him, and shall be known to them to
whom by Vision, Revelation or Inspiration, or any other way he shall reveal
himself; which in us, if it be observed and obeyed, is our glory, and will
yield all glory to our great Master Jehovah.

King, I am under great trouble of mind concerning thee and the Nations, and
being commanded further to speak unto thee, truth makes me bold, woe is me for
fear I grieve thee, I am full of love to thee, and to the whole Creation of
God, under whose Ministry I am.

Thou art to take heed of the Crown of Gold, which is of men's making, for a
Crown of glory is offered to thee, that thou may wear for ever, and if thou
embrace the same, the worldly Crowns will well fit thee.

Thou art to take heed of making Contracts with these people, for they are out
of order, and God has a controversy with these Nations.

Thou art to take heed of the Oath they will put upon thee, for fear of being
snared, for there are many things to be done, and many things to be undone,
which must be according to the Word of our greatest King and Lawgiver.

Thou art to take heed of the Philosophers, and such as will slatter thee for
their own ends, minding more the commands of man, and love to man more than the
Command of God our greatest Master.

Thou art to open the Prison Doors for Debtors, and appoint Commissioners in
all thy Counties, to examine every man's cause, there will appear great
advantage to thee, to remit thy self in the People hearts, for none can stand
before our great Masters Sword which is within every man, and thy Sword which
is without, let be one proceedings in all Courts, as in the Exchequer.

Thou art to take heed of all thy Officers in all places in the Nations, for if
that they through corruptions shall any way abuse the People, it will all
reflect on thee, and make thee little; and although the world, flesh and sin be
thy enemy, God will be thy friend, and thou shall never want Counsel, nor miss
at last the eternal Crown of glory.

Thou art to hold the Balance equal to all sorts of People, and to
Persecutions and Imprisonments of People for Conscience, thou art to forbear
and hinder those fiery Angels in the world, that would burn up all with a fiery
zeal, which is not true, having no wisdom but in their Lips.

Thou art to be like our great Master, good to all, for he has created a full
creation, that shows his Love (there is no want) of his works, but there is a
want of enlarged hearts, universal men, for narrow covetous spirits will never
do good, but to themselves; our great Masters House must be built by steps, by
those which have skill (even a Solomon's House) for the delivering of the Poor,
Oppressed, Despised Bodies, that wants Food and Clothes.

Breeding and Planting restores. Oh King, live for ever, our great Master
Jehovah bless thee, Amen. Buying and Selling destroys.

WILLIAM COVELL.

London, Printed by J. C. for the Author.


