ENGLANDS INTREST IN SECURING THE Woollen-Manufacture, OF THIS REALM Against
the Artiffices, and designs of FRANCE, asserted and made Evident to all true
Lovers of their Country.

To which is added a REPLY to some Objections Former^^ made to the same Subject.

LONDON Printed by Joseph Streater, for the Author, Anno. Dom. MDCLXXXIX.

TO THE READER.
IF I should value the Discouragements I have met withal, not only by appearing
Publicly in this Matter; but also, in my endeavoring to prevent the Mischiefs
that accrues to this Nation, by the Exportation of Wool: I must have been both
silent and un-active; but having conceived it to be the greatest Concern, not
only to the Merchant and Clothier, but also to the whole Kingdom in general; I
have exposed my self, because the greatest Strength of the Nation, which
consists in the Multitude of People; the greatest Riches, the greatest Power
upon the Sea in Shipping, and the greatest Revenues of the Crown, in most of
its Branches; do all principally depend upon the Woollen-Manufacture, as more
at large appears in the following Discourse: And considering that these great
Advantages, are not only endeavored to be gained from us by Foreigners, but
more especially by a Powerful Neighbor (viz.) the French King, while some at
home, are not only Reasoning, but appearing in Print for it; to such I will
adventure to say, and doubt not to make appear, that they are Enemies to
Englands Prosperity, what ever Pretense, they may make to the contrary.

I am much convinced, that by this Means, and by the Cunning Artifices, and
secret Contrivances of French Agents, that not only the Clothing Trade, but the
very Intrest of the Nation in General is at Stake, and in Hazard, to be utterly
lost. This I have for some Years foreseen, and publicly declared (though little
regarded) that it will appear in time, that what I then mentioned, was upon
very Good Grounds, and from my foresight of that Ruin in our Trade, which
will certainly come upon us, if not Timely and Industriously prevented.

And though I have Wrote of this Subject, 20 Years ago, and reprinted the same
in 71, and abstracted that Discourse, and added a few Lines, as an
Advertizement to the Merchants and Clothiers, and published that Discourse in
the Year 72, to all which, was Objections made, and printed in the Year 77, to
which I also then made a Reply, as I thought sufficient: And it did answer my
End therein, (viz.) in preventing the French Agents in their Design.

But finding in my Attendance, on a late Committee of the Honorable House of
Commons, appointed to consider a Bill depending before them, for the
Explanation and better Execution, of two Acts of Parliament, made in King
Charles the 2ds. Reign, Prohibiting the Exportation of Wool, that Answer was
urged by some against me, supposing no Reply was made to it: I have for that
and other Reasons, now reprinted an Abstract, both of my first Discourse, my
Opponents Answer, and my Reply thereunto; wherein I have endeavored to remove
that Gross Mistake, as if the hindering the Exportation of Wool, was the Cause
of the low Price thereof, the Cause of the fall of Rents, and value of Lands,
the contrary whereof I do Assert, and shall plainly Demonstrate the true Cause
thereof; Evincing, that the hindering the Exportation of Wool, will Cause the
recovery of our Trade, the raising the Price of Wool, and consequently of
Lands, which is the Principal Drift and Design, of the Following Discourse.

That tho the Subject I am upon is mearly matter of Fact, and therefore less
subject to Controversy; yet that it may be free from all Objections, I have
added the Testimony of two Witnesses, one a Gentleman of Kent, viz. Thomas
Manley Esquire. against whom there is little room to cavel; the other is Mr.
Andrew Marvel, (who though Dead, yet his Name still Lives,) (...) Member of the
last Long Parliament; and very well known to many of this; who endeavored to
oppose that unfortunate Act, (for so I must in all humility call it) that
prohibited Irish Cattle: He Wrote that discourse, under the notion of a Letter
from a Younger Brother in Ireland, to an Elder in England, because he was
unwilling to be known to be the Author, being loath to disoblidg his Friends in
Yorkshier, who were for Passing that Act.

Since the following Papers was printed, I am informed that by ^eans of the
stop at present to Irish Wool, the Clothiers in the West want Wool; which
makes good what I supposed, Page the ^^th. therefore it may be considered how
necesary it is to have a ^tock of Wool before hand, to keep the Poor at Work,
when there ^ay be a scarcity of Wool upon other occasions.

An Abstract of a Discourse formerly Printed Entitled Englands Intrest by our
Woollen-Manufacture; wherein is demonstrated, that the whole Nation is
concerned in the Improvement thereof, and the evil Consequences of the
Transportation of our Wool Vn-Manufactured.
FEw Princes have such means to support their splendor and Greatness, as His
Majesty of Great Britain, nor have many Countries such a variety of staple
Commodities within themselves, and in such abundance, as th^se Kingdoms.

So that if these Advantages were duly improved, this Kingdom might be a
general M^rt, for these parts of the World. But,

That those Adventages are not improved, is obvious to all that look into it,
by the so^^ complaints that are frequently made of the great Poverty and decay
thereof; and indeed, (which is worst of all) by that general d^speration of
Spirit, which will not put orth a hand to help, support or prevent the total
desolation fo^r Country, upon a prepossest opinion, that all en^eav^u^s will be
rendered ^ruitless and abortive.

The consideration whereo^ has greatly prompted me, who must confess my self
the meanest of Thous^n^s, to use the utmost of my little skill, to try what
might be done, toward the management of some Methods, that may prevent the
(...); and (if possible) that some good part of what is lost may be recovered.

I shall confine my self to those things only, whereof I have had not only
credible information, but a considerable (though a sad) experimental knowledge;
and in a more particular and especial manner, that of the Manufacture of Wool
in England, which, amongst ^any, is the richest Treasure in his Majesty's
Dominions; the Flower, Strength and Sinew of this Nation, and therefore of full
Merit, to be had in parpetual remembrance, defense and encouragement, for the
most advantageous improvement thereof.

The Dukes of Burgundy, (who had, as ^ am informed, the greatest, if not the
whole Manufacturing of our Wool,) well understood, and long enjoyed; before
King Edward the Third, the benefits accruing to that People by English Wool,
which they received at six Pence per pound, by their industrous Manufacturing
thereof; returned again to us in Cloth, at ten shillings per yard, to the
enriching of that People, and advancing the Revenue of their Sovereign; which
being perceived, by the vigilent and industrous Prince, King Edward the Third,
upon a visitation made by himself, to the Duke of Bungundy, during his
residence there, he employed such able Agents, amongst the Flemish Clothiers,
representing to them, the Danger they were in by the bordering Wars with
France, and the peaceable Condition of England, and Freedom of the People that
are Subjects there (which are great Motives) propounds an Invitation for them
to come over hither, wherein he ^romises them the same Privileges and
Immunities with his own Subjects, by which promises) he prevailed with a great
number of them to come into England soon after him, where He most Royally
performed those promises, and also replanted many of his own Subjects, who had
been long settled in Fla^ders.

And as a suitable improvement of so great a mercy, did wisely project, and
also accomplish the Manufacture of Wool within the bowels of this Kingdom, to
the great enriching of his own People, and also to the peopleing of his
new-Conquered Dominions: the Memory of whose Wisdom and Care for his People, is
worthy to be had in remembrance, by English men, unto the Worlds end.

The said King having thus settled the Manufacture of Wool, within the Kingdom
of England, confined it by a penal Statute, which (at first) reached not only
to Goods, Chattels and Lands, but also to Members, and L^fe it self; but, in a
short time repealed; the two latter thereof, continuing the other in its full
force, to remain to future Generations, which exceeding great advantage, to
the propriety of the English Trade, has now coutinued three Hundred Years, by
the vigilency of the government, and the Protection of its Laws in the careful
execution thereof upon offenders, with more than a little diligence, to provide
against the th^^sting desires o^ Foreigners, to wrest this Nations privilege
out of English hands; which by the Providence of God, through the care of our
Ancestors, has been (for many Ages) enjoyed by the Nation, as it is indeed its
proper right.

But so it is, (for some years past) the diligence of Foreigners, to enrich
themselves upon us, has so far exceeded our care to preserve our selves, that
its come to, if not beyond a question, who has the greatest benefit of the
Manufacture of English Wool? they who have no right unto it? or, they to whom
of right it does belong?

That this is so, will appear by considering, that not only Holland and
Flanders, have long sucked the sweetness of our Trade, but France is likewise
learning to be too hard for us, as is manifest by the great quantity of Wool,
that (of late years) have been imported there; how injurious it must be to us,
is also unquestionable, if we consider the necessary consequences thereof.

For every Pack of Wool sent to France, does prevent us (not only) of the
benefit, of the Manufacturing thereof; but, of much more, by reason of the
advantage that they make of their own course Wool, and fine spun Linen in
their Drugets and Stuffs.

Besides our Damage in putting that value on the French Fancies, by giving them
double the worth for the same Manufacture (which we our selves make) of our
English Wool, so much have we been deceived in this Matter, that whereas in
the time of the late War with the Dutch and French, that French Druggets, and
other Stuffs, not coming so freely from France, some English broad Clothes
striped, at 10s. per Yard, were rent in three parts ( viz.) Breadths, and put
in the form of French Druggets, and each part sold at 8s. per yard which makes
that one yard comes to 24s. which as English ^loth was sold for 10s. and the
like Fancy many have for Dutch Black Cloth, if it have the Name of Dutch, though
our own Make, this is real Matter of Fact.

Now if we consider, what damage we sustain, by exporting one pa^k of Wool
unmanufactured, (by which we may judge of the rest,) that a pack of Wool worth
ten pound, if it be Manufactured here, and so exported, would be improved to be
wor^h one Hundred Pounds.

That it is so, does most evidently appear by worsted-hose, that one pound of
Kembed Wool, worth twenty pence, will make two pair of Hose worth five
Shillings the pair; or three pair, worth three Shillings four pence; which
reckoned either way, s^ten shillings for one pound of Wool, (though some is
less, some more) there being twelvescore pound of Wool in a pack, is so many
ten shillings, makes a Hundred and Twenty Pound.

For when it shall be observed (as I have now demonstrated) that a Pack of
Kembed Wool worth 20l. does, when Manufactured at home yield 120 l. here in
the English Market, out of which deduct 20 l. for the Wool there remains 100
l. Starling, gains by the Labor of Spining and Knitting, besides the Dying,
Leging, Packing, and fitting it for the Sea; when the additional advance
thereon by home, and foreign Customs, Freight, Land-Carriage and other
incident expense, together with the Profit on s^le in Foreign Parts, shall be
considered; it is reasonable to conclude that this single Pack so Manufactured,
and Exported by the English Merchant, will Purchase Foreign Commodities to
near the value of 20^ l. by that time the Customs of Importation are answered
for the same.

And indeed the thing is naturally so obvious, and the loss to England in (...)
Years so apparent that t^ may justly ^lence the greatest oppos^r, and convince
any thinking Person tho hims^l^ never so indifferent, or unconcerned in point
of intrest.

And if it be so that the single Exportation of one Pack o^ English Wool
unwrought be so great a ^amage to the Nation, it is an amazing thing o^
^alculate what the loss has been and does daily prove to the King ^n^ K^^gdom,
while so many Thousand Packs have been, and still are Yearly Transported; the
mischeife ha^ not perhaps been (...) to every one, but is very easily
discovered by such who give themselves the leastle sure to consider.

To return it is aver'd, that the Export^tion of English and Irish Wool is of a
Dangerous an^ Destructive Conseque^^^ to the very Being of our Trade, and to
the riches and strength of this Kingdom, and to his M^jesti^s Customs,
notwithstanding the Objections produced against it, with respect of the
Graziers Advantage thereby, supposing 40 s. upon a Pack of Wool was advanced
for a year or two by Exportation, yet other things would be lessoned by it, it
being not to be denied at the same time, that the poor and laborious People
can be employed, as to have money to buy them Bread, Beet, much less Mutton,
the want of which must of necessity full the price of all manner of V^ctuals,
and if we name only Mutton (which is relative to our subject) 2 s. in the
^arkass, which comes to 10 l. for (...) Sheep, they producing a Pac^o^ Wool,
at that rate ^s the value of the sa^d Pack modestly computed: But then for Beef
and Corn, (...) that ^e l^sned proportionable, it must be o^ course greater
damage to the Farmer and G^azier, it being reckoned three times the value of
Wool throughout the Nation, one with another. And supposing there should b^
grown yearly in En^land Two Hundred Thousand packs of Wool, one year with
another: And supposing that once in ^our years the sheep were a^l killed, (
Viz.) 25 yearly of ^00, which 2^ Sheep valued so low as 10 l. which is the
value of the Wool yearly shorn, from the 100 Sheep.

It may therefore prevail upon us to believe, that Beef and all sorts of Corn
must be of a far greater value than Mutton, (and consequently of Wool) because
the greatest number of People by far, are the poor and laborious People which
consume Beef, Bread and Bear, and few of such do often buy Mutton, or at least
any quantity proportionable to other provision, and therefore whatever some
others think, that a Country can be enriched without the poor laborious People,
I am of another opinion: For it is matter of Fact, that in England it self, in
those part, where the inhabitance are thin, and the Countres not full of
People, that the Land in those p^^ts wi^ not yield much above half the value,
as Land of the same goodness will yield near Towns well Inhabited, or
Countries where Trade is good, and if thus in England it is much less in
Ireland, which I think is a good Demonstration.

T^ese things considered on the other hand, it will manifestly appear, that the
Exportation of Wool unmanufactured will not only be destructive to the
Merchants and Clothiers Trade, and the exposing the poor to distress, ^o want
of employment; but consequently the Farmer and G^asie^ will not be able to pay
his Rent: For if it be so, that whilst we have some little T^a^e left there are
such general complaints, what may be expected if our Foreign Trade should be
wholly taken away, which is now in more danger, by the French, than it has
been this three Hundred Years past, and we seem to sleep and take no notice of
it.

And then we ^a^ consid^r what price Wool will bear, when we, some of us b^
our remiss^es^, and other w^^fulne^^ have lost our Trade, by the circumvent^ng
practices of Forreiners, and we our selves helping forward, for fear they
should not be able to do it alone, and all this for a mere fancied and
supposed profit, for there was not more Art and S^ill used by our A^cestors, to
bring home the workers at first to the Wool, and Prohibiting ^he Exportation
thereof, and settling the Manufacturing of it in England, than is now used to
Export the materials unmanufactured to Foreign Artificers; and if by the means
of that which is Exported already, Wool is now made so cheap as it is, a
greater Exportation would make it yet cheaper, supposing ten thousand Pa^ks
shipped into France, which by their sort of working it, and mixing it with
Lining, and their own course Wool, and thinn^^s of their work, goes as far
there, and makes as many yards in the whole, as twenty thousand Packs if
Manufactured here, into more firm and substantial Cloth and Stuffs, which Ten
Thousand Packs, if they were not Exported into France, it would unavoydably
follow, that France would have of us the quantity of Twenty Thousand Packs, in
our Manufacture.

B^ all which it is obvious, that in time to come, the Wool in England will be
much more cheaper than now it is, because, by the aforesaid means, more Wool
will be Exported, and less will of course be used in England, and that little
which will be Manufactured here can bear little or no price, Foreigners
making that themselves, which we should furnish them with; which if it be true,
as it is generally asserted, that Wool is as cheap in France, as in some parts
of England at this time, it is but rational to conclude it will be much cheapter
hereafter, when our Wool dos increase on our hands, and our Manufacture
decrease, both in quantity and value.

For the better clearing of this point, give me leave to insert one instance or
two, as matter of Fact: That when Wool was wholly Manufactured in England, and
very little, if any at all Exported raw, the price thereof for several years
together continued, betwixt 12 d. and 18 d. per l. weight, and I verily
believe as much, if not more, Wool was grown in England at that time, ( Viz.)
betwixt 20 and 30 years ago, then is now at this time, the reason is plain,
from the great quantity of our Woollen Manufacture vended beyond Sea, which was
so considerable, that it kept up the price of Wool at home. On the other hand
in Ed. 3's. time, when all the Wool was Exported Un manufactured, it was sold
for 6 d. per pound, as is before asserted, by which it is manifest, that the
advancement of the price of Wool, consist, in the consumption and vent of our
Manufacture freely beyond the Seas, and not in the Exportation of our wool un
manufactured.

As the Price of Wool to be Set at a const^nt Rate without varying, it is very
Improbable, if not Imposible, for that which Rules the Market's in this Affair
is the Sale of the Woollen Manufacture beyond the Seas.

For Example Suppose the Pack of Stockings before mentioned stands the Merchant
at home, at first buying 120 l. besides other growing Charges; now if this Pack
be sole abroad by the Merchants for 100 l. only, the Merchant at his next
buying cannot pay 120 l. but the maker must withal ab^te proportonable, first
in the Wool he shall next buy, and then in the Wages, his Work folks in
proportion being re^uced in their payments. So on the other hand, if this Pack
of Stockings valued at 120 l. here, be Sold for 200 l. Clear of all Cha^ges,
this advance puts the Merchants upon a Speedy buying, by which the Price is
Advanced by the Merchants, and consequently the price of Wool, and Workmens
Wages.

Now to answer an Objection, that we do not so much depend upon the Export, as
upon the were and Consumption within the Kingdom, the mistake is so visible
that all which gives themselves the least trouble to look into Trade knows,
that not above the 5th. part of the Woollen-Manufacture made in England is wore
here at home: and that at least 4 parts of 5 of what is made here is Exported;
and further quantities wiill be demanded when the Exportation of Wool
unwrought is effectually prevented.

Before I conclude, give me leave to add here, what Sr. Walter Rawleigh in his
time presented to King James the first, ( viz.) that by means only of the
Exportation of Cloth (...) and undressed, was lost to the Kingdom above Four
Hundred Thousand (...) yearly, to the workmanship, which the Dressers and
D^ers, and other Artificers would have gained thereby, besides the damage to
the King, in discourageing the Importation of Dying Stuffs, which pay a
considerable Customs, besides the hindering Navigation.

Now if it was thus with England when the Wool was ^^de up into Cloth, and
that only for want of the Dressing and Dying it here, ^o much loss came to this
Kingdom thereby, what must the loss be, when it is (...) Manufactured here at
all, but the Materials Exported raw, without any manner of gain to any
Artificier at home.

For if we first consider his Majesty's loss, and next that of the Merchants
and Clothiers, after which must follow, the Detriment to all other Persons
depending on T^ade, there being such a connection of Trades one to another, that
the d^mage of one harms the rest, and the profit of one advances others, while
the whole is enlarged by the abounding of working and laborious People, who
supply the Farmer and Grazier with money, with which he pays his Rent to the
Nobility and Gentry, and they again disperse it amongst Tradesmen, by which
circulation all dedegrees of Men are either employed or enriched or both, and
hence naturally comes content, harmony and pleasure, that one condition of Men
take in the other, the poor by being employed are delivered from the fear of
want; the Merchants and Artificers encouraged by certain markets, and ready
Sale; the Nobility and Gentry secured in their Rents by thriving and able
Tenants. And thus it is plain that em^loyment rationally is the strength of any
People, but Idleness brings Poverty, Shame and Ruin, which unavoidably
follows the want of Trade. But to return, in short there is such Connextion
and Dependancy one upon another in England, that if one fail, all the rest
more or Less, either near, or more remotely are concerned. All Trades and
Degrees of men, as Merchants, Artificers, Farmers, Seamen, Fishermen; being
the People, which by their study and labor do principaly, if not only bring
in, or give accasion to the bringing in of W^lth to the Nation, and the
Nobility, Gentry, Lawyers, Physicians, Scholars of all sorts; Shopkeepers are
they that receive from these, and distribute it again, and all are consequently
concerned in this rich Treasure of Wool, because this being a Manufacture at
home, sets more hands at work than half the Nation.

May I not with modesty and within Compass, say three parts of Laborious and
Industrious People? Considering that most of the Shipping is employed in this
Affair, and also so many Trades that depend immediately upon this of Clothing,
that most of other (...) are but for Provision, either in Food or Conveniences
for (...): and so from his Majesty to the meanest, all are more or (...)
concerned, The King mostly; not only in that his People are by th^^ most
employed and provi^ed for, (nor in that such a Staple Trade the li^e whereunto
the Wool has not maintained with so good Advantage;) but because so great a
Revenue comes directly into him upon the Trade, occasioned thereby: Thus as the
King gains, or suffers (...), so the Persons that have the greatest Estates or
Trades, and so (...) proportionable to the Beggar. And also concerning that an
accusto^^ry thing begets such an habit that is hard to reduce; as in our rough
and und^est Cloth to Holland, so it will be with all our Manufactures in
France. I am the more large in the Demonstration of this affair, not only
because this has cost me many years labor and study to consult all sorts of
concerned Persons, besides mine own experience about it; ^o^ because it is so
hard to convince people of the me^n^st capacity, but some of the wiser sort,
how to cure this dismal malady: which some dispairing of, have rather thoughts
of setting up s^m^ other Manufacture (in Lieu of endeavors to prevent the
exportation of Wool and Manufacturing of that at home, looking thereon as a
thing not to be overcome,) as that of Linnens in some capable parts of England,
and a better in provement in the product of Foreign Plantation, which may also
be set upon together herewith as an Addition; so as several sorts of Persons
may be set better on work, not capable of this employment, and yet no
prejudice to this of Clothing: For all other Countries have the Advantage of
England, or a^e equal to us in other Manufactures proper to their Countries,
but not in this of (...) hi^g: and it will be found that all Trades in England,
wholly distinct from this of Clothing, brings not the tithe of the Advantage
that this does.

Having given an Account in General, of the (...) to England b^ the Woollen
Manufacture, I did intend to have decended to Particulars, how all Persons are
Concerned: But my time will not permit now; Leaving that for another season.

Notwithstanding what I have before said, I find by Discourse with several
Gentlemen of great Honor and Worth, that there are some Mistakes yet remaining
in their minds, who Impute the Cause of the low Price of Wool, the fall of
Rents, and value of Lands; because Wool is no more freely exported; to
rectify which mistake I have been laboring many years, because the
consequences of such mistaken Notions is dangerous to this Kingdom; but if
there was nothing more in it at this conjuncture, this were sufficient to
oppose it, that it contributes to the Greatness of the French King, into whose
Dominions our Wool is imported, and who has given so great an encouragement
thereunto, that to the Town of Caellis alone, there has been at least, within
two years, brought in 40 Thousand Packs of Wool, from the Coast of Kent and
Sussex (besides what is imported in other places of France, from Ireland, and
the western Parts of England) for Rumney^marsh-Men (who so much complain) are
not content only with the Exportation of their own Grouth, but buy Wool 10 or
20 Miles up in the Country, and bring it down to the Sea side, and Ship it off;
besides much Wool is carried from London, to make a Trade of Exporting of it
un-manufactured: Kent is the place, out of which more Wool is exported, than
out of all other parts of the Kingdom besides; so the Woollen-manufacture in
that Country, which before Wool was so much exported, was considerable, is
now almost lost, though some seems to be well pleased, that they have by that
Means, rid themselves of their Poor in that County: I would desire such to
consider, what they would do with their Sheep, Bullocks, and Corn, if all other
Countries that now are employed in the woollenmanufacture, which is brought to
London, and there sold to maintain Trade was as Barren of the Poor as Kent is,
though with it, they have lost the benefit of so great and good Trade: Give me
leave to compare the Profit with the Loss, and suppose Kent was wholly
Independent, and that it did produce Six Thousand Packs of Wool yearly, and
put the Rate of Ten Pounds upon a Pack, which in the whole amounts to
Threescore Thousand Pounds, and so exported. And then to consider, what it
would be worth ^f made into Stockings and worsted Stuffs, that wool being most
of it fit for it. And supposing that a Pack and half of rough wool, made one
Pack of Kembed wool, and as such worth Twenty Pound, which if made up into
Stockings, would Yield one Hundred and Twenty Pounds, as before demonstrated,
which would amount to Seven Hundred and Twenty Thousand Pounds; so that if the
said Wool was Manufactured in that County, the profit by the Manufacturing
thereof, would be six hundred and sixty Thousand Pounds, which instead of this
Profit, the Kentish Gentlemen are willing to content themselves, with forty
shillings per. Pack advance upon their Wool exported, which amounts to but
Twelve Thousand Pounds, though it be only to the enriching and strengthening the
French King, who alone has the Benefit of most of the Wool exported, and though
this in reason should be satisfactory to any, yet I shall Answer that question,
how we can work up the Wool if not exported, Matter of Fact is not often
disputed, that it is matter of Fact, that before there was such great
quantities of Wool Exported to France, all the Wool grown in England, and
what was imported from Ireland, was all made up into one sort of Manufacture or
other, and a great part of it exported to France, which now having our Wool,
Prohibits ou^ Manufacture; so, that were the wool wholly stopped, we should
quickly work it up, and then no complaint of wool upon hand. For I have known
for several years together, when little wool has been exported, that at
Sheering-Time, there has been but a very small quantity of wool left on hand.

Give me leave further to add, that by the said Exporiation of Wool to France,
Exeter alone, has lost the sale of Three Hundred Thousand Pounds worth of the
woollen-manufacture P. An. next is the loss of a great part of the Cottens and
Bays, made ^n Dorcetshire, as also Cloth-Rashes in Hampshire, from the Town of
Hampton and Rumsy, two thirds of the Trade is lost in 20 Years time, next may
be considered Welsh Cottens, Manchester Bays, and Yorkshire K^^s^s, worsted
stuffs and stockings, formerly a great Trade to France; And last of all, fine
broad mixed Cloth from London, which Trade is now lost, for one Merchant in
London, that had the buying of Fifty Thousand Pounds worth of Cloth Pr. An.
Sterling, now have nothing, which is the effect of Exportation of wool to
France; who as they have tas^ed the sweetness, and have sound the Sinues of our
Trade, so they have not spared any Cost to gain it from us, by getting our
wool, either by Craft or Force from us, for there was not more Art and Skill
used by K. Edw. 3d. in bringing home the Manufacturers at the first to the
wool, than is now used to Export our wool; the consequence of which is not
only I^jurious to us in the manufacturing of it in France, but in another
Advantage to them, by the Improving every Pack of Raw wool, as before hinted,
by their sine-spun Linning and Course wool (otherwise only fit for Ruggs, or
Seamens Garments) that it makes as much manufacture as three Packs, if used in
England, which together by the Cheapness of wages under sels us, and without
our wool, the French can make no middle sort of Cloth, nor Stuffs, or
Stockings, there being none in the Known parts of the world, to my best
Information, fit for those manufactures, which is the greatest Trade in Europe.
for confermation, give me leave to add the words of an English Merchant, living
in France, in a Letter to a Friend of mine here, dated the 16 of March 1669,
(viz.) we Englishmen, have our Throats Cut with our own Weapous, wondering at
the Stupidity of the English, that they should so long omit, to possess the
King's Majesty with their Deplorable and dangerous Case, in respect of the
present and future Inconveniency thereof, in having such great quantities of
Wool that is stolen into France, by which the French Make Cloth called
Serge-de-Berry, in which they Cloth their Soldiers, and all made of English
wool, by which Means, the English Men have the Reputation of betraying their
Father for two pence, than no Marvel if they betray their Country.

And in another Letter from the same Person to my self, dated the 5th. of March
1671, Respecting Stockings, thus (viz.) I have much reason to believe, unless
some are made Examples, there will be a continual Abuse of the Comodi^y, both
English and Irish, raw and kembed, abound much in these Countries, that they
make abundance of Fabrics, and without our wool they cannot make it. There is
a City called ^ourney, that makes all sorts of woollen S^ockings, it is but few
Years ago, that they betook themselves to it; a Trade which in my Minority, was
considerable from London into these Countries, but it is now lost; it is not
above three Years ago, that there was a Scarcity of kembed Wool in that
quarter of the Country, and could have contemedly given double the Price for
the said Wool; I told them care was then taking in England to prevent it. I
Remembered at that time ( viz) the beginning of the Year 166^, upon my Address
to K. Char. 2d. by the Importunity of some Merchants in Exon, for some Friggats
at Sea, and a Party of Horse at Land, and strict Orders then given, as at large
elsewhere does appear, a great stop was then put to that mischief, but I being
discouraged, and also falling Sick in 1671, that Wool was then Exported in
great plenty, that the same Gentleman says. That Wool abounded, both English
and Irish, that it fell in few Months one third part of its Price, and there he
concludes thus, (viz.) you may easily see how Englands Hearts-Blood is drawn
from them; in a word France rejects our Fabrics at this day, presuming they
shall never want our wool to make their own Fabrics, which are so variable,
as puts a great stop to the Current demand, that used to be of our Sollid
Fabrics, for which they will pretend to give the Mode to all the world; and so
by this Means, in time all the world will be disgust with our Fabrics, when
they shall receive the Mode from the French, consider this I pray, that so
there may be some speedy Remedy.

What has been done in pursuance of this Letter, I have else where wrote at
large; I shall here only incert the main Objections, made against what I have
here Asserted, ( viz.)

1st. That for want of vending our superfluous wool abroad, that the Tenant
and Landlord are so much damnified, that the one cannot pay his Rent, nor the
other sustain his Taxes; and this is the chiefest, if not the sole Reason of
sinking our Rents, and throwing up of Farms, and the Misery of the whole
Country.

2d. That it is much more the Concern of the Nation, to preserve the Nobility,
and Gentry, rather than regard a few Artifficers, who are employed in the
working up the wool, or the Merchant who gains by the Exportation of our
Manufacture.

3d. That it will be more for the Advantage of our woollen Trade, and less for
that beyond the Sea, than the hindering of it has been.

4th. That if a large Custom was put upon all wool that was exported by
Strangers, and that at least by this Means, they may come to pay double the
Price of what our Clothiers do, and not only so, but by this Means also, His
Majesty may receive an advantage by the Customs, that is Imposed upon it.

5ly. That our Forefathers did never Prohibit the Transportation of Wool,
unles upon some great Occasion, and for a certain Season, till of late Years,
for making good of which, a Summary of several Statutes are brought, from the
Time of Edward the 3d. downwards, to our Times.

6th. That the decay of our Clothing, does not lie in the Exportation of our
wool, but on the contrary, (viz.) because our wool is not more freely
Exported than it is, that in as much as the decay and fell of our Manufacture,
comes properly from the Prohibition of our wool, the stopping or hindering of
it, is but the applying to our distemper a wrong Remedy.

To all which Objections, I make the Reply following, which I desire may be
Impartially considered; and if therein, there be any thing of Reason, Truth, or
Argument; I question not, but that Persons of Honor and Reputation, will not
oppose their own Judgment, especially when their Intrest is truly, and so
nearly therein concerned.

A REPLY To a Paper ENTITLED, REASONS For a Limited EXPORTATION OF WOOL.
I Must need say, that I had not thought of appearing in Public any more, and
could not easily have been moved thereunto, had not my Zeal to the Commerce of
the Nation (which is at present solely maintained by the Woollen Manufacture of
it) Raised my fears so far as to believe a great Prejudice is coming upon Us,
and so far as to doubt also that we may be hastening of it, by those very means
we would endeavor to prevent it.

And therefore I cannot but like the dumb Child speak, when he saw a Knife at
his Fathers Throat, I mean, when I consider the extremity we are like to be in
from the French Kings Vigilance, and the great Endeavors that he has of late
used to acquire the making of the Woollen Manufacture in his own Kingdom, and
what Artifice and vast Expense he does use to effect his said design, both in
France, and by his Agents here in England.

And to encourage the Manufacture thereof in his own Kingdom, he has even very
lately issued forth his Edict, for the erecting Hospitals in many Towns in
France, both for the setting all sorts of Persons at work, (that are able) in
the Woollen Manufacture, and for the Maintenance of all Indigent Persons, and
not to suffer a Beggar there.

And if the French King, how fair soever he pretends a Friendship to us, by
Defining by all ways and means, to Undermine our Commerce, and by it to
prejudice us in our Trade and Strength by Sea, I may I hope be pardoned, if I
am more that indifferently concerned, or more than ordinary warm, to think that
we our selves should endeavor to perfect His Design by delivering up our
Wool, the Foundation of so Rich a Manufacture, into His hands; for that which
is moved, is moved principally (if not solely) for the French Kings advantage,
and that which is desired (if granted) tends to our own Inevitable ruin.

Nor can we hereafter think of so Vain and Idle a Thing, as to recover our
Woollen Manufacture once lost, or to preserve the Kings Customs, or the
Strength and Shipping of this Great Kingdom without it.

Upon all which considerations, I cannot but humbly entreat the Nobility and
Gentry, (and more especially such as have the Honor to serve their Country, in
Parliament) seriously to reflect upon the wisdom of that Great Prince, King
Edward the 3d. and upon the Method which he in his Reign used, now so long
since to gain the Woollen Manufacture out of Flanders into this Country, and
withal Impartially compare that with the present design of the French King,
viz. to Improve His Intrest hear to gain the Trade from us.

And then to Consider whether, we have not Reason to do the utmost we may to
Prevent his Design, or whether we have Reason to do all that we can (nay more
than he himself does ask or expect from us) by a Law to promote and Encourage
his Design.

We must be very short-sighted, if we understand not that after he has
supplied his own Country, he will not only endeavor, but will soon be able, to
supply Flanders, Portugal, Spain, and the Streights, to gain an Advantage to
his own Subjects; for if we may break the Laws of Commerce, and lay what
Impositions he pleases upon our Cloth, and all other our Native Commodities,
even while we are at Peace with him, why may he not also lay an Imposition upon
all our Ships that pass the Streights, or that shall dare to Trade or bring the
same Commodities that he does in any Port of Italy, or Turkey, where the
Subjects of his Greatness comes? And when our Commerce is lost and our
Manufacture gone, and our Ships imposed upon that shall pass the Seas, what
shall be left to defend our selves in case we will not also receive his Codex,
or whatsoever he shall (for the greatness of his name) think fit to require of
us.

All which things, whether they be convenient not only to be wished but to be
Contributed to by a Law, I humbly leave to my Opponents themselves to judge. For
when the Trade that not only brings such a Revenue to his Majesty, but is the
Riches and Strength of this Kingdom shall be lost, as is now attempted, what
Way or Means may we as Rational Persons, think (on) to prevent any of those
Mischefs before mentioned.

This General being permised, I shall now enter upon the Discourse it self: the
main Aim or Scope of my Antagonist divides it self into two Parts, the one to
prove that there ought to be a Limited Transportation of Wool; the oath that
by a Limited Transportation of Wool the Price of it may be Raised: and by the
Raising of this, the Rents of Lands, may and will be increased, and his
Majesty's Customs greatly Advanced; and if these things were Really
Practicable, I should not only be so Just to my Self, and to my Opponents, but
so Just to the Nation, as not to put Pen to Paper to trouble the Reader, and
much less to expose my self to a Stage of Contention, as I am now like to do;
but for as much as the quite contrary will (if I mistake not) apear, I shall
therefore Examine and Weigh those Reasons and Grounds which my Opponent has
brought for those Assertions.

Whereas my Opponent does endavour to Alarm the Nation, that for want of the
vending our superfluous Wool abroad, that the Farmer and Landlord are so much
damnified, that the one cannot pay his Rent, nor the other sustain his Taxes;
and that this is the chiefest, if not the sole Reason of sinking our Rents, and
throwing up Farmers, and the Misery of the whole Country.

This Consiquence is not allowed, that being assigned for a General Cause,
which is but one amongst many, and that a very small one, the true Cause of the
abateing the Price of Land and lessening the Rents, shall be given in the
Answer to the next pretense in this Head; (Viz.) That it is much more the
Concern of the Nation to preserve the Nobility, Gentry, and those that the Land
of this Country belongs unto; rather than regard a few Artifficers, who are
employed in the working up of the Wool of this Nation, or to regard the
Merchant, who gains by the Exportation of our Manufacture.

I Humbly crave leave to say, that the said Argument does wholly depend upon a
Supposition, which is no way fit to be Granted, ( Viz.) as if the Intrests of
the Merchant, Mariner and Artisicer, were not only Opposite to, but wholly
Inconsistent with the Nobility, Gentry and Farmers, whereas there is nothing
more evident than the contrary; so that the whole Argument it Self falls for
want of a Foundation. For the clearing of which let us consider, that in as
much as it is Imposible, that we should defend our selves, as an Island,
otherwise than by the strength of our Shipping, and seeing this is much less
posible to be done now, at such a Juncture of Time when our nearest Neighbors
do (partly out of Fear, and partly out of Emulation) multyply Shipping upon us,
and use all endeavors that are possible to gain the Dominion of the Sea from
us, it is hence clear, that we must either say, that the Intrest of the
Nobility, Gentry, and Farmer, is not the same with the Intrest of the Nation,
or if it be the same with the Intrest of the Nation, it must be their Intrest
then, to uphold the Trade and Shipping of this Country, and Consequently to
uphold the Merchants.

But for as much as all that understand Trade, do well know that all the
Commerce of this Nation, does for the value and bulk of it, Entirely depends
upon the Woollen-Manufacture, Consequently it must be the Intrest of the
Nobility, Gentry, and Farmer, to uphold the Woollen-Manufacture, as much as
it is to uphold Trade, or to uphold the Strength of our Shipping by Sea. For
what will the Lands of the Nobility and Gentry profit them? or what will become
of the Privileges and Rights of English Men, if through the Loss of our
Woollen-Manufacture, we Loose our Trade, and by the Loss of this we want
Shipping to Defend our Selves?

To this Argument let us also add, that if there be no opposition between the
Intrest of the Nobility and Gentry, and the Intrest of the Farmer, (as no Man
does pretend there is) than there can be no Oposition between the Intrest of
the Nobility and Gentry, and the Intrest of the Artifficer, who Works up the
Wool of all the Country.

For besides the Profit that does arise to the Nobility and Gentry, by the
Houses which are taken, and by the Lands that are Rented by the Clothiers, and
by the Workmen under them it is well known, that the said Clothiers, and Workmen
are Serviseable to the Farmer, not only for the buying up of his Wool, but for
the buying up all manner of Victuals also; by the which not only one, but all
the parts of the Farmers Rents come to be discharged, one Clothier Employing
not only one, or two Hundred Persons, but sometimes one or two Thousand; and
Consequently, if we shall admit that there are in England not above five
Thousand Clothiers, and that each of these (one with another) do maintain but
two Hundred and Fifty Workmen, the whole will amount to upward of one Million;
whereof if we allow for each of these People but four pound Per. An. one with
another; the whole will amount to between four and five Millions of Pounds
Sterling Per. An. which Yearly Sum the Farmer does Immediately recieve, and
Consequently the Nobility and Gentry, from the Poor and Contemptible Artificer,
over and above what is further Contributed by them to the Shoomakers, Tailors,
and other Trades, that could not live and be Maintained without them, nor the
Farmer himels, if all these Trades should Fail.

And this leads us also, to take notice of another mistake in my Opponent, and
such as is no small one, which is, that in as much as it is Matter of Fact, and
such as may be clearly demonstrated; that there is at least if not much more
than a Milion of Persons, employed in the Clothing-Trade, and has their
dependence wholly upon the said Manufacture: It Is hence evedent, how much my
Opponent has mistaken himself in supposing, that though our Clothing-Trade
should be lost, yet all the Persons that are now employed in it, might find
work from the Farmers, foreseeing it is Matter of fact, that the Farmer is able
to supply himself with as many Laborers, and more than he has occasion for,
without so much as meddling with that of the Clothing-Trade: It must unavoydably
follow; that if our Manufacture should be totally lost, as there will be above
a Million of People; that must either Starve or Beg, or be put to the Charge of
several Parishes, or be forced to Steal or Rob, or leave the Kingdom; so it is
as evident that the Farmer after all this, will not only be less able to employ
Laborers, than he was before, but less able to pay his Landlord, by four or
five Millions every Year.

And when such an Abatement as this shall be made of the Farmers Income: I
shall leave it then to any wise Man to Consider what will become of the Price
of Lands, or Value of Rents, and how much this will advantage the Grower or
Breeder of Wool? and to make good this Computation, and free it from all
Suspision of Slightness, we will further offer to Consideration, that
whatsoever is the true Vallue of all the Woollen- Mannfacture of England, the
Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty do receive among them, near, if not more than
Nine Parts of Ten. For inasmuch as all who are well acquainted with the
Clothing-Trade, do know that it is not a Tenth Part of the Profit, nor
sometimes the Twentieth that is gained by the Clothier, or first Employer, who
frequently loses of the very Intrest of his Money; consequently it must of
necessity follow, that Nine of the Ten Parts, if not Nineteen of Twenty Parts
of the whole Value of the said Manufacture must be distributed to the Nation;
so that admitting the whole Woollen-Manufacture of this Nation, comprehending
Cloth, Stuffs, Bays, Stokings, and all other of the said Manufacture, do amount
to Four Milions of Pounds Sterling Per. An. (more or less) there will not come
of that Great Sum to the Clothier, or first Employer, much above Two Hundred
Thousand Pound (if so much;) so that Three Millions and Eight Hundred Thousand
Pounds Per. An. must of necessity be distributed to the Nation by Virtue, of
the said Clothing-Trade; whereof we cannot but suppose the Farmers, and
therefore the Nobility and Gentry must receive the greatest Part.

It is well known also, that it is solely by our Trade, that not only this
Great City of London it Self, but several other Large Cities of this Nation do
wholly Depend; and which, if our Trade were removed, they would soon be
deserted by their respective Inhabitants.

And then we cannot but offer to Consideration, where the Nobility, Gentry, or
Farmer, would find a Market for their Commodities, or find a Price answerable
to them.

All which Particulars I have been the larger in, to remove that Mistake, which
is almost as Distructive to the Nation, as the Pestilence it Self; which is
that mentioned by my Opponent (Viz.) that the Intrest of the Merchant, or the
Intrest of the Clothier and Artifficer is not Consistant with the Intrest of
the Nobility and Gentry; the contrary being made sufficiently to appear.

Another thing Alleged by my Opponent, is, that a Limited Exportation of Wool,
will be more for the Advantage of our Woollen Trade, and less for that beyond
the Sea, than the hindering of it has been.

Which Ascertion, if my Opponent had Really, Sufficiently, and Effectually made
good, he might justly have Merited the Name, for being the greatest Master of
Reason in England.

And indeed seeing a Paradox more strange, and more hard to be Conceived, could
not easily be stated, I could not but expect, that some Arguments more
Remarkable than ordinary, would Immediately have followed it, but finding
(contrary to my Expectation) nothing beyond a bare Affirmation, that if
Strangers had a Liberty to Buy what Wool soever they please, they would Pay
Dearer for it, then they do, and that our Clothiers would therefore have it the
Cheaper, and by this Advantage would be able to under-sel the Strangers in
their Manufacture: I say finding little or no thing more; to be brought, either
by way of Reason, or Argument, to maintain this Parradox, I was soon convinced
that it remained as incapable to be proved as it was before, and a little to
evidence the Improbability of the said Consequence, we shall here offer some
few Reasons to the Contrary.

And First I crave leave to say, that it is no way likely that the Grower in any
part of England, should not be willing to get the utmost Price for his Wool
that he can, and therefore not likely that any Grower whatsoever, will sell his
Wool to the Natives of this Country, for less Price than he presumes he may
have of Strangers: And therefore not at all likely, that our own Manufacturers
should Buy it Cheaper than others,

Secondly. Admiting that it should be made Unlawful, for any Strangers to Buy
up Wool, till such a time or season of the Year, to the end that our Clothiers
might first Provide themselves of what they need, yet it would no way follow,
but Strangers may have their Agents and Factors here, that may Purchase it at
the same ease, with the same conveniancy, and at the same Rates that our
Clothiers are like to do, nor can I perceive any thing propounded by my
Opponent, that would be able in the least, either to Prevent, or Obviate it.

Thirdly. And this great Omition in my Opponent, I could not but take the more
notice of, because if no Expedient can be found out by him (which I doubt there
will not) to prevent Strangers, from giving what Commissions they please, to
Buy up what Quantities of Wool soever they think fit, here in this Country; as
I see not how, or by what means, the Exportation of our Wool, should be any
way possible to be Limmited, so neither do I see how the Clothier here should
be sufficiently; certainly Furnished, or how the Manufacture it self should be
Capable of being any way preserved, and if these Mischeifs, and Inconveniences
cannot but follow, and cannot but be a Necessary Consequences of such a Law, as
is propounded by my Opponent; and that nothing to Obviate or prevent these
Inconveniences, has been either Regarded, or so much as attempted by him, I
cannot but take it to be a very great Blot to his Judgment, barely and boldly
to Offer at such a thing, which is attended with so much Hazard.

Fourthly. Because my Opponant seems to put his chiefest Stress in this, (Viz.)
that a large Custom may be put upon all Wool that is Exported by Strangers,
and that at least by this means, they may come to Pay double the Price of what
our Clothiers do, and not only so, but by this means also, his Majesty may
receive an Advantage by the Custom, that is Imposed upon it.

To try the weight or strength of this Expedient, or rather to show the Vanity
of it. Let us suppose that 3d. or 4d. Per Pound, should by a Law, be Imposed
upon all Wool, that shall be Shipped out by Strangers; or others, as it will not
follow, that the said Custom should be Paid to his Majesty, for one half of
the Wool, that shall be Paid to his Majesty, for one half of the Wool, that
shall be so Shipped out: Seeing under the Color of one Hundred Packs, many
Hundred may be Exported. So this will much the less follow, from the very
Observation; which my Opponent himself has made, of the nature of the Stealers
or Transporters of Wool; for if as he Confesses they will be content with
12d. a day profit so they may play the Merchants; and if they are content to
run the hazard of their Necks, and to be tried as Fellons, for so small a
matter as this amounts to, which cannot be above 8, or 10s. upon a Pack, how
much more then, will they be encouraged to steal the Custom of it when their
excuse shall be fairer, and their advantage much greater, and the hazard less a
hundred times then now it is? but in the fifth and last place, let us admit for
Arguments sake, that if 4l. was imposed upon every Pack of Wool that was
Transported, and let us admit, that all this Custom was duly Paid, yet I see
not the least Ground for my Opponents Confidence, that we shall for this Cause
be able to underfell the French, in the Woollen-Manufacture.

For beside that the Nature of their Manufacture being but flight; and such as
takes up much less Wool than ours does, and a great part of their warps, being
made of their fine spun Linnin and their own course Wool: I say besides this,
the Impositions that have been of late, Arbitrarily put upon all our
Woollen-Manufacture in France; and considering also there is no Custom at all
put upon Wool there, when Imported, both these will utterly prevent, our
selling the said Manufacture there, Cheaper than the French can make it, though
they shall not only give double, but treble the Price, that we our Selves do
give for Wool.

The next thing Alleged by my Opponant is, that our Forefathers did never
Prohibit the Transportation of Wool, unless upon some great Occasion, and for
a certain Season, till of late Years, for making good of which, a Summary of
several Statutes, are brought from the Time of Edward the 3d. downwards to our
Times.

For answer to all which Statutes, I shall make use of no other Argument, than
what my Opponent himself has put into my Mouth, which is; that Wool was for
many Ages, by the Wisdom of the Government, at least very often Prohibited; and
that whenever the Government it self saw, there was a greater Occasion than
ordinary for it, they did always Prohibit it; and Consequently, if the Intrest
of the Nation at present be such, and the circumstances relating to our
Neighbors about us, be not only so great, but so Instant and Importune, that
these two considered, there will be much more Reason, and much more Necessity,
for the Prohibiting of it now, than formerly.

Then all that my Opponent labors at, in producing Instances of other Kinds,
and where the Circumstances are not the same, falls wholly to the Ground; for
the clearing of which, let us consider, that the Circumstances peculiar to this
present Time are, that we have not only been Possessed for many Ages of the
Manufacturing of our Wool, but have of late so Improved our Trade and Commerce
by it, that we have Exported it by Shipping of our own, not only into France,
Portugal and Spain, but into Italy, Turkey, and to the remotests Parts of the
World.

By which means, as our Wealth came greatly to Increase, so we our selves
become more Powerful in Shipping than ever, which greatness of our Trade and
Strength of our Shipping being not only Observed, but forthwith Emulated by
some of our Neighbors, and seeing it was likewise clearly discerned, that the
chiefest means for the Maintenance of it proceeded from our
Woollen-Manufacture, as the Hollander therefore first, so the French since,
have by many undue Laws and Pressures upon us, contrary to the Ancient
Treaties of Peace and Commerce, endeavored to Rob the said Manufacture from us.

Nor is the state of the Contest now at present between us only, who shall have
the Trade, but who is fittest to have the Strength and Dominion of the Sea.

Wherefore if my Opponent be not only an Islander, but so much an Englishman,
and be so true a Subject to the Intrest of his Majesty, which I doubt not but
he is, as to think there is none so fit as his Majesty to Command the Sea, then
my Opponent must of necessity grant, that nothing ought at this time to be done
by us, that may hazard the greatness of our Trade and Commerce, and
Consequently, that nothing ought to be suffered by us, (so far as we are able
in any wise to prevent it) that may either lessen or endanger our
Woollen-Manufacture, and Consequently, if nothing can so much hazard it, and
hazard the very loss of our Trade, and of the Dominion of the Sea it self
through it, as the countenancing and contributing to the Woollen Manufacture
now set up in France, then this is not to be done by us, but is rather, if we
will pursue the Intrest of the Nation, by all means to be prevented by us.

And Consequently till my Opponent shall be able to make it appear, that the
Dominion of the Sea, if lost, will be no great harm to us, or till he make it
appear, that we are able to keep the Dominion of the Sea; even, notwithstanding
our Trade and Commerce should be utterly lost, and notwithstanding our
Woollen-Manufacture, should be wholly carried away by our Neighbors.

Or till he make it appear by other Arguments than hitherto he has done, that
the French though they increase their Woollen-Manufacture, will neither be able
to Under-sell us abroad, nor be able to prevent our Clothes and Stuffs from
going into France, as formerly.

I say till my Opponent shall be able to make good all these things, I must
crave leave to differ from him wholly, and plainly to affirm on the contrary.

1. That the Transportation of Wool, if allowed by a Law, can no way be
Limited. Because if the Transportation of Wool shall be allowed by a Law, no
means, (speaking rationally) is able to prevent the Hollanders, Flandrians, and
French, to give each of them such Commissions as they please, to Buy up here
what quantity of Wool soever, they shall think fit.

2. In regard that this can no way be prevented, and that my Opponent himself
offers not the least grain of an Expedient toward it: I therefore farther
affirm, that it cannot appear that our Clothiers or Manufacturers here, shall
have the least Privilege above the Stranger; either in point of Provision, or
point of Price.

3. That our Clothier, or Manufacturer here, must of necessity have a far
greater disadvantage, with reference to the furnishing himself, than the
Strangers abroad, in regard it cannot be thought, he shall be able to raise any
such stock of Money as the Stranger can, to prevent the Strangers Forestaling
of him; and Consequently (if it be Lawful to talk Reason) there can be no
ground to Imagine, that our Manufacture should not in short time be utterly
lost, and this being lost, as our Trade and strength at Sea must be Inevitable
lost with it, so not only the Honor, Wealth and Rents, but the very
Privileges, Liberty, and Property of the Nation, must be hazarded to such
Strangers as shall carry away the Trade and strength from us.

As to the next Allegation made by my Opponent, (Viz.) that the Transportation
of Wool, will better his Majesty's Customs: I see but little in it that may
require my Answer to it, inasmuch, as I have spoken already to this, under the
Fourth head: Nevertheless I must crave leave to say, that my Opponent here also
goes upon an extraordinary Mistake, it being not at all in dispute between us,
whether his Majesty's Customs would be bettered if a Subsidy were paid only
for that Wool that is now Exported, instead of having it all stolen: But the
dispute between us strictly is what his Majesty's Customs will hereafter
amount to, Comparatively to what they at present are, in case there should be a
Law for the free and Unlimited Exportation of Wool, and that by reason of this
Law, and the Consequences that must follow from it, our Woollen-Manufacture
shall come to be wholly and entirely lost: For it becomes not a wise Man (and
such I must in Civility Judge my Opponent to be) in making such Proposals as
tend to the altering of Laws, to look at the present only, but to look more
principally at the time to come.

And therefore it is not in this case at all, to be considered what the
advantage will be, that may come to his Majesty's Customs for a few months,
or a single Year, but it is to be considered, what the advantage or
disadvantage will be to his Majesty's Customs for the time to come; admitting
these Inconveniences, which I have before mentioned to be unavoidable, from
the Law which is Propounded by my Opponent.

Besides my Opponent cannot doubtless be so Ignorant, as not to have
Considered, that the greatness of his Majesty's Customs (which is at this Day
greater than ever) is not at all Raised Comparatively from the Export but from
the Import, which is 10. if not 20. times greater than the Export, the Vallue
of all which Import must proportionally fall, as the quantity of our
Manufactury shall fail to be carried out, and as our raw and unwrought Wool
alone shall instead of it be Exported, and Consequently to pretend that by such
a Law as is desired, his Majesty's Customs would be advanced, is either
greatly to betray Ignorance, or greatly to betray the Revenues of the Customs
it self.

The next thing alleged by my Opponent is, that the cause of the decay of our
Clothing does not lie in the Exportation of our Wool, but on the contrary,
(Viz.) because our Wool is noe more freely Exported than it is, and that we
may be sure not to mistake his Sense, herein he further adds, that inasmuch as
the decay and fall of our Manufacture, comes properly from, the Prohibition of
our Wool, the stopping or hindering of it is but the applying to our Disease a
wrong Remedy.

Which Argument, had it been brought by a Stranger, we should immediately have
turned it into Merriment, as supposing that he thought us such Children, that
any thing would easily Deceive us? but being brought by a Gentleman, and an
Englishman, I confess I could not possibly think what might be the meaning of
it, unless it were, that my Opponent was resolved to cross the Proverb for a
while, and by a piece of Wit to make it appear, that it is not always True,
that Intrest cannot Lie; for that nothing can be more contrary to Truth, than
what is here alleged, or more against the Intrest of the Nation, and of an
Englishman than what is here Asserted, (if that be the very Intrest of my
Opponent) is most Clear.

For if it be True which my Opponent faith, that the decay of our
Clothing-Trade, is not from our Exportation of Wool, but rather the Contrary,
because no more of our Wool is not Carried out Raw and Un-Manufactured, it
must follow then, by how much the more our Wool is thus Exported, by so much
the more our Manufacture will not only be Preserved, but Encouraged, and the
Reason for this must needs be, that if we are once rid of our Wool, and have
got a good Price for it, we need not trouble our heads so far as to Imagine,
that they who Buy it will do any thing with it, but only will lay it up to look
upon it: For if we shall Seriously Believe that they will have so much Wit as
to make Use of it, and to make Use of it as becomes Rational Persons, in order
to the Increase of their own Clothing by it, we cannot be so sottish as to
think, that they do intend after this to Buy our Manufacture any more, but do
on the contrary design to prevent, and shut out the Importation of it, as a
thing not Expedient for them.

And if this and no other be really the intent of Buying up of our Wool by our
Neighbors, then must it not necessarily follow, that by how much the more
Wool they have, by so much the more Manufacture they will make for the
Furnishing themselves, and Furnishing their Neighbors, and then by so much the
less Place, or Possibility, there will be that we should be able to Furnish
them, and then also by so much the greater stop must of necessity be put to the
Vending our own Cloths: And is it not plain that by how much the less we Vend
of our Manufacture, by reason of the Increase of it abroad in other Places, by
so much the more our Manufacture must decay: Not only in point of Price, but in
point of its Necessity and Use?

And is it not then as manifest, that by how much our Manufacture Decays, our
Trade must Decay, and our Wealth must Decay, and the Strength of our Shipping
must Decay, and we our selves must be the more made a Scorn, a Prey, and a
Laughing Stock by it to our Neighbors: And if all this be not for the Intrest
of the Nation, but the contrary wholly, is it not plain that my Opponent,
seeing he is an Englishman, and seeing it is for the Intrest of the Nation
that he Writes, does cross the Proverb, and give us a Demonstration by his thus
Arguing, that Intrest may now and then Lie, though not always?

But in the next place, to try whether my Opponent be in earnest, or not, let
me humbly Beg of him, to tell me truly, why those naughty Men that Usuerped the
Government in the Year 1647. did upon such Penalties strictly Prohibit the
Exportation of our Wool; if he faith, it was because they were not only
Rebels, but Men of no Reason, and Understood not the Intrest of the Nation:
Will he not by this brand many of the Parliament also that now sits? who though
they did not Confirm the Rebels Law, did think fit at least to make a new Law to
the same purpose, even soon after his Majesty's most happy Restoration.

Granting then that the Laws now in force of the 12 and 14 of his Majesty's
Reign, were not made by other, than by the Wisest and most Loyal Persons of
this Nation, the said Persons must consequently have some grounds or other for
making of the said Laws, and if we may guess at their grounds by their own
words in the preambles of the said Laws, they appear mainly to be these three
following, (Viz.)

1. For the setting on Work the Inhabitants of this Realm. 2. For the Improving
the native Commodities of this Country, to its beast, fullest, and utmost use.
3. And that the advantage accruing hereby might Redound to the Subjects of this
Kingdom, and not to the Subjects of foreign Realms, as hitherto, and as it
would, and must otherwise do.
WHerefore, either these Three grounds, when the said Laws were made, were
either good and sufficient Motives for the Prohibiting our Wool, and for the
laying so great a Penalty upon such as should Export it, or they were not: if
my Opponant shall say, they were not good and sufficient Grounds, then he must
say that the Wisdom of these Honorable and Loyal Persons, who at that time
served in Parliament, were indeed not much better than that of the Usurpers of
the Government in the Year 1647. But if the said grounds were Good, Valid, and
Sufficient, and such as did both Regard and Comprehend the True and Sincere
Intrest of the Nation; then my Opponent must confess, that the said Laws ought
to Stand, or he must show wherein the Case is altered now, from what it was
then, with reference to the said Motives or Grounds, that the said Parliament
then went upon, in making the said Laws. For,

1. If my Opponent can make it appear by Letters that he has lately received,
that the Hollanders have laid down their Woollen-Manufacture, and that they in
France are altogether grown Sick and Weary of it, and that the French King
has wholly forbidden it, and has released all the Impositions that he has of
late Years put upon it, then I must needs confess the Case is altered, and that
the said Laws ought Justly to be Repealed; or,

2. If my Opponent has received Information from sure and good Hands, that the
Hollanders make use of no other Wool than that of their own Grouth, though
they breed few or no Sheep; and that he has also received Information from
good and sure Hands, that the French make use only of their own Wool in all
their Manufacture; or,

3. If my Opponent can make it appear, that the setting on Work the Inhabitants
of this Realm, is not now a thing so conveniant or fit, as it was when the said
Acts were made; or,

4. If the Improving the Native Commodities of this Country to its best and
utmost Use, be found by Experience to be no good Policy, but to bring many
Inconveniences with it; or,

5. If it be much more advisable that Forreiners should go away with the Gain
of our Manufacture, and with the sweet of our Trade, rather than that his
Majesty's Subjects should have it, in all these Cases I must confess, it must
Inevitably be for the Intrest of the Nation to Repeal the said Acts, and lay
them aside.

But on the other hand, if none of all these Five Cases can possibly be put,
and that those very Reasons and Grounds do still remain, and are the same now,
which they were when the said Acts were made.

Then my Opponent's motion to Repeal the said Laws, must be against the Intrest
of the Nation, or Intrest does not always speast True; which was the Paradox
intended to be Argued by my Opponent.

As it is clear then, that by both these Arguments, my Opponent has wholly
mistaken himself in the Cause of our Manufactures decay, to evidence yet
farther the manifestness, and palpableness of this mistake, we affirm that it
is Matter of Fact, that our Woollen-Manufacture did greatly increase after the
said Prohibition of Wool; and not only increased, but bore a good Price, and
that I may not be found like some others, who regard not the Credit of what
they affirm (and particularly, like him who has contracted the Arguments of my
Opponent, and has published them together in one Sheet of Paper) I will to
justify what I say, appeal for the Truth of it, not only to the Custom House
Books, and to the quantity of Woollen-Manufacture there entered; but to the
Gentry themselves: And to the Price that the Land bore (and Victuals) for many
Years together after the said Prohibition.

Yea, as our Manufacture did increase for many Years together, after the said
Prohibition of the Exortation of Wool, so it had to this day still increased,
had not those accidents happened, that laid so effectual a Foundation for the
ruin of it, as it was neither in the Power of the Clothier, nor in the Power
of the Crown to prevent: I mean those new and immoderate Taxes, which were laid
upon our Manufacture by the French King, on purpose to encourage his own
workmen to gain the said Manufacture from us; and on purpose to prevent our
Cloth and Stuffs from being brought into his Country, (the Fruits of
Exportation of Wool) although we Yearly take of his Commodities, to the value
of above a Million of Pounds Sterling, and I mean in the second place, the
making that unfortunate Act against the Importation of Irish Cattle, which has
not only tended to the ruin of the Grower, but to the ruin of the Clothier,
and to the ruin of the very Trade of England it self; and which if it should
continue to stand un-repealed, must necessarily, and inevitably ruin more and
more: Both the Gentry, Merchant, and Clothier every day.

And therefore as a further Proof of what I say I shall give one instanca
instead of many, and leave the Truth of it to be strictly examined, and judged
accordingly; which is, that since the said accedents have befallen us (I mean
of the French Kings Arbitrary Impossitions upon us, and that Act against the
Importation of Irish Cattle) Exeter alone, has lost of what it did formerly
Vend, near, if not above three Hundred Thousand Pound Sterling every Year; And
if we shall reckon Proportionably for all other Countries and Cities, we shall
then easily see there is a Just Ground for the Decay of our
Woollen-Manufacture, and for the fall of the Price of our Wool by it, and for
the fall and ruin of our Rents, not as my Opponent Alleges by reason of the
Prohibition of Transporting our Wool, but truly and really by reason of the
Multiplycation and Increase of our Wool, to that degree, that the Exportation
of it has almost been Necessary, in the Judgment of some.

The serious consideration of which true and real cause of the decay of our
Manufacture, I shall humbly leave to the Wisdom of the Parliament. And shall
likewise leave it to their Wisdom to be considered, whether in this Conjuncture
of Affairs, and according to the Circumstances which now attend Us, while our
Neighbors do not only Emulate us, but are become actual Rivals with us, not
only for our Clothing, but for our Trade it self; and for our Strength and
Dominion at Sea, we shall, or ought so far to contribute toward the Design,
and toward the Certainty and Effectualness of our own Ruin, to permit at any
rate our Wool to be Exported, and by this means make our Neighbors scorn the
Commerce and Trade they formerly had with us, and thanked us for.

But if any Caveller should say that after all I cannot deny, but there is a
surplus of Wool which cannot be wrought up by Clothiers at home, and that I
offer not one word, how it should for the future be disposed of: (I answer)

1. That it appears not by any thing which my Opponent has hitherto said, at
least not by any thing that he has hitherto proved, that the Clothier either
cannot or does not work up the Wool of the proper grouth of England to the
full of it, but if a far greater quantity of Wool be brought into England from
Ireland then ever until of late Years, as the Clothier cannot be Responsible
for his not Buying up all the Wool which is sent into England, so neither can
he or ought he to be Responsible for the Glut proceeding from the Importation
of it, or for the cheapness of the said Wool, by reason of the said Glut. Non.
withstanding which Glut I may presume to say, (or at least to suppose) that if
an account was taken both in Ireland and England before the time of shearing,
there will not be found one quarters Grouth, or at the most 6 Months
Un-Manufactured, in the greatest Year of plenty of Wool and dullness of Trade;
which duly considered, does require more care for a stock beforehand in
England, and not to suffer it to be Engrossed and Stored up in France and
Holland as now it is: Which is the true cause of keeping our Markets low for
our Manufacture, and consequently that of Wool also, which when our Trade
shall be revived and brought into the right Channel, will be Encouraged by a
full Employment, we might find a want of Wool before the next shearing;
notwithstanding our great complaint of a Surplus of Wool, as it has
frequently accurd in Corn very lately, and more formerly as in Sr. Walter
Rawly's Remains.

2. If the proper and only way for removing all evil effects, be to remove
their respective causes, and that this is and must be acknowledged by all
rational Persons, then considering what we have said before, and not only said
but proved and made it appear, ( Viz.) that the cause of the said Surplus of
Wool (with the Cheapness of it at present) among us, is partly from the Irish
Act that Prohibiteth the bringing in of live Cattle, and puts the Kingdom upon
the Breeding of Wool whether they will or no, and partly by the Decay of our
Manufacture, through the supply that we our selves do make to our Neighbors of
our own Wool, for the Promoting of their Manufacture, to the Ruin of our
Selves.

The proper Remedy then, for the removeing the Cheapness of our Wool on the
one hand, and Employing our Poor, and Recovering of our Trade on the other
hand, must necessarily be the Restraining the Export of it from Ireland, and
from hence.

And here I must take the Boldness to say that where a Nation is not Rich in
Mines of Gold and Silver, it is not capable of being Enriched any other way,
than by its Manufacture.

And consequently if it be from our Manufactures alone, that the Riches of this
Nation comes, and if it be from our Manufacture chiefly that our Shipping is
Employed, and our Mariners bread, if it be from our Trading alone, and from
the Riches which our Trading brings in, that his Majesty's Customs are Raised,
and that our Fleet have been hitherto Built and Maintained, and the Dominion of
the Seas has been Preserved, than it is and must be from our Manufacture only
that our Bullion has been brought in, and that the Rents of our Nobility and
Gentry does Depend and are Sustained.

And therefore it must be granted me, that there is no higher Intrest in the
Nation, than that which preserves his Majesty's Customs, and that which
Sustains the Nobillity and Gentries Rents, and that which Supports our Navy and
Shipping.

Then in regard our Manufacture alone does all this, our Manuf^^ture alone and
the Encouragement of it must necessarily be the greater Intrest of the Nation
it self: And I must crave leave to say that whoever places it in any thing
elce (as the circumstances of this Nation, stands at present) must either
mistake the Intrest of this Nation, or can be no Friend to England.

Wherefore it must needs be plain to every person, that not only the breeding
of Wool, but the disposing of it, and the disposing of it to most Advantage,
is mow become the Intrest of the Nobility, Gentry, Yeomandry, and of all others
whatsoever that have a concern for the good of England and Ireland, and it
ought to be Indulged to none besides our Selves, whose whole proper and entire
Intrest it is, to be Sole Manufacturers, or Workers of it.

This Satisfaction also I had to encourage me to reprint my Sentiments, and
Observations ( viz.) that by one Gentleman a true lover of his Country's Good;
whom I take liberty to name for his Honor, which is Thomas Manly Esquire. of
Kent, who in 1677. published a Discourse, showing how far Exportation of Wool
is Distructive to this Kingdom; whose own words do best show his well grounded
Judgment and faithful regard to Englands welfare, I Transcribe them as they
stand, as an answer to the slender Reasons meanly alleged in favor of
Transportation of Wool, which are as follows; Viz.

1. Our store of Wool (say they) is so great, that we have sufficient both for
our selves and Neighbors. 2. Its free and unrestrained Exportation will
occasion a greater increase in its price, which will sustain our drooping
Rents, and draw considerable sums of Money from abroad, for so desirable a
Commodity. 3. That tho we use all care imaginable to prevent its Exportation,
yet our Neighbors, by means of our own People, draw great quantities from us.
4. It Is to small purpose to keep our wool at home, for that Ireland supplies
our Neighbors therewith to a great degree. 5. This Prohibition of wool is a
new practice, unknown to us till within these twenty years, and yet before that
time, both wool and Drapery yielded the best Rates for above 60 years last
past.
To the First I Answer.
1. That I conceive our Yearly increase of Wool is now no greater than when
the Rates were double, nay treble, to what they now are; and if so, the fall
and meanness of the price proceeds purely from the loss of Foreign Markets for
our Drapery, and from our own forsaking the wear of it, and not from the
quantity above what we had 30 or 40 years ago.

2. It Is very manifest how the Rates of Wool these last 15 or 16 years, have
graduly fallen from bad to worse, and how as by degrees we have increased in the
wearing of Silk, Camlets, and frowsie French Drugets, and as our Neighbors,
especially the French, have enlarged their Woollen-Manufacture by means of our
Wool, which they mix with theirs, just so have the Rates of this Commodity
with us sunk almost beyond belief.

3. That seeing we have a multitude of People, who for want of employment, want
bread, and that the price of Wool here is so low as to tempt us to let out
that commodity, which the wisdom of this Trading Age has hitherto secured
under Public Prohibition, as being the prime fund of our Trade and Navigation,
and which is so necessary to our active Neighbors, that no Laws, how Penal
soever, have yet totally debarred them from it, what do we else by such a
design, but declare that henceforth, being not able to manage that Manufacture,
we abandon all thoughts of an advantageous commerce, necessitate our people to
live on us, or dye at our doors, and surrender to our Neighbors that
Manufacture for which we were so notorious? is not, this at once, to cast the
Childrens bread to strangers; and to remain for ever without hopes to maintain,
after such a dereliction, any Manufacture which our Neighbors may have a mind
to snatch from us?

4. If our Neighbors could have Wool as good to all intents and purposes, and
as plentiful and cheap from other Countries, it might peradventure, be
advisable, how far we ought to keep ours at home; but the case being
otherways, and they (our Rivals) being not able to carry on that Manufacture
effectually without it, it seems a great mistake and dangerous to spare it on
any terms.

To the second Reason; That it will occasion the Rates of Wool to rise, and
thereby sustain our drooping Rents, etc.

I Answer.
1. The were and use of Silk, Camlets, etc. have so far supplanted that of
Drapery in Europe, that we must never rationally expect those Rates for Wool
which were usually given 30 or 40 years ago.

2. If we find bad markets for Drapery now Wool is cheap it is very improbable
our Neighbors will take so much Wool from us as to raise the price thereof to
that degree as may sustain our falling Rents; for the dearer we sell them our
Wool the dearer they must sell their Drapery, and consequently sell so much
less; or else it will be our shame or ill fortune that they shall vent much
Drapery made of dear Wool, and we vend little or none, now Wool is cheap.

3. The more Markets our Neighbors supply with Drapery, by means of our Wool,
the less Drapery we must Export; the reason is, because there is a certain and
determined quantity of Cloth consumed by the Trading World; whence it must
necesarily follow that so much Wool as they receive from us, so much less
Drapery we our selves shall Export, and consequently the price of Wool remain
the same it was before those Laws were repealed.

4. Upon repealing those Laws we may bid adue to the Exportation of Drapery;
the reason is, because our Neighbors live, work and Navigate cheapter than
we; and having once our Wool in common, must necessarily undersell, and beat
us out of Trade: It being a great mistake to imagine that the Exportation of
our Wool and Drapery may consist together; and as great a mistake to suppose
that the pretended increase of the Rates of Wool occasioned by an allowance of
its Exportation, may balance the mischefs accruing thereby; because a Pound of
Wool Manufactured and Exported, is of more worth to as by employing our
People, than ten Pound Exported raw at double the present Rates; unless, which
is not reasonable to imagine, we could introduce some other better employment
for them.

5. If our Neighbors tread on our heels in this Manufacture, begin to supply
us with their Drapery at home, and to supplant us therewith abroad, having only
their own corse Wool; which they mix with ours obtained at dear rates (by
reason of secrecy and many chargeable contrivances always attending a
Prohibited tra^^ick) there is no doubt, when once the prohibition is removed,
and they by that means plentifully supplied therewith (which in an open and
allowed commerce is always cheapest) but that they will soon beat us wholly
out of that Trade, and by consequence e're long out of all other Commerce and
Navigation to boot.

6. The Exportation of our Wool will be so far from sustaining our drooping
Rents, that tho we may Export the whole yearly grouth thereof, yet I conceive
it will not answer the value of our Drapery, which hitherto we have yearly
Exported, and by consequence, so much loss must redown to us, as the Wool
Exported may be of less value than our Drapery; without any consieration had to
the want of employment for our People, or to the insignificant Navigation which
the Freight of Wool will occasion, compared with that of Drapery; and how
Politic it may be to lessen the value of our Exits, which already are so
trivial, and so exceedingly overballanced by Importations to foment our luxury,
I leave to the j^dgment of every Man, who considers that it is the Exportation
of the Growth and Manufactures, which deserves the name of Trade, and makes a
Nation Rich.

7. But suppose that by repeal of the Laws the value of our Wool should rise
considerably (which for the reasons already given is very improbable) whereby
our Neighbors should be enabled to manage that important Manufacture, which
otherwise they could never effect, must it not necessarily follow, that as they
enlarge their Drapery so ours must lessen, and gradually shrink to nothing, our
Navigation decline for want of so staple a Commodity wherewith to Traffic, our
Treasure yet more conveyed abroad to manage a wanton and Luxurious Commerce,
multitudes of our People who subsisted by that Manufacture Exposed to ruin,
and as many in every Age, thereby becoming useless and poor, must become
chargable, and may become dangerous to the Kingdom: all which must and will
inevitably subdue our Rents to a degree far beyond any relief or benefit, we
may reasonably expect from any increase of the price of Wool, occasioned by
the repeal of our Laws: hence an experienced Merchant, who in other Commodities
was himself a great smugler, used to say, that the offense of Exporting Wool,
was like that Sin not to be forgiven; (though of an higher Nature) nor can the
injury then be less to the Commonwealth if it go out by a Law?

To the third Reason for repealing our Laws; That our Neighbors with the help
of our People, get great quantities of our Wool daily from us, notwithstanding
those Laws to the contrary.

I Answer.
1. That such practices are showed evidences of what esteem that commodity is
among them, and that what is thus purloyned cost the Receiver dear, by reason
of secrecy, subtle contrivances, etc. as has been already hinted, (for who
will venture hanging for nothing?) which upon repealing those Laws will come
freely to them, without any such encumbrances, and consequently cheapter,
whereby they may be enabled to contest with us in this important Manufacture on
even Terms.

2. Our Neighbors by these under practices either have or have not sufficient
of our Wool already; if they have, there will be no need of repealing those
Laws, and we may justly charge the present dullness of Foreign Markets for our
Drapery, upon the Export of our Wool by these vile practices; which must needs
grow worse when those Laws are repealed; but if they have not enough by reason
of the prohibition, let us thank the Laws for it; and yet observe that it is a
pregnant Argument that by our Wool, thus unduly obtained, they manage a
considerable Manufacture, for it seems they get great quantities from us; and
that if they had more they would enlarge their commerce, which must necessarily
undermine and lessen ours.

3. It is better particular Persons do Acts hurtful to the Public against Law,
than for want of a Law, because this latter would reflect on the wisdom of the
Government.

4. Should we repeal the Laws against the Exportation of Wool, because against
Law Wool is exported, we should transcribe their wisdom that would repeal Laws
against Felony, because ill Men contrary to Law commit Robberies; or immitate
those who will not shut their doors because Thieves sometimes break in at the
windows.

To the fourth Reason, That it is to small purpose to keep our Wool at home,
for that Ireland supplies our Neighbors therewith, etc.

I Answer.
1. If this be true, it is to small purpose to permit its Exportation in hopes
to put a better value on it, which is the most avowed reason for the repeal:
for if our Neighbors be plentifully supplied therewith from Ireland, where
it is much cheaper at present than with us, (and probably ever will) there is
small reason to expect better Rates for Ours: for who will give us six pence
for that pound of Wool, which in Ireland may be had for four pence? unless it
may be granted that ours is better than that of Ireland; which few of the
Adjutators will, for certain Reasons, be willing to confess.

2. If the Irish Wool enables the Forreigner to carry on that Manufacture to a
degree hurtful to us, we have small reason to assist them further therein by
affording them ours, seeing they enjoy advantages, too many already; least we
immitate those good Men, who break the pot because their Wives break the
pitcher; ruin our selves because Ireland hurts us.

To the last Reason, that the prohibition of Wool is a new practice unknown to
us till within this twenty years, and yet before that time, both Wool and
Drapery yielded the best Rates, for above 60 years last past.

I Answer.
1. That it is very true, but it does not follow that the prohibition was
therefore necessary, or that the same brought a prejudice upon either; but that
other reasons already given,, must be assigned for the fall and meanness of the
Rates of those Commodities; it being no ways questionable, but that the
Exportation of our Drapery had long since expired, had not the prohibition of
Wool interposed.

2. Statutes are provided to answer the present emergence and reason of
Affairs, and adapted to the occasion and Interest of the Age wherein they are
made, so that what was judged unnecessary in former Ages, may be of superlative
use in this; and if the reason thereof again cease, may be as insignificant in
the next.

3. We had no need of such restraining Laws long before they were enacted; for
till the peace of Munster, England alone enjoyed almost the whole Manufacture
of Europe: But France (who then also received Woollen-Drapery from us) agitated
since that peace by a most sagacious Counsel (who understands the advantages of
Manufactures and Navigation) and filled with an active nnd enterprising People,
'has unhappily added that Manufacture to the many other advantages they enjoy
for commerce, above most other Nations; and has all things propitious for the
managing thereof except fine Wool, such as ours is, to mix with their own:
Must our Ancestors proceedings then who were governed by reasons far different
from ours, be presidents to us? or is it not rather high time to employ our
utmost skill to retain so necessary a Commodity at home.

I have lately met with one Merchant of no small pretenses to the intrigues of
Trade, who, although he will not allow that the Rates of Wool may increase
upon the repeal of our Laws, (which is the prime reason alleged for repeal of
the prohibition) yet affirms that if the prohibition were removed, and due
Imposts charged upon Wool, it might thereby, better than the prohibition, be
either retained at home, or rendered so chargeable to our Neighbors, that we
might have sufficient advantages over them in that Manufacture.

To which, I Answer.
1. That he which affirms all this, must maintain, that either His Majesty's
Officers of His Customs will be more industrious to Collect the Duties, and
Imposts so to be charged on this Commodity, than they were to make Seizures of
it by virtue of the prohibition, though they had a Moiety of the Seizure, or that
the Exporters will be more conscientious in paying His Majesty's Impostes, than
they were in obeying His Laws which prohibited the Exportation, though they
ventured their Necks into the bargain, or that the Forreigner may be less
desirous of it after the repeal than before.

2. The Imposts must be either much, or little; if much, it may be worth
venturing to save the payment; as is so frequently practiced in payments of the
like nature; but if they be little, the payment of them will be easily
balanced, by the advantages our Neighbors have over us in cheap diet, labor,
etc. as has been already showed.

If, to what has been said, it be replied, that it is better Export Wool, than
neither Wool nor Drapery.

I Rejoyn.
1. That it is so, were it true that we Exported no Drapery, and remained
without hopes of ever sharing again in Foreign Markets: but thanks be to God
Matters are not yet arrived to so ill terms, and probably never will, unless
some aspiring Neighbor (who may design to engross all Traffic) beat us out of
the Mediterranean Sea, or that we let out our Wool by a Law.

2. If we do yet more effectually provide to keep our Wool at home, it is a
thousand to one but our Drapery will off: but if once we Export our Wool by a
Law (charge it with what Impost, and confine it to what Ports and seasons you
please, as some vainly or slily propose) we may bid an Eternal adieu to the
Exportation of our Woollen-Manufacture.

Who will buy our Wool, seeing we slight it our selves? will the French? to
what end? to employ their People, and carry on a Manufacture as universal as
their other designs, have they not of late charged our drapery with heavy
impositions, merely to discourage its coming among them, the better to employ
their own people? and must we then return the civility with such advantage to
them?

4. And lastly, to Export our Wool because at present we want vent for our
Drapery, is for ever to confirm in that want; and is a choice like pulling
down my house for fear it may be burnt, or like hanging my self least any other
kill me.

Thus far Mr. Manley; but before I Conclude, give me leave to ad one Testimony
more, Written by an unknown Author; under the name of a Letter from a Younger
Brother in Ireland, to an Elder Brother in England: Occasioned by the Act
against Irish Cattle, Printed the same Year 77. the sum of which follows, viz.
THe ^all of Rents, cheapness of Wool, and decay of Manufacture in England,
being Sugjested to be principally occasioned by Ireland, the Irish Cattle were
thereupon Prohibited, by an Act of Parliament, and declared to be a public
Nuisance.

Admitting that some off those Counties might be prejudiced by the Importation
of Irish Cattle, yet whatsoever proffit accured to others by it, did upon the
mutual necessities of all, settle into the common Stock of the Nation. And it
seems but reasonable that whatsoever private obligation a Parliament Man has
to the place where he is Elected, yet, when once he comes to sit, his Trust and
his mind is enlarged, and he does no more consider himself as the Politician of
a Shere, or the Patron of a Borrough; but as a Representor of the universality:
whereas otherwise, if any County, one or more chance to be more Fertile than
other in Members of Parliament, and they Act by such narrow Measures; the
decision would be by multitude, not by Reason.

And notwithstanding if we were to tell Counties, those that are not advantaged
and are realy agrieved, make the greatest plea, for if we account like
Merchants by Proffit and loss, all the proffit that can be made (and that very
small) by this Act, returns to such Counties which are proper for breeding, and
that small proffit is l^st to them, if not much more by their Corn for want of
Trade by it, and the whole Nation has hereby lost in great measure the vent of
its home and Foreign Commodities to Irland, and the increasing product to
England in general by Irish Cattle, in Specia.

But as to the Political Point, you did herein, as much as in you then lay to
cut off all that strong as more Natural dependence of Ireland upon England,
and to govern it rather by the force of Authority, than by the Influencial
benignity of Intrest.

Ireland being thus exposed, their Corn not fit for Transportation put them
upon increasing their Flocks of Sheep, which produced great quantities of
Wool, by which means the price in England consequently decreased, through the
whole Kingdom, though the Irish Wool with the duty in Ireland fraughts and
Facturing, the Charges wear 2d Per Pound, for that in the judgment of some, as
the Irish Cattle was grown to a Nuisance so the increase of Wool occasioned by
the Prohibiting Act, comes to the same Fate.

That as among our English Gentry, whose Rents depend upon the product of
Wool, do find their Estates by the late cheapness of it, much reduced, yet
there are other reasons than Irish Wool.

But than first of the Manufacture in Ireland, about 20 years some Westren
Clothiers reduced to extreme poverey, moved themselves and their Families over
into Ireland, invited by the cheapness of Wool and Victuals there, which
Errected then a Manufacture at Dublin, which has since increased. About the
same time 60 Families from Holland come to Lymrick which by the occasion of the
succeeding War decayed; but after this more of the English Clothiers went over
and fixed about Cork and Kingsale, where they continue and are grown not
inconsiderable: some French have since resorted to Waterford, to make Druggets
there, and other Commodities of their fashion, and about a year or two ago
some Merchants of London raised another Manufacture at Clonmell, managing it by
Agents.

But a more evident and certain reason of yours and our consuming for want of
vent or consumption, is the wares with which formerly, and of late years Europ
has generally been infested, so that in most parts thereof which were supplied
from you, the People have been much Impoverished, and thereby necessitated to
be their own Clothier first and from thence Enabled, (industry increasing,)
some of them to furnish their Neighbors. And to this several of your own
Subjects have concurred, who either not finding themselves well and easy at
home, or intised over by greater profit, have instructed Foreigners in the
whole Mystery of Clothing, till they now have made it a staple Commodity, thus
by the reciprocation of humane Affairs, that Trade which the Wars, upon the
foreigners reffuge with you, first introduced, is upon occasion of the Wars
recovered back again, and the Drapery restored to them in great measure, even
by the means of your own Subjects, furnishing them with Wool. But the grand
Spring of this whole Matter lies in Frame, that King is a most vigilent and
Potent Prince etc. for he has made War with all Europe, with his Sword,
against his Enemies; but against his Frinds by Trafique; which is indeed as the
more just, so the most effectual way of destroying them: But among all, none
has on this later account more suffered than England, for besides the Wine
which we purchase at most Excessive Rates, and for the most part with pure
Money; and besides these Trinkets, of which we are so fond, and to the making
of which the French Genius was formerly Adapted, he has now for many years,
applied his People to the more solid Trades of Cloth, and Stuffs; indeed of all
things valiable, embracing in effect, or in projection, the universel Monarchy
of Commerce; never did any Prince except ours, addict himself so wholly to the
encouragement of Trade and Navigation, etc. To this he has either wholly
Prohibited, or, which is Tant^^neunt, laid so excestive Impositions upon all
English Manufacture, etc that they are in a manner totally excluded, and you
have no Commodity to exchange with, but whatever you have of his must be Bought
with a Penny, insomuch that I have seen hear a particular, drawn up as it is said
in your Parliament; wherein they computed besides, the Lucrum Cessaerum, that
your Nation sustains a clear loss of Eleven Hundred Thousand Pounds Yearly by
the French Trade; hereby the French, that were before, at best, but the
Milliners of Europe, are now become, or pretend to be, the Cape Merchants, and
their King gives, not only the Mode, but the Garment to all Christendo^e; and
the World puts it self into his Livery at their own Expenses; well may you
complain of the Death rather than the Deadness of your Manufacture, when from
this Cause it receives such an obstruction, even to Suff^cation, when you are
not only deprived of that general and gainful v^nt that you had formerly in
France it self, but in all other Places where you Traffic, you meet the
French now at every turn; and the Foreign Post brings news from all Parts that
they are before you, and have undersold you in the same Commodities.

And to this Disease so Mortal, and which is beyond any private Man to remedy,
your selves do more particularly contribute, by those vast quantities of Wool
which they tell us here, are daily and now more than ever Transported for
France (a thing that you always prohibited, but it seems, at least some of, you
always Tolerate) so that in effect Calice is still no less your Staple, than
while it was formerly under the English Dominion, I will not excuse Ireland
from the same Crime; although in less Proportion; but you have I hear, a Milicia,
that in Defiance of all Authority, Convey their Wool to the Shallop with such
Strength that your Officers dare not offend them: While whatsoever we do of
that kind, is more Modest; and wheresoever it looses its way afterward at Sea,
it is first entered for England, and pays, both the King's Duty and that to the
Lord Lieutenant, for License; so that as we cannot Trade, so neither can we
Steal with you on equal Terms; by this time I hope you are satisfied and
convinced that Ireland deserves not your Complaint, but your Pity; and that
those things which some have ascribed to us, are but the common Calamity of
both Nations, occasioned by the Flux of Humane Affairs and Accidents of the
present Conjuncture through Europe; and therefore that you will not only consult
how to redress our common Grievance, but that you will also remedy those more
particular Pressures that we suffer by or under you: Whether you will think fit
to reverse your Act against our Cattle, I know not; nor can I answer for the
Effect that it would produce; but I have often observed how gladly Waters that
have been diverted, return and fall into their former Channel.

Though I am no Politician, dare say in General, that it concerns you to use us
kindly, and to Indulge us in all things that tend to Civilize, Cultivate, and
People this Nation.

FINIS.

