A PROPOSITION For the ADVANCEMENT Of EXPERIMENTAL Philosophy.

By A. COWLEY.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman; and are to be sold at his Shop
at the Sign of the Blew-Anchor in the Lower-Walk of the New-Exchange, 1661.

To the Honorable Society for the Advancement of Experimental Philosophy.
THe Author of the following discourse, having since his going into France
allowed me to make it public, I thought I should do it most right by
presenting it to Your Considerations; to the end that when it has been fully
examined by You, and received such Additions or Alterations as You shall think
fit, the Design thereof may be promoted by Your recommending the Practice of it
to the Nation. I am,

Your most humble Servant, P. P.

A PROPOSITION For the ADVANCEMENT Of LEARNING.

By A. COWLEY.

VIRG. O Fortunati quorum jam Maenia surgunt! LONDON, Printed by J. M. for
Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Blew Anchor in the
Lower-Walk of the New-Exchange, 1661.

The Preface.
ALL Knowledge must either be of God, or of his Creatures, that is, of Nature;
the first is called from the Object, Divinity; the latter, Natural Philosophy,
and is divided into the Contemplation of the Immediate or Mediate Creatures of
God, that is, the Creatures of his Creature Man. Of this latter kind are all
Arts for the use of Humane Life, which are thus again divided: Some are purely
Humane, or made by Man alone, and as it were entirely spun out of himself,
without relation to other Creatures, such are Grammar and Logic, to improve
his Natural Qualities of Internal and External speech; as likewise Rhetoric
and Politics (or Law) to fulfill and exalt his Natural Inclination to Society.
Other are mixed, and are Man's Creatures no otherwise then by the Result which he
effects by Conjunction and Application of the Creatures of God. Of these parts
of Philosophy that which treats of God Almighty (properly called Divinity)
which is almost only to be sought out of his revealed will, and therefore
requires only the diligent and pious study of that, and of the best
Interpreters upon it; and that part which I call purely Humane, depending
solely upon Memory and Wit, that is, Reading and Invention, are both
excellently well provided for by the Constitution of our Universities. But the
other two Parts, the Inquisition into the Nature of Gods Creatures, and the
Application of them to Humane Uses (especially the latter) seem to be very
slenderly provided for, or rather almost totally neglected, except only some
small assistances to Physic, and the Mathematics. And therefore the Founders
of our Colleges have taken ample care to supply the Students with multitude of
Books, and to appoint Tutors and frequent Exercises, the one to interpret, and
the other to confirm their Reading, as also to afford them sufficient plenty
and leisure for the opportunities of their private study, that the Beams which
they receive by Lecture may be doubled by Reflections of their own Wit: But
toward the Observation and Application, as I said, of the Creatures
themselves, they have allowed no Instruments, Materials, or Conveniences.
Partly, because the necessary expense thereof is much greater, then of the
other; and partly from that idle and pernicious opinion which had long possessed
the World, that all things to be searched in Nature, had been already found and
discovered by the Ancients, and that it were a folly to travel about for that
which others had before brought home to us. And the great Importer of all
Truths they took to be Aristotle, as if (as Macrobius speaks foolishly of
Hippocrates) he could neither deceive nor be deceived, or as if there had been
not only no Lies in him, but all Verities. O true Philosophers in one sense!
and contented with a very Little! Not that I would disparage the admirable Wit,
and worthy labors of many of the Ancients, much less of Aristotle, the most
eminent among them; but it were madness to imagine that the Cisterns of men
should afford us as much, and as wholesome Waters, as the Fountains of Nature.
As we understand the manners of men by conversation among them, and not by
reading Romances, the same is our case in the true Apprehension and Judgment
of Things. And no man can hope to make himself as rich by stealing out of
others Truncks, as he might by opening and digging of new Mines. If he conceive
that all are already exhausted, let him consider that many lazily thought so
hundred years ago, and yet nevertheless since that time whole Regions of Art
have been discovered, which the Ancients as little dreamt of as they did of
America. There is yet many a Terra Incognita behind to exercise our diligence,
and let us exercise it never so much, we shall leave work enough too for our
Posterity.

This therefore being laid down as a certain Foundation, that we must not
content our selves with that Inheritance of Knowledge which is left us by the
labor and bounty of our Ancestors, but seek to improve those very grounds, and
add to them new and greater Purchases; it remains to be considered by what
means we are most likely to attain the ends of this virtuous Covetousness.

And certainly the solitary and unactive Contemplation of Nature, by the most
ingenious Persons living, in their own private Studies, can never effect it.
Our Reasoning Faculty as well as Fancy, does but Dream, when it is not guided
by sensible Objects. We shall compound where Nature has divided, and divide
where Nature has compounded, and create nothing but either Deformed Monsters,
or at best pretty but impossible Mermaids. It Is like Painting by Memory and
Imagination which can never produce a Picture to the Life. Many Persons of
admirable abilities (if they had been wisely managed and profitably employed)
have spent their whole time and diligence in commentating upon Aristotle's
Philosophy, who could never go beyond him, because their design was only to
follow, not grasp, or lay hold on, or so much as touch Nature, because they
caught only at the shadow of her in their own Brains. And therefore we see that
for above a thousand years together nothing almost of Ornament or Advantage was
added to the Uses of Humane Society, except only Guns and Printing, whereas
since the Industry of Men has ventured to go abroad, out of Books and out of
Themselves, and to work among Gods Creatures, instead of Playing among their
Own, every age has abounded with excellent Inventions, and every year perhaps
might do so, if a considerable number of select Persons were set apart, and
well directed, and plentifully provided for the search of them. But our
Universities having been founded in those former times that I complain of, it
is no wonder if they be defective in their Constitution as to this way of
Learning, which was not then thought on.

For the supplying of which Defect, it is humbly proposed to his Sacred
Majesty, his most Honorable Parliament, and Privy Council, and to all such of
his Subjects as are willing and able to contribute any thing toward the
advancement of real and useful Learning, that by their Authority,
Encouragement, Patronage, and Bounty, a Philosophical College may be erected,
after this ensuing, or some such like Model.

The College.
THat the Philosophical College be situated within one, two, or (at farthest)
three miles of London, and, if it be possible to find that convenience, upon
the side of the River, or very near it.

That the Revenue of this College amount to four thousand pounds a year.

That the Company received into it be as follows.

1. Twenty Philosophers or Professors. 2. Sixteen young Scholars, Servants to
the Professors. 3. A Chaplain. 4. A Baily for the Revenue. 5. A Manciple or
Purveyour for the provisions of the House. 6. Two Gardeners. 7. A Master-Cook.
8. An Under-Cock. 9. A Butler. 10. An Under-Butler. 11. A Surgeon. 12. Two
Lungs, or Chemical Servants. 13. A Library Keeper who is likewise to be
Apothecary, Druggist, and Keeper of Instruments, Engines, etc. 14. An Officer
to feed and take care of all Beasts, Fowl, etc. kept by the College. 15. A
Groom of the Stable. 16. A Messenger to send up and down for all uses of the
College. 17. Four old Women, to tend the Chambers, keep the House clean, and
such like services.

That the annual allowance for this Company be as follows. 1. To every
Professor, and to the Chaplain, one hundred and twenty Pounds. 2. To the
sixteen Scholars 20l a piece, 10l for their diet, and 10l for their
Entertainment. 3. To the Baily 30l besides allowance for his Journeys. 4. To
the Purveyour or Manciple thirty pounds. 5. To each of the Gardeners twenty
Pounds. 6. To the Master-Cook twenty Pounds. 7. To the Under-Cook four Pounds.
8. To the Butler ten Pounds. 9. To the Under-Butler four Pounds. 10. To the
Surgeon thirty Pounds. 11. To the Library Keeper thirty Pounds. 12. To each
of the Lungs twelve Pounds. 13. To the Keeper of the Beasts six Pounds. 14. To
the Groom five Pounds. 15. To the Messenger twelve Pounds. 16. To the four
necessary Women ten Pounds. For the Manciples Table at which all the Servants
of the House are to eat, except the Scholars, one hundred sixty Pounds. For 3
Horses for the Service of the College, thirty Pounds.

All which amounts to three thousand two hundred eighty five Pounds. So that
there remains for keeping of the House and Gardens, and Operatories, and
Instruments, and Animals, and Experiments of all sorts, and all other expenses,
seven hundred and fifteen Pounds.

Which were a very inconsiderable sum for the great uses to which it is
designed, but that I conceive the Industry of the College will in a short time
so enrich it self as to get a far better Stock for the advance and enlargement
of the work when it is once begun; neither is the continuance of particular
men's liberality to be despaired of, when it shall be encouraged by the sight of
that public benefit which will accrue to all Mankind, and chiefly to our
Nation, by this Foundation. Something likewise will arise from Leases and other
Casualties; that nothing of which may be diverted to the private gain of the
Professors, or any other use besides that of the search of Nature, and by it
the general good of the world, and that care may be taken for the certain
performance of all things ordained by the Institution, as likewise for the
protection and encouragement of the Company, it is proposed.

That some Person of Eminent Quality, a Lover of solid Learning, and no
Stranger in it, be chosen Chancellor or President of the College, and that
eight Governors more, men qualified in the like manner, be joined with him,
two of which shall yearly be appointed Visitors of the College, and receive an
exact account of all expenses even to the smallest, and of the true estate of
their public Treasure, under the hands and oaths of the Professors Resident.

That the choice of the Professors in any vacancy belong to the Chancellor and
the Governors, but that the Professors (who are likeliest to know what men of
the Nation are most proper for the duties of their Society) direct their choice
by recommending two or three persons to them at every Election. And that if any
learned Person within his Majesty's Dominions discover or eminently improve any
useful kind of knowledge, he may upon that ground for his reward and the
encouragement of others, be preferred, if he pretend to the place, before any
body else.

That the Governors have power to turn out any Professor who shall be proved
to be either scandalous or unprofitable to the Society.

That the College be built after this, or some such manner: That it consist of
three fair Quadrangular Courts, and three large grounds, enclosed with good
walls behind them. That the first Court be built with a fair Cloister, and the
Professors Lodgings or rather little Houses, four on each side at some distance
from one another, and with little Gardens behind them, just after the manner of
the Chartreux beyond Sea. That the inside of the Cloister be lined with a
Gravel-walk, and that walk with a row of Trees, and that in the middle there be
a Parterre of Flowers, and a Fountain.

That the second Quadrangle just behind the first, be so contrived, as to
contain these parts. 1. A Chapel. 2. A Hall with two long Tables on each side
for the Scholars and Officers of the House to eat at, and with a Pulpit and
Forms at the end for the public Lectures. 3. A large and pleasant Dining Room
within the Hall for the Professors to eat in, and to hold their Assemblies and
Conferences. 4. A public School-house. 5. A Library. 6. A Gallery to walk in,
adorned with the Pictures or Statues of all the Inventors of any thing useful
to Humane Life; as Printing, Guns, America, etc. and of late in Anatomy, the
Circulation of the Blood, the Milky Veins, and such like discoveries in any
Art, with short Elogies under the Portraictures: As likewise the Figures of all
sorts of Creatures, and the stuffed skins of as many strange Animals as can be
gotten. 7. An Anatomy Chamber adorned with Skeletons and Anatomical Pictures,
and prepared with all conveniences for Dissection. 8. A Chamber for all manner
of Druggs, and Apothecaries Materials. 9. A Mathematical Chamber furnished with
all forts of Mathematical Instruments, being an Appendix to the Library. 10.
Lodgings for the Chaplain, Surgeon, Library Keeper and Purveyour, near the
Chapel, Anatomy Chamber, Library and Hall.

That the third Court be on one side of these, very large, but meanly built,
being designed only for use and not for beauty too, as the others. That it
contain the Kitchen, Butteries, Brew House, Bake-house, Dairy, Lardry, Stables,
etc. and especially great Laboratories for Chemical Operations, and Lodgings
for the Underservants.

That behind the second Court be placed the Garden, containing all sorts of
Plants that our Soil will bear, and at the end a little House of pleasure, a
Lodge for the Gardener, and a Grove of Trees cut out into Walks.

That the second enclosed ground be a Garden, destined only to the trial of all
manner of Experiments concerning Plants, as their Melioration, Acceleration,
Retardation, Conservation, Composition, Transmutation, Coloration, or
whatsoever else can be produced by Art either for use or curiosity, with a
Lodge in it for the Gardener.

That the third Ground be employed in convenient Receptacles for all sorts of
Creatures which the Professors shall judge necessary for their more exact
search into the nature of Animals, and the improvement of their Uses to us.

That there be likewise built in some place of the College where it may serve
most for Ornament of the whole, a very high Tower for observation of Celestial
Bodies, adorned with all sorts of Dyals and such like Curiosities; and that
there be very deep Vaults made under ground, for Experiments most proper to
such places, which will be undoubtedly very many.

Much might be added, but truly I am afraid this is too much already for the
charity or generosity of this age to extend to; and we do not design this after
the Model of Solomon's House in my Lord Bacon (which is a Project for
Experiments that can never be Experimented) but propose it within such bounds
of Expense as have often been exceeded by the Buildings of private Citzens.

Of the Professors, Scholars, Chaplain, and other Officers.
THat of the twenty Professors four be always traveling beyond Seas, and
sixteen always Resident, unless by permission upon extraordinary occasions, and
every one so absent, leaving a Deputy behind him to supply his Duties.

That the four Professors Itinerant be assigned to the four parts of the World,
Europe, Asia, Afrique, and America, there to reside three years at least, and
to give a constant account of all things that belong to the Learning, and
especially Natural Experimental Philosophy of those parts.

That the expense of all Dispatches, and all Books, Simples, Animals, Stones,
Metals, Minerals, etc. and all curiosities whatsoever, natural or artificial,
sent by them to the College, shall be defrayed out of the Treasury, and an
additional allowance (above the 120l) made to them as soon as the Colleges
Revenue shall be improved.

That at their going abroad they shall take a solemn Oath never to write any
thing to the College, but what after very diligent Examination, they shall
fully believe to be true, and to confess and recant it as soon as they find
themselves in an Error.

That the sixteen Professors Resident shall be bound to study and teach all
sorts of Natural, Experimental Philosophy, to consist of the Mathematics,
Mechanics, Medicine, Anatomy, Chemistry, the History of Animals, Plants,
Minerals, Elements, etc. Agriculture, Architecture, Art Military, Navigation,
Gardening; The Mysteries of all Trades, and Improvement of them; The Facture of
all Merchandises, all Natural Magic or Divination; and briefly all things
contained in the Catalogue of Natural Histories annexed to My Lord Bacon's
Organon.

That once a day from Easter till Michaelmas, and twice a week from Michaelmas
to Easter, at the hours in the afternoon most convenient for Auditors from
London according to the time of the year, there shall be a Lecture read in the
Hall, upon such parts of Natural Experimental Philosophy, as the Professors
shall agree on among themselves, and as each of them shall be able to perform
usefully and honorably.

That two of the Professors by daily, weekly, or monthly turns shall teach the
public Schools according to the Rules hereafter prescribed.

That all the Professors shall be equal in all respects (except precedence,
choice of Lodging, and such like privileges, which shall belong to Seniority
in the College) and that all shall be Masters and Treasurers by annual turns,
which two Officers for the time being shall take place of all the rest, and
shall be Arbitri duarum Mensarum.

That the Master shall command all the Officers of the College, appoint
Assemblies or Conferences upon occasion, and preside in them with a double
voice, and in his absence the Treasurer, whose business is to receive and
disburse all moneys by the Masters order in writing, (if it be an
extraordinary) after consent of the other Professors.

That all the Professors shall sup together in the Parlour within the Hall
every night, and shall dine there twice a week (to wit Sundays and Thursdays)
at two round Tables for the convenience of discourse, which shall be for the
most part of such matters as may improve their Studies and Professions, and to
keep them from falling into loose or unprofitable talk shall be the duty of the
two Arbitri Mensarum, who may likewise command any of the Servant-Scholars to
read to them what he shall think fit, whilst they are at table: That it shall
belong likewise to the said Arbitri Mensarum only, to invite Strangers, which
they shall rarely do, unless they be men of Learning or great Parts, and shall
not invite above two at a time to one table, nothing being more vain and
unfruitful then numerous Meetings of Acquaintance.

That the Professors Resident shall allow the College twenty Pounds a year for
their Diet, whether they continue there all the time or not.

That they shall have once a week an Assembly or Conference concerning the
Affairs of the College and the progress of their Experimental Philosophy.

That if any one find out any thing which he conceives to be of consequence, he
shall communicate it to the Assembly to be examined, experimented, approved or
rejected.

That if any one be Author of an Invention that may bring in profit, the third
part of it shall belong to the Inventor, and the two other to the Society; and
besides if the thing be very considerable, his Statue or Picture with an Elogy
under it, shall be placed in the Gallery, and made a Denison of that
Corporation of famous Men.

That all the Professors shall be always assigned to some particular
Inquisition (besides the ordinary course of their Studies) of which they shall
give an account to the Assembly, so that by this means there may be every day
some operation or other made in all the Arts, as Chemistry, Anatomy,
Mechanics, and the like, and that the College shall furnish for the charge of
the operation.

That there shall be kept a Register under lock and key, and not to be seen but
by the Professors, of all the Experiments that succeed, signed by the persons
who made the trial.

That the popular and received Errors in Experimental Philosophy (with which,
like Weeds in a neglected Garden it is now almost all overgrown) shall be
evinced by trial, and taken notice of in the public Lectures, that they may no
longer abuse the credulous, and beget new ones by consequence of similitude.

That every third year (after the full settlement of the Foundation) the
College shall give an account in Print, in proper and ancient Latin, of the
fruits of their triennial Industry.

That every Professor Resident shall have his Scholar to wait upon him in his
Chamber and at Table, whom he shall be obliged to breed up in Natural
Philosophy, and render an account of his progress to the Assembly, from whose
Election he received him, and therefore is responsible to it, both for the care
of his Education, and the just and civil usage of him.

That the Scholar shall understand Latin very well, and be moderately
initiated in the Greek before he be capable of being chosen into the Service,
and that he shall not remain in it above seven years.

That his Lodging shall be with the Professor whom he serves.

That no Professor shall be a married man, or a Divine, or Lawyer in practice,
only Physic he may be allowed to prescribe, because the study of that Art is a
great part of the duty of his place, and the duty of that is so great, that it
will not suffer him to lose much time in mercenary practice.

That the Professors shall in the College wear the habit of ordinary Masters
of Art in the Universities, or of Doctors, if any of them be so.

That they shall all keep an inviolable and exemplary friendship with one
another, and that the Assembly shall lay a considerable pecuniary mulct upon
any one who shall be proved to have entered so far into a quarrel as to give
uncivil Language to his Brother-Professor; and that the perseverance in any
enmity shall be punished by the Governors with expulsion.

That the Chaplain shall eat at the Masters Table, (paying his twenty pounds a
year as the others do) and that he shall read Prayers once a day at least, a
little before Supper-time; that he shall preach in the Chapel every Sunday
Morning, and Catechize in the Afternoon the Scholars and the Schoolboys; that
he shall every month administer the Holy Sacrament; that he shall not trouble
himself and his Auditors with the Controversies of Divinity, but only teach God
in his just Commandments, and in his wonderful Works.

The School.
THat the School may be built so as to contain about two hundred Boys.

That it be divided into four Classes, not as others are ordinarily into six or
seven, because we suppose that the Children sent hither to be initiated in
Things as well as Words, ought to have past the two or three first, and to have
attained the age of about thirteen years, being already well advanced in the
Latin Grammar, and some Authors.

That none, though never so rich, shall pay any thing for their teaching; and
that if any Professor shall be convicted to have taken any money in
consideration of his pains in the School, he shall be expelled with ignominy
by the Governors; but if any persons of great estate and quality, finding
their Sons much better Proficients in Learning here, then Boys of the same age
commonly are at other Schools, shall not think fit to receive an obligation of
so near concernment without returning some marks of acknowledgement, they may,
if they please (for nothing is to be demanded) bestow some little rarity or
curiosity upon the Society in recompense of their trouble.

And because it is deplorable to consider the loss which Children make of their
time at most Schools, employing, or rather casting away six or seven years in
the learning of words only, and that too very imperfectly:

That a Method be here established for the infusing Knowledge and Language at
the same time into them; and that this may be their Apprenticeship in Natural
Philosophy. This we conceive may be done, by breeding them up in Authors, or
pieces of Authors, who treat of some parts of Nature, and who may be understood
with as much ease and pleasure, as those which are commonly taught; Such are in
Latin Varro, Cato, Columella, Pliny, part of Celsus, and of Seneca, Cicero de
Divinatione, de Natura Deorum, and several scattered pieces, Virgil's
Georgicks, Grotius, Nenesianus, Manilius; and because the truth is we want good
Poets (I mean we have but few) who have purposely treated of solid and learned,
that is, Natural Matters (the most part indulging to the weakness of the world,
and feeding it either with the follies of Love, or with the Fables of gods and
Heroes) we conceive that one Book ought to be compiled of all the scattered
little parcels among the ancient Poets that might serve for the advancement of
Natural Science, and which would make no small or unuseful or unpleasant
Volumn. To this we would have added the Morals and Rhetoricks of Cicero, and
the Institutions of Quintilian; and for the Comoedians, from whom almost all
that necessary part of common discourse, and all the most intimate proprieties
of the Language are drawn, we conceive the Boys may be made Masters of them, as
a part of their Recreation and not of their task, if once a month, or at least
once in two, they act one of Terences Comoedies, and afterward (the most
advanced) some of Plautus his; and this is for many reasons one of the best
exercises they can be enjoined, and most innocent pleasures they can be
allowed. As for the Greek Authors, they may study Nicander, Oppianus (whom
Scaliger does not doubt to prefer above Homer himself, and place next to his
adored Virgil) Aristotle's History of Animals, and other parts, Theophrastus and
Dioscorides of Plants, and a Collection made out of several both Poets and
other Grecian Writers. For the Morals and Rhetoric Aristotle may suffice, or
Hermogenes and Longinus be added for the latter; with the History of Animals
they should be showed Anatomy as a Divertisement, and made to know the Figures
and Natures of those Creatures which are not common among us, disabusing them
at the same time of those Errors which are universally admitted concerning
many. The same Method should be used to make them acquainted with all Plants;
and to this must be added a little of the ancient and modern Geography, the
understanding of the Globes, and the Principles of Geometry and Astronomy. They
should likewise use to declaim in Latin and English, as the Romans did in
Greek and Latin; and in all this travel be rather led on by familiarity,
encouragement, and emulation, then driven by severity, punishment, and terror.
Upon Festivals and playtimes they should exercise themselves in the Fields by
riding, leaping, fencing, mustering and training after the manner of Soldiers,
etc. and to prevent all dangers and all disorder, there should always be two of
the Scholars with them to be as witnesses and directors of their actions; In
foul weather it would not be amiss for them to learn to dance, that is, to
learn just so much (for all beyond is superfluous, if not worse) as may give
them a graceful comportment of their bodies.

Upon Sundays, and all days of Devotion, they are to be a part of the Chaplains
Province.

That for all these ends the College so order it, as that there may be some
convenient and pleasant Houses thereabouts, kept by religious, discreet, and
careful persons, for the lodging and boarding of young Scholars, that they have
a constant eye over them to see that they be bred up there piously, cleanly,
and plentifully, according to the proportion of their parents expenses.

And that the College, when it shall please God either by their own industry
and success, or by the benevolence of Patrons; to enrich them so far, as that
it may come to their turn and duty to be charitable to others, shall at their
own charges erect and maintain some House or Houses for the Entertainment of
such poor men's Sons whose good Natural Parts may promise either Use or Ornament
to the Commonwealth, during the time of their abode at School, and shall take
care that it shall be done with the same conveniences as are enjoyed even by
rich men's Children (though they maintain the fewer for that cause) there being
nothing of eminent and illustrious to be expected from a low, sordid, and
Hospital-like Education.

Conclusion.
IF I be not much abused by a natural fondness to my own Conceptions (that
(...) of the Greeks, which no other Language has a proper word for) there was
never any Project thought upon, which deserves to meet with so few Adversaries
as this; for who can without impudent folly oppose the establishment of twenty
well selected persons in such a condition of Life, that their whole business
and sole profession may be to study the improvement and advantage of all other
Professions, from that of the highest General even to the lowest Artisan? Who
shall be obliged to employ their whole time, wit, learning, and industry, to
these four, the most useful that can be imagined, and to no other Ends; first,
to weigh, examine, and prove all things of Nature delivered to us by former
ages, to detect, explode, and strike a censure through all false Moneys with
which the world has been paid and cheated so long, and (as I may say) to set
the mark of the College upon all true Coins that they may pass hereafter
without any farther Trial. Secondly, to recover the lost Inventions, and, as it
were, Drowned Lands of the Ancients. Thirdly, to improve all Arts which we now
have; And lastly, to discover others which we yet have not. And who shall
besides all this (as a Benefit by the by) give the best Education in the world
(purely gratis) to as many men's Children as shall think fit to make use of the
Obligation. Neither does it at all check or enterfere with any parties in State
or Religion, but is indifferently to be embraced by all Differences in opinion,
and can hardly be conceived capable (as many good Institutions have done) even
of Degeneration into any thing harmful. So that, all things considered, I will
suppose this Proposition shall encounter with no Enemies, the only Question is,
whether it will find Friends enough to carry it on from Discourse and Design to
Reality and Effect; the necessary Expenses of the Beginning (for it will
maintain it self well enough afterward) being so great (though I have set them
as low as is possible in order to so vast a work) that it may seem hopeless to
raise such a sum out of those few dead Relics of Humane Charity and Public
Generosity which are yet remaining in the World.

FINIS.

