CAPTIVITY Improved to SPIRITUAL PURPOSES, Or Spiritual Directions, Given to
PRISONERS Of all sorts whether Debtors or Malefactors.

Principally designed for the use of those who are Prisoners in those Prisons
which are under the Jurisdiction of the City of London, as Newgate, Ludgate,
the Counters, etc.

Though also applyable to others under the like circumstances else where.

To which are annexed Directions to those who have their Maintenance and
Education at the public charge, as in Christ-Church Hospital, or Cures, as in
St. Bartholomew's and St. Thomas's, or reducement to a more Thrifty course of
Life, as in Bridewel, or have been happily restored to their former sense, as
in Bethleem, alias Bedlam.

London, P(...)d by I. Redmayne. 1675.

THE PREFACE.
IT is an Act of Prudence in any man that designs any thing for public View,
to consider, First within himself, whether what he is to offer be useful in it
self; not better handled by other Authors, who have written upon the same
Subject before, and whether what he writes be suitable to the profession and
employment of the Author: And if these three circumstances ever concurred in
any discourse that has yet passed the Press, I think, I may safely say, they
do in this that I am now to treat upon, for the subject cannot be denied to be
very useful, the main end of it being to improve captivity to spiritual
purposes, and to teach Prisoners how to behave themselves under those
afflictions which are but for a moment; so as to make them instrumental toward
the attainment of an eternal weight of glory. They that have the enjoyment of
their Liberty, have not so great need of such directions as these men have:
Their Liberty which is a great advantage in it self, carries with it also many
advantages for their improvement in spiritual things; they have the freedom of
access to their spiritual Guides, the choice of learned men, with whom they may
if they please discourse in the affairs and concerns of their souls, and which
is an advantage beyond all these, the liberty of frequenting, as often as they
please the public Congregations, where they have the offices of Religion
performed, not only every Christian Sabbath, but in diverse places of this City,
every day; but such conveniences as these, are wanting to Prisoners under
their consinements, for in many parts of this Nation there are no constant
Ministers allotted to those places, and though the care of this City have
provided better here, assigning to every Prison under their inspection, a
particular Preacher, yet impossible it is, that any one man should divide
himself to attend to all the particular exigencies of every Prisoner, and
therefore it is very necessary, that such men should be provided with such a
Counselor, whom they may advise with when they please, such printed directions
as they may read whenever they will. Now although this Subject may well be
accounted very useful upon the grounds now mentioned, yet I find none that have
treated upon the whole matter here offered by me, and few that have insisted
upon any part of it, and those few had been fewer, but that lately the
necessities of Prisoners were in some measure provided for by the pious pains
of one Mr. Flower the Worthy Rector of St. Margaret Lothbury, not long since
offered to the Right Honorable the Court of Aldermen, and received by them
with a kind approbation; but that discourse consisting either only or chiefly
of Prayers and Ejaculations, may well be thought to have left room for another
Writer, who pursues the same general end, the good of Prisoners, by a
different method, the providing for them such directions, as are suitable to
guide them in those duties which are proper for their present conditions: And
if the doing of this be agreeing to the profession of any man living, it is to
mine, who am at this time actually a Preacher, licensed by the Reverend Father
in God Lord Bishop of London, and appointed by the Right Honorable the Court
of Aldermen, with the encouragement of a considerable Salary to one of those
Prisons, for the use of which this discourse is designed; and though I have
enlarged my Meditations something further, then my particular charge obliges
me to do, yet I hope, that what is a commendation in ordinary charity, will be
accounted no fault in that which is spiritual, that it is communicative: In the
pursuing these ends I have chosen a style suitable to the Subject I am treating
on, not set off with Courtly expressions or Quaint Phrases, but in plain words,
suitable to the Truths I am to deliver, and to the poor people I am to
instruct: Nor have I only provided for the consolation of those with whom I
have to do, as knowing, that men of ill lives, as too many of them are, may
many times have more comfort administered to them, then they are fit for, or
then is fit for them, but I have sincerely endeavored to instruct them, not
only in more pleasing duties, but in those also that are more severe, and have
chosen rather to anger the sore than skin it over; where I have thought
corrosives to be more proper for my patients, than applications of a milder
nature: This in general may suffice to have been said concerning the general
design of this Treatise; my particular method shall be this: First, to
discourse concerning the duties of those that art Prisoners for Debt: Secondly,
to proceed to those that are Malefactors in a lower rank, whose penalty is,
some public disgrace or corporal punishment, or any infliction under that of
Death. Thirdly, I shall endeavor to offer something suitable to the condition
of those, who are actually under the sentence of Death, and are under the
constant exspectation of the speedy Execution of it upon themselves. And all
which I shall say under these heads, will be very proper to some one or other
of those that are under my particular charge and inspection, and as to some of
the forementioned particulars, not improper to the conditions of those that are
Prisoners in Ludgate, the Fleet, the Counters, or other Prisons: But because
diverse Hospitals also are under the care of that City which I serve, and by
whose allowance my labors are encouraged, I shall subjoyn diverse things which
are useful to them, and give some directions suitable to those that are
educated at the public expense, as in the Hospital of Christ-Church, or are
healed of their wounds and other infirmities, as in St. Bartholomew's, or are
restored to their wits and senses, so far forth, as the use of Physic and
humane means will contribute, with the blessing of God upon them, as in
Bethleem, commonly called Bedlam, or are reduced from a lose and extravagant,
to a more diligent and thrifty life, as in Bridewel. And because what man can
say, will be unsuccessful, unless the spirit of God set it home on men's hearts,
I shall to every one of those Chapters subjoyn such prayers as are proper to
the matter discoursed of in them: And, that what I shall say may be the more
useful, and the more readily applied to the exigencies of those for whom it is
designed; I shall distribute my matter into several Chapters, suitable to those
several heads already propounded, that whoever shall think fit to make use of
this Book, may easily find what is proper to his particular condition; and, if
he so please, let the rest alone; I shall begin with the condition of those,
who are Prisoners for Debt.

Directions suitable to those who are Prisoners for Debt; which may be
applyable to the condition of such as are Prisoners in Ludgate, the Fleet; or
either of the Counters, or Newgate, as it is the County Prison for Debt, etc.

THere are some who have made great boasts of some excellent (...) or Universal
Medicine for all ailings, but those who have better considered things, find
that it is more prudent to appropriate a particular Medicine to every
particular disease, and withal to have regard to the temper and constitution of
the Patient, with other circumstances attending his condition, and as it is in
our natural infirmities, so also is it in our spiritual; general applications
are seldom of any efficacy against particular sins, but he that would be a
successful Physician of souls, ought to divide the word aright, and not only
deliver general truths, but take care to bring them home as much as may be to
every man's particular case; and this course I shall observe in what I have to
offer for the good of Prisoners, where according to my propounded method, I
begin with Debtors, and these, according to the causes of their troubles, may
be ranked into two sorts: First, Some there are, a more innocent sort of
Debtors, who have not drawn their miseries upon themselves, but have fallen
into them by the severe providence of God toward them, whether in losses at
Sea, or the failing of their Creditors, whose ruin hastens theirs also, or by
other methods, better known to Tradesmen, then Divines: Besides these.
Secondly, There are another sort, who have fallen into want by luxury or riot,
extravagancy or ill Husbandry, and endeavored to get rid of it by Knavery, and
Fraud, and unjust Compositions, rather choosing to tire their Creditors by
delaying arts, and a seeming patience under their confinement then to discharge
themselves of their Debts, by more honest and righteous ways; and as the cases
of these two are different, so the directions for them must be different
likewise: To the former of these my directions, shall be: First to own and
acknowledge the Justice of Gods providence toward them, although as yet they
cannot tell the particular reasons of it: To men under these circumstances Job
may be a very suitable pattern, who under greater losses then most men usually
suffer, yet patiently said, The Lord gave, the Lord has taken away, Blessed be
the name of the Lord, Job 1. 21. and as proper for them may be the example of
Eli, who upon the receipt of very unwelcome news, very piously said, It is the
Lord, let him do what seems him good 1 Samuel 3. 18. and to these they may
subjoyn a pattern far greater then either of these, that of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, who after he had prayed for the removal of that bitter
Cup, yet quietly submitted to the pleasure of God in it, with that pious
ejaculation, Not my will but thine be done, St. Luke 22. 42. Too usual it is
for men to fret at second causes, and to murmur at those, who are but as
instruments in Gods hand, but they that seek for the ground of their troubles
no higher then this seek too low, for there is a providence above that orders
all, a wisdom above that directs all, and a hand generally unobserved by most
men that guides all things for the good of those who love and fear him; and it
is our spiritual prudence to look above these lower causes, and observe that
higher; thus did Joseph, who gratefully acknowledges the providence of God in
the severity of his Brethren, and their unkindness toward him, as for you,
says he, you thought evil against me, but God meant it for good, Genesis 50. 20.
Thus did David, when Shimei cursed him, Abishai flies out in revenge against
the Instrument, but David discerns the hand of God in it, Let him alone, let
him curse, for the Lord has bidden him, 2 Samuel 16. 11. and if Prisoners for
debt, design for themselves any Christian advantage by their afflictions, here
they ought to begin the course of their spiritual improvements, in discerning
the all disposing providence in his just permission and wise ordering of them
for the good of those who are exercised thereby.

Secondly, When Debtors have discerned the hand of God in their afflictions, it
is their duty to exercise that patience which becomes Creatures under their
corrections from a gracious Creator: It must be confessed, that it is very
natural for men the more to repine at their sufferings, by how much they think
themselves the less deserving of them: What we deserve, we think we ought
quietly to suffer, but it adds to the fretfulness of our Spirits, when we
consider, that men less righteous then our selves, are yet more prosperous then
we are; this was that which troubled Jeremiah, more then any of the evils which
we underwent, because he saw the Way of the wicked to prosper, and them to be
happy who dealt treacherously, Jerem. 12. 1. This much troubled the mind of
Habbacack, that God seemed to connive at the wickedness of mankind, and to hold
his tongue, when the wicked devoured the man that was more righteous then he,
Hab. 1. 13. This troubled Job, who was the scorn of them that were at ease, and
David that the wicked prevailed against him: But when good men suffer under the
pressures of Imprisonment, or such like afflictions, they may allay the
disquietness of their Spirits by such considerations as these.

First, That that inequality which seems to be in the dispensations of God
toward good and bad men, is only confined to this World, but that all things
will be set right in the retributions of another: Righteous Lazarus in this
life, may be brought to those straights as to want a piece of bread, but little
reason has he upon that account to fret at his own condition, or envy at that
of Dives, seeing the time is coming, when he shall be comforted, the other
tormented, St. Luke 16. 25. Judgment indeed does begin at the house of God, but
that Judgment is mixed with mercy, but desperate will the end of those be that
obey not the Gospel, 1 St. Pet. 4. 17. All the evil things that good men
receive, they receive in this life, and when this life ends, they are at an end
of their troubles, and happiness commenceth that shall never end, and all the
good things which the wicked men receive, they receive only in this World, and
hereafter they shall give a very dreadful account for all those mercies that
they have abused here; and therefore very little reason have they that are
righteous, to murmur at those afflictions which shall so soon end, or to envy
to the wicked those mercies, for which they must give so sad a reckoning.

Secondly, When good men suffer under that Imprisonment which is the result
rather of their misfortune then their (...), they have little reason to
complain, as if they suffered more then they did deserve, for how innocent
soever we may be before men, there is no man but is guilty before God: He that
punishes a man of upright intentions and just purposes, merely because he
cannot pay the Debt which he has contracted, and which he desires, if he
could, to satisfy, is cruel and unmerciful, and as he has shown Judgment
without mercy, so there is a time coming wherein he shall want the mercy
himself, which he denied to others, and as he has shown no mercy to others, so
in his Case also mercy shall rejoice against Judgment, St. Iam. 2. 13. But
whatsoever may be said of the prosecutor, God is not unjust, to punish those
that are sinners against him, by the hands of those that are more sinful then
themselves, nay very frequent it is, for God to correct the sins of those that
belong to him by the hands of those that are more unrighteous than they: Thus
the sins of Israel are punished by the Caldeans, of David by Saul, of Joseph by
his wicked Brethren; and in these cases, they that afflict shall bear their
sin, because they have used severity to those that have not deserved it at
their hands, but those that are afflicted have no reason to repine at the
Justice of God, as if he were unrighteous, to make use of wicked men as his
Rod, and his Scourge, and the Instruments of his displeasure against them for
their particular transgressions committed against him.

Thirdly, Another consideration to allay the impatience of such men's spirits,
may be this, that those very miseries which they groan under, are sent by God
with designs of love and mercy, the afflictions of their Bodies are sent as
Physic to their Souls, and the sufferings of one as improvements of the other:
To this import, are those many assertions in Scripture, that all things work
together for good to them that love God, Romans 8. 28. That our light afflictions
which are but for a moment, work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight
of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. and while our outward man perishes, our inward man is
renewed day by day, ver. 16. of the same Chapter: And therefore it would be
spiritual prudence to convert our murmurings into spiritual cautions and holy
diligence, how we may improve all our sufferings to so great and to so
spiritual purposes, which if we should do, we shall have no reason to grieve
that we have suffered so much, but much reason to rejoice, that these our
sufferings have proved unto us so happy an opportunity of enhancing our Crown
of glory.

Thirdly, A third duty which I shall direct such Prisoners to, is to pray to
God for an happy deliverance out of their troubles, but with the reserve of a
quiet submission unto his Will, if he shall see the continuance under their
afflictions more fit for them: Both parts of this duty are recommended in the
example of our Savior before cited. When he was to dye, he prayed for the
averting of that bitter Cup, but when he perceived that God had determined
otherwise concerning it, he declares his desire, to submit rather to the Will
of God than choose his own: Prayer is a proper remedy against all sorts of
afflictions: If any man be afflicted, let him pray, James. 5. 13. and as God
has made it our duty to pray, so he has made it his particular style, that he
is a God learning prayer

And if he be attentive to any prayers more than others, he is so to the
prayers of the afflicted: This is more than once asserted in the 102. Psalm, He
will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer, ver. 17.
He has looked down from the height of his Sanctuary, from Heaven did the Lord
behold the Earth, to hear the groanings of the Prisoners, to loose those that
are appointed to dye, ver. 19. 20. Our poverty is the time of our destitution
from men, and though the rich has many friends, the poor is forsaken of his
Neighbors, but that which discommends us to men, most potently recommends us
to God; who, in diverse places of Scripture has made it his most peculiar
style, that he is a Father to the Fatherless, a Husband to the Widow, and
adjutor in opportunitatibus, a ready help in time of trouble, and therefore it
is not only our duty that we should, but our privilege and advantage that we
may cast our care upon him who cares for us, 1 Pet. 5. 7. Among all these
duties it is not only allowable but very commendable for those that are
Prisoners to endeavor their liberty by all just and prudent methods, such as
are, receiving such supplies as they can get from their more wealthy friends,
accepting of such contributions as they may have from the charity of merciful
and well minded men, the offering of such compositions as the meanness of their
circumstances will enable them to make, and such honest methods as these: For
our endeavors are very consistent with Gods Providence, and our diligence with
his blessing, and so far is our dependence upon God from discouraging our
industry, that it is rather proper to promote it, for God hears not the prayers
of the Lazy, but sends an answer to our Petitions in his blessing upon our
Diligence: But above all things we must be careful that our streights prove not
our temptations, that our trouble put us not upon any indirect courses to
deliver us from it, for he that thus endeavors to draw his foot out of the
snare, does but by fluttering entangle himself the faster, and change not his
trouble but his Prosecutour, and as man has been his adversary hitherto, so
makes God to be so for the time to come, and discharges himself from the first
rank of men, to whom I designed these directions, and has placed himself into
the second, that of ungodly Debtors.

And so men may be upon a double account, either First with reference to the
beginning of their troubles when they fall into these streights, by their own
profuseness, or prodigality, or Luxury, or negligence, or ill husbandry; or
secondly with reference to the means that they use to extricate themselves out
of their troubles; as fraudulent compositions, or unrighteous arts, or unjust
concealment of that estate with which they might pay their Debts, or any other
such ungodly Methods as these: The Directions suitable to such as these may be.

First, That they would not appropriate to themselves any of those promises
which the Scripture give toward the support of those that are in an afflicted
condition: For it is not afflict on that entitles to the particular Patronage
of God, but either the causes o^ it when it is for righteousness sake, or ou^
Christian deportment under it, but setting aside these two considerations, a
man is never a whit the more a Child of God for being chastised, nor does any
man entitle himself to those promises that are made to mourners, by having
drawn trouble upon himself by his own folly and extravagance, or injustice; or
unrighteousness, for there are afflictions that are not chastisements but
judgments, not the effects of God's fatherly correction, but of his just
indignation. The Midianites were distressed, yet not a jot the more to be
accounted God's people for it, Pharaoh severely scourged by God, yet not the
more a Saint upon that account. Those Nations that oppressed Israel had their
time of being led into Captivity as well as others, and yet no Title to those
promises made to Captives. Good men ought to humble themselves under those
Fatherly corrections, which the Wisdom of God thinks fit to exercise them with:
But evil men should be awakened by those judgments which are sent to them for
their obduracy in their sins, and which fall upon them as the results of their
sinful follies.

Secondly, When the Prisoner has discerned his sins in their punishment, in the
next place ^^t him endeavor to be troubled for them, and to repent of them;
and in his restraint mourn over the miscarriages of his Liberty; and study to
redress them: Sadness and pensiveness of spirit is an usual attendant of this
condition, and happy is it when carnal grief is improved into spiritual sorrow
for sin and transgression. For Godly sorrow works repentance not to be
repented of, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7. 10. But the sorrow of the world
works death: For our grief for our losses may stir up the impatience of our
spirit against God, and the dispensations of his providence toward us: The
desperateness of our circumstances may lessen our hope and faith, and
dependence, and Christian relyance upon him, and the reflection upon the
rigor, and severity of our Prosecutors and Creditors may possibly Minister to
the useless purposes of inward malice and secret revenge, and all this is
productive of sin, and sin of guilt, and guilt of death: But when our sorrow is
directed against our sin as the sourse of our trouble all this is prevented,
and that grief which in others is the cause of sin and death, is by this means
made the happy occasion of repentance and life: For he that looks upon his riot
as the original of his poverty, and those troubles which ensue upon it, will in
likelihood be for the time to come more in love with temperance: He that
accuses his sloth as the ground of his evils, will at present commend in the
secret approbation of his own conscience that diligence which God has made
both his interest, and his duty, and hereafter practice it, when God by his
enlargement shall give him the happy opportunity to do so: And if the Prisoner
discover that the Curse of God has rotted his estate, and blasted all his
unjust designs, denied him those riches, which he sought as the reward of
iniquity, and given him that poverty for the punishment of his sin, which he
endeavored to avoid by the pursuit of it, he is in a fair way of returning to
his duty, and such a man in all probability will use his Liberty to better
purposes when God in his good time shall restore him to it, and commit himself,
and his Affairs to God in well doing; following God and his Providence in the
ways of justice and paths of righteousness, casting all his care upon God who
cares for him, 1 Pet. 5. 7. I know, and have often with sadness of spirit
observed that quite contrary is the usual practice of Prisoners: Their own
folly has perverted their way and they fret against God. Their sloth and
negligence, their excess and riot have brought them to poverty, and they repine
at providence: They have disappointed, deceived and delayed the just
expectations of their creditors: and they accuse their rancour and severity,
their cruelty and unmercifulness, and lay that blame upon them, which they
ought to take upon themselves: These are the usual miscarriages of most
Prisoners, and in some others there are greater than these: And that place
which should be the School of repentance is made to them the Nursery of sin;
they knew what it was to want before they came thither, and there they learn to
cheat; they lay under all the temptations to it before, and there they learn
all the Arts of it, or perchance they came in Knaves, and go out Theives.
Before they knew how to overreach their Neighbors, now learn how to Rob them,
be ore practiced all the unjust arts of the Shop; now learn those of the
Highway too, were very bad men when they came to Prison, and grow worse by
their converse with men as bad or worse then themselves; were unjust enough in
their inclinations before, and among men more skilful in the mysteries of
iniquity than themselves learn all the art and cunning of it: But several men
have several inclinations, and there are some that grow worser by their
Imprisonments, but in other instances of sin, they have time enough, and to
spare lying upon their hands, and they spend it in Diceing and Carding, and all
sorts of Gaming, have sorrow and sadness lying upon their spirits, and
endeavor to drown it by Tippling and Carowsing: Are of a malicious temper, and
show it in fretting against their Creditors, and praying for their ruin, or
perhaps not only of a malicious spirit but profane too, and vent both the one
and the other, in vile Oaths and horrid urses, and deep imprecations against
their adversaries: And those that they take to be the contrivers or promoters
of their misery: And thus affliction, which well improved is the best spiritual
Physic in the World, proves often an occasion of the greatest sin, but if we
will not be wanting to our selves, we may soon find that a Prison that deprives
us of all other opportunities of thriving, wants not its conveniences, nay
happy opportunities too. For the exercise of repentance in the several parts of
it, and here as elsewhere may a man religiously and virtuously disposed
practice those important duties of contrition for sin, and confession of it,
and humiliation for it, and reformation of life, which if he cannot show here
constantly in some of those outward actions which are the demonstrations of it
to men, and for which he wants the opportunities, in that narrow Scene of
action; yet he may always practice it in the inward acts of it, such as Faith,
and Patience, dependence upon God, and resignation to his will in the sincere
purposes and resolutions of outward, which before God the searcher of hearts
are always accepted; and in diverse external instances of duty as temperance,
and sobriety, and savoury discourse, or devout attendance upon these offices of
Religion, which according to the discipline of this well governed City, are
performed in the Chapels belonging to those places, with the same constancy as
they are in the public congregations; and by men frequently approved for their
preaching in more public auditories.

And none of these circumstances which I now mentioned as being too too often
occasion of sin, but may be made use of as aids to repentance: men's afflictions
make them repine against God, but they may better teach them, to humble
themselves under his mighty hand that he may exalt them in due time; profane
men in their troubles fret against God and charge him foolishly, but would it
not be more manlike in such cases to pray unto God? And to pour out their souls
in supplications to him, who has delivered others and can deliver them in six
troubles and in seven? The cares of the World and the love of riches heretofore
choked up the word, that it became unfruitful: But here they have very little
of worldly business, and less of riches to disturb them, and where men's affairs
are desperate in this world, one would think they should think it not only
their duty but their interest, to provide for the next, that they may not be
undone both here and hereafter.

Most wise men are sensible that their time is short when compared with the
work that they are to do, and the Eternity that they are to prepare for; that
their days are as a shadow, as a vapor, as a flower, that they pass away as a
Tale that is told: And it is a saying not more common than true, that time is
precious; and if it be so precious, it is more valuable sure than to be thrown
away upon Cards, or Dice, or any other idle and foolish diversion that Courts
their foolish, and Lazy humor; it is folly in the worldling to prefer his
business, before his Religion, before his Devotion, before his Duty, greater
sure in the Prisoner to prefer before these most valuable things any idle toy,
or silly sport, or impertinent diversion, profane is the Worldling who will not
serve his God as long as he has any thing else to do, more profane is the
Prisoner who will not serve God when he has nothing in the World to do
besides; and they cannot find time to pray, when they can find time to curse,
and to swear, to game, and to drink, to tell idle stories, and employ
themselves in useless recreations: But sin is never without some excuse, and
those that cannot be so senseless as to complain that they want time, complain
with more show of reason, that they want Oratories to perform their Devotions
in: They love the beauties of holiness, they delight to meet God in his Temple,
to praise him in the Congregations of his Saints. The house of God is the house
of prayer, and in that house they desire to pay their Vows: And it is not more
their trouble that they cannot meet their friends in the World, that it is that
they cannot go with other good men to join in prayers and praises, and other
offices of Religion in his Church and Temple: But it is the glory of this City,
that this objection is in great measure taken away, in those Prisons that are
under their inspection, the Governors of this City having extended their care
both to the Souls and Bodies of their Prisoners: Having made their Chambers so
convenient that they are inferior to those of most dwelling houses, in nothing
but this that they want the advantages of Liberty, and their Chapels so decent
that they come not much behind the Churches of diverse Parishes among us.

But in other places where these Oratories are wanting, it is no excuse for our
omission of our devotions, that we want a Church to perform them in: For God
has made nothing to be our duty to do, which his providence has made
impossible to be done: But where we want the usual conveniences of the public,
we may by the devout offices of Religion consecrate every place to be a kind of
Temple to us.

No place so noisome but there God is willing to dwell with a pious Soul, no
confinement so straight but from thence God can hear our prayers: The stench of
a Prison does not fright away his presence, nor stone walls intercept between
him and our supplications, St. Paul and Silas sung Psalms in Prison, and St.
Peter prayed there: Jeremiah sent up his supplication from a Miry Pit, and
Daniel from the Lions Den, David from the Cave, and Jonah from the Belly of the
Whale. He found a Chapel in the Sea, and a Temple in the midst of his Billows;
and as he himself words it, he said from thence he would look toward his holy
Temple. In every place men ought to lift up holy hands, in every place men
ought to pray, and from every place God can hear and answer their prayers: So
that the exercises of repentance, and humiliation, and devotion, and piety, are
proper for a Captive condition, and this condition is not wholly destitute of
suitable aids and conveniences for this duty.

But then thirdly in these places also there are not wanting those that are
more unwilling than unable to pay their Debts, who could be as willing to serve
God in praises, and devotions, and long prayers too, as the Pharisees were, but
would be allowed in the mean time to devour Widows houses, and to make their
Heirs rich with what they rob the Fatherless of: They are willing to die in
Debt, that their Sons may live in plenty: But though men ought to love their
Children, yet sure this is an unnatural love to be willing to be damned for
them: To purchase them an Estate at the price of their Souls, and cast away
these by fraud and injustice that their offspring may flourish in Pride and
Luxury; to burn in Hell, that they may thrive on Earth.

Unhappy circumstances such men put themselves in, if they repent before they
dye, they must restore their ill got, or which is much the same, their unjustly
detained riches, and then their Children are undone in this world, but if they
do not they themselves are undone in another world: The damnation of such is
just, but not so sure the striving of their posterity: For the Curse of God is
in the house of the wicked, and the Children seldom enjoy long, what their
Fathers soon got, by rapine and violence: But howsoever that falls out, the
unjust man shall be sure to find Gods vengeance following him if not in this,
yet assuredly in another world: We must not overreach, nor defraud our Brethren
in any matter, for God is the assured avenger of all such: We may deceive men
by our concealment of that Estate which ought to be liable to pay our Debts, by
conveying to the Son what ought to pay the obligations of the Father, and by
many other fraudulent arts, and knavish compositions, but God is not mocked,
Conscience will not hereafter be stifled, and though we endeavor to Lull it a
sleep now, it will awake hereafter and torment us, and when we have our Liberty
the checks of it will be more anxious, than the troubles of Imprisonment; or if
it be seared here, it will be uneasy enough hereafter: And the more drowned in
security we are here the more affrighting will be our amazement hereafter: If
they will not now then they shall howl and weep; their riches shall corrupt,
their Garments shall be Moth eaten, their Gold and Silver shall be Cankered;
but the rust of them shall be a witness against them, and shall eat their Flesh
as it Were fire; by all their fraudulent compositions, and unrighteous
conveyances, and unjust detention of what is not their own, they have but
heaped up treasure against the last day, but a very sad treasure indeed: They
have heaped up treasure against the day of wrath, and the Revelation of the
righteous judgment of God.

And now, it remains that I conclude this Chapter with some office of Devotion,
not thereby to exclude the office of the Church which is very suitable not to
public only but also private Devotions, but though the general exigencies of
Christian votaries are provided for therein, yet it did not become the Fathers
of our Church to descend so low as to all minute circumstances of private
Christians, and therefore the most obedient sons of the Church have not thought
it any wa^ inconsistent with their high esteem for the Liturgy to compose new
Prayers for some particular occasions, as appears by the Printed labors in
this kind, as of diverse others, so particularly of the Right Reverend and
Learned Bishop Andrews, Bishop Hall, Bishop Taylour, and of the now living, and
no less Learned, than conformable the Incomparable Doctor Patrick: From whom I
have borrowed this ensuing Prayer, and because I have charity to think that
Prisoners may find company in so good an exercise I have here, and in other
parts of the Book where I have transcribed such patterns of Devotion from
others, changed the Singular into the Plural, which Singular they may replace
again, if they please when they pray solitary: or retain the Plural still as
Christians do in the Lords prayer, when they use it in their Closets, and with
this Prayer of our Lord I have concluded this, and think proper, to conclude
with it our other Devotion.

A Prayer to be used by Prisoners for Debt, transcribed out of Dr. Patrick 's
Devout Christian.
O GOD, who art present to us in in all places, and have regard to the sighs
and groans of the miserable, who humbly implore thy pity and compassion toward
them: Vouchsafe to look graciously upon us thy afflicted Servants in this
place, which is most desolate, and comfortless, unless the light of thy
countenance shine upon us: We confess that we have too much abused the Liberty
which we formerly enjoyed, and not so carefully as we ought, improved those
happy opportunities which were put into our hands: Many ways we are sensible,
we have offended thy Divine Majesty, for which we are heartily sorry and
acknowledge our selves infinitely indebted to thy goodness, that we are not
plunged into the depth of misery, to bewail our sins in the bottomless pit. We
thank thee O Lord, with all our Souls, that we are not shut up into the place
of utter darkness, and that we have any hopes to obtain the redemption which is
in Christ Jesus, in whose name we beseech thee to pardon us and to sanctify
the streights wherein we lie, to the freeing of our Souls from the bond of all
iniquity, and the restoring of us to the glorious Liberty of thy children: Help
us seriously to follow the direction of thy providence in this restraint, and
now that we are so much alone by our selves, to descend into our own hearts, to
search and try our ways, and unfeignedly to turn to thee our God: Enlarge our
spirits more than ever, now that our bodies are confined, in fervent prayer for
thy divine grace, and in cheerful thanks givings for the innumerable benefits
that we have received from thy divine bounty, and in tender pity and
commiseration of the sad condition of all distressed people, and be pleased to
touch the hearts of our Creditours also with a sense of our miseries; incline
them to accept of what we are able to pay, and make us willing to satisfy them
to the utmost of our power. In the mean time bestow us on the blessing of a
contented spirit; help us patiently to endure the inconveniences of this place,
and preserve us from the danger of those temptations which we meet with in it,
especially from seeking a remedy of our sorrows in the pleasures and
intemperance of evil company, or any profane mirth whatsoever. Be thou our
comfort O God, and our exceeding joy and the full satisfaction of our Souls in
all conditions, and when thou art pleased to deliver us from this place, and
restore us again to our desired freedom, O Lord make us ever mindful of the
Vows wherein we are now forward to bind our selves: dispose our hearts to be
sensibly affected with those mercies which we have formerly little regarded,
that we may never forget to praise thee even for the benefit of a sweeter air
than now we enjoy, and to acknowledge thee in the night season upon our beds,
and to thank thee for the coursest food, and especially that we may rejoice to
go again into the great congregation to praise thee with the most ardent love
for all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus: Preserve in us also a grateful
remembrance of the kindness of our friends and neighbors, especially of those
persons to whom we stand particularly indebted, when by their charity we shall
be released, and whatever loss they sustain by our poverty, good Lord make it
up abundantly to them and theirs out of thy rich grace and mercy, requite their
love with plenty and prosperity in this world, and give them the reward of
eternal life and glory in the world to come, through Christ Jesus our Lord, in
whose name and words we further pray.

Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven, give us this day our daily bread, and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the kingdom
and the power and the glory for ever and ever,

Amen.
CHAP. II.
Instructions for such Malefactors, as have committed such crimes, the
punishment whereof is some public shame or corporal infliction, or any other
punishment below that of death, Applyable in great measure to the condition of
those that are in Bridewel.

FRom Debtors I proceed in the next place, according to my promised method to
Malefactors, and as soon as ever I set Pen to Paper upon this Subject, I find
within my self a reluctance of Spirit to proceed any farther, as considering
within my self the small probability I have of success, from any thing that I
shall write here, upon minds so hardened against all good Counsel, but though
men will be unmindful of their duty, the Ministers of God ought not to be
unmindful of theirs, but according to the charge given to Ezekiel when he was
to Preach to that Rebellious House, they ought to speak the words of God unto
them whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, chapter 2. v. 7. and it
becomes them to remember that they are spiritual Watchmen, whose duty it is,
to warn the wicked to turn from their way, which if they forbear to do, the
blood of the wicked shall be required at the hand of the Prophet, but if they
do as they ought, endeavor to turn the wicked from their way, and they turn
not, they shall dye in their wickedness, but the watchman has delivered his
own Soul. chapter 33. v. 6, 8, 9. The Grace of God is always sufficient, and
sometimes effectual to the recalling of Publicans and sinners: as St. Matthew
and others, Whores and Harlots, as Magdalen, Idolaters, as Manaseh,
Persecutors, and Blasphemers, as St. Paul, and Thieves and Robbers, as
Onesimus, and the Thief upon the Tree; And it is possible with him, to whom
nothing is impossible, to bless what I shall write to the Conversion of the
most obdurate sinners, and peradventure he may give them repentance, which if
he should of his infinite grace, and goodness do, I shall rejoice that I have
been a poor instrument in his hand toward the turning of a sinner from the
Error of his way, and saving his soul alive. But if, which I fear, my poor
labors in this kind should want the desired success, I shall content my self
with the satisfaction of my conscience in having endeavored to stop the mouths
of wickedness, and in having rendered them inexcusable: Which I purpose to do in
this ensuing discourse. But because all sinners are not of the same side, nor
have arrived at the same degrees of wickedness, I shall begin with the lower
sorts of Malefactors, and before I proceed to those who have either deserved by
Law the Sentence of Death, or are under it, shall say something to those who
have committed lesser crimes, whose punishment is some shame or disgrace, or
Corporal infliction, whether of whipping, or working in the House of
Correction, or the Like.

And my first exhortation to these shall be, to take notice of these lesser
punishments, and those sins which are the causes of them, and to endeavor
heartily to repent of them before they come to that height of wickedness which
greater Malefactors have arrived to; For that direction is a very prudent one,
not only in the diseases of the Body, but of the Soul too.

Principiis obsta sero Medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
A Green wound is soon cured with any common Plaster, and with ordinary care:
but when by neglect it grows into a Gangreen, no cure for the member so
affected, and scarce for the Body, but by cutting off a part so corrupted, for
fear of diffusing its venom into the whole. Young novice sinners are often
reclaimed without much difficulty; In them natural conscience is quickly
awakened, the sense of shame easily revived, and the fear of Hell easily
impressed upon their minds, but when men have broke through all these, hardened
their hearts, stifled their consciences, strengthened their foreheads against
all shame, and their Souls against all fears of damnation, it is scarcely
possible to reclaim them, and as hardly possible to secure the public, from
the mischiefs they may receive from their poisonous example, but by cutting
them off by the hand of Justice, as corrupt members use to be from the rest of
the Body, for fear of spreading their infection into it. And therefore before
men are arrived at this dreadful height of wickedness, it will be their wisdom
to watch against those beginnings of wickedness which have already brought them
to shame and disgrace, and the House of Correction, will probably bring them to
the Gallows here, and unless the grace of God reclaim them, to Hell and
damnation hereafter: To these if to any that exhortation is proper. Exhort one
another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 1. It is possible those that are concerned in
this exhortation, may find the work hard when they first set upon it, their
long contracted Habits of sin are hard to be removed, the thoughts of God are
uneasy to their minds, it is difficult for them to return from a loose to an
Industrious course, from a riotous to a sober way of life, from the folly of
the wicked, to the wisdom of the just; But the difficulty of the work, ought
not to be a Plea for our deferring of it, but an Argument rather for setting
about it, without delay; for what is hard at present, will be harder hereafter,
when our sinful inclinations by continuance have grown stronger, our conscience
more seared, the Spirit of God by constant resistance less operative in us, and
the Grace of God weakened and abated by contrary Habits of sin; and therefore
if we ever desire to repent before we dye, (as the most obdurate sinners will
pretend they do,) the wisest way is, to set about the work betimes, before a
further continuance in a wicked course of life, make our reformation more
difficult to us then at present it is. There is no man that is well in his
wits, and considers what he does, that would be willing to fill up the measure
of his sin, to outsin the day of Grace, wholly to tire out the long suffering
and forbearance of God, or to arrive at such a degree of wickedness, from
whence there is no hope of reclaim by the usual methods of Gods Grace and
mercy; And if men are afraid of arriving at such a desperate estate, the best
Counsel that I can give them for the avoiding of it, is this; That they would
seriously take notice of those early discoveries of Gods indignation, and
displeasure against them: the footsteps of which they may in some measure see
in their present punishments of shame, and disgrace, and confinement, and
drudgery; and may more clearly discern in the checks, and reproofs of their own
consciences, unless they have hardened them against all such apprehensions by a
constant custom of sinning, and this is the first advice that I think proper to
give to this sort of Malefactors, that they would now endeavor to break off
their sins by a timely repentance, before they arrive at those degrees of
wickedness whose punishment is that of death by the Laws of man, and a far
worse punishment, from the wrath of God revealed against them in the Scriptures.

My second direction shall be that in order to this their reclaim, they would
take occasion from that degree of Punishment which at present they endure to
reflect seriously upon those several evils, and inconveniences which by the
just Judgment of God attend upon sin even in this life. And for this meditation
they may find abundance of matter supplied by observing the circumstances of
their present condition; They are in restraint and other men enjoy their
liberty, and so might they have done too, if they had used their liberty more
soberly, they are exposed to scorn and contempt, disgrace and obloquy, while
other men live in Credit and repute among their neighbors; and thus they might
have lived too, if they had sought the praise of God and man by a Faithful
continuance in well doing. They are employed at hard drudgery and severe
Labor, under their fierce, and Egyptian Taskmasters, while others follow
their callings with mirth and cheerfulness, maintain their Families by a
prudent, and moderate industry, take pains in an honest way, but are forced to
take no more then the convenience of their concerns engages them to: and what
is the condition of other men might have been theirs if they had so pleased
themselves; but because they refused an honest labor, they are brought now to
this forced, and constrained drudgery: Surely no way is so foolish as the path
of iniquity: and no Fool so unwise as the sinner is. He loses his ends by those
very methods whereby he pursues them, and runs upon mischief by those very ways
by which he seeks to avoid it; the pride of his heart made him ungovernable,
and in Bridewel he finds a severe check for his pride. He hated labor, and
there he finds a drudgery more toilsome than any of those labors that
industrious men are usually engaged in; he was of a gadding, and a vagrant
humor, but there he has a close restraint; he loved sloth and pleasure, but
there he wants both, and instead of them, meets with the Lash, and the
working-house to correct the riot, and laziness of his former conversation: It
is possible that sinners when they are under the smart, may murmur at God, and
his providence toward them in all this, but if they will but seriously
consider the tendency of things, they will have reason to acknowledge that what
they call severity, is the greatest mercy imaginable; for it is much for our
interest, that sin should be made uneasy to us, that the Paths of it should be
hedged with Thorns, and that sinners should meet with rubbs and blocks in their
way, for fear the pleasure of sin should prove a bate to them, to tempt them to
swallow the hook more glibly, and the more uninterruptedly to pursue those ways
the end of which will be destruction, and perdition at that dreadful day of
judgment, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels: In flaming Fire taking vengeance on them that know not God and obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. 2
These. 1. 9. And this brings me to another direction suitable to the condition
of those that are concerned in the Meditations of this Chapter, and that is.

Thirdly, When these offenders have in their most retired thoughts considered
the several inconveniences which attend sin, and sinners in this life, it
would be a very useful instance of spiritual wisdom in them to carry their
thoughts further to those punishments which are due to it in the world to come:
Suitable in this case is the counsel of our Savior to the impotent man whom he
found, and healed at the Pool of Bethesdah, sin no more lest a worse thing come
unto thee: S. John 5. 14. For although heavy are those afflictions which they
are under already, more heavy are those which they may still expect (unless the
grace of God and a timely repentance prevent) both in this world and in the
next, grievous it is for men to consider that they are slighted by their
friends, that their kindred and acquaintance forsake them, that they are
accounted, (and that justly) the fi^th and offscouring of the world, but more
grievous is it for them to think that they are rejected of God, accounted by
him as reprobate Silver, Vessels in which there is no pleasure, Vessels of
dishonor here, hereafter likely to be Vessels of wrath and indignation: Now at
present accursed children, without Christ, aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, strangers from the Covenants of promise, Without hope, without God in
the world, hereafter like to be, of the number of those Goats which shall be
cast to Christ's left hand, those tares whose end shall be to be burned, those
unprofitable Servants whose lot it shall be to be cast into utter darkness, and
whose dreadful sentence that shall be, which our Savior mentions, St. Mat. 25.
41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devils and
his Angels. Shame is burdensome to an ingenious spirit, and God has planted a
keen, and quick sense of it in our natures for this very purpose that it may be
a check to sin, and a present punishment to those that do things deserving
shame; and however mildly men, or women may be used when they come to Bridewel,
yet a punishment it is, barely to be sent thither, in that it brings a blot to
their Name, and a stain to their reputation, and will be a note of infamy upon
them even after they are delivered from that place: Now if shame be grievous,
(as indeed it is,) there is another shame, and a more lasting one attends the
wicked after they are delivered from this: For as the righteous shall go into
everlasting glory, so also the wicked shall go into a place of shame and
everlasting contempt, Dan. 12. 2. Here only our grosser actions and such are
scandalous are exposed; there our very secret thoughts; Here the greater
miscarriages of our lives, there the naughtiness of our hearts; Here men only,
and usually but few are spectators of our infamy and disgrace, but there we
shall be made in a worse sense, then that in which the Apostle spoke it,
Aspectacle to the world, and to Angels, and men. Even God himself, the God of
mercy and all consolations shall laugh then at their destructions: The Good
Angels, who rejoice in Heaven at the Conversion of one sinner that repents,
shall shout at the ruin of those transgressors against their own souls, and
the Devils who were their tempters to sin here, shall be their tormentours for
it there, and all mankind shall behold their shame, and none shall endeavor to
cover it, none shall pity it. But if the sense of shame be but a weak argument
to those that have cast off all shame, let them consider that that is a place
of pain too: If fire be tormenting, there they shall converse with everlasting
burnings, if the gnawing of a Viper in our bowels may be thought to be
grievous, there their worm shall never dye, if the smart of the whip be
tormenting, there it is said that the wicked shall be delivered up to the
tormentours, and their torment shall never end. I know there are dispersed up
and down in the Gospel many more sweet and ravishing motives to repentance then
these are; The Love of Christ ought to constrain us, the Grace of the Gospel
ought to invite us, the promises of it are with enough to encourage us to
obedience, and men of ingenuous spirits, men who will act like men, will be
drawn by these cords of Love, by these cords of a man, as the Prophet calls
them, and they will follow God. But the same Gospel has more rough Arguments
then these, for men of more rough tempers, and where we meet with obdurate
sinners, as knowing the terrors of the Lord, We ought to persuade them, We
ought to tell them; That vengeance is his, and he will repay it; That
tribulation, and anguish, indignation and wrath shall be the Portion of every
soul of man that works evil of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile. That
God will consume the wicked from the very beginning of revenges, that his wrath
will begin to burn against them here, and will reach against them everlastingly
hereafter: If the Present sufferings of offenders raise up in them such
thoughts as these are, they have then a very useful effect upon them: The very
end of Punishment is, that the wicked may see and hear, and feel, and be
sensible of that hand of God that is stretched out against them, and do no more
wickedly. And if this be the effect of such punishments, as in this Chapter
have been described, they have reason to rejoice, That these chastisements
which are not for the present Joyous, but grievous, have begun to bring forth
the peaceable fruit of righteousness, that these corrections which are in the
Flesh have any way contributed to the saving of the Spirit in the day of the
Lord Jesus, and that these afflictions which are but for a moment have begun to
work in them that fear of God which is the beginning of wisdom, that Godly
sorrow which is naturally productive of that repentance which is never to be
repented of, and that reformation of life, which if persevered in to the end,
will entitle them to a far more exceeding weight of Glory. And when these
motions begin to work in them, it is their duty, and it is their interest to
pray to God for that Spirit that may further convince them, of sin, and of
righteousness, and of Judgment, and our Heavenly Father has promised that he
will not deny his Spirit to them that ask it, and if they lack Wisdom to direct
them in that way, with which as yet they are very much unacquainted, Let them
ask of God who gives to all men Liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be
given them. And because that of themselves as of themselves they are, they are
not sufficient to think any thing that is good, much less to do it, and much
less still to preserve in doing: Let them implore the Grace of God, which is
ready at hand to all those, that by Faith and Prayer, and sincere endeavors
seek after it: Let them ask and it shall be given, Let them seek and they shall
find, Let them knock and God will open to them. Let them draw nigh to God in
sincere purposes of repentance, and he will draw nigh to them in his grace and
mercy, and will enable them to cleanse their hands though they have been
sinners, and to purify their hearts though they have been double minded, and to
assist them in such supplications as these I have here subjoyned this ensuing
Prayer.

A PRAYER.
O LORD, our God we beseech thee look down upon us poor and miserable sinners,
who now groan under the weight of our sins, and the punishment of them: We
desire to submit to thy providence in all things, and to ackowledg that thou
art just and righteous in those evils which thou sendest upon us, and thou have
but recompensed upon us the fruits of our doings, we have misused our liberty,
and thou have punished us with thraldom: We have sinned in pride and the
haughtiness of our hearts, and thou have brought us to shame and disgrace: We
have sinned by riot and excess, by sloth and wantonness, and thou have
exercised us with slavery and drudgery, and have made us to serve under
Egyptian Taskmasters. We beseech thee, O Lord, of thy mercy to teach us how to
discern our sin in our punishment, to learn repentance and obedience by the
things that we suffer, and to humble (...)selves under thy mighty hand, that
thou may deliver us in thy due time. However thou dealest with us now, cast
us not from thy presence hereafter, howsoever thou exercises us with shame at
present make us not then in our perdition to be a spectacle to the World, and
to Angels and to Men: But let the sense of thy wrath at present instruct us in
thy fear, and withdraw us from the error of our ways, that our Soul may be
saved in the day of our Lord Jesus. Give us thy spirit O God, further to
convince us of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment, and to guide our
feet into the way everlasting; Give us thy wisdom to direct our steps, and to
lead us into those paths which as yet we are very much acquainted with; Grant
us thy grace to enable us to do those things which thou requirest of us. As
thou have given us a heart to will what is good, so of thy good pleasure give
us strength to do and to persevere in well doing: And, whenever of thy
goodness it shall please to deliver us from this miserable condition wherein we
are, grant that we may return from the folly of the wicked to the wisdom of the
just. Let the time past of our Lives suffice us to have fulfilled the lusts of
the flesh, and for the time to come teach us to live more soberly, and
righteously, and godly than hitherto we have done, that we may adorn the Gospel
as much by our repentance, as we have dishonored it by our looseness, that we
may break off our sins by repentance, that we may work with our hands the thing
that is good, that we may commit our selves to thee well-doing, that we may
provide for the things that are honest in the sight of God and men; that we may
serve thee in this world, and be happy in another, and all this we beg of thee,
and what else thou shall see needful for us in the name and mediation of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: In whose name and words we further pray.

Our Father, etc.

CHAP. III.
Directions for those that are tried and cast for their lives, but have them
spared, by the mercy of the King or the Bench.

FRom these that in Law are counted lesser Malefactors, I proceed in the next
place to those that are greater, and have incurred the danger of death, and
these are to be considered under two several, though near in time, yet in
nature very different circumstances before their Trial and after it; Before
their Trials we find them full of fears, and sollicitudes, and careful
thoughts: What the witnesses will depose against them, what plea they
themselves may make against their depositions, what verdict the Jury is likely
to bring, and what sentence the Judge may pronounce upon them.

Now natural it is for men that are in trouble, to be affected with such fears
and sollicitudes as these, and as it is natural, so if these cares rise not to
too inordinate a degree, it is allowable too in the permissions of religion;
Jacob was afraid of his brother Esau, and his fears made him seek to appease
him by a present, David was afraid of his Persecutour King Saul, and his fears
made him seek so many Subterfuges, our Savior himself had some natural
reluctance against that bitter Cup, and he prayed very earnestly that it might
pass from him, and when St. Paul was accused by Tertullus and others he made
very curious, and artificial defenses for his life: And so may Prisoners too
when they are Indicted very allowably make all just defenses that their case
will admit, all such Pleas for themselves as their cause will bear, and all
prudent arts, that their wit, not aided by lies and falsifications can direct
them to: But while Prisoners are mindful of all those methods of defense, which
self preservation will put them upon as men, they should not be neglectful of
those religious considerations which become them as Christians: They should
with the same solicitude prepare for that great account at the last day, as
they do for that at the Old Bailey, they should remember that he that is to
judge them hereafter is God, and not man; that there will be no need of
witnesses to depose against them, their own consciences, which they sti^e now,
will impartially testify against them then, and supply the place both of
witness and Jury too, by bringing in a righteous verdict against them, and
making them as condemned of God, so also self-condemned, in the secret
convictions of their then awakened spirit. For the raising of such thoughts as
these are within their souls, let the Prisoners frequently consider and
meditate upon every word in that suitable Text of Scripture: 2 Cor. 5. 10. We
must all appear before the judgment Seat of God, that every one may receive the
things done in his body, whether they be good o^ bad, Some young sinners by the
reason of the tenderness of their age are below the cognizance of such Courts
as these, and there are years, at which sentence of death cannot be passed
against an offender, but all must appear before that judgment Seat, both young
and old. Some sinners are so great as to aw Justice, and when a Tyrant holds
the Scepter, and establishes iniquity by a Law, no Court is so high as to take
cognizance of him, and to call him to account but none is great enough to
deliver himself from the hand of God, for hi^ justice is armed with an infinite
power, whereby to execute the awards of his wrath upon the most obdurate
sinners: Some sins are so secret that the eye of man which sees not the heart,
can not discover them, and therefore the justice of man cannot punish them, but
God searches the hearts, and tries the reins, and he will judge the secrets of
men by Christ Jesus. Men can only kill the body, but he can cast Body and Soul
into Hellfire, they can inflict only temporal death, God eternal and
everlasting. Fire here may burn the body for a while, which punishment is
sometimes inflicted upon women for petty treason, but as that fire burns the
body, so it consumes it, and the fierceness of the flame, and the pains of the
offender have both a speedy conclusion, but that fire burns for ever, and the
sinner has an everlasting duration to endure those flames in.

This judgment and the consequences of it they should often meditate upon; and
no time more proper than this, wherein they are to pass to that temporal
judgment which bears some faint resemblance with the Eternal.

Now it is a proper time for them to set their souls in order before God, to
endeavor to make their peace with him, by earnest prayer to seek his pardon
and forgiveness, and whether they live or die, they will find the spiritual
benefit of such thoughts as these are, if the latter be their dreadful Lot,
they have by this means begun their preparation for death; but if through the
mercy of God, the former be their more pleasing portion, they may assure
themselves, that such men as are prepared to dye, are by that means much more
fit to live.

And now that I have brought the Prisoners to the Old Bailey, it will not be
long before they know their several Dooms. Some have the Sentence of Death
pronounced upon them, Some are cast for their Lives, but by the mercy of the
Bench, are set aside for Transportation, or for Clergy, or are left to the
mercy of the King: For the first of these the ensuing Chapter is designed, to
the others I now Address my self, and first to those who are for Transportation
who are usually the most in Number,

And here a very slender observation may soon suggest to us, that the condition
of convicts after their Transportation beyond these as differs little from that
of those that are in Bridewell, unless in the duration of their evils. For when
they are set down upon the place of their Banishment, they are delivered to a
seven-years bondage, engaged in hard labors, exposed to great drudgeries, and
treated with very much scorn, and contempt, and insolence; and usually the
reason why this mercy is showed to them for the sparing of their lives, is
because they are reputed to be but young Malefactors, having never before been
legally convicted of such crimes, as are punishable by death, and therefore
before they proceed to the remainder of this Chapter, I desire them to read
what they find in the former Chapter concerning the breaking off their sins, by
repentance, and improving their present afflictions of shame, and slavery to
spiritual purposes: And to these directions I shall add these that follow.

First, That they would be persuaded to observe the mixture of Judgment and
mercy which is very apparent in their present condition, mercy in that their
lives are spared, and Judgment in that they are to spend the remainder of their
lives in so much hardship and misery, and then to turn the expostulation of the
Apostle, Romans 2. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. into an exhortation to themselves, and that
they would not despise the riches of Gods goodness, and forbearance, and long
suffering, which ought to lead them to repentance, neither treasure up to
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and the Revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God, who will render to every man according to his deeds: To them
who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for Glory and Honor and
immortality eternal life, but to them that are contentious, and do not obey the
truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath, tribulation, and
anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of
the Gentile. Those that are thus Transported, they have Captivity for their
punishment, and in that Captivity, they may discern something of the severity
of God toward them, but not greater severity then God has heretofore showed
toward sinners, and in the same kind of punishment too, that of slavery.
Manasseh sinned against God, and his punishment was, he was taken Captive by
the Captains of the Kings of Assyria, and as such bound in Chains, and carried
to Babylon. Zedekiah sinned against God, and for his sin, he was exposed, first
to the scorn of Nebuchadnezzar in his bondage, and then in his cruelty, in the
loss of his eyes, and what was dearer to him then his eyes his Children: And it
is no more then what was threatened by Moses, to rebellious Israel, Deuteronomy. 28.
68. Ye shall be sold to your enemies for bondmen and bondwomen, and no man
shall buy you, that is, when they should commit iniquity with greediness, their
sins would make them so vile in the eyes of God, that he would sell them into
the hands of their enemies, for Slaves and Drudges, and their enemies should
count them so vile too, that they could not think them worth the buying: So
that that bondage which God inflicted sometimes upon Kings and Princes, nay
frequently upon his own People too, when they sinned against him, and departed
from him by their transgressions, ought not to be repined against by
Malefactors, as it were too severe a punishment upon them by the hand of God,
for their transgression, but contrari wise they ought to be thankful to the
mercy of God, that he has spared their Lives, and thereby given a space for
repentance, which if they consider it aright, is a mercy of very great value,
and of so great value, that their gratitude for life, ought to overballance
those murmurings, which they usually entertain upon account of the sufferings
of it; of this opinion was Jeremiah, when he and his Nation were under the like
circumstances, in Captivity in a strange Country, Wherefore, says he, should a
living man complain, a man for the Punishment of his sin? Lament. 3. 39. in
which sentence there are almost as many Arguments as words, and every one of
those Arguments suitable to the Subject now in hand, God is the Creator of all
things, man his Creature, why therefore should man complain when he is
afflicted? The clay against the Potter, the workmanship against the maker, man
that is but dust and ashes, against God the Lord of all; his Soverainty will
bear him out, if he disposes of his Creatures, as he in his wisdom thinks most
fit, therefore they ought not to complain, especially when they consider, that
they are sinful men, and that their afflictions are but the punishment of their
sins. No great wonder if upright Job complain that he is afflicted more then
the scorners, Jeremiah, then those that deal treacherously, holy Daniel and
righteous Shadrack, Meshack, and Abednego, then their accusers, and tormentors,
but unjust it is that sinners complain, under their just and deserved
punishment, when they reap but the very fruit of their doings; More it would
become them to acknowledge that God is just and righteous in all that he does,
and in all the corrections which he does inflict, and that he has punished them
less then their iniquties deserve, and then in justice he might have done, if
he had been extreme to mark what is done amiss, and therefore that they ought
to be humbled, and accept of the Punishment of their iniquities, and bear the
indignation of the Lord because they have sinned against him. Especially
considering that he has given them a Portion among those that are living, God
had not been unrighteous, if he had taken away the sinner in the midst of his
sins, and then as the Tree fell, so it wouldly, as death left them, so Judgment
would find them, and as they died in the Commission of sin, so they would rise
hereafter to the inflictions of wrath, but God has been merciful in that, he
has given them a life, though a life very full of misery to repent in, a
space, though that space surrounded with many afflictions to make their peace
with God. This Goodness of God ought to lead them to repentance, in order to
which end let them.

Secondly, Live under a constant sense of Gods omnipresence, and that
wheresoever they go, and into whatsoever parts of the World they are sent by
Banishment Gods eye follows them. He fills the Heaven and the earth, and the
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, his greatness is unsearchable, so that
there is no flying from his presence, nor can any man hide himself in secret
places that God should not see him. They may fly their Country, but they cannot
fly from the presence of God, if in a strange Land they retain the sins of
England, thither the Vengeance of God can follow them, there the Justice of God
can find them out, prove their Plague and their scourge there as well as here,
but if in a foreign Country, they repent of their sins committed here, Gods
Grace is as near to them there as here, his mercy is over all his works, and
his goodness reaches to the utmost corners of the earth. And though their
Fathers see them not, and their Friends know not their condition, yet God is as
present to them there as here, and is ready to receive the Prayer of the
Captive, the petition of the stranger, the supplication of the Banished, and to
grant his pardon to the poorest, most afflicted Penitents.

At the Sessions some are found not guilty by their Jury, or obtain the benefit
of their Clergy, or the gracious pardon of the King: which if they consider it
aright, is a mercy very highly valuable, and as it is the happiness of these
men that they have their Lives and Liberties, so it is their disadvantage, that
their Liberty is attended with the disgrace of having once held up their hand,
and how to improve this dishonor to spiritual advantage, they have been taught
in the forecited Chapter, and together with those directions let them take
these directions that follow.

First, Now that they are free from the Tribunal of man that they would
endeavor to set all accounts right between them and God: For very possible it
may be that an offender may be either free, or guilty to a lesser degree in
these counts below, but perfectly guilty in that court above: Here some things
are accounted felonies, some petty larcenies, some deserve only by the law a
brand in the hand, some the lash and public whippings, but those are
violations of the Eighth Commandment, and both of them place men in the Number
of those Thieves of whom St. Paul has said expressly, that they shall not enter
into the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 10. He that shall kill a man in his heat and
passion, is counted here not guilty of Murder but Manflaughter, but both these
are violations of the sixth Commandment, and both make us liable to the
judgment to come: Nay more, that very passion which we make the alleviation of
our crimes here is counted Murder in the the sight of God. For so our Savior
expressly asserts, Math. 5. 21. 22. Ye have heard that it was said by them of
old time; Thou shall not kill, and whosoever is angry with his Brother without
a cause shall be in danger of the judgment; and whosoever shall say unto his
Brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the Council, but whosoever shall say thou
fool, shall be in danger of Hellfire: Where we see different degrees of
causeless anger, have different degrees of punishment, but all of them are
violations of that Commandment, Thou shall do no murder, and all punishable
more or less in the judgment to come. And as for those that are acquitted here,
let them examine whether they are clear before God, and if of that crime,
whether of others, as great perchance, and as crying, in the account of God:
And to them, who escape with life and liberty, as well as to others, is
appliable that of our Savior, unless ye repent ye shall all likewise perish.

My second exhortation to such is that for the time to come they would
endeavor to live without offense in the sight of God and man: New mercies
require new acknowledgments, and we have no way of showing our gratitude to God
but by doing things that are pleasing in his sight: God has granted them life;
let them improve it to his honor, they have had the pardon of the King, let
them seek forgiveness of God also, they have dishonored themselves and their
profession, let them endeavor to adorn the Gospel for the time to come, by a
more spotless conversation; Let them heartily repent of all their public and
private crimes against God and against men, that when they come to dye, they
may be fitter to dye, than they were when they were Tried for their Lives, and
for this among other things, let them pray in this or such like address to God.

A PRAYER.
O LORD our God we acknowledge before thee our manifold transgressions, the
sins of our hearts, the sins of our Lips, the sins of our Lives, our unclean
thoughts, our filthy discourses, all our unrighteous actions, we are here
Prisoners in one place, but very different is the Lot, which thy Providence
has assigned to us, such of us, O Lord whose days thou have measured out to
the oppressor, give us grace to repent of those sins, which have caused this
punishment, and the less mercy we find with men, the more let us find with God:
As many of us as have found thy mercy in our Lives and Liberties give us grace,
to be sensible of thy mercies, and to live closer with our God, who has
delivered our feet from falling, and our soul from the snare, and our life from
the Grave. Let the shame we endure make us truly sensible of those sins that
have caused it, and however we have had disgrace here, let us not be confounded
when we stand in judgment: make us mindful of thy eternal judgment, and prepare
us for it, that when we come to die we may be fitter to die, and fitter to give
an account to God, Lead us O Lord by thy council, guide us by thy grace, give
repentance, and pardon here, and bring us to thy glory hereafter, through our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. In whose, etc.

CHAP. IV.
Considerations suited to the condition of Malefactors as are actually under
the sentence of condemnation for death.

WHat has been already written in this discourse is designed, to prevent, if
possible, men's wretched arrival at the height of wickedness, and by such
considerations, as the nature of the subject would suggest, to stop their
carier in wickedness, before they proceed from lesser crimes to those that are
Capital: But there always was and always will be a generation ^f men that are
reprobates to every good work, that have their consciences seared with a hot
Iron, that turn a deaf ear against all good Counsel, and harden their hearts
against all good advice, and as for these seeing milder Methods will do no good
upon them, necessity enforces to practice those that are more severe. God says,
nay which is more, swears that he does not delight in the death of a sinner,
but that he should turn from his wicked way and live, but yet it is consistent
both with his Justice and mercy, to make death the Portion of such as by their
wickedness pursue it, and to make Perdition the inheritance of those that by
the obstinacy, and perverseness of their way unavoidably run upon it; And the
same method is very consistent with the rules of Justice, and mercy among men;
Nay very often it is, that severity upon offenders is mercy to the innocent,
and compassion to the wicked, is cruelty to the just, for the slackening of
Justice, increases the number of Malefactors, and if severe laws were not made,
and executed against Malefactors honest men would not be safe, but the Nation
would be soon overrun with Robbers and Murderers, and all sorts of evil doers,
for as Solomon observed long ago. Because Sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily; therefore it is that the heart of the Sons of men is
thoroughly set in them to do evil, Eccl. 8. 11. Righteous therefore and just it
is, that the wages of sin should be death, death eternal by the Law of God, and
death temporal by the Laws of God and man, but the gift of God is eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord: But to what acts of Faith and repentance to
direct the Malefactor, that he may lay hold of that eternal life, will require
much Spiritual skill, and prudence. The Right Reverend Bishop Taylour, and the
Learned Doctor Hammond, and some others have written diverse things very
accurately toward the Lessening of that esteem which some men have of the
efficacy of a deathbed repentance: If I should here lay down their opinions in
express terms, as they have delivered them, in all probability I should drive
those whom I now write to, into utter despair, but if I should endeavor to
assert and maintain the contrary, those surriving Malefactors, into whose hands
this Book shall come, would in all likelihood make use of it, as a further
encouragement to delay their repentance to the hour of death: Seeing therefore
it is hard to Minister to the comfort of some, without giving occasion to the
Presumption of others, I think it not safe to handle that point in a Treatise,
which will be read both by the condemned and reprieved; But judge it more
prudent to leave the Conduct of the souls of dying men in that particular, to
those Ministers that shall visit them near the approaches of their death: For
the supply of which in such cases I suppose there is some provision made in all
places of this Nation, but in this City very plentifully: They have a
particular Minister allotted to them, whose duty it is wholly to attend this
affair, to his assistance there are allotted by the order of the Honorable the
Court of Aldermen, and upon the motion of the Right Worshipful the present
Sheriffs, the Ministers of Ludgate, and both the Counters, and Diverse other
Ministers of this City out of their Pious compassion toward them, very
frequently contribute their spiritual aids, who may privately Minister to them
such comfort as their condition is capable of without danger of occasioning
presumption and spiritual security to other Malefactors, who at such times are
not within hearing: But such other considerations as I may safely let down
without this danger, I shall here insert.

First, The condemned Malefactor ought humbly to confess his sins, and this
when accompanied with other requisites of repentance has a promise of pardon.

So we have it expressed by the beloved Disciple, St. John. 1. 9. If we confess
our sins, he is Faithful, and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness. So in Hosea 14. 2. Take to you words, that is of
confession, and supplication, and turn to the Lord your God, say unto him, take
away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, so will we render the Calves of
our lips: For this pardon upon a true and sincere confession, Solomon depends
by Faith in his Prayer at the Dedication of the Temple, 2 Chronicles 6. 36, 37,
39. If they sin against thee, (for there is no man that sins not) and thou
be angry with them, and they turn and pray unto thee, and say we have sinned,
we have done amiss, we have dealt wickedly, then hear thou from the Heavens
even from thy dwelling place, their Prayer, and their supplication, and forgive
thy People which have sinned against thee: and that Faith that Solomon had in
this Prayer of his, was founded upon that promise which we find in Lev. 26. 40.
42. If they confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their Fathers, with the
trespass that they have trespassed against me, and that also they have walked
contrary unto me: Then will I remember my Covenant. That is, his Covenant of
mercy and forgiveness. And suitably to the Faith of Soloman, and the promise of
God David found it, Psalm 32. 5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee. says he
there, and my iniquity have I not hid, I said, I will confess my transgressions
unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. And where the sin
against God is complicated with injustice toward men, (as in condemned
Malefactors it always is,) there it is requisite that the sinner confess to
men, and show his Zeal against unrighteousness by discovering the combinations
of wickedness that he has been acquainted with; for it is hardly conceivable,
that they thoroughly repent of their unrighteousness, who at their death desire
it should go unobserved, and unreformed and unpunished in others.

Secondly, These confessions where they are accepted with God are always
accompanied with a deep sorrow, and contrition of Spirit for those sins that we
acknowledge: otherwise they are Hypocritical, but together with this they are
often a sacrifice acceptable to God: Psalm. 51. 16, 17. For thou desire not
Sacrifice, else would I give it thee: thou delightest not in burnt offerings,
the Sacrifices of God are a broken and contrite Spirit, a broken and a contrite
Heart, o God thou will not despise: And so to the same effect we find it in the
Prophet Isaiah, chapter 57. v. 15. For thus says the high and the Holy one that
inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place,
with him also that is of a pure and contrite Spirit, to revive the Spirit of
the humble, to revive the heart of the contrite ones.

Thirdly, To that repentance that will find pardon, there ought to be joined a
forsaking of sin: and we are to explain the place before cited, 1 St. John 1.
9. by that other place from whence it seems to be taken. Prove. 28. 13. He that
covers his sins, shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and forsakes them
shall have mercy. And by this the Scripture every where describes saving
repentance, calling it a turning from our evil ways, returning from the folly
of the wicked to the wisdom of the righteous, cleansing our hands, and
purifying our hands with many other expressions importing a thorough
reformation of the whole man in life, and heart and lip; many parts of which
because they are always wanting in the late conversion of old Transgressors,
the above mentioned Divines have very much doubted of the efficacy of such a
deathbed repentance to the great intents of mercy and pardon; and if it be
said sincere intentions are often accepted by God, instead of performances, it
is possible it may be as difficult to distinguish between the integrity and
Hypocrisy of men's purposes, as between the truth and falseness of their
conversion, and therefore it is more prudent to leave the decision of such
questions to the Oral solution of such Divines as shall either out of Duty, or
Christian Charity visit them then to deliver it in Printed rules, where it may
be read by those who have more need to be pressed to a speedy Conversion, then
be persuaded of the efficacy of a late repentance.

Fourthly, After such acts of confession, and contrition, and repentance, as
the condition of the Malefactors is capable of, let them cast themselves upon
God, by a holy Faith and reliance, mixed with fear and trembling, both these
conjoined are and neither of these single is suitable to the condition of these
condemned sinners. They ought to have a Faith in the mercy of God, as
sufficient to pardon the greatest sinners that return, according to the terms
of the Gospel, for else it were in vain to pray to God if we thought him wholly
inexorable: but this Faith of theirs ought to be joined with a holy trembling,
for fear, lest their repentance should not be such as God will accept, and lest
their preparations should not be according to the Preparation of the Sanctuary,
or else their Faith may soon degenerate into presumption. Where the first is
wanting, men run into despair: This seems to be the sin of Cain, who said, (as
it is in the marginal interpretation of our Bibles, and suitable enough to the
signification of the Hebrew verb (...) there used) My iniquity is greater then
that it may be forgiven. This seems to be the sin of Judas, he knew he had
sinned, and he repented of it in some degree, and as an instance of it made
restitution of the price of blood, but had not recourse by faith and Gospel
repentance to that blood of atonement, and therefore died as a sad instance,
and dreadful example of horrid despair, and indeed no sin, (except that one
unpardonable one against the Holy Ghost,) is exempted from forgiveness upon a
true repentance: And to take away doubt in this the Scripture has particularly
mentioned the greatest sorts as actually forgiven to sincere Penitents. As
particularly, The Blasphemies of Saul, the Fornications of Magdalen, the
extortions of Zaccheus, the Murder and uncleanness of David, the drunkenness
and incest of Noah, and the Robberies of the Thief upon the Cross. But as there
may be an error on this hand, so there may be, and possibly is more frequently
on the other hand toc: in relying too confidently upon the pardoning mercy of
God in Christ, without those Gospel preparations of heart which will sit us to
receive it. And this seems to be the sin of those very confident, but very much
mistaken fiduciaries, mentioned and reproved by our Savior. Mat. 7. 21, 22,
23. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven, Many will
say unto me, in that day Lord have we not Prophesied in thy name? and in thy
name cast out Devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? And then will
I profess unto them, I never knew you; depart from me, ye that work iniquity.
And if they would guide themselves between presumption and despair, it will
behave them to take the Advice of St. Peter, to Simon Magus, so Acts 8. 22.
Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought
of thy heart may be forgiven thee. He says not, and so certainly it shall be,
this possibly might be too confident a presumption to depend upon: but if
perhaps, that an humble hope may be allowed to seek after. The carriage of
Benhahad to King Ahab may well become them, The Kings of Israel are merciful
Kings, says he, and so they The God of Israel is a merciful God, this they may
with fullness of Faith believe, and peradventure he will save us, this they may
with an humble hope desire; And to accommodate a little to this purpose that
expression of Queen Esther, They may go into the presence of God, by humble
supplication and prayer, and say, if we perish, we will perish praying unto
God, we will perish imploring his Grace, we will Perish rolling our selves upon
his mercy in Christ Jesus, and it is possible God may be more merciful to us,
then we are apt to think he will, when we reflect upon the great defect of our
death bed repentance; The rest I shall refer to the Conduct of their spiritual
guides, of which number I am bound in duty to be one, and shall request them
often to read these seven Psalms, 6, 32, 38, 51, 102, 130, 143. Paraphrased
into Prayers by Bishop Taylour which I have provided for them at my own charge,
A small Treatise called, The Penitent sinner, provided for them by the care of
the Court of Aldermen, and these two Prayers, the one taken out of Doctor
Patricks Devout Christian, the other from Bishop Taylour, and with a small
alteration accommodated to their condition.

A Prayer for condemned Malefactors written by Dr. Patrick in his Devout
Christian.
O MOST holy and righteous judge of the whole world, give us sinful and
miserable wretches, leave to prostrate our selves before the throne of thy
Grace, and to implore that mercy which we have formerly despised or abused. We
are not worthy we confess to lift up our eyes toward heaven; and it becomes us
in the greatest dejection of spirit to sigh and groan under the Load of our
sins: which have been so great and many, so bold, so presumptuous and shameless,
that when with an awakened mind we reflect upon them; we are ready to sink into
Hell, and utterly despair of any mercy. O God how have we hated instruction,
and our heart despised reproof? And have not obeyed the voice of our teachers,
nor inclined our ear to them that admonished us: How swift have our feet been
to run into evil! and how backward and averse have we been to any thing that is
good! O the injuries that we have done our neighbors; the abuse of our selves
and thy good creatures! the profane contempt or neglect of thee and the duties
of thy worship and service. Here let them reckon up the blasphemies,
debaucheries and violences that they have been guilty of.
The remembrance of all this is dreadful, the burden is intolerable.

How shall we appear before thee at whose rebuke the mountains quake, since we
cannot think of our appearance before an earthly judge without shame and
affrightment of spirit? O Lord work in us a greater dread of thee with a
greater shame and confusion of face, now that we are in thy presence: For which
end represent unto us essectually the wickedness, the baseness and vileness of
our evil doings; as well as the guilt and just desert of thee? O that we could
hate and abhor them more than death, which we expect shortly to suffer for
them: Bestow on us that ingenuous and godly sorrow which works repentance,
and unfeigned purposes of amendment of life: If thou through thy great mercy
and unexpected providence should grant enlargement of it. These purposes
come too late indeed, we may justly think to find acceptance with thee; and
therefore, not without great fear and trembling, and a great sense of our
undeserving, we look up unto thee, acknowledging thy infinite goodness, if thou will vouchsafe but the smallest hope of mercy.

Mercy, mercy, Good Lord cast us not quite out of thy sight, for Jesus sake who
gave himself for us to redeem us from all iniquity. It is the beginning of some
mercy, and an earnest, we hope of more that thou have made us sensible of our
offenses: Help us to manifest our sincerity by making free and open confession
of our crimes, and taking the shame of them before others, and by
acknowledgment that we are unworthy to live, and by earnest admonishments to
all to be warned by our example, and to cease betimes, to do evil and learn to
do well. O that we could glorify thee O God, a little in our latter end after
this manner: And till we come to receive our deserved punishment, help us to
spend our time in bewailing our sins, in humbling our selves before thee for
them, in setting our hearts against them in studying and admiring with the
greatest affection the holy life of our Lord Jesus; in calling other offenders
to repentance, and exhorting them thereby to give thee glory. Deny us not we
beseech thee the grace thus to employ our selves; that we may have some taste of
thy mercy; and the fear of death may be abated by some hope that when our soul
shall be parted from the body, it may be received into everlasting mansions,
through Jesus Christ our Lord: In whose name and words, etc.

A Prayer for Penitents by Bishop Taylour.
SON of David, Blessed Redeemer, Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the
world, have mercy upon us. O Jesu, be a Jesus unto us, thou that sparedst thy
servant Peter, that denied thee thrice, thou that did cast seven Devils out
of Mary Magdalene, and forgavest the woman taken in adultery, and did bear
the convert Thief from the Cross, to the joys of Paradise, have mercy upon us
also; for although we have amassed together more sins, than all these in
conjunction, yet not their sins nor ours, nor the sins of all the world can
equal thy glorious mercy, which is as infinite, and eternal as thy self. We
acknowledge, O Lord, that we are vile, but yet redeemed with thy precious
blood; we are blind, but thou art the light of the world; we are weak, but thou
art our strong Rock; we have been dead in trespasses and sins, but thou art our
resurrection and our life. Thou, O Lord, love to show mercy, and the
expressions of thy mercy, the nearer they come to infinite, the more
proportionable they are to thy essence, and like thy self. Behold then, O Lord,
fit objects for thy pity: Our sins are so great and many, that to forgive us,
will be an act of glorious mercy, and all the praises which did accrue to thy
name, by the forgiveness of David, and Manasses, and St. Paul, and the
adulteress, and the Thief, and the Publican, will be multiplied to thy honor,
in the forgiveness of us so vile, so unworthy wretches, that we have nothing to
say for our selves, but that the greatness of our miseries are fit objects for
thy miraculous and infinite mercy. Despise us not, O Lord, for we are thy
creatures, despise us not for thou did die for us, cast us not away in thine
anger, for thou came to seek us, and to save us. Prepare us for death, and
take away the bitterness of it, Pardon our sins, and purge us from them, first
of thy Grace make us fit for the inheritance of the Saints in Light, and then
bring us to it for the sake of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. In whose
name, etc.

CHAP. V.
Instructions suited to the Condition of those who have their Education in the
Hospital of Christ Church.

HItherto I have discoursed such things as I thought proper for the Instruction
of Prisoners, and among those the worst of them Malefactors, and if I had
consulted the order of Dignity, I should have placed these last, but I purposed
in this discourse to pursue the rules, not of honor, but of Christian Charity,
and therefore have allotted the greatest share of my directions to those that
most need it, the greatest offenders, herein following the example of my
Savior, who bestowed a great part of his time and pains upon Publicans, and
sinners, and came with a design, not to call the righteous but sinners to
repentance. I proceed now to such as may be supposed to be of a more teachable
temper, more succeptive of instruction, and have more opportunities for it, as
living under a strict Discipline, and under the happy opportunities of a very
advantageous education in the Hospital, and School of Christ Church. And here
before I proceed any farther, it will not be improper thankfully to take notice
of the goodness of God toward this City, in that he has from time to time
raised up so many generous Spirits among us, and inclined them to such noble
instances of Christian Charity: For there is scarce any necessity that humane
nature is liable to; but here Provision is made for the relief of it; If men be
infirm in their senses, and disturbed in their brains, there is provision for
them in the Hospital of Bethlehem; If weak and infirm in their Limbs, or
wounded, in St. Bartholomews; and if Children be Fatherless, or (which is the
next degree of misery to it) descended of such Parents as have not where withal
to bring them up, they are clothed and fed, and Educated in Christ-Church, an
Hospital erected by King Edward the sixth, a Protestant Prince to the
confutation of that Vulgar calumny then, and still common among the Papists,
that men of our Religion have renounced not only the merit, but also the
practice of good works: and as this Hospital is of Royal extraction, so is it
of Honorable Government. The Governors of it, being always some of the most
Eminent Senators and Commonours of London, and in the House they have all
things necessary for the feeding, and clothing, and lodging, and instructing
of those Children, Male, or Female, that are under their care, and therefore to
those that are here Educated.

My first Direction shall be to be thankful to God, who has so plentifully
provided for them: There is a gracious promise in the Psalmist, When my Father
and Mother forsake me, the Lord takes me up; Psalm. 27. 10, and again to the
same import. Psalm 146. 9. the Lord cares for the strangers, he helps the
Fatherless. And again Psalm. 147. He feeds the young Ravens when they call
upon him, the observation is common (out of Plin. 10. 12. and Aristo. Hist.
Animal. 6. 6.) that of all other Birds, the Ravens are observed soonest to
forsake their young ones, and therefore by an argument a majori ad minus. If
God so sufficiently provide for the young Ravens when the dams forsake them,
much more will he provide for us, who stamped with his Image, are much more
valuable then many Ravens, when our Parents either through want cannot, or
through unnaturalness will not maintain us. Of this providence of God toward
such helpless Children, there are diverse instances in profane stories, that
famous one of Cyrus exposed by his own relations, and by a wonderful providence
nourished by strangers. Of Romulus and Remus deserted by their Parents, and
nursed by a Wolf, and harbored by a Shepherd; Or if the credit of these
relations be as suspected, as the Faithfulness of their first reports. There
are instances in sacred writ, to prove his Faithfulness to the abovementioned
promise, and that when Parents have forsaken Children, he has taken them up.
When Ishmaels Mother despairing of his life, had forsaken him, and laid him
gasping, (his last for ought she knew, or could do to help it,) in the
Wilderness; the Lord took him up: He opened a new Spring of Water, and opened
her eyes to see it, and so the Child was preserved, Genesis 21. 19. When Moses his
Parents also had forsaken him, (for they durst not stand by him any longer) and
laid him down among the rushy flags, the Lord took him up: He provided him of a
Savior the Kings own Daughter, and of a Nurse the Child's own Mother, and so he
was preserved too? But to the Children here maintained, I need not multiply
instances of this nature, they themselves are standing monuments of the
goodness of God in that kind. They are Lodged in those Chambers, that their
Parents never hired, clothed with those Garments, they never provided, fed
with that meat they never paid for, and supplied with all things necessary by
the care of those good Patrons which the Providence of God has raised up for
them. And now that God has so largly blessed them. Let me teach them the duty
of gratitude to him out of the Book of Psalms, which they so often sing at
their meals, and so often read by the injunction of their instructors. They may
every one of them say with David. Psalm 16. 5, 6. The Lord is the Portion of my
Inheritage, and of my Cup, he maintains my Lot, the lines are fallen unto me in
pleasant places, yea, I have a goodly Heritage. And therefore let them say with
David also, v. 7. I will bless the Lord who has given me Counsel, by the
instruction of my teachers, and maintenance by the bounty of my patrons. My
reins also shall instruct me in the night season. They may again say, all in
general, and each in particular, in the words of the same King David. Psalm
116. 5, 6, 8. Gracious is the Lord and righteous, yea our God is merciful. The
Lord preserves the simple, I was brought low, through the poverty of my
Parents, and he helped me. Return to thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has
dealt plentifully with thee. For the Lord has delivered my soul from death,
and from want, which is almost as bitter as death, mine eyes from tears, and my
feet from fallings. And as their mercies are proportionable to his, so let
their thankfulness be proportionable to his also, which they may appositely
express in his words, v 12, 13, 14. What shall I render unto the Lord, for all
his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the
name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now in the presence of all
his people: Even those vows which I made in my low condition, when my friends
were forced to forsake me for want, and no eye pitied my poor condition. And as
these great mercies ought to teach them thankfulness, for all the
loving kindness of God toward them hitherto, so

Secondly, Let the same mercies teach them to place their faith, and hope, and
confidence in God for the time to come: They have already found to their great
comfort that God is a Father to the fatherless, a protector of the destitute,
and a ready help to them in the needful time of trouble; and now of all men in
the world they will be the most inexcusable, if in their age they forget the
God of their Childhood, and of their youth, or ever neglect to depend upon him,
who has already been so good, and so gracious to them. The experience of the
continued goodness of God should increase their relyance in him, and make them
say in a pious expectation of his gracious providence toward them for the time
to come: In the words of Job which we find Chap. 5. v. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24,
25, 26, 27. God has delivered us in six troubles, yea in seven no evil has
touched us in famine, he has redeemed us from death, and in need from the hand
of poverty, and now we will confidently rely upon his faithfulness, and without
wavering depend upon his providence, for surely he that has so soon prevented
us with his loving kindness will be our God all the residue of our lives, We
shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue, neither shall we be afraid of
destruction when it comes. At destruction and famine we shall laugh, neither
shall we be afraid of the beasts of the earth, For we shall be at league with
the stones of the field, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with us:
We know that our Tabernacle shall be at peace, we shall visit our habitation
and not sin: We know our seed shall be prosperous, and our offspring as the
Grass of the earth: We shall come to our grave in a full age like as a stock of
Corn comes in his season: Lo this we have searched! so it is: After this
manner we have found it hitherto, and so we trust in the loving kindness of our
God we shall find it for the time to come.

But because those to whom in this Chapter, I am to direct my exhortation, are
very much practiced in the singing and reading the Psalms of David, I shall
from them further instruct them in this useful and comfortable duty of
increasing their relyance, and dependence upon God from their experience that
they have of his gracious protection and watchful providence over them
hitherto: This Lesson the Psalmist teaches them in Psalm 23. 4, 5. Thou art
with me, O Lord, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. Thou preparest a Table
before me, thou anointest my head with oil, my cup runs over. These words
are very applyable to those that have their education in Christchurch, the rod
of God corrected them heretofore in the poverty and destitution of their
parents, his staff supports them now in their present maintenance; they have a
Table prepared for them, and that plentifully, their cup runs over; this is
their present privilege as exactly described in the expressions of this Psalm,
as if it were on purpose penned for them, and their duty is in the ensuing
words, they ought confidently to expect that God will still preserve and bless
them in well doing, ver. 6. Surely goodness and mercy shall preserve me all the
days of my life, and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. The like
expressions we have concerning his early hope in God, and God's early provision
for him in his Childhood, Psalm. 22. 9, 10. But thou art he that took me out of
the womb, thou did make me hope when I was upon my mothers breasts. I was
cast upon thee from the womb, thou art my God from my mothers belly. And
therefore he prayers with full assurance to be heard in the expressions that
follow: v. 11. Be not from me, for trouble is near; and there is none to help
me, excepting God only who has been my helper from my very birth, and in whom
I trust that he will be so still: And if at this second teaching the Scholars
will not learn this Lesson we have it inculcated a third time, Psalm 71. 5, 6.
For thou art my hope, O Lord, thou art my trust from my youth: By thee have I
been holden up from the womb; thou art be that took me out of my mothers
bowels, and from these premises, within few Verses follows that prayer. v. 8,
9. Let my mouth be filled with thy praise, and with thy honor all the day.
Cast me not away in my old age, forsake me not when my strength fails: And
both these immediately succeed each other, v. 17, 18. O God thou have taught me
from my youth, and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works. Now also when I
am old and gray headed forsake me not, until I have showed thy strength unto
this generation; and thy power unto every one that is to come. And thus from
those Psalms which the children of this house have made familiar to themselves
by their frequent singing and reading; I have endeavored to inculcate that
useful duty of depending upon that God in their riper years, who has been in
so many gracious instances the God of their Childhood, and of their Youth. But
because the opportunities afforded to those of this house, are not only those
of Lodging and Clothing and Diet, but of religious education also: The next
duty that I shall recommend to them, shall be.

Thirdly, That they would be thankful unto God for those means of grace that he
has afforded them, and endeavor to be fruitful under them: It is the great
disadvantage of poor men's children, (and such only are entertained here) that
they want things necessary as for life, so also for Godliness: The means of
their parents are so short they can scarce provide their Children bread, much
less able are they to be at the charges of Education; by which they might learn
to read, and understand the word of God, which is the food of the Soul, the
sincere milk whereby they should grow, the bread of life. But it is the honor
of this society, and the glory of the City, which has made provision for that
pious discipline that is in it: That children are here trained up in their
tender years in the religious exercises of Prayer, and singing of Psalms, and
reading the Scripture, and besides these in Grammar, and History, and
Rhetoric, and Poetry, and Writing, and Accounts, and Navigation, and such
institutions of Learning, as may fit them for the University, or the Shop, or
the Sea, all which they may imbibe together with many happy opportunities of
improving in virtue and grace: And here while Children they are trained up in
that way, that they should go, and from which they ought not to depart when
they are old, Prove. 22. 6. And now under the enjoyment of all these advantages
they ought to be thankful, to that God who has given them these opportunities
to know God, and to be acquainted with his will, and to understand the great
things of their salvation, and the greater ought their thankfulness to be;
because the advantage of all this is not confined in the narrow compass of this
life, but extends also to that which is eternal: For as our Savior has told
us, John 17. 3. This is life eternal to know the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom God has sent. Together with their thankfulness for this mercy,
they ought to join their devout prayers to God, that to these means of grace he
would graciously be pleased to add his heavenly blessings, and the powerful
influences, and assistances of his holy and sanctifying spirit, For Paul may
plant, and Apollo may water; the Masters may instruct the young men, and the
Mistresses, the Maidens, and both may endeavor to instill Religion into the
hearts and heads of the Children, but it is God only that can give the
increase, it is he only that can give the hearing ear, and the seeing eye, and
the understanding, and pondering heart. And as God only can, so he will give
these things to those that pray for them: for he has promised that he will
give his Spirit to those that ask it, wisdom to those that seek it of him, and
his Grace to those that are willing to lay hold of it, but then to these
Prayers for wisdom, it is the duty of the Scholars of this House, and all other
Students to join their own endeavors: for in the appointment of God, our
Prayers, and our industry ought to go together neither of these single but both
jointly have the promise of his Heavenly Blessing: as is most admirably
described by the wisest of Kings. Prove. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 8, 9. My Son if
thou will receive my words, and hide my Commandments with thee: So that, thou
incline thine ear unto Wisdom, and apply thy heart unto understanding: if thou
seek her as Silver, and searchest for her as hid treasures, then shall thou
understand the fear of the Lord, and find thee knowledge of God: For the Lord
gives Wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge, and understanding: He lays
up sound wisdom for the Righteous, he is a buckler to them that walk uprightly:
He keeps the path of Judgment, and preserves the way of his Saints, then
shall thou understand righteousness, and Judgment, and Equity, yea every good
work. Many here are the advantages of early Piety, and therefore they should
consider the many obligations by which they are engaged to it, they have the
express command of God for it, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the
days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, the days wherein thou shall
say I have no pleasure: Where early piety has been found, it has been
recorded in Scripture with a particular note of commendation, as particularly
it is said of Samuel, that he served God from his Childhood, of Josiah that in
the Eighth year of his reign, while he was yet ^rung he began to seek after the
God of David his father; and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and
Jerusalem, from the high places and the Groves, and the carved Images, and the
molten Images, and to the Praise of Timothy it is said, that from a Child he
had known the Holy Scriptures, which were able to make him wise unto Salvation,
and certainly his great improvement which he afterward made in wisdom, were in
some measure owing to that good foundation which was laid in his Childhood:
seeing he is put into remembrance to stir up the gift of God that was in him;
and to be constant in that Faith which dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois; and
his Mother Eunice, and through their Pious Instructions in him also. 1 Timothy 1.
5, 6. And he may be an excellent pattern to the Scholars of this House, both
for his early and continued Piety, For here they have those seeds of knowledge,
and virtue, and Religion, which if not choked may produce a happy Harvest
hereafter, here they have those instructions when Children which may make them
the more useful to their Generations when men; At School they learn those
useful parts of Christian knowledge, which may make them the better Divines,
and the better Trades men, and the better Citizens, when God in his good
providence shall call them forth, to any of these useful, and commendable
vocations, and therefore it is their duty, and their Interest, to build upon so
good a Foundation, the superstructure of a Virtuous, and Industrious, and
Religious life, and not to relapse into vice, after so many opportunities for
the confirming them in Religion and Virtue, For it had been better for them
never to have known the way of righteousness, nor to have imbided the
Principles of Religion at School, then after they have known tt, to turn from
the holy Commandment delivered to them. 2 Pet. 2. 21. But because God has so
far blessed this Worshipful Foundation, as to raise from thence many eminent
Divines to the Service of his Church, many Worthy Patriots to the City, and
many Learned Sergeants and Counselors to the Bar.

My last request, and exhortation to such shall be, that in their prosperity
they would remember the afflictions of Joseph, that in their advancement they
would be mindful of their beginning: and bless with their bounty those places,
where they had the rise, and Foundation of all their after greatness: To God
they cannot make any retributions, but in the tributes of Praise and
thankfulness, and they cannot demonstrate their thankfulness to God better,
then by bestowing not only charity, but which is an expression something
larger, bounty, and liberality, upon that Hospital, where they themselves had
by his good Providence, so large a maintenance, and so advantageous Education:
And now having given these plain, but honest directions, I shall conclude this
Chapter as I have done the rest, with a Prayer.

A PRAYER.
O LORD we do acknowledge to the praise of thy goodness and bounty toward us,
that thou have been a father to the fatherless, a comfort to the comfortless,
and a ready help in the needful time of trouble, thou have been our God from
our mothers belly, and thine eye has watched over us for good; from our birth
to this very hour. We beseech thee, O God, give us thankful hearts, for all thy
benefits bestowed upon us, confirm in us always an unfeigned faith, and firm
relyance upon that providence which has preserved us, and maintained us
hitherto, and constant resolutions to serve our God with all faithfulness and
sincerity, who has been so good, and so gracious to us; and because from thee
comes every good and perfect gift. Assist and bless us in our prosecutions, of
all true and beneficial learning: Inlighten our understanding O Father of
lights: Bestow upon us a discerning spirit, and a sound judgment, and an honest
and good heart, sincerely disposed to employ all the Talents which thou shall
entrust us withal, to thy Honor and Glory, and to the good of those among whom
we converse: For which end we beseech thee to excite our thirst after useful,
rather than much knowledge, and especially enrich us with the treasures of that
inspired wisdom contained in thy holy Scriptures; which are able to make us
wise unto salvation, that growing in understanding and goodness as we grow in
years; we may answer the intentions of our pious founders, and prove useful
instruments of thy glory, and the good of mankind when thou shall call us forth
to be serviceable in our generations: Give us grace that we may not forsake
when we are in the way that we are trained up in, now we are children, but
proceeding from grace to grace here, we may hereafter come to thy glory,
through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. In whose name and words, etc.

CHAP. VI.
Instructions proper for such, for whose care Provision is made in the Hospital
of St. Bartholomew near Smithfield, and St. Thomas the Apostle, in Southwark.

WHile we are here in this Imperfect state of flesh and blood, the operations
of the Soul are very much impeded by the infirmities of the body; Hereafter
indeed when this mortal shall put on immortality, and this corruptible, shall
put on incorruption, there will be an exact accord, and harmony between these
two, for that which is natural, shall be turned into that which is spiritual,
and we that are dull, and unactive now, shall be like the Angels, not only in
Holiness, but in the purity of our natures also, ready and active to the most
spiritual Offices, that God in his wisdom shall think fit to employ us in; But
this happy estate we enjoy not at present, but hope for, groaning within our
selves, and with holy expectation waiting for, not only the Salvation of our
Souls, but also for the redemption of our bodies, from those infirmities
wherewith now they are encompassed, and both the former, and the latter of
these shall be accomplished in the highest sense that those words are capable
of bearing, in that great day when all the righteous shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption, into the Glorious liberty of the Children of God,
Romans 8. 21. 23. At that glorious time we shall have no infirmities to molest
us, no pains to disturb us, no sickness to discompose us, but now we labor
under all these, our bodies are Subject to many weaknesses, and our Souls which
are so strictly united to them, sympathize with them; and for the relief of
those that labor under these ailings, and have not where withal to provide
for their cure. The two Hospitals of St. Bartholomews, and St. Thomas were
founded Authority: Both by the of King Edward the Sixth our English Josiah, and
both subjected to the Government of the Major, Communalty, and Citizens of
London, as in the style of their Incorporation does appear. What uses these two
houses were put to, before the times of King Henry the Eighth (by whom they
were suppressed among other religious houses) it will not be needful here to
enquire, but the designs they are at present employed about are free enough
from superstition, for in them is endeavored to be done by natural means what
our Savior often effected by miracle, the weak have their strength received,
the sick their health, the Paralitick their former soundness of constitution,
and the Lame are taught to walk: And the Cure of their bodies is not attended
with expense to their purse, but Apothecaries and Attendants are provided for
them by the public charity of this noble foundation; and if I were worthy to
instruct men of such prudence, and gravity, and integrity, as reside here,
there is nothing that they could be directed to, but is done already by the
worshipful Governors of this house, and therefore what exhortation I have to
give, shall be to the Patients of this place, and that in the plainest way that
possible may be; because, as by the orders of this house they are of the
poorest, so by consequence, they are of the most illiterate sort of people.

First, Therefore the most proper direction to them may to be patience under
those afflictions with which they are exercised, and the infirmities that they
are under: None of these pains with which they are now exercised, come by
chance but by the determinate counsel of God, who is of greater Love then to
delight in their afflictions, and of greater wisdom then to send them, unless
he knew they had a natural tendency to their good; And indeed they have, if
improved after a right manner, and in such a way as good men have improved them
heretofore. David said it was ^ood for him that he was afflicted, St. Paul said
that while his outward perished, his inward man was renewed day by day, and it
is universally asserted that no affliction is at present joyous but grievous,
howbeit afterward it brings forth the peaceable fruit of righteousness to
them that are exercised thereby, Heb. 12 11. and that the Light afflictions
which are but for a moment work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight
of Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. It is a severe affliction to contend with weakness, and
infirmity of body, but it is possible that God, who kows us better then we know
our selves, sees that we would employ our strength in outrageous sins, which
require vigor and activity to the performance of them, we want health, but God
sees we would wast it in excess, and riot, we groan perchance under smart,
under pain, but it is probable God finds that we want such a Monitour to put us
in mind, that we are but men, and if this be his gracious design in sending
these corrections we ought not to repine at his severity, but to be thankful
for his goodness who has made the sickness of our body contribute to the
health of our Soul, and ^he weakness of one to the strength of the other.
Besides this consideration, these afflicted Lazars may also take notice that in
these their sufferings, there is no temptation has happened to them, but what
is common to men, and very often to good men, as well as others: Honest
Mephibosheth is attended all his days with an incurable Lameness, while his
crafty Servant Zibah is brisk, and active, and by it gets an unhappy advantage
against his Master: Hezekiah is exercised for some time, with a sore Plague,
whereas Ahaz for any thing that appears to the contrary, passed all his days in
health and strength; and we read of a man that was born blind, not for his own
sin, nor the sin of his Parent, but that the works of God should be made
manifest in him, John 9. 3. and therefore those that are under cure here, have
no reason to complain against God, as if he had given them hard measure: when
he lays diseases and infirmities upon them, seeing he only gives them those
chastisements which he has often made to be the portion of the most innocent,
and best of men: But very often it is that we may read the causes of our
infirmities in our sins that have been the occasions of them, and then we need
not run to the Soverainty of God, to check our murmurings, but reflect upon our
guilt, and that ought to teach us to be patient under these sufferings which we
have justly deserved: Some complain of the ragings of the Gout, but their
Luxury and case has fed it, of redness in their eyes, and shaking in their
hands, and Dropsies in their whole body, but their Drunkenness has brought
these Diseases upon them; of broken Limbs, but occasioned by some rash
squabble, and of wounds but received perchance in some Duel, or unlawful
combat: And if this be the case, the Patient has reason to be thankful to
God, that he has discovered his sin in his chastisement, and by a temporal
punishment here given him early warning by a speedy repentance; to prevent that
everlasting punishment which shall be hereafter: The Tortures of the Gout are
grievous, but not comparable to those torments that are in Hell! The gashes,
and flashings of a wound are grievous, but not comparable to those ictus, and
Lanialus, secret scourges of conscience which a sinner under conviction finds
here, and shall find in a more insupportable manner, under actual reprobation
hereafter, hard it is to endure those feavors and burnings, which the keenness
of their pains often put the poor Patients into, but more hard to dwell with
everlasting burnings: Hard to cut off a hand, or a Leg, or any other Limb, but
harder having all members perfect, and entire, to enter into those flames which
are never quenched: And if our sins have brought these our aylings upon us, God
has whipped us with rods, when he might with Scorpions, punished us with pains
which are but momentary, when he might with torment that is everlasting: But
this is not the case of those that are received into that charitable
Foundation: where few are taken in, that have fed their Diseases by expensive
sins, for the poor only are admitted. Few that have drawn their ailings upon
themselves, b^ rash, and unadvised engagements; for they generally make their
address to the Governors, by Petition, showing in what way of industry they
have lived heretofore, by what ill accident their infirmities were occasioned,
and how unable they are to provide for their own cure: And besides these, such
also are admitted who have suffered the loss, or disability of any Limb or part
of their Body, in the Service of their King and Country, and to such as these
the very reflection upon the innocence of their Lives, or the serviceableness
of them, may much contribute to their cheerful, and comfortable bearing of Gods
chastisements; Their inward peace may help to abate their outward grief, and
the tranquillity of their Soul some way allay the pains of their Body. The
Spirit of a man, will sustain his infirmity, said the wise man, Prove. 18. 14.
and daily observation may inform us, that men of stout hearts, and strong
constitutions, and brisk Spirits, can bear their infirmities with less trouble
then other men, but a wounded Spirit who can bear, and when inward guilt, and
outward pain both concur such anguish is insupportable. But the Patients of
these Houses I charitably hope have seldom these two meet together upon them:
and therefore they may the more boldly cast themselves upon God, to be their
comfort in all their troubles, to make their bed in all their sickness, and
account their wounds which they have received for their King and Country, not
more the defacement of their bodies, then they are the Glory and ornament or
their names and reputations. And because here they are under the means of cure,
therefore

Secondly, Let them thankfully acknowledge the mercy of God in those Provisions
which they enjoy for that purpose: God has graciously been pleased in all the
parts of his creation, and providence plentifully to provide not only for the
life, but health and cure of mankind: The Land yields not only Herbs necessary
for food, but also Physic, the bowels of the earth, as they yield Gold and
Silver for the convenience of Traffic, so they also afford many minerals,
improveable to the uses of Physic and Surgery; and as God has every where
mixed the Sea and Rivers with the dry Land, to supply drink for the use of man,
and Beast, so also he has commanded in diverse places to break forth many
medicinal Springs for their health and cure, as the Bath for infirm People, and
elsewhere Turnbridge, and Epsam, and Barnet, and others very proper for
preventing diverse Diseases, and the removal of them when upon us. Of old he
gave a miraculous Virtue to the Pool of Belhesdah for the healing of all that
were halt or withered, or troubled with any other infirmity, and in these two
Societies, he has by his good providence raised up those charitable
Samaritans, who have made St. Bartholomews, and St. Thomas's a couple of
English Bethesdahs, where that is done by the blessing of God upon humane
means, which there was done by the miraculous moving of the waters by an Angel
sent from Heaven. In all these cures men are the Instruments in the hand of
God, God the chief and Principal Physician, and therefore as they ought to be
thankful to men, as employed by God for their good, so ought they to give the
chiefest praise to God, the giver of all health and cure. And as it is their
duty to be thankful to God for his good providence toward them: in that he
has put them under not only the possibility, but also probability of cure, so
ought they to depend upon him for the success, and that brings me to the next
duty, which I think proper to recommend to the Patients of these Houses, and
that is*

Thirdly, That they would cast themselves upon God by the Prayer of Faith, and
hope for his blessing upon the means used for their recovery: For the
endeavors of men though never so regular, and Lawful, are not succesful,
unless the blessing of God go along with them. Except the Lord build the House,
they labor in vain that buil it, except the Lord kept the City, the Watchman
waketh but in vain, Psalm 127. 1. and unless the Lord promote the cure, in vain
does the Nurse cherish the Patient, or the Chyrurgeon apply his Plasters, or
the Physician prescribe Medicines, for the success of all this proceeds from
God, in whose hand are the issues of life, and death, of health, and sickness.
Our Savior when he was here on earth, put Diseases to flight by the command of
his mouth, and gave sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, Legs to the lame,
strength to the weak, and health to those that are diseased, and all this at
the bare expense of a word, attended with that power which was never wanting to
the execution of his holy will and pleasure: And now that he is in Heaven, his
hand is not shortened, that he cannot save; his power is not less, that he
cannot heal, his compassions are not less propense, that he should not pity,
but he is as ready now, as he was then, to hear the Prayer of the weak and
infirm, and to send them health, if not in the very same way, to as good
purposes, if not by a visible miracle, yet by his effectual, and efficacious
blessing upon natural means And therefore the Scripture directs Patients to
both sorts of cure, the spiritual, as well as the humane, and more ordinary, in
a place so apposite to the condition of the Patients of these Hospitals, as if
it were penned on purpose for them: St. James 5. 14, 15. Is any sick among you?
Let him call for the Elders of the Church: and let them pray over him,
anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord, and the Prayer of Faith shall
save the sick: and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed sins,
they shall be forgiven him. It was a fault in Asa, (though in the main a very
good Prince,) that in his disease he sought not to the Lord; but to the
Physicians, and the same fault is too common among Christians, but would any
walk according to the right Gospel Method in these cases? Let them make use of
humane means, because God has no where promised to heal us by miracle, and in
the use of the means, send up an eye of Faith to God, because without his
blessing, the means will prove ineffectual.

Fourthly, When the poor Patients are cured of their infirmities, let them obey
that exhortation which our Savior gave heretofore to the Cripple, and the
Worshipful Governors of St. Bartholomews have inserted into their Orders, Page
24. Let them sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto them. For better is it
to be a sickly Saint, then a stout sinner, an afflicted Christian, then a
healthy reprobate, better to be weak in body, then weak in grace, more eligible
far to be strengthened in the inner man with the aids of Gods Spirit, then to
be strong to commit wickedness. Our days here are few and evil, Our bodies
brittle and frail, subject to many Diseases, liable to many frailties, but
after this life, there is a happy state will take place, where the righteous
will be blessed with endless rest, not disturbed by any pains, a perpetual
health not interrupted by any sickness, and perfect strength, not abated by any
weakness, this bliss let them seek in weldoing, and for their blessed arrival
at such a condition. Let them not be wanting in their constant supplication to
God the only giver of temporal and eternal life, of health here, and of
everlasting Salvation hereafter: And I have endeavored to assist their
Devotions by two Prayers, the one to be used by them, during the time that they
are actually under their infirmities, the other after that they are cured of
them: and the latter of these is transcribed word for word out of the Orders
and Ordinances of the Worshipful Hospital of St. Bartholomews.

A Prayer.
O Holy Father, we desire in all humility, to acknowledge the Justice of thy
correcting hand upon us, in those pains and infirmities which we endure, we are
not worthy of life, much less of health, and strength, and therefore teach us
to submit to thy corrections, with all Christian patience and resignation: Let
the weakness of our bodies, prove the health of our Souls, and while our
outward man perishes, Let our inward man be renewed day by day: and grant we
beseech thee, that these light afflictions which are but for a moment, may work
for us a far more exceeding weight of Glory. Have mercy upon us thou Son of
David, and as here on earth thou did give eyes to the blind, and ears to the
deaf, and Legs to the lame, strength to the weak, and health to the sick, so
now that thou art in Heaven, let us find thy power great, to heal our Diseases,
and to relieve our infirmities, and give thy blessing to the means used for our
recovery. However we beseech thee, o Gracious God, prepare us for thy self by
all thy mercies, and by all our afflictions, and at last bring us to that happy
state where there is health, and no sickness, rest, and no pain, everlasting
life, with no death to follow it, let this be our blessed Lot, and let this be
our happy Portion in eternal enjoyment of God, and in our everlasting Communion
with the Father, and with the Spirit, and with the Son, who when he was on
earth taught us to Pray, saying. Our Father, etc.

A Thanksgiving unto Almighty God, to be said by the poor that are cured in the
Hospital of St. Bartholomews, at the time of their delivery from thence, upon
their knees in the Hall before the Hospitaler, and two Masters of the House at
the least.
WE magnify and praise thee O Lord, that so mercifully and favorably have
looked upon us miserable and wretched sinners, which so highly have offended
thy Divine Majesty, that we are not worthy to be numbered among thy elect and
chosen People: our sins being great and grievous, are daily before our eyes, we
lament and be sorry for them, and with sorrowful heart, and lamentable tears,
we call and cry unto thee for mercy. Have mercy upon us O Lord, have mercy upon
us (...)d according to thy great mercy, (...)way the multitude of our sins, and
grant us now O Lord, thy most holy and working Spirit, that setting aside all
vice and idleness, we may in thy fear walk, and go forward in all virtue and
godliness. And for that thou have moved O Lord, the hearts of Godly men, and
the Governors of this House, to show their exceeding charity toward us, in
curing of our maladies and diseases, we yield most humble and hearty thanks to
thy Majesty, and shall incessantly laud and praise thy most holy and glorious
name: Beseeching thee, most gracious and merciful Lord, according to thy holy
word and promise, so to bless this thine own dwelling House, and the Faithful
Ministers thereof, that there be here found no lack, but that their riches and
substance may increase, that thy holy name may thereby be the more praised and
glorified, to whom be all laud, honor, and glory, world without end.

Amen.
CHAP. VII.
Instructions for those that have been restored to their senses, in the
Hospital of Bethleem.

IT has been already observed in this small Treatise, to the great Glory of
this City, that there is scarce any infirmity to which humane nature is liable,
but some Provision has been made against it, by the generous charity of the
Honorable, and Worshipful Patriots thereof: and as in other Hospitals this
has been manifested, so also it is very demonstrable from the worthy intents
of this charitable foundation; where very ample provision is made for Physic,
and Lodging, and attendance, and all other things requisite for the cure, and
welfare of those miserable people, that are crazed in their brains. To the
Governors of this place there is no need to address any advice; Their worthy
performances supply abundant matter for praise, and leave no room for further
directions to do any thing more then they do already. The Poor people under
cure are not capable of it, for it would be a piece of madness to direct advice
to such as are under actual phrensy, and so are not capable of it. The only men
therefore to whom applications of this nature must be made, must be such as
have received cure in this House, and by that means have been restored to the
enjoyment of heir senses and use of their reason: To these.

My first direction shall be, that they would endeavor to be thankful to God
for so great a mercy: We usually value mercies by the want of them, as those
that have been sick, know how to put an estimate upon health, those that have
been confined upon Liberty, and those that have been exercised with any other
affliction, know how to prize those enjoyments, which others have, and
undervalue for the commonness of them: and therefore if any know how to put a
due esteem upon this great mercy, the undisturbed use of their sense and
reason, these men do: Those that are under the care, and Provision of other
Hospitals, are not half so miserable as they lately were. Christ-Church is a
receptacle of poor men's Children, but poverty though a great misery, is not
wholly without relief, and remedy, if men have the use of their sense and
reason, whereby to learn and practice honest, and ingenuous arts for their
relief, and maintenance. In St. Bartholomews, and St. Thomas's there are lame,
and decrepit, and infirm People exercised with diverse pains, but seeing their
distemper does not touch their brain: they can enjoy the sweet and delightful
converse of Friends, and acquaintance, and communicate pleasant and useful
discourse with them: and both the former, and the latter of these have
opportunities for the working out their Salvation with fear and trembling: But
the Patients of Bethleem want all this, if they be poor, they want the use of
reason to attend upon a beneficial calling, and if surrounded with a multitude
of Friends, they are not bettered by their converse, as not understanding what
they say, or what they do: but if they have been addicted to any course of
mortal sin, they are as it were locked up under a state of impenitence, having
not sense to apprehend the error of their former ways, nor reason to direct
them how to return to the wisdom of the just: But by being restored to their
senses, they are restored to all these advantages. They are better enabled to
maintain their charge, better enabled to enjoy their Friends, better enabled to
serve their God: And as it is a complicated mercy, so it deserves a complicated
thankfulness. And they that are restored to their senses, ought to return a
several acknowledgment to the Divine goodness, as for the fundamental mercy it
self, so for all those that are contained in it, Men are Instruments in the
hand of God, and as such there is due to them a gratitude proportionable to
their care over them: but God is the principal agent, and therefore he may
claim their highest praise and adoration.

Secondly, My second exhortation to those that have a happy cure in this
Hospital, is to take care of those sinful passions that heretofore have either
caused, or hastened their former distraction upon them: For seldom it is that a
man of a sedate temper, or a quiet mind, or of moderate propensions, or that
has bounded his desires within the limits of reason, and Religion, that
arrives at these phrensies which have their cure in this House. But usually
some inordinate passion transports us first beyond our duty, and then beyond
our wits. Some are vain glorious, and because they meet with scorn, where they
looked for respect, it is a disturbance first to their thoughts, then to the
very constitution of their brain, and then perverts their senses; some guide
their Love more by fancy then by reason: not regarding the consent of Parents,
nor approbation of Friends, nor any of those circumstances which a wise man
ought to consider, and that passion which was but the issue of an unreasonable
lust, concludes at last in a more unreasonable phrensy: And some disturb their
minds with unreasonable scruples, and Religion, which has a natural tendency
to compose men's Spirits, disturbs theirs: My advice to all such is, that when
they are restored to their senses, they would correct their passions by reason
and Religion, and they will find the benefit of it in the sedateness of their
Spirits, and in the peace of their consciences, and in their mastery over those
inordinacies of Soul, which often transport men into phrensy: Love nothing
passionately but God, and those Divine beauties, though they may transport,
will never distract the Soul: Submit to the dis^^^s^tions of God, concerning
you, and think that condition best which his providence has allotted you: and
you need never fear that discontent will crack your brain. Keep a conscience
clear in all things, for nothing is so distracting as guilt, nothing more
sedate then uprightness and integrity. In Religion, study not the things that
are mysterious, but the things that are necessary: Deep enquiries have often
distracted the acutest brains, but plain truths never discomposed the most
illiterate understanding. Believe the Trinity to be a mystery incomprehensible,
and let it continue so: Acknowledge the decrees of God to be unsearchable, and
pry not into them too curiously: Resign your self to the guidance of the
Spirit, and be content to be ignorant of the manner of its operations, and if
this you do, you will be as wise as God requires you should be; more Religious
then some men that count themselves more wise then you, and more composed in
your Spirit, then those that distract themselves with mysterious enquiries; And
this is my second direction to this sort of People, to avoid violent passions,
and nice speculations.

Thirdly, My third direction shall be, that when men have recovered the use of
their reason, they would employ the exercise of it about the best things, the
service of God, the good of mankind, and the discreet guidance of their own
lives and conversations: And surely God in his providence will preserve that
reason sound, and entire that is employed to so Divine purposes. In these
generous employments there are many things ennobling to our reason, nothing
disturbing or distracting. To serve God, and submit our will to his, to hope in
his goodness, and depend upon his mercy, are things easy to be understood, and
require not an acute brain to perform them. But the disputes about God, and
Religion, lead men into endless mazes, and Meanders. To do as we would be done
by requires no great skill and cunning, but the methods of Craft and deceit,
may soon puzzle the shrewdest understanding: for the paths of righteousness are
plain and easy, but the contrivances of the wicked, are many of them very
distracting: And then for those duties which concern the Regulation of our
affections, there are none of them have any tendency in them to disturb our
Spirits, but all proper to compose them: Anger, and impatience enrage the
heart, but meekness will compose, and settle it. Thirst of revenge boyls up the
blood to unnatural heats: but Christian forgiveness makes us at peace within
our selves, and with others. Anxious care, and desponding thoughts, are very
often productive of Phrensy, but nothing so proper to quiet, and allay all the
fluctuations of our minds, as Faith and Hope, and those other graces that are
nearly allied to these. If God of his mercy restore our reason, in gratitude we
are bound to employ it in his service: and this is also the best course to
preserve the soundness and integrity of it; for God will bless that reason that
is employed in the exercises of Religion, and the duties of Religion naturally
tend to the improving and preserving of it.

The last duty that I shall recommend to them, is to pity them that are in the
like condition to that wherein they heretofore were, to aid them at present
with the assistance of their prayers, and hereafter their Hospital with the
bounty of their purse, if God shall enable them to do so. To do good and to
communicate, forget not, says the Apostle; for with such sacrifices God is
well pleased, but our charity is most suitable when it is extended to those who
are under those miseries which heretofore were ours: Israel must not grieve the
stranger, because they were strangers in Egypt. The believing Hebrews to whom
the Apostle writes, must remember those that are in bonds, as being bound with
them, and them that suffer adversity, as being themselves also in the body. And
those that have wanted their senses should remember those that want them still;
remember them always in their prayers, and when they shall be able in the
largeness of their bounty too. I add not further to this Chapter, but only the
usual conclusion of the rest, a Prayer.

A PRAYER.
O LORD we desire to return unto thee all possible praise, and thanks for all
thy mercies bestowed upon us, more particularly for that great mercy of
restoring us to our former senses: We beseech thee teach us to employ our
reason in the service of God, and the duties of religion; to work out our
salvation with fear and trembling, and to study the things of our peace: Subdue
in us all disturbing passions, and inordinate affections, which are contrary to
our peace, and contrary to thy Gospel: Root out of our souls sensual love, and
restless ambition, and all pride, and haughtiness of spirit; and teach us to
regulate our desires according to the rules of reason and religion: Preserve
our reason which thou have restored, and restore it to those that want it: pity
their dark and disconsolate condition, allay their fears, answer their doubts,
and subdue their distempers, and speak peace and health to them, and make us
truly thankful to God, who has made it to be better with us than it is with
them: And as thou have relieved our bodily distempers, so heal all our
spiritual diseases. Make us every day more and more to be religious toward our
God, just and charitable toward our Neighbors, and sober, and temperate in
our chaste and Christian usage of our own bodies. Fill us with the fruits of the
spirit, goodness, and meekness, and faith, and hope, and patience, and
long-suffering, and all other Graces here, and the fullness of thy glory
hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord. In whose name, etc.

The Close.
HItherto from the beginning to the ending of this Treatise, I have walked in a
path untroden by others before me: But all along have sincerely aimed at the
spiritual good of those that have come under the directions of my Pen. It is
very meet that in this, as in all other actions, the main end that I propound
to my self should be the hohour of God, and the good of Souls; but r^^^er that
I have also designed to testify my duty and respects to the Court of Aldermen,
whose Stipendiary I am, and to the Worshipful Governors of the several places
mentioned in this discourse; and if they will permit these books to be
distributed among the people under their charge, I shall pray for a blessing
from God, upon what I have writ and the^ shall read, and direct them to pray
for their Governors, and Patrons, and Benefactours in the short form following.

A PRAYER.
O LORD, the giver of every good and perfect gift, we return unto thee the
tribute of praise and thanksgiving, for all the privileges and advantages
reached out to us by the hands of our Patrons, and Benefactours: We beseech
thee, give us Grace to walk worthy of all these thy mercies, and their favors,
and restore unto them into their bosoms a hundred fold for all their
Christian charity and bounty; Granting them in this life all the blessings of
thy Grace, and favor; and in the world to come, life and immortality, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who has taught us to pray, saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven; Give us this day our daily Bread,
and forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us, and
lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
THE CONTENTS.
Of the several Chapters of this Treatise.
Chap. 1. Directions suitable to those who are Prisoners for Debt; which may be
applyable to the condition of such as are Prisoners in Ludgate, the Fleet, or
either of the Counters, or Newgate as it is the County Prison for Debt. Page 1.
Chapter 2. Instructions for such Malefactors as have committed such crimes, the
punishment whereof is some public shame, or corporal infliction; or any other
punishment below that of death: Applyable in great measure to the condition of
those that are in Bridewel. p. 28. Chapter 3. Directions for those that are Tried
and Cast for their Lives, but have them spared by the mercy of the King or the
Bench. p. 45. Chapter 4. Considerations suited to the condition of such Malefactors
as are actually under the sentence of condemnation for death. p. 60. Chapter 5.
Instructions suited to the condition of those who have their Education in the
Hospital of Christ-Church. p. 77. Chapter 6. Instructions proper for such, for
whose care Provision is made in the Hospital of S. Bartholomew near Smithfield,
and S. Thomas the Apostle in Southwark. p. 94. Chapter 7. Instructions for those
that have been restored to their senses in the Hospital of Bethleem. p. 110.

FINIS.
The Reader is desired before he proceed to peruse this Book, to mend with his
Pen these following mistakes, which are not wholly chargeable upon the Printer,
but in part upon the Copy, which was in some places interlined, and in others
not very fairly writ: mispointings and smaller Errata's I have not here noted,
but such as pervert the sense, of which the first is the Grossest, and in that
as well as the rest, the Reader has the very Pages, and Lines noted.

Page 2. l. 9. for Creditors read Chapmen, p. 4. l. 26. for we r. be, p. 8. l.
27. for Learning r. hearing, p. 15. l. 25. after world, insert then, p. 29. l.
last, for side, r. size, p. 31. l. 28. for Heb. 3. 1. r. Heb. 3. 13. p. 37. l.
16. for Devils, r. Devil, p. 39. l. 9. after are, blot out with, l. 26. for
reach, r. reak, p. 41. l. 3. after themselves, blot out they are, p. 49. l. 16.
after these, blot out as, p. 55. l. 19. for Counts, r. Courts, p. 80. l. 2. for
reports, r. reporters, p. 93. l. 20. blot out in, and insert old, p. 95. l. 16.
for Authority both by, r. both by the Authority.


