AN ALARM TO ENGLAND, To prevent its Destruction By the Loss of Trade and
Navigation; Which at this Day is in great Danger.

Submitted to Consideration in time.

By W. C.

LONDON, Printed by K. Astwood, for Mary Fabian, at Mercers-Chappel in
Cheapside, 1700.

TO THE KING's MOST Excellent Majesty.
May it please Your Majesty,
AS the Multitude of your Subjects is an Honor to Your Majesty, so the
Employment of them, is both Your Safety and Riches.

Great Sir,

These few Lines do therefore, Humbly crave Your Majesty's Perusal, because
they make it appear, That the Trade and Manufacture of this Nation, supports
the Government, and consequently the Revenue of the Crown in each Branch
thereof; which is Humbly submitted to Your Princely Consideration by

Your Majesty's Most Obedient and Dutiful Subject and Servant, W. C.

THE PREFACE.
IT IS certain that Trade in General is a Great Benefit to, and a Main Support of
any Nation; and the Woollen Manufacture of this in particular: Therefore it is of
Great Concernment, to endeavor by all means possible, to preserve and increase
it. But to our Sorrow, we have our Ears filled with daily Complaints of the
great Decay of it; and the most effectual means to find out a Remedy, is to
enquire into the Cause. I did in the Year, 1669. express my Fears to King
Charles II. of a great Decay of our Woollen Manufacture; by what I Observed
then, and by woeful Experience we have found it come to pass. I have in the
following Papers endeavored to represent the Causes of it. And the General
Cause I have observed to be, the Trading into those Parts, whither but little
of our own Manufacture is exported; and the Returns of Foreign Commodities to
us, are made by purchase with our Money. The Particulars of which, I have
instanced in our Trade with France; which during the Two Last Reigns, gave them
the Advantage of near Four Millions per Annum of our Money; while but little of
our Manufactures was exchanged for theirs. The like is instanced in the
East India Trade, which is mainly carried on by our Money, and the Callicoes,
etc. which are imported from thence; not only hinder our own Manufactures at
Home, but lay a Foundation of the Loss of our Trade in the Woollen Manufacture,
both with Flanders and Germany. This Mr. T. Smith has hinted, in a Sheet he
wrote the last Year, concerning the East India Trade; showing how prejudicial
it was to our Silk and Woollen Manufactures, which at present are well settled
among us. It tends to our Impoverishment, by taking away the Employment of our
Poor; depopulates the Nation, lessens the Value of Lands and Houses; and
exposes us thereby to the Contempt of our Neighbors.

An ALARM, etc.
IN the Preface of a Discourse, Entitled, Awake Sampson: Printed in the Year,
1696. I hinted that that was intended to be a Preparatory for a General Alarm.

Since we were told in the Year, 1678. that there was then a Design to subvert
the Frame of our English Government, the Destruction of the Protestant
Religion, and to adulterate the Coin, and had we took that caution given us
timely, we had prevented many of those Evils, which we have so sensibly since
felt.

And since the Designs of our Enemies have been variously exercised, ( viz.) to
destroy Trade, to invade Property, to alter on Religion, and to adulterate the
Coin of the Nation, which has cost us so much lately to retrieve; let it be a
caution to us in other cases for the Future.

It may seem to some to be needless now, to talk of an Alarm seeing we are at
Peace; yet the following Discourse will evidence that in the Subject I insist
upon, we have more need to be called upon now, then in a Time of War: The
Reasons are many, but in General, we know in War Watches are set, and People do
never sleep secure from Noise; but in a Time of Peace Persons are apt to be too
secure: I presume, there is no just Occasion to make an Apology, for waking a
Person in danger of a Fire, though he is forced to it against his Natural
Disposition; and that such a Person would not be offended, if pulled out of his
Bed when the Flames are about him; though he do not see it his Eyes being shut,
and he in a sound sleep: It is the Condition of England at this time. We have
been often in Danger, and the Fire as often quenched, and though (generally speaking)
we have had very many and great awakening Providence sounded in our Ears, Yet
we have been like the deaf Addor that stops her Ears, and will not hearken
to the Voice of Charmers, though charming never so wisely; and do not consider a
Secret Train is laid to blow us up, and though we have hitherto been preserved
almost to a Miracle, yet whether we have any grounds to expect it always, I
cannot tell; my Faith is weak: But on the contrary, though we in this Age do not
pretend to Prophetic Inspiration, nor do I as little to Prognostication, yet
by Common Observations any Man may predict, what Conclusions necessarily follow
such and such Premises; or in a more familiar way of speaking, we know if we
keep a certain Road on Shore, or steer our Course at Sea, whither at length it
will bring us.

How we have taken our Course these Forty Years is too Notorious, and for which
the Land mourns; (I would be glad to be deceived if my Fears are groundless)
that it may vomit out many of its Inhabitants, at least some of us fall short
of our Expectations.

And had I not made some Observations, of the wonderful Goodness of God to this
Nation; as before hinted: I should have despaired of any hopes of being saved
from an utter Destruction, for the Dangers we are now in are so great, that
though we are at present (Blessed be God) at peace, yet when I consider, the many
thousands that have lived comfortably in the Trade of our Woollen Manufacture,
and which have contributed to the Support of the Government, and Maintenance of
the Poor; are now (and like to be more) reduced to want themselves, having no
Employment; by reason that many of those Countries that we have formerly
supplied with those Goods, do make not only for their own Use with our Wool,
but sup(...) other Foreign Countries also; and not only so, but that we have
cut off as it were, and disobliged both Ireland and Scotland in some late Acts;
I am not without my Fears what the Effects may be, besides our Domestic
Consumption of Foreign Manufacturies, and hindering our own, etc.

But if it be said by some, (as it is) that if we loose our Woollen
Manufacture, we may employ our poor in a Linen Manufacture, etc. I must answer
as I did on a like Occasion, about the Year 1669. in a Tract, Entitled,
England's Interest by the Benefit of the Woollen Manufacture: (viz.) I am the
more large in the Demonstration of this Affair, not only because this has cost
me many Years Labor and Study to consult all sorts of concerned Persons,
besides my own Experience about it; but also because it is so hard to convince
People of the meanest Capacity, and some of the wiser sort, how to cure this
dismal Malady which some despairing of, have rather thought of setting up some
other Manufacture in lieu of endeavoring to prevent the Exportation of Wool,
and manufacturing that at Home, as that of Linen, etc. which is in my Judgment
a great Mistake, for other Countries have the Advantage of England in that, but
not in this of Clothing; and it will be found that all or most Trades in
England, wholly distinct from this of Clothing, bring not the Tithe of
Advantage that this does.

And to confirm my Sentiments herein though so long ago writ, I crave leave to
add the Opinion of a late Author, who say^

Divine Providence that appoints to every Nation and Country a particular
Portion, seems to allot to England which was the first Acceptable Sacrifice to
his Omnipotence, that of the Flock the Produce of which, is the most Universal
Covering of all Civilized Countries of the World.

Our Woollen Manufacture is a Talent, which no Nation has to that perfection as
we have; this has been for many Ages the Support of the Nation, employing the
Poor at home, and our Men and Ships at Sea. Now to decline this, and set up
another Manufactory, looks like an Extravagant Mechanic, who by his
Improvidence has lost his own Art, and thinks to retrieve his Misfortune by
taking up that of another Man's: This is condemned in particular Persons, and
therefore much more to be so in a Community.

But it will be said, There is not Employment for the Hands of the Nation in
the Woollen Manufactory; and since Linen carries away so much of our Money, it
seems the Interest of the Nation to employ idle Hands, in that which will keep
Money in the Kingdom.

Now though both these Assertions have too much Truth in them, yet neither of
them have weight enough to enforce the Conclusion, That the Linen Manufactory
is the only Remedy. If we search into the Bottom of our Distemper we shall find
another cause of our Disease.

It is not because there is less Woollen Manufactory used in the World than
formerly, that our Trade declines, nor yet because we make more than formerly;
Nor is it altogether to be assigned to the late War: For that our Trade decayed
in the latter part of King Charles the Second, and all the Reign of the Late
King. The Reasons then for our Decay in the Woollen Manufactory seem to be these,

1. The Growth of Course Woollen Manufactory in Germany, with which the
Venetians Trade to Turkey. 2. The Prohibition of our Woollen Manufactory in
France. 3. The Increase of the Woollen Manufactory by our Neighbors with the
help of our Wool, so that in some things they outdo us in the Price they can
sell at. 4. By the great Wearing of East India and other Silks, and the Use of
Calicoes, which was formerly supplied by our Tammies and Says. 5. The Want of
the Consumption of Ireland, etc.
Now if there be any thing in all I have said, it seems reasonable to consider
well; before the Nation gives up its Staple and long-continued Trade for a
Shadow, as I take the Linen Manufactory to be: For although I believe it can
never come to effect, yet so far it may go, as to injure that of the Woollen, by
diverting some that are now in it, and so raises price of Spinning; than which
nothing can be more prejudicial; for as I mentioned before, nothing can
retrieve our lost Trade abroad, but underselling our Competitors: So then we
must labor to make ours as Cheap as we can, and not set up another
Manufactory. To bid who gives most for Spinners, is a ready way to ruin the
Clothing Trade of England, but not to set up the Linen.

Let us consider, besides what has been said before of injuring the Woollen
Manufactory: How it will affect the Kingdom in the two Pillars that support it,
That of the Rents of Land, and the Employing our Ships and Men at Sea; which
are thought the Walls of the Nation.

For the Rents of the Land they must certainly fall, for that one Acre of Flax
will employ as many Hands the Year round, as the Wool of Sheep that graze
twenty Acres of Ground. The Linen Manufactory imploys few Men, the Woollen
most, Weaving, Combing, Dressing, Shearing, Dying, etc. These eat and drink
more than Women and Children, and so as the Land that the sheep graze on
raises the Rent, so will the Arable and Pasture that bears Corn, and breeds
Cattle for their Subsistence.

Then for the Employment of our Shipping, it will never be pretended that we
can arrive to Exportation of Linen; there are others and too many before us in
that: And the Truth is, he that cannot thrive at his own Trade, will hardly do
it in that of another. If we are beat out of our Inheritance the Woollen
Manufactory by Foreigners, over whom we have such Advantages in our Wool,
Fullers-Earth, and long Continuance in the Trade; it can be nothing less than a
Miracle for us to take from them their Linen Manufactory, in which they have
so much the Ascendant over us.

I shall end this part of my Discourse with the Answer of a West Country Man to
his Neighbor, that asked, what Voyage he had made in a Fishing at
New Foundland, that proved not good? I have made ( said he) a brave Voyage, as
you may guess, for I have sold my Bible, and bought a Tobacco-Box: Would it not
be so to this Nation, if we should change the Noblest Manufactory in the World,
for the poorest and most despicable: So are those People in all parts of the
World, that are employed in the Linen Manufactory, which only thrives where
the Country is crowded with Poor, and Bread not to be had, at the Charge of the
Parish, where the Tenant is but a Vassal to his Lord, and there is no power in
any to relieve; but in the Lord who is strange to the Practice. It is a Mistake
in them that believe the Linen Manufactory in Holland, to be the Product of
their own Country: It is only the easier part, that of Weaving and Whiting,
most of the Thread comes from Saxony.

Thus much for this Author, from whence we may Conclude, That if the Riches and
Strength of England, were first of all begun from our Woollen Manufacture by
King Ed. 3d. and brought to a greater Perfection in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth; we also ought to take the same care in its preservation: Otherwise
we may be reduced to that mean Condition England was in, when Land and other
Commodities was of no Value, till about the Time of that Famous Princess Queen
Elizabeth, whose Long and Prosperous Reign had raised this Nation to that
Riches and Strength, as elsewhere is enlarged; and Sir Walter Raleigh, as a
Wife Statesman, and Lover of his Country, (as many, if not most of that
Queen's Council were) had began well to promote Englands Interest, but was in
the Reign of King James the First undermined by the Interest of Spain, which
was then so prevailing that that unfortunate Knight was taken away. But in the
latter End of that Reign, and the whole of the three Last Kings, instead of the
Spanish the French Interest has so much prevailed amongst us, that we are now
under the sad Effects thereof, and that King about the Year 1661. upon a Design
he had to have forbidden the Trade between France and England, supposing the
Value of English Commodities sent into France, did surmont the Value of those
that were transported hither: The following Particulars were laid before that
King. ( viz.)

l. 1. There were then transported out of France into England, in Velvets,
Sattins, Cloth of Gold and Silver, yearly to the Value of 150000 2. In Silks,
Taffaties, Ribbons, etc. to the Value of 300000 3. In Silks Ribbonds, Galloons,
Laces, Buttons to the Value of 150000 4. In Serges, etc. to the Value of 150000
5. Beavors, Demy-Castors and Felt-Hatts, 120000 6. In Feathers, Belts, Girdles,
Hatbands, Fans, Hoods, Masks, Gilt and Wrought Looking-Glasses, Cabinets,
Watches, Pictures, Cases, Medals, Tabulets, Bracelets, 150000 7. In Pins,
Needles, Box, Combs, Tortoise-shell Combs, 020000 8. In Perfumed and Trimmed
Gloves, 010000 9. In Paper, 100000 10. Iron-monger Ware, 040000 11. In Linen
Cloth, 400000 12. In Houshold-stuffs, Beds and Hangings, 100000 13. In
Aqua-Vitae, Syder, Vinegar, Vergis, 100000 14. In Wines, 600000 15. In Saffron,
Castle-saop, Honey, Almonds, Olives, Capers and Prunes, 150000 Besides Five or
Six Hundred Vessels of Salt, yearly amounting unto all about 2600000 And all
the Commodies exported hence at that time amounted but to 1000000 So that by
this Act the Ballace on the French came to 1600000

Upon which the French King soon laid aside his Design of Prohibition, and
instead thereof increased the Duties laid upon all our Woollen Manufacture
imported into his Dominions, of what was imported in the Year 1654. and 1660.
(about which time we exported more Goods, especially of our Woollen Manufactures
to France, then was imported from France into England in those Years.) But the
great Increase of French Commodities imported into England, was after the
Arrival of King Charles the Second. And we may rationally conclude, that the
Duties paid to the French King when the aforesaid Goods, valued at 2600000 l.
were exported, together with the Freight, and what was paid for Custom when
imported, as also the Profit to the Merchant and Retailer, and by the Advance
of Price by our Fancies, the said Sum of 2600000 l. may be rationally
increased to 3000000 l. so that the Consumers of the French Commodities
advanced the French Interest and impoverished our selves; but then after this
time in 1662. the French having got vast Quantities of our Wool to encourage
that Manufacture, greater Duties were imposed on our English Commodities in the
Year 1664. and further increased in the Year 1667. not only on our Wollens but
on all our English Commodities, even great Duties upon our Shipping, that I my
self having occasion to go to Lille in Flanders, could not land at Dunkirk,
though I had no Commodities in the Vessel without paying Tunnage; but thy was not
all, but the French King restrained and confined the Importation of our Woollen
Manufactures to his Ports of Callice and Diep, and other Goods to some other
inconvenient Ports: By which means, and by the Encouragement of the Consumption
of the Cloths, Stuffs, etc. made by his own People; it amounted to a
Prohibition of our Commodities in many cases.

And by the way, it has been examined that in the Year 1674. or thereabouts;
there was imported from France Silks to the Value of 300000 l. and in Linen
Cloth 500000 l. and Wine and Brandy, 217000 l. where we may also Note, that if
such a Quantity was legally entered, there was some of all those Commodities
run, as it is called ( viz.) Stolen and paid no Duties; besides all sorts of
Lace, when in that Year our Exports to France amounted but to 171020 l. and it
was further Observed, that in the Year 1675. the Importation of Wine and Brandy
was almost doubled of what it was before, and at the latter End of the Reign of
King James it was much more increased, ( viz.) the Importation of French Wine
and Brandy.

The great Loss of the Trade we formerly had with France of near 1500000 l. per
Annum, which we exported of our Woollen Manufacture to that Kingdom; occasioned
that Famous and Worthy Sir Matthew Hale, late Lord Chief Justice to say that
our Populousness, which is the greatest Blessing a Kingdom can enjoy; is become
the Burden of our Nation: The uneasiness of this Burden upon us these late
Years, has occasioned many unusual Remedies and Attempts, many New Acts of
Parliament in the Reign of King Charles the Second, being once misled, our
Uneasiness made way for a further Design upon us, as a Man being out of his way
will be ready to listen believingly unto almost any Direction. In the 15th.
Caroli 2. there was an Act made for the Encouragement of Trade in its Title,
whilst the Body of the Act was no more, than to encourage the Exportation of
Corn; (the low Price thereof being as before, occasioned by so many thousands
want to Employ, and could not have Money to buy Corn) and to give Liberty to
carry away our Bullion, which helped one step forward. In the next Place
followed the Act against importing Cattle from Ireland, which was a Cure like
the rest that led to farther Inconveniences, this was in the 17th. Caroli 2.
After which a free Liberty was given to Export Leather, which was in the 20th.
of that King's Reign, directly contrary to former Statutes successively. And to
complete the whole Design, in the 25th. Caroli 2. there was an Act made, to
take off Aliens Duties upon all Commodities of the Growth, Product and
Manufacture of our Nation, except Coals; which fully answered their End. All
the Privileges of England were given away by wholesale, whilst all those Acts
proved but turnings in a Feavor, which gave ground to the Distemper upon us, no
way affecting the true cause, and this not matter of choice; if any other way
proposed, the Country Air was soon thought best, ( viz.) the Parliament sent
home, such was our Case in those Reigns; etc.

Of which Acts I shall by and by more enlarge upon, but to speak more of the
Trade of France and the Consequence thereof; for as we lost the great Advantage
that formerly we had by the prohibiting of our Woollen Manufacture in that
Kingdom, during most of the two last Reigns; so the unequal Duties laid upon
the German and Flanders Linnens, the Product of our Woollen Manufacture, and by
the small Duties laid upon the French Linen, and East India Calicoes, and
Muslings purchased with our Money. This in my Judgment being impartial ( viz.)
(not concerned in Interest) must in reason be the main Occasion; at least a
Foundation for Germany and Flanders, to encourage the Woollen Manufactury in
those parts: And it is well Observed by the Author of a little Tract, Entitled,
The Interest of England considered; Printed in the Year 1694. ( viz.)

The fine Linnens of Flanders and Germany, have come in competition these many
Years with the Calicoes and Muslings of the East Indies; and the fine Dowlace
and Gauses of France, one the Effect of our Manufactory, the other of our
Bullion, and yet you will find upon the Book of Rates, if I mistake not, all
the Linen of Flanders charged with about three pence an Ell Custom, and the
fine Dowlace of France not at one half penny; and the Callicoes of the
East Indies but at two pence a piece.

Now as that unequal Trade was carried on, all the time almost of the two Late
Reigns, so the Necessity in the late War in doubling the Duties upon Flanders
Linen, which is almost half the Value of much of their said Linen, and the
unseasonable timing of the Lace Act, which did (as was lately affirmed in a
Committee, etc.) occasion a Flanders Merchant then in London, dealing much in
Lace, to go over to Flanders, and put the States upon the prohibiting our
Woollen Manufacture.

And though this occasioned the said Prohibition, yet considering the Little
Quantity of Lace, at least visibly brought into England, in comparison of the
Linen imported formerly from Flanders; cannot be the Original, though it may be
the Instrumental Cause as before hinted.

Hereby it may appear how we have lost our Trade, and how insensibly our
Treasure was exhausted, and our Nation beggared, whilst we neglected our own
Interest, and Strangers (such as proved our great Enemies) were diligent to
make their Advantage by us, but most of those Evils might have been prevented,
had we really assumed our Ancestors regard to our Wealth and Grandeur.

But leaving Particulars let us be more general, for though we are agreed, that
Trade is the main Spring from whence Riches flow, yet we do as much differ in
the Method of acquiring thereof, and there is certainly as much need of
Regulation in Trade, as of Laws to secure one Man's Right from being invaded by
another, for it is now become as necessary to preserve Government, as it is
useful to make Men rich.

And notwithstanding the great Influence, that Trade now has in the Support
and Welfare of States and Kingdoms, yet there is nothing more unknown, or at
least that Men differ more in their Sentiments; than about the true Causes that
raise and promote Trade.

The Merchant and other Traders, who should understand the true Interest of
Trade, do either not understand it, or else lest it might hinder their private
Gain, will not discover it.

Some Writers about Trade, do in their Treatises better set forth the Rule to
make an Accomplished Merchant, than how it may be most profitable to the
Nation. And those Arguments every day met with from the Traders, seem biased
with private Interest, and run contrary to one another, as their Interest are
opposite.

And how fair and convincing soever their Premises may appear, for the
Enlarging and Advancement of Trade; the Conclusions of their Arguments, are
directly opposite.

The Reasons why many Men have not a true Idea of Trade is, Because they apply
their Thoughts to particular Parts of Trade, wherein they are chiefly concerned
in Interest; and having found out the best Rules and Laws for forming that
particular Part, they govern their Thoughts by the same Notions in forming the
great Body of Trade, and not reflecting on the different Proportion betwixt the
Body and Parts, have a very disagreeable Conception; and like those, who having
learnt to draw well an Eye, Ear, Hand, and other Parts of the Body, (being
unskilful in the Laws of Symmetry) when they join them together make a very
deformed Body.

Therefore whoever will make a true Representation of Trade, must draw a rough
Scetch of the Body and Parts together, which though it will not entertain with
so much Pleasure as a well finished Piece; yet the agreableness of the Parts
may be as well discerned, and thereby such Measures taken, as may best suit the
Shape of the Body.

The Reason why I use this similitude, is from the Experience we have of the
miserable Effects we now, and may more hereafter feel of this separate Trades
that have been carried on in this Kingdom, ( viz.) that some few Persons gain
great Estates, when the Nation in general decays, as in many Particulars may be
instanced, ( viz.) the French Trade all the Time of the two late Kings, that
such Merchants who imported vast Quantities (and some that run their Goods and
paid no Customs) of such Commodities that were purchased with Money, and tended
to debauch the Nation, then the East India, by both those Countries this Nation
has lessened the Employment of near Five Hundred Thousand Persons, for by such
a Number of Persons out of Employ, or double that Number but half Work; it is
all one the Nation must be greatly impoverished thereby: For before that time
when People were fully employed, some Families could earn in the Clothing
Trade by spinning and weaving Twenty, and some Thirty Shillings per Week, though
some less, others more; which was most spent by them, and laid out with the
Farmer and Grasier, who was thereby better able to pay their Rents to the
Nobility and Gentry; by which means the Value of Lands were kept up, but when
such a Number of Persons beforementioned had no Employment, it is not probable
the Commodities can be sold which necessarily sunk the Rents of Lands, and this
was the Occasion of the Irish Act, (as that before of Corn) to prohibit the
Importation of Cattle, supposing that would be a means to support the Value of
Lands in England: But the Mistake is now so manifest, that we have by it lost a
great part of our Trade, and laid a Foundation to loose all, and it was well
Observed by Mr. Tho. Manly, a Justice of Peace in Kent, shortly after that Act
past upon another Occasion about the Exportation of Wool; (viz.) If the Irish
Wool enables the Foreigners to carry on that Manufacture hurtful to us, we
have small reason to assist them further, least we imitate those good Men, who
break the Pot, because their Wives break the Pitcher, and ruin our selves
because Ireland hurts us.

For if it be true, as is by some affirmed, (and by Demonstrations made good)
that England gained by the Trade with Ireland before, and in the beginning of
the Reign of King Charles the Second, Two Millions per Annum: It is plain, that
Act laid the Foundation of our ruin, for before that Act was in force, the
Irish contented themselves with Trading only with England, by which Trade we
received so great an Advantage, but since the Irish have been necessitated to
seek for a Trade elsewhere, which they have found to be our Loss. And though the
late Act about the Woollen Manufacture in Ireland, was well intended to
encourage our own; yet as things now stand, I am not without my Fears that it
will not be so advantageous as was expected, and as it might have been done
another way: I would be glad if I am deceived in my Fears.

Before I pass Ireland, I would crave leave to insert a part of a Discourse
writ by Mr. Andrew Marvyl, and printed in the Year, 1677. ( viz.)

The fall of Rents, and cheapness of Wool, and decay of Manufacture in England,
being suggested to be principally occasioned by Ireland, the Irish Cattle were
thereupon prohibited by an Act of Parliament, and declared to be a public
Nuisance.

Admitting that some of those Counties might be be prejudiced by the
Importation of Irish Cattle, yet whatsoever Profit accrued to others by it, did
upon the mutual Necessities of all, settle into the Common Stock of the Nation.

And it seems but reasonable, that whatsoever private Obligation a Parliament
Man has to the Place where he is Elected; yet when once he comes to sit, his
Trust and his Mind is enlarged, and he does no more consider himself as the
Politician of a Shire, or the Patron of a Borough, but as a Representer of the
Universality: Whereas otherwise, if any County, one or more chance to be more
fertile than other in Members of Parliament, and they act by such narrow
Measures, the decision would be by Multitude, not by Reason.

And notwithstanding if we were to tell Counties, those that are not advantaged
and are really agrieved, make the greatest Plea; for if we account like
Merchants by Profit and Loss, all the Profit that can be made (and that very
small) by this Act, returns to such Counties which are proper for breeding, and
that small profit is lost to them, if not much more by their Corn for want of
Trade by it, and the whole Nation has hereby lost in great measure, the vent
of it is Home and Foreign Commodities to Ireland, and the increasing Product to
England in General, by Irish Cattle in Specie.

But as to the Political Point, you did herein as much as in you then lay, to
cut off all that strong as more natural Dependence of Ireland upon England, and
to govern it rather by force of Authority, than by the influential Benignity of
Interest. And though I am no Politician, dare say in General, that it concerns
you to use us kindly, and to indulge us in all things that tend to civilize,
cultivate, and people this Nation.

Memorandum, This was written by Mr. Marvyl, under the Notion of a younger
Brother in Ireland to an Elder Brother in England; the reason was that it might
not be thought his Writing, because he was not willing to disoblige the North
Country Members, being his Friends, they being for that Act.

The next Act was about Leather, the Effect of which has lessened the
Employment of many Thousands in that Manufacture; so that Act has given
Advantage to Foreigners, contrary to the design of the said Laws, and more
particularly one lately made in the 12th. Year of Car. 2. as by the Preamble of
that Act may appear; wherein it is Evident that the Design thereof was for,

1. The setting on work the Inhabitants of this Realm. 2. The Improving the
Native Commodities of this Country to it is best, fullest and utmost Use. 3. And
that the Advantage accrewing hereby, might redound to the Subjects of this
Kingdom, and not the Subjects of Foreign Realms.
Wherefore these three Designs were either good, and sufficient Motives for the
Prohibition therein expressed or not; if Good and Sincere, then whatsoever is
contrary must be to the prejudice of England.

So that if those Acts beforementioned are contrary to the true Interest of
England, and notwithstanding have produced Effects contrary to Expectation, we
ought to consider whether it be proper that the said Acts should still remain
in force.

And then we added another Mistake, upon a Supposition that if Foreigners had
a liberty equal to our English Merchants, it would unavoidably encourage and
increase Trade; and therefore Aliens Duties were taken off; the Effect of which
has, instead of that, laid a Foundation to loose the Freedom of the English
Merchant, and let Strangers into the Mystery and Advantage of our Manufacture,
as well as ruin many of the Woollen Manufactures of this Kingdom, for when those
Foreigners have got some Credit, they have engrossed vast Quantities of the
said Manufacture, and then leave the Kingdom: So that all those Acts
beforementioned, instead of promoting have tended to destroy our Trade; and
had not the late War fell out as it did, (which occasioned the Consumption of
so much Flesh and Corn in the Fleet and Army) it had been much worse than now
it is for the Farmer and Grazier. Besides the General Decay of our Trade, which
we should e're this time been more sensible of. I say again, had not the War
came on at that time, we had not only lost our Trade, but the Liberty of
Freeborn English Men.

And now we have Peace (generally speaking) there is much cause upon another
Account, to be afraid we shall bring Destruction upon our selves by the Methods
used, now to promote a foreign Interest, as we did France in the Two late
Reigns; and though we are daily told of our Danger, yet we will not credit those
Cautions given us. Which brings to my Mind the History of the Jews, who though
they were often told of their Destruction that would certainly come upon them,
if they continued to go on in those ways in which they were then walking; and
though this Warning was given 'em with the greatest Compassion that a Man could
express, and all imaginable pains taken to convince them of the certainty of
those Evils that were coming upon them; yet they rejected all good Counsel, and
slighted all the Reproofs that were given them by their Prophets, until at last
Destruction came upon them to the uttermost, and there was no Remedy.

I would also crave leave to instance in the Case of the Grecian Christians at
Constantinople; that notwithstanding the many Warnings given them of the
Designs of the Turks against them; yet how careless and insensible they were,
and would not make that provision for their Defense which was required of them,
and therefore, the Effects of that Carelessness was felt by them, when the Turks
came to possess that great City: For at the taking of it by Mahomet the Great,
At which time the Riches of the Conquered was no better than Poverty, and
Beauty worse than Deformity; but to speak of the hidden Treasure there found,
passes credit; the Turks themselves wondering thereat: Whereof if some part
had in time been bestowed upon the Defense of the City, the Turkish King had
not so easily taken both it and the City. But every man (as now we here) was
careful how to increase his private Wealth, few or none regarding the public
State; (it is still our case) until in fine every Man with his private
Abundance, was wrapped together with his needy Neighbor in the self same
common Misery, (and who knows what may fall out of the same kind hereafter) yet
the security of the Constantinopolitans was such, that though they were always
environed with their mortal Enemies, yet had they no care of fortifying so much
as the Inner Wall of the City, but suffered the Officers, (which had the Charge
of it) to convert the greatest part of the Money into their own Purse.

I dread to name my Fears, if England, which (for many Generations) has been
so Famous to all the World, should now be given up to ruin, and be a prey to
our Neighbors, and thereby a Scorn and a Byword to the World, by the Evil
Practices of it is own Natives; but were we unanimous and true to our real
English Interest, we need not fear all the World; but on the contrary if we
persist in that destructive Practice of private Interest, what Misery may not
justly be expected by us, when we are so insensible of the Train that has been
so long laid to blow up those good Foundations, (which have been so many Ages
ago established by our Noble Ancestors) of all our English Liberties and
Properties: For I know no Nation under Heaven, as at this Day enjoying those
Privileges we do.

It Is thirty Years ago, there was a Tract published, Entitled, England's
Glory: (as a Caution to us against the Designs of its Enemies) which I now fear
is departing from us. (I will not say as Phineas's Wife at the taking of the
Ark, The Glory was departed from Israel) though I may say I fear it. I would not
forestale Providence, nor anticipate the evil Day, yet if I could be any ways
instrumental, to awaken us out of that General Lethargy we are fallen into, I
should greatly rejoice; however, I shall endeavor to quiet an uneasy Mind, by
discharging it this way, in giving some Account of that which has occasioned
my Fears.

This Nation is hitherto owned a Free People, but now long that Freedom may be
enjoyed no Mortal can conclude; for if we do (as we ought) seriously reflect on
the condition of most Parts of the World, and more particularly many of our
neighboring Nations, how they have lost their Liberties and Privileges they
formerly enjoyed, and consider how we at present are upheld, and the Dangers we
are in by our own Folly, and if we did but a little deny our selves, (though
supposed) present self-denial, and really pursue our real and true English
Interest ( viz.) if I as a private Person or in Company carry on a Trade that
may be advantageous to my self and Company, which may not only be prejudicial
to a greater Number, but tend to the destruction of the whole Kingdom, and
peradventure my self at last; I therefore in such a case ought to deny my self
in my private and supposed profit; and by this happily preserve the rest from
Destruction: For if through the Loss of our Manufacture some Hundreds of
Thousands have no Employ, Hunger breaks through all Laws, we may not forget
what happened not many Years since of the Weavers in Spittlefields, and if that
was so dangerous in one branch of Trade then failing, and but part of this City
of London; what may we not fear, when it shall be the General Complaint of the
whole Nation; which I fear, we shall be more sensible of by feeling, than by my
writing: And though at present, those Persons beforementioned are some of them
removed, and others by turning their Hands another way; which does and will
affect not only the City of Norwich, but the Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk,
Cambridge and Lincoln, and some other Counties; yet when it becomes a General
Complaint, I cannot see where we can then have Relief.

I would not Omit the Collection of some Things I observe in a small Tract,
printed in the Year 1697. under the Notion of a Letter to a Parliament Man; who
says,

I have hitherto given my Observations and Thoughts in general, how all Nations
have acquired their proportions of Gold and Silver, and that they have most,
who depend least on their Native Product; Art and Labor are the only
Philosophers Stone, that turns the Product of the Earth into Gold.

You see, I have all along in this Discourse shown, that it is by Labor and
Manufacture Bullion is brought into any Country.

Now if this be so, then we have that Foundation left us, by which all the
Treasure of the World is purchased. But if we lose our Manufactures, we at the
same time destroy our Navigation, it being our Manufactures which send our
Ships abroad, and they likewise invite them home again with Oil and Dying
Stuffs, etc.

If we make a right use of our present Exigences, we may turn them to the
Advantage and Enlargement of our Manufacture.

Necessity we say is the Mother of Invention, and there seems reason to believe
it will be the Father of our Riches; and if it had no other effect, but to
abate our Foreign Expense, it might in a few Years fill this Kingdom with Gold
and Silver; it is not commonly considered, how much saving multiplies Treasure:
And sure this must be of mighty Advantage to us, when we abate our Foreign
Expense and increase our home, upon that which will bring us in Bullion.

It is said the Fair Sex are showing us the way how to save and enrich these
Nations, may they be the Happy Instruments of doing so great a Good*

Vives in his Book of a Christian Woman, tells us, that he heard it reported
when he was a Boy, that in a City of Spain the Young Men abounding in Wealth,
gave themselves up to Excess and Extravagancy, which the Ladies observing, and
forseeing that it would be the ruin of the City; united in a Resolution that
they would abate in their own, and despise and turn their Backs on all Men that
were Extravagant and Gay in their Clothes

The present Circumstances we are under, alters not my Opinion which I have
given in another place, That the Parsimony of the Rich is the Ruin of the Poor;
and in Truth, in some cases Damage to themselves: But what I say here of the
Expense of our Gentry, relates to Foreign Manufactures, such as are more for
Curiosity than Use; and had it not been for our Excess in them, the Reign of
King Charles* the Second had loaded this Kingdom with Coin and Bullion: Would
it not then be our greatest Wisdom, to retrieve that in this Reign that we lost
in that; I mean our Senses as well as Money; both which run a Tilt, while we
exceed our Old Character of being Apes of Imitation, and become Apes of
Invention, our Great Masters of Trade, sending Patterns for Indians to work out
the Money of the Nation from the Rich, and the Bread out of the Mouths of the
Poor; perhaps our present Necessities may make us think: And if we did so, I
believe we might yet be the greatest People for Trade and Navigation in the
World; and were rightly possessed of that, we need not fear the Power of all the
World. Our Element is the Sea, our Business is there, nor are we Masters of our
Possessions on the Land longer than we command the Sea, and that is not to be
done only by Ships of War, it is our Fleets in Trade, that are the Nursery of
our Fleets in War.

We are an Original in every thing and that I take to be our Misfortune, as it
might have been our Happiness; for certainly no Civilized People in the World,
would make so little of such Inestimable Funds as we have to work upon; what
would the Dutch (and to our shame, we may now bring in the French) do, if they
had our Mines of Lead, and Tin, our Fleeces of Wool, etc. And to complete all,
an Industrious and Ingenuous People to manufacture and improve them. Can any
one believe the Councils of Holland or France would credit a few Merchants and
Retailers that should tell them, notwithstanding these mighty Advantages you
have above the World, you shall sell none of them, if you will not wear the
Livery of the Indians, and that you must purchase with your Money, not with
Commodities; but them you must sell to all Nations, and having turned them into
Money send it to the East Indies: There must certainly be some wonderful Charm
in this matter, to make Men fear that all the Nations in the World will combine
against us, if we wear not the Manufactures of the Indies.

Money can no way be brought into the Kingdom, but by the Export of our
Manufactures; so that nothing but our ill Conduct can hinder us from full
Supplies of Gold and Silver. We account no Man poor, that has Flocks and
Herds, though he has not Money; and the same Reason holds for a Country that
abounds with Natural and Artificial Commodities, that are as Necessary for
Foreign Use as our Flocks and Herds at home; and are not for Luxury and
Luxurious Effeminate Expenses, but are Vtensils of Life and Society, which a
great part of the World are supplied with.

In the Year 1669. was laid before King Charles the Second an Account, by what
ways the Trade and Riches of England was begun, and also how it was undermined,
and afterward at several times Proposals conducing to our Preservation, was
also laid before that Prince, etc.

And in the Year 1677. was published in Print by diverse Persons, and more
particularly by Mr. Andrew Marvyl, what Evil Consequence the Exportation of our
Wool to France was to England; and that there had been for some Years near
Twenty thousand Packs annually imported into the Town of Callice, and much of
it from Kent; that before such Quantities of Wool were exported, there was a
considerable Trade of the Woollen Manufacture in that Country; but it is now
almost lost, and yet some Persons of that Country favoring the Exportation of
Wool, in their Prints seem to be pleased, that they have the less poor in their
Country thereby; it is necessary for such to consider, what they would do with
the Sheep and Bullocks brought up to London, if all other Countries now
employed in Woollen Manufacture brought up thither (which is the grand Wheel
that carries on Trade) were as much depopulated as Kent.

Give me leave to compare Profit and Loss, suppose Kent was the only County in
England which produced Wool, and that 6000 Packs were yearly grown there, and
put the Rate of 10 l. per Pack, which amounts to 60000 l. and so exported
rough, but if that Wool was manufactur'd in Kent, and then exported, it would
amount to 720000. so take out the 60000 l. for the Wool, Kent would have gained
660000 l. but now France has got it; and as they have tasted the sweetness,
and found the sins of our Trade, so they have not spared any Cost to gain it
from us, by getting our Wool, either by Craft or Force, for there was not more
Art and Skill used by King Ed. 3. in bringing home the Woollen Manufacturers at
first to the Wool, than has been of late to export it to France; the
Consequence of which is not only injurious to us, in the loss of what we
formerly exported of our Woollen Manufacture thither, but also by their
supplying Foreign Markets with the Manufacture made with our Wool much cheaper
than we, by reason of the cheap Workmanship in France, the which is three or
four times the Value of the Wool; which if the French had not our Wool, they
could not make any considerable Quantity of the Woollen Manufacture ( viz.)
Worsted, Stuffs and Stockings, which is now a Considerable Part of our Woollen
Manufacture.

But this is not all, but we have been imposed upon by the Consumption of the
French Manufactury in our own wearing, all the Reign of the two late Kings,
which was very great before the late War; but since by the great Increase of
East India Commodities, the French have been undersold: So that from the whole
matter, we have not only lost a great part of the Export of our Woollen
Manufacture and in a way to lose all, but much of the Consumption of our own
wearing; the Evil Consequence of which, I fear we shall too sensibly feel, and
to take Notice what is already past; as is very well Observed by Mr. Tho.
Smith, in a Tract printed the last Year, which he has also published another;
Entitled, Profit and Loss.

As to the First, The ruin of the Tammy and Greensay Trade, settled in Suffolk
and Norfolk for many years, the Use of these Commodies was for our Home
Consumption, which betwixt Twenty or Thirty Years ago, the East India Company
brought over such Quantities of Callicoes stained, etc. which wholly turned
those of our Commodities out of doors, not only the Wear here, but the Export
of it to Ireland, Scotland, and our Plantations, and the People employed forced
to leave their Houses, which standing empty where Tradesmen inhabited,
Landlords abating 20 l. per Cent. of their Rent, nay, offering large good
Houses to any that would keep them in repair, which did also affect the
Counties of Lincoln, Leicester, Northampton, and Warwick by the Fall of the
price of Wool at that time.

The next Instance is in Spittle-fields, there was first the Walloons, and
since by the English a very large Silk Manufacture settled, till the East India
Company sent Patterns and Workmen unto the Indies, and by that means beat the
English out of that Trade.

A third Instance is, the Gloucestershire Cloth exported by the Turkey
Merchants, which brings home Silk and Grogrin Yarn in return, which by the
means of the East India Commodities, the said Merchants Effects lie upon their
Hands, and instead of Exporting 30000 Clothes in a Year, now 5000 serve the
turn.

The last Instance is, the miserable Condition of the Manufacturers of
Canterbury, these People are Weavers of Silk, the Foundation of which Trade was
laid in the time of Queen Elizabeth, when the Nobility and Gentry of England
were in earnest to advance the Nation; when the Trades of Norwich, Colchester,
London, Exon and Canterbury had their Original, and greatly encouraged: And
this of Canterbury I shall particularly mention, what fell out betwixt the
Years, 1697, and School.

The Traders in Canterbury upon some prospect of Trade, provided Quantities of
Goods for the English and West India Markets, but the coming in of Indian
Damask in the Fleet Frigot; the said Canterbury Men were ruined, unless they
could have metamorphosed their Tabbies, made of very rich Italian Silk, that
came in Exchange for English Serge, into Indian Silk; they must leave Trading,
or sell at 30 or 40. per Cent. loss: By which means, half the Workmen of that
Town of the weaving Trade, are now running up and down the Nation seeking
Bread, and their Families left to the Parishes to maintain, and the Trade by
which that Town has been upheld for an Hundred Years come to nothing: These
are some of the past Effects of the East India Trade, with respect to the
English Manufactury; and who shall pay the Damage?

The next Thing to be considered is, what further Mischief this Trade may do to
the other Manufactures of England, and this is to be Evidenced upon what they
have begun and tried upon; and partly upon this Supposition, that whatever
Commodity is made in England of Wool, may be imitated, and in many respects
exceeded in Cotton manufactured in India, and be afforded cheaper than our
English Tradesmen can afford theirs, and be New and Odd, and so pleasing, that
it will be the Interest of the Indian Traders to encourage such Trades.

They have already brought over great Quantities of double Callicoes, used in
the room of English Flannels for Shifts and other Uses; besides great
Quantities of Cotton Stockings, which are both worn here, and exported to the
West Indies.

As for Stuffs, they have brought already great Quantities of Cotton Stuffs,
dyed, stripped, plain, mixed Color, in the directest opposition to Woollen
Stuffs.

As for Silk and Cotton mixed, it were almost Endless to give an Account how
many sorts of Norwich and London Stuffs, that are made of Silk and English
Wool, they have imitated and outdone as to Price in Silk and Cotton, but we may
Note, that the New-Drapery so called is much more than Old.

But suppose all those Manufactures should be ruined, sure they cannot hurt the
Cloth Trade; say the Agents of the East India Company. In Answer, Why may not a
Commodity made of Cotton put down Cloth. Cotton is as fine and soft as Wool, it
may be spun as small or as large, it may be milled and dressed dyed and
stained, and when the English Merchant shall send over Cloth-weavers, etc. I
question not but we shall have Cotton Cloth, and Knaves to make it a Fashion,
and Fools enough to wear it; and though those Calamities are upon us, and many
more in view, though nothing but employing our People can preserve this Nation;
yet that Trade must be free, though it brings the Nation in Bondage, whereas
formerly a Million at least were employed in the Woollen Manufacture, who were
Instrumental in distributing near Four Millions per Annum for Bread and other
Necessaries, which the Graziers and Farmers (Tennants to the Nobility and
Gentry) received; which Persons also did bear part of the Taxes which supported
the Government, and therefore in all reason one would think, deserves
Consideration and the greatest Encouragement: Yet on the contrary, we find by
sad Experience, that many are more fond of the East India Commodities than
ever; so that that is increasing, as may more evidently appear by a Printed
List, which was this Year given to the Parliament, of the Number of Ships sent
out and returned in Two Years last past, with several Remarks and Queries, and
Observations thereupon; an Abstract of which I have here recited, and is as
follows. ( viz.)

That there has sailed for the East Indies and China, 52 Ships since the 10th.
of February, 1697. the Account of their Cargo of 26 of their Ships amounts to
1, 114, 933. The Cargoes carried out by the Captains, etc. 111, 993. Total of
26 Ships amounts to 1, 226, 426. Note, By the Rule of Proportion, 52 Ships must
carry out, besides what is taken in at Cadiz, which is very considerable. 2,
452, 852.

Note, Of this great Sum not a 40th. part consists of our Woollen Manufacture,
and that they send out does prevent a greater Quantity, which would be sent out
by the Turkey-Company; which would return raw Silk to carry on that Manufacture
in England.

Note, That according to the usual Account of the Sales by the Candle, the
Goods amount to treble the first Cost; if so, the whole Cargoes brought in will
come to 7, 388, 556. These sold by the whole sale Buyer to the Retailers,
allowing 10 per Cent. Profit to such Wholesale Buyers comes to 738, 855. Total
Value in the Retailers Hands. 8, 127, 411.

Memorandum, When the Profit the Retailer makes of this great Sum, paid for by
the Consumer, must of course increase the said Sum; which is a Loss to the
Nation.

Note, That by a Computation of our Woollen Manufacture made in England in one
Year, comes to but and the East India Goods comes to near that Sum by the Rule
of Proportion according to their present Trade. 4, 850, 558.

Memorandum, That in the London-Gazette of the 25th. of January last, that a
Ship belonging to the French-India Company is arrived at Diep from Surrat; it is
said her Cargo is worth near 200000 Crowns, and that great part of her Cargo
consists in Gold and Silver, which she brought from the Isle of Bourbon.

Note, The Difference of this Ships Cargo, ours bring over Wrought Goods to the
Destruction of our Manufactures, at the Expense of our Silver; the French
brings over Gold and Silver, to support their Government and Trade.

Query, Whether the Difference may not proceed from the Discouragement, that
the French put upon the East India Manufacture some Years since, as appears by
the Decree which follows.

A Decree of the French King's Council of State, concerning Callicoes printed
in East India, or printed in the Kingdom, and other China and India Silks,
Stuffs, and Flowered with Gold and Silver: Given the 26th. of October, 1686.
THE King being informed, That the great Quantities of Callicoes, printed in
East India, or painted in the Kingdom, and other China and India Silks, Stuffs,
and Stuffs flowered with Gold and Silver, have not only given Occasion of
Transporting many Millions, but also have diminished the Manufactures of Old
Established in France, for making of Silk, Woollen, Linen and Hemp-stuffs, and
at the same time the Ruin and Destruction of the Working People, who, by want
of Work, having no Occupation, or Subsistence for their Families, are gone out
of the Kingdom; the which, being needful to provide a Remedy for, and for that
Effect to hinder the Trade and ^^le in the Kingdom of the said Printed
Callicoes, and India and China Silks and Stuffs, nevertheless granting to the
Owners a reasonable Time to sell them in. Having heard the Report of Mounsieur
Pellitier, Counselor Ordinary of the King's Royal Council, and Comptroller
General of the Finances; his Majesty, in his Council has ordered, and does
order, that from the beginning of the Day of the Publication of the present
Decree, all the Manufactures established in the Kingdom, for Painting of the
White Callicoes, shall be abolished; and the Moulds serving to the Printing of
them shall be broke and destroyed: His Majesty does forbid most expressly the
re-establishing thereof: Also to his Subjects the Painting of the said
Callicoes, and to the Engravers the making of any Moulds serving to the said
Impressions, under the Penalty of losing the said Callicoes, Moulds and other
Utensils, and Three Thousand Livres Fine, to be paid without Diminution, one
third part to the Informer, the second part to the Hospitals of the Place, the
third to the Farmers of the of the Revenue. And as concerning the Painted
Callicoes, and other China and India Silks, Stuffs, and Stuffs flowered with
Gold and Silver, his Majesty has granted, and does grant, to the last of
December, 1687. next, to the Merchants and others, the permission of selling
them as they shall think fit: The same Time being expired, his Majesty does
forbid all Persons, of what Quality and Condition whatsoever they are, the
exposing and selling thereof; and to particulars, the buying thereof, does
order, That those found in all Warehouses and Shops shall be burnt, and the
Proprietors condemned to the like Fine of Three Thousand Livres, paid as
abovesaid. His Majesty does permit, nevertheless, the Entry, Sale and Retail,
of the said White Callicoes in his Kingdom; paying for them the Taxes according
to the Decree of the Council the 30th. of April last, which shall be Executed;
and that of the 15th. of the present Month, to the last of December, 1687. last
year. His Majesty does command the Lieutenant of the Policy of the City of
Paris, and the Intendents and Commissaries of the Provinces and Generalties of
the Kingdom, to cause the present Decree to be executed, being published and
affixed in all Places where need shall be, that no Body should be ignorant
thereof. Done in the King's State-Council held at Fountainbleau. Signed
Coquille.

Note, Several of the French Printers since this Edict, are come over hither,
and set up, and follow the same Employment.

Query, Whether the Printing of the Silks and Callicoes in England, is not as
prejudicial to us as it was to the French?

Suitable to this may be well Observed, some Observations of that once Famous
Sir Josiah Child. viz.
THat Wool is eminently the Foundation of English Riches; and that the ways to
equalize, or overbalance our Neighbors, in our National Profit, by our
Foreign Trade, are -- To prevent the Exportation of our Wool, and encourage
our Woollen Manufactures: To encourage those Foreign Trades most, that vend
most of our Manufactures, and that supply us with Materials further to be
manufactured in England. [Discourse of Trade, p. 127, 156.]

That its our Interest, by Example, and other Means, (not distasteful) above
all kind of Commodities, to prevent, as much as may be, the Importation of
Foreign Manufactures. [ Page 161.] That it is multitudes of People, and such
Laws as cause an Increase of People, which principally enrich any Country. [
Preface.] -- That Lands (though excellent) without hands proportionable, will not
enrich any Kingdom. That whatever tends to the Depopulating any Kingdom, tends
to the Impoverishment thereof. [ Page 165, and 167.]

That it is our Duty to God and Nature, to provide for and employ the Poor.
That such as our Employment is for the People, so many will our People be. [
Page 56. 174.] -- That it is the Interest of a Kingdom the Poors Wages should be
high; for wherever Wages are high throughout the whole World, it is an
infallible Evidence of the Riches of that Country; and wherever Wages for
Labor runs low, its a Proof of the Poverty of that place -- That the Expense
of Foreign Commodities, especially Foreign Manufactures, is the worst Expense
a Nation can be inclinable to, and ought to be prevented as much as possible.

To which may be added a Note of the Observation of the Author of the Essay on
Ways and Means. viz.
IT IS evident that our Woollen Goods are sold in several Countries, namely,
Holland, Hamburgh, Germany, the Hans Towns, and all the East Countries; many of
which Places will not be able to take off our Woollen Goods, unless we deal for
their Linnens. And in Fact, and by Experience, it has been seen in the Case of
the East India Trade, since there has been imported from thence vast Quantities
of Linnens, such as Callicoes, Muslins, Romals for Handkerchiefs, which
answered the ends of Lawns, Cambricks and other Linen Cloth, we have not
exported that vast Quantity of Drapery to those Northern Parts, of which Sir
Walter Rawleigh makes mention. As our Call for their Linnens had diminished,
their Call for our Draperies has proportionably decreased; and not only so, but
these People have been compelled by Necessity to fall upon making course Woollen
Cloth, by which they supply themselves and other places, which we were wont to
furnish.

Note, That there has been exported to the East Indies in about 2 Years, almost
one third part as much silver as has been coined in England, since the
Recoining our Money.

Query, Whether it be not as reasonable to send our Money to the East
Countries, to buy up Corn (which is very cheap) to feed us, as it is to send it
to the East Indies, for Garments to cloth us.

Query, Whether it be not as necessary to restrain the Trade to the
East Indies, as it was to put a stop to the Exportation of Woollen Manufacture
from Ireland.

Query, Whether the East India Traders (if not restrained) may not in a short
time, bring over vast Quantities of Stuffs for Men's Wear, since they have
la^ely imported fine Cotton Druggets very fit for that p^rpose, and sold at
Cheap Rates.

Query, Whether the sending above two Mi^ the East Indies to make our wearing
Apparel; our own Poor starve for want of Employment, be (...) Consideration of
great weight, and deserve some (...) Remedy.

I shall therefore, from the whole Matter ^clude, that if it be from our
Manufacture tha^ Riches of this Nation come; and if it be (...) from thence
that our Shipping is employed, (...) our Mariners bred; if it be from our Tra^
alone, and from the Riches which it brings, (...) his Majesty's Customs are
raised; and that (...) Fleets have been hitherto built and maintai^ and the
Dominion of the Seas preserved; the^ is and must be from our Manufactures, that
(...) Bullion has been brought in, and that our Tr^ has been increased, and by
which the Rem^ the Nobility and Gentry have been advanced^

And therefore, it may be easily granted, (...) there is no higher Temporal
Interest in this ^tion, than that which sustains the Nobilities (...) Gentries
Rents; that which preserves the (...) venues of the Crown, and increases our
N^ and Shipping.

Then in regard our Manufacture does this (...) Encouragement of it must
necessarily be the g^est Interest of the Nation to preserve it; (...) whoever
pretents the contrary, though under n^ so fair Disguises; do either greatly
betray I^rance of what is England's Interest, or pl^ prove to be a Promoter of
a Foreigners, etc^

FINIS.

