GODS ZEAL THUNDERED FORTH, Against all Those MAGISTRATES, BISHOPS, PRIESTS and
PEOPLE Of this CITY of LONDON, Who have deserted their Brethren in this day of
sore CALAMITY.
Thus says the Lord,
BEHOLD, Oh City! I have visited Thee with my Judgment, to the end thy
Inhabitants through true repentance might learn Righteousness; and therefore
have I given my ANGEL COMMISSION to smite in thee, to cut off and destroy; who
is fulfilling my Decree, prophesied of in thee O City, by my Servants, whom
thou have rewarded evil for all their love unto thee; and the cry of their
injurious sufferings, and oppressions are entered into my Ears, for whose sakes
I am arisen to plead with all their Adversaries, and will lay wast and make
desolate; yea, and I will even lay heaps upon heaps, for all thy abominations
wherewith thou have provoked me year after year, and time after time; yea, in
my Zeal have I declared it. And you who have most shamefully deserted your
Brethren in this day of CALAMITY, and have fled the Judgment, and have taken
SANCTUARY in the holes of the Earth, and clifts of the Rocks, thinking thereby
to hide from my Presence; I will visit you, I will visit you, and you shall
know I am God of the Country as well as the City, and my hand shall search you
out, and your Gods of Silver and of Gold, in whorn you have trusted this many
years, and do trust, shall not be able to save you from my wrath, for I am God
of the whole Earth. Is this Christianity to your Brethren, to leave them sick
and wounded, with my Judgments? what, all pass by, yea, LEVITE and all, surely,
surely, my hand shall follow you even to the remotest hole and corner,
whereunto you are fl^d: And for you that have taken upon you to promote a
National Church and Worship, and are Ministers thereof, and are found in this
ungodly desertion; my hand is against you for ever, forasmuch as you have given
the Magistrate no rest till he has wrought your vengeance upon my people; my
woes for ever is your portion: what did you make mention of my name in your
Assemblies in a time of prosperity, and in a time of Judgment do you flee? am
not I the same God still; if your Worship was good then, it is good now; and
surely in such a time as this all hands and hearts in holiness are to be lifted
up; but to me have you been known of old, and the ways of your hypocrisy and
deceit, your inventions, traditions, and all your vain Imitations, mine eyes
have beheld, and my very Soul has loathed them, and long ago have I spued them
forth, in these Nations, and these your deceitful performances, are a very
abhorency unto my Soul. And would you have a People whom I have gathered forth
of all People to magnify my Name, and in whom I have placed my Righteousness
and Truth, manifested unto them by my Eternal Spirit, to bow unto your ways,
which my very Soul abhors? Though you have been permitted for some years to
inflict penalties upon them according to the rule of your Lusts; and some you
have slain, and some Banished, and many imprisoned, and are at this time in
your Cruel Goales held; for your better effecting your Barbarity of Banishment
on them, I tell you and that in my holy Zeal, you shall fail in your purpose,
for I have not gathered them into my Holy Truth, any more to conform, or bow to
an Harlot, for my ways are purity, in which I am leading of them. And thy
wound O National Church of England which thou have given thy self in this day
and time shall never more be cured, for all the Balm that thy Halberts, Clubs,
and Staves, with all thy ungodly coercions of all sorts poured into it; shall
not heal it, for if thou would have exalted thy way, now had been thy time to
have been zealous, and those eyes which were blinded, with thy Charms and
sorceries, behold I will open them, yea and they shall hate thee with an utter
detestation, and my great dispensation at hand will I manifest, which has been
spoken of old, I will, I will, yea I will, devide between Priest and
Magistrate, and this my work is in order unto it, the eye in me does behold it:
And though you may in your hearts treasure up vengeance in your holes whereinto
ye are fled, and may think so soon as my hand is a little removed, to fall to
your old cursed work of PERSECUTION, and inflicting your barbarous penalty upon
my People; I say I will honor and magnify my Name in and through all these
things, Remember Pharaoh, for his second Plague was worse and more heavy then
his first; and at last he paid dear for all his Aggrevation. And you who have
lived like Devils in the flesh in ramming, damming, sinking, and confounding,
with numberless Execrations, your very lives have been hell on Earth, your
heaven has been in Taverns, Alchouses, Whorehouses, and all manner of ungodly
Stage Plays, and other places of Debauchery; you even have made my fury to
smoke, and your cursed desires in belching forth Oaths, Plagues, and other
hideous EXECRATIONS, are now, even now falfilling upon you. And thus with my
Judgments which are pure and just, will I sweep this Nation till the
hypocrite, profane, PERSECUTER, and ungodly be no more.

R. C.

Printed the 4th. day of the 6th. Month, 1665.


