THE VINDICATION OF A. Cresner, Schoolmaster in LONG-ACRE, From the Aspersions
of A. PVLTON, Jesuit and Schoolmaster in the SAVOY; Together With some Account
of His Discourse with Mr. MEREDITH.

Imprimatur,

October. 24. 1687.

Hic Liber cui Titulus [The Vindication of A. Cresner, etc.]

H. Maurice Reverendissimo in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris.



LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVII.

THE VINDICATION OF A. CRESNER, Schoolmaster in LONG-ACRE.
HERE a pleasant Schoolmaster diverted Mr. Pulton's Aspersions in his
Narrative.
the Auditory, with a Picture (as he pretended) of the Blessed Trinity, which
he showed me, with wry Mouths, and many antic Gestures; upon this I told him
of God's appearing in the shape of an Old Man, and that we might Picture him,
so we meant not to delineate him sub specie propria. I turned to the Doctor,
and pressed my forementioned Argument, but the Schoolmaster continuing to give
Diversion to the Company, and throw in Impertinent Questions, I bid him be
silent, saying, I came not to Dispute with a Buffoon, but a Doctor. Thus far
our Disputant, to which I Answer;

That our Jesuit cannot be Ignorant of the Method A. C. used in his Discourse
with him, without putting A Vindication of A. C.
violence upon his Understanding, and wilfully resolving to Mis-represent his
Adversarie's Arguments whatever it cost him. He tells us A. C. was pleasant,
and indeed so he was, and he that could keep his Temper amidst a company of
such singular Arguments, as M. P. vented in defense of his Cause, he that could
be so grave, as to deny himself the liberty of a Smile, at the singularity of
M. P's Reasonings, has really greater share of Mortification, than ever A. C.
could pretend to. But our Jesuit may Object, What had A. C. to do, to speak in
a Cause he had nothing to do with, was not the Doctor able to defend his
Religion, without borrowing the Assistance of a By-stander, who yet appeared
impertinent enough in what he said? As for the Impertinency of it, that shall
come in in its place; 'twill I hope be sufficient to rectify Misapprehensions
of this Matter, and to justify the procedure of A. C. if the Reader be
acquainted with the Motives that influenced him to speak his Thoughts of what
was said by our Disputant. The occasion then was this.

The Reverend D. T. being sometimes engaged with The occasion of A. C's
speaking to Mr. Pulton.
M. M. who sat at his Left Hand, and who would several times interpose with
private Questions of his own, though D. T. was never so closely engaged with
our Disputant; 'twas the little Equity that appeared in this sort of conduct
that urged A. C. to deliver his Sentiments of the Subject disputed of, but
still with respect to the very foul play used by our Adversaries. But (...) to
all this? why truly just nothing, but on the contrary would insinuate to the
World, that all that A. C. did in relation to the Conference, was abrupt and
without necessity: I must confess if our Jesuit's bare saying all this was
true, was sufficient to prove it so; it were an unpardonable Presumption in any
Man to go about to persuade the World into a contrary Opinion; but because it
is hoped that A. C. may find better luck, than to be so unmercifully used, he
comes now to give the World a true representation of his own Deportment at the
Conference.

And First, A. C. cannot forbear wondering, at our The true representation of
the Words and Actions which Mr. P. has so much misrepresented; together with
their Defense.
Jesuit's forwardness to Insinuate to the World, as though A. C. produced a
resemblance of the Blessed Trinity (which is delineated in their own Breviary,
set out by the Authorities of Pius the 5th. and Clement 8th.) abruptly and
without any regard to the particular Subject disputed of; which if it had been
so (as it was not) it were but equitable and fair to follow our Authors
Example, who first pulled out of his Pocket a Breviary to help his Memory,
which would certainly have been at a loss without it. Is then our Author become
so Criminal, that it is dangerous for any Man to follow his Example, without
being reproached for it? for otherwise, how comes the same Action to be both
prudent and safe in our Disputant, and yet ridiculous and dangerous in another,
when the external Circumstances that produced that Action were both the same.
M. P. pulled his Breviary out of his Pocket to assist his own Memory, and his
Adversary produces another Breviary to relieve his; this is really the Case:
yet it is this Action our Jesuit takes so much pains to discredit; if there be
any thing indecent in the Action, our Disputant ought to have given a better
Example. Our Jesuit has here a great mind to be thought in the right, and
therefore says, that what A. C. had shown him, he pretended to be the
resemblance of the Blessed Trinity. But what does our Disputant mean by
pretended? not sure that he himself had no other way of knowing it to be so,
than A. C's bare affirming that it was such a resemblance, and yet there can be
no other Sense put upon this Word, than is here put upon it; for A. C. showed
it him (the Jesuit) who looked on it, endeavoring withal to justify the
Practice of their Church in this particular, without offering at any other way
of doing it, than by producing that Text in Daniel Cap. 7. ver. 9. which I
shall speak to in its place. But then,

Secondly, This pulling out the Breviary has yet a greater Justification
attending it, than M. P. is willing to make the World believe it has, and
which if proved, may go near to relieve this Action from Impertinency. Our
Disputant having objected to D. T. (who spoke of the share the Greeks ought to
have in our Belief as well as other Churches, in their handing down the Bible
to us (as a part at least of the Universal Church) that the Testimony of the
Greeks could not be relied upon, because of their denial of the Procession of
the Third Person of the Trinity from the two First. D. T. going to answer our
Disputant, was interrupted by M M. In this Interval A. C. seeing the Jesuit
disengaged, told him, That as for the Greeks, their Dispute was about Phrases,
and that they were agreed in Sense; further adding, that upon that score, they
were far more justifiable in an unwilful mistake of a Term and Mode of
Expression, than the Roman Church, who brought down the Glory of the Adorable
Trinity, into the pitiful resemblance of a Picture, thus doing more mischief by
their unwarrantable Practices, than these Greeks by their Doctrine: whereupon
A. C. turned to the place, where this delineation was, and showed it our Jesuit.

And now let the World judge where the impertinency of this action lay, and
whether it was half so ridiculous as our Disputants making use of his Speculum,
where his Lesson was pricked ready to his hand, instead of answering like a
Scholar that had undertaken the Cause of his Church. But were these all the
impertinent Actions A. C. is charged with? No, our Disputant has not only
discovered Impertinency, but a great deal of rudeness in A. C's. procedure: but
pray let us hear what it is; why he tells the World, That A. C. showed him the
Picture with wry Mouths and many Antic Gestures. Why truly this is a heavy
Charge, and little beseeming a Protestant who had the honor to speak in the
defense of his Religion, which, if true, would go near to make him resolve
never to venture in the Defense of his Religion, if he could not do it without
so many guilty Actions. But what if this Charge should prove (as I am afraid it
will) to be false, and nothing but Calumny, what will become of M. P's
Reputation, and that mighty Esteem he has acquired amongst his own Party, of
being so well versed in all those Qualifications, that are requisite to
consummate an able Disputant? I am afraid M. P. is grown a little unwary of
late, that he is so ready to venture his Reputation without considering what
may be the Consequences which will attend the proof of his unfair dealing. But
perhaps our Jesuit may not be satisfied, unless it be proved that what he
charges A. C. with, is very far from being true, which I shall endeavor to do,
that I may satisfy our Jesuite's longing.

1st. Then I answer, A. C. is very sure he never kept a stricter guard upon his
Actions, than at this Dispute, as not being influenced in the least by any
Passion, though never more provoked than at this time, being by our Disputant
called by a very hard Name, which, had A. C. been inclined to any Passion, in
the Dispute, that unchristian usage of our Jesuit, might have justified the
most extravagant one: But on the contrary, A. C. mildly replied, That as for
unkind Words, he was resolved he would not make use of any, that he would come
behind our Jesuit in nothing, but in that sort of Language which he was too
well acquainted with, to begin to use it now: adding moreover, that he would do
our Jesuit all the kindness that lay in his power, having always that notable
Saying of a Worthy Gentleman in his mind, That it was the method of Charity to
suffer without re-action Dares our Disputant say that I gave him the least il
Word? I confess part of this Discourse was used with our Jesuit after the
Dispute of the Counsels of Constance and Trent; but however, this is sufficient
to prove the mildness A. C. used toward our Disputant, in that there was most
part of this spoken after M. M. had endeavored to justify M. P. in this sort
of Rudeness.

2ly. The Aequanimity of A. C's Deportment under these Circumstances, may be
partly guessed from the little disturbance, the weakness of our Disputant's
Argument could give an Adversary; but whether they were so or no, the
Conference will best discover. Men are usually calm and sedate, when they have
an answer ready to the Objections of their Antagonist. And on the contrary,
it is then they fly into passion, when any thing presses them that they cannot
answer; and that I suppose made our Jesuit (instead of answering A. C's
Objections) call him Buffoon, unless this last Word has some extraordinary
sense in it, which no Mortal, besides our Disputant, has yet been able to pick
out of it; and if it has, M. P. ought to have decyphered it, that the World
may be taught for the future, to answer by wholesale, without using that
tedious way of twenty Words, when one will do: but if no man can find any thing
in the Word, but virulency and bitterness, as indeed they cannot, how can our
Disputant evade the force of that Reproof the Reverend D. T. gave him, upon his
using it to A C? But what then? Did M. P. give A. C. no other answer? Why truly
yes; he told A. C. That the Representation of the Trinity was no such strange
thing, seeing that in Daniel, God had appeared in the shape of an old Man, and
that we might Picture him, so we mean not to delineate him sub specie propria.
To this A. C. answered (which our Adversary has concealed) That as for the
Text before us, what this Prophet saw, was only in a Vision, which was a
Representation of Gods coming to Judgment, and fitted only to that particular
occasion; and therefore ought not to be prostituted to all intents and purposes
whatsoever: and then for the lawfulness of representing God, provided it was
not meant to do it sub specie propria, A. C. answers now, (he confesses he did
not answer to this last part of the Objection at the Conference) Any one may
see (if he will but take a little pains) the vanity of this distinction; for if
God's Image be not given us sub specie propria, with relation to his own
Essence, it is no more the Image of God, but the Sign of his Power which is
represented in the abovementioned Chapter of Daniel; his Throne was like the
fiery flame, etc. But suppose all our Disputant says were true, what comfort
could it be to a poor Soul, who is charged with dishonouring God, who is
Infinite, by representing him by an Image that is Finite, and terminated by
visible Dimensions, to be told by M. P. that he does not dishonor God, because
he has no intention to represent him sub specie propria? But because A. C.
said not this at the Conefernce, he does intend to add but one Word, or two
more: And first, That he might here observe, that if it were granted, that we
might picture each of the Three Persons of the B. Trinity apart; that this
could be no argument at all, for it is resembling it (the Trinity), because such
Resemblances does not only make Three Persons, but Three Gods; such Images as
these, represent not only a distinction of Persons, but a diversity of
Substance. I leave our Jesuit to think of this; for it is not A. C's. meaning
to enlarge on this Subject, as intending only to give a Relation of what he
said at the Conference. Our Disputant goes on, telling us, That the
Schoolmaster (meaning A. C.) still interposing with impertinent Questions, M.
P. bad him be silent; but I would fain know of our Jesuit, which of those
Questions were Impertinent. If he means by this Word, that the Questions A. C.
asked, were not at all to our Jesuits purpose, which was to make the Spectators
believe, he was very knowing in those things he talked of with so much freedom,
and of which, all unbiased persons at the Assembly found he was very ignorant:
A. C. is very ready to confess that he was impertinent enough; but because (it
may be) our Disputant may take impertinency in it is most ordinary sense, A. C.
need not clear himself here, because it is already done to his hand in the Body
of the Conference, whither I refer the Reader for satisfaction in this point.
D. T. finding M. P. to be very ignorant of common Church History, which he
perceived by the Answers our Jesuit made him, D. T. pressed M. P. about the
Council of Lateran: This Disputant having first named this Council himself
(where the term Transubstantiation was invented, to express the Corporeal
Presence, after the year 1200, after it had been broached by Paschasius
Radbertus, in the year 818.) but while this was asking, M. M. pulled D. T. to
be satisfied about some Questions he had to propose. A. C. (seeing D. T.
engaged with M. M.) took up the Jesuit, and made an end of what D. T. had began
by asking our Jesuit, some important Questions, which concerned the Lateran
Council, which no Persons (that had but the least knowledge of this Council by
any other way, than that of Quotation) could be ignorant of: As, How many
Fathers there were, who presided in it, etc. To the first he answers, a
Thousand, and to the last, nothing. In all our Jesuit's Accusations of A. C. we
have not one word of what was answered, neither of what A. C. replied
occasionally when standing by D. T. nor what was urged in the last Room betwixt
our Disputant and A. C. about the contradictions of the Two Councils, Constance
and Trent, upon the question of the Pope's Superiority. All this our Jesuit
has quite slipped over, either wilfully or forgetfully, I shall not determine
which: If the first, our Disputant has unworthily prevaricated in the cause of
God, and rendered the Protestants cause weak and impotent, which I am sure is
not the part of a Gentleman, nor a Scholar: if the last, it had been the part
of a prudent person to have taken surer measures, to have acted more cautiously
in a thing of this Consequence, before he had ventured to have treated A. C.
with so much virulency and contempt: but to prevent all misrepresentation, I
shall annex the Discourse A. C. had both with M. M. and our Disputant, at the
end of this Paper, which, according to the exactest care I could take, of
neither adding any thing on A.C's side, or omitting on his Adversaries, was
thus: When the Question of [How the Protestants could tell that the Bible they
used, was really what they, (the Protestants) thought it to be, the Word of
God,] An Account of the Confeference betwixt M. M. and A. C. about the
Confessional.
had been canvass'd some while, M. M. arising, went to the other end of the
Room, whither A. C. followed him, desiring some satisfaction about the
prohibition in the Second Commandment; A. C. telling him, that this way of
worshipping of God, and the Saints (besides the utter unlawfulness of
worshipping the latter, either ultimately or relatively) by Representations,
they brought down the Glory of Holiness, which consisted in the Excellency of
inward Dispositions, to the contemptible lowness of being beholden, for the
most indistracted part of our Devotion to the sight of an Image; which is a
readier way to advance, than to cure our Distraction; that it was much more
agreeable to the Precepts of the Gospel, to serve God after his own
Prescription, who being a Spirit, our Savior tells us, must be worshipped in
Spirit and in Truth. M. M. answered, That we were Finite Creatures, and what
conceptions we had of God, could be no more than finite neither; and therefore
why not by an Image? The first part of this I granted, but must not, I told
him, allow of his Inference, telling him, we ought to come as near to the
Nature of God as possible, in our Devotions to him; but that would best be
done, by a Worship, abstracted from all material representations of him. To
this M. M. answered, Well, well; and from thence began to preach me a Moral
Lecture, which I heartily thanked him for; and so we parted for that time, he
to the Conversation of some Women of his Acquaintance, and A. C. to the place
of Dispute; whither he went some time after to M. M. again, who was then at the
Window; but there happening a little time after, a Discourse about the
Confessional, (A. C. does not exactly remember for what Reasons the Question
was started) A. C. asked M. M. What if a Person that was a Traitor to the
Kingdom or State, of which he was a Subject, and was actually in Conspiracy
with others against that Kingdom or State; if this Traitor should come, and
reveal this Conspiracy to a Priest, by way of Confession, must that Priest
reveal the horrid Secret or not? To which M. M. replied, No; that Priest must
not disclose it. What! replied A. C. and must such a Kingdom or State, be
involved in Blood and ruin, for want of such an Obedience as Indispensibly
obliges every Subject of what Capacity soever, not to be wantting in his utmost
endeavors for the preservation of that Kingdom or State he owes all the
Happinesses of Life to? To this M. M. replied, That all this was nothing, all
that the Priest could do in this matter, was to deny him Absolution, if he did
not Repent. And is this (repeated A. C.) all the security a King or Kingdom
must expect from you in such a juncture of Affairs? Is not the Priest (by
taking Methods like these) actually enrolled in the Number of the
Conspiratours? are not they as sure of him in relation to secrecy, as of the
greatest Desperado in all their Cabal? Is it very likely, that Fellows
desperately resolved to do such barbarous Acts of Wickedness, will be much
moved or concerned at your denial of Absolution to them? To this M. M. replied,
That A. C. was out in his Conceptions, for the Priest did not help the
Conspirators by these means. And seeing him stop there, A. C. answered, And is
it possible that such an Ingenious Man as M. M. can be guilty of so great an
absurdity, as to say (as you do) that the Priest does not help the
Conspirators, because he does not actually make some endeavors himself toward
the promotion of such a deed of darkness? To all which A. C. could have notihng
returned, but, That if the Priest did deny him Absolution, he had done his
Duty. After which A. C. had no further Discourse with M. M. nor any other, till
a part of the Company retired into another Room, whither A. C. followed them,
and engaged himself with the Jesuit, about the Decrees of some later Councils,
as An Account of the Conference betwixt our Jesuit and A. C.
those of Constance and Trent, against which he endeavored to prove a
Contradiction in their Decrees; the first of these setting up the Council above
the Pope; the latter deciding the direct contrary, setting up the Pope above
the Council. A. C. affirmed, That this first Council could not be Infallible,
because it had not been Convened by a Lawful Pope, but had assembled it self at
the Solicitation of Christian Princes, and by the sole Authority and Power of
the College of Cardinals: Now if a Council cannot be Infallible without the
Pope in Person or by his Legates, then it is plain this Council was not
Infallible, because there was no true Pope in being; for it convened to condem
three false ones; now were the Acts during the Interval of this Council
Infallible or not? To which M. P. answered in the affirmative. To which A. C.
replied, What, without a Pope? To this our Disputant said, That this signified
little, so long as the Pope confirmed what the Council had done; and when A. C.
replied, That the question was not about the Infallibility of the Decrees after
Confirmation; but whither the Decisions of the Council before Confirmation were
Obligatory upon Men's Consciences, so as to oblige all Persons of what Capacity
soever, to act in pursuance of them; and if they were, then such submission
must be due to them, by virtue of some Infallible Authority enjoining such
submission; but the Authority that enjoined the Execution of the Canons of this
Council, was not Infallible, because it wanted an Essential part of its
Infallibility, viz. the Presence of the Pope in Person, or by his Legates; thus
these Qualifications being wanting, the Authority that exacted Obedience to
their Decrees, was fallible; and upon that score, could not indispensibly
oblige any Individual Member of their Church to submit to it with an implicit
Obedience. M. P. still urged the Confirmation (which the Pope gave the Acts of
this Council) for their being infallible, and therefore Universally Obligatory.
A. C. seeing our Disputant could not be made to drop this Insignificant shift,
asked him what that was the Pope confirmed? an Error? For amongst the Acts of
this Council, the Supremacy of a Council above a Pope was actually decreed; but
the Council of Trent which came afterward, decreed just the contrary: Now one
of these Councils was certainly mistaken, for their Canons (which respect this
Article) are formed in direct contrariety to each other; this Council coming
under debate, A. C. asked our Jesuit, What he thought of the Decree made at
Trent about the Forfeiture that Princes were to suffer, in Case they should
permit any Duellings in their Territories? The Import of the Decree in English
runs in this Sense, in short, viz. That if the places on which the Duels were
fought, be Fief Lands, they shall Escheat to the Lords of the Fiefe; I do not
exactly remember whether our Disputant objected that Clause quod ab Ecclesia
obtinent, which implies that the Forfeiture should only be of those Lands that
were holden of the Church; and if our Jesuit did object this, (because I would
not omit any thing material he said in his defense) A. C. answers in the Words
of a late Ingenious Gentleman, who says, That that Clause, quod ab Ecclesia
obtinent, was inserted into the Decree, only to hinder the opposition that
would have been made by the Ambassadors of Kings and Princes, who were present
in that Council, and who would never have let pass a Decree so destructive of
their Master's Interests; from all which A. C. Inferred, He that can by Virtue
of some Right residing in himself, dispose (upon any pretense whatsoever) of a
parcel of Land as big as this Room (speaking of the Room he was in) may take
away a Province, and he that may Jure suo take away a Province; may rifle a
Prince of his Dominions; but that is deposing of them: To which M. P. replied,
No such thing, for if my Prince shall lay upon me a moderate Tax, has
therefore that Prince a Right to all I have? To which A. C. answered, No,
adding, That what M. P. urged as a Simile, was not at all like the thing we
disputed of; for the Question was not of the Power of Princes over their
Subjects, but the Jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical State, over that of the
Civil one, without this latter States leave; to which M. P. replied All good
Princes ought to consent to the Decisions of the Church; But answered, A. C.
suppose those good Princes are not in a very good Humor (as it is ten to one if
they are, when the Church decides so favorably for her self) and have no mind
to recede from their Right to any part or parts of their Dominions, of which
they are the true owners; must they be dispossessed of their Rights against
their Wills? To all which A. C. had no other answer than this, or much to the
same Effect, viz. That in such a Case the Church had power to decide in favor
of it self. Well, says A C. to our Jesuit, if the Case be so, I am satisfied;
and withal turned himself away, and had some Discourse with a Gentleman by the
Bed side.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
On the Title for Cresner, r. Cressener. page 2. line 12. for greater r. a
greater, p. 7. l. 30. for Term and Mode, r. Term or Mode.


