A General-Epistle TO THE Christian Churches, To be spread abroad amongst all
professing Christianity; for a Warning to some, and an Encouragement to others.
JOHN COX your fellow Servant, and a Messenger of Christ Jesus, in whom is our
Life and eternal hope of Salvation, purchased for all that shall believe in his
Name, when he gave himself a Sacrifice once for all; for the expiation of the
Sins of the whole World, bearing them in his holy Body upon the Cross. Thus in
his Person, he became Sin for us, that had no Sin; Reconciling us to the Father
in his most precious blood, whilst as yet we were Aliens, nay, Enemies unto
him: So that we may cry out, and say, Ah! the height and depth of the
unsearchable Wisdom and Love of God in Christ Jesus; in whose saving Name,
Light, Life, Spirit, and Power, I salute you every where, that call upon him,
and approach near unto God the Father, by his Mediatorship, who sits at the
Right Hand of his Father, continually making Intercession, as our heavenly High
Priest, for us; teaching us by his Spirit, how to pray; and then offering up
the Incense of our Prayers unto God the Father, and praying for us; always
beholding and seeing the face of the Incomprehensible Majesty of God; to whom
no Mortal Eye can approach.

This is a Trying Day, that is coming upon all the Earth, and the Inhabitants
of the World, and of the Sea, a day of Anguish and unexpected Calamity shall
overtake them unawares: For the day of Recompense is at hand; the Lord is
drawing his glittering Sword, and his Arm shall devour Flesh; he will avenge
him of his Enemies, and recompense it to his Adversaries; a day of terror, a
day of shaking, a day of trembling, of winnowing and sifting: and a Cousumption
of all Flesh, such as never was upon the Earth, every man's hands upon his
Loins, as a Woman in Travel, because the day shall burn as an Oven, and shall
leave neither Root, nor Branch. Do they consult? It shall not stand. Do they
take Counsel? It shall come to naught. For the Lord is on his way, as a Giant
refresht with Wine; and as a Mighty Man of War, he shall thrash the Nations.

Blessed are they that fly unto the Living God for Refuge, and put their trust
in the Arm of his Salvation, that look over all these Commotions that shall
come upon the Earth: where Distress, Confusion, Contradiction, Confusion of
Language and understanding, Jealousies, Mistrust, Falseness, betraying and
devouring, and a breaking and defeating of the Wise-Societies, and
Combinations, shall be: all the Wisdom of the Wise is confounded and betrayed,
to his own Shame and Desolation.

Therefore look not out, for then Thoughts, Fears, and Doubts enter, and
Mistrusts of God and his Sufficiency are let in, and the great Adversary of
Man's Peace hearkened to, and Carnal Reason, which will cry, Master, pity thy
self, save thy self, and yet knows not where to turn for Safety. But look unto
the Lord, that has called you forth of Darkness, and visited you and your
Fathers, when you sat in Darkness, and under the Region of the Shadow of
Death, by the message of the Light of his glorious Gospel; and remember how he
led you, and covered your heads in the day of storm; how he gave you Srength, a
Mouth, and Wisdom, and Courage in the day of your Humiliation, Simplicity, and
Tenderness, when you sought the Lord in all things, and that he went in and out
before you, and you waited for his daily directions, and counseled all
thereunto in themselves, that they all might come to be taught of the Lord, and
know the Lord, from the least of the People to the greatest. Oh! consider then,
and let it rent your hearts, and humble you continually within your selves, to
follow on still, to know the Lord, and to look unto the Author of our Salvation
in all things: stand still: Who is this that says, I have done this? This was
by my Wisdom, my Counsel, my Labor, my Understanding, I have brought this to
pass; This will the Lord overthrow, and all the Carved Images, all the pleasant
Pictures, all the fair Buildings, all the wise Platforms of Structures, the
Lord will overthrow, that none may be exalted, or glory in any thing, but daily
dependency on the Lord, and following on* to know more of him; and not
glorying, that Spirits are (through his Name) made subject (when Satan descends
like Lightning) but rather that your Names are written in Heaven.

Dwell in the Faith, for it is written, The Just shall live by Faith. And it is
Faith in the Son of God Christ Jesus, which has caused his Light to shine in
our hearts, that overcame the World first; and all that did, and do overcome
the World, and in the end are crowned with Victory, overcome through Faith in
his Name, that was, is, and is yet to come. Oh! stand steadfast, without
wavering, be faithful unto Death, and he will give the Crown of Life; watch
against that which would lead the Mind from Stillness and Quietness, watch
against Thoughts and Words, and multitudes of Cares, under pretense of Serving
God and his Truth: for Christ says, Without me ye can do nothing: and exhorts
his Disciples not to be Careful, and reproves Martha (a Member of the True
Church) for her being too much troubled with Serving, and complaining of her
Sister to him; and reproved Peter, that thought carnally in taking upon him to
admonish his Lord, though it was his Love to his Master, yet it was also his
Ignorance (of the Purpose and Fore determination of God) and his Presumption
that caused him to err. Therefore it is in Patient Learning, that every one
must possess their own Souls: and having the Loins of their Minds girded, and
their Lamps trimmed, wait for the coming of their Lord, who will come, and his
Reward is with him, to give to every one of his Servants, according to the
Works he has commanded from them to be done. Blessed are they that are
watching and sober, that are not drunk with Pride, with Vainglory, with
Pre-eminence; nor, are not choked, nor furfited, nor biased from the known
Will and Mind of the Lord, for Honor and Greatness-sake which is an empty
Name: And how can you believe (says Christ) that receive Honor one from
another, and not the Honor that comes from God only. And then are found
taking their Fellow Servant by the Throat, and beating, reproaching,
nick-naming, slandering, contemning, and casting forth as Dung to be trodden
upon. Oh! the Lord is coming, that will cut you asunder, and will give you your
Portion with Hypocrites; yea, Abusers of his Trust, you Renters of his Church,
for which he died, ye proud Scoffers, heady high-minded, Daubers, and
Flatterers amongst all People repent, or the Lord will be dreadful unto you;
you have gone in the way of Cain, killing the Just, in the Tyranny of Nimrod,
hunting before the Lord: ye Giants, and mighty Men, the Lord will cut you off,
ye are in the way of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, that resist the Truth, and lay
occasions of stumbling, and Offenses before the Weak, causing the Offense of
the Cross to cease, ye that render Reviling for Reviling; ye despiteful,
venomous Bespatterers of one another, to the Shame and Scorn of the World. You
manifest what generation you are of, you Intruders, that have not the Wedding
Garment on, but the Rags of Self-conceitedness, and swelling Thoughts, and
abounding of your own naughty unmortified Wisdom, carnal, sensual, and
devilish: the Lord is a swift Witness against you all, you Renters, and Sowers
of Discord, Whisperers, Tale-bearers, and Baeckbiters, Disturbers of Societies,
Families, Nations, Kingdoms, Princes, and People, the Lord will root you out,
and take away your false Covering of pretended Religion, and you shall be a
hissing to all People.

But all that love the Lord, and all that seek his Face and love his
Appearance, and that nothing, whatever the pretense be, can content, or cause
you to take up a Rest, short of the Lords comfortable, inwardly refreshing,
Soul-satisfying Presence, who only speaks Peace to his People, that they turn
not again to Folly. Oh! dear Brethren, those words of the Messiah, are often as
an Alarm sounded in my Ears, When the Son of Man comes, shall he find Faith
upon the Earth? I tell you, Nay: Oh! how much talk to little purpose? How much
Profession, and how little Faith in the World? Therefore awake to
Righteousness, all you that sleep, that Christ may give you Life; and be not
slothful and negligent, saying in heart, The Lord delays his coming; and a
heart of Unbelief enter you, take heed of a Spirit of Sleep and Slumber; or, of
easiness to join and comply with the Spirit of this World, through
Discontentedness; Oh! whether can you go? Have you not heard him to speak to
your Souls? whilst your hearts melted within you, at his Love and Glory, that
has the words of Eternal Life; therefore draw near to the Lord, and he will
come, that shall come and will not tarry: yet a little while, and Satan shall
be trodden under foot.

Be not dismayed, these things happening, are not Temptations, otherwise than
what in some respect, have come for a Trial amongst all God's People; as ye may
read in Christ's words, which warned his Disciples against those that cry, Lo
here, and Lo there; bidding his not to go forth: and the Apostles in their
Epistles, speaking of Intruders: and as there were False Prophets amongst the
Jewish-Church, so should there be False Teachers amongst them, which unawares,
should bring in damnable Doctrine, denying the Lord that bought them. Now, this
was spoken of those, that erring from the Spirit, the Comforter and Leader into
all Truth, should set up the Form of Godliness, denying the Power. And here
has been the Apostasy amongst the JEWS and CHRISTIANS, the one, and the other
falling to Idolatry, under a Pretense of God's Worship, and owning Christ, but
denying the Sufficiency of his Spiritual and Inward Government, have set up
their own Inventions and Commandments, and then have imposed Conformity and
Uniformity thereunto: then there has been produced amongst all such People,
Strife, Hatred, Scorn, Wrath, Malice, Revenge, Fury, Disdain, etc. and who got
the Carnal Weapon, Bodily Persecution over all the rest. And thus the Mystery
Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, and abomination of the whole Earth, has
wrought, and High and Low, Rich and Poor, have been made drunk and quarrelsome
with the Cup of her Fornications, as Satan transformed, and intruding amongst
the Sons of God, in his transformed, unreforming Ministers, has exalted
himself in the Temple of God, over all that may be called God, pretending to
give Rules and Laws to the People in Spiritual Things, how to walk; and then
his Kingdom in the Mystery, in Pride, Lordliness, and Flattery,
Presumptuousness, High-mindedness, etc. has again gone forward: therefore,
wherever this shall be, it is naught, and the time of its stately Reign is
drawing near unto an end; for the Lord of the Vineyard will come himself, and
will gather his into the Divine Unity; which all the Righteous in all Ages have
waited for, and in Faith, see it afar off, and rested in hope together with us,
to be made entire, complete, and perfected in him, who is the Resurrection and
Life Eternal.

But Oh! you distressed, and not forsaken; you afflicted, but never forgotten
of the Lord, you Children of Zion, for whom the Lord is on his way; you that
have no helper in the Earth, but for your Testimony-sake to the Lord, are set
as Butts, to shoot at, by the Proud and haughty of the Earth. Ah! the Lord will
espouse you in Righteousness, and everlasting Loving Kindness to himself. Be
not dismayed, the day of your Redemption draws near, lift up your heads and
rejoice, for all tears shall be wiped away from your Eyes. They that touch you,
touch the Apple of the Lord's Eye; for which he will rebuke Nations, and
distress many People; keep on your way, in which the Lord has called, and led
you by his Grace and Spirit to walk in; love the Simplicity of the Gospel, love
one another unfeignedly, bridle the tongue, condescend to them of low degree,
serve one another in love, and without upbraiding; have Salt in your selves, to
savor withal, for great is the Mystery of Ungodliness, but it has been well
with the Upright in heart in all Ages and Generations, when the Wise and Crafty
have been taken in their own Snare. The Wisdom of Men savours not the things of
God, and this intruding and getting place, having Men's Persons in Admiration,
have bred disturbance, and wise men (so called) have made work, with opposition
of Science (falsely so called) one against another, troubling the Peace of the
Lord's People, and ought to be avoided and shunned, for it has stumbled the
weak. Therefore eye the Lord, and hold the Unity in the Spirit; which Spirit of
Truth is the bond of Perfection: And all keep out of the ways of the World, the
Rock of our Salvation is the same, which will not permit any of us to be tried
(if we do abide in his Counsel) further than what we (he assisting) shall be
able to bear, and all our troubles shall turn to our Good: the Lord will turn
the Wrath of Man to our Good. Therefore hold fast what you have received of the
Lord, and let a Spirit of Mercy and Tenderness compass you about; and of such
as fall, have Compassion, making a difference; for some are betrayed as a Bird
in the snare of the Fowler; unto whom the Lords tender Bowels are open, and he
will never forget the Love of their Youth, but will pluck them as brands out of
the Fire.

But that which is naught, is naught, and Flattery will not cover it, for all
it can turn and face about as the Camellon. Ah! the Lord will gather the
bruised, and the Out: casts of Israel. Oh! my heart is glad, I could shout for
Joy, in a sense of the Messiah entering (upon his being proclaimed) into
Jerusalem, though this was not known to the Wise of the Jewish-Church; their
eyes were, for our good, held. Oh! what a day of gladness to all that wait for
Salvation, is a coming, a day without Clouds to them that mourn now, and have
been afflicted for Righteousness sake, with a day of unutterable and endless
Rejoicing: but to the World, of Woe, that for lying Vanities, neglect so great
Salvation, etc. Rejoice, O Daughter of Zion, behold thy King comes unto thee,
meek, and sitting upon an Ass, and a Colt, the Foal of Ass.

So all look to him, of whom the Brazen Serpent in the Wilderness was a Figure;
for the People having sinned, and being bitten by Scorpions, and dying of the
wounds, they were in great Fear and Distress; and the Lord commanded Moses (for
he did only the Lord's Will) to set the Serpent, made in Brass, upon a Pole on
high, that so all the whole Congregation of Israel might behold it. And so it
was, that whosoever was bitten, looking upon the brazen Serpent, was
immediately healed, and dyed not: so was Christ lifted up, on a Tree, or Cross;
and as Moses lift up the Serpent in the Wilderness, Christ being thus lifted
up, will draw all men after him; and whosoever looks upon him, and believes in
him, they are cleansed and healed, and delivered from the Old Serpent, the
Devil, and all his Baits and Wilds can in no wise pluck them out of his hands,
that by his Light, Spirit, and Grace, do believe in him, they have Life Eternal
through Faith in his Name, and knows him in Spiritual Things, now to rule over
them, and acknowledge him Lawgiver unto them, that brings them out of all
Strife, Wars, Divisions, and Sidings, or making Parties in this World, loving
and seeking the good, the present and eternal Welfare of all men, from the King
on the Throne, to the poorest Person in his Kingdoms, bearing Testimony in
Practice, and in Doctrine, against all that shall do otherwise, knowing the
Earth is the Lord's, and that by him Kings do reign.

Therefore let all approve themselves to the Lord, and that of God in the
Consciences of all men, that we pass the time as Sojourners here in fear,
knowing that here we have no continuing City, but that we seek one eternal in
the Heavens, whose Builder and Maker is God: And that having a High Priest that
is holy and harmless to make intercession for us: a Prophet, that continually
(by his Spirit) teaches us: and a Spiritual King to reign in our Hearts and
Consciences. Let all take him for their Example, who did not come to do his own
Will, but the Will of his Father that sent him, unto whom the Father has given
all Power in Heaven, and in Earth, and has said to all in the voice, from the
excellent Glory, from the holy Mountain; This is my beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased, hear ye him.

Little Children, keep your selves from IDOLS. Amen. Written the 6th. of the
7th. Month, 1683.

