A Beneficial Proposal, WHEREIN All Adventurers are Gainers: For exchanging the
Blank Tickets, and 10 l. Benefit Tickets in the Million-Adventure, by making
them much more Valuable than now they are, to all persons that shall bring them
into this PROPOSAL, MADE BY R. CARTER, And Others.

As Likewise Showing,

The great Difference betwixt those Proposals made by Tho. Neale, and Dalby
Thomas, Esquires, and this now proposed; which last will appear to be much more
the Advantage to the Adventurers than that formerly proposed by T. N. and D. T.

London, Printed for W. Marshal. 1695

A Beneficial Proposal, Wherein all Adventurers are Gainers, etc.
ALL persons that bring in their Tickets into either of these Proposals,
instead of receiving Tickets or debenters of one pound a year for sixteen years
successively; shall receive Tickets or Debenters payable in some one or two of
the sixteen years, according to the several Tables hereafter expressed, as their
Fortunes lead them to.

By the Proposal for the Blank Tickets, the Number of Tickets, or Debenters* of
1 l. per Annum, are divided to every one, in proportion to the time they are to
stay for payment; So that those that receive their money sooner, receive less,
and those who stay longer, receive the more, by which means all persons will be
Gainers; for the worst Blank Ticket will by this method be worth 9 l. and a 10
l. Benefit 90 l. discounting Interest for the time, till come due, at 10 per
Cent. per annum; which is above a fifth part more than they will now sell for;
and if discount 10 per Cent. Interest, and Interest upon Interest, every Blank
Ticket will then be worth about 8 l. which is more then by Mr. Neals and Mr.
Thomas's.

Every Blank Ticket, brought into this Adventure, is to be marked by the
Propriator; with one of the first 16. Letters in the Alphabet; for which the
Receivers, Goldsmiths, and others hereafter named and appointed; will give the
owner of such Blank Ticket a Receipt for the same; with security that they will
return to the said Propriator of such Ticket, so many 1 l. Tickets or Debenters
payable on the Exchequer; at such and such times, as fortune allows them;
according to the following Table of proportion and Alotment.

First year 11 l. Payable at Michaelmas 1695 * Second -- 12 l. -- 1696 Third --
12 l. -- 1697 * Fourth -- 13 l. -- School * Fifth -- 14 l. -- 1699 * Sixth -- 14
l. -- 1700 * Seventh -- 15 l. -- 1701 ** Eight -- 16 l. -- 1702 * Ninth -- 17
l. of which 16 l. in -- 1703 and 1 l. in 1701 Tenth -- 17 l. of which 16 l. --
1704 and 1 l. in 1697 * Eleventh 18 l. of which 16 l. -- 1705 and 2 l. in 1700
* Twelfth 18 l. of which 16 l. -- 1706 and 2 l. in 1699 * Thirteenth 19 l. of
which 16 l. -- 1707 and 3 l. in School * Fourteenth 19 l. of which 16 l. -- 1708
and 3 l. in 1697 Fifteenth -- 20 l. of which 16 l. -- 1709 and 4 l. in 1696 *
Sixteenth -- 21 l. of which 16 l. -- 1710 and 5 l. in 1695 256 l.

The proof of this Table and what Advantage it is to the Adventurers.

A Blank Ticket is now sold for 6 l. 10 s. the price Current.

If the Letter the Adventurer puts upon his Blank Ticket, comes up with the
year 1695. then all those Adventurers that put that same Letter on their Blank
Tickets will have paid them at Michaelmas, 1695. 11 l. by Eleven several
Tickets, or Debenters of 1 l. Each, all payable on the Exchecquer; at that time
in lieue of 16. their Ticket entitled them to before, for 16 years successively.

If it comes up with the year 1710. they will have 5 l. paid them at
Michaelmas, 1695. and their whole 16 l. more at Michaelmas, 1710. which 16 l.
stands them in but 1 l. 10 s. according to the now price Current.

The rest are of proportionable Advantage, as any one may see upon a plain
Calculation, and the worst years payment, allowing interest thereon, at 10 per
Cent. per Annum, makes out 9 l. for every Blank Ticket thus Adventured; which
fully makes good my Title of a Beneficial proposal, wherein all adventurers
will be Gainers.

And to make good the plain Advantage and Encouragement to the Adventurers; it
is proposed by some of the Receivers, Goldsmiths and others, that those that
shall happen to have their Alotment of payment in either the first two years,
or last two, viz. 1695. 1696. 1709. 1710. Shall have imediately paid them down
8 l. for every Ticket so Adventured, and happen such payment (if the Propriator
thinks fit to accept it) and for the other Alotments as they can agree; so that
by this it evidently appears that every Blank Ticket will be more valuable then
now they are, to sell them for 6 l. 10 s. a piece, or such like sum.

Note, the undertakers will be at the charge of Examining at the
Transfer-Office, to see all the Tickets thus adventured be good; and if any
should happen to be Counterfeit, or any demur should be on them, being not
fairly come by, they shall not be adventured, but notice given to the partys
that brought them to the Goldsmiths, and others to be adventured, they having
books on purpose to enter the same.

The Trustees.
The Trustees for the due management of this Exchanged adventure, are,

The Honorable Colonel Philip Howard, Sir Ralph Dutton, Sir Charles Windham,
Major Manly, Mr. Simon Smith, and Mr. Harrison, Merchants, with several other
Gentlemen of Quality, and Merchants of good Integrity, do promise to be
present, to see all things fairly performed.

Receivers.
Mr. Smith and Mr. Spynks at the Grasshopper in Lumbard-street, Capt. Passil at
the Kings Arms in Cheapside, Mr. Seymore at the 3 Flower de luces in
Fleetstreet, Mr. Hammersly at the Marygold, Mr. Adams at the Black Horse in the
Strand, Mr. Spakeman next Northumberland House, Mr. Goddard at the Bunch of
Grapes in the Pall Mall, Mr. Osburn at the George-lnn-Gate in Southwark,
Goldsmiths; Mr. Davis next the Antverp-Tavern in Threadneedlestreet, Scrivener;
and of the Undertakers at Whitehall-Coffee house over against Scotland-yard:
Where any Goldsmith of good Repute, that have Friends that will bring in
Tickets to this Proposal, may be accommodated with a Book, with the same
Allowances and Advantages as the other Receivers have from the Undertakers.

Who will all of them give the following Receipt, and security to those that
shall bring any Blank Tickets to be thus Adventured by way of Exchange.

Received the (...) day of (...) 1694. of A. B. a Blank Ticket in the Million
Adventure, No. (...) Adventured upon the Letter Q. on the proposals published
per. R. Carter, etc. In lieue of which I promise to deliver to the said A. B.
or Bearer, so many Tickets or Debenters of 1 l each on the Exchecquer; for such
time or times of payment as their fortune by this Adventure allots them; within
14 days after drawn. Books shall be delivered to the Goldsmiths and others,
abovementioned receivers by the 1st of March, and this Adventure shall be drawn
the 1st of April following, with what shall then be brought in, though they be
but ten of each letter to make a beginning to demonstrate to the world this
great advantage; and so will continue Drawing the 1st of every month following,
for some time; and if should happen to be more of some Letters then others,
those first brought in shall be Adventured, and the others declared not
adventured at the time of drawing, but shall be the first perferred in the next.

Manner of Drawing.
That public notice of the time and place of every drawing being first given;
the several Books in which the Tickets are entered being produced, sixteen
papers of like shape and size, each marked with one of the said sixteen letters
shall be produced, and sixteen other like papers, each of them numbered with one
of the 16. Years in which the Tickets are payable, as 1695. to 1710 shall be
also produced, and then in presence of such of the Trustees, Receivers and
Adventurers, as please to be present* the 16 papers marked with Letters shall
be Rolled, sewed up, and put into one Box: and the other 16 papers with the
number of the Years of payment shall be Rolled, sewed up and put into one other
Box: and being well shaken together, a person approved of by the Trustees and
Adventurers present, Shall pull out a paper marked with a letter from one Box,
and one other person likewise approved of; shall at the same time pull out a
yearly number from the other Box; both which shall be entered in a Book, and
signed by three of the Trustees aforesaid; which numbered paper so drawn shall
Entitle all those persons whose Tickets are endorsed with the letter that was
drawn against it to the several sums payable, according to the Table aforesaid.
As for example:

The several letters of the Alphabet are from A. to Q. Inclusive; suppose the
letter first drawn be Q. and the number drawn against it be 1695. the said
number Entitles all, and each of those Tickets which are endorst with the
letter Q. to Eleven Tickets of 20 s. per Ticket, all payable on the Exchecquer,
Michaelmas 1695. which is the first year.

Suppose the next paper drawn be D. and the number drawn against it be 1710.
the said number Entitles each of those Tickets Endorst with the letter D. to
twenty one Tickets, whereof sixteen are payable the sixteenth year, Michaelmas,
1710. and five of the first year, Michaelmas, 1695. and so of the rest, as per
the Table.

Note, every person that brings in Blank Tickets to this proposal, has their
whole 16 l. for every Ticket divided amongst the Adventurers; without reserving
any part to the Undertakers for their Charges and Labor, and Receivers
trouble, (which is done by that proposed, by Mr. Neal, and Mr. Thomas) and
therefore it is proposed that every person receiving his exchanged fortune of 1
l. Tickets, or Debenters, do pay for Charges, and Labor, for every Alotment 5
s. to the Goldsmiths and others, from whence they Receive the same.

Here follows Mr. Neals and Mr. Thomas's Table of Calculation, for the Blank
Tickets in the Million Adventure; and the difference betwixt the above proposed
by R. Carter, which is as follows.

First year 11 l, Payable at Michaelmas 1695 Second 11 l, -- 1696 Third 12 l,
-- 1697 Fourth 12 l, -- School Fifth 13 l, -- 1699 Sixth 13 l, -- 1700 Seventh 14
l, -- 1701 Eighth 14 l, -- 1702 Ninth 16 l, -- 1703 Tenth 17 l, of which 16 l.
in -- 1704 and 1 l. in 1701 Eleventh 17 l, of which 16 l. in -- 1705 and 1 l.
in 1700 Twelfth 17 l, of which 16 l. in -- 1706 and 1 l. in 1699 Thirteenth 18
l, of which 16 l. in -- 1707 and 2 l. in School Fourteenth 18 l, of which 16 l.
in -- 1708 and 2 l. in 1697 Fifthteenth 20 l, of which 16 l. in -- 1709 and 4
l. in 1696 Sixteenth 20 l, of which 16 l. in -- 1710 and 4 l. in 1695 243 l,

Note, the difference in the two proposals made betwixt Mr. Neal and R Carter,
viz. Mr. Neals 16 Lots for every 16 Blank Tickets, brought to his proposal,
makes in all 243 l. and that by R. Carter, 16 Lots for every 16 Blank Tickets
makes 256 l. as by casting up each Table does appear; so the difference is only
13 l. in 16 Blank Tickets, Mr. Neal and Mr. Thomas have carved out for
themselves, for charges, labor, and pains; (out of which profit they may very
well publish, as they did in their proposals; that all people shall have their
Tickets registered at the Transfer-Office, to prevent Counterfeits Gratis) and
by this of R. Carter; has all persons their whole 16 l. proportioned, which
makes 11 Lots in the 16 better than Mr. Neals, by 1 l. a year, and one Lot 2 l.
a year, which you may find marked in my Table thus, * so in lieue of the 13 l.
their profit and Advantage in 16 Tickets, I propose only 16 Crowns, which is 4
l. for charges, and trouble: So that by this proposal, the Adventurers, will
have 9 l. in every 16 Blank Tickets to be divided, some where amongst them;
more then in Mr. Neals and Thomas's

Note likewise, that Mr. Neal and Mr. Thomas in their proposal for the
Benefits, for every 16 Benefit Tickets of 10 l. each, have carved out a good
handsome share for themselves, not less then 140 l. in every 16 Tickets, (for
trouble and Charges) but by my following proposal for 10 l. Benefits, all
persons have their whole payment of money divided into s^veral Alotments, as by
the following Table, and 1 l. only paid for every Exchanged Lot upon the
Receipt thereof from the Goldsmiths, which will be 16 l. for every 16 Benefits;
In lieu of 140 l. in Mr. Neals, and Mr. Thomas's so that the adventurers will
have divided amongst them by mine more then by theirs, 124 l. for every 16
Tickets so brought in; which is evident enough that this is most Beneficial to
the Adventurers of and will be of public good.

A proposal for making the 10 l. Benefit Tickets in the Million adventure, much
more valuable then they now are, or will be by Mr. Neals and Mr. Thomas's
Proposal.
These Tickets are to be adventured on the Sixteen Letters, and be received,
kept and delivered in the same manner and by the same persons as the blank
Tickets are in the other proposal; And when any equal number of them shall be
brought in upon each letter; if but two, three, four or five, they shall be
drawn the same time the blanks are:

The receivers will give the following receipt for security to the propriators
of every Benefit Ticket:

Received (...) day of (...) 1695. of A.B one 10 l. Benefit Ticket in the
Million adventure No. (...) adventured upon the Letter Q. on the proposals
published by R Carter, etc In lieue of which I promise to deliver to the said A.
B. or Bearer, so many Tickets or Debenters of 5 l. each, on the Exchecquer for
such times of payment as their fortune by this adventure allots them: within 14
days after draw: Each benefit Ticket of 10 l. per Annum, entitles the
propriator to 5 l. every six months for 32 successive payments, and are now
sold for 70 l. the price Current; in lieue whereof by this proposal, the
adventurer will receive the whole in two or three payments; and the Lots are so
proportioned as to time, that the worst Lot that can be drawn will be worth 90
l. Allowing interest for the time till paid at 10 per Cent, per Annum, as will
appear upon a plain calculation, which fully makes good that this proposal will
make the said Tickets to be more valuable than now they are, and much better
then that proposed by Mr. Neal and Mr. Thomas, as by the following Tables both
of mine and theirs will appear.

If the letter upon which the Ticket is adventured comes up with the first
year, he shall receive in lieue of every Benefited Ticket of 10 l. a year by
Mr. Neals and Mr. Thomas's Proposal.

First year 27 Tickets of 5 l. each. whereof 15 payable at Lady Day 1695 and 12
payable Lady day 1710 Second 27 15 -- 1696 12 -- 1709 Third 30 15 -- 1697 15 --
1708 Fourth 30 15 -- School 15 -- 1707 Fifth 32 16 -- 1699 16 -- 1706 Sixth 32 16
-- 1700 16 -- 1705 Seventh 32 16 -- 1701 16 -- 1704 Eight 32 16 -- 1702 16 --
1703 Ninth 32 Michael 16 Michael. 1703 and 16 Michael. 1702 Tenth 32 16 -- 1704
16 -- 1701 Eleventh 32 16 -- 1705 16 -- 1700 Twelfth 32 16 -- 1706 16 -- 1699
Thirteeth 30 15 -- 1707 15 -- School Fourteenth 30 15 -- 1708 15 -- 1697
Fifteenth 27 12 -- 1709 15 -- 1696 Sixteenth 27 12 -- 1710 15 -- 1695 484 242
242

But if the letter upon which the Ticket is adventured comes up with the first
year, he shall receive in lieue of every Benefited Ticket of 10 l. a year by
this Proposal of Richard Carters, according to the following Table.

** 1st 29 Tickets 5 l. each whereof 15 payable Lady day 1695 and 14 payable L.
day 1710 ** 2d 29 16 -- 1696 and 13 -- 1709 ** 3d 32 16 -- 1697 and 16 -- 1708
** 4th 32 16 -- School and 16 -- 1707 * 5th 33 16 -- 1699 and 16 -- 1706 and 1
Mi. 1709 * 6th 33 16 -- 1700 and 16 -- 1705 and 1 L.D. 1709 ** 7th 34 16 --
1701 and 16 -- 1704 and 2 Mic. 1709 ** 8th 34 16 -- 1702 and 16 -- 1703 and 2
Mic. 1710 ** 9th 34 16 Michael. 1703 and 16 Micha. 1702 and 2 L.D 1710 * 10th
33 16 -- 1704 and 16 -- 1701 and 1 L.D. 1695 * 11th 33 16 -- 1705 and 16 --
1700 and 1 L.D 1695 ** 12th 34 16 -- 1706 and 16 -- 1699 and 2 L.D. 1709 **
13th 32 16 -- 1707 and 16 -- School ** 14th 32 16 -- 1708 and 16 -- 1697 ** 15th
29 13 -- 1709 and 16 -- 1696 ** 16th 29 14 -- 1710 and 15 -- 1695 512 250 250
12

Note, the difference of the two Tables: this last of R. Carters is better then
that of Mr. Neals and Mr. Thomas's by as many five pounds in every Lot, as
there is Stars before it, and for same time of payment; being in all 28 Five
Pounds in every sixteen Tickets.

Note likewise, that the adventurers security is not altered, but remains upon
the act of Parliament to be paid in the Exchecquer, as appears by the receipt
given by the Goldsmiths, who are only to get them made payable to such and
such persons, and at such and such times as fortune alots the adventurers.

Note, All Tickets that shall not be drawn, shall be returned again to the
Propriator.

FINIS.

