CREDIBLE INTELLIGENCE CONCERNING CAPTAIN TUTHILL Governor of Rushall
Garrison IN STAFFORDSHJRE.
HAving viewed some little in a late Diurnall, of the great activity of the
Noble Governor of Rushall in Staffordshire; I was desirous to make a more true
relation of what was then published, and so signify diverse later passages to
the end that that faithful servant of the Parliament might be better observed,
and his worthy acts (formerly too much neglected) might now be published, who
upon the fourteenth of this instant June, with his small Troop coasting the
Country (according to his constant custom) for the security thereof,
discovered a party of the enemies Forces, having a Coach, and a number of
Horse guarding the same toward Liechfield, whom this noble spirit saluted with
so hot a charge, that in short time he made him master thereof, wherein was the
younger son of Sir Gualter Devereux, whom the enemies had taken, and were
carrying him to Liechfield: For his elder brother having beaten up the enemies
Quarters at Lie Court where Captain Debdale, a Pestilent plundering person in
Liechfield, lost the most part of his horses, and fled to Worcester, and
procured a party of horse to fetch in Sir Gualter Devereux his younger son,
intending to keep him prisoner until all their Horses and Arms were again
restored: But the unconquered Champions of Rushall dashed their hopes, rescued
the prisoners, ceized the Coach, with many prisoners and brave horses, and
forced the rest to fly, leaving their luggage and portmantues, amongst which
were some belonging to the said Debdale, and the Lord Carington, who escaped
very narrowly. The said garrison of Rushall has been now lately faced twice,
and once summoned by the Kings forces: But the later time they sallied out and
encountered them, and took two good horses and one Soldier, and since that
went to the very town of Liechfield, and took a Lieutenant, and three other
prisoners, with three very good horses. It is much desired for the safety of
that country, and keeping the way open betwixt London and the Northwest parts
of the Kingdom, that the Garrison of Rushall were more countenanced, and the
number of Horse therein augmented.

Printed according to Order, by Jane Coe. 1645.


