THE GOOD MAN'S EPITAPH BRIEFLY EXPLAINED and APPLIED IN A SERMON AT THE
FUNERAL OF Mr. JOHN DRVRY.

By THOMAS CARTWRIGHT, M. of A. of Queens College Oxon, and now Vicar of
Walthamstow in Essex.

2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for
us a far more exceeding, eternal weight of Glory. London, Printed by D. Maxwel,
for John Baker at the Peacock in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

TO My ever honored Friend, Mris. REBECCA DRURY.
Madam,
WHen you were pleased to make your desires known to me, That I who had
performed the first Office of Friendship to You both, would likewise do the
Last to your deceased Consort, I found a double task in my hands; the one, to
compose my self, and the other, this Sermon; as likewise, an indispensible
engagement of making that small portion of time, which was too short for the
former, sufficient for both. Now being thus divided, and straightened between my
Studies and Passions, I could not but expest that my Auditors should bewail the
sadness of my Discourse, and be as sensible of my want of time as my self. And
therefore though I could civilly have denied all other Suitors, who deemed it
worthy of a longer life (which was judged to enjoy but an hours breath, and
then to be buried with him to whose death it owed its birth;) yet an innocent
Ambition of publishing my Obligations to either part of your self, has
obtained its reprieve, and made me so inclinable to your Commands (which indeed
I could not pardonably resist) as to reconcile my Respects to you with my
Judgment of it, and so, for your sake, to allow it public Liberty (if indeed
this be not a severer Sentence, then any to which I could have adjudged it.) If
it may be so happy as to raise you matter of spiritual joy from the ground
which has been watered with your tears, by convincing you that your dearer self
is gone to Heaven before you, so much to your advantage, because to his, I
shall have the better thoughts of it for your sake.

I might easily have spent a longer Discourse upon the Coffin then I did upon
the Text (nor was it for want of respect to the Truth or Him, that I strewed so
few flowers on his Hearse; but that I might appear to be so perfect a stranger
to that over-bold flattery, which has so frequently intruded at such melancholy
Solemnities, as rather to be acknowledged to have fallen short in many
particulars of his Commendations, then to have exceeded in the least. And as I
was the more obliged to be free of my Eulogies, in respect of Himself, because
he would never accept them from any when alive; so the less, in regard of his
acquaintance, amongst whom his Civil and Christian carriage has already
brought him into so much Credit, that any good Word of mine will come too late.

Though you lost as great a Temporal Blessing in him, as your utmost Ambitions
could have aspired to, yet I know you are so much a Christian, as to be
sensible whom you are obliged to love above him, and so patiently (at least) to
part with what God has thought fit to take to himself, and to be fully
satisfied with what he has left you.

If the assurance of having so considerable a part of your self, (as he was) in
heaven before you, may be a means to wean you from the world, and engage you to
live in the Lord (like him) that when you dye, you may be happy and Blessed
with him to all eternity, you will make a very good improvement of your loss;
in order whereunto you may promise your self the Prayers of

Your Faithful Friend and Servant, THOMAS CARTWRIGHT.
October. 18. 1659.
REVEL. 14. 13. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are those who dye in the Lord, from henceforth; Yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, and their Works do follow them.
THese words are words of Consolation, conveyed to S. John by a voice from
Heaven, that he might thereby encourage the Saints and faithful Servants of God
cheerfully to encounter all the dangers which should at any time assault them
in their passage through the wilderness of this World, to the Canaan of
Eternal happiness; by assuring them that the utmost extent of their enemies
malice, and the worst they could do them, was to put them in present possession
of their happiness.

What dependence soever they may have upon the foregoing parts of this Chapter,
they are (as considered in themselves) fit for such a Funeral Discourse as
ours, and need no other Introduction then a Coffin.

Now that you may benefit the more by them, I shall propose them to you in the
easiest and most familiar method imaginable.

But first, Let The Voice challenge your attention, because it is a Voice from
Heaven: Non vox hominem sonat, it sounds as if it came from the tongue of an
Angel; and not of a Man; and therefore hearken to it, not as it is reported by a
weak and sinful man, at the second hand, but as if you heard it with S. John's
ears, immediately sounding from heaven.

And I heard a voice from heaven saying, etc. Which Words may fitly be termed,
the Godly man's Epitaph, penned by S. John as 'twas dictated to him by a voice
from heaven; in which (as in all well-composed Epitaphs) there are three things
observable,

1. The Inditers Love to the parties deceased, in registring their happiness,
and causing it to be exposed to public view. And I heard a voice from heaven,
saying unto me, Write, Yea, says the Spirit. 2. A Signal Character given them,
whereby they are distinguished from all others, and their memory continued to
posterity, Blessed are they that dye in the Lord. 3. Their Friends surviving
are comforted, from an assurance of a double privilege, which they since their
death enjoy, viz. 1. Rest or cessation from their works, They rest from their
labors. 2. Remuneration, or reward for their works, And their works they follow
them.

We shall speak something (as far as a Funeral-warning, your patience, and this
time will give us leave) to each of these particulars, and that orderly,
briefly and plainly. And therefore

1. First let us take a view of the Inditers love to the parties deceased, in
exposing their happiness to public view, and causing their privileges to be
recorded. And from hence we may observe, how the Spirit of God takes care to
register the Privileges of the Godly, both for their own satisfaction, and
others conviction: He causes their Ptiviledges to be written, that in them
others may read the goodness and bounty of God to them that seek him.

Though Christ's friends dye as well as others, yet he takes a special care to
show his friendship to them, and to clear it to the world after their death,
lest possibly his love to them might appear to die with them. Now this praise
which he takes such a special order to have upon record of them, it makes both
for the glory of God, and the benefit of the living.

The happiness of the godly is a Truth of more unquestionable Authority, than
those which are conveyed to us by Tradition, for it has a Scriptum est to
confirm it, It Is written. So that these are no transient Commendations which
are given them from Heaven, such as spend their life in a breath; but they are
determined to be lasting and permament ones, they must be written in an
indelible Character, as it were, with a Graver, upon the Tomb of them who dye
in the Lord.

God has a Book of Remembrance in which those who are his Servants are
registered, that they may be had in everlasting remembrance, that they may
appear to be (...), a people of extraordinary note, even Gods (...), the Jewels
of Heaven, those upon whom he puts an higher value then ordinary; and indeed it
his esteem of them which does both make and manifest their happiness. Those
therefore whom by the declaration of Gods will (as it were by a voice from
heaven) he causes to be written amongst his Favorites, must needs have such a
share in his love, and such a title to his affection as will make them happy to
all eternity.

God threatened the wicked that he will scatter them Deuteronomy. 32. 26,
into corners, and that he will make the remembrance of them to cease from
amongst men. And when Bildad was reckoning up the calamities of the wicked, he
thought this was not to be forgotten, That the light of Job. 17. 6.
tbe wicked shall be put out, and his candle put out with him, his remembrance
shall perish from the earth, and he Ver. 17.
shall have no name in the street. The face of the Lord Psalm. 34. 16.
is against them that do evil (says David) to cut off the remembrance of them
from the earth. It seems they are so bad that God would have us hear no more of
them when they are gone, because their memory stinks and is offensive,
therefore does he take care that it may be buried with them. All their actions
abhor a register, nor shall they be ever named, unless like that obscure
Herostrotus, to their perpetual infamy. But the righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance; Psalm. 112. 2.
He took care to do well, and God takes care that he may hear well, causing his
best actions to be written in a fair hand, that he may transmit his memory to
after ages: He enrolls them in an everlasting Register, and that his name may
ride in Triumph to all eternity, he allots his glorious Angels for his
Supporters.

That the privileges of the righteous may be sure to be heard of far and near,
God causes them to be pronounced by a voice from heaven, a miraculous one
indeed, a voice without a Speaker, an audible testimony of an invisible
witness, and yet not outwardly sounding (that we read of) to S. John, but
inwardly conveyed to him by that Angel who revealed the whole Apocalypse to him.

The Memorial of the Just shall be blessed. A Good Prove. 10. 7.
Name shall be his heir, which that it may be made manifest to Succeeding, as
well as Present Generations, God orders it to be written, that so his respect
and love to him may never be forgotten, but remain upon Record to all eternity.

Now because this affection of the Holy Spirit of God to the Servants of God
(when deceased) runs through the other two parts of their Epitaph, and is to be
seen as well in the Character which is given them, as likewise in the Comfort
which is administered to their surviving friends, I cannot properly be said to
pass it over, though I come along with your patience to the Second Observable
in my Text; viz.

II. The Signal Character which by order from Heaven is given to these servants
of God, whereby they are to be distinguished from all others, and by which their
Memory is perfumed to all eternity; viz. in the Blessing which is pronounced on
them, and of them. Blessed are they who dye in the Lord; (a Phrase suitable to
that, Of Sleeping in the 1 Cor. 15. 18
Lord.)

The Verdict of the Holy Spirit is much different from the Worlds opinion, for
whereas they judge none more Miserable, the Comforter declares none more
Blessed, then they who dye in the Lord (that is, either for his Cause, or in
faith and obedience to him;) nay, none besides them: The Spirit says it,
though the flesh and the world deny it.

It was but one man's opinion (and he a Heathen too) That Death was Natures best
invention; and therefore that Blessedness should be entailed upon the dead,
will amongst sober men easily pass for a Paradox; which that it may appear to
be true beyond all exceptions and mistakes, three is a clause of Inhibition by
the Holy Spirit here inserted, which limits the Proposition, and shows what
sorts of Dead he means, when he styles them Blessed (not all, for then Scipio's
Question to his Father were material, Why should we live, many in pain, more in
misery, all in sin? but) they only who die in the Lord; that is, they who lead
their lives in an impartial obedience to his Commands, and continues faithful
to the end, and then departs in Peace with God, their own Consciences, and all
the World.

Though every Subject do desire to have this Predicate of Blessedness coupled
to it, yet to none is it really agreeable but to those who dye in the Lord,
which as I now tell you in the beginning of my Discourse, you will certainly
find most true in the end of your lives. Not every one who ferries over the
Dead sea is happy, only they are truly styled Blessed who arrive safely at the
Haven of eternal Happiness, and such are those and those only who dye in the
Lord.

It cannot be expected, but as men differ in their lives, so they should in
their deaths. They who go two several ways, and those opposite one to the
other, can never hope to meet at one end of their journey.

The same Prison may for a while contain both the Innocent and Malefactor, but
when a Commission is issued forth to call them out, and a Warrant to bring them
to the Bar, this Summons finds a different entertainment between them. For the
wicked man's Guilt does then fly in his face, and take down his courage, nor
can all his vain and frolic methods of confidence shift off the violent horror
which he conceives at this news, upon a conscience of his own misdemeanors.

The fear of death, like one of the stained colors, does then abate his
pleasant and cheerful countenance, and the melancholy remembrance of what he
has done together with the horrid expectation and foresight of his future
sufferings, terrifies him to the purpose. He now sees the gates of death wide
open expecting him, and through them his passage to those of hell, which he
cannot possibly conceive any means of escaping, having so highly provoked that
Great Judge before whom he is then to appear: Whereas on the other hand, he who
has made it the business of his life to make the Judge his friend, triumphs at
the news of his appearance before him, and looking merrily toward heaven, the
Reward of his Innocence, his soul is ravished with an earnest desire of being
dissolved that he may be with God. The Glory of the End makes him contemn the
Hardness of the Way: He knows, that as he lives in Gods Fear, so he shall dye
in his Favor, and therefore he smiles upon the Messenger of his Departure, and
embraces it as his entrance into Happiness.

Is it any wonder that the wicked should fear death, when their Conscience
(which is their faithful Informer) tells them, that it is a Trap-door which
will let them down into the Dungeon of eternal misery? Is it any wonder that he
is dismayed when these Spiritual Philistines (the terrors of death) make War
upon him, when his own heart informs him that the Lord is departed from him? No
wonder if he who lived without Grace expects to dye without Comfort. Needs must
it be a ghastly sight to him to see death like a Pursevant sent from hell,
waiting to guard him into endless miseries. But now they who dye in the Lord
have another-guess Cordial to keep up their spirits, so that in what habit
soever death comes attired, they can make him welcome, because they perceive
him to be a Messenger come from their Heavenly Father, to call them to take
possession of a Kingdom. They may pass with comfort and courage through this
dark entry which leads to the Palace of their eternal Glory. They may play upon
the hole of this Asp without danger, for it cannot sting them. Christ has
subdued the Second, and reconciled the First Death to them, so that the one
they never taste of, and the other is so sweetened, that they cannot justly
complain of its relish.

When these Jacobs have got the blessing of their heavenly Father, they can
meet this ruff Esau with a kiss, and not with a frown; and if they do receive
a blow from his ruff hand, yet that very stroke is healing.

When our Savior has made the bed of the grave soft and sweet by his own lying
in it, a Christian can with much cheerfulness and quietness repose himself in
it.

When an Angel comes to him, as it did to S. Peter, knocks off his chains, and
profers him a Jail-deliver; he is no longer in love with the Prison of his
flesh, but lets his Soul follow him freely into the best of Liberties.

When his Redeemer sends for him, he has no reason to show any unwillingness to
go to him. And what do you think, it was but a sight of this future blessedness
which made the Martyrs so in love with their stakes, and so strangely amorous
of their torment? What was it but this, that made them challenge death, and
court their persecutors as their best friends, giving them thanks for their
service in letting them loose from the slavery of this world? Was it not the
earnest desire of their future glory, which so passionately inflamed them with
a love of their present misery.

Needs must they be blessed who dye in the Lord, who then reap the great and
plentiful gain of their Godliness; here they have Beatitudinem viae, but then,
and there do they enter upon Beatitudinem Patriae; they have a blessing
accompanying them in their ways, but it is not to be compared with that which
meets them at their journies end.

He who is the Lord of life, and has tried what it is to dye, has pronounced a
peculiar blessing upon them that dye in the Lord; they are both Beati qui
moriuntur, and quia moriuntur in Domino, who do, and because they do dye in the
Lord; the interest which they have in God whilst they live, is that which gives
them assurance of their happiness with him when they dye: They who do not live
in London cannot expect to dye there, nor can they who do not live in Gods
Grace, expect by death to have admission into his Glory: They who would be
happy in the end, must first be holy in the beginning; they who would obtain
the price of eternal happiness (which is to be distributed at the Goal) must
first run the race which is set before them, and observe the rules likewise,
that are given out by the eternal God, who is to dispose of it, and in so doing
they shall have privileges of a double nature conveyed over to them; some in
possession, others in reversion; some in spe, others in re; they shall have
some blessing in hold, whilst they live in hope of others: Here they shall have
desiderium Beatitudinis, there Beatitudinem desiderii, here the desire of
happiness and persuit after it, there shall they be swallowed up in the
happiness which they desire.

Those are blessed who live in the Lord, but they rest not from their labors;
toil and sorrow intrudes between them and a perfect enjoyment of that
blessedness which they now possess only in hope and inchoation, when Death adds
rest to it, then, and not before is their happiness completed; whilst they are
in the body, their souls lie manacled in their jayl of flesh; but then they
receive a release, and are joined with their Savior in eternal liberty, where
they possess joys, for matter, spiritual; for substance, real; for use,
universal; and for continuance, eternal: And therefore

Foelices nimium quibus est fortuna peracta.

Jam sua.

They are happy beyond comparison, or expression, whose Glass is so well run,
as that we may say of them, they are dead in the Lord. Blessed are the dead who
dye in the Lord (so some translations) by which it seems that good men are
dead, before the stroke of death reaches them; death is no stranger to them,
they are grown familiar with it, being dead to Sin, dead to the Law, and dead
to the World: The wicked go down quick to Hell, but the Godly are dead before
hand, and therefore it is no trouble or difficulty for them to dye, especially
considering that they dye in the Lord. They live in the Lord, in one sense, but
they dye in him, in another, for being engrafted into Christ, that precious
Vine by Faith and Love, they live and flourish for ever, and continue to be the
Mystical Members of his body, the living Branches of that Vine, even when they
have naturally breathed out their Souls, and are fallen asleep in his bosom.

But Beza's Latin Translation reads it, Beati qui Domini causa moriuntur,
Blessed are they who dye for the Lord's sake, who are persecuted for
righteousness sake unto death, because through a red Sea of blood, they pass
into a Canaan of eternal happiness: Though Christ have finished his own
sufferings for the expiation of the World, yet there are (...), portions which
are left behind of the sufferings of Christ, which must be filled up by his
body, the Church, and happy are those who contribute most unto it. And this is
a duty which our times make highly seasonable to be pressed, though the present
occasion of our meeting, do withdraw me from pursuing it.

Now there is a particle of time mentioned in this blessing, which breeds some
small difference among Interpreters [from henceforth] from now] from this time]
which some, with Beza, would join with [Blessed] and then the words run thus,
Blessed from henceforth are they who dye in the Lord. Others are unwilling to
stir it out of the place, which our Translation has given it, and therefore
join it with [Dying] and then they read them thus: Blessed are those that dye
from henceforth in the Lord; not but that those who dyed in former ages were
also blessed, but because the times which the Angel here spoke of, were times
of great persecution, and therefore required more signal comfort then ordinary.
A third sort restrain it, not to the time of uttering this Prophecy, but to the
instant of death, and thereby make this voice from heaven, of strength enough
to blow out Romes pick-purse flames, and beat down their Doctrine of Purgatory.

Now because every Epitaph is supposed to be (...), Commendatory, and therefore
is likewise (...), Consolatory, carrying something in it that may calm the
minds of those friends, who shall bewayl the parties ^^^psed; therefore the
holy Spirit here writing upon the Saints departed, closes their Epitaph with
matter of comfort to their surviving relations; wherein he takes care by a
fresh gale of consolation, to blow over those showers of tears, which would
otherwise fall for them; in the last words, for they rest from their labors,
and their works they follow them. So that

III. Their Friends are Comforted, from an assurance of a double Privilege,
that they (...) their death enjoy, viz. Rest and Reward.

1. The First Cordial that the H. Spirit administers to keep up their fainting
friends, is a serious consideration, That they rest from their labors. By which
it seems, That Christianity is no lazy Employment. God admits none but
Laborers into his Vineyard, Loyterers have nothing to do there; We must bestir
our selves in it all the day till the evening comes, and with that the
Messenger of Death from God, to serve a Quietus est upon us, and command us to
rest from our labor.

Labors are a Law which we all are bound to submit to, who have Adam for our
Grandfather; and Crosses are a Curse which will reach us all who acknowledge
Eve for our Grandmother; and though the wickeds death is not properly a Rest,
but a Remove to a greater place of torment, as well as Labor, yet there
remains a rest to the people of God, which at the hour of death they enter
into possession of, for then they Rest from their labors; that is, from Evils
of all sorts, from the Injuries of the World, from Temporal Chastisements from
all Infirmities and Bodily Diseases, from all painful and Laborious
Employments, and therefore they are never better delivered then when delivered
by death: For they are now in their Haven, and no longer tugging at the Oars:
Their Work is done, their Journey ended, no more Fasting, Weeping, Watching,
Sinning, Suffering, no Peccant Humors to disturb their crazie bodies, no
griping Fears, nor consuming Cares to afflict their minds, as formerly, but
they are freed from all these, and enjoy an absolutely perfect and complete
Rest from all their Labors, from the sense of Gods displeasure, from the
Disturbing Temptations of Satan, from the Allurements of the flesh, from the
bewitching Snares of the World, from all Abuses and Dissentions, from the many
Duties which their Weakness made burdensome; from the disturbance of Desires
and Hopes, of their Longing and Waitings, which made them weary of their lives,
and desirous to be dissolved.

But before we dismiss this Clause, let us not forget to reconcile it with
another in the same Book, which may seem to stand at a distance from it; where
it is said of the Saints in Heaven, That they have no Rest day or Rev. 4. 8.
night; whereas one of the principal Fruits of Life Eternal is shadowed out
under the Metaphor of Rest, and here it is recorded, as a Privilege of theirs,
That they rest from their Labors. To bring both which expressions together, to
salute one another with a Kiss of Peace, let us consider that a Rest indeed
they have viz. Such a one as implies, A cessation from all toilesome and
troublesome Labors: But yet they are not Idle in Heaven, they have their work
to do there as well as on Earth; but yet such an one, as will not in continuance
of time tire them, but eternally Delight them, such as will not at any time
destroy, but for everperfect them And therefore weep not for them, but your
selves, in that God has not thought fit to give you a Writ of Ease to sit down
with them.

2. The second Comfort which the Holy Spirit administers to the Living at the
death of their righteous Friends, is, That their Works follow them; which if
they were Good, must needs Comfort the pensive spirit of the Mourner, and
administer a Cruse of Oil to his Joy; but if Bad, a Conduit of Tears to his
sorrow, for Qualis vita, finis ita; As men live, so they dye.

As Evil Works have two Punishments following of them close at their heels,
viz. Remorse and guilt of Conscience in this life, and Eternal Damnation in
that which is to come: So Good Works have two Rewards attending them, the one
in this life, and that's Peace of Conscience; the other following them into that
to come, viz. Joy for evermore. Then shall they reap the Fruit of their Labors,
when God renders to every one according to their deeds that they have done in
the flesh whether good or evil.

Good Works are the Seeds of Glory. A man may, as well ride to Rome upon a dead
horse, as go to heaven with a dead faith, and such is that which is without
Jam. 2. 17.
Works: and therefore Blessed are they whose works follow them into Heaven,
whither Christ is gone before them, and do there claim of God, that exceeding
weight of Glory, which is (not out of our Merits, but His Mercy) treasured up
for them who dye in the Lord: so that if thy Actions have been good on Earth,
great will be thy Reward in Heaven, where thy Grace will be consummated, thy
Glory perfected, and thou have the inseparable Company of Christ, and immediate
communion with thy God; where thou shall feast thy self with the vision of that
Being, which is Invisible, and according to the Riches of Gods promise, Inherit
that Kingdom which flesh and blood cannot inherit.

No sooner does the Messenger of death arrest us, but Riches they take wing and
fly away, our Pleasures they steal from us and forsake us, but our Good works
prove our close and faithful friends, they follow us still; in regard whereof
David extolls this as one of the Privileges of godly men, That they shall eat
the labor of their hands, happy shall they be, and it shall be well Psalm. 128.
2.
with them; insomuch that when their palates shall disgust all other things,
yet shall their souls be much affected in tasting the Fruits of their Labors.

But when do these Works of theirs follow them, and what haste do they make?
will you say! I answer, Those Works which they did in the Soul only, follow
them through the Chambers of death, and overtake them immediately. The soul
instantly after her departure from the Body, receiving upon the state of
separation her reward for them; but as for those which they performed, partly
by the soul, and partly by the body, those will not make any more haste then to
overtake them by the Day of Judgment, their recompense being reserved for the
Sentence of Remuneration, to be pronounced at that day, Mat. 25. 34, 35.

If Our Works shall certainly follow us, what manner of men ought we to be in
all sober conversation? And what a bitter Pill is this for those wicked men to
chew upon, whose consciences will convince them, That all their works have been
works of Darkness, when they shall certainly know that they will follow them
into the Place of Eternal Darkness; which to prevent, follow your works now,
that they may follow you hereafter. To do well here, is the only way to fare
well hereafter; and therefore they are the wisest men, who are the best livers.
The fear of the Lord that is Wisdom, and to depart from evil that is
Understanding.

If honor, liberty, length of days, riches, or contentment might have the
favor to pass with us for things desirable; that which God commands us for
our duty, might easily suffer us for our reward too. If we had so much of the
Saducee in us, as not to believe the Resurrection, or of the Atheist, as not to
dream of the life to come, yet methinks there is allurement enough in goodness,
to challenge our choice, our sweat, our industry. But if our obligation to it,
and comfort which we may reap from it, will not move us, think upon the benefit
and reward which will follow it; for if Faith can but discover to you what the
eyes of reason is too dim to see, the eternal weight of glory which is laid up
for those in the life to come, who shall serve God in this; I cannot think how
you can need any encouragement to press you to lead your lives in a constant
obedience to Gods commands, (as I question not but our deceased brother did,)
that so when sickness shall nail you to your Pillowes, you may have a full
assurance that you shall dye in the Lord, and partake of that blessedness,
which I am fully persuaded he now inherits.

To give the dead their due praises, is both for the Glory of God, and the
benefit of the living. And therefore I shall not need to crave your pardon, but
patience, whilst I unlock our dear brothers Coffin, and set his chief virtues
out, as so many precious Jewels before you, which are the rather worth your
present view, because they follow him. But because Adulation has been a
familiar vice too frequently following Hearses in this latter age to their
Graves, and that it may appear to you all, how sollicitous I am to avoid it, I
shall not play the Wire-drawer with his commendations, but rather omit the
mentioning of those things which could not possibly incur the suspicion of
either flattery or falsehood.

His carriage to those of his acquaintance was so modest, his words so civil,
his dealings so just, his conversation so obliging, and his friendship so real,
that I may confidently say, he left a monument in every breast that knew him.

And I begin the rather with this, because he himself sufficiently understood
what is fit to be preached to you, how Morality is a fair step toward
Christianity, and the Observation of the second Table the best touchstone to
try our sincere obedience to the first. But to his endless commendations as
well as comfort, he did not rest here, but went on in the course of his life to
prove himself a religious, as well as an honest man, of his stedfastness in the
true Faith (notwithstanding the many temptations which our giddy times might
profer to shake it) as likewise his frequent attending on the ordinances, and
improvement by them; he has left me amongst others, a faithful witness, and of
his more than ordinary diligence in those stricter duties which require more
retirement, his nearest relations give abundant testimony; all his actions were
sufficient evidences, that he judged his Wife, his second self, for he behaved
himself so lovingly, so meekly, so courteously tow^^ds her, that there was no
difference or distaste between them from the first hour of their acquaintance,
to that of his departure; nor did he seem to entertain any displeasure but that
he could not be better than he was; so that his worth was like her loss, and
therefore not to be expressed but with silence and admiration: In fine, he was
neither ashamed to live, nor afraid to dye, out of a full persuasion that
Christ would be an advantage to him in both.

Now before we lay him in the Grave, that bed in which he will rest from his
labors; let me bespeak his nearest surviving relations, that they would set
bounds to restrain their exorbitant passions. Rachel, though otherwise very
good, yet was in this too much a woman, that she would not be comforted. I
neither hope, nor attempt to preach you up to a stoical Apathy; our headstrong
passions, like unruly Horses, are not to be broken at the first attempt; and
therefore, there will be time as well as wisdom required to moderate them:
It Is true, the blow by which he fell did reach to you, who were so nearly
concerned in him; but yet remember from whose hand it came, even from God, and
then you will find your selves obliged to sit down in silence, and give glory to
him, by showing the strength of your graces, in this present opportunity which
he gives you of exercising them: This will work you up to acquiesce in old
Eli's resolution, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. It behooves
you rather to be thankful to God for sparing him so long, than to murmur and
repine at his taking him away now at last. I know you love him too well, to
wish the deferring of his happiness, which yet he could never have had but by
death, and therefore do not betray so great a design of injuring him, as to be
sorry that his goodness hindered him no longer from glory: Put this Dilemma to
your own Souls, and try what answer they can give you to it. Either you loved
him for himself, and then you must needs be pleased with that change which
makes so much for his advantage; or else you loved your selves in him, and then
you may very well be ashamed to let us know it.

If you sorrow for him as those without hope, you distrust this voice from
heaven; and if an Angel should come from thence, you would not believe him.

Though the loss be yours, yet the gain is his, (nay, the loss cannot be yours,
because the gain is his) whatsoever you complain of, he is freed from;
whatsoever you desire, if it be good, he enjoyes it, and therefore weep not for
him but your selves; and though his Soul be beyond the reach of your
commendations, yet consider how you are obliged to follow after him by
invitation, that so you living, as he did in the fear, may dye in the favor of
the Lord, and in his good time, rest from your labors, and of his special
grace have your best works, that is, the comfort and exceeding great reward of
them, following you into his presence, where there is fullness of joy and
pleasures for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

