AN Epistle to Friends, Concerning the PRESENT and SUCCEEDING TIMES. BEING A
faithful Exhortation and Warning to all Friends, who profess the Truth, to be
ware of the manifold Wiles of the Enemy, and to stand Armed in the Light of the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth, against his Assaults, that so they may be ready
to answer the Call and Requirings of the Lord. ALSO, Some thing signified of
the Misery of the Succeeding Times, that all may be prepared, and that the Evil
Day may not overtake any at unawares, but such as turn away their Ear from
Counsel.

Let him that has an Ear, hear what the Spirit says to the Churches. By one
who is a Traveller in the Way of Peace and has good will toward all Men, and
more especially to the Household of Faith. STEPHEN CRISP.

London, Printed in the Year, 1666.

AN Epistle to Friends, Concerning the PRESENT and SUCCEEDING TIMES.
Dear Friends,
YOU whom the Lord has reached unto in this the day of his Love, and has made
known the way of Truth and Righteousness unto you, through the raising up of
that holy, living Witness of himself, that long lay hid and buried in you, and
has brought you to a secret feeling of something in you, that is worth the
minding and regarding; and the Lord causing this to appear in the day of your
seeking, as a Light, discovering Darkness, and its power, by which ye were
formerly holden, and giving you, by his Spirit, a sense and secret hope, that
in this Light, the way of Deliverance was to obtained unto; this hope made you
not ashamed of the Light which before you hated, but you came to own and
embrace it, even while others still hated it and you, for its sake; yet your
hearts being affected with the hope that did appear therein, could not but so
far join unto it, as to make public profession of it for its own sake; and for
no other ends or designs, or interest at all, but with resolution in that
Light, to wait for the Salvation of God. Dear Friends, it is you
aforementioned that both now, and for some days and weeks, my heart has been
deeply exercised concerning, even night and day; and the aboundings of the
Fathers love does often overcome me, and draws me forth now to say and write
these things unto you for your admonition and establishment; and indeed it is
you who did thus rightly own the way of Truth, and knew your believing to be
the gift and mercy of God to your souls, that I do aim at; for those that have
taken up the profession of the precious Truth upon by respects and sinister
ends, and but for reasons propounded in their carnal minds; though I do pity
them, yet I have not much at this time to say to them, but this; The day shall
declare them, and their garment shall not hide them.

But you, oh my friends, who had fellowship with us, in the deep travels of our
beginnings, and did come to Truth the same way, and have known the power and
virtue of it, many times overcoming you in your inward man, which has made you
cry out, Lord evermore give us of this Bread; and has made you as a watered
Garden: Oh Friends, how shall I express or signify unto you those longings,
those ardent desires and earnest breathings of my soul, that you, even you,
might abide to the end of all trials, and tribulation, and adversities; and
might inherit that Crown of Immortality, that is in Christ Jesus our Lord, and
might not by any means be bereft thereof; this is singly my travel in Body and
Spirit, that you might be kept and preserved out of all the subtle snares of
the wicked one, which hunts for the soul, even of those that have believed; and
therefore in dear and tender love I have a few things to write unto you for the
clearing of my Conscience, and discharging my duty in the sight of the Lord,
and the Lord give you all a tender and an understanding heart, that both you
and I may yet have cause daily to praise the Lord in the glorious Light of his
Salvation, which he has manifested amongst us, by the revealing his Son Christ
Jesus, to whom belongs Dominion, Honor and Glory for ever, Amen.

And first, dear Friends, it is in my heart to put you in remenbrance of that
by which we were called and convinced, which as a foundation Principle was laid
in and among you, and it being unchangable and unalterable in it self, does
therefore admit of no alteration or change in those that are rightly kept to it.

It was a Light which arose in our hearts, and shined forth from God, the
Father of Lights, carrying in its appearance the nature and property of God,
both in its condemning evil, which the Enemy had sown or planted in us; and
owning, allowing, and justifying every thing that was good and honest, just and
equal; even those thoughts in our hearts which were of turning toward the
Lord, and seeking his righteousness; these thoughts were justified and
encouraged by the Light, and all the contrary discovered and judged, as they
were brought to it to be tried. Now this Light did our souls rejoice in, as
they had good cause, though it took away our former rejoycings; our pleasures
in vanities and iniquity died, our glory in this world withered, our friendship
with the Sons of men decayed, and we stood in the Light, and saw all these
things, and were not sorry at it, but waited daily to see these things more and
more brought to pass, neither was there a permitting our thoughts to go out,
how we might prevent those damages, or repair these losses, but the Cross of
Christ was indeed our glorying or rejoicing; and the hope that was before us,
did make us despise the pleasure, treasures and honors, friendship and
delights of this world; and in those days you grew into a feeling of the
heavenly joy, where the hundredfold was witnessed in your bosoms, and the zeal
of the Lord was kindled by his own Spirit in you, against whatsoever this Light
of Jesus in the Conscience did witness against; and the Lord beheld your
integrity, and blessed you, and multiplied you, and added to your strength and
stature, and then did the fruits of this glorious work abound among you, in
three more general and special effects, by which effects, or by their
continuance among you, let all now come to search and try themselves, that so,
dear Friends, those that have continued faithful in them all, may persevere in
like manner to the end: and those, who upon true search do find, that they have
failed, and fallen short in all or any of them, may make have to repent, and to
turn to that which was the root of them all, that they may not be found, as
fruitless and withered branches, in the day that comes, lest they be cut off
and utterly consumed and blotted out from among the living branches of the
Vine; for a day comes that Truth will look into the Fig Tree for Fruit, and
Leaves will not defend it from the Curse and Blasting.

The three especial fruits that did spring forth from this blessed root, and
were and are to continue, and increase in us, and amongst us to the end, are
these;

1. Purity, manifested in a godly Conversation.

2. Unity, manifested in dear and tender Love one toward another.

3. Faithfulness, manifested in bearing a constant and faithful Testimony to
the things we had received and believed, though it were unto great loss and
sufferings.

And against all these do the wicked one appear to see if he can make you
barren concerning them, and that with diverse wiles and subtilties, that he may
prevail on you, and not be known to be the Enemy, but might so overcome you, as
that you might both submit to him, and then plead for him and his snares and
wiles, as being just, right, lawful, prudent, convenient, etc. But, oh dear
Friends, let all be watchful and diligent to wait in the sense and true feeling
of that Seed that never fell nor was beguiled; and you will (even the least of
you) see and comprehend his workings and transformings, and be delivered from
them.

1. Purity and Holiness was a fruit in you which does yet flourish in many
(blessed be the Lord) who are as watchful and careful to approve themselves in
obedience to the Light of Truth in their inward parts as ever; and finds as
great a necessity both of trying and judging with its judgment as ever; these
having thus waited, have renewed their strength unto this very day, and do
mount up as upon the wings of the Eagle; these are neither weary in running,
nor faint they in their walking; But alas, Friends, even these do know with how
great and manifold asfaults they have been assaulted, and know and see with
sorrow of heart how the assault has prevailed upon some, by working into the
mind a secret Liberty, and supposed enlargedness, whereby a carelessness has
entered some, and they having no keeper, but the measure of Light revealed in
their hearts and consciences, so soon as they came to be persuaded to slight
the reproofs of that, they soon erred; and this supposed Liberty entered, that
now after so many years strictness and circumspection, they should not need now
to stand so straightly to try things and words as at first, because now, a day of
more Liberty was come, and this Liberty secretly prevailed against that pure
fear that once was placed in their hearts, and against the very obedience of
Truth, inwardly in the subjection of the mind, and then it became manifest
outwardly; the actions sometimes blameworthy, the words and speech again
corrupted, and run into the old channel of the World, like them again, and the
single pure Language, learned in the Light, in the time of their poverty and
simplicity, almost lost and forgotten, and so the work of God which he wrought,
in a manner laid waste; and then, when this Liberty is entered, and made use of
as aforesaid, oftentimes a secret subtilty arises against the judgment of
Truth, either from within, or from any outwardly, that are grieved with this
loose and careless kind of speaking or acting, which subtly leads to contend
for it, or against the judgment, telling the Creature, why these things are but
small things, and little things, and what, we must not strain at a Gnat, and
such like. Oh my Friends, beware of these evil suggestions of the wicked One;
how came they to be small and little things, seeing they were great things with
us in the beginning? and how comes an offense of this nature to be light now,
seeing it was heavy in the beginning? Oh let not the greatest Mercies of our
God so fill us, as to make us slight or forget the least obedience; but rather
let the continuance of his mercy the more quicken you up unto a zeal for his
Name and Truth in all things, to be found doing and speaking according to the
Rule of Righteousness, which ye learned in the Light, in the day of your being
low and little, and then nothing will rise up and be exalted in the multitude
of Gods mercies, but that holy birth which lives in purity when it is at
highest; and so that life of Righteousness will shine forth more and more,
which glorifies God and seeks his honor. Dear Friends, that ye might be so
kept unto the end is the breathing and travel of my soul: and that where this
neglect has entered, and this aforesaid corruption either in speech or action
is to be found, that ye would receive the Word of Exhortation in meekness and
fear, in which it is written unto you, and may redeem the time, for the days
are and will be evil; and none will hold the mystery of the Faith (that saves
from falling in the evil day) but such as do keep the pure and undefiled
Conscience, which none can do but by persisting and continuing in the daily
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief and obedience of the the Truth.

A second Fruit that was brought forth from this good Root, was Unity and Love
one toward another; which, blessed be the Lord, is preciously preserved in and
among many to this very day; who are so sensible of the diverse operations of
Truth in them, to be all by one Spirit, that they are still kept of one heart
and mind, given up freely to serve the Lord in singlness of heart in their
generation; and are in this good work as strengtheners and encouragers of one
another; but notwithstanding the enemy has been exceeding busy to lay waste
and destroy this blessed effect also, and that under diverse pretenses, which
the Lord still discovered by his own Light and Spirit in his People, who have
singly waited upon him; but many have been his wiles, sometimes fitting and
preparing vessels to rise up in the fleshly and sensual wisdom; and to traduce
and bring in corrupt and evil doctrines, to try who was not sound in the Faith,
that they may draw them aside into a heat and zeal for something which had not
its root in the Truth, and which they that abode in the Truth could not own,
but judge and condemn in the Name of the Lord; which when such saw, they took
thereat occasion of striving to propagate and promote that which they saw
withstood, so having lost subjection to the Spirit of Truth in themselves,
which would have kept them in Unity in the Body; and having also lost and laid
by their subjection to them that were over them in the Lord, they then grew
stubborn and wilful, and proceeded in more zeal for that which stood in
opposition to the Truth, than ever they did for the Truth it self; and these
sometimes have prevailed to the subverting whole households, and have turned
several from the Faith and simplicity that is in the Gospel, who, as well as
those that subverted them, have lost the fellowship of the Saints, and the
savor of Life either in themselves or others; and then the Enemy persuaded
them, all are dead to the Life but themselves; and so they grow to have a
tickling joy in what they do and say, in obedience to that perverse and
singular private Spirit, and so grow up to speak evil of Dignities, and are
unruly, and dare to speak against Heaven and them that dwell and inhabit in it,
whom God makes to shine as Stars in the Firmament of his Power; but alas for
them, my soul pitties them, when I see how they sport themselves with their own
deceivings, but the day of the Lord is among his People, which has and does
make them and their spirit manifest, and their fruits also has made them
manifest.

Another way that the Enemy seeks to break the Unity, and dissolve the bond of
Amity, is by sowing a seed of jealousy and prejudice in the hearts of such in
whom he can get an entrance, that so they may cease from the true and
unfeigned love, and that upon a pretended reason, because of this or that,
which is supposed or imagined, in the evil part in themselves against others;
giving heed to evil thoughts and surmises, which break forth many times in
whisperings and tale-bearing; which though the thing supposed to be evil, were
really so, Yet this is not to be allowed or given way to among you, but to use
plainness one toward another, and singl-heartedness; and to shut out the evil
one in this his subtle appearance also. Oh dear Friends, remember how the Lord
has dealt with you, and deal you so one by another, he has not sought
occasions against you, but has long born and suffered, and exercised much
patience and tenderness toward you; yet plainly reproving the evil in you, and
not treasuring it up against you. Oh Friends, be ye like-minded one toward
another, that the Enemy of your peace and concord may be defeated, and you
preserved entire to one Head, even to Christ Jesus; and ye may be one, and the
Name of the Lord may be one among you; and that which tends to the making cold
your Love, may be judged in all; and so Brotherly-Love will continue with you
to the end.

Another way which the Enemy works to scatter and to bring from this Unity, is
by leading some who have believed, into some sin and iniquity, which the Body
that are in the Truth, are constrained to appear in judgment against for the
Truths sake, and yet notwithstanding the party so sinning, being above the
Witness in themselves, which would bring them to own the judgment of the
Spirit of Christ in his Church, they exalt themselves above the judgment, and
seek to gain to them, such whom they can enter by their words and complaints to
take part with them against the judgment and those that passed it. Such were
those whose words did eat (the Apostle said) as a Canker; of whom the Believers
in those days were to be aware: for commonly such as have gone from the Power,
that should have kept them clean and upright, they will also turn against the
power in those that abide in it, especially if they be drawn forth to reprove
and rebuke them: but let all such know, that is not the way to be renewed; and
let all that take part with any that work iniquity, know, that they do but
defile their own souls thereby, and do but rend themselves from that Body,
which they cannot prosper out of. And therefore, dear Friends, beware of
joining with that in your selves or in others, which the Power goes against,
let the pretenses be what it will; for that which does evil, will always be
aptest to sow evil complainings of others; and such as are in the unsatisfied
murmurings against judgment passed upon them, are much to be feared, for they
thereby render themselves to be the more guilty, and yet the further from
repentance. But, dear Friends, watch unto that which gives you a living feeling
of the living Body, which is the Church, that in all things you may demean your
selves as true Members of it, serving one another in Love, and submitting your
selves one unto another for the Lords sake: That in all plainness and
singleness, as becomes the Truth, you may seek to preserve the Unity which the
Enemy of Truth and Peace does envy: so shall ye continue to strengthen one
another hands in every good work, and this shall tend to the weakening of the
hands of your Enemies, who seek to divide you, that they might rule over you.
Many other designs does the wicked One try, daily to break and divide, more
than can now be named or here inserted; but they are all out of the Light, and
if you be in it, you will see them, and that will preserve you for it is own,
and did make us one, and will keep us to be of one heart and mind to the end,
if we abide in it.

3. The third good effect which Truth did work in the beginning in them who did
truly receive it, was Zeal and Faithfulness to God in the bearing testimony to
what was manifest, though through great sufferings; in which, as Friends abide
in the Root, they do daily increase in power, to fulfill the same Testimony:
for the Mercy of the Lord does engage them; and his answer of peace, in the
midst of their trials, does arm them and encourage them, and they do hold out
to the end; and for such the Lord has always made a way, better than they
could have made for themselves. Yet the Enemy has in this matter also been
very busy, and has prevailed with some under diverse considerations, or rather
consultations, which he has propounded unto them. But, oh Friends, be ye all
watchful, and take heed lest any of the testimonies of Truth be laid waste; for
that which leads to be weary of bearing witness to the Truth, and to lay it
waste, the same will lay thee waste, and bring thee into such a state, as thou will want the Truth to bear witness for thee; and though it be hard for flesh
and blood (which has no kingdom but here) to fall into the hands of
unreasonable men; yet it is a more fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God; and therefore let all luke-warm-ones, who are neither hot nor cold,
be now awakened, and all that have gone backwards be warned to return to their
First Love, else the Lord will come against them, and the day hastens that will
divide such their portion among hypocrites, except they repent.

But to touch at some of the Reasons or Arguments, which he that abode not in
the Truth himself, uses to draw others into this kind of treacherous
backsliding:

First, He appears to some to persuade them, That their former testimony was
born more from an immitation of others, than from a work of the power of God in
themselves; and that now, they not finding the thing required of them, they may
leave of their testimonies, or may do such things as they have denied formerly;
this snare does the Enemy make use of in these days. But mark who it is that
he has caught with it, none but such who sometimes were low in their minds,
and dare not grieve the Spirit of God in themselves, nor others, but for the
Truthsake could give up all things rather than their Testimony; but in time
growing careless, and loose in waiting, lost that subject state, and grew high
and exalted in their minds, above the Cross that should have crucified the
betraying wisdom; and so having lost the true exercise of the power, and the
feeling of the Excellency and worth of the Truth, they knew not the requirings
of the Lord; and the earthly mind got up, that placed a greater esteem upon
earthly things, than upon things that are eternal; and so things that once thou
offerest up to God, thou take again into thine own hand, and so robbest the
Lord, and growest careful about outward things, as other Gentiles are; and to
cover thy shame herein, the Enemy then tempts thee to belly the power that once
wrought in thy heart, and made thee afraid to act against the Light, or to deny
thy Testimony for God, in such things as was manifest, and then say, thou
did it by immitation; but thou shall know thy covering is too narrow in the
day that hastes upon thee.

Another Temptation that the Enemy presents, is, That though thou art
convinced what to do, or what thou should deny, yet the trials are so hard
and so many, and Persecutors wax worse and worse, so that thou shall not hold
out to the end; and where he can get entrance with this bait, he presently
causes an evil heart of unbelief and doubting to arise, which takes away even
the strength which the Lord did give, and so feebleness does enter the mind,
and a spirit of bondage leads thee to fear again; and then comes the dispute in
thy heart whether thou shall stand with the power of God in the obedience, or
whether thou shall fall under that power that arises against God, and his
Truth and People; and in this combat thou have a subtle Enemy, using many
devices to betray thee; and a part in thy self, not yet mortified, that is
ready to say, Pity thy self, pity thy Wife, pity thy Children, and pity thy
Relations; which, it may be sometimes, are all as so many Instruments of Satan
to seduce thee, and lead thee into darkness, that thou may not see so great
necessity in thy bearing up thy Testimony, as indeed there is, nor so great a
danger in the contrary as indeed there is.

Oh Friends, at such a time as this, where is there any help but in the Lord?
where can thou find a Savior but in that Light which gives to distinguish of
the several Voices: Now it is good for thee to remember that If thou walk after
the flesh, thou must and shall surely dye, and wither; in such a time flee,
flee to the Lord, wait in his dread to feel thy strength but renewed at the
present, and take no care for strength next month, next year, or next trial;
for God is God, and changes not, and will be the same to thee in seven trials
as in six, if thou believe and wait on him in uprightness; and therefore fear
not man, but trust in the Lord all ye that have known and felt his power, and
let not in the Enemy of your souls by the door of carnal reasoning, but keep
that shut; and rather consider, how the Enemy makes thee as a rejoicing among
his own Children, and strengthens that hope in them of their overcoming all
others, as well as thee; which hope is cursed, and shall be confounded: and
consider that if thou let fall thy Testimony, which thou have once born for
the Lord, thou make the heart of the Righteous sad, and make their travel
through that Testimony the harder for them, by reason of thy encouraging their
Adversaries by the hope aforesaid. And whatever thou do, they must go through
to the end, who will inherit the Crown of Immortality.

And again consider, It may be that thy backsliding, or cowardly drawing away
the shoulder, may prove a discouragement to others, and they may stumble in thy
stumbling, and fall with thee, and never be able to rise, and so thou bring
their blood also upon thee. Oh remember also, that servant of the Lord, who
could say, Psalm. 119.157. My Persecutors are increased, but my heart does not
decline thy Testimonies. That was a noble Spirit becoming the Soldiers of
Christ: yea, though persecuted by Princes, as he says, verse. 161.

Dear Friends, Let your minds be stirred up to be zealous for the Lord, in this
the great day of Controversy with darkness and its power; Who has God to bear
witness to his Name but you? Among whom has he made it known as among you? Who
have given up themselves to the Lord as you have done? Well, Blessed are they
that keep Covenant with the Lord, for they shall see his glory.

One more subtle snare of the Enemy in this matter, is in my heart to mention,
that is this, Viz. To persuade thee for once, sometimes to do that which the
Light has made manifest, with a purpose afterward to be more faithful. Oh
Friends, in the name and fear of the Lord, I exhort and warn you all to take
heed of this, for this will prove but a false confidence, thou will find this
kind of going out of the guidance of Truth, to be a dear out-going to thee; for
if ever thou do return, it will be very hardly, and with bitter anguish of
soul. Oh do not tempt the Lord on this wise, Lest it does prove impossible,
upon thy sinning willingly, to renew or restore thee again by repentance; thou will have my Pottage, but wilt lose the Blessing, though thou may seek it
with tears; for while thou wentest out, behold, thy way became hedged up, and
the Thorny-Nature gat up in thee, and so thou art debarred and fenced out from
enjoying thy former state; Sin being entered, Death soon follows. Oh remember
Sampson, who when he had disclosed the token of a Nazarite, in which state he
stood in Covenant with God; yet thought to have shaken himself, and to have
gone forth in his strength as at other times, but was mistaken, Judge. 16.20.
for the Lord was departed from him, though he knew it not. And so, though thou
have known the Lords presence and power in thy Vessel, yet take heed of letting
in that treacherous spirit, to lead thee to unfaithfulness, and to betray the
least of his Trusts and Testimonies committed to thee, though it be but for
once, for thereby thou will render thyself unworthy to be found a Witness of
his Power another time; for the Lord will leave that Vessel, and often does,
and chooses other Vessels to manifest himself in, that will be more true and
faithful.

So, Dear Friends, in true and tender Love I have laid these things before you,
that ye might all be stirred up and provoked to Love and to good Works, that ye
might abound in the grace committed to you; and none of you who have known the
Truth, might be entangled with the Wiles of your subtle enemy; and that you
that have begun well, might not lose the things that ye have wrought, but might
persevere in well-doing till ye have finished your course in peace. And
Friends, this is the joy and delight of those that labor among you in the
Lord, and hereby is our hand strengthened, and our hearts refreshed, when we do
find ye such as we desire ye should be, even steadfast in the Truth; and then
also do you find us to you-ward, such as ye desire we should be, even a
refreshing in the fellowship of life unto you, and our God comforts us
together, in the mutual joy and comfort of his holy Spirit, working in us and
you.

And Friends, I am the more drawn forth at this time to visit you with an
Epistle, because the Lord has given me some sight of his great and dreadful
Day, and Workings in it, which is at hand, and greatly hastens, of which I have
something to say unto you, that ye may be prepared to stand in his day, and may
behold his wondrous Working among his Enemies, and have fellowship with his
Power therein, and may not be dismayed nor driven away in the tempest, which
will be great.

And as concerning those succeeding times, the Spirit of the Lord has
signified that they will be times of horror and amazement, to all that have,
and yet do reject his Counsel; for as the days of his forbearance, warning and
inviting, has been long, so shall his appearance, amongst those that have
withstood him, be fierce and terrible; even so terrible, as who shall abide his
coming? for the Lord will work both secretly and openly, and his Arm shall be
manifest to his Children in both.

Secretly he shall raise up a continual fretting anguish amongst his Enemies,
one against another, so that being vexed and tormented inwardly, they shall
seek to make each other miserable, and delight therein for a little season; and
then the Prevailer must be prevailed over, and the digger of the Pit must fall
therein; and the confidence that men have had one in another shall fail, and
they will beguile and betray one another, both by counsel and strength; and as
they have banded themselves to break you, whom God has gathered, so shall they
band themselves against one another, to break, to spoil, and destroy one
another; and through the multitude of their treacheries, all credit or belief,
upon the account of their solemn engagement, shall fail; so that few men shall
count themselves, or what is theirs, safe in the hand of his Friend, who has
not chosen his safety and friendship in the pure Light of the unchangable Truth
of God; and all the secret counsels of the ungodly shall be brought to naught,
sometimes by the means of some of themselves, and sometimes by impossibilities
lying in their way, which shall make their hearts fail of ever accomplishing
what they have determined; and in this state shall men fret themselves for a
season, and shall not be able to see the hand that turns against them, but
shall turn to fight against one thing, and another, and a third thing, and
shall stagger, and reele in Counsel and Judgment, as drunken men that know not
where to find the way to rest; and when they do yet stir themselves up against
the holy People, and against the holy Covenant of Light, and them that walk in
it, they shall but the more be confounded; for they shall be helped with a
little help, which all the ungodly shall not hinder them of, to wit, the secret
Arm of the Lord, maintaining their Cause, and raising up a Witness in the very
hearts of their Adversaries to plead their Innocence; and this shall make them
yet the more to vex themselves, Isa. 8.
and to go through, hard-bestead; for when they shall look upward to their
Religion, to their Power, Policy, or Preferments, or Friendships, or whatsoever
else they had trusted in, and relied upon, they shall have cause to curse it;
and when they look downwards to the Effects produced by all those things,
behold, then trouble, and horror, and vexation takes hold on them, and drives
them to darkness; and having no help but what is Earthly, and being out of the
knowledge of the mighty overturning Power of the Lord God Almighty, they shall
despair and wear out their days with anguish; and besides all this, the
terrible hand of the Lord is, and shall be openly manifest, against this
ungodly Generation, by bringing grievous and terrible Judgments and Plagues
upon them, tumbling down all things in which their Pride and Glory stood, and
overturning, overturning, even the Foundations of their strength; yea the Lord
will lay wast the Mountain of the ungodly, Nahum 3.12, 13.
and the strength of the fenced City shall fail, and when men shall say, We
will take refuge in them, they shall become but a snare, and there shall the
Sword devour; and when they shall say, We will go into the Field, and put
trust in the Number and Courage of our Soldiers, they shall both be taken
away; and this evil also will come of the Lord, and his hand will be stretched
out still, and shall bring Confusion upon Confusion, Ruin upon Ruin, and War
upon War; and the hearts of men shall be stirred in them, and the Nations shall
be as Waters, into which a Tempest, a swift Whirlwind is entered, and even as
Waves, swell up to the dissolution one of another, and breaking one of another,
so shall the swellings of People be: And because of the hardship and sorrow of
those days, many shall seek and desire Death rather than Life.

Ah my heart relents and is moved within me in the sense of these things, and
much more than I can write or declare, which the Lord will do in the Earth, and
will also make have to accomplish among the Sons of Men, that they may know and
confess, That the Most High does Rule in the Kingdoms of Men, and pulls down
and sets up according to his own will; and this shall men do before seven
times pass over them, and shall be content to give their glory unto him that
sits in Heaven.

But, Oh Friends, while all these things are working, and bringing to pass,
repose ye your selves in the Munition of that Rock, that all these shakings
shall not move, even in the knowledge and feeling of the eternal power of God,
keeping you subjectly given up to his heavenly will; and feel it daily to kill
and mortify that which remains in any of you, which is of this World; for the
worldly part in any, is the changable part, and that is up and down, full and
empty, joyful and sorrowful, as things go well or ill in the World: For as the
Truth is but one, and many are made partakers of its Spirit, so the World is
but one, and many are partakers of the spirit of it; and so many as do partake
of it, so many will be straightened and perplexed with it; but they who are single
to the Truth, waiting daily to feel the Life and Virtue of it in their hearts,
these shall rejoice in the midst of Adversity; these shall not have their
hearts moved with fear, nor tossed with anguish because of evil tidings, Psalm.
112.7, 8. Because that which fixes them remains with them: These shall know
their entrance with the Bridegroom, and so be kept from sorrow, though his
coming be with a noise; and when a midnight is come upon man's glory, yet they
being ready and prepared, it will be well with them; and having a true sense of
the Power working in themselves, they cannot but have Unity and Fellowship with
the works of it in the Earth, and will not at all murmur against what is, nor
wish nor will what is not to be; these will be at rest till the Indignation
passes over, and these having no Design to carry on, nor no Party to promote
in the Earth, cannot possibly be defeated nor disappointed in their
undertakings.

And when you see Divisions, and Parties, and Rendings in the Bowels of
Nations, and Rumors and Tempests in the Minds of People, then take heed of
being moved to this party or to that party, or giving your strength to this or
that, or counselling this way or that way; but stand single to the Truth of
God, in which neither War, Rent nor Division is; and take heed of that part in
any of you, which trusts and relies upon any sort of the Men of this World, in
the day of their Prosperity; for the same part will bring you to suffer with
them in the time of their Adversity, which will not be long after; for
stability in that ground there will be none, but when they shall say, Come
join with us in this or that, remember you are joined to the Lord by his pure
Spirit, to walk with him in Peace and in Righteousness, and you feeling this,
this gathers out of all Buslings, and Noises, and Parties, and Tumults; and
leads you to exalt the Standard of Truth and Righteousness, in an innocent
Conversation, to see who will flow unto that; and this shall be a refuge for
many of the weary, tossed and afflicted ones, in those days, and a Shelter for
many whose day is not yet over.

So, Dearly beloved Friends and Brethren, who have believed and known the
blessed appearance of the Truth, let not your hearts be troubled at none of
these things; oh let not the things that are at present, nor things that are
yet to come, move you from stedfastness, but rather double your Diligence, Zeal
and Faithfulness to the Cause of God: for they that know the Work wrought in
themselves, they shall rest in the day of trouble, Yea, though the Fig Tree
fail, Hab. 3.16, 17.
and the Vine brings not forth, and the labor of the Olive Tree cease, and
the Fields yield no meat; and Sheep be cut off from the Fold, and there be no
Bullock in the Stall; Yet then may thou rejoice in the Lord, and sing
praises to the God of thy Salvation.

And how near these days are to this poor Nation, few knows; and therefore the
Cry of the Lord is very loud unto its Inhabitants, through his Servants and
Messengers, that they would prize their time while they have it, lest they be
overturned, wasted and laid desolate before they are aware; and before
destruction come upon them, and there be no remedy, as it has already done
upon many.

Oh LONDON, LONDON, that thou and thy Rulers would have considered, hearkened
and heard, in the Day of thy Warnings and Invitations, and not have persisted
in thy Rebellion, till the Lord was moved against thee, to cut off the
Thousands, and Multitudes from thy Streets, and the pressing and throngings of
People from thy Gates, and then to destroy and ruin thy Streets also, and lay
desolate thy Gates, when thou thoughtest to have replenished them again.

And, Oh says my Soul, that thy Inhabitants would yet be warned and persuaded
to Repent and Turn to the Lord, by putting away every one the evil that is in
their hearts, against the Truth in your selves, and against those that walk in
it; before a greater Desolation and Destruction overtake you.

Oh what shall I say to prevail with London, and with its Inhabitants! The Lord
has Called aloud, he has Roared out of Zion unto them, but many of them have
not hearkened at all, nor considered at all.

Well, Oh my Friends, (and thou, oh my Soul) return to your rest, dwell in the
Pavillion of the House of your God, and my God, and shelter your selves under
the shadow of his Wings, where ye shall be Witnesses of his Doings, and see his
STRANGE ACT brought to pass, and shall not be hurt therewith, nor dismayed.

Oh my Friends, in the Bowels of dear and tender Love have I signified these
things unto you, that ye might stand Armed with the whole Armor of God,
Clothed in Righteousness, and your Feet shod with the Preparation of the
Gospel of Peace: and freely given up in all things, to the disposing of the
Lord, who will deliver us, not by Might, nor by Sword, nor Spear, but by his
own eternal invisible Arm, will he yet save us and deliver us, and get himself
a Name by preserving of us; and we shall yet live to praise him, who is worthy
of Glory, of Honor and Renown, from the rising of the Sun, to the setting of
the same, now and for ever, Amen, Amen, says my soul.

THE END.
Faults escaped the Press.
In page 3. line 15. for obtained, read be attained. Page 9. line 24. for
preserve you for it is own, read preserve you: for it is one.


