GOD's ARRAIGNMENT OF ADAM: DECLARED In a Sermon preached at St PAUL'S, September.
5. 1658. before the right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council.

By Thomas Cartwright, M. A. of Queens Coll. Oxon. and now Vicar of Walthamstow
in Essex.

LONDON, Printed for John Baker, at the sign of the Peacock in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.

To the Right Worshipful and much Honored JOHN ROBINSON Esquire, Alderman, and
then Sheriff of the City of London.
SIR,
WHen your command gave life to this Sermon, I did not imagine that it could
have been exposed to any such uncharitable censures as might force it to return
to your name for shelter and protection; by which means I doubt not but it will
find better entertainment then it can deserve, or I hope for: For now unless
they resolve to run the hazard of a public disgrace, they must needs blush to
proclaim their dislike of that, which a person of so much honor and judgment
as yourself, was pleased (with many other good men) in the hearing to approve
of; and therefore I presume will not now dislike of. Sir, I knew when I
preached it, that telling the truth was not the way to insinuate into many of
my Auditors affections, and if I am therefore become their enemy, my case is in
this no worse then Saint Paul's, Gal. 4. ver. 16. Nor indeed are they such
Cato's, as that it should be punishment enough to be condemned by them; but
they rather publish the clearness of the light in declaring how offensive it
was to their e^es. The honey is never the worse, because it made their wounds
to smart: If Saint John Baptist had been only a shining and not a burning
Lamp, he might possibly have kept his head upon his shoulders: when the truth
shows it self, there is none can dislike it; but when it shows them, there are
many that hate it, because it gives Check-mate to their interest; and such I
hope will appear to be their displeasure, whose stomachs could not digest this
Sermon almost a quarter of a year after they received it. Wholesome meat must
not be kept from the table, because some agu^sh stomachs nauseate it. It was
delivered in as general terms as I could think upon, that so they who are angry
might accuse themselves.

Sir, If there be any thing in it that may be worthy of your perusal, be
pleased to accept it as your due, and a testimony of my gratitude; for having
run so long upon the score, till the interest of your favors exceeds the
principal of my abilities, rather then I would put off so noble a Creditor with
a Non sum solvendo, I thought it more commendable, with the bad borrowers of
our times, to begin the payment of great debts by such a slender composition as
this; there is a power in your aceptance to make its meanness fashionable, and
to teach others to have a more charitable opinion of

Sir, Your Worships most obliged servant and Chaplain, Tho. Cartwright.

GOD's ARRAIGNMENT OF ADAM.
Genesis 3. 9. And the Lord called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou?
NO Sooner does a man step out of Gods highway into the bypath of
wickedness, but he is traveling in the ready road to misery. Sin and
punishment like Hypocrates his twins go hand in hand together; so that as soon
as that unprofitable work of wickedness is done, the wages of death is ready to
be paid it; for as mercy will permit no good deed to go unrewarded, so justice
will let no bad deed go unpunish't: And if you trace these bitter streams, you
will find their fountain to be but a little above my text; in which you h^ve
the Judge of heaven and earth managing a legal (...)ss against our first
parents for the first breach of his Law, of which they were newly guilty; and
that he who is the rule of all justice and equity, might appear most perfect in
it himself, before he sentences the Delinquents he summons them before him to
plead to that Indictment which their own consciences had found against them,
which is summed up in my Text: in which I might observe; 1. The Judge, the
Lord. 2. The prisoner, Adam. 3. His Summons, he was called, as it were, to the
bar, and by his indictment, where art thou? i. e. in what condition, whether
guilty or not? But that my discourse may be the more methodical, I shall rather
divide the whole into two parts:

I. Magna vocantis benignitas, the great benignity of the party calling, which
appears if you look upon the words in these six senses, of which they are
easily capable; viz. As they are either.

1. Verba Judicis reum citantis: the words of a Judge to his arraigned
prisoner. 2. Verba patris filium increpantis: the increpation of a father
chiding his son. 3. Verba medici conf^ssionem morbi extorquere conantis: the
words of a Physician, inquiring into the condition of his patient. 4. Verba
creatoris, creaturae suae sortem commiserantis: the words of a Creator
commiserating the condition of his lapsed creature* 5. Verba Prophetae,
veritatem conditionis suae indicantis: the prophetical words of the God of
truth, declaring to Adam the truth of his condition. 6. Verba monitoris, culpam
suam in memoriam reducentis: the words of a monitor, putting the offender in
mind of his offense.
II. Magna vocati malignitas: the great malignity of the party called: viz. of
Adam, who because he offended first, must first be handled.

Now his offense was the eating of the forbidden fruit, which was the cause of
his fall from that state of integrity in which God had created him. But perhaps
you will desire that the Apostle Saint Paul may be admitted to plead for him, and
that I would take his words into consideration, 1 Timothy 2 14. Adam was not
seduced, but the Woman being seduced was in the transgression: and if so, how
coms it then to pass that he is charged here with delinquency in my text, and
that he himself confesses, ver. 12. That the woman gave him of the tree, and he
did eat.

For the better reconciliation of which two texts (which are not so unlike, but
that they may both be fathered upon the God of truth) consider,

1. That Adam was not seduced as was the woman, immediately, nor strictly and
externally by the fraud and discourse of the Serpent; nor before (as he was
created) but after her, and by her.

2. The Apostle does not treat so much of the seduction it self, as of the
manner and order of it; so that the wmman who was created last, ver. 13. (says
he) was seduced first, ver. 14 And this puts us in mind to consider, why it
then is, that God lays this charge to him particularly by name, and not rather
to her; for he does not say Eve, but Adam w^e^e art thou? which certainly was
because he was her Husband, and so consequently her head, and her superior:
from whence we may deduce these two conclusions: viz.

1. That the quantity of the offense is to be measured (amongst other
circumstances) from the quality of the offender.

2. That a superior shall be called to an account not only for his own, but
likewise for the offenses of those that are under him.

And first, of the former of the two: viz.

That the quantity of the offense, is to be measured (amongst other
circumstances) from the quality of the offender: for though Eve had sinned
first, yet Adam is summoned first, though she had first offended, yet was he
first blamed, because he was her superior and so should not have followed her,
especially when she did not follow the commands of her God.

The greatness of the man is so far from lesning, (...) it augments the
greatness of his offense. The higher God has placed them, the greater is their
fall, and so will their punishment be, for Gods laws are not like Cobwebs
which only catch the lesser flies; but amongst a multitude of delinquents, he
first takes care to cull out the fattest, and sacrifice them to his justice.
Laertius tells us of Diogene, that he complained, that the greater thieves in
his time did ordinarily punish the lesser, and yet secure themselves, that
secret thieves condemned open robbers; but when God comes to sit in judgment,
he will summon the biggest to the bar first, and make them give an exact
account of their misdemeanors, that so their punishment may be as exemplary as
their transgressions, and that they who went before others in sin, might
likewise go before them in suffering.

This then condemns all such corrupt magistrates, who like fishing-rods stand
ind^fferently strait, when a small fish is to be taken up, but bow and yield
when some greater one is to be hanged and drawn up; not considering that Gods
Vicegerents should be like himself, who is not (...), an accepter of persons,
but one who will set the saddle Acts 10. 34.
upon the right horse, punish the rich as well as the poor, the greatest as
well as the meanest men.

Examples work more upon most men, then precepts, who read lives more then
books; and therefore if they whose carriage should be as a looking-glass for
others to dress their lives by, shall represent false things to them, God will
quickly break them, that others may no longer be the worse for them: If they
who should not be a law to others, become a stumbling block, God will in mercy
to others take care to remove them out of the way.

Gods anger is hightned with men's ingratitude, and therefore when they whom he
has placed a degree above others, whether in knowledge or dignity shall fall
short of others in the practice of godliness, their knowledge being without
obedience, and their honor without holiness, will but serve to damn them the
more profoundly. In how sad a condition are these men who presuming upon such
like privileges have so grossly abused Gods love, as to side with the first
against the second Table of the Decalogue, boasting of their godliness, and yet
overlooking the punctilio's of upright dealing, whereas godliness and moral
honesty cease to be, by being parted. Certainly those that tread in that path
mistake the way to heaven; for the business of our salvation does not consist
in the keeping of Sabbaths and fasts, in repetition of long prayers, in
receiving of the monthly Sacrament; I doubt many Hypocrites have done all
these, and yet are damned into the bargain; he that does not go on farther, to
the observation of the second Table, must sit down on this side heaven: The
performance of some part of his duty will never apologize for the neglect of
the other, his keeping of fasts will never absolve him from breach of oaths.
His frequenting of Sermons will never make sacriledg a virtue; his long prayers
will fall short of acquitting him from oppression; nor will his configuring to
a form of Godliness ever make amends for his cheatings; his parts, places,
privileges and preserments, if not accompanied with righteousness to his
neighbors as well as holiness to his God, will ^e as so many milstones about
his neck to sink him the deeper into the bottomless pit of destruction. If the
magistrate ^hare in the peoples sins, the husband in his wifes, or the master
in his families, they shall likewise be the copartners with them in their
sufferings, and have the precedence then too as well as at other times. Though
Adam sinned after, yet ^as he called to an account before Eve.

And this calls upon me to insist on the second proposition, viz.

That a superior offending shall be called to an account, not only for his own,
but likewise for the offenses of those that are under him.

Because when he is with them in any villainy; they do offend (as they think) by
prescription, and so by prompting, or participating with them, he becomes
guilty of their crimes.

Alas! they think themselves privileged to sin with such Authors, as if the
conscienciousness of their duty were unmannerly (if not saucie) when it gave
check-mate to the crimes of their Superiors.

A Magistrate is as it were the Physician of his Subjects, upon whose
prescriptions their lives and safeties do depend; if therefore he either
administer things that are prejudicial to them, or by his ill example or
silence seem to countenance them, their blood may justly be required at his
hands: The Physician may easily be guilty of his Patients miscarriage, and if
his skill be not answerable to his profession, the more practice he has, the
more unhappiness: In him it is a greater fault to be accessory to a man's death,
than in any other, because it is a breach of trust.

Vt in corporibus, sic in imperio, gravissimus est morbus qui Plin.
a capite diffunditur: As in the body natural, so likewise in the Politic,
those diseases are most dangerous which seize first upon the Head. Superior
sibi indulgens peracerbus est in subditos: A Magistrate does not only hurt
himself, but his subjects by his sins; and therefore it is but reason that he
who multiplies other men's sufferings, should likewise himself be beaten with
many stripes.

When the Judges know not God who placed them in authority, and understand not
his Law, which should be a lanthorn to their feet, and a light to their paths;
when they will neither learn what is their office from others, nor yet
understand it of themselves; then all the foundations of the earth are Psalm.
82. 5.
out of course (says David;) all fundamental Laws, all commendable customs,
all good orders (which are the very basis and foundation of humane societies)
are broken: And therefore when they who should establish others, are themselves
unsettled; when they that like Atlas's should bear up others, shall stoop of
themselves, the manifold inconveniences that follow their offense will cry
aloud to the offended justice of heaven, to make them drink deep of the vials
of his vengeance.

Constantia praecepti est exemplum praecipientis, nutatmandatum quod non
stabilitur superioris, moribus: The confirmation of a precept is the example of
him that commands it; and the people look upon that Law as nulled and abrogated
which is not to be read in the lives of them who should enforce it, so that
their sins being both vicious and scandalous, must needs have a double
punishment.

Scarlet crimes are of a double dye, and therefore God will assuredly take the
more notice of them. If you whom God has placed higher then others, shall
offend him more highly then others, how can you flatter your selves with the
least hopes of escaping his fury? The fall of Lucifer was the more
impardonable, because it was a fall from heaven. Adams sin was the more
inexcusable, because 'twas committed by him the then Monarch of this lower
world. If Moses the Prince of God's peoplesin, how can be expect to enter into
the promised land? If Aaron the Priest (whose life and mouth should speak the
same Creed) offend, Gods wrath must needs be incensed against him. Tanto majus
peccatum esse cognoscitur, quanto major qui peccat habetur. Needs must it
grieve our Savior to be wounded in the house of his friends, and trouble him
much to consider, that one of his own Apostles should give the blow. That the
brutish Gadarens should esteem their swine above their Savior is no great
wonder; but that they who a^e in covenant with him should rather part with him
that their sins, is a prodigy; and therefore when they whom he has married to
himself in everlasting kindness, shall run a whoring after their own
inventions, a double punishment will certainly overtake them, and that for a
double reason:

1. Because they sin against a greater measure of knowledge than other men:
Ignorance may sometimes excuse in part, but knowledge does always aggravate a
crime. Weakness cannot mitigate more, than does wilfulness highten an offense.
They therefore that know their masters will, and do it not: they that have
graces, and employ them not; they that have talents, and improve them not; they
that see the right way, and yet will not walk in it, they deserve not more
pity, but more punishment than others.

2. Because they sin against a greater measure of mercies than other men, and
that speaks their unthankfulness. When God had done so much, that he could not
do more for his Vineyard, then certainly for it to bring forth wild grapes,
(...) served a curse. To whom much is given, of him will much (...) expected;
and to whom much is forgiven, of him will much be required. Where God sowes
benefits he expects to reap gratitude, (that is all the return we can make him
for his mercies;) and therefore when he misses that obedience which in duty and
gratitude we ought to have yielded him, no wonder if he pay us the wages which
are due to such disobedient and ungrateful servants as we are. If men abuse the
dignities and places with which God has entrusted them, to the scandal and
prejudice of those that are under them, their punishment shall quickly let them
know there is a God above them, who will summon them to give an account of
their Stewardship. The Inferior may first break the ice in sinning, but yet if
the Superior follow him, he shall have no other privilege but to be punished
before him. Eve first tasted of the forbidden fruit, but Adam must first taste
of the bitter consequences of it; for behold the great Judge of heaven and
earth calls him to the Bar to answer for both; Adam, where art thou?

Cavete quid facitis, Take heed what ye do, (remembering that that wit is
always better cheap, which is purchased with the fight of other men's
punishments, than with the feeling of your own) the higher is your place, the
greater will be your fall; and the greater your talents are, the more will you
suffer for the mis-imploiment of them. If you who should be like Constantine
and Theodosius, Scuta Christianorum, the bucklers of those Christian people
that are committed to your charge, shall butcher them, in betraying their
liberties and persons to the violence and malice of their enemies; if you who
are as it were the singers of that hand with which God does rule this part of
the world, shall favor some, fear others, and so not judge uprightly, God will
certainly sweep you away as he did Nebuchadnezar, with the besome of
destruction, till your bodies be brought to their graves, and your souls to
hell; and then shall the survivers take up this proverb against Isa. 14. 4.
you, as they did against the King of Babylon, and say, How have the oppressors
ceast, the golden city ceast? If you who should be the Keepers of the peace
both of Church and Sta^e, shall be Docti in perturb and a utriusque pace, more
ready to make than to hinder such uneven reckonings as fractions are, you may
expect that God should give you an exact and punctual payment at last. If you
who should lead others in the paths of truth and righteousness, shall either
lead them, or be led by them into the bypath of error and injustice, God will
summon you to the bar to answer theirs and your own transgressions. Adam was
concerned in Eves as well as his own offense, because God gave the Law to him;
and he by command to her, as committed to his charge; and therefore when he
permitted her not only to eat herself, but likewise to set his teeth on edge,
to taste of the forbidden fruit, he quickly heard of it on both ears; for
immediately after God comes to him with an unwelcom summons, saying, Adam,
where art thou? Which brings me to the second general part of my Text, viz.

2. Magna vocantis benignitas, The infinite mercy of God, in that he first
sought Adam, and called him to an account so soon after his transgression;
which will appear if you look upon the words in those six senses of which they
are capable, viz. as they are

1. Verba Judicis reum citantis, The words of a Judge to his arraigned
prisoner. God is not so prone to condemn men as willing to acquit them, and
therefore before he sentences Adam, he is willing to call him to the bar, and
to examine him what it is that he can say for himself; Adam, where art thou?
Though it is impossible for Adam to have done any thing which might escape
God's knowledge (he being acquainted with the very secrets of our hearts)
Judiciario tamen more interrogat Deus a reo id quod plane scit, ut vel hinc
discant Judices reum interrogare quod ipsi nesciunt, and Rupertus and Abulensis.
se scire praesumunt, ne quem inauditum damnent aut puniant: Yet that his
judgment might appear to be just, he proceeds legally against him, and asks him
that which he knew well enough before, that he might leave Judges a president to
ask the prisoner such things which they presumed to know, but might possibly be
ignorant of, and so by an overhasty judgment might condemn or punish them
before they heard them. God was willing to try whether Adam could clear himself
of the whole, or excuse himself in part of the crime: so that he chose rather
to conceal his knowledge of the fault, then to sentence the Delinquent, before
he had given him leave to make his defense. The Devil (that old Serpent) was
sentenced indeed without any summons, because 'twas impossible that he should
either clear his innocence, or make out his repentance. But God deals not so
with us, that we might not deal so with one another; for before Adam is
sentenced, he is summond to answer for himself, Adam, where art thou? From
whence we may draw these two conclusions, viz.

1: That it is a rash and overhasty judgment to pass sentence upon an
arraigned person, before we hear what it is that he can reply to his accusation.

2 That judgment treads upon the heels of a sinner.

Qui statuit aliquid parta inandita altera, aquum fecisset si nunquam
statuisset. It were better not to judge at all, then to do it before you lend an
equal care to both parties. A judge had need know that man well to whom he
trusts both his ears; nor can there be a greater blemish charged upon him,
than that he will believe the probable argument of a friend, before the
demonstration of an enemy; or that he cannot read any cause but through the
false spectacles of a favorite; by which means he can never clearly see what
it is that the plaintiff or the prisoner can plead for themselves. Though the
tempest were so great that the Ship was likely to be broken, and Jonah declared
to be the cause of the danger by the infallible oracle of heaven, yet the
Mariners (who are usually in a greater rage then the Sea it self) would Jonah
1. 8.
not cast him over board till they had put these questions to him; For whose
cause is this evil come upon us? What is thing occupation? whence come thou?
what is thy country? why have thou done this? what shall we do unto thee?

Quem sors judicaverat cogunt propria voce confiteri, (as it is in the
interlineary Gloss;) though the lot had judged him yet they asked him some
questions as forced him to confess it himself, before they put the judgment in
execution. Rei inauditi and indefensi tanquam innocents pereunt. It is as
justifiable to condemn an innocent person as one that is guilty before you have
heard what defense he is able to make for himself.



Take heed of being overcurious in observing or over-critical in judging a
mote in your brethrens eyes, lest they turn again, and to your greater shame,
reprove you for a beam in your own. Consider that charity will never make her
conclusions like those of the Syllogism, to follow the worser part, but the
better; nor will she judge men by a few actions (lest the sentence should fall
too heavy upon the righteous) but by all, and (as near as she can) square her
judgment according to that straight rule of the Schools, In judicandis aliis,
eorum bona certa meliora, certa mala minora; bona dubia certa; dubia mala nulla
judicemus. In the judging of others, let us reckon their certain good works to
be better than they are; their certain miscarriages to be lesser; if their good
deeds be doubtful, let us look upon them as if they were certain; if their
offenses be doubtful, let us judge them none at all. A doctrine that could never
be more seasonably pressed than in this age of ours, in which the multitude, like
flies that stick only upon sores, are apt to make even the precious ointment of
a good name unsavory; and such are those who will not be induced to believe
that any good thing can come out of Nazareth, I mean that any piety can lodge in
such men's breasts as are not of their party; and so being rapt with the pang of
a furious and misordered zeal, do judge, censure and condemn them, before ever
they hear what evidence they are able to produce of a power of godliness
working effectually in them beyond the bare form, of which they are perhaps
accused. They presume too much of themselves, who think they are as well
acquainted with their brothers transgressions as God was with Adam's, and yet
he was pleased to hear him before he judged him, to summon him before he
sentenced him, saying, Adam, where art thou? And thus much for the first
inference; the second follows, viz.

2. That judgment treads upon a sinners heels. No sooner had Adam tasted of the
forbidden fruit, but God called him to an account for his transgression,
saying, Adam, where art thou? Sin is not less old than Adam, and punishment is
altogether as old as sin; so that after his work is done, a sinner seldom
tarries long for his wages which is death. God is said to ride upon the wings
of the wind, to intimate that it will not be long before he overtake his
enemies. The gall of bitterness does immediately succeed the honey of sin; nor
do those rivers of unlawful pleasures ever leave running till they are buried
in the salt sea of miseries. Sin is like Gunpowder, no sooner touched with an
hot appetite, but it immediately flies in our faces; so that it is ill fighting
for the Devil (as a sinner does) since the presse-money that he gives them is
no small punishment, and it will not be long before he pay them to the full;
nay the more service his Soldiers do him, the worse it fares with them, for he
studies nothing more then how to torment them most; because their Tragedy shall
never have an Epilogue, he takes care that where old go off, new scenes of
miseries shall be ready to take their Cut's. So that sin and suffering are
relatives, near akin one to the other; they are but like the two neighboring
links of that chain in which a sinner is bound, the one hangs or borders upon
the other, so that he who bears one must bear both. Credas individuo nexu
sceleri illigatam poenam, aut inhaerentem calcaneo illius tanquam viperam.
Suffering is so firmly entailed upon sinning, that nothing but Gods mercy upon
our repentance can cut off the entail: For otherwise what Solomon says of one
holds true of every sin, ori Acts 28. 5.
novissimo mordebit, and he that would suffer no harm by it, must with St. Paul
(...), shake this viper into the fire, left it pull him into those unquenchable
flames out of which there is no escape.

If Adam offend against the law of God, his own conscience will be sure to
endite him, and the Judge of heaven and earth will call him to the bar, as he
did in the language of my Text, Adam where art thou? which may be considered,
Secondly, as they are,

2. Verba patris, filium increpantis; the words of a father, rebuking his son;
in which the affection of a father mitigates the severity of the judge. God is
not like that severe Roman, qui exuit patrem, ut consulem ageret, who put off
the father that he might put on the Consul; for he does not condemn Adam
without any more ado (as he did the lapsed Angels) but he gives him an
opportunity of repentance, and in tenderness calls him to him after his
delinquency, that so he might have an oppertunity to sue out his pardon: As if
he had said; O my son what is become of thy obedience and duty which thou owe
to thy father? how prodigal art thou of thy happiness? how quickly have thou
morgag'd that inheritance which I so lately settled upon thee in Paradise? how
earnestly do thou endeavor to disinherit thy self and thy posterity? art
thou so willing to divest thy self of the title of a son of God, to be styled a
slave of sin? do thou not foresee the dangerous consequences of this thy
disobedience? what will be the end of thy traveling on in this road? is it not
high time for me now to call thee to an account and to reckon with thee for thy
transgressions? how can thou possibly expect that I should spare thee any
longer whilst thou continuest in this perverse course; turn thine eye into
thine own breast and see what will become of thee: Adam, where art thou? which
may be wound up on this bottom, viz.



Dignus patre amor est, quem censura consileat. It is the commendation of a
fathers affection, when it can so allay the sowreness of a reproof that the
patient son may not digest it but relish it kindly. Thus did our Savior John
4. 19
Christ oblige the woman of Samaria even by the discovery of her shame; for
when he told her of her adultery she made no reply but this; Sir, I perceive
thou art a prophet, and immediately ministered unto him.

When the party reproved can perceive that the reproof is the result of the
reprovers love, he cannot choose but be in love with it; for the lashes of a
father are better then the kisses of an enemy; reproofs that are thus qualified
are like Seneca's poma suaviter aspera, Apples that have a pleasant sowreness
in them, and so are more acceptable to the best pallates then flattering
Sweetings.

Now that we may so correct our brother as not to corrupt him, we must come to
him as God here did to Adam in the cool of the day, when his passion is over;
and like the King of Bees, bring honey but no sting along with us; and this is
a lesson chiefly to be learned of them who are termed fathers of their country,
which very name carries clemency along with it.

Homer. (...). That so the greater is their power, the lesser may be their
passion. Set Moses's meekness as a pattern before you, and then though you do
rebuke men in hatred of their faults, yet you will do it in love and
long-suffering, remembering your selves to be his Vicegerents, who has said,
That he will visit their iniquities with stripes, nevertheless his loving
kindness will he not utterly take from Psalm. 89. 32, 33.
them; And thus did he deal with Adam, whom by a paternal increpation he
indeavor'd to move to repentance, saying, Adam, where art thou? which you may
look upon thirdly, as they are

3. Verba medici, confessionem morbi extorquere conantis: the words of a
Physician, inquiring into the condition of his patient. He does not condemn,
he does not reproach, he does not revile him, but makes a gentle search into
his disease, a meek inquiry into the state and condition in which he then was,
saying, Adam, where art thou? least the remedy should offend him more than the
disease.

Though he knew well enough where, and in what condition Adam now was, yet was
he pleased in starting this Quaere to tempt him to confession, and then by an
argument drawn from his present desperate condition to seek out for a Savior,
of which he could not but be the^ sensible how much need he had: as if he
should have said, Adam, how dishonorable is that which thou have lately acted,
to me, and how destructive to thy self? Do not thou feel an insupportable
burden upon thy shoulders? Does not the Law pursue thee for a rebel? Where
will thou take Sanctuary? There Is nothing wanting but execution to make thee
irrecoverably miserable: Give me leave to search thy soar, that so at length I
may salve it; tell me, how do thou feel thy self? Adam, where art thou? From
whence we may draw this conclusion, Viz.



The confession of our disease makes way for our Physician; which he that
neglects, does carelessly slight his own cure. Ipse sibi denegat curam, qui
suam medico non publicat causam. It Is bad to transgress, but it is worse to
deny it; for it is a sign that we are not sufficiently ashamed of the offense,
when we blush to confess it. Primae sanitatis pars, est velle sanari. The first
step to health is a desire to obtain it, which cannot be expressed without an
acknowledgment of our disease. He that is unwilling to discover his wound, is
not desirous to part with it: The beggar will freely show his rags as the best
invitation for your charity to relieve him. The Petitioner will neglect no
means possible of discovering his grievances, that so his Prince may be the
more graciously pleasad to redress them; The Malefactor must confess his crime,
before ever he be capable of a pardon. When a sinner is caught with the
Tempters hook, he must (as the fish Scolopendra does its bowels) cast it out
again by an humble confession, unless he desire to be further ensuar'd. Non
perit qui suum agnoscit errorem, an humble ack(...)ledgment of our sins to God
is the only way to smother them. 'Twas the Prodigals peccavi which moved his
father to make him so welcome. The Pharisees Non sum sicut (I am not like other
men) stopped the current of God's mercy; but the Publicans Miserere mei (Lord be
merciful to me a sinner) opened it. That therefore God may not impute our sins
to us, let us soundly aggravate them to our selves; for the only way possible
to hide our sins from him, is to lay them open before him, from whom indeed
they can never be hid. When he call us to confession, we must answer at the
first word, if we do expect the benefit of an absolution.

That the Surgeon might search his Patients sore, and so apply a suitable
plaster to it, he bids him open it; and thus did God deal with Adam, saying,
Adam, where art thou? which words may, fourthly, be looked upon as they are,

4. Verba creatoris, creaturae suae sortem commiserantis: The words of a
Creator, commiserating the condition of his lapsed creature and so they are
Verba dolendi, words of pity; and as much as if he had said, Alas! thou art
upon the brink of destruction, thou art become the most sad object that ever
eye shall bedew with tears of pity. Thou were clothed with innocence, but now
art thou naked! What Is become of that image after which I formed thee? Who has
robbed thee of those graces with which I beautified thy soul? What witness
rises up against thee? Quis test is adest, quis detulit? (who pursues thee?
what is the meaning of those blushes, those fig-leavs? I left thee in one place,
but I am now to seek thee in another: Whither fliest thou? Adam, where art
thou? From whence we may infer,

That a just man is always in Gods presence, but a sinner flies from it.

Cain had no sooner stained his soul with his brothers Abels blood, but he went
out of the presence of the Lord. Adam had no sooner committed the trespass, but
he fled for it* when he was just and upright, he walked before God, but now
having transgrest he is sought out by God, Adam, where art thou? There is this
evil (which indeed is the cause of all other) entailed upon sin, that it makes
a sinner as it were a stranger to God; it blo^s such out of the book of his
remembrance, and when he comes to make up his jewels he casts them aside with a
Nescio vos. I know you not, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Is not sin a
strange defacing of the soul, when he that first made it, does not then know
it? Desperate must needs be the condition of that creature, of which the
creator himself seems to be ignorant; and were there no other Hell this would
make it a kind of damnation to be a sinner.

Amongst others of Gods names in Hebrew [ Machon] is one (which signifies a
place) and therefore the question was most pertinent whereby God enquires of
Adam where he was, since he moved not in his proper orb, since he was not to
be found in his right place, Locus enim hominis Deus est, extra quem nusquam
been est. He Rupertus.
that is not in God (not interested in him) is not in his proper place, and the
farther he strayes from him, the nearer does he draw to misery.

It Is a sign he is not where he would be, when God and his conscience or any
other messenger, propound this question to him that he did to Adam, saying,
Adam where art thou? which may be considered, fifthly, as they are.

5. Verba prophet^ veritatem conditionis suae indicantis. The prophetical words
of the God of truth declaring to Adam the truth of his condition. Adam where
art thou? And so the interrogation is a most keen and vehement form of
assertion, whereby God (does not doubt himself but) labors to certify Adam of
the truth of his condition, viz.

arrest of Gods judgments, but he who searches all, will find him out in any
place, so that he can never be safe till he be at peace with his maker; for
there is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. Qui in peccato est, in
perditione est. He that drinks in iniquity like waters is plunged over head and
ears in miseryes; and this was that Doctrine, which God here preached to Adam
so soon after his fall. As if he should have said in other terms. Adam, deceive
not thy self with those fig leaves, let the woman no longer beguile thee, nor
the serpent both of you; for you have lost your innocence, and in that your
happiness. Do you not now see what a cheat the Devil has put upon you? and how
by crediting the father of lies before the God of truth, you and your posterity
are fallen into his hands? do you not perceive what a change is wrought in you
for the worse: Heu Quantum mutatis ex ipso? I made you, but you have marred your
selves; consider what I did for you, and how your have undone your self: I left
you in a far better condition then I now find you; turn your eye into your own
breast, and there read the truth of your present condition, let not your heart
deceive you, deal impartially with your self, what a strange alteration has a
few hours made in thee? Adam where art thou? And thus I am come to the last
acception of which the words seem capable, viz. as they are,

6. Verba monitoris culpam suam in memoriam reducentis: the words of a monitor
putting the offender in mind of his offense; for God does not ask, as if Adams
iniquity were hid from his eyes, but that he might lay it open to his own.
Compare this former with thy present condition. Qualis ex quali factus? What Is
become of the serpents promises and thy vain confidence in them? What Pannick
fear is that which has now seized upon thee? Thy flight proclaims thy guilt;
thou did not seek such starting-holes as these during the time of thy
innocence; see what a kindness thy sins has done thee to turn thy love into
fear, and to teach thee to fly from thy God, whom before thou did seek will
all thy heart; compare thy former happiness with thy present misery, that so
thou may regain by repentance, what thou have already lost by disobedience.

Adam where art thou? so that two things may we learn from hence; the one from
the matter, the other from the form or manner of this reproof.

God goes but slowly when he goes about to punish, that so the sinner repenting
of his sins may escape his judgments; like a tender father he enquires after
his prodigal son, when he had lost and forgot himself, and having found him
puts him in mind of the ruin into which his riot will bring him, and if he
will be wooed to a return, he will meet him half way and embrance him. When the
sinful offspring of Adam do like their forefathers run from God, he is
pleased in mercy to follow them; and to draw nigh to them, that so they may no
longer estrange themselves from him, and to put them in mind of the right way,
that so they may no longer run on in their Erroneous courses.



Has not he caused his messengers to sound their woes in our ears before ever
he sent them into our bosoms? Was not the sword of vengeance first shook over
our heads, and then sheathed in our bowels? and yet do we continue in our sins
with as little regret as formerly? Consider that he is now pleased to allow
another opportunity of laying to heart the hainousness of our sins; and
therefore let us pray unto the Lord that he would give us grace in this our day
to mind the things that concern our peace before they be hid from our eyes.

2. And as God dealt with Adam when fallen, so ought Gal. 6. 1.
we to do, with our brother when overtaken in an offense; for when we see him
offend God and do no^ reprove him for it, we do as much as in us lies, justify
him. In omnibus peccantibus pecco, quando eos quos scio Prosp. de vit. contempt.
peccore quadam crudeli, animi malignitate non increpo: It is cruelty and not
charity to see your neighbor out of the way, and not to labor presently to
reduce him, and that with meekness too, that a rebuke may not be construed for
a reproach, which that God did to Adam is deducible from the manner of this
reproof, it is a gentle one, from whence it follows, in the second place,

When we hate a person, we hate to name him, and therefore when Saul sought
David in indignation, he did not say, where is David? but where is the son of
Ishai? the Jews did not say, where is Jesus? but where is that fellow? but that
God might declare that sin it self should not alienate his love from his
creature, though Adam had offended him, yet he allowed him his proper name,
saying, Adam where art thou?

Quicquid enim exacerbat animo dixeris, punientis est impetus noncorrigentis S.
August.
charitas. Charity is such an enemy to passion that if your rebuke be perceived
to have any of that corrupt mixture in it; the patient to whom you tender it,
will never be induced to follow it. A reproof must be handled not like a sword
but a lancet, so it must not be the enemy, but the Phisician that does the
cure; and twill commend his skill if he can hide the point of it till the smart
be over, for then will they reward that as a courtesy which otherwise they
might possibly have looked upon as a piece of cruelty. Reproofs candyed over
with good words like gilded pills looks pleasantly, are swallowed suddenly,
and work kindly. Though Adam had provoked God highly, yet was he pleased to
give him a fair and gentle summons in the words of my Text, saying, Adam, where
art thou?

And now to apply the whole, let me beg of you to examine your selves, whether
your own consciences, and your Ministers, have not frequently called upon you
to behold where you are; whether in a state of grace, or under a sentence of
condemnation? whether in the narrow path that leads to life, or the broad road
that leads to destruction? I will not throw the first stone at you, your own
actions will best acquaint you with your deserts. Consider therefore, could
your consciences plead not guilty if you were indicted for dishonoring God, for
contemning Christ, for wounding and blaspheming his Holy Spirit? for crumbling
his Sion into factions? for calling Religion to help out your faulty wares? for
citing the name of God to make up weight and measure? for leaving good counsel
at the Church where you heard it? for looking upon honesty as the birthright
of fools? for scrambling for your particular interests, and not minding the
public good (as if in the safety of the whole were not contained the good of
each individual). Have you not against your own eyes and consciences complied
with the public sins of the times? Have you not eaten out the power of
godliness by your corroding and satirical censures of them that differ from you
in forms of worship? and has not that your prejudice like a sullen Porter kept
better company out of your affections than ever it let in?

Whilst others were casting lots for Christ's coat, have not you made it your
business to divide it? if you have, the weakest-sighted man in the world may
read without the help of any other spectacles than your own actions where you
are. Into what dregs of times are we fallen, when men's consciences are so
seared, their senses so stopped, their foreheads so steeled, their hearts so
hardened, so much carnal bias clapped upon their souls, that all the art and
industry which we can use, cannot keep them strait, but they will still run
aside after their own inventions. O that remedies were as easy as complaints!
Has not this Iron-age of ours out done all before us in villainies? Were there
ever so many the Devils factors amongst us as now, who make it their busines^
to drive on the interest of hell? ^la^l how sensibly does the deluge of sin
prevail over us? Is not Christ again put to open shame, whipped, scorned, and
crucified; th^ugh his person cannot be reached are not these affronts and
injuries put upon his Spouse the Church? Nay farther, do not men please and
flatter themselves in these misch^efs? and pretend to do God good service in
killing his Son? Is it possible that you should style your selves men after
Gods own heart, and yet do what his soul abhorrs? Can Hypocrites, can
adulterers, can extortioners, can uncharitable Nabals, can factious disturbers
of the peace of Jerusalem ever attain to that height of presumption, as to
dream that their names are enrolled in the catalogue of life? If such as these
be Christians, who are Scythins? If these Saints, who are Devils? if these be
God's favorites, who are his foes?

Do you think to purchase heaven wi^h as much ease as you have done, it may be
an opinion of sanctity in your deluded brothers breast? Alas! it is not your
hypocritical faces, your artificial tears, your long prayers, your civil
language, your aguish holiness which takes you by fits, nor is it your frequent
attendance in this place that will do it. It is not every one that cries Lord,
Lord, who shall presently enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

How ambitious are you to be accounted just and merciful, and yet how unwilling
to be so? What severe censurers are you of your own crimes in other men's
persons, and how negligent of others in your own? What a sin is Drunkenness in
the Temple, and yet what a blessing in the Tavern? How loud are you against the
sins of the times when before others, and yet how closely do you hug them when
you are by your selves? How freely do you spend your censures upon so many of
your brethren as without scruple do any of those things which you upon false
grounds have fondly condemned as utterly unlawful? and yet how angry are you,
when upon such just grounds they style you uncharitable? Have you not first
l^^t your reason, and then your modesty in your sins? act^ng upon the open
st^ge what at first you did but behind the cu^tains, and saying in the
blindness of your heart, Tush, God does not see it: And therefore does not a
parasite find better entertainment amongst you then a Prophet? As if you had
rather be cozened with a flattering li^, than cured with a galling truth. What
murmurings, what d^^contents, what repinings are there continually amongst you?

Did you formerly surfeit upon peace and plenty, that you now nauseate even the
best of Gods blessings? Suppose God should not strike off your chariot wheels
till you were in the red sea; suppose he should no^ cu^b or check you in this
your careere by your ministers, or judgments, what incredible have would you
make into the bottomless pit? But consider in this your day that he does once
more stretch for^h hi^ hand to a gainsaying, and rebellious people: He now
calls upon you as a Judge, to try whether you can acquit your selves of the
whole, or excuse your selves in part of these crimes, these crying sins that
are laid to your charge. Does he not sometimes cause your consciences to reado
you that sentence of condemnation under which you lie, that so if by any means
possible he might move you to repentance: Does he not mitigate the severity of
a judge with the tenderness of a father, and show how unwillingly? he is to
disinherit you; and how desirous rather that you should return and live. Does
he not like a Physician make a search into your disease, the sad condition in
which your souls lie? That so having made you sensible of your distemper and
danger you may be desirous of a cure. Does he not call to you in pity, and
show you how you are even upon the brink of destruction, so that there is
hardly a hairs breadth between you and misery? Has he not frequently declared
to you by his prophets, in how unsafe a condition you are, and how much at a
loss, if he should call you ^o an account for your stewardship? Has he not now
sent me to tell you that if you knew where you were, in what a sinful, and so
miserable condition, your hearts (...) gush out at your eyes in tears of pity
for your selves? Hearken then to this voice (as Adam did to Gods) all ye that
have his fear before your eyes, and especially you that are superiors; for your
charge is greater then other men's, you have received more talents and so have a
greater account to give in the last day; consider that you are now in the
Church reaping that benefit from us, which we may expect from you when in your
counsels; and therefore when ever you sit down to consult, remember the Church
and servants of God, that when we kneel down to pray, we may not forget the
State and hers.

FINIS.

