MALICE Against MINISTRY MANIFESTED By the Plain and Modest PLEA and DEFENSE OF
ZACH. CROFTON Minister of the Gospel at Buttolphs Aldgate London Unto the False
and Frivolous Charge of Tho. Harrison, and John Levet against him exhibited
unto the Commissioners for the Ejection of Ignorant, Scandalous and
Insufficient Ministers, etc. within the City of London. In which you have His
Past Credit Attested. Present Plea demurred. Particular Articles duly and
distinctly answered.

Acts 26.2. I think my self happy King Aggrippa, because I shall this day
answer before thee of all things whereof I am accused by the Jews. Neque tu
bonus Poeta esses, si preter legem carminis caneres; Neque ego Civilis Praetor
essem, si preterquam quod leges permittunt tibi gratificarer. Themi. ad Sim.
London, Printed for James Nathal, and are to be sold at his house in the
Minories next door to the Dolphin, and at Booksellers Shops, 1657.

To the Right Worshipful and Reverend, The Commissioners for the Ejection of
Ignorant, Scandalous and Insufficient Ministers, etc. within the City of London.
Right Worshipful and Reverend Sirs,
THIS ensuing plea is to you presented, not as a Book which begs your
Patronage, nor yet to prejudge the cause before you depending, or in the least
to supersede your proceedings, but to acquaint you with the real truth to
facilitate your debates, and answer the desire of some among you, whom (if I
did not mistake) I heard (in my last appearance before you) say, They expected
my answer in writing, which now you have; and this Epistle is to apologize this
public approach unto you: unto which I have been constrained By your multitude
to whom one Copy could be little advantage, and transcription is a burden I
cannot bear, and I believe your Clerks would find very heavy: By the clamors of
mine enemies who have loudly said, They had laid in before you a Charge, by
which they should discover me to be the vilest Minister in England, even more
vile then those Centuries silenced by the late Committee for plundered
Ministers: and therefore did provoke my friends to persuade me to run away, and
(have since my appearance) clamored that I cover my guilt by denying your
cognizance; and demur to your jurisdiction, because I dare not plead to the
charge; hereby the world may see the charge though detecting some infirmities
is not so criminal; and although I would not represent you arbitrary who are
bound up to a law; and therefore by advice of Counsel learned in law, I have
demurred; yet I had a full answer ready on which I dare join issue. By the
pragmatick readiness of some over-busie spirits to be printing the passages of
last days proceedings (which was by a Printer of my acquaintance
providentially prevented:) lastly, I have made thus bold to entreat a speedy
result of your present debate, that if within your cognizance we may proceed to
trial: if not you will please judicially to declare it so, and not keep it in
deck and me and my people under suspicious delays: mine accusers have said it
shall be Lady Day before it be by you decided: but I hope you will consider the
great work of God upon my hands, and one way or other set me at liberty: and
if (as mine accusers blaze abroad) the charge be to be returned to his Highness
and Council (whose cognizance I cannot but believe it is much below) I crave
that you will please with the charge to return this plea, that if possible by
it their prejudice against me may be removed, and I and my people (by their
favor) be restored to our Sabbaths liberty in our own Church; and erroneous
John Simpson be removed from among us: the which if you, or any of you, could
obtain in our behalf, our restored peace and order, the advancement of Gods
truth and ordinances should be your blessing; and I should be no more suspected
of disaffection to the present Government then I was before his intrusion.
Worthy Sirs, I will hold you no longer, save to tell you, I doubt not but you
see how ready Satan is to make use of you (who are piously intended to reform
the Ministry) unto the ruin of this holy function: and how ever it may fare
with me, I hope it will make you cautious what charge and by what kind of
persons is laid against a Minister: and if I have offended in coming a little
out of my way to meet you with this answer, I pray remember you stepped something
out of your way to call him hither, who is

From my Study in Covent Garden in the Parish of Butolphs-Aldgate this 8. of
December, 1657. Your humble Orator expecting your piety and justice, ZACH.
CROFTON.

MALICE against MINISTRY MANIFESTED. By The modest Plea and Defense of ZACH.
CROFTON unto the false and frivolous Charge against him exhibited unto the
Worshipful and Reverend, The Commissioners for ejection of Ignorant, Scandalous
and Insufficient Ministers within the City of London, by John Levet, and Tho.
Harrison, and other their anti-ministerial Confederates in the Parish of
Botolphs Aldgate: as it was prepared, and purposed to be declared at the
Guild Hall on Wednesday, the 2 of December 1657
I Am here convened before you, under the Notion of a Scandalous man in life
and conversation; and on that account to be ejected out of the Ministry. The
Ministry of the Gospel I know to be so sacred a Function of approach to God,
as that Holiness should adorn the subjects of it: A Ministers practice I well
know is so obvious to the peoples view, that he that is profane, must needs
unprofitably preach the Word of Holiness: it has ever been a Petition in my
Lerany, From an ignorant and profane Ministry, the scandal of Christianity,
Good Lord deliver us. And on that account I have in my late A Book so called.
Right Re-entred declared to all the world, and told mine enemies, I am so
zealous for a pious Ministry, that let me but have just Judges, judicial
Process, and faithful Witness, and if I be found guilty of a scandalous
conversation, let me be cast out as unsavory salt; for though I cannot bear
recrimination, as the answer of my Right yet I desire not to retain forfeited
privileges, the forfeiture being regularly demanded. Hereupon the enemies of
my Ministry having loudly clamoured, that I was a person vile and scandalous,
and that they may audacter calumniare, reproach with impudence, not doubting,
but that though they miss their design, they may with so much impudence make
some dirt to stick. To this end they have exhibited a charge in sundry Articles
against me, unto which I now appear to give this ensuing answer.

Articles exhibited against Mr. Zachary Crofton of Buttolphs Aldgate, London,
To his Highness the Lord Protector and Council, by John Levet of the said
Parish.
I. AT his first coming into the Parish, some difference fell betwixt him and
the Inhabitants, whereupon the Church Wardens and some others, went up to him in
the Vestry-house, where he questioned the Church Wardens and some others, why
they had brought so many of the inhabitants thither, and told them, That he
desired but twenty or thirty of the names of the chief of the Parish to consult
withal, whereupon M. John Farmantle, then Constable, asked him, What he would
do with the names of those persons that he knew not? then the said Crofton
replied, What is that to you if I consult with the Devil to know what they are.
Whereupon William Turner, then Constable, answered him, If you have so much
familiarity with the Devil, you are no fit Parson for us. And the said Crofton
replied, What have you to do with that? or words to that effect.

II. M. Sabine (one of M. Croftons friends) says, That a little time after M.
Crofton came to preach at Aldgate, asked of him, By what power he came thither?
and he answered him, By my Lord Protectors. Then said M Sabine, Why then
observe ye not his Highness Orders, concerning the days of Fasting, and days
of Thanksgiving, and praying for his Highness? M. Crofton answered him, An
honest man may receive a courtesy of a Thief upon the high way, or words to
that purpose.

III. Some of the parish being given to understand that M. Crofton had been at
Whitehal with a Petition to his Highness, desiring as they were informed to
have a hearing of the business concerning his uncivil behavior used toward
his maid, upon which two of the Common Council men, and another person went to
the house of the said M. Crofton to give him an account that he had been (as
they understood) with M. Maline, and clamourd them against them, upon which the
said persons told him, They were ready and willing to make good whatsoever they
had said against him; and in order thereunto were resolved to Petition his
Highness for a hearing, upon which the said Crofton replied, The Protector was
no competent Judge, for that he had prejudged him already, in giving away half
his Pulpit to M. Simpson. And further, said, He was an unrighteous Judge, for
he that shall make a nose of Wax of the Law, as he has done, was an
unrighteous Judge, or words to that effect.

IV. The uncivil behavior of the said Crofton used toward his maid servant,
Mary Cadman, as appears by Affidavits taken before the Master of the Chancery;
as also the examinations of several, taken before the Commissioners, ordered by
his Highness the Lord Protector, to examine the same; all which lie before his
Highness at this present.

V. That whereas there was an Order granted by his Highness the Lord Protector
and the Council (to confirm the former Order for M. John Simpsons preaching on
the Lords day in the afternoon (as usual) and a Lecture on one of the week
days) dated the 4 of August 1657. The Churchwardens, according to their duty,
carried the said Order to the said M. Crofton, who read the same, and then
demanded, Where they had it? they answered, From my Lord Protector and the
Council. Nay, said M. Crofton, you mean you had it from the Common Council; and
said, he knew not the hand, and that the Order did not concern him.
Notwithstanding this, he having performed his morning exercise on the Lords
day, being the 9 of August, he there continued in the Pulpit, and several
others with him in the Church, and went not home, as is usual, which caused
many people from several parts to flock about the Church, seeing the said
Crofton to keep the Pulpit, and Constables staves brought to the Church out of
Middlesex to guard him by the said persons to whom the staves did belong they
being Constables and Headboroughs of Middlesex caused a great disturbance. The
Constables, whose charge it was to see the peace kept, and that no disturbance
might arise, went into the Church with one of the Churchwardens, about one of
the clock, in a peaceable manner, to know whether M. Zachary Crofton would obey
his Highness and Councils Order, upon which one of the Constables of Middlesex
aforesaid; thrust both the Constable and Churchwatden who only went to perform
their duty.

VI. That on the next day, being the 10. of August, the said M. Crofton got a
Warrant from a Justice of Peace to apprehend Edward Tench and Antony Finch,
Constables. (which did their duty according to his Highness and Councils Order)
and after the Warrant Signed and Sealed by the Justice, the said Crofton did of
himself interline and put in the name of one Roger Waldin, who was the
forementioned Churchwarden in the fifth Article; and apprehended the said
Waldin and carried him before a Justice of Peace for a disturber, which upon
examination was found to be none.

A true Copy. William Avery John Levet. Tho. Harrison.


Additional Articles exhibited by the major part of the Common Council, the
Churchwardens, and diverse of the Inhabitants of the Parish of Buttolph without
Aldgate, against Zachary Crofton Minister there.
I. THat on the 16 day of August last, being the Lords day, the said Zachary
Crofton in the public meeting place of Aldgate, in his public Exercise or
Sermon, did say, That Moses could prevail with the Lord by Prayer, but he could
not prevail neither by Prayer nor Law, because that ungodly men have prevailed
with the unjust Judges of this Nation, who have gone contrary to their Oath,
tyrannically disinheriting him of his right, and letting of an erroneous
turbulent spirit enjoy it.

II. And that their sword was the Law, and therefore their tyranny was the
greater, whereunto Law cannot reach.

III. And that if that he were to plead his cause, with either Gody or honest,
Pious, or Civil, Modest, or Just Judges, according to Law, he was confident he
should enjoy his right: and said that the wickedness of ungodly man has so
prevailed against him, with the tyranny of unjust Judges, that he is enforced
to leave his right, and if any of the Souls of his people be damned, for ought
he knew, their blood would be required at the hand of the unjust Judges or the
Erroneous Intruders.

IIII. The said Zachary Crofton, on the day and at the place above mentioned
did further say, I have received an order for Simpsons teaching in my Pulpit,
and I am here to surrender my just reentred right to Simpson, contrary to all
Law right and reason, and as a certain king said, what I will do I will do; so
I am disreentred by that power, that what they will do they will do contrary
to all Law, right and reason.

V. That on the Third day of September last, it being a Commanded public day
of Thanksgiving for the Victories of Dunbar and Worcester, the said Zachary
Crofton would not Preach himself that day, nor suffer any other to Preach that
day in the Public meeting place at Aldgate.

That on Monday the 21. of September last it being the day appointed according
to the Annual Custom for a thanksgiving to the Lord for his Mercies to the
Trained bands of Algate (amongst others) at the memorable fight at
Newberrie-Wash the said Zachary Crofton was requested by the inhabitants of
Aldgate Parish who had been Soldiers in that fight to give leave to M. John
Simpson to Preach them a Sermon in the public meeting place at Aldgate, but
the said M. Crofton would not give leave, so the said inhabitants were forced
to have their Sermon at Katherine Creed-Church a Neighbor Church.

A true Copy. William Avery. John Levet. Thomas Harrison.


I am a Man, and so subject to infirmities, and hard it will be to pass through
the sieve of envy, and rake of malice, and have the whole course of my life
reviewed by revengeful foes, and not something of guilt found, which may be
charged and must not be denied; but yet though as a man I have been surprised
with some failings, yet this I have to say, That as a Minister I have (by Gods
grace) for more then fourteen years exercised this holy calling, not only
without the least clamor and charge of scandal; but with the fame and repute of
a godly man among such as are godly, both Ministers and people; to the evidence
of this, I crave that your Clerk may read these annexed Certificates from the
people and Ministers among whom I lived in the Country before I came to London:

Newcastle in Staffordshire.
WHereas we are given to understand that it is most wickedly and maliciously
reported that Mr. Zachariah Crofton our late Minister, now Preacher at James
Garlick-hill in London, was in the time he lived amongst us, known to be a
Malignant, and Scandalous man in life and conversation, and was for his
Malignancy and Scandal, from us removed: We do hereby certify and declare to
all men, that he was never charged with, nor amongst us so much as suspected of
malignancy, but well known for his integrity to the Parliament of England, and
that as to his carriage amongst us, he was not only painful and faithful in
preaching to us the word of truth in soundness, to the profit and good of many
a soul amongst us, and in the Country about us, but also clear from all
scandal in his conversation and well reputed among us for his piety, and never
was from among us removed upon the account of malignancy or scandal, in witness
hereof, we have set our hands, the twentieth of August 1653.

John Hill, Major Joseph Sond Minister of Newcastle Tho. Lawton Walter Bagnall
Richard Orine Schoolmaster Randle Bagnal Aldermen. Richard Bagnal Aldermen.
Randolph Shaw Aldermen. Richard Heath Aldermen. Richard Bowker Aldermen. Ralph
Keeling Aldermen. Thomas Bagnall Thomas Low, Bailiffe Thomas Harrison Richard
Harrison Richard B^lton Randolph Lovet William Bret Richard Bradshaw Thomas
Shaw William Waklate Matthew Pain Tho. Wood John Brooks John Harrison James
Tarbuck John Burgis Georg Richardson Gilbert Hill Matthew Rock Thomas Knight
William Harrison John Butler Churchwarden. Richard Cook. Samuel Bagnal John
Jennings John Harrison Richard Harrison Matthew Bowcar William Beard.


Sept. 16. 1653.
WE whose names are subscribed being Inhabitans in the Parish of Wenbury in
the County of Chester, do hereby certify to all those whom it may concern,
that Mr. Zachary Crofton was Minister in the said Parish from September 1649
for the space of two years and upward, all which time with diligence and godly
zeal he did Preach unto us the Word of Truth, Administer the Sacraments, and
Catechize the younger sort of Christians. His Doctrine was pure and Orthodox, so
far as we are able to judge, his Conversation honest, and such as became the
Gospel of Christ; his Reputation with the Ministry and godly Christians in the
County was unspotted, his Company desired, and since his departure hence to
London, his absence very much lamented; all which we shall further testify as
occasion shall be offered.

John Massy Nicholas Wilson Thomas Morris Richard Savage William Hall Hugh
Hall Richard Lewis Ralph Yeavison Peter Jackson John Fisher. John Barrow Thomas
Brees Richard Heighfeild Randal Ankars George Hall Thomas Gray Edward Hamnet
Robert Tricket Hugh Massy Jonathan Ball James Barnit Thomas Caldecot John
Savadge John Sproston Jo. Broster Ludim John Vernon Henry Woolrich William
Wollrich, Thomas Colesacks John Wilkison Thomas Wolam Richard Jackson William
Howpar Thomas Tensh George Bennifield Thomas Gray Thomas Spencer William
Manwaring Edward Palin Joseph Palin Ar. Cartwright George Starkey William
Cudworth Fench Yeaman Thomas French Ralph Preese William Rogers Thomas Rogers
William Milliton Richard Rogers Randle Hare John Daxon William Wicksteed John
Twis John Lunt John Woolrich.


November the 5th. 1657.
WE the Ministers of the Gospel in the County of Chester, and parts adjacent,
do upon our personal knowledge of M. Zachary Crofton, now Minister of Bottolphs
Aldgate, London, certify, That he lived, and constantly exercised his Ministry
among us for many years together, during which time he was highly esteemed by
our selves and such as feared God among us, and that as well for the Grace of
God in him witnessed by his holy and unblameable conversation among us, his
Sober and Modest behavior in his own Parish and Family, as for his abilities
for faithfulness and constant diligence in the work of the Ministry: and that
in all the time he lived in our Country, he was never stained with the least
blemish of Malignancy, or Scandal, or Immodesty, either in reference to himself
or family.

And Parsons Minister of Wem. Tho. Porter Minist. of Whitchurch Sam. Cole
Pastor of Wybunbury Edw. Burghal Minister of Acton Sam. Fisher Minister at
Thornton James Marbury Minister of Davenham. George Mainwairing Minister of
Malpas. Richad Jackson Minister at Namptwich. Mat. Jenkyn Pastor at Grefford.
Ran. Sillito Pastor of Church-Lawton. Ri. Steel Minister of Hanmer Flint Not.
Lancaster Pastor of Tarperly John Glendole Pastor of Peter's in Chester. John
Pemberton Pastor of John's in Chester Sam. Clark Minister of Taruin Thomas Edge
Minister of Goostree. Josias Clarke Pastor of Tatenhall. William Keys. Aylmore
Houghton Minister of Preeze.


And since Providence cast my Ministry into this City, such has been my course
of life, known to my brethren in the Ministry, with whom I have conferred, and
intimately associated, as that they are pleased to give of it this ensuing
Testimony.

LONDON April the 10. 1657.
WHereas M. Zachary Crofton (Minister of the Gospel of Buttolphs Algate
London) has for several years last past had his abode, and exercised his
Ministry in this City, by means whereof we whose names are under written
(with many others) have had the opportunity to know him, his ministry and
Conversation.

These are to certify (all whom it may concern) that upon our Personal
knowledge and long experience, we Judge him to be a truly Godly man, an eminently
able, painful, faithful, and Zealous dispencer of the Gospel: In whose hand God
has exceedingly prospered his own work, for the conversion, consolation,
strengthening, establishment, and edification of very many Souls to eternal
life; So that he is (we know) very much in and dear to the hearts of Gods
People in this City: And as for his conversation, we esteem him a man of great
integrity, and conscientious in all his ways, truly Pious, exemplary and holy
in the course of his life and converse with men, whereby as by his public
indefatigable labors, and all other good ways and means, his endeavors have
always been to promote and advance godliness and the interest of Jesus Christ
in his generation. In witness of all which we have hereunto readily set our
hands.

Edm. Calamy. Simeon Ash. Arthur Ja^kson. James Nalton Minister of Leon
Fosterlane. Thomas Case. Samuel Clark. Charles Offspring. Elidad Blackwel.
William Bates. Matthew Poole Minister of Michal Querne. John Cross Minister of
Fridastreet London. John Fuller Minister of Jronmonger lane. George Smalwood
Minister of Mildreds in the Poultry. William Blackmor Minister of Peter's
Cornhil. Thomas Clendon Minister of Alhallowes Barking London. John Wells
Minister of Olaves Jewry London. Thomas Watson Minister of Stephens Walbrook.
Roger Drake Minister of Peter's West-Cheap. James Cranford Minister of
Christophers. William Tailor Minister in Coleman street. Thomas Jacomb Minister
of M. Ludgate. Richard Kentish Minister at Katherines tower. William Wickins
Minister of Andrews Hubbards. Matthew Haviland Minister of Trinity Parish
London.


And in this Parish, where these men labor to render me vile such has been my
conversation, that the people who has seen and known my manner of life (these
men excepted, whose first quarrel was, and greatest is, at my * ministry) in an
open Assembly (not by gathering names to blanks from door to door in a
clandestine way, as did mine enemies) with an unanimous and cheerful
acclamation, give this annexed Testimony of me, and protest against these
prosecutions of my name and ministry.

To the Honorable Comissioners for Ejection of Scandalous ignorant and
insufficient Ministers. The Humble Representation and Protest of the
Parishioners of the Parish of Botolphes Aldgate London, against the present
prosecution of M. Zachary Crofton our faithful Pastor.
WE the Inhabitants within the Parish of Botolphs Aldgate London, having
understood, that there are certain Articles of Scandal exhibited against M.
Zachary Crofton our present Minister; and that in the name of the
Churchwardens, and Parishoners of the said Parish, thought it to be no other
then our duty, to acquit our selves from the guilt and odium of this
prosecution by making this representation of our thoughts, that we received M.
Zachary Crofton to be our Minister as a blessing from God, and peculiar favor
from his Highness.

And that as we were satisfied in the piety of his past life (by the
testimonials, we have seen subscribed by the hands of the people among whom he
has lived, so since he has lived among us (which is almost three years) he
has labored among us with much faithfulness, industry, diligence, and good
success in his Ministry, unto the great settlement of our distracted Parish,
and restitution of Gods ordinances (of which we have been long deprived) and
has led his life among us in all honesty, and godliness; and walked before us
in the example of an holy unblamable conversation, as becomes a Minister of the
Gospel; and in submission to the present Government of this Commonwealth, in
so much that the common infirmities of a man excepted, we cannot charge him:
but protest our dislike, and detestation of all prosecutions of him, to the
reproach of his name, (which has been precious in the Church of God) and
depriving us of his Ministry, which we have found powerful in our hearts, and
consciences; farther declaring that we utterly disown all Articles against him,
in our names or by any entrusted with any power, or places of trust and dignity
among us against him exhibited, well knowing that they are no other, then the
malicious prosecution of some too violent and discontented men among us; who
have disturbed our peace, distracted our order intruded on us teachers which we
cannot own, and now labor to deprive not only us, but the Churches of God of
his pains and precious Min^stry, whom though we are far from defending in any
known Scandal, yet as knowing his integrity, cannot but own and stand by, and
desire such as are entrusted with power that he may be convicted of real
crimes, and not infirmities, (from which we know no man free,) strained by
malicious enemies, but as become, Piety, Justice, and the end for which you are
Authorized; in all which we hope for expressions of tender respect unto our
souls which cleave unto his Ministry, and we whose hands are subscribed shall
pray.

Rob. Burdit. Rich. Garford. Edward Mico. Kelham White. Edward Quick. William
Grammar. Abram Parrat. Henry Winsle. Nath. Friar. Alex. Green Roll. Swinnerton
Church wardens George Ayrey. Nicholas Addams. John Hebs. Anthony Wood. John
Beck. William Acton. James Nuthal. Paul Doby. John Langham. Abram Venhack.
Nathaniel Page. Richard English. Peter Turner. Nathaniel Milles. John Widness.
Anthony Hancock. Joseph Surbut. Seni. John Duncomb. Jonathan Grammar. John
Warren. Thomas Basset. James VVoodward. Ralph Cawte. Thomas Ederton. John
Hutton. Thomas Draycot. John Barfout. James Rayner. John Bondon. Vincent Izot.
Thomas Wharton. William Shan. Edward Dexter. John Hoskin. Henry Johnson. John
Barham. William Arly. George Moris. William Woodross. Thomas Burrows. Henry
Tanner. George Rodes. Henry Skarbrow. Thomas Borral. Ralph Browner. Thomas
Heath. James Heneks. William Ledger. Christopher Ally. James Honiburn. John
Johnson. William Smith. John Smith. Nicholas Boswoth. Thomas Gunner. Abram
Row. Thomas Place. William Saunsom. Richard Maidman. Thomas Hobkin. William
Clacstone. George Spencer. Thomas Read. Robert Sabin. John Mason. Nathaniel
VVhitting Timothy Roberts. William Beck John Barker. Richard Rodgerson David
Ploumer Peter B^tton John Palsmor William Henderson William Pain Peter Goslin
Richard Cooper William Smith Rodger Coply John Strandwidg Robert Real Jonas
Brookbanke Ralph Gillam Eleazer Berens William Beal George Banners Joseph
Sarbut junior. William Harris William Hutchines William Arm Thomas Batt John
Blython Richard Penney John Greenhaugh William Peacocke John Gray Richard
Corner Thomas Jones William Powel Cornelius Foxly Thomas Neall John Peacocke
William Bafer Richard Wharton Robert Tinbee Richard Allin Thomas Gostlin John
Towers Edward Gesford Richard Lawless Charles Williams Joseph Barcop John Merry
Nicholas Kilbee Valentin Hall Andrew Kildenmore William Lambey Hugh Griffin
John Hartley John Sharp Joseph Bell William Budley George Jelly John Claye
Robert Hall Walter Thomson Richard Farley Thomas Bilefome John Wright John
Millborne William Tailor Thomas Griffen Timothy Smart Charles Elmor James Doxtie
James Smith Edward Nicholson Tho. Pardew. John Clarke Henry Jackson Christ.
Taunton Richard Hail Andrew Eastwood Thomas Issacher John Campion John Lee
Peter Waddeman John Rosse Henry Rumball William Compton Charles Williams Joseph
Bartoke Will. Cuppey James Jeason Sam. Cocshull William Lecke Rob. Thompson
John Partridge Robert Pearce Philip Shipton Robert Duke Natha. Duckfeild Gawin
Aremstead Robert Skyner Will. Fletcher. Robert Wonham Tho. Forest Joseph
Robeson Ruben Ricraft Andrew. Reeme Harman Tivil Michael Goodman


So that I doubt not but you now see, that till this, and at this time to none,
but these men; who to revenge their own desired lust, and to wrest out of my
hands the authority of my ministry, and civil right of my place: and the better
to palliate their horrid impiety, and to cloud mine integrity, do labor might
and main, right and wrong, to make me vile, whom blessed be God they cannot so
find. And now as to the Charge, I shall desire to note of it in general,

1. That it is exhibited under the specious title of the major part of the
Common Council-men, Churchwardens, and diverse inhabitants of the Parish of
Bottolphs Aldgate, London And yet no one Common Council man, or Churchwarden
has signed it; nor any one Inhabitant, John Levet (one of the basest and
vilest for constant enmity to Gospel ministry, common lying and cozoning in the
course of his calling, and contempt, in the point of his estate excepted)
unless Capt. Tho. Harrison (that known enemy of Gods Ministers, and impudent
invader of the pulpit (who as I am informed) purposely to avoid the charge of
pragmatical busying himself in other men's matters, has about a fortnight since
taken some lodgings in the parish, must be deemed an inhabitant. I well know
indeed that the major part of the Common Council-men in point of number; and
two Churchwardens are confederate in this design, protested against by two
Common Council-men, and two Churchwardens, and many hundreds of the Parish: and
if quality may but counterpoise, the five exhibiting will be found much too
light for one of the four disowning this Charge; two of the three Common
Councilmen being venerable Carpenters in their Taffety doublets, John Wildgoss.
John Pits. William Iellie.
and the other a Tallow-chandler, who gaping for a Deputiship, did on purpose
to remove them, help the two opposite Common Councilmen to the dignity of
Aldermen, and yet lost their design: and as to the point of their practice, let
the whole Ward witness, whether it possesses more proud, ambitious,
turbulent, deboist, envious and profane persons, more profound Sack-suckers,
and substantial Alehouse-supporters, then are these five men. And I will be
bold to charge them to be malicious enemies to Gospel ministry; one of them to
be forsworn, another convict before the Council impudently to assert a
notorious lie, and yet four several times offered to swear it: the third it is
well known has many times high heels under an heavy head, and knows how in
Vestry Councils to pay his Tavern Reckoning; and the two Churchwardens will
scarcely bring their action against such as shall say they are common drunkards
and swearers, but they have made the whole Congregation witness, that they can
apply this general confession in prayer, Lord, there are in the midst of us men
mighty to drink wine, and such as put their bottle to their brothers nose to
make them drunk. In a word, they are the shame of the Ward that keeps them in
office, and a great dishonor to the honorable Common Council of this City.
And as these five, so their diverse inhabitants confederate, will be on enquiry
found to be men most desperately profane, and at a deadly enmity to the power
of godliness. I doubt not but you will easily judge these are fit instruments
to appear against a Minister, and eject him out of this office, whom men of
Civility, Gravity, Honesty and Piety do own as godly, and contend to enjoy.

The second thing that I desire to note, is, That this Charge is merely
frivolous, and visibly malicious; containing in it nothing really criminal or
scandalous: Suppose a truth in the whole, it accuses humane infirmities, and
charge some acts of weakness, which yet are not inconsistent with piety, or
ministerial fidelity; nay, and the whole charge lies without the Cognizance of
this Court, and although there were (as indeed there is not) never so much
truth in it, yet it is Coram non Judice: you being to judge by a Law, and that
law enumerating such particular crimes as shall be deemed scandalous, none of
which is in this Charge objected against me, and therefore unto it I am not
bound to plead, or give any answer: Nay, I doubt not but you will see that you
are bound to reject the charge as merely frivolous; for as to that part which
seems to come nearest the criminals, you are appointed to judge, (viz.) many
expressions which are pretended to be spoken against the Lord Protector; had I
(as I profess in the presence of God, Angels and Men, I did not speak them)
yet they are no publication of disaffection to the government, but only
Querulous expressions of the carriage of Governors, and that in the case of a
personal and particular grievance, and these two are distinct. The Government
may be just, good and allowed, where the Governors may act unjustly, oppress
and occasion groans and grievous expressions of complaint, which yet must not
be deemed disaffection to the government.

So that whilst in pleading and giving answer to this Charge, I may render
scandalous and criminal what is not so, and bespeak you a Court altogether
Arbitrary, who are not so, and become an evil President to such as shall come
on this stage after me; and be an occasion for men to fancy, that your
Commission, piously intended to reform the Ministry, may be used as the humor
of envy, and means to ruin Gospel Ministry, on the discontent of any malicious
men. I cannot but crave your judgment on the charge, and its consonancy to your
Law, and if in your judgments (as in mine) it appears to be out of your
cognizance, that you will please so to declare it, and accordingly to reject it
as merely frivolous; the which being done, if you and mine enemies please, I
shall as before so many private persons, whose judgments are amicably desired,
give answer unto the several particulars of this Charge, by which wide-mouthed
and weak men may know, that I plead not your want of Judicial Power to palliate
my wicked cause, and cloud my course of life, the which, as it has, so it
shall (with the allowances due to frail man) undergo the strictest scrutinie of
envy it self, if God deliver me from false witness, with which I have been
afflicted.

I having made bold by way of demur to note what is in general observable in
the Charge, do now crave liberty to give unto the particular Articles this
particular answer.

Unto Article the first and sixth, the one charging me to have said unto John
Farmantle, If I should consult the devil, what is that to you? And that of my
self I should interline the name of Roger Walden into a Justice of Peace his
Warrant.

I answer, Though neither of them are criminal, and are qualified with such
mistaken circumstances, and notorious falsities that I might plead Not guilty,
and evade by disproving the circumstances; yet I say to them, as Austin to the
accusing Manichee, Quae tu accusasti egomet damnavi, Mine own accusation ought
to have saved them the labor; whilst had not mine own in genuitie and
simplicity owned, they could never have convicted me, especially of the
latter. Is not that a right Christian charge, when a man's own confession must
be the only ground of the accusation? Is not repentance the sponge of impiety,
much more of infirmity in the pious, and these were no other; if so much; for
neither was the one spoken, nor the other acted wilfully, but under visible
temptation, or mature advice and counsel.

John Farmantle as a faithful witness should tell the whole truth, he as an
overbusie man near three years past, packing with, and put on by Will. Turner,
and other his profane companions (who rage at the least restraint or bar to the
Lords Table) purposely to disturb the serious debate to that end agitated, did
restlesly and clamorously querie, How will you know who are profane? to which
he received that mild answer, Friend, I will resolve you in that anon when this
debate is ended: yet he pursued to disturb, and was repelled with this second
answer, it may be some of your neighbors may inform me; yet not abiding silent,
he received this third answer, Why do you so busy your self in that which
concerns you not? I shall endeavor to know who are profane, and if God by his
Spirit should reveal it, what need you care? He yet proceeding to interrupt our
debate, at last received this unadvised check, What a strange busy man are you
thus to enquire of that which concerns you not? if I should consult the devil,
what is that to you? So you see passion provoked to the height before it
uttered this expression; and a meek Moses may wrathfully call Israel Rebel, and
by the Spirit of God canonizing his Saint-ship be shadowed with this charge,
They vexed his Spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips.

And as the expression was not uttered, so the action was not done without
temptation. And concerning it, I say it was an error, but I bless God on my
spirit there is no aggravating guilt, nor any thing more save actum agere, I
wrote the name. The case was thus; The Justices Clerk having omitted Waldens
name (purposed to have been in the Warrant) I was running to the Old-Bayly to
have it inserted, and met with an eminent and ancient Attorney of this City,
who told me, I might put in his name my self, for it was ordinary so to do, and
in that case for which the Warrant was granted, he was apprehensible without it.

Passing from him, I met with an Alderman, who told me, I might do it and the
Justice would own it, who never did disowne it. On which advising, and knowing
that the Alderman was busy at the Sessions, I did interline his name; and
although one Justice did acquit him, yet before the Lord Chief Justice he was
convicted of a Conspiracy laid at the Fountain Tavern by Aldersgate to pull me
out of the Pulpit; to which end he combined with Tench and Finch two profane
and blasphemous Constables, who made a Riot in my Church, and came up to the
Pulpit to pluck me thence, and disturbed our assembly in the time of Public
Worship, and therefore gave just cause for a Warrant to apprehend him.

And now what will this Charge amount to; Mr Crofton is guilty of an unadvised
expression and action, extorted by the visible force of a temptation. This is
indeed an infirmity deserving fraterna correptio, Brotherly reproof, which I
have, and am ready to receive from my Brethren in the Ministry, and desire to
be humbled for, as they open the mouths of profane men, that delight to
blaspheme.

But are these criminal acts inconsistent to piety, and making the Ministry
odious, that he must for them be cast out, and trodden under foot of men. The
men that can thus loudly clamor upon his unadvised expression, never once
discover the provoked passion which uttered it, nor consider their own terms
deliberately uttered, as, That the devil is in you that you own Mr. Crofton, as
Thomas Harrison said to M. Vanhack, and we will consult the devil, but we will
have that shall do against him to ruin him, as they were heard to say in the
Guildhall on Wednesday the second instant. This is not a check of pragmatick
curiosity, but a public resolution. May I not justly say, Pull the beam out
of thine own eye; but recrimination is not my work.

Unto the second Article, which charge me to have answered M. Sabin when be
asked me, Why I did not observe his Highness days of Thanksgiving, etc. An
honest man may receive a courtesy from a Thief on the Highway.

I answer, That this is not criminal, for it is an evasive answer, and no
Argument of disaffection to the government; for it is the usual Simile brought
by such as press subjection unto government irregularly acquired. I remember
Judge Mackworth used a more homely similitude after the cutting off the late
King, pressing subjection to the changed government, he said, I will presuppose
your former husband was most cruelly and unjustly murdered, were you not then
at liberty to marry another? It is well he is dead; these men would endeavor
to make him a Traitor: But these words I never spoke, and that M Sabine himself
is steady on his oath to witness when ever he is called. And what they mean by
words to this purpose, I know not, nor need I care; for they that will make a
man an offender for a word, ought to charge and prove syllabically. Words to
this purpose, was deemed a very great grievance in the late High Commission
Court, and I hope shall not be admitted in these days of liberty. For Words to
this purpose, may be so in their apprehension, which are not so in the speakers
intention: Evasive answers are usually ambiguous. Presuppose that I should say
in answer to such a Querie, a man may receive a courtesy on Hounslow Heath.
These men cry it amounts to the same sense, as if none but Thieves did travel
over Hounslow Heath; but charity can easily find another sense, and make the
simile run thus, A man may receive a courtesy from a stranger traveling over
Hounslow, whom he knows not, nor what right he has to give, only he finds him
possessed. Words to this purpose, will easily hook in the best friends that
have pleaded plenary possession to create a right to punish acquirements; and
according to accusers mistaken apprehensions, I must be charged as I am in the
next Article.

Unto Article the third, which charge me to have said, The Lord Protector was
not a competent Judge, because he had prejudged me in giving away the half of
my Pulpit to Simpson; and further, that he was an unrighteous Judge, for he
that could make a nose of Wax of the Law, as he had done, was an unrighteous
Judge an unrighteous; or words to that effect.

To this I answer. This is a complaint of unjust administration, but no
declared disaffection to government; but as to these words, as charged, I never
spoke them: The Harrison told me, He would have the Protector hear the foolery
clamoured of my maid: To which I answered, I have offered, and do offer to cast
my credit on the verdict of twelve men amicably chosen, or returned by the
Sheriff, but as for the Protector he is no competent judge, for he has
prejudged me: and that I had cause to say so there are some anong you know: And
if a man may not deem his Highness in some cases an incompetent judge, why does
the Lord Chief Justice sit on the Bench in causes to him relating? And how is
he capable of being impleaded? But, as for the giving away the half of my
Pulpit, and saying, That the Protector was an unrighteous judge, and made a
nose of Wax of the Law, I never said or thought it: For I am yet to be
convinced, that by any color of law I should be interrupted in public
service, or hindered from preaching twice a day to my people, and that statis
horis, on the Sabbath. And therefore unto this part I plead, Not guilty, and to
convince me, you must expect the Oath of John Wildgoss, and William Jellie,
both accusers, but have not subscribed, that they may be witnesses; and these
men if they would swear truth must tell you, these were Tho. Harrisons words,
not mine. For they coming to my house, and knowing that I would not speak with
them alone, brought with them Nathaniel Duckfield and Edmund Man (now at rest)
both men fearing God, and they heard what past in discourse between us.

And if these two Common Council-men do swear (as they are desperate enough)
that I spoke these words, I shall produce, Nathaniel Duckfield and one Roger
Morris (a Minister in North Hamptonshire, who was in my house) to witness that
when I said, The Lord Protector was no competent judge; Thomas Harrison said,
What, do you say the Protector is an unrighteous judge? I replied, No, he that
is an incompetent, is not always an unrighteous judge: He answered, I will
swear you said so; and he now attempts to accomplish his word: and when these
two Common Council-men were gone away with this accuser, I and my friends did
bewail their wickedness, that would gloss on my words, and then swear I spoke
them; but thus they make up their words to that purpose.

Moreover I should (if not furnished to disprove them) except against their
testimony as incredible, not only as they are accusers, in whose name the
Charge is exhibited, but as the one is forsworn, and the other a convict liar.

Unto Article the fourth, Relating to the incivility pretended to be acted on
the body of Mary Cadman, I say it is here added to no other end save audacter
calumniaere to fasten with impudence their own slander; were it true, it is no
crime; and modesty has been more violated by the fame, then act it self if
done.

But these men are most notoriously impudent, to charge what they can prove by
none, save a notorious thief and liar, and one that has to many in discourse,
and on her oath denied it; and that which she never owned, till by a Justices
Warrant brought to the Pie and Hoop Tavern hefore their very selves, who have
circumstantiated it most ridiculously; and taught her and others to swear the
things in which they are palpably forsworn, and so proved, as does appear in
the late book to you directed, called Perjury, the Proof of Forgery, penned by
a friend of mine that well knew all circumstances relating to that business.
To this therefore I plead, Not guilty; and will hold mine integrity until I
die, and not justify these mine accusers.

Unto Article the fifth, I say, that I did say, That the Order concerned not
me, it being directed to M. Grafton. I knew not the Order to come from the
Council, it not being signed by the Clerk as was usual. On August the 8. I gave
an answer to that order which provided M. Simpson a liberty of Lecturing in my
Church, which answer was, That I would do my duty statis horis, and leave him
to his liberty when I have done; and I am sure Stepney would give 50 l. per.
ann. for such a grant. On August the 9. I kept my pulpit, being so advised by
council, and knowing that if I stepped out they would seizeit, and to that end
Simpson preached at Creed-Church that morning.

The Constables out of Middlesex who had their staves were Parishioners, and on
their duty defending me in my right, from such as had at the Fountain Tavern
conspired to pull me out of the pulpit, who were these very accusers and
prosecuters of this charge. For this I was had before the Council, and
acquitted; and these Constables were by these men indicted for a Riot who did
but their duty, as was evidenced on Tuesday the first of December instant,
before the Lord Chief Justice, where they were acquitted, and the conspiracy of
these men was discovered. And it must not be made a scandal for a Minister to
contend for his just liberty to do his duty, and to have the Officers to defend
him in the same against the plotted, viotent assaults of his enemies.

Unto the four first additional Articles, charging me on the Lords day August
16 in my Church and Sermon to have said,

1. That Moses could prevail with the Lord in Prayer, but I could neither
prevail by Prayer nor Law, because ungodly men have prevailed with the unjust
Judges of this Nation, who have gone contrary to their oath, tyrannically
disinheriting me of my right, and letting an erroneous turbulent spirit enjoy
it.

2. And that their sword was their Law, and therefore their Tyranny was the
greater, whereunto law could notreach.

3. And if that I were to plead my cause with either godly, or honest, or
pious, or civil, modest or just Judges, according to Law, I were confident I
should enjoy my right; and said, That the wickedness of ungodly men had so
prevailed against me, with the tyranny of unjust judges, that I was enforced to
leave my right; and if any of the souls of my people be damned, for ought I
know their blood would be required at the hands of the unjust Judges, or
Erroneous intruders.

I have received an order for Simpsons teaching in my pulpit, and I am here to
surrender my just re-entred right to Simpson, contrary to all law, right and
reason, and as a certain King said, what I will do, I will do, so Iam
disre-entred by that power that what they will do, they will do, contrary to all
law, right and reason.

Unto this whole charge I desire it may be noted, That these are the highest
but querulous expressions in apprehension of of oppression in a particular
case. They all relate to the intrusion of John Simpson into my church, and are
charged on that occasion to be spoken, as being thereby provoked. It is the
observation of the preacher, That oppression will make a wise man mad. These
men make me cry, and then endeavor to have me beaten for crying. His Highness
grants I. Simpson a liberty, taking it for granted, that he and his people have
so much honesty and modesty as to obtain both ministers and peoples consent.
They dis-ingenuously decline that, and by his liberty violently bring me and my
people and Gods Ordinances into Captivity.

Can I choose but be grieved? Can a grieved spirit choose but speak? And must not
their unadvised speeches meet with indulgence? Our common proverb says, Losers
may have leave to speak. All men must needs judge, that to have my Church
commanded against the common and just privilege provided for, and possessed by
all other Ministers, must needs provoke passion: I, but to be commanded by Jo.
Simpson a man of tumults, witness Paul's Church yard, Bishops-gate and Spittle
fields: a man of sedition, witness Blackfriers, and Alhallows fifth Monarchy
Lectures: A man of Error, even damned errors, a convicted Antinomian, the men
yet live in Aldgate Parish that convicted him of saying, The Law is of no use,
not so much as a rule of life to a believer: Since his intrusion into my
pulpit, he has decried and degraded Gods holy Ordinances; at one time
preaching, he said, To learn a Catechism is not to worship God, you may as well
take your children to the Market or Fair, and buy them Bawbles, Rattles and
Hobbie-horses as Catechismes; And when I took notice of it, most impudently
denied in the ears and to amazement of the same Assembly, that ever he spoke
it, insomuch that some ran out of the Church charging him with a notorious lie.
And at the same time he utterred this expression, That it was gross ignorance
for any to think by catechetical heads to bring a man to the knowledge of
Christ. Thus in the same place where I had vindicated, he has vilified this
needful Ordinance of Catechizing. And in my own hearing he did most grossly
abuse Scripture by false interpretations, as in the Sermon he preached on 1
Pet. 3.19. he noting Christ by his Spirit preached to the spirits which are in
prison: By Spirit of Christ, he understood, the Works of Creation and
Providence to such as lived remote from Noah, and the voice of Noah to such as
were near him: and by Prison he understood an estate of sin and unregeneracy.

And on Wednesday the 2 of Sept. 1657, he preached, and most vigorously pressed
this Familistical, and Baptism degrading Notion, (viz.) Baptism is not the
ground of communion with the Church, but real grace, the answer of a good
conscience by the Resurrection of Christ from the dead; and though a man were
altogether ignorant of the Doctrine, and had never passed under Water Baptism,
he could own him as a member of the Church, and give him all the Ordinances of
Jesus Christ. And greatly he did inveigh against all such as would not continue
in communion with the unbaptized. And although the same day I taxed him with
error, and soberly demanded his Arguments, noting some against this notion;
nay, and on the following Wednesday I by another Letter did demand and provoke
his answer, but so dis-ingenuous and obstinate he is, that I never obtained any.

Now to have such a man to be intruded upon my people, will it not provoke
ministerial zeal to loud complaints, and give me cause to say, If any of my
peoples souls be damned, their blood will be required from the erroneous
intruders.

So that I hope unadvised expressions in this case shall not be deemed
disaffection to the Government, under which I lived peaceably without the least
expression or suspicion of disaffection, until hereby provoked; and if God and
those in Government will but take this yoke from off me and my people, I should
be found as silent as the most submisse to the present Government: and a
favorable apprehension of any expressions uttered in this provoked complaint,
is the rather desired, for that I was one who fought for my liberty, and expect
to enjoy it, no less then others: so far was I from being in arms for the
King (as mine accusers have reported) as that under Sir John Meldrom and
Colonel Shuttleworth, I was in arms against him, as Lancashire and Cheshire
can well know, where I encountered those dangers that the proudest of mine
enemies I believe never did. I will not except Captain Harrison, nor yet Major
John Simpson, of both whom I much mistake if it may not be said, Tutius est
contendere verbis, quam pugnare manu: And in that Parliamentarie quarrel I did
persevere to the last stroke, and the Principles thereof I do with constancy
retain. Nor was I ever sequestered on any account of disaffection as mine
enemies have falsely suggested: It is indeed true, our Nation has of late been
subject to some revolutions, wherein I can better dread providence then defend
instruments; herein I (as many other good men) stand dissatisfied, but not
declaredly disaffected: and I hope if the child's complaint do fly something
too high, it will be an Apology to acquit from the charge of disaffection that
the parents have provoked unto wrath.

But why do I stand to apologize where I am falsely accused: unto this whole
charge I do really plead, Not guilty. I did not on the 16 of August speak any
of these expressions in the Sermon preached at Aldgate, nor did I speak them at
any other time in any other place or Sermon: and I much wonder who must witness
these expressions to be mine, where did they sit? I can already read that they
trusted their memory more then their pen, and I hope when they come to proof
they will give you a convincing account of the Sermon in which these
expressions were uttered. Sure I am that my whole Congregation will on the
first view of them say, Mr. Crofton never uttered such words in their ears,
nor is it his Dialect or style of speech; it sounds much more like the rash
conceptions and rude expressions of an All-hallows Lecturer, and those who
penned that days Sermon can find nothing like this Charge, though mine
accusers charge with confidence, and without their wonted Salvo, or words to
that effect; nay, so far are these words from being mine, that though I would
justify the matter, I should blush at the form: I do not usually speak non
sense, and these expressions are no other; in the very first, note the
connection, Moses could prevail with the Lord in prayer, but I can neither
prevail by prayer nor law: I pray you who is the object of Prayer and Law? is
not the Lord, with whom Moses prevailed? and does it not sound like M. Crofton?
He could not prevail with God by prayer or law because ungodly men had
prevailed with unjust Judges, etc. And again, thinks any that I deem a
Church-living an inheritance, that I should account the intrusion of Joh.
Simpson into the whole (who is in no part) a disinheriting me of my right.
Again, Thinks any that I understand not the term Pious or Godly, that I should
Tautologize in my expressions? Let my brethren Judge whether it is probable
that I would fetch a Similitude from a certain King that said, What I will do,
I will do, as if I knew not sic volo, sic Jubeo, to be a faeminine reason; so
that the whole is such an heap of nonsense, that could I be convict I spoke
it, I should rather be convened before you as an insufficient, then a
scandalous Minister, but the very face of the child shows it to be the brat
of some malicious brain; For I profess before God, Angels and Men, that I spoke
them not: Nay, by Gods grace, it has been my care not to mingle my passionate
complaints with his pure Word; and therefore whatever I have done, I did it
distinct from my Sermon. I did the 16 of August express a complaint against
John Simpson and his confederates, and expostulate with them as men of neither
reason nor civility, honesty or piety, and they reflect what is charged on
themselves upon the present Government, whereas in the whole complaint I did
not once mention tyrants, or tyrannically disinheriting, nor unjust Judges, nor
the sword being their Law, nor indeed any thing in this whole Charge. The
complaint I did make, I (foreseeing the malicious misapprehensions and
misrepresentations of it) I did commit to writing, communicate to some before I
spoke it, and did read it syllabically out of the paper unto the people, and I
can if need be produce it. But these men that have openly enveighed against the
Lord Protector, as As did John Simpson in Alhallows Lectures.
Tyrant, Great man at White Hall, and provoked against him an Ehuds dagger,
calling him As did Will. Iellic.
Juggler, and one that regarded not oaths, and that out of disaffection to his
Highness government; can put him into their room, and reflect on him the
complaint made against themselves, who in this very case of mine have done no
mean dishonor to his government, as I have noted in my Right Re-entred.

Unto the fifth Additional Article, I answer, That preaching on the 3 of
September, was not commanded none was unto me propounded to preach that day at
Aldgate, and though I preached not at Aldgate, yet I preached at Alhallows
Barking; and I am not the only man that omitted that Days Exercise, Communis
error fit jus.

Unto the last Additional Article, I answer, That there is in it a notorious
falsitie; for none of the neighbors desired of me that John Simpson should
preach; one indeed put out that querie, when they desired the liberty of the
Pulpit, What if we choose M. Simpson? but he desired no liberty for him; but
with their swords by their sides they brought him into the Church, and I would
not let him preach, nor will I let him him preach in my Pulpit one moment
longer then I cannot help it, and I think, such as love the truth will say,
that the care of the souls of my people will nourish, maintain and justify
this resolution.

And now, Gentlemen, I have brought out my cause before you, and given a plea
unto this Charge, and that not merely formal, but real and true, by which I
doubt not, but you will see that I had cause to say of it, it is false and
frivolous: And hereupon if it come within your cognizance, and the compass of
your Law, I join issue, and am ready to proceed to proof, by which it will be
more plainly manifest, that malice against Ministry, not any scandal in my
life, is the ground of my long vexation, and present prosecution; and that I
have cause to say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 56.5. What things I either did or
spoke
They wrest them at their will,
And all the counsel that they take
Is how to work me ill.


FINIS.
Page 3. l. 10. r. unrighteous Judge. p. 5. l. 4. r. godly. p. 19. l. 33. r.
unjust. p. 20. l. 2. r. judge. p. 22. l. 16. r. violent. l. 34. r. at the. l.
38. r. on p. 23. l. 5. r: These. p. 10. against line 4. in marg. r. Hence their
cry in all this contest is, We will know whose is the Pulpit.


