Berith Anti-Baal, OR, Zach. Croftons Appearance Before The Prelate-Justice of
Peace, Vainly pretending to bind the Covenant and Covenanters to their good
Behavior.

By way of Rejoinder to, and Animadversion on Doctor John Gauden's Reply or
Vindication of his Analys^s, from the (by him reputed) pitiful Cavils and
Objections; but really proved Powerful and Convincing Exceptions of Mr. Zach.
Croftons ANALEPSIS.

By the Author of the Analepsis, and (not by the Dr observed) Analepsis
Anelephthe, to the continuing of St. Peter's Bonds, and fastening his Fetters
against Papal and Prelatical Power.

Claudicat ingenium, delirat linguaque mensque. Prove. 16.7. The legs of the
lame are not equal, so is a parable in the mouth of fools. V. 4. Answer not a
fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto him. V. 5. Answer a
fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit. LONDON,
Printed by M. S. for Ralph Smith at the three Bibles in Cornhil; and for Thomas
Parkhurst at the three Crowns over against the great Conduit in Cheapside, 1661.

TO THE READER.
Courteous and Christian Reader,
DOctor John Gauden finding no regular, rational, or religious way to release
St Peter, and restore him to his Episcopal chair, thinks it best to leave him
in his bonds, or holy Fetters, and as a Justice of Peace proceeds against his
keeper, and to bind him and his adherents to their good behavior; (we say of
the Devil, that change demonstrates the non-prevalency of his temptations.) In
order whereunto, after nigh forty weeks from the appearance of my Analepsis in
the world, against the Analysis, his pregnant Genius was delivered of a Reply
thereunto; without the least regard to any other thing by me written, to
enforce and establish the Sacred and Indissolvable Bond of the most Solemn
League and Covenant that ever past on Christian Church or People, (which God
has severely, and before our eyes avenged on the Violaters, in that part,
which was (for its matter mainly Civil; and will undoubtedly appear no less
jealous for that part which is Religious) and yet it is swollen into such a bulk,
and dressed in such a garb, as that it is not for every man to buy; nor any
civil, sober, wise man to read, much less to rejoyn unto; being able to do no
more, but fill their mouths, who are minded to make a clamor, and think
speaking (though to no purpose) to be a sufficient answer to Mr Crafton.

I having animadverted this Anti-Baal-Berith, find a necessity to Apologize
for the very act of my animadversion, and fear nothing more then to be bound to
my good behavior, for mis-behaving my self so much, as to answer a fool
according to his folly; wherein I may seem like unto him; did not the very next
words give me some encouragement, directing me to answer a fool according to
his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit.

The truth is, what I ever expected and expressed to many, is now effected by
the Doctor, viz. That he would never be so hardy as to encounter me single, or
assault the reason, and strength of argument objected in my Analepsis to his
Analysis; but his honor engaged in an evil cause, provoked him to say
something, to keep up a repute among the simple; he would take up the Anonymous
Anatomist, (whose Dialect I cannot approve) which unhappily had started into
the world, some two hours before my Analepsis; and scoulding at that and its
Author, would shuffle in my Book and N^me, (which yet as one that could not
read, or fought blindfold, not seeing his adversary, he has mistaken through
his Book, writing Mr Grafton, as if I should answer Dr Gaudie) and seem to say
something in it, though nothing to the purpose: How exactly this is done, I
leave the Reader to observe.

It is indeed to be acknowledged, that although he enter the Stage with a Title
that bespeaks him some strange Hercules fureus, or Ajax Mastigophorus, and his
raging, rambling, raving discourse toward his late Anatomist, does too much
verify the same; yet he expresses himself with as much civility, respect, and
modesty toward Mr Cr. as can be looked for from such a sarcastical Pen; that I
wonder he could make it consist with so much rage; I could not but expect his
prudence to have directed him, no way to conjoyn two such different tracts in
the same furious expostulation, lest his wrath had run beyond its propounded
end; or his Reader should apply the whole discourse beyond the Authors
intention, as indeed they commonly do; for he knows, ^ulgus non distinguit.

I am not insensible, the barking Curre in the Emblem (most scurrilously)
prefixed to his Book without color of reason, is by many applied, and
understood to be intended to represent Mr Cr. which if so, I leave the Reader
to judge its aptness; the Dr taking no notice of any Book written by Mr Cr.
save the first, which has found much acceptance for the sobriety of its Style;
so far from barking, as that its modesty is acknowledged by the Dr himself; and
all rational men must acknowledge the Moon, for its mutation, spots, dark,
cloudy, uncertain light, and cold chilling influence, to be much a more apt
Emblem of inconstant, uncertain, ambiguous, obscure, and lukewarm Bishop
Gauden; whose Episcopal Influence is like the Moon, more likely to kill, then
animate Religion; and his glorious light of his rude Rhetorical swadoes, to
lead men into a fools Paradise; for children to play by, rather then direct
men's duties, or resolve their doubts, or guide them into paths of safety: But I
have more charity, then to think that this (though by the vulgar applied) was
by the Dr intended, as such an Emblem of Mr Cr. 's book; because though he is
restlesly unquiet in barking out the barking property of his Anatomist, yet he
does not so much as allude thereunto in all his debates, with Mr Cr. otherwise,
I could have answered a fool according to his folly; and to this piece of
scurrility (unbeseeming a man of common modesty, much more a Christian, a
Minister, nay one who as a Bishop pretends to more piety, patience and gravity)
have opposed, and prefixed to this Tract, the figure of a Wheel, with a Tongue
on it, whirling about without order or stay, to the only raising of a cloudy
dust, with this Motto; Who is this that darkneth knowledge by words without
wisdom? Or this, A fool is full of words, a man cannot tell what shall be, and
what shall be, who can tell? My nature is as bad, and fancy as wild as the Drs
can be; but I bless God for the restraints of Reason and Religion, which
bridles I hope I shall never break or cast off.

The Dr does in the close of his elaborate Tract, complain that he had tired
himself, and his Reader; nor is it without cause, he might have said it in the
middle, nay beginning of his journey; and remembered that wise observation,
Eccl. 10.15.
The labor of the foolish wearieth every he one of them (guide, or guided,)
because he knows not how to go into the City; which one thus illustrates,
Nesciunt viam in Vrbem, Lava.
qui a recto tramite aberrant, and in loca a via adducuntur: The Dr having in
his Analysis loosed from the Haven of Reason, true Religion, and the fear of
God, runs adrift wherever the wind of his own words can hurry him, and leads
his Reader into a wilderness, where he hears no sound but the shrieks of
Satyrs, barking and howling of beasts, at best, raging and railing of men, or
wild and improper discourses, that direct to no certain end; The Dr having
unhappily returned railing unto what seemed rational in his Anatomist,
according to what is noted as usual with heretics, Haeretici cum perver
sitatis suae non possunt reddere rationem, in maledicta convertuntur; and
endeavored by words and shuffling glosses, to darken the plainness, and
clearness of the truth urged by the Analeptist; of whom we must say, as Bishop
Jewel of the Jesuit Harding, in his confutation of him; Who so takes upon him
to maintain untruth, must needs be forced to discourse about with long
vagaries, to lead his Reader from the purpose, and to feed him with words for
want of matter.

Defense of the Apology of the Church of England, Preface to the Reader.
The truth is, the Reverend Dr has expressed great affection to Episcopacy, in
his zeal for it, fully matching Harding's apprehension of the Papacy, and
Assertion, That the Popes chair, (or English Prelacy) is the very knot of
Christian Unity; and so branding with Schism all that say the contrary: Nor
falls he much short of Pope Boniface, having according to the measure of his
Prelatical power, Anathematized all Presbyters, as he did Aurelius, and all the
Bishops of the Council of Africa, not exempting Augustine himself; Aurelius,
cum collegis suis instigante diabolo, superbire caepit contra Romanam
Ecclesiam: Nor is he much defective in their subtilty, whilst visum est utile,
ut scribatur ad Episcopum Romanum, ut consideret res nostras, and det
consilium; will more easily signify the Popes power, and be rendered, It has
seemed good that we write unto the Bishop of Rome, that he visit us, and
determine our matter by his sentence; then I swear with reality, sincerity, and
constancy, to endeavor the extirpation of Prelacy; that is to say, the
Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. can be rendered, I do swear to my
power to establish and advance Prelacy, the Government by Archbishops,
Bishops; only I will consent to reform the excessive and defective abuses
thereof: but the cause cannot be good, that must be salved by such strained,
yea contrary interpretations; especially in matters of an Oath: with how great
ability the Dr has managed his great affection against his little Antagonist,
let wise men judge; the weight of the cause, and some men's doting on the bare
say so of a Bishop, more then the cogency of the Reply has produced this
following Tract, to thy cost and trouble, as well as my pains, and expense of
more precious time; into which before I pass thee, I must mind thee of these
two things, pretermitted in the following Animadversion.

1. That Dr Gauden seems to gather much strength from the silence, or seeming
compliances of some to his absurd, contradictory interpretations of the
Covenant: Because I will do him, or them on whom he reflects no wrong, read his
own words, viz.

I find no men of learning and ingenuity, but are ashamed to appear in such a
cause; Sober Presbyterians do very loyally, piously, prudently own, yea and
profess to the King's Majesty, a quiescence under Episcopal Government, as no
way inconsistent with the Covenant: Epist. to the Reader. This mitigated, and
just sense of the Covenant, some that were and are great masters in our Israel,
and assertors of the Covenant, are now content to own, abating the rigor
which sometime possessed some Covenanters against Episcopacy, in that sense,
wherein this, and most other Churches ever owned, and used Episcopal
Government, and Authority among and above Presbyters: yea many of them begin to
cast a favorable eye on Episcopal dignity, no less then on Church lands,
fearing nothing so much as not to have a share of them; much congratulating, as
the King's happy restoration, so the hopes of recovering the pristine Honor
and Government, with the Revenue and Rights of the Church, in point of
Episcopacy; not in the fallacy of a Presbyterian parity, but of a presidential,
constant eminency of Bishops in authority over Presbyters, page 72, 73.

That any have by their silence, or seeming compliance given the least occasion
to this insultation, is matter of grief and scandal to good men: who yet have
observed the subtle attempts, and strenuous endeavors of Prelates and their
abettors, to tempt and debauch the consciences of some Zealous Covenanters; and
cannot but bless God that any have obtained power to withstand such
temptations, and decline such glorious baits; which should they, and many have
admitted, I was, and am resolved through divine grace, to sing no song under
the sufferings that are threatened against me, save only this, All this is come
upon me, yet have I not dealt falsely in thy Covenant: but charity bids me
conclude, that the Dr reckons without his host, and that the boasting clamor
is a base calumny: He professes the reason of the so late appearance of this
elaborate wilderness, was, an expectation of what others would say in the
cause; and yet he runs so fast as not to heed the Covenanters Plea, which would
have told him, some men no way short, in learning and ingenuity, of Dr Gauden,
did appear in such a cause: moreover, many may and do appear in it, that appear
not to write for it; Pen and Pulpit are different capacities; multitudes of
books need not; let the Dr judiciously (not judicially) confute one of his
Antagonists; I dare assure him more will take up the quarrel, and defend it: I
could (if he call on me) show the letters of many faithful Covenanters out of
many Counties in England, jointly and singly owning the same cause of the
Covenant with Mr Cr. and are neither afraid nor ashamed to own it: I know not
what any particular Presbyter might profess to his Majesty; I hope such on whom
the Dr reflecteth, will in due season vindicate themselves; I have cause to
think, the Dr reports this as faithfully as he did Mr Baxter's discourse about
the Liturgy: I well know, that those who had immediate conference with his
Majesty, professed in private debates with their Brethren, another judgment of
the Covenant and Episcopacy, then what is now reported of them: I am sure at a
general meeting of the Covenant Presbyters in and about the City of London, the
cause of the Covenant was debated, generally owned in its opposition to
Episcopacy, and other things returned amongst us; and by joint consent it was
agreed, to petition his Majesty, and the Houses of Parliament; the heads of
which petition, being agreed on, was committed to certain brethren to prepare
and draw up; and was this.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
Humbly shows,
YOur Petitioners humbly blessing God for your Majesty's happy Restoration to
the Throne of your Royal Father, being also sensible of your Majesty's gracious
acceptance of our humble Address made to your Majesty; as likewise of the great
piety and zeal in your Majesty's late Proclamations for suppressing of
profaneness, and countenancing and protection of godly Ministers, are thereby
encouraged to lay this humble presentation and Petition, with our selves, at
your Majesty's feet.

That whereas your Petitioners by the Authority of the two Houses of
Parliament, were brought under the sacred obligation of a Solemn Oath, wherein,
with our hands lifted up to the most high God, we did Covenant to endeavor a
Reformation in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, and Uniformity of
the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms; and in pursuance thereof, the said
Honorable Houses, with the advice of the Assembly of Divines, did ordain a
Form of Church government, a confession of Faith, a Directory for Worship, and
the greater and lesser Catechisms, which we and our Congregations have through
God's goodness for many years together, and still do comfortably enjoy and
practice.

We are therefore humbly bold, in the name and for the sake of our Lord Jesus
Christ (for the prevention of divisions, offenses, and snares to the
consciences of many thousands within the three Kingdoms, both Ministers and
people, who are pious and peaceable) with all humility to beseech your Majesty,

That the things of God and Religion, which have been so solemnly Covenanted
for, may be owned and confirmed by your Royal Authority; which notwithstanding,
we do sincerely profess our readiness to accommodate with our Godly and
Orthodox brethren dissenting from us, so far as may consist with our
consciences and Covenant.

This Petition however by some State stratagems and Court complement, and over
prudent cowardice of some, who contrary to the due order of all Assemblies,
would never let it be reported, it was prevented from being presented to his
Majesty; yet I know it was agreed and assented unto by many learned and
ingenious men, who are yet ready in all ^^ble, lawful, and submissive ways, to
own the same cause of the Covenant, in which Mr Cr. has appeared; and is here
inserted as a check to Dr Gauden's fancied compliance of Covenanted Presbyters.

2. Dr Gauden does often suggest the extinpation of Episcopacy to be
inconsistent with loyalty to the King, and therefore affectionately wishes,
that Mr Cr. may maintain and express his loyalty, to which he finds him a
pretender.

To this, give me leave, as Dr Gauden has done before me, to play the fool,
and boast; and I can say without vanity, in expressions of loyalty on
conscience of the Covenant, I think I have not come behind the highest Prelate
which pretends most to it; though it be not so visible at Court as they make
theirs to be, yet all England knows Mr Croftons contest against the cruel and
barbarous murder of his late Majesty, and how plainly he did in the pulpit at
Nantwitch in Cheshire, to the face of the chief Republican agents reprove it,
as an actual and positive breach of Covenant, in a solemn Assembly, and
Thanksgiving held on Jan. 25. 1649. what rage and reproach he that day
underwent, and what hazard he thereby ran into, the yet Minister of that Town,
and other Gentlemen loyal to his Majesty, can declare.

In conscience of this Covenant, and loyalty to his Majesty, he withstood and
declined the Engagement, and that against the open and violent threats of
promoters of it; persuasions of complying brethren, one of whom pressed me to
it with this great argument, The fight at Dunbar is l^st; the Kings Interest
quite overthrown; these times afford few Martyrs; yet Mr Cr. resolved to make
one, and conflicted with a violent and vexatious people, to a Sequestration of
his Estate, on no other reason, but not subscribing to the Engagement. It is
too long to report my constant praying for, and preaching up the King's
Interest, to the conviction of the enemy; my constant refusal to observe any of
their Fasts, or solemn Thanks-givings, my preaching at Westchester at the
beginning of Sr George Booths attempt, and my troublesome attendance on the
Council of State, and Militia, with the threats and rage I then underwent: The
Articles of Treason against Oliver, charged against me, for which I underwent
much trouble; the friendly and angry conflicts I have often had with John
Bradshaw, whom I feared not to mind of his wages of unrighteousness: my
constant asserting of his Majesty's Interest, and subjects duty of returning to
the Lord, and to David their King, which I preached in St Peter's Cornhil, when
the hearers trembled, and all the City expected Mr Crofton's bonds at the
least: All which were expressions of loyalty to the King, and conscience of the
Covenant. But I will only present thee with a Letter which I sent unto a Member
of the Rump Parliament, on the very day of their triumphant return from
Portsmouth; it was then published (though without my name) I shall now affix it
to this Epistle, and leave thee to judge, how far conscience of the Covenant
has acted Mr Croftons loyalty to the King, and tell thee he retains the same
duty for his Majesty, and in sense of it does (and cannot but do it) now
contest for, and assert the solemn League and Covenant, in that religious part
which must be promoted with utmost zeal, by all who wish well to King and
Kingdom; though the devil and his instruments do endeavor to damp, deaden, and
divert the discharge of duty, by the clamorous charge of Treason, Rebellion,
Sedition, and Disloyalty of that Act, which is in its Nature, Principle, and
Disposition of the Agents, most truly loyal and faithful to the King, and
Kingdoms Interest, Honor, and Happiness; which none has, or can more
sincerely seek and promote, then the zealous, conscientious, Covenanters,
amongst whom to be reckoned, (cost what it will) is the Ambition and Resolution
of

March 14. 1660. Zach. Crofton.

A Letter written by a Minister in London, in Answer to one sent from a Member
of the Long PARLIAMENT.
Honored Sir,
YOurs of the 18th instant I received; whereby I discern your sense of the sad
hand of God upon these Nations, in the many sad Revolutions to which they have
been subject. And now you seem studious of the way of its recovery, in which I
rejoice. Though, Sir, your Enquiry does a little amaze me; not so much for the
matter, as that you should press me to it in this juncture of time. You well
know, Sir, I have not declined to let you know my thoughts of all the late
transactions of those who called themselves, The Long Parliament. Did I not
much presume on your Faithfulness never to use it to my damage (however God
deal with you) I might burn my pen and paper for fear of a Charge of Treason
and High Court of Justice. But I will not fear to write at his request to whom
I have often spoken freely, and yet met with the fidelity of a Friend.

Sir, your Enquiry is serious and seasonable, and calls for a better resolution
then I can render.

It is this.

Quest. What is to be desired by them that wish well to England?

I understand your Enquiry as grounded on the present sad state of the Nations
affairs; and so my resolution is, as of a Minister of God, that of Isreal's
Repentance promised in Hosea 3.5. Afterward shall Israel return, and seek unto
the Lord their God, and unto David their King, is the unum necessarium, one
only thing to be desired for England as her sovereign Remedy against all her
maladies by the hand of God inflicted on her.

On serious observation of England, I cannot but judge her the parallel of the
ten Tribes in sin and sorrow, and wish she may precede them in a serious and
seasonable Repentance. Methinks, Sir, the Prophet Hosea his Prophetical
Marriage of an Harlot, and leaving her a long time with this charge, Hos. 3.3.
To abide for him, and not to play the Harlot, or be for any other, is a lively
Emblem of Englands state and duty.

England, Sir, as Israel, have gone in the way of Jeroboam, and have sinfully,
against all Natural, Civil and Religious bonds, cast off and shut out their
Lawful Governors and Established Government left them by their Progenitors,
Englands Disease.
and under which she long flourished, unto the Enriching of her self, Envy of
her Neighbors, Nations, and Encouragement of the Reformed Churches: And that
after many Declarations, Protestations, Vows, Oaths, and the SOLEMN LEAGVE AND
COVENANT for the defense and preservation of the Kings Majesty's Person and
Posterity, the Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberties of the Subject, and
that Sworn in a day of Extremity, when they seemed to be in danger, and men
were Jealous (the subversion since effected) was intended. Nay, and after a
vast expense of Blood and Treasure in the defense of them; and when under an
Obligation inviolable and never to be dispensed withal, wherein we have sworn
to God, Not to suffer our selves by any comminations, persuasions or terrors
whatsoever, directly or indirectly to turn aside to the right hand or to the
left, or to make defection from this Cause. Yet have our Nation, to the Scandal
of Religion, Reproach of the Nation, and Blasphemy of God, and Provocation of
his Justice, with Israel, made defection from their Lawful and Natural Prince,
yea and altered their unalterable Government at the Lusts of Men subverting
very Foundations. Only, Sir, I must be free to let you know, that in two things
Englands defection has been more vile then that of Isreal's, in that it was
made by a violent, base, unjust, extrajudicial, barbarous Regicide, with an
hypocritical pretense of Justice. Secondly, In that Members of the Parliament
have been to themselves an Herod Ascalonite to violently break up their own
Sanhedrin; and Guido Faux, to blow up King, Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, to the everlasting blemish of the Protestant Religion, and in the
room thereof have been subjected to usurpation and self-created Governors,
with whom most of the Nation have concurred, and to them consented. And for the
support of this Usurped Magistracy, Calves have been set up at Dan and Bethell,
all falsehood in Religion Tolerated, the Ministry laid common, who will becomes
a Priest unto the Lord. So that, Sir, Schism and Sedition, Rebellion unto
Regicide, Perfidie and Perjury is become Englands Guilt, and impiety written in
such legible and indelible Characters, that all men must say, She is become an
Harlot, and see repentance absolutely necessary to prevent her ruin. England.
Distempers.
Sir, give me leave to tell you, Englands sin (like Isreal's) has been pointed
out by her Sorrows; for she having shamefully shaken off her Rightful Governor
and Government, has been prostituted to the Lusts and Ambition of particular
men, and proudly trampled on by Military insolency, in so much that our very
Bell-men can reproach us as we lie in our Beds. Shall I, Sir, make bold to
insert a Bell-mans sound which I heard with my own ears. It was this, Whilst
you securely Sleep, I Ring my Bell,
Which lately has rung out your Freedoms Knell.
Your Soldiers, now, your Sovereigns are become,
Your Laws and Liberties command by sound of Drum.
Nor is it strange, for they read no Commission,
Regard no Bonds, but prosper by Transgression.
By Pride and Perjury, these Saints most rude.
Have Cut off the King, and Parliament subdued.
Your eyes have seen't, vile Slaves, yet in this season,
You are Rid like Asses, and not Ruled by Reason.


Oh, Sir, how many sad and shameful revolutions have passed upon us, and yet we
are full far from Settlement? Authority, like a Tennis-Ball, has been cast up
and down for him to catch that catch can, and has been tossed between a
republican pack, and single Person, whilst both are plain and palpable
Usurpers; for indeed in nature, and by Gods just judgment, Revolution is the
constant Attendant on Usurpation; the Globe of Magistracy must roll up and
down, whilst off its Pin, and from its Center, it only rests in right
Subjects; and now we are covered with confusion, and left without King, any
lawful, nay, without Prince, any unlawful Governors, without any establishment
in Church or State, Civil and Religious order, and this was the punishment of
Isreal's, now is of Englands adultery: The estate of her widdowhood, the time of
divine desertion; for Civil Order is Gods presence in the World, and Religious
Order his presence in the Church. The very Heathen conclude from the confusions
in the world, the Gods have forsaken the Earth; so that, Sir, he must have no
Religion who sees not in Englands case to conclude and cry out, Righteous art
thou, O Lord, and just are all thy Judgments.

Now, Sir, I have showed Englands disease and distemper; it remains that I
direct the cure and remedy, and that I say is, Repentance, true and hearty,
Englands Cure and Remedy.
General and Universal Repentance. Let the Ministers of God lift up their
voice, and cry, Repent, England, repent, repent; let all that wish well to
England, pray that God would pour out a Spirit of Repentance, that from Dan to
Beersheba all Israel may return and seek unto the Lord, and to David their King.

Sir, Repentance is the end and errand of all Afflictions, Isai. 27.11. Men cry
out of doing the Work of God, nor do I deny it in all our strange revolutions;
only I desire it may be noted, it is Gods strange work, speaking his
displeasure, and summoning his Peoples Repentance: A relenting heart, a
returning spirit shall no sooner be effected, but these sharp rods will be
rejected. God will walk contrary to a stubborn People, until their
uncircumcised heart be humbled, Levit. 26.
but no longer, for, then his end is effected.

Repentance does engage divine return; for he has promised, that when ever he
speaks against a Nation, to pluck it up, or root it out, if that Nation repent,
he will repent, Jer. 18.8. He ever meets relenting Ephraim with Repentance for
inflicted judgments; his method is to give Repentance and Remission of sins:
Jer. 31.18.
The greatest good intended for Israel is contracted into the promise of
repentance; the Sun does not more certainly follow the morning Star, then the
return of Gods presence does attend repentance:

Nay, Sir, in this case repentance is an actual re-enjoyment of blessing, not
only a quality disposing to it, but an act putting into the possession of it;
as your Armies late repentance for their backsliding, put your Members
actually into the House, to rule and govern, and their counter repentance put
you out again, so the repentance of your pretended Parliament, and the People
of England puts lawful Governors into their proper places, and fixes
Authority in its right Center, which sin un hingeth and expels. You may
observe, Isreal's Repentance was an actual and ardent Contest to bring home the
King. Repentance breaks open the Bar of Sedition and Rebellion which shuts
out lawful authority; will but God give Repentance, the Restitution of Englands
Government will be very feasible and speedy. For this Repentance consists in
two parts.

1. To abide for rightful Governors, however expelled, and at present
excluded; and not to be for any other Magistrate, by any act of Allegiance, or
acknowledgement of Loyalty; strike not hands with, consent not to any
self-created Governors, by Pride, Perfidy, and Rebellion, slipping into a
Chair of State; play not the wanton with any self-advancing Absalom, be not
seduced by every seditious Sheba: If proud men have power and profaneness to
catch a Scepter, and stamp Authority upon themselves, let men maintain their
Chastity, deny their Allegiance, court them not as rightful Governors: Men's
giddy unconstancy is the blood that nourishes Rebellion: resolved chastity is
the rebuke of adulterous attempts; if with Mephibosheth, men cannot follow
their exiled David, let them abide in their widdowhood, and retain their
Loyalty until he return. According to Nature and Scripture a people may better
be without any Prince, then strike hands with a Usurper, for in that is sorrow,
but in this is sin: I should, Sir, wish that fond and blind affection may not
engage any to commit lewdness with any the Members of Englands late Husbands
body; let not any the Members of our Collective Body (now beheaded, and
bemangled,) cheat us with the claim of Allegiance by pretense of Relation, and
cry of a Long Parliament; but rather let these Members be dispersed throughout
the Tribes of Israel as evidences of that unheard of violence, and
unparalleled cruelty which has been acted on our Espoused Lord. Englands
Subscription of sinful Engagements and shameful Addresses to unlawful Powers,
has been the breach of her chastity; let us abide for lawful Government, when
we can do no more, evidence our integrity, and assert our duty and relation,
when we cannot enjoy our right.

The second Act of Repentance to be done, Second part of Repentance.
is to return unto the Lord, and to David their King. Return to God, is the
formal act of true Repentance; Sin and Repentance have the same object, though
some sin is more immediately against God, yet all sin is a transgression of his
Law: The same God that said, Thou shall have none other Gods before my face,
said also, Thou shall honor thy Father and thy Mother; and, Thou shall not
commit adultery: Isreal's Rejection of Samuel, was a Rejection of the Lord; as
light as men make of Civil Right and Order, it is Gods direction in the second
Table of his Law: The complaint of the Penitent for any sin, is unto God,
Against thee, thee only have I sinned; seeking to the Lord, will spur a seeking
unto David their King; sense of God offended, engages a return from all sin,
not only from last, but first acts of violence done unto Authority; not only
the interruptions made on you in 1653. but those chiefly made by you in 1648.
and that with fullness of Resolution to back-slide no more; a return to God will
awe the conscience, and obviate all the difficulties and discouragements of
Repentance; danger sinfully created by rebellion shall not deter repentance,
because it is a return to God, ready to forgive; let me say to England as God
to Israel, Jer. 4.1.
If thou will return, return unto the Lord, who enjoined your duty; whose Law
has been violated by your impiety; unto the Lord, to whom you swear in the day
of your distress; who is a God of jealousy, and will avenge the quarrel of
the Covenant; sad is the Repentance which is but an exchange of sin, or of sins
object; a bewailing of one rebellious act, but maintaining and proceeding in a
series of Rebellion, violence, and sedition. Sir, whatever Soldiers do,
Saints must not thus return.

Isreal's return to God must be with a return to David their King; by David is
generally understood the Messiah the Lord Jesus Christ, nor do I deny it, only
Sir, I wish it may be noted, the Messiah is called David for Relation and
Succession sake, because the same seed and rightful Successor of David, as the
Pharaohs of Egypt, and Caesar's of Rome; he is their King, not only as the
Messiah, but by a lineall descent from, and lawful succession to the Crown of
Israel; so that a return to David their King is mentioned with an allusion unto
their Apostasy from, and Rebellion against the House of David, which must be
repented in their return; for they must embrace the Lord Jesus, not only as the
Messiah, but also as their natural Prince and lawful Sovereign; and therefore
Calvin cries out, Aliter vere and ex animo Deum quaerere non potuit, quin se
etiam subjiceret Legitimo imperio cui astrictus erat; they could no way seek
the Lord in truth, but by becoming Subject to their lawful Sovereign.

Englands repentance must be according to this, they must seek the Lord,
through Christ, by subjection to their lawful Government and Governors, from
which they have revolted; the formality of Repentance from Rebellion is a
return to Loyalty. Sir, Restitution is an essential act of Repentance; the
only restitution made for repented of Rebellion, is a re-establishment of
Authority, and a return to Loyalty, becoming subject for conscience sake:
Israel repenting the Rebellion into which they run after self-advancing
Absalom; 2 Samuel 19.
they fell to strife among themselves about fetching home their King: Nay,
Shimei's Character of repentance is this, Thy servant does know that I have
sinned, therefore behold I am come down the first of all the House of Joseph to
meet my Lord the King; if God will do England good, he will give them hearts
to give God the things that are Gods, and Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
which have been too long held back with violence.

I wish, Sir, that none may pretend an inconsistency between this act of
Repentance, and the Good Old Cause of God and his People, for whoever shall so
do, must sell themselves unto positive blasphemy, and perpetual profaneness;
pretending that to be the Cause of God which is expressly repugnant to his
revealed Will, and resolving Rebellion is the honor of Religion, and only work
of Saints; and wilfully shut their eyes, that they may cozen their Consciences:
For, Sir, is not the Kings Preservation, Honor and Happiness, the Privileges
of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, and defense of the Government by
King, Lords and Commons, written in such Legible Characters in the Parliaments,
Cities, and Armies Declarations, Remonstrances, and Protestation; in all our
Vows, Oaths, and Covenants, as the Good Old Cause for which so much blood and
treasure was expended, that none but the wilful impenitent can choose but run
and read it; I shall for more full conviction refer you to Mr. Prynns Good Old
Cause truly stated, which I know you have seen,

Neither, Sir, would I have the hazard of any man's life or estate, threatened by
this repentance, be any bar unto it; for, Sir, this hazard is self-created, and
sinfully procured; which, should it be inflicted, were but the proper effect of
Justice, better to be undergone here then hereafter unto eternity; happy may be
the stroke of Justice which may save a Soul from Hell; the sinful escapes of
humane Justice will one day be found exceeding sad: Running away from the rod
of correction, is an heightning rebellion, and note of a Reprobate; and whither
will such fly from Gods all-seeing eye? Or will it boot any to contend with
God for impunity? Oh no, it will not.

But Sir, such men may be worse feared then hurt; Repentance is the sponge of
Guilt in the sight of men, as well as in the sight of God: God who has the
hearts of Kings in his hand, and turns them as the rivers of water, relents
toward a repenting Ephraim, and makes David relent toward a rebellious
Absalon; Royal Clemency never shines brighter then in returns from violent
exile; Shall any be put to death this day in Israel? for do I not know that I
am this day King in Israel? Is David's answer to the son of Zerviah provoking
against Shimei, who had full well deserved it? Any indifferent Politician can
give assurance of indemnity for general delinquency, especially, when true
repentance is the spring that does enforce it.

Lastly, Sir, let none stand up against this act of Repentance, and cry, It is
dangerous to Religion, a Free Parliament will call home the King, and he is
rude and profane, and converseth among Papists, and will bring Popery into the
Land with him. To such I say in short, How came they into Gods Chair to become
solicitous of Event? is uncertain fear of an issue any ground of bar to duty?
Where is our Faith should carry us on in duty against all dread? Needs God our
Sin to preserve the Sanctity of his holy Name? Will not this prove a sad
support unto Religion? But is not this fear groundless? Is not the King a
Protestant born and brought up? bound in the same Solemn League and Covenant
with our selves? Has not our sin subjected him to the saddest temptation to
turn Papist that ever poor Prince underwent? Does not Mr. Prynn tell us plainly
and upon good demonstration, That his exile is the great propagation of the
Catholic Cause, and high courtesy to Rome? Sir, these obstructions are all
frivolous, and so will appear, if ever God pour on the Nation a Spirit of
Repentance.

Worthy Sir, I have with the plainness of a Minister, and freedom of a
Friend, given my thoughts on your Inquiry, and that not Rashly, but as having
consulted the Oracles of God. And I cannot but beg that you persist no longer
in your way of sin: Oh that God would give you and your Fellow Members hearts
to give him Glory, and after your success, to take to your selves shame for
your sinful subversion of an Established Government, and that with pretense of
Law, calling your selves a Parliament, when your own Consciences tell you, you
are no such thing. Sir, England is inclining to repent, if your House prove not
a Sheba to sound again the Trumpet of Rebellion. However, my advice is, Let the
Ministers of God cry out, Repent, England, Repent, Repent; and let all the
people of God pray, That England may return and seek unto the Lord, and to
David their King: Then shall we be established enjoying our Princes as at the
first, and our Rulers as at the beginning. I have no more, save with the
Prophet Ezekiel, They, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear,
for they are a Rebellious House, yet shall know there has been a Prophet among
them, Ezekiel. 2.5.

FINIS.
BERITH ANTI-BAAL. OR, Zachary Croftons appearance, BEFORE The Prelate Justice
of Peace. PRETENDING To bind the Covenant and all Covenanters to their good
behaviors.
WHen Dr. John Gauden first appeared in the World with his Analysis to the
sinful loosing of St. Peter's bonds, under a plausible pretense of counselling a
Christian friend, in a matter of great concernment, and resolving the
conscience, in the point of the solemn League and Covenant, and its opposition
to Episcopacy; Mr. Crofton considering the good observation of Gregory the
great, Lib. Mor. 22. cap. 2^.
made of the course of Heretics, sub specie eonsulendi agunt negotium
seducendi, that they pretending to play the Casuistes, to resolve conscience,
and to advise in matters of Religion, drive on the design of seducing souls,
and subverting the truth, and Salvation. Thought it no less then his duty to
consider the same very seriously, and to try it by the rule of Scripture and
right reason; and finding in that book (what ever was the Authors intention)
too great a tendency to enervate all sacred bonds, Invalidate, yea annihilate
the solemn League and Covenant, and thereby supplant the peace, and happiness
of our restored King and Kingdom, he apprehended it his duty, as a Minister of
Jesus Christ, and his Church, (though the meanest and least to be regarded) to
intimate to the worshipful person concerned, and (by him) those to whom that
book should come, Sir ^.B.
the dissatisfaction, and delusive danger, he found in that book; and therefore
he did on July 8. 1660. send after it an Analepsis, or St. Peter's bonds abide,
detecting the impiety thereof, in subverting the Covenant, by a pretended
interpretation thereof, nay enervating the sacred obligation and power of all
Oaths, by the principles therein suggested; and its excee^ing imbecility, as
to the satisfaction of conscience, unto which it professed. This done, Mr.
Crofton composed himself in s^lence, and submission, waiting for the reply of
the reverend Author of the Analysis, but received none, only more then one,
though one (a stranger to Mr. Crofton,) more especially told him, Dr. Gauden
thanked Mr. Crofton for his civility, and yielded to his reason; yet at length
(how engaged I know not) he appeared to repeat the same things, and almost
words, in an Epistle to an Anonymous book, called, Doubts and scruples, but
repaired to the Oxford reasons, as his fort against the Covenant, in which,
(with other books of the same nature,) Mr. Crofton though (good, (once for all)
to consider what was said, or could be said against the Covenant, and to answer
them by several Antitheses, which he did in his Analepsis Anelepthe, or the
fastening of St. Peter's fetters, and so thought his work on that subject to have
been done, being established, and enforced by the learned, pious, and judicious
Covenanters plea against absolvers, both which must receive a Logical, and
clear theological confutation, ad grecas calendas, and therefore did apply
himself to his ordinary Ministry; and his little spare time to such other
things, as might be profitable to Gods Church, and prevent the backsliding of
our covenanted reformation, but

Hark, What is this, is cried? Dr. Gaudens Reply to Mr. Croftons answer, I
must sure see that: Hem, quid video, what is this, I see? a book with a fair
bulck, nigh forty sheets of Paper, to vindicate Dr. Gaudens Analysis, (why not
Loosing of St. Peter's bonds, is he beaten out of that Title, and ashamed to use
or own it any longer) contained in three* answered in five sheets of Paper, ten
at the most, (if you take in the Anatomy of his nonsense and blasphemy) long
looked for comes at last; it sure, will answer expectation? No, it intends no
such thing; after its ten months travel, it will profess no more, then to
vindicate his Analysis.

Parturiunt montes, nascetur tandem ridiculus mus. As Mountains great, travels
a man of worth,
At length a Mouse (swollen like a Toad,) creeps forth.
Howsoever, Mr. Crofton, nay the Covenant is concerned in it, it must be taken
up and considered, what Title is that it bears? Anti Baal-Berith; Sure the
Printer has abused him by a transmutation, the Reverend Doctor cannot be so
mad, as to account the Solemn League and Covenant, a Baal-Berith; a Covenant
for Baal, which he himself swar, and only labors to interpret, and in the
positive part of it does bind unto a reformation of Religion according to the
word of God, which kills, and example of the reformed Churches, who have cast
out Baal, and his Communion Table, set Altarwise, Altar (I should say) not
according to humane inventions, Papal impositions, or prelatical prescriptions,
which advance, and maintain Baal, (if not against) competitour with the Lord,
and in the negative part of it, binds to the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy,
superstition, heresy, schism, and profaneness, under some of which, certainly
Baal must be couched at the least; if not visible in Popery, visibly supported
by Prelacy, must not the man be out of his wits, who shall call this Covenant a
Baal-Berith? If the Doctor did direct this title, and in this book do pursue
it, it is pity but D. B. or some Anatomist should discover his nonsense and
blasphemy now made as plain, as the Nose on his Face; but I will have more
charity.

The utmost this book pretends to, is to bind the Covenant and Covenanters to
their good behaviors, (not abandon, or abolish it, as a Baal-Berith) and to
this, they are ready to submit, when summoned by a just authority, for they
are, and ever have been (qua tales) as Covenanters of a good behavior, neither
bound nor presuming to endeavor beyond their places and callings, though their
reality, constancy, and sincerity therein, by Preaching, or Writing (the works
of Ministerial calling) does not a little vex and displease some Idle Lordly
Bishops, and make them complain of the Covenanters misbehaviour in disturbing
them on their Velvet couches, or not coming before their Lordships with such
cap and knee, and may it like your Grace, as they look for: but

Who is this that will bind the Covenant and Covenanters to their good
behavior? It is done by the Author of the Analysis: who, Dr. Gauden? I confess
he is made a Bishop, but is he yet made a Justice of peace? or do these
coincidere by his consecration? I have heard indeed he was entertained into his
Diocese, and City of Exeter, like one of his Majesty's Lieutenants at War, and
passed through rancks and files of men of War, not Citizens in their Civil
Garb; well, be it so; but methinks, our Bishops should not yet cry out, Ecce
duo gladia, but if it be his Majesty's pleasure, I shall submit, and Mr.
Crofton is ready to appear, and to give such Security as his Worship shall
demand; For he must tell him this is not the first time, Mr. Crofton hat^ been
(on the score of the Covenant) called upon to be bound to his good behavior; I
remember on the trial of a Minister (at the quarter Sessions held at Namptwich,
in the County of Chester,) Indicted for opposing the Engagement, to be true and
faithful to the Commonwealth, without King or House of Lords, Mr. Crofton (at
the desire of his brethren who thought it their duty to stand by their
suffering brother) did urge in his behalf, that the Engagement did interfere
with the Solemn League and Covenant; unto whom the Attorney for the
Commonwealth made no other reply, save, Suckling will you speak, Suckling what
will you speak? to which Mr. Crofton (then young as well as little) made this
short return, have you not read that out of the mouths of babes and sucklings,
God will ordain strength to confound his foes; on which, the enraged Attorney
prayed the good behavior, which fiery Justice Gerrard enforced against Mr.
Crofton, who desired the judgment of the Bench before he would find surety; and
they declared, Mr. Crofton had only as a Minister urged the Covenant, and a
place of Script^re against the Attorney, which was proper to him as a Minister,
and could be no misbehaviour; and so he was discharged. I hope I shall have no
less Justice, from a Convocation of Prelate Justices, then those who were
civil, and under an Usurper.

But let us pass from the Title, and look into the body of the book, and here I
must remem^er, Robora parentum, refe^unt liberi, the growth of the Children
shows the strength of the Parent. And the bulk of this book, must bespeak no
little strength in the Author, but wherein lies his strength? In the passions
of his soul, in the Pride of his spirit, Profaneness of heart, and natural
fluencie of words, but in neither Rhetoric, nor reason, humane or divine,
natural or Theological.

Whosoevever in his right mind reads but this book, will find it such a rudis
indigestaque moles, a me^r chaos of confusion, and intricate labyrinth of words
(not in themselves but) rudely scattered, and flung out, without any due
dependence or coherence, as in the Turkish Alchoran, and worse then in the
Rabbis Talmud; the whole method of it (though a pretended reply to a
methodical exception, which might have directed him to order) is so indigested
and full of confusion and disorder; nothing defined or distinguished;
Episcopacy, (the subject of the debate) no way described, or explained; so that
every common capacity reading it, runs into a wilderness of words, by want of
relation and connection, leaving his understanding at a loss, as to scope or
drift, gazing as on unknown pictures, had not a marginal note (related most an
end to words more then matter) like the bungling workman in the Painters art,
written this is a Lion, this a Bear, and that a Wolf.

Lest the reverend Author should think I do him wrong, I must make bold to give
a taste thereof, leaving his abusive Anatomist to bundle up his Nonsense and
blaspemy, which what ever it did in his Analysis, I am sure lies scattered in
every page of this book; If the Justices assigning a bastard born, page 150.
to be kept, because, quod fieri non debuit factum valet, which men of any
brains refer to moral, not natural entities; or Mr. Crofton says Episcopacy
must not be restored though it be good, if not proved to be necessary, but he
that vows to take away my horse, must not say, he will not change his vow;
until it appear my horse is not only good but necessary for me, page ^9^.
may be taken for Nonsense, which certainly for its profoundness of reason
would make an understanding horse to break his bridle. Or, if it may be any way
accounted blasphemy, to denominate that a Baal-berith, which is, a Solemn
League and Covenant, for the glory of God, advancement of the Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus, the honor and happiness of the King and his posterity, made on
sense of the plots, conspiracies, attempts and practices of the Enemies of God,
and true Religion, and expressly binding to a reformation of Religion, according
to Gods word, and example of the best reformed Churches; open, vowed Enemies to
Baal; and to an extirpation, of whatsoever is contrary to found Doctrine, and
the power of godliness, all which, admitting it extended to one particular
thing which ought not to have been removed, (yet tended at the most but to the
been esse of Religion) in which respect, it at most could be rendered but
imprudent, or unjust in that point, and not a Baal-Berith.

Or if the reviling, with most opprobrious terms, as factious, seditious,
rebellious, perfidious pack (which I leave the Anatomist to gather up and
present unto the world) the most lawful, rightly called and constituted
Assembly of the Lords and Commons, Princes and principal Rulers of the people,
by his late and present Majesty often, and openly owned as a Parliament, and
invested, during their being, with the fullest Authority of the Nation; and
thereby despising Dominions, and speaking evil of Dignities, may be accounted
blasphemy:

Or if false and impudent accusations of the Covenant and Covenanters to have
plotted, contrived, occasioned, and effected the Kings barbarous murder, from
which all sober men (in their right wits) must acquit it, and them, as violated
and oppressed, trodden down and ruined, to make way for that accursed act by
men (on whom God has avenged the quarrel of the Covenant) may be accounted
blasphemy:

Or if railing and despightful speaking, in the height of rage and fury, in the
most base, Billingsgate, obscene, scurrillous, opprobrious and disgraceful
terms that anger could dictate, or envy could devise, which breaks through
his own professed integrity, page 7.
and those holy charms by which he pretends to restrain his revenge, and flies
out beyond the gravity of a Minister, authority of a Bishop, sobriety of a
Christian, or modesty (much more honesty) of a man, unto the height of
effeminate scolding and uncivil ribaldry, with which he has stuffed more then
twenty sheets of his Book, may be accounted blasphemy.

I must indeed confess in the heat of his anger he has treated me with as much
civility as could be expected from a Bishop to a Presbyter, judged rigid, and
consist with so much railing at another with the same breath; often professing
to know and keep a difference between me and his other Antagonist,
acknowledging Mr. Croftons civility, reason, honesty, ingenuity, and the like;
yet not without some drops of his sarcastical pen; as little Mr. Crofton, so
great a Dictator, Presbyterian pertness and petulancy, hold, odious, and
fallacious, and the like, which are very little spots in his feasts of love,
and plain errata, and slips of passion in comparison of that series and serious
mood of scolding with the other, whom he has coupled with Mr. Crofton in his
vindication, yet is enough to guide Mr. Crofton, what to look for, and observe
that it is with Bishop Gauden, as Rivet notes of Bishop Mountague, Non potest
vir ille, sine convitiis, quenquam a quo dissentit vel in levissimis nominare;
This man can scarce name without reproach any man from whom he differs in the
least thing and sleightest matter; But it may be this is the expression of
Prelatical state and pomp; but the Lord deliver me from rendering railing for
railing: I do not delight to rake in this puddle; And therefore with one note
more I pass him over, and that is,

His levity and pride in proclaiming his own worth and dignity, as if far from
his neighbors, or that they would not, or indeed could not commend him, soaring
aloft in his ambitious self-apprehensions into an equality with the chief
Fathers of the Church, beginning his Epistle to the Reader with An having had
the honor and happiness, after the example of the great Athanasius, the
industrious St. Austin, our own Archbishop Whitgift, Mr. Rich. Hooker, to
encounter the enemies of this Church, King and Kingdoms with success: When
alas he never yet came nigh the last and least of them in a conflict; If
little Mr. Crofton could have answered God and his conscience for so vain an
expense of time, he had hampered your Hieraspistes, and strained your sighs and
tears, no less then he has done your Analysis, and yet could not for shame
have crowed of any valiant act, in vanquishing the shadow of a Disputant; and
in page 8. He must make the world to take notice of his high honor, in
attendance on better persons and better employments, getting the Bishopric of
Exeter unto himself, which hindered his Reply for so long a time, Sir, We will
excuse you if your friends do not with blame to you say You are come too soon:
Yet they, as we, must believe, if your say so be enough, that your affirmations
are beyond any rational or conscientious Reply, page 151. because indeed they
never reach reason, or pinch conscience: But your Lordship is pleased to tell
us, that you have condescended to consider our exceptions, Sir I thought it had
been a Casuists duty to consider all objections, and a Ministers to endeavor
all satisfaction, but I must remember you were on your Episcopal Sea, when
little Mr. Croftons Analepsis was laid at your feet, to be taken up, or kicked
away; but enough of this, it is more fit for your Anonymous Anatomist, then for
a man of modesty, who shall keep himself distinct, as you have differenced him,
and shall therefore desire to weigh, what your Worship has against his
Analepsis.

Mr. Crofton is in this elaborate tract dealt with a part, but the little man
is so light, that he is tossed up and down the Wilderness, that seeking, he
cannot without tyring, find himself, in these indeed tedious, and entangled (as
your self calls them) animad versions; he did according to his little reason,
unravel your last snarled skain, and resolved it into a regular method, which
methinks Sir might have kept your fluency within some bounds, and have curbed
your wild excursions; he showed you the Rocks against which your resolution
dashed, and digested your discourse into argumentation as well as he could, and
dare say, you appeared better to the Reader in Mr. Croftons Analepsis, then in
your own Analysis, why kept you not to this? I promise you if this be
Rhetoric, I shall not love it, till it keep to rule, be plain, pure,
perspicuous and methodical (without which it is but natural fluency of words,
and volubility of tongue) and not fordid, tedious, obscure, flat, wild, rabid,
raging, empty and barely wordy, without sentence, confused and immethodical, as
is yours, unto the very height of exorbitancy: take notice of it, if I be (as
God forbid I should be) Archbishop of Canterbury, and an appeal be made to the
Archp. against your writings, I will adjudge you, instead of your Marginal
digitations to your Reader, to place over every Paragraph, the figure by which
you frame your sentence, and mood by which you form your argument; for now you
have vindicated your Analysis, I must send to you to pray an Analysis of your
vindication; my reason it is too little to make it; I must be fain to guess
your meaning by your mumping.

The Doctors great design in his Analysis, professed to reconcile the Covenant
and Episcopacy, but how unhappily he lost it, and miscarried in it, was
modestly declared by little Mr. Crofton, (whom I apprehend this great Doctor
scorns to admit as a Dictator, so as to take notice of, or amend his errors;)
on which his conscience cannot but tell him, all his Casuistical endeavou^s
have been, and must needs be shipwrackt, without all possibility of
satisfaction to conscience, how ever it may catch the fancy of his prelatical
proselytes, who are pleased with a sound against the Covenant, and consider not
the certainty of it, and are ready jurare in verba Episcopi, be they never so
groundless; the say so of a grave Prelate, is a sufficient reason of their
faith.

The inadvertency of his expressions both for their fury, and falsehood, against
Presbytery, the Parliament, and all those whose consciences cannot correspond
with his propounded Prelacy, as well as against his particular Antagonists, is
so far from being abated, that it is more vigorously acted, and made so
accumulative, that his book runs over with foams of rage, filling (as I said
before) more the twenty sheets of paper with such furious and foolish
objurgatio^s, ridiculous reflections, and scurrilous chiding, that he that
enters this book, and passes but the Threshold, must needs say, this man is in
no temper to resolve a doubt, or satisfy a conscience, he is in the heat of a
scolding passion, and so lay it aside, as unfit to be read: really had angry
Mr. Crofton been his Chaplain, he must have become an index expurgatorius to
his book, and presumed to dictate more sobriety and meekness, before it had
seen the world; for that the wrath of man, cannot work the righteousness of
God, men cannot but judge this book an hot contest, and violent plea for his
prelatical honor and revenues, in which beginning to be warm, he grows as
hot as a Toast, and fearing to lose them, falls into a fretting chafe against
the Covenant, and Covenanters, which promise them little security, and
therefore runs his rage against sacrilege, and buying Bishops Lands, (from
which it is well known Mr. Crofton is free, nor indeed does he charge him)
rather then for his Episcopal office in Christ's Church, the conscience of which
would have made him sensible, a Bishop must be no brawler, but patient.

In this angry mood, we cannot expect him to be very clear o^ certain in the
ratio formalis objecti, the object of the obligation scrupled, and disputed;
the want of which has been noted to him by the different acceptance of the
term Bishop, and Episcopacy; the which Mr. Crofton did not only explain, but
propose unto him a doublesence thereof, affirming the one to be Scriptural,
primitive, and Catholic, the other to be Papal, Novel and tyrannical, and on
the variety of his words, prayed a positive determination which of them he
owned, and would reconcile to the Covenant; but his greatness would not
condescend to make a choice of either, according to Mr. Croftons proposal, but
that we may know he scornfully takes notice that Mr. Crofton had observed his
uncertain proposal of the object, in ambiguous words, he affords us a
parenthesis, in the threshold of his book, which runs thus.

The way of Episcopal order and authority (that is lest Mr. Crofton should
again mistake my meaning, the presidency of one chief Prebyter or Bishop among
many, and above all lesser Bishops or Presbyters in his Diocese, according to
the ancient custom, and laws E^clesiastical and civil) I thank you Sir, for
this grave cast of your eye, did Mr. Crofton mistake you without cause; or
clamor it to your damage? or did he not take the pains to pick up your words,
and put them together, and tell you that some of them speld one thing, and some
another distinct from that, and modestly desire which you would own, and stand
by.

Sir, the spirit and men of your Diocese, are said to be near a kin to the
Welchmen, and they must have leave to tell their tale twice, and for ought I
see you must tell yours thrice, for I am as likely to mistake you as I was
before, such an Heraclitus (...) you are in your Aenigmatical extrication of
your own made intricacies, and rhetorical labyrinths: Before I presume to
determine your meaning, I must enquire what you mean by Presidency? whether you
intend not to extend it, beyond the gradus of a Moderator, unto the power and
efficacy of a President of a College at the least? what you mean by above all
less and subordinate Bishops? whether Officio and honor Cathedrae, or Ordinis
authoritate, which your Episcopal order and authority does suggest; though the
title Bishop given by you to Presbyters does seem to mitigate it. What do you
mean by ancient custom? only that which has long use, and can plead
prescription, and which may have run long, and yet leave us a space, in which
we may see and say, this was not from the beginning? You do indeed profess to
the first six hundred years, but I dare say the last three hundred of them are
those you would chiefly cleave to. And what do you mean by Ecclesiastical Laws?
where are these recorded? and by what authority were they composed? When you
have given me a plain, clear and distinct resolution to these, if I mistake
your meaning let me be blamed, till then blame me not. I love not the
Rhetoric, which contrary to its end, proposes objects with that obscurity,
that they cannot be with certainty determined, and that under a profession to
clear and convince the conscience. Yet Sir, to do you right,

When I observe you page 114. eat your own words, and offer (as if your
Brethren Prelates had brought you now into Cassanders School, and charged you
to make an Apology for your over-friendly proposal to Presbyterians) which you
pursue by telling us, All Presbyterians do hug Bishop Ushers Reduction of
Episcopacy (which in your Analysis you assured us did reduce Episcopacy to an
efficacious conjunction with Presbytery; and on which Mr. Cr. concluded that
sense, which you say he seemed in a sober mood to own, An Episcopacy consistent
with the Covenant, page 191.) but now say, will reduce Bishops to primitive
poverty (the estate which attended and enforced their piety) and therefore tell
us, That humble learned and pious Lord Primate, propounded that reduction not
in order to bind the hands of, or limit Bishops in England and Scotand; but as
a condescension and expedient at present to disarm and bind the hands of
Presbyters and people. Sir, who told you that this was the politic stratagem
of that pious Bishop? did not Bishop Wren? Sure I am, he came not down from
heaven to authorize you in your Book to call him hypocrite, and to tell all the
world, he had in Machiavillian policy, by his grave and judicious authority
affirmed, That it was apparent out of the Word of God, and practice of the
primitive times, that Presbyters had an intrinsecal power unto all Jurisdiction
and order in the Church, and by after Usurpation were thrust out; and therefore
he proposed an expedient, prudendentially to restore them to their just
authority; but never intended it to be believed as a truth, or ever be put in
practice as a duty, but to only be jingled in the ears of crying children. Are
you not ashamed, to cast such a blot, on the precious name of him, who I know
was by some Cassandrian Prelates judged Puritan, whilst alive! Do you measure
every man by your own temporizing principles? and think they are only in a
good mood, till they have opportunity to be bad and base? do not you blush to
offer this reduction in one book, and call it in, in another? But whilst I see
you thus play fast and loose, I know how to trust to you, and am helped the
better to understand what you mean by Episcopal Government; and when I observe
the sovereign power by which Mr. Crofton (you say, and that truly) is not
willing to be ruled, page 216. Coordination with Kings as chief Governors by
Divine appointment, page 205. Honorable fatherhood and government, p. 203. The
legal constitution by the Laws of England, to which our Episcopacy does
pretend; the continued practice and exercise of it in this Nation; the
superiority above, and authority apart and distinct from Presbyters, whose
advice may be good and useful, but not necessary, as that which would make
every Presbyter suffragan Bishop, and the Bishop without his Presbyters a mere
^^pher. All which I find predicated (up and down your tedious discourse) of
that Episcopacy, you would advance, and which you say is not so obscure as Mr.
Crofton would pretend, but in express terms you tell us, is, That Church
polity, honor, order and government, which our Bishops had, and now have, and
that we must not by an equivocal and levelling fence, confound Bishops and
Presbyters, by a silly ^^gomac^ie, or cavil of names, distinguished by a real,
rational difference of place, honor, office, authority and use, in the Church
of Christ, which you say, no learned man can doubt of or deny (but sure you
mean affirm;) when I consider these things, I must confess, I should mistake
you, and do my self wrong (by suspending, yea stifling my judgment) if I
should not see clearly, the Episcopacy, which you pretend to reconcile to the
Covenant, is no other then that very frame and fabric of government, which
Smectymnuus tells us, was of humane invention and diabolical occasion, by which
the man of sin was made manifest, and did advance himself in the Temple of God,
innovated by Austin the Monck, so exercised that it appeared papatum alterius
mundi; which my Analepsis told you I was jealous you meant in your Analysis.

I have Sir (with tiring difficulty) discovered the ratio formalis objecti,
which you profess to reconcile to the Covenant, and make consistent with it,
and in my eyes it does seem to be the very same with that which in terminis was
covenanted to be extirpated, viz. Prelacy, that is to say, the government by
Archbishops, Bishops, their Commissaries, Chancellors, Deans, Deans and
Chapters; Archdeacons, etc. depending on that Hierarchy. But let us see how you
answer the third part of Mr. Croftons Analepsis, and acquit your self from the
imbecility of argumentation charged on you: And sir, you seem to me to take a
very preposterous and strange course, to commend the strength of your reason,
by a tedious and long confused discourse of rage, enmity and opposition at the
Covenant, or by a general hypothesis, that it must bind to what is good, pious,
just, lawful, and not against reason, religion, justice, piety, morallitie,
duty to God and man; whereas you ought to remember, that generalia non pungunt;
these may be all admitted, and Episcopacy never the nearer reconciled to the
Covenant, whereas you ought to have given us a grammatical construction,
logical resolution, genuine interpretation of that Article, which seems cross
to your Episcopacy, and by a clear acceptance, and vulgar apprehension or
general scope of its words, make it appear that the words will without
straining, admit such a sense and signification; but it may be the simplicity
(which becomes an oath) of the terms; extirpation or reformation, being
incompetible (except in a fools fancy) might strike you off this: But them you
should Sir, have given a point blank charge against that Article, which
clasheth with your Hierarchy, as binding to injury, injustice, immorality,
irreligion, against the duty we owe to God and man, and pursued that closely by
clear and convincing demonstrations, then had the Bishop showed himself a
workman who needed not to be ashamed; but let little Mr. Crofton be never so
great a Dictator he must find e quovis ligno non fit Mercurius; every tongue
well hung, cannot be well tuned, nor will natural fluencie be easily kept to
rules of art, or under the command of reason: I must be content to take you as
I find you; and follow you as well as I can in your own confusion. And Sir,

I find the fabric of your discourse, founded on some seeming principles,
which you account undoubted and eternal, then raised by some Hypotheses, or
conjectural fancies framed in your own brain, and so your strength is at length
directed against that opposition to your prelatical structure you undertook to
clear by your Analysis: this is the only order into which Mr Crofton can
reduce you, and according to which he shall now consider you.

First, Sir, your foundation is first offered to view, in pa. 8, and must be
considered, and you point to it, (by moral and immutable grounds) in the
Margin, and in the Text tell us, your Analysis was fixed on these undoubted and
eternal principles of Justice, and true Religion.

1. No man can lawfully covenant, swear, vow or engage himself contrary to that
duty he ows to God, the King, the Church, the Laws and good of his Country, or
contrary to that particular Justice and charity which he owes to himself, or
other men.

2. If any man be surprised, or hampered in such Covenanting words, or vowing
forms, he must find out such a sense of his words, as may consist with true
Religion, Justice, and known Laws, etc.

3. If this cannot fairly be done, he must presently retract his Covenant, etc.

Sir, before I can digest your Notions, and fundamental axioms as undoubted and
eternal, moral and immutable, I must demand proof for part of the first, and
then the next fall in and follow; think you Sir, a man may in no case swear, to
endeavor in his place or calling to remove what is established by Law? if so,
you must prove it, I do not believe you; for the laws which were good, may
become hurtful: will not you Bishops swear, and pursue it to have the statute
17. Caroli repealed? if you say no, I shall not believe you; nor will you be
easily made to believe it is unlawful, and yet I dare boldly affirm it is
contrary to your duty: Again, is every Oath unlawful which is against the
particular charity and Justice, a man owes to himself? I cannot believe it; a
Merchant may find it to be much for his gain, that he Trade to a place, which
is to be excluded by League between two Nations, he is required to swear; may
he stand off and say, Charity begins at home, my particular charity does carry
me to Trade thither, to my own enriching, I may not lawfully swear against it?
Preach this Doctrine, and the people will love you better then your Prince; my
own particular justice, does bind to exact the utmost mite of the Covenants
forfeiture or damages, which I recover against a man; may I not lawfully
mitigate it; and on sense of the man's poverty, and my own credit, as not
revengeful and cruel; may I not swear, I will not take one mite, or but one
half? you are Sir, no Chapman for me, that will not give me leave to cut a
thong out of my own hide. As to your second, if a man have so sworn, and be
surprised, or hampered by Covenanting words, he must seek to find a just sense,
if you mean of the words, according to their natural signification, and others
vulgar acceptance, as well as the matter he would perform, I shall not much
quarrel with you; only tell you, the fencing of an Oath, when sworn, is a
Tickle slippery stone to place in a foundation, it is a snare to devour holy
things, and after vows to make enquiry.

But Sir, for your third, not finding such a sense, he must fly off and retract
his Oath, I can in no cause consent, until you have cleared it, that the Oath
of the Gibeonites was not against the duty they owed to God, their Laws and
Country, their own charity and justice; or that Jeptha's vow was not against
his own particular charity and justice (you have some whimsies concerning
these, we shall weigh them in their proper places) I am sure these were both
surprised, and whatever you fancy the one did, I am sure the other did not go
about to sense it, as they might much more clearly and rationally then you do
the Covenant. If Sir, these be your political axioms, I am sure the Heathen
would soon tell you, You are like to bring an old house on the head of humane
Society, and lay them open to all kind of persidie: what now, must we expect
the fabric and superstructure to be raised and fixed on so false and slippery
a foundation, is like to prove? a falsis nil nifi falsa sequuntur, such as is
the Thesis, such must be Hypothesis; the following matterials be of the same
nature, and bear a Symerie to the groundwork.

And Sir, when I gather up your rafters (promiscuously scattered) to the
raising of your Hierarchical, Anti-covenant structure, I find them to be a
hydra of ecclesiastical heresy, and political error, by which your Prelacie
seems to work (like the man of sin from whom it was derived, the papacy, of
which it cannot be denied to be a species, though alterius mundi) with all
deceiveableness unto all unrighteousness; the which you must give me leave to
pile up and lay together, that your self, and such on whom you pretend
influence may discern them. Yet Sir, I have more charity then to count you an
Heretic; I judge them to be the exuberancie of your inconsiderate loquacity,
the excrescencie of an unregarded tongue, darkening knowledge by words without
wisdom; for in a multitude of words there cannot want much sin: However by a
bold and base petitio principii you build upon them, I hope when you see them
naked, you will retract them, and run away from your own structure, lest it
tumble on your own head, to your ruin as well as shame.

Concerning Episcopacy, the Object and Ratio formalis of the debate; I have
observed your unwillingness to be mistaken, and therefore have done my
diligence to understand you, and do think I have taken you right (and as your
present state does declare to all the world) and whilst I say the Solemn League
and Covenant does bind in the plain, literal and obvious sense to the
extirpation thereof, you do determine it cannot so do, rationally, justly,
honestly, piously, morally, religiously, with an heap of such words; but if it
so bind us it is void; but instead of those clear, constant and pregnant beams
of right reason and true Religion which you promised in your Analysis, and I
demanded in my Analepsis, you us present with the foggie fancies of your own
brain, and run away with them ^y your fluid and gliding tongue or discourse, as
if granted; as your moral and immutable principles indispensably and undeniably
true, whilst every knowing man will tell you nothing but a flood of vanity can
drive you to imagine them so to be: Particularly you conclude, as without
contradiction these Ten things, which in their aspect and appearance will be
found (by any man conversant in Scripture, and acquainted with the estate and
affairs of the Church) notorious falsehoods.

1. Presbytery has no divine appointment, was not commanded by God, never used
in the ancient Church, has nothing in it piously, morally or po^itically good
or necessary. Epist. to the Reader. How Sir? can you read of the Elders of
Ephesus, and the Presbytery that ordained Timothy, and say Presbytery was not
commanded by God? Can you read in the Fathers, of the Presbytery advancing by
their own power a primus Presbyter, in the ancient canons of the essentialitie
of the Presbyteries concurrence, in all acts of Discipline of the Fathers
Epistles to, and concerning Presbyteries, and yet say Presbytery was never used
in the Church? Can you consider Presbytery is a College of Gospel Ministers,
gove^ning communi consilio by j^ynt advice, and yet conclude there is in
Presbytery nothing piously, morally, or politically good? Will not every
child in his double Psalter tell you, In the multitude of Counselors there is
safety? and every Schoolboy teach you plus vident oculi, quam oculus? and yet
are you so blind as to see no moral, political good in Presbytery? but this is
but one Doctors opinion; the meanest Clerk in your Cathedral would tell you,
your Grace was at a loss when you thus concluded. Nor do you hit the next.

2. Presbytery was not conjoined to Episcopacy (if you mean in its first
constitution, and the order of it, which was without and before Bishops,
afterward made by its power, you begin well) nor has any power or authority
unto the governing of the Church, is no way necessary to a Bishop, otherwise
then by advice, when called and required, and that to be taken or refused at
the Bishops pleasure, page 289. I pray Sir, help the Papists and untie that
knot, whether Peter received the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, as a Presbyter
or Bishop, ordinary Minister, or Apostle, or prince of the Apostles. It is pity
John Chrysostom had not you for his Advocate, when he was charged as with a
crime for ordaining without his Presbyters: I hope the correction of the
ancient Canons being committed to you, you will purge out those that confine
the Bishop to his chair, to declare and execute the decrees of the Presbytery,
and make void the ordinations and censures made without the Presbytery, forget
them of the Council of Carthage. And Sir, there is one passage or two in
Scripture worth your notice; Let him tell the Church, sufficient to such an one
is (...), the punishment inflicted by many: You know Sir they are words that
imply plurality, dignity and authority. I pray Sir, when your pen is in your
hand, draw a line through these words, in the form of ordering Priests,
minister the Discipline of the Church; to what end should they promise faithful
diligence to that which they have nothing to do withal, and concerns them
not. But to the third.

3. To endeavor to advance Presbytery to exercise in the rule and government
of the Church, is Schism and Superstition, page 214, 215. How, is Church
Government an Article of Christian faith, and an essential act of Divine
Worship? Oxford Reasons Sect. 3.
your friends at Oxford were of another mind, when they charged the Scots
supposed say so, to look like Schism and Superstition: What fools were Clemens
Alexandrinus, Augustine, and Gregory the great, and other Fathers to Father John
Gauden; they left us this ground of Schism and Superstition, Vnitas Ecclesiae
catholicae non consistit in uniformitate disciplinae, sed in unitate fidei: but
our Bishop stands on their shoulders, and can see further then little Mr.
Crofton, who yet hopes to see as far, as little Zacheus in his Sicamore Tree,
advancing Presbytery as Gods institution, and to keep the unty of the spirit in
the b^nd of peace.

4. Bishops are the sole and chief cisterns, conservators, conduit, and
derivators of all holy orders, discipline and Government, the principal Pillars
and Fathers of the Church. page 221, 248.

I hope Sir, you will then make your succession as clear as the sun: I would
make a journey to Exeter, to have the intricacies thereof well unravelled, what
became of the Churches, when in Alexandria and per totum Aegyptum, the
Presbyters did ordain; and think you, that Denmark demolished the Church, when
Christian their third King did by public edict, beat down your Pillars? your
charity is more to the reformed Churches, then to condemn or censure them as no
Churches, page 196. but yet you will cut off their pipes, cisterns, conduits,
and make them come fetch Waters at your Wells; your charity is very rational.

5. Episcopal presidency, and authority, is a Sovereign power, and spiritual
jurisdiction in ordination, confirmation, censures, rebuking, silencing,
excommunication, absolution, and other exercise of Ecclesiastical power;
without, above, and against Presbyters and people. page 215, 229. Well said D.
Gauden, I like a man that can speak out, Mr. Crofton shall know your meaning
anon; but your jurisdiction is so spiritual, that to him your Sovereign power
is invisible; it is probable you may make him feel it, though he cannot see it,
but I am confident it must be in his body, not in his soul; make good this
description by Scriptures, Fathers, Divine principles, or good Authors Popish,
or Protestant, and if you make not a full formal Pope, I will burn the
Covenant, renounce my reason, and believe as your Church believes; for all that
I have met with, give Presbyters an interest (if not the greatest share) with,
and without the Bishops, in every of these acts of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

6. The Episcopacy which England had, or the English Hierarchy for its
difference from Presbytery, in place, honor, office, authority, use, and
honorable support, is of universal tradition, and observati^n, in all ages and
places, eminent in the judgment and practice of antiquity, and the Church, from
Christ and his Apostles until now of late, in use and authority in the Church,
as the Lords day, and infant baptism; which to deny is impudence, and falsity,
against the very letter, and practice of the new Testament, and judgment of all
antiquity. Page 198, 220* 228, 248. How Sir, the practice and letter of the new
Testament, and yet but a tradition, you sure will say more of it, you do well
to parallel it to the Lords day, and infant Baptism, for they will be evidently
grounded on the practice, and letter of the new Testament; and so be found more
then a tradition: but Sir, will you stand by it, that Episcopacy was an
universal observation in all ages, and eminent in all places till of late? I
pray Sir, enquire when it came into Scotland; and how basely it was driven out
of Denmark, they are places in the Christian World: again was Englands
Hierarchy distinct from Presbyters, in place, office, authority, honor, use,
and honorable support, of universal tradition, and practice? how am I mistaken
in the poverty of the Primitive Bishops, and the parity at least, of
Presbytery to Episcopacy: I must borrow your Spectacles when I look into any
thing of antiquity, but sure Sir, Smecty^^nuus will not think you modest, to
charge impudence and falsity on such as deny it, they were bold to contradict
your opinion in this very point, asserted by the remonstrant, your
predecessor, and assign several things, in which the English Bshops differ
from the primitive, when you have reconciled them, we will find you more; but
they will be enough for one book of forty sheets.

7. This universal custom is not to be despised by any sober Christian; yet
this Episcopacy is not only tradition, and universal observation, for it has
further the stamp and impression of divine order and wisdom, Scripture
precept, and Apostolic pattern, all right reason, prudence and policy, page
247. we need not go far to find the precepts, can^ns, commission, power and
authority of this Episcopal jurisdiction, given by Jesus Christ, and his
Apostles, page 228. such Bishops rooted in Christ, branched in the twelve
Apostles, and spread in all the Christian world, and endowed with honorary
supports, page 220. I like you Dr, that you speak out, most Episcopal men stand
stammering at a divine right, as if afraid to say it were to be found in
Episcopacy; and yet Dr. Gauden can plainly see the stamp and impression, not
only of right reason, prudence and policy, but of divine order and wisdom,
yea Scripture precept, and Apostolic pattern, the very canons, and commission
of Jesus Christ. I must confess I am so dark sighted, I cannot see it; I dare
not incline to say, or think as Dr. Gauden does, that the Apostles were proper
Bishops, or, such as are our English Bishops, because our learned and judicious
Whitaker, (whom I judge no way short of Dr. Gauden) declares it to be the
fancy of a crack brain. Patres cum Jacobum Episcopum vocant, aut etiam Petrum,
non proprie sumunt Episcopi nomen, sed vocant eos episcopos illarum ecclesiarum
in quibus aliquando commorati sunt; and si proprie de episcopo loquuntur,
absurdum est Apostolos fuisse episcopos; nam qui proprie episcopus est, is
Apostolus non potest esse; quia episcopus est unius tantum ecclesiae, at
Apostoli plurium ecclesiarum fundatores, and inspect^res erant; non multum
distant ab insania dicere, Petrum fuisse proprie episcopum, aut reliquos
Apostolos. I hope Dr. Gauden will not charge Dr. Whittaker with impudence and
falsehood; and I think he strikes at the very root of his supposed Divine
impresion, and Apostolical practice and precedent, to which you refer us for
proof; but that this may be believed, you must needs proceed.

8. The testimonies of the Fathers, Councils and Historians, are so necessary
to the Scriptures, that without them no man can receive satisfaction,
concerning the distinct offices of the Church; the difference between the
community of Christian duties, as professors and believers of the common verity
and specialty of the office of Preachers, page 247, 248. But Sir, is a charge
of imperfection in the Scripture the only support of your Prelacy? or does it
abide as a mark of its papacy? I apprehended the Scriptures profitable for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works; which it can never be,
if we cannot by it receive satisfaction concerning the distinct offices in the
Church (which are the only means of intercourse between God and the soul) or
the common Christian duties of professors, and beleiving of the common verity,
or specialty of the off ce of preaching; certainly if the word be in this too
short, the writings of the Fathers, Councils and Historians, must needs
aedisicare in Gehennam; guide us like a dark lanthorn into inevitable danger;
for whence did they know these, if not from Scripture? this you stumbled on to
divert the dispute of the Office, name, degree, order and authority of your
Bishop, which Mr. Crofton put you upon. Sir, I am sorry I should be an occasion
of your divulging such an error, which your Anatomist will readily pick up as
piece of blasphemy; incidit in Scyllam, qui vult vitare Charybdim, you would
avoid the dispute of the Divine right of your Episcopacy, as that which was
dangegerous to your See, and have laid a foundation for another dispute
concerning the perfection of the Scriptures, as to the common duty of
Christians, and special office of Preachers; and that on a fancy too; For Sir,
Mr. Crofton would have you know, he has an audience and credence for the
Fathers, Councils and Historians, as venerable witnesses in matter of fact, but
cannot receive them as judges in matter of right, and sole Dictators of duty.
Mr. Crofton has read that when Augustine was pinched with a passage out of
Cyprian, he made answer, Sunt certilibri dominici, quorum authoritati utrique
centimus utrique servimus, ibi quaeramus Ecclesiant, ibi discutiamus causam
nostram. Sir, whatever you say in an angry mood, I will hope you will join with
me in an appeal to the Scriptures, and then I say, ibi quaeramus Episcopum,
find your Episcopacy there, for otherwise if I find its extirpation in the
Covenant, I Will stand by it, it must be extirpated, if King, and Kingdom, or
peace, and glory must be preserved from Gods angry extirpation; for bona
mutabilia are within the verge of man's vow, and reach of his hand, but you
being loosed from the truth, tumble you know not whither, and therefore you
suggest.

9. Episcopacy is a matter of Faith, essential to the being of the Church, an
eminent part of Gods Worship, which may not be wanting, withdrawn from, or
withstood, changed or covenanted against, without Schism, and superstition,
Page 195, 214, 215. Yet you dare not trust it to the trial of the Scriptures; I
promise you Sir, I dare not admit any thing as an Article of my Creed, nor
offer to God any thing as an act of his Worship, which is not plain and obvious
in the Scriptures, without the witness and Authority of Fathers, Council, or
Historian. I must adventure the schism and superstition, I hope Dr. Gauden
does not use Schism and superstition, as the old Prelates did the term
Puritan, and Englands late Tyrants did the term Malignant, as words of no
signification, but only served to nickname, and reproach the opposers of their
profane principles, and proceeding, and to deter men from the discharge of
required duty, but to secure your Prelacy, you go one step further; and
suggest, yea, speak out, that

10. Bishops are coordinate, and equal with Kings, in that commission (the
word) whereby God has left liberty to his Church, or the chief Governors
thereof, Kings or Bishops, to order all things, as they shall judge meet, Page
205. Episcopacy is unalterable by any lawful humane power, Dr. Gauden
peremtorily determines, that Parliaments, Kings, Lords and Commons have no
prudent, moral, religious and lawful authority, to change the ancient,
universal, and excellent government by Bishops, for Christian Kings and their
Parliaments are obliged to the Laws of God, and rules of Christian piety, and
policy too, of which the whole Church in its primitive example, and constant
custom is the best interpreter: No legislative power is empowred by Gods law
to bring in heresy, error, or schism into the Church; or take away the
essentials of sound Doctrine, and Christian Communion, ever owned and
maintained in the Church of Christ: page 196. well said Doctor, aut Caesar, aut
Nullus: No Bishop, no King, must now be a Scripture maxim, and article of
faith, if Smectymnuus his stir up, to the papacy, be not now held, Salmasius
his Apparatus ad papatum asserted, and Beza his Episcopi papam pepererunt
verified, by the Bishop of Exeter, I am much mistaken, but Sir have you not
stretched too far, and stepped into a praemunire? little Mr. Crofton, should fear
to be made less by the head, as guilty of Treason, sedition at the least,
should he thus confront King and Parliaments, in what all their Statutes
declare to be their own creature and constitution, changeable at their
pleasure, even from the statutes of Carlisle, and 25. of Edward the 3. Declaring
against the Pope, that holy Church was founded in prelacy, by their own
donation, power and authority: Where is Sir, the Kings Prerogative over all
persons, in all causes Ecclesiastical? What is become of your Oath of
Supremacy? can you make this peremptory determination (as your self calls it)
consist with it, any more then with your Covenant? has a gracious King lately
advanced you, to debase, nay dethrone him, and his Parliament too? I know no
better confutation of this error, then the hundred eighteen thousand, eight
hundred and forty pounds, paid by the Bishops to Henry 8. to redeem the
praemunire into which this persuasion had betrayed them, with the Petition and
Statute of the submission of the Clergy, which in my apprehension runs direct
counter to Dr. Gaudens peremptory conclusion. It has been observed to be the
fatal chance of the Deputies of Ireland, to lose their heads, and the Bishops
of England to run themselves into a Praemunire: which when his Majesty
(affected with their bold encroachment) does exact, will make them feel, and it
may be deal with them, as did the King of Denmark, provoked by the same
peremptory determinations. These Sir are your errors in matters
Ecclesiastical, which you must give little Mr. Crofton leave to tell you, are
more obvious, notorius, and abominable heresies, then was that charged upon
Aerius (though an undeniable uniuersal truth) by Epiphanius; nor does he fear
to be contradicted by any sober or judicious Prelate, resolved to keep
Episcopacy, one peep short of Papacy, unto which I shall make bold to oppose
these few conclusions of undoubted verity, and universally confessed by all
Antiquity, which (that little Mr. Crofton may not appear too great a
dictatour) let Dr. Gauden (owning sacred, or Ecclesiastic story) deny it if he
can.

1. The Lord Jesus Christ is the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls: the great,
good, chief, and only one, to whom all must be gathered; by whom all must be
ruled that will be saved, and from whom all must be authorized, that will feed
his flock.

2. The Lord Jesus executes this pastoral charge, and Episcopal function, by
the Ministry of men, successively sent, and commissioned by his immediate
authority, and in his name, without which they may not Minister to, or be
received by his flock.

3. That the mission and commission of Jesus Christ, is directed and given to
two only officers in his Church, Bishops or Elders, and Deacons, the one to
look after the bodies, outward necessities, and condition of his sheep, to
serve Tables; the other to manage all the pastoral charge, and Episcopal
office, as it immediately concerns the soul of his people.

4. That all Ministers are equally invested with, and do intrinsecally possess
authority from Christ, for administration of all acts of feeding, or ruling the
flock of Christ, without any difference of order, place, charge, name, office,
or dignity; and therefore are joined in the same general commission; called by
the same name, Bishop or Presbyter; chosen by the same characters; conseerated
after the same order; charged with the same duty, feeding or overseeing; and
challenge the same dignity, esteem, obedience and double honor from, and among
the sheep.

4. That for some time in the pure and primitive time and estate of the Church,
the Presbyters did by and among themselves govern the Church communi consilio,
without any over them, as Episcopus episcoporum, or Pastor pastorum, as having
from Christ a different order and function, yea without any gradual priority,
or pre-eminence of any particular Presbyter above the rest.

6. That in process of time the Presbyters neglecting the course and care of
Christian mortification, by which they ought to have subdued their ambition and
passions, and so silenced their schism, did (by the working of the man of sin,
and permission of God) devise a politic way or remedy thereof, and advancing
among themselves a Primus Presbyter ad schismatis remedium, who was after
dignified with the title Bishop, and was by Canons (honoris causa) placed in
Cities, who was before in any poor village: This gives just ground for
Smectymnuus note, that Episcopacy above Presbytery was an humane invention on
Diabolical occasion.

7. That all jurisdiction and ruling power was yet acknowledged to abide
originally, intrinsecally and properly in the Presbytery, whose creature the
Bishop was, to act, pronounce and execute their decrees; and therefore when
Bishops began to encroach, and invade the Presbyters liberty and authority,
to usurp and ingross their power and function, and make them subject and
servile to them; Canons were made to limit, confine and subject the Bishop,
maintain and preserve the Presbyters power in Ordination, Excommunication and
Absolution, not to be done without the Presbyters: So that Presbytery was ever
known in the Church as Christ's and his Apostles institution; and Bishops apart
and in pre-eminence to them, the Churches Canonical constitution, and
Presbyters creation; to the formality of whose advancement consensus clericorum
was essential.

8. That by this political preferment of a primus Presbyter, the man of sin did
work and exist in the Church; engrossing the power of the Presbytery; and
advancing himself above them, he assumed by degrees a Principality, to which he
made the Presbyters sworn vassals, by which became the subject of Princes
indulgence and benevolence; until capable of universal influence and extention
through the Christian world, he assumed an universal Papacy, which he executed
by subordinate Bishops, heads of Diocesses and Provinces (contracted
universalities throughout the Church) thus Beza well notes Episcopi papam
pepererunt, and Salmasius discovers the apparatus ad papatum; and many
judicious men see nothing but a gradual difference between Englands Prelacie
and Romes Papacy, this being in specie the same with that, and so a formal
papatus alterius mundi.

9. Under this usurpation, Presbytery sensible of its intrinsecal power, did
resist, and often complain, and when it was by force (acted by fraud)
restrained, yet made and continued its contests, and its paritie in order and
authority; and has ever been dogmatically asserted, and polemically debated
by, not only the enemies, but friends of the Papacy, by Canonists, Schoolmen,
Commentators and open discourses in Councils, where the Pope durst never admit
a free dispute, not so much as in the Council of Trent: and as the Reformation
of the Church proceeded, Presbytery not only pleaded, but reassumed its own
proper power and authority; and managed the affairs of the Church, as against
the Pope, so without Bishops; and England it self, though (through the policy
which too much attended and acted its reformation) it retained an Episcopacie,
yet did dethrone its spiritual jurisdiction, and resolve it into a mere humane
and civil constitution, acting circa ecclesiam, and most plainly avowed the
intrinsecal power of Presbyters, in the act of the submission of the Clergy,
and other Statutes disavowing any ecclesiastical or scriptural constitution of
Prelacie, and baring them from all juridical acts, otherwise then by the Kings
commission, and in his name: And all our English Divines, have openly asserted,
and polemically defended the power and authority of the Presbyters, in their
contests against Papists, concurrence with, and defense of the reformed
Churches, and their Presbyterial acts; and at length our late learned Primate
of Armagh; in his grave Reduction, affirmed it to be the Presbyters right, to
rule and govern the Church, and propounded an expedient in order to the
restitution thereof, too long held from them; the which being in its natural
tendency desperata causa papatus (as Voetius has well termed his defense of
the Presbyterated reformed Churches) the man of sin does under a Cassandrian
accommodation withstand, and endeavor to stifle it; in which however he
succeed to oppose, he shall not prevail, Presbytery being Christ's own
ordinance, and the primitive constitution of the Church, and mediate discharge
of his pastoral and Episcopal office; whilst this is a plain humane
constitution, conform to the course of the world, and contrary to the charge of
our great Shepherd, Matthew. 20.25. The Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion
over them, and they that are great exercise authority over them; but it shall
not be so among you.

Sir, consider well this Climax, I will assure you it is to me so obvious and
apparent in Ecclesiastical story, that he that will not see must turn
Sceptique, and must say, Non persuaseris etiamsi persuaseris; and how much
soever Presbytery be slighted, and represented to the world with the
insignificant, odious charge of Schism and superstition, Christ's kingly Office
in and over his Church is bottomed in it, and the recovery of its full liberty,
to the exercise of its just authority, is not only justice, but duty, that may,
that which must be pursued, pleaded for unto bonds, yea death it self; and
therefore to match your number; I upon these undeniable premises make these
conclusions, which if you will turn your Rhetoric into Reason, and with a calm
and composed spirit debate it, I will be bound logically and theologically to
defend against you.

Hierarchia Anglicana non est ecclesia, nec ad ecclesiae entitatem, aut
gubernationem necessaria, adeo ut ejus extirpatio estimetus schisma.

Hierarchia Anglicana est nullo modo divina, aut ecclesiastica, sed mere
humana, and civilis, cujus abolitio, and extirpatio sit licita sub juramento
faederanda.

Englands Hierarchy is not the Church, nor necessary to the being or government
thereof, so as that the extirpation thereof should be accounted schism.

Englands Hierarchy is neither divine or ecclesiastical, but merely civil and
humane, whose abolition and extirpation may be lawfully sworn and covenanted.
Until Sir these be confuted, you who blame others, do your self build upon a
plain petitio pincipii.

Dr. Gauden being well considered, will be found no less erroneous in his
Politiques then in his Ecclesiastiques, running away with certain general
notions, as if universally granted, and undoubtedly true, and agreed upon by
all; whilst indeed they are openly and generally denied: I shall gather them
together as the former, and leave the Reader to take notice of them, as he
reads his book, they running as a line through his book, some of them being
obvious in every page, where his passion would give him leave to speak like a
reasonable creature. As that

1. The Hierarchy or Episcopacy is established by the Laws of England, which I
have in my Analepsis Analepthe denied, and the Covenanters plea has more fully
and judiciously expostulated, and contradicted in Cap. 6. page 22, 23, 24. I do
aver, that the English Laws, finding Episcopacy conversant about the Church,
does restrain its exorbitancies, and direct its administrations, but neither
Canon, nor common law does establish it, and in terminis declare, and authorize
it to be the Government of the Church of England.

2. No Oath may be fully sworn, which shall bind to an endeavor to extirpate
what is established by law; and therefore, although sworn by the legislative
authority and command, or by the sharers in the legislation, it is ipso facto
void, and yet endeavor of alteration is to every man sui juris, no way
inconsistent with that passive obedience, which we owe to laws in force; and
all Laws lie veiled, and at the legislators feet, to take up, or refuse and
void; and an Oath is the most positive authentic repeal of a law veiled, and
at the least binding the sharers in the legislation, and such as shall succeed
into their capacity, to repeal those laws which establish the thing, which they
have sworn to extirpate.

3. There is no legislative power, de facto operating, and exerted, binding the
subject to any action, or obedience, unless all things concur, which may
constitute a full and formal statute law; and so all Votes, Orders, and
Ordinances, Resolves and Judgment of any the Estates of Parliament, are of no
force, power or authority, during their session; Which all Lawyers acquainted
with Englands constitution will deny, unless their Oracles of divinity have at
the Temple taught them new notions of law, which the constant practice of Lords
and Commons, and subjection and obedience of those, whom they represent, does
ordinarily contradict.

4. That Lords nor Commons, severally, nor both conjunct can impose on
themselves, or others whom they represent, any Oath, without the knowledge,
consent and command of the King, and if they do, it is ipso facto; void
therefore you suggest that the protestation which is apparently sworn by
Parliament, and Kingdom without the King, to be precarious; whilst there is
nothing of petition in it, but much of legislation, and that manifest by the
subjects obedience, even to your Champions, the Authors of the Oxford reasons;
and therefore must be proved.

5. That the Parliament putting an Oath upon themselves as the collective body
of the Nation, does not transmit an obligation to the Nation, us and our
posterities, who shall any way succeed into that national capacity; as if
Parliaments were not the Princes, yea more, the body of the people, doing in
their names, and by their consent, what ever they do; and if they do it by an
act of permanent nature, binding posterity in all ages, that can dispose their
succession into that capacity: of this see more in my fastening of St. Peter's
Fetters, Sect, 6.

6. That tumults, stirs, and the timorous withdrawings of some, does null and
void a Parliament established by a positive law, and without any positive,
visible and real force, securing their doors, to the barring of the entrance of
any the Members, to the discharge of their duties: and easy way to dissolve
Parliaments, and blow them up without Gunpowder.

7. That the Parliament can Act, Vote, Determine, and execute nothing under the
Kings withdrawing from them, into any part of his own Country: Who may yet do
all things in his infancy, or whilst in a Foreign Country, as if the place of
his retirement, or reason of his absenc^, did add or abstract to the Authority
of Parliament.

8. That the two houses alone, nor King alone, no nor King with them, have any
legislative power to decree or execute what is unrighteousnes against God or
man. So that the legislation is founded in the piety and justice of the decree;
And rebellion against authority, is acquitted by the iniquity of the command.
An authoritative aholishing of any subordinate order or society of men, is
injustice to the persons, and possessions of the present Occupants: And so
England is bound to penance, for the abolishing Monks Nuns and Abbeys; and
that no King or Parliament have a power, or can justly extirpate and abolish
out of the Nation any trade, calling or order of men any way useful to the
Commonwealth, Tinkers and Pedlers, and men of the like order, will certainly
cleave close to this conservator of their liberty.

9. That no King can lawfully swear to the diminution of his own prerogative
and power, or honorable estate, which all people in the world, must and will
contradict.

10. The solemn League and Covenant, binding to an endeavor to extirpate
prelacy, is irreconcilable to the duty we owe to God and man. First, to the
Kings Supremacy. Second, to the Church and Countries peace and honor. Third, to
the glory of God, in the Government of the Church. Fourth, to the reformation
of reformed Religion. Fifth, to the conscience and care of avoiding Sacrilege,
Schism, and Faction. Sixth, to the justice we ow to all godly, honest, and
deserving men, especially Ministers; cujus contrarium verum est.

Sir, whilst you take these for granted, which are contrary to right reason,
natural policy, Ecclesiastical story, yea and truth it self, you may easily
raise your Fabric, swell your book, and run on in a magisterial reda^gution,
prelatical determination, and raging, reviling, opprobrious rebuke; but Sir you
must remember, a man that is first in his own cause seems righteous, but his
Neighbor comes after and finds him out. Prove. 18.17.

We shall leave the Doctor to a view of these Rafters, proportioned to his
foundation, and promiscuously scatterd up and down his book; And more
particularly observe the strength of his argumentation in his reply to what was
excepted against in his Analysis, and specially as it relates to Mr. Crofton,
leaving Anonymous to himself, who herein will find full work for his
anatomizing genius.

The first onset of Dr. Gauden (in this his vindication of his Analysis) made
upon Mr. Crofton his Analepsis, is in page 147: and thus enters, viz. [Which
was the thing Dr. Gauden had to prove (as Christ did the resurrection) not out
of the letter only, but the Analogy and equity of that Scripture, from the
force of which M. Crofton cannot extricate himself by his more soberendeavours.]

Under this charge I must enquire what it was he had to prove? and I find
nothing in this sentence dictating what it should be, save only the relative
[which] from which his rhetoric, or rather his indigested heap of words, has
removed the antecedent at such a distance, that I cannot easily find it; I
looked into the Paragraph foregoing to find out the thing spoken of, as that
which according to the grammatical construction should make the Antecedent to
the Relative; and there I find this general conclusion, viz. [Such Vows and
Covenants, so much to the scandal of Religion, reproach of Reformation,
gratifying dangerous factions, disgrace of this and all reformed Churches,
dishonor to Jesus Christ, his Apostles and chief Successors the Bishops, so
injurious to many worthy men, to the whole Church and Nation of England, either
ought not to be taken by Christian King and People: or if by force, fraud or
fear and facility they a^e so taken, or rather imposed and mistaken, yet they
mu^t never be kept in any such sense: bue either repented of, and dissolved, or
else the words must be resolved and reduced to such a sense as is good, and
lawful: Id quod erat demonstrandum.] To leave his Libeller to take up his
petitio principii, as to our Covenant, not such in point of matter or form, nor
so imposed or mistaken, as he suggesteth, and takes for granted, and to demand
his Id quod erat demonstrandum: This sentence must be the antecedent to his
relative [which] for so it is connexed, which was the thing Dr. Gauden had to
prove out of that Scripture.

But what is the Scripture out of which he must prove this conclusion? I find
no Scripture nigh hand, that can be the proof produced; running some seven
pages back, through a wild wilderness of words, I find in page 140. a quarrel
begun about Numb. 30. and other Scripture is not urged; this was the Scripture
which was produced in his Analysis (though with a misquoted verse) and must be
vindicated in this book; so that this only must be the Scripture predicated to
prove his [which] before noted, and then indeed Mr. Croftons more serious
endeavors cannot extricate him from the entanglements of the Doctors wild
fancy, for the Text neither the letter, nor analogy, does afford any such
conclusion: All Mr. Croftons brains cannot beat such a sense into the words,
they are so far out. The Text in the letter of it is a special direction
concerning the vow of a daughter or wife vowing without the knowledge of the
Father or Husband: In the Analogy of it, of the Inferior swearing without the
knowledge of the Superior, and directs an establishment or irritation of the
vow, not any sencing or interpretation, id quod erat demonstrandum. And how Dr.
Gauden can make it grammatically speak, or logically conclude, Such a Vow so
scandalous to religion, gratifying to faction, dishonorable to Christ,
disgraceful to England, must not be sworn, if sworn, not kept; if kept, senced
and interpreted, I am certain all the Doctors in Oxford cannot discern it: If
Christ had thus proved the Resurrection, the Saducees would never have been
silenced, and we must have been at a sad loss for the great Article of the
resurrection of the body, that ground of our Christian hope. Will Dr. Gauden
please to frame his argument a pari, for little Mr. Croftons rescue he
conceives it must run thus,

Numb. 30. Directs that the Oath or vow of a Daughter, Wife, or other
inferior, made without the knowledge of Father, Husband, or Superior, should
be at the pleasure of the Superior, confirmed or made void; Ergo, no
scandalous, disgraceful, dishonorable Oath, may be taken, if taken, must not
be kept, if kept it must be well interpreted: by what rules must we measure
this argument? the Anticedent is particular, the consequent is general; it must
needs be a syllogism currens quatuor pedibus, running as fast as B follows
A, C follows B and so one follows another, and all follow A immediately,
the frame such, upon which the conclusion follows the connexed terms as
naturally, as the Jesuits at the conference at Ratisbone.

Qui negat articulum fidei est haereticus; sed hoereticus est, qui negat Tobiam
habuisse canem; Ergo, sequitur, articulum esse fidei, quod Tobias canem
habuerit. The barking Cur at the Moonlight of Dr. Gaudens logique, is seen as
plain as the sun, continually disturbing his reason.

I find the Dr. in a Wilderness of words, and wood of invention, tossing the
words of this Scripture, telling us one while, they are meant of lawful vows,
another while the Oath is made through weakness; another while to the damage of
the superior; and so stretching them, as the only square and rule for all
Oaths; but yet can stumble on no ready way, due proportion, or fit parallel,
whereby to resolve them, but at lenth preposterously breaks through them, with
an invective against the nameless Libeller, which concludes with a dolosus
versatur in generalibus (which none is more guilty of then Dr. G.) and
concludes, that may be just by some general maxims, or customs of common
law, which yet is very unjust, when brought to the rules of Chancerie, as D. B.
well knows in Hipslies case, page 145. The Dr. has sure made a good
proficiency in his Temple Studies, but I must enquire what Chancery can comment
on the maxims of the common Law; I know the just, and proper strict rigor of
them may be mitigated, must not be denied, otherwise then as to execution, what
Chancellor must do it on Gods Law? or has a Commission to interpret an Oath,
beyond what its genuine sense allows? or to restrain the performance of it
unto God? Dr. Gauden does assume (not to say presume) to do it, and we well
know Bishops have been Lord Chauncellours of England? Though we deny his
Authority, let us a little consider his equity, for the strictness of an Oath
is an heavy burden, and many times binds a man to loss and grief; and he
proceeds by some special cases, which he suppose thought not to be made, or
kept; let us take a glance of them, that our minds may be cleared in the sense
of Numb. 30.

His first case is [ If Parents vow, not to give a Child in Marriage, or not
till such a time, or not to give him such a portion, but to devote him to
single life, poverty, banishment, or base employmennt; it is sinful and
injurious, may not be made or kept: in this case he must give me leave to
dissent from him, until he have stated the case more perticularly, as to the
reason, and ends of such a vow; and until, he have proved the Child as to all
these things, is not, to the parent, sui juris, to be disposed of, debased, or
advanced; although I should neither advise, nor commend so harsh and heady an
exercise of parental power, and prerogative, yet if pinched with the question,
I durst not determine the negative: The Parent finds the Child Proud, Stubborn,
Disobedient, Perverse, voweth to cut him short in his portion, may he not do
this in Justice, and in his just displeasure perform it? may not the Parent
send the stuborn Child to Barbados by slavery to subdue his spirit^? may not
the Parent vow he will not give in Marriage, to such a person as he judged
unfit for his child? or is not the Parents consent in his own power? the danger
of a single life are not proper effects of the Parents not giving in Marriage;
and Dr. Saunderson distinguishes between the thing sworn, De juram p^e^ect. 3.
Sect. 1^.
which is, causa propria, and occasio or causa per accidens of sin, and
concludes that an Oath made concerning the last, is not unlawful. I should
wish Parents to be very wary of making such vows; and Dr. Gauden as wary of
discharging them; though rashly made; that may be sinfully sworn by a Parent,
which must be sorrowfully performed: if the parent have unadvisedly devoted the
child to want, the law may rather take Alimony for him, then the parent
perjuriously give it: I hope Abraham shall not be charged with injury to them,
in sending away Hagar, and his son Ishmael, Gods encouragement could not acquit
the sin; and what a parent may do, he may swear to do without injury: And
methinks the case of the Israelites should resolve this case fully, they had,
(I admit,) rashly sworn, they would not give their daughters to Benjamen; the
effect reflects their Oath very sadly, and reduces them into a strait, yet
they fear to break it, and upon Counsel from God, find out a way to save it,
and make some supply unto the defect; which falling short, they devise (some
think indeed sinfully) a second stratagem rather then break their Oath: what
ever others may say upon this case, I cannot but observe, Children are fully
sui juris to the Parent; an hurtful oath is to the child no injury, strictly to
be so accounted; an Oath concerning them, when rashly made, must be strictly
observed and kept, the light of nature, and law of Scripture, does in my
apprehension in this dissolve our Chancellours injunction.

The next case, is of the like nature, in reference to Servants and Subjects,
for supposing their Masters, and Princes to have (as Prelates suppose of every
King) merum imperium, though they may swear rashly, sinfully in reference to
God, yet not injuriously as to the slave or Subject: Although Gomarrus and
others note, that man has not from God, a^ absolute dominion over himself; yet
they deny not but men may vow and must keep their vows to the latitude of that
Dominion, God ha^, given them over themselves or others, and this is the rule
our^ Bishops Chancery should interpret, and relieve against, for this will
conclude against him, that a King may swear, or having sworn, must perform a
diminution of his own just Sovereignty, and that authority and power which is
given him by Law, and is necessary for his high calling: Is a man bound to take
what the Law allows him, and that, whether he will or no? if so, if our
prelate can beg the recognisances forfeited by licensed victuallers, allowed by
the law to the King, it will make his Bishopric a fat one.

But how do these cases clear the conclusion to be proved out of Numb: 30?
there is nothing relating to the Oath of the superiors, but the asserting of
their prerogative and absolute dominion over their inferiors, to irritate, or
establish their vows; what ever the Libeller did, Mr. Grofton in his Analepsis
allowed the Dr. this Text in its latitude, and referred him to be judged by it;
and now grants, that the inferior in things, not sui juris, may have the
action vow^d superseded by the declared pleasure of the superior and that
whether it be son, or servant, but in our case he then affirmed.

1. The Parliament sitting had over us a Legislative power, to which we owed
subjection, they were in their capacity the Nation collective, and sui juris,
and to be obeyed during their Session, by those whom they represented; their
power in this Covenant was no less legislative then in the Protestation of May
1641.

2. The King who then was hearing of it, did prohibit the Act, but never did
declare it null and void; and Dr. Saunderson concludes the superiors dissent
must be expressed in a full, formal d^scharge; ut t^llendo t^llat, renuendo
renuat, is required to rescinde the oath: But our late King advised to keep the
Oath, his present Majesty swear it, swear his consent to it, and to the
Ordinances enjoining it, and conjured his Subjects to the keeping of it.

Both these Mr. Crofton suggested in his Analepsis, and cleared more fully in
his Analepsis Anelepthe, which the Doctor should have considered before he had
declaimed from the force of this Screpture. Mr. Cr. does not, cannot extricate
himself, by his more serious endeavors, whilst Mr. Cr. has traversed his
ground, and turned the mouth of his cannon against himself, and will offer
again to join issues with a man acted by reason, to establish the Covenant by
the force, equity, analogy of this Scripture, or otherwise to let it fall: But
he must not be worded out of Gods warrant. But the judicious Doctor opposing;
p. ^45, 14^.
counts Mr. Croftons observations pitiful shifts, and not potent solutions,
and small twigs at which poor Mr. Crofton as a drowning man did catch, yea
weeds which sink him, being of no deep reach, nor any skill in swimming. You
are very right Doctor, for Mr Crofton (God be thanked) could never yet swim
with the stream, or reach preferment with a profligated conscience: But let us
see these twigs and weeds he takes notice of, and observe whether the Doctors
wits be not run a woolgathering, in charging them with weakness.

Analepsis page 12.
The first was, The two Houses of Parliament are coordinato^ and sharers in the
Legislation of England, and so a constant lawful authority. To this the Doctor
replieth, He gently observes a legislative power, at least coordinate in the
Parliament; More modest man he, this being out of his sphere, otherwise then as
a Subject and Casuist; yet you might have pleased to observe he has more
strongly asserted and enforced it, to the fastening of St. Peter's fetters, Sect.
4. But the Doctor enquires, Can they legally exercise it without and against
the Kings consent, being not in his nonago, nor out of his wits; that they may
do it without the Kings consent; none do or can deny it; common practice, with
the peoples constant obedience does plainly manifest it; as also the
Protestation of May, 1641. (never doubted as to the validity of authority)
which you say was precarious, but Resolves of the House declares to have been
authoritative: Votes, Resolves, Orders and Ordinances of one or both Houses do
proclaim it; and the privileges of Parliament, That the King take no notice of
what is debated, or voted, ordered or acted by them, until it be by themselves
formally presented to his Majesty: And the very nature of coordinate power (if
the Dr. understand it) with their actings in case of his absence by minority,
or otherwise, does determine it: As to the exercise against the Kings consent,
I shall conclude nothing, but commend Mr. Prians Sovereign power of Parliaments
to your serious study; yet this much matters not in our case: for a Parliament
duly summoned, and rightly constituted, has his Majesty's consent to exercise
that legislation placed in them, so long as they shall continue in that
capacity; I think no English man will deny this: And the legislative power of
their Votes, Debates, Resolves, Orders or Ordinances were never gainsaid by his
Majesty; though the peoples act of swearing the Covenant (upon an unhappy
difference and misapprehension) was by an unusual way inhibited.

But the Doctor further profoundly demands, Are they legislative in fact, where
there is no law made (as none was for the Covenant?) was there legislation in
actu secundo, in exercise or act? as to commend a writer for a book never writ,
or an architect for an house never built. Where are now your wits good Master
of words? Is there is no writing or architecture in actu secundo, in act and
exercise, until the whole book be writ, or house built? I fancied the writing
of every page, and framing of every board, or squaring of every beam, and
laying every brick, to be something more then scribendi, or aedificandi
potentia; and if any more, how far is it short of actus secundus? Is there no
Legislation without a full and formal Statute law? What do you make of Votes,
Resolves, Orders, Ordinances of either or both Houses suspending, superseding
the Laws and Courts of Judicature, directing and disposing the Subjects?
enquire at the Temple whether these be legislation in actu secundo? Let your
old friends a little laugh to see the Prelate-Justice his profound notions of
legislation.

But the Doctors enforcement of these premises of legislation in potentia and
actu, is very considerable, At best the two Houses, nor King, nor both together
have any legislative power to decree, or execute what is unrighteous against
God or man. Suppose they have not, have they therefore no legislation in actu
secundo, act and exercise? else what is this to the purpose. But stay Sir, What
is that you say? King and Parliament have no legislative power to decree or
execute what is unrighteous against God or man: I must deny this; have you
never read of wickedness established by a law? Had Queen Mary and her
Parliament, who cast out the true and returnned the false Religion, no
legislative power by which they did it? Does the injustice of the matter
nullify the authority of the Law, and Legislators; is impiety enjoined by a
just authority, to be actually disobeyed, and relisted? will not this
prostitute legislation to every private fancy? and furnish all Rebellion with
Apology? I am not bound, for the thing decreed is unrighteous, and neither King
nor Parliament, nor both, had legislative power to decree, and cannot therefore
execute it; for execution is subsequent to legislation; I must not be punished
where I am not bound to obey. Doctor, whose wits are now a woolgathering, to
run away from the Covenant by stating a doctrine of Sedition, yea Rebellion.
Mr. Crofton should more soberly have said [The King and Parliament have
legislation to all acts of humane Society, but must be careful they do not
decree unrighteousness, establish iniquity by a Law.] You have indeed very
powerfully opposed Mr. Cr. his first observation, beating down all legislation
in actu secundo, yea and in some cases which will fall too often, and must be
judged by every private man, all potentia legem ferendi. What say you to the
second?

M. Croftons second notion, says the Doctor, his second nothing observed as
his safety, is, that a thing may bind in conscience, which does not bind in
law, or in the Judicature of man.

This M. Crofton did say, and will stick to, against the raging billows of your
proudest words. But what says the Doctor to this notion? True, is it true, and
yet M. Croftons nothing? True, and yet a pitiful evasion, a small twig, a
sinking weed? Sure Sir, the true of so big a bladder, will keep little M.
Crofton swiming above water.

How does D. Gauden avoid the strength of what he confesses to be true, has
he well weighed it is an Oath that binds in conscience, though not in law, or
humane judicatu? how is it that he having cried true, turns off with a but
nothing can bind in conscience, against the Laws of man, in cases of equity,
justice and right. Suppose Mr. Crofton cry True to Dr. G. what has he gained?
Mr. Cr. did not affirm that any thing of that nature did bind conscience; but
that the Cove^^nt not charged on any by a Statute Law, yet binds the
conscience of all personally, or politically subjected to it. And Dr. G. runs
away with his petitio principii, that Englands Episcopacy is established by
Law, and cannot according to Ju^tice, Equity and Common right be extirpated;
which M. Cr. has denied, and does deny; and when it is proved, will further
examine how far an oath binds in conscience against it: But as yet Dr. G.
offers nothing to prove it, but his Worships say so, which will not be
believed: Only M. Cr. must say, that my oath may bind me against what,
according to equity and right, the Law must adjudge me; as in cases of
contracts, bargains, or alienation of Land or goods, where I have sworn or
vowed a release, of which the Law according to common justice, equity and
right, can take no cognizance, but must restore, I am bound from requiring, or
by law receiving the restitution or performance. It is hard that Dr. G. should
lose the power of conscience, by preaching equity and right among the Lawyers.

Mr. Croftons third Observation, of the Kings oath making a supply to the
supposed defect of authority binding the Covenant; is entered upon with a drop
of his sarcastical pen; for Mr. Cr. bold and odious, no less then fallacious
(if you will make a right Shemaiah, add seditious and treasonable too) urging
by a Presbyterian pertness, the present taking of the Covenant in Scotland. I
pray you sir, though this be bold, wherein is it fallacious? that his Majesty
swear the Covenant is not nor can be denied; the form of his Royal Coronation,
his Royal Declaration from Dumferling, and the History of King Charles the
Second, have made it known through the world, that it cannot be hidden. Though
had not Dr. G. blurred paper to bring perjury upon King and Kingdom, it had not
been here pleaded by Mr. Crofton. But Sir,

Wherein is an argumentative urging the Kings taking the Covenant so odious a
piece of Presbyterian pertness? Shall not every Disputant have liberty with
freedom to express, what will enforce his argument? Is not the meanest Subject
interested in the Kings oath, and capacitated humbly to demand performance? Do
not Royal acts fall under the consideration of Casuists, resolving conscience?
Are not Kings objects of ministerial admonition? how bold soever it may seem,
none but a proud Pashur, and shameless Semaiah, could count it odious in
Jeremiah, to say to the King, Keep the oath, and thou shall be delivered from
that distress which may too late engage his Majesty to send to his faithful
Monitor to pray for him: Is not Mr. Cr. capacitated in all these respects to
consider his Majesty's oath, even when he is abstracted from his Presbyterian
pertness? Sir, I must tell you it is more odious in you, to make his Majesty's
Legislative authority, depend on the piety of his decrees, then for Mr. Crofton
to urge his Royal Oath, as a bar to the Nations perjury.

Wherein lies the odium of an argumentative urging the King taking of the
Covenant? it was but modestly mentioned in the Analepsis, though more fully and
forcibly to the fastening of St. Peter's Fetters: It is every way visible Mr. Cr.
does neither justify, nor commend the insolent imposing of it, but does
expressly condemn that; although the maturity of his years here mentioned by
this Doctor, makes it the more obliging as having the full exercise of his
judicium rationale; which if it were any way restrained by the distress of his
affairs, will not release him; because it was chosen as his best course; and
juramentum metu extortum, is agreed to bind the conscience, and as a moral
rule, reaches Kings as well, yea as much, as other men, though therein he is
more obnoxious to temptations, and needs to have the case more clearly
resolved, if his Majesty delight not to hear of it, (as Dr. G. scandalously
reports,) more is the pity, Mr. Cr. has in Loyalty to his Majesty pressed
it, and persuaded others to press it on the same principles in his Analepsis
Analepthe, Sect 1. convincing, and affirming, his Ministers and Chaplains ought
as his Monitors to mind him of it, and affect him with it; though I fear,
flattering prelates will rather expose him, to hear of it in Gods wrath, and by
his Enemies reproach; for the breach thereof, then hazard their dignity, by
discharge of the duty they owe to God and his Royal soul.

That the Kings taking the Covenant, can make any thing in it lawful, which by
the rules of religion and civil justice is unlawful, Mr. Cr. did not affirm,
or urge it to that purpose; but that it makes up the supposed defect of
authority in the first taking the Covenant, is that which Mr. Cr. said, nor
does D. G. deny it, his consent unto the ordinance for taking the Covenant,
expressed by Oath, gives it (at least to conscience,) the formality of a Law.
That what his Majesty did in Scotland, must not extend to England, is a most
false maxim, according to which we were no way secured by what he declared
from Bredah; but what he swear in any place, qua Rex Britanniae does bind his
soul in every place: Mr. Cr. out of Grotious has affirmed in his Analepsis
Analepthe, Sect. 6. Which by alll these cavils, I discern Dr. Gauden has not
read, I shall commend that book with these notions to his second thoughts, he
will find his supposed legistative Justice, and the like of Episcopacy
contra^icted; and the authority prescribing and imposing the Solemn League and
Covenant vindicated from all his trivial exceptions; but our Doctor proceeds to
enforce his battery, and tells you.

Page, ^51.
Mr. Croftons next defense against Dr. Gaudens battery is not a Wool sack, but a
brown Paper, a Cobweb, pleading, quod fieri non debuit factum valet; yet this
Cobweb is a sufficient net for his fly with which he endeavors to pull it
down, and most profoundly tells us; this may not be pleaded in moral cases, I
pray you Sir, in what then? you cry true to it, but it is in some state
policies, and civil necessities, or legal formalities, and accutely amplisieth
it: As Bastards though they should not have been begotten, yet must not when
begotten and been be murdered, but must be kept: Would not our Doctor deem it
a barking at the bright Moonlight of this reason, I should enquire whether the
begetting of Bastards be a state policy, a civil necessity, or legal formality,
to keep the Bishops Courts in employment, that he has no other instance of
them, or chooses this as the chief? again does the natural entity of the Child
consist in, and depend upon the plea of quod fieri non debuit, factum valet?
certainly many of his well bred well brooding Christians would gladly
obliterate and not plead this rule, if the being of their brats of sin and
shame could cease by it; this Sir is good sport for your Anatomist. Mr. Crofton
must tell you that he ever conceived it to relate to, and must be praedicated
of moral entities, constituted by, and existing out of some essential acts
irregularly applied; as in creation of relation, office, or dignity a Novice
should not he made a Bishop, but when consecration has passed on him, his
defect in reason or religion will not divest him of his dignity, for fieri non
debuet factum valet: I ever judged natural beings, as Bastards, cannot but
exist in the world, without the help of a moral rule, by the necessity of
nature; in reference to our case, what is material, unlawful, cannot be by this
rule releived, because it corrects not, supplys not the natural defect or
irregularity of any matter; but where the matter is good, and the general form
invocation of God, is retained, but erroneously or ignorantly managed, as when
an Oath is made by an Idol God, by the Heaven or Earth or other Elements, as
the Heathen, who ought not, do commonly swear; now such is the moral nature, or
reason of an Oath, an intended invocation of the divine nature that it
obliges, and the error or mistaken special mode of swearing, will not make
void the Oath; and hence it comes to be different questions, an juramentum hoc
vel illud sit licitum? and an hoc vel illud obligat? I would Dr. Gauden would
own Dr. Saunderson as his dictator in the nature of an Oath; he should not then
so much need the dictates of little Mr. Crofton, who having urged this rule in
his Analepsis, has improved and enforced it, beyond the power of this
battering Dr. to pierce and break thorough, in his Analepsis Analepthe, Sect.
2. where he will in the case of the Covenant find fieri non debuit, factum
valet, explained and established, to teach him and others, that Gods name
profaned by rash irregular swearing, must not be blasphemed by false swearing;
an unadvised Oath, must not be amended by open perjury, or repaired by
rejection, Mr. Crofton does not believe a baptism by, or ordination of a woman
to be valid, because there is a defect in the forma constituens, which is of
the esse of the ordinance, the woman not being subjectum capax of conferring
the one, or receiving the other, hut how ever had he as a Bishop pleaded,
Presbyters ordained by Presbyters (though a Bishop might have been more
orderly, their ordination is valid; he had hit on a right instance though by an
error, and many ptophane prelatical priests, which ought not to have been
admitted, and ought to have been deposed from the Ministry, Mr. Crofton can own
as Ministers; though rude, yet in Moses chair, quod fieri non debuit factum
valet. Mr. Cr. Wool-sacks being thus pulled down, you shall hear the Dr. shout
out his victorious entry on Mr. Cr. arguments in Page 151.

[Mr. Crofton discovers his weakness, and exhausted spirits (well he may in
contesting with so acute a disputant) by bringing in a tumultuary rabble, that
should pretend to be a Parliament, and impose a vow or Covenant on the people,
against the immunities of Church and State, King and People, which we like
Gugeons stulta facilitate swallow simply like baits, and feeling the hook of
fraud, faction, injustice, the poor man by a terrible (...), super superstition
is afraid of a three years Famine, in case he and other honest men should dare
to resume their reason and liberty, and keep themselves to rules and actions of
justice, which the laws of God, and men prescribe; from which these pitiful
trepanners, and impostors sought to seduce them, and oblige them to the
contrary unawars.

If this be a (...), super superstition, to tremble at Gods word, and fearful
judgments there recorded, let it be Mr. Croftons portion; yet I must tell you,
the divinity of Bishop Hall (your predecessor) has provoked it: your rising
Episcopacy would strike you into a pannique fear, if Gods judgments should
break out, and not be pacified, but by the sacrifice of some that strive to
advance it; pardon the comparison, the closer it comes, the clearer the
conviction; whilst you enjoy your braveries, poor Mr. Crofton walks in the
Scriptures, and there he finds Israel by a pack of trepanners and impostors the
Gibeonites, by the baits of old clothes, moldy bread, and clouted shoes
seduced into a Covenant against the Laws, and immunities of their Church and
State, their King and people, Joshua and the people had stulta facillitate,
like Gudgeons simply swallowed it; within three days they feel the hook of
their fraud and falsehood; the people resume their reason, and quarrel with
their Princes for not keeping to rules and actions of justice, but they in a
(...), super superstition, fear to break their Oath, and carefully keep it,
some hundreds of years, until Saul affected with reason, and the liberty of
Israel, in a well meant zeal breaks the Oath with the Gibeonites, which breach
God avengeth with a three years famine, whose wrath was only expiated by
hanging up seven of the chief Violators of the Vow; will your Worship please
once a day to take a turn in poor Mr. Croftons walk, and deliver your soul from
this pitiful passion if you can: however you fancy that fraud and force make
void an Oath, your Brother Bishop Sanderson, all Protestant Divines and
Civilians, yea Popish Cafuists, will dictate to you other things; and little
Mr. Crofton desires to fear an Oath, and to tremble at every tendency to a
breach of faith, with a jealous God; but judicious Dr. Gauden can find a
difference in the case of the Gibeonites, from the case supposed by Mr.
Crofton, and makes it a specialty to that people, and that in these
particulers. First, The League with the Gibeonites was only civil and secular,
not Religious. Secondly, Made by the chief council and authority of the Nation.
Thirdly, It was of things within their power, as civil and secular, Fourthly,
No injury to honest men. Fifthly; Though unadvised in prudence and policy of
War, yet it was confirmed by God to punish unadvisedness, to preserve leagues
obtained by honest fraud; God had mercy for the Gibeonites, as less sinners and
more disposed to fear, and repent. A most profound comment, but Sir, was the
Covenant with the Gibeonites wholly civil and secular within their power, were
they not the Hittites by Gods express command to be destroyed? observe well the
Catalogue, Deuteronomy 7.1, 2. Ex^d. 23.32. your predecessor Dr. Hall says the
sentence of Death was passed against all the Cananites, and that Joshuas heart
was clear from any intention to make a league with the Canaanites, and enters a
caution against it; So Sir, this was a League against the Laws of Israel given
by God, something more then civil; confederacy with the Canaanites was
inhibited for the safety of their Religion, lest they should be seduced by
them: but Sir where the matter is religious; will the case alter, or the Oath
be any more void, then where it is civil? the validity or religion of the
matter, whilst either it may be just and lawful, according as the occasion of
the Covenant does direct.

2. In that the Covenant was made by the chief Council and authority of the
Nation; it does not relieve the fraud: whoever they were, they were cozened by
a people who appeared to them what they were not; Mr. Cr. will not fear to
affirm the Solemn League and Covenant was sworn by the chief Council and
authority of England, though not complete. But the question is of the fraud by
which any are deceived into an oath.

3. Was the oath of the Gibeonites no way to the injury of honest men? you will
not stand to it; was it no injury to Israel to lose four Cities out of their
inheritance given them by the Lord? Was it no injury to be engaged in war, and
to hazard their lives for a company of Trepanners and cheaters? (who should
have fallen by their sword, and D. Gaudens interpretative spirit would have left
to fall by the sword of another) was it no injury to have such a temptation to
Idolatry, which God had charged to be removed? and such tormenting affliction,
Canaanites, as pricks in their eyes, and thorn-in their side? If it were no
injury to Israel, what was the well-meant zeal of Saul, on which his resumed
reason did perjuriously destroy the Gibeonites?

4. But say you it was confirmed by God; how Sir, not by any post-fact, or
immediate signification of his pleasure, nor by the special dispensation of the
High Priest; but merely by the power and virtue of the oath fraudulently
obtained; bu^ admitttng God did confirm it; an oath obtained by bone, fraud and
surprisal (as you phrase it) if any can be honest, is established, as
permanently binding, and the breach of it is punishable by God: has not then
Mr. Crofton cause to fear, or must his fear be super superstition, or not
^ather Dr. Gaudens observation be super-ignorant, and super-arogant, in
reputing the hypothesis, illustrating the very pinch of the Question, against
the very utmost supposed strength of opposition, the least issue of weakness
and exhausted spirits; yet this is as ingenuous, as the next note is honest.

Page 352.
Mr. Croftons Oratory, reason, and civility, fails his zeal, whilst he makes
such a reflection on his honorable Covenanting Masters, comparing them to
Colliers, whilst they acted like Kings: Where Sir did Mr. Cr. make this
reflection? had he not asserted, and established their authority? though to
detect the weakness of your argument, he imagines what you fancy to make
against the binding power of an Oath, and your self is constrained to see the
weakness thereof, but verbosity must be venting though with falsehood, yet this
is as honest as the next is sound [that not the honor and authority, but
reason and religion, in a Parliament must be weighed] as if there were nothing
in such an assembly but what is common to men; if your prelacy may be thus
measured, it will soon be found a vanity. But Sir, I must tell you, the man can
be afraid, God will be angry for not keeping Oaths unlawfully made, and also
for keeping and making unlawful Oaths, or lawful Oaths by unlawful means; but
he cannot admit the say so of a Runagado, as an evidence against the Covenant;
but affirms it will be broken before your strain of Rhetoric can make
extirpation to signify reformation of your Episcopacy; the first being so
plain in the words, and unavoidable sense of the Covenant, that it needs no
Presbyterian stretch, (as you scurrilously taunt) or strappado more then it
will endure, the Antiphrastical strain of an apostate Presbyter, and English
Prelate.

But stay Sir, you crow before the Victory; Mr. Crofton was so far from showing
his wit and art in this defense, (as you falsely say) by presently withdrawing,
that he who out of his sally port, appeared to you like a little Mark, and
picolhomo, did so little fear your first Granado, that he followed you to your
trenches, and encountered your main body encamped in the Oxford reasons, and
yet keeps the field within reach of your Gunshot, not fearing to have his
brains beaten out by Dr. Gauden his reason, if God restraines the Prelates high
commission batteries against the truth, which they can neither bear nor
contradict: let me tell our Champion, notwithstanding his renewed assault, he
must go down to the Romish Phylystines to sharpen his prelatical Pikes, before
his battering rams can make impression on the Covenant, and enter the garrison
of Presbyterial reformation, impregnably guarded by Mr. Crofton his Woolsacks,
which the Doctors skill cannot remove.

Having as he thought reinforced his battering Rame, he proceeds to what he
calls his gulf between the Covenant, and its legality and sanctity, the
tumultuating terrors of those times in which it was contrived, conceived and
brought forth or imp^sed; as if sanctity and legality, could not exist in
tumultuous days.

page 177.
And he tells you in this mud Mr. Crofton was afraid to stick, and therefore he
nimbly skips over it. Oh Doctor, its an advantage to be light and little, know
you not its an eminent piece of dexterity in a Soldier to pursue an enemy
beaten from his battering Ram, into, and over those gulfes to which for want of
strength or courage he retireth, hoping to escape; and it is an Irish man's
excellency to tread Bogs without sinking: yet Sir, Mr. Crofton skipped not so
soon over your Gulf, but he took a turn with you in it, and told you; the
tumults were not so great and loud, but that Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, A^a^ep. p. 14.
commissioners of the Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland, assembly of Divines, did
solemnly seek divine direction, seriously debate and determine the Covenant;
and to this you make no reply, but tell your Libeller a tale of a tub, and
story of mad Hugh Peter's, in 1641. two years before the Covenant. Here Sir, Mr
Crofton by his little reason, leapt so nimbly, and light so strongly on you,
that in this point you cry quarter, and confess the autho^ity, due meaning and
matter of the Covenant, is more to be considered then the tumults and arms, and
how suspicious soever it may render it, what is just and good is not null
because tainted with tumults; pa^. 179.
this is that which Mr. Crofton urged, and enforced by the instance of
Zedekiah, whose perjury was odious having sworn the best terms the straights
of his condition would allow him, as your self yields, and was all in which Mr.
Crofton made the parallel; So that Sir, in this gulf you are become my
Prisoner: but perceiving you are not willing to be held, but think you have a
Weapon yet to weild, viz. the injustice of the matter; I will give you fair
quarter, and still liberty to fight, and therefore will let you go on your
promise that you will not provoke by vain brags, and like the Athenians fight
against Alexander, verbis tantum; but presently join issue, and try your
strength and skill at your Quarter Staff, the unjust matter of the Covenant; at
which if you prevail not, you must yield your conscience to it, or be Gods
Prisoner of wrath for ever.

Let not Dr. Gauden fight with an Irish man in a bog, for he will turn his
tune, and make you hear him cry the next time, honest Mr. Crofton is more
valorous, and answers against the novelty and partiality of the Covenant,
that it is neither new nor partial; page 180
but Mr. Crofton must say Dr. Gauden is wilfully blind to enquire the sense, in
which Mr. Crofton says it is not new and partial, whilst he might read plainly
in the Analepsis, the matter is not new or partial, and Mr. Crofton says that
forms and circumstances are as changable new and partial as time, at whose
command they are; but supposing the matter to have been new to England, if
good, Mr, Crofton did say and stands to it, it binds, and the novelty bars not
the obligation, nor can or dare Dr. Gauden deny it, though he can easily say,
Mr. Croftons observations are a palpable Sophistry, and playing at bo-peep,
which were these two.

The supposed contrariety of the Law is of no force to such as conclude a power
in the Parliament, to put a period to those laws, and an oath against them upon
the people. Secondly, Analep p. 12
An oath sworn by the Legislators, and body of the people, is the most full
discharge of all contrary laws: Both these Mr. Cr. (and all rational men) do
believe: but that Mr. Cr. must confess the Laws did establish the Hierarchy, is
the sophistical groundless inference of him, who knows Mr. Crofton does deny
it, and therefore urged his reasons against a supposed contrariety; but give a
^^relate an inch he will take an ell; suppositions are sufficient supports to a
man of fancy, who all along his discourse plays at bo-peep, begging what must
never be granted whilst his nose is between his eyes: Thus he supposes the two
Houses into a non entity, as to their supreme legislative power, by the temper
they were then in, and the absence of the King, though they were animated by an
express Statute Law, which some (upon grounds, and by reasons (beyond the reach
of Dr. Gauden, or little Mr. Crofton to resolve) have openly averred to
continue them yet in being. And thus he profoundly supposes, a Parliament
swearing qua Parliament, in the fullest formality and professions of their
national capacity was a personal covenanting; and this he supposes, for fear
their act should, page 181.
as Mr. Crofton affirms it does, engage all the Nation and their posterity,
so long as it shall be a Nation, as Adam did all mankind: And all this he
supposes to make us suppose, extirpation signifies erection of the Prelatical
Hierarchy.

But stay, the Doctor has a request; What is the matter? I must desire Mr.
Crofton to bate me an ace, the repeated stroke at the Royal assent (by which he
again lasheth the King, as did the Monks of Canterbury King Henry the Third) is
not a grain of allowance to the English Covenanters. I perceive his Majesty's
Oath troubles him, as it well may, for it i^ a rivet will never be loosened;
yet he might have seen some difference between the mention of it, and the
lashing of the Monks of Canterbury; for that theirs was a formal penance, by
and in defense of Episcopal Jurisdiction; this is at most a Ministerial
admonition, and Casuistical consideration; the smiting desired by David, as
that which would not break his head; nay would be a kindness and excellent oil,
better then the Archiepiscopal unction: But I cannot bate him one ace of it, it
does add many grains to the Covenant, though current before: However his Royal
assent was given in Scotland, post factum and pactum; Mr. Crofton does affirm
it has made the Covenant National, as far as the King is capable of a national
capacity; and the Ordinance requiring it has in foro conscientiae, the
formality of a Law. This Mr. Crofton has affirmed in his Analepsis Anelapthe,
Sect. 6. and shall affirm whenever a Parliament shall put the question to him;
and if his Brethren shall not do it, it will be for want of due consideration
or courage: Sure our Doctor will not make all foreinsecal acts, and post-facts
void, and of no efficacy; if he do, we must determine a nullity on the late
Parliament, and take heed of a treaty out of our own land. But all men know Dr.
G. is singularly well skilled in politics. He proceeds in page 182, and 183,
and tells us,

Mr. Crofton goes as boldly to look on the next Gorgon or Medusa's head, by
which the Doctor sets forth the horror of the Covenant, which in his Analysis
was the unblest consequences which attended it; and so exclaims against the
Covenant, or rather acclaims the happy days they had before it, and expect when
it is sunk. To which Mr. Crofton shall say no more, but sure those happy days
were not real, but seeming; for the Covenant does naturally make for what is
truly good. And as for Mr. Croftons boldness, he shall say no more, but the
righteous are as bold as a lion; it is not snakes or worms of a dead head,
which can frighten him. But Mr. Crofton his defense and rescue of the Covenant
from the odium of these horrible effects (as to a proper and natural causality)
is a plain Gorgon to Dr. Gauden striking him dead, by the very aspect thereof:
For as one planet struck, he mumbles out an heap of words hardly to be
understood [How far the covenanting planet or spirit had its influence on
these, I will not dispute.] Which amounts to thus much, I will not answer Mr.
Croftons enquiry, are these effects the proper brood and natural issue of the
Covenant? For if I do, I must confess I fathered them very wrongfully. Sir you
do well to show your skill in an acclamatory and calumniatory flourish, and
presently withdraw with an I will not dispute.

His next defense is against Mr. Croftons wish he had been at his elbow, when
he mentioned the bafflings of the Covenant, page 184, 186, 180.
wherein he acknowledges the truth of all Mr. Crofton in his Analepsis had
urged to demonstrate the odious falsehood of the Kings shiprack on the Covenant;
though he most unworthily reproacheth the poor Scots, with the want (not of
fidelity and good will, but) of success, Gods only gift: And instead of
vindicating his Analysis, against Mr. Croftons Analepsis, notes, The vote of
non-addresses was passed by the covenanters; but he does not, nor dare not say
by virtue of the Covenant; nay himself calls the promoters thereof the
Cromwellian Faction, and quotes Sir Henry Vane, as if all the world knew not
these to be perjured Anti-covenanters* And himself is constrained to profess
Dr. Gauden is not so illogical and atheological as to infer a nulling of all
things (and all must be nulled if any on that ground) by the apostasy and
perverseness of some: And so subscribes to Mr. Croftons conclusion and argument.
What he suggesteth of the rational baflings of the Covenant by the Oxford
reasons; Mr. Crofton has fully considered, and cut him out work enough, to
contradict his Analepsis Anelepthe. His suaso's to loyalty are as needless to a
sincere covenanter, as those of subjection to Episcopacy, and content with its
restitution, are groundless.

The Doctors opposing contrary Oaths to the Covenant concerns not Mr.
Crofton, who yet has considered them in his Analepsis Analepthe, sect. 3. page
97, 98, 99. and therefore Mr. Crofton shall only enquire what principle of
morality or justice makes the Hierarchy a royal and successive duty to our
Kings? Is this duty immediately imposed by God, or prescribed by the laws of
the land, any more then that an Ecclesiastical person shall put on the Crown,
Lands late unction in forma crucis, or the offering the Regalia upon the Altar?
or was not this the voluntary assumpsit of the English Kings: will not a
previous oath bar such a voluntary assumpsit, countermand custom, and at least
suspend an execution of laws which bear any aspect to such an action?

When the Doctor has cleared these, there will be a better support to
Episcopacy, then they can yet receive.

What the Doctor discourses about the divine, civil, and moral authority of
Episcopacy, in page 191, 192, 193, 194, is a petitio principii, and noted
before in his collected errors, to be proved before the Covenant or its
obligation can be strained by them.

His eighth difficulty he tells us seems to press heavy on the Analeptist;
which was but a bare seem so, and that in his own account, who dreams of an
Almighty power in his words without reason: It being an empty swada, and
insinuating plea without any force, by the uncertainty of its object, as Mr.
Crofton in his Analepsis page 19. has observed; persuading to a sense which
the words of the Covenant will no way afford; in respect of which he tells us,
Mr. Cr. after some shuffling and confusion (which let the Reader judge)
definitively resolves, that the Covenant expressly binds against the very form
and fabric of the late Hierarchy in England ( established by law (is by him
added and fancied, for it was never believed nor asserted by Mr. Crofton) and
not against its abuses, excesses and defects only. This Mr. Crofton did
conclude as definitively, as became a Disputant or Casuist; yet not as if he
had been in the bosom of the first composers of the Covenant; but as the
grammatical construction, logical resolution, vulgar acceptance, and genuine
interpretation of the words (which D. Gauden does not dare to be tried by, yet
this must convince and guide the very Composers themselves, if never so willing
to shift off the Covenant) do assure him, and from this conclusion he shall not
easily recede; nor does the Doctor urge any thing that may drive him from it:
for to his [good Mr. Crofton if the excesses, abuses and defects of our former
Episcopal constitution be reformed, what can remain but the good] Mr. Crofton
does affirm that the same being a civil, humane frame, alterable at men's will,
if covenanted against, cannot be retained; but corruption unius, must be
generatio alterius; the frame must be exti^pated, unless it be found necessary,
not ratione subjecti; as you profoundly say, you must have your horse before
the detainers know it is necessary for you, but necessitate praecepti, because
of Gods positive will and institution; therefore you must specify what is in
your Hierarchy, that is [not only a good notional, entitive, national, and
poli^^cal, but moral and Ecclesiastical, having in it something more Christian,
Apostolical, perfect and divine, then any other government, and prove it; for
your words are too many to be believed, though Mr. Crofton can easily believe
many of you will witness your couches, manors, states, honors, revenues, to
be as necessary to you (though primitive Bishops went without them) as is your
horse; sooner then you will specify that goodness which must, and only can
expunge extirpation out of the Covenant, and Mr. Crofton must tell the Doctor,
reformation of the Hierarchy was not Covenanted, but extirpation, and his
Dictionary will teach him to know, what it means, yea and let his profound
reason know that every plebeian fancy can differ between the fabric of man's
body built by God and nature, and not within humane power, (except in case of
justice) to demolish, and a political frame, reared by humane art, invention
and industry, at his pleasure to be thrown down ag^in; and therefore he is not
more scurrilous then foolish, in demanding whether [if Mr. Cr. diseases be
cured it be not enough to justify his Physician, unless his body be taken in
pieces codled and pur-boyld] for that there is not more of difference between
an humane body, and an Episcopal frame, then is between the faederated
extirpation of the one, and Physical expurgation of the other, commending the
Physician; but the Reader cannot without high content (unto open laughter)
observe the apt similies which boiled out of our Doctors codled brain, who must
not be angry if Mr. Crofton adhaere to his conclusion, who is ready to meet the
Doctor unto a fair dispute about his Episcopacy; and hopes until he have
thereby convinced him, he will restrain his rods of Iron, Page 201.
and severity of power which he imprecates; and give us leave to live in Old
England, without the logic of their high commission; for he shall find little
Mr. Crofton who cannot be vanquished by a flood of words, will easily fall
under the power of reason; though he with plainness out of conscience, have
declared his judgment, not as the Doctor fancyeth on a presumption of his
Majesty's indulgence, whose judgment expressed and declared for Episcopacy, may
be a reason for submission negative, by non resistance, not of conviction, or
sinful suspension, or silencing of his judgment in his place, as with the
modesty and moderation, so the confidence of a Minister, for I fear God: but to
proceed

The Doctor tells us, having strapped the sweetness of Mr. Crofton (after which
for its reason and sobriety, truth and seriousness, give me leave to say Dr.
Gauden needs not be ashamed to lick his lips) he proceeds to his ninth
reflection; the Covenant of Israel, the ten Commandments; to which Mr. Crofton
took exceptions in his Analepsis page 20. and tells us, that Mr. Crofton runs a
calmer, but not clearer stream then the Libeller (and so the Doctor sets up his
own shadow to fight withal) and desires a demonstration to prove, Page 257.
that one complete and grand Covenant given of God to the Jews, was the only
rule and dictate of what matter they should Covenant; to which he insultingly
answers, as indeed to a frivolous question, he may as well look for a
demonstration to prove there is but one God, one true Religion, and one Sun in
the firnament, judiciously fought Doctor, must you not be hum'd; is Mr. Crofton
so little, you cannot see or distinguish him from your Umbra? I pray you where
does Mr. Crofton desire this in his Analepsis, which only you encounter? he
did determine and agree to this, your grave eyes are dim, and Episcopal
spectacles made at Rome dusty, otherwise you would have read true English. Mr.
Crofton his desire to the Doctor was, to demonstrate that the law of Moses,
Analep. p. 20.
or Covenant in Horeb, was NOT ONLY the RULE and DICTATE of what MATTER (can
you see it Sir) they should Covenant, but the EXPRESS COVENANT, or did consist
in the EXACT RECITAL and REPETITION of the law or ten Commandments, so as that
they never VARIED or ALTERED (Sir I would help your eye sight) the same. Do not
these words much agree with that you have falsely fathered on Mr. Crofton, his
desire? is this the praxis of your profound notion, by which you would save the
credit of your liturgy from beginning its Rubric with a lie, defending the
sameness of the words, by a supposed soundness of the sense? But what say you
yet to Mr. Crofton his demand? were the Jews tied to those words on no occasion
to vary them? that these did rule and limit their matter is agreed; but you
dare not affirm they were tied to the order and number of words; yet on this
score you quarrel with the Covenant, and by a childish fancy, cast the words
into 666, as if that number was as fatal to every thing, as it is to Papal,
Prelatical Hierarchy; and will needs suppose, to live according to the word of
God, and laws of the land, to be a sufficient form for all Oaths or Covenants
on any occasion? but who made Dr. Gauden the Dictator of the words, which
should be the same in all Covenants? these are not the words of Moses, or
Covenant in Horeb. I may sir, come into your Diocese, and need your license;
and I will covenant with you to live according to the word of God and laws of
the land: I hope you will require no other canonical oath, or subscription.
Sir, declare this, and stand to it, and you shall be the best Bishop, and have
your Diocesses stored with the best Ministers in England.

The Doctor having thus solidly defended his profound notion of the one
Covenant in the Old Testament, he proceeds to establish his one baptismal
covenant in the New: the man professes much to unity, and fondly dreams of
nothing but unites, even of words and humane expressions, as if tens, or
hundreds, or thousands in a covenant were utterly Antiarithmetical and
Antichristian, against the rule of Nature and Scripture.

Herein having sufficiently scolded his Anatomist, he courts Mr. Crofton with
such justice and civility as ^he can afford, which is comparatively very much,
and tells us,

Mr. Cr. instead of proving the Covenant to be ratified by any precept in the
New Testament, or examples of any Christians in succeeding ages; flies to
justify it, by the dictates and discoveries of the Old Testament, by politic
arts befitting any people, or Church National. But the Doctor should have been
so just and civil, as to have observed Mr. Croftons distinctions between the
matter and circumstances of the Covenant; how he concluded in his Analepsis,
that the New Testament directs us as Christians, but in Acts that pertain to
us as a Kingdom, or Church national, it leaves us to the dictates of Nature,
and the discoveries of the Old Testament. Although the Doctor has unjustly
couched the one, he does not, he dares not contradict the other; but infers
truly on the same grounds, that so much by him and others decried (oath he
intends) with etc. in it, which excluded Popery, and confirmed the already
legal, and settled Episcopacy of the Church of England, had been as lawful and
sacred as this Covenant; and in some respect more allowable, because it
disseised no man of his freehold or Estate. But sure the Doctor runs too fast,
and now reckons without his host, and by an after reckoning will find his
mistake, in these three things.

First, The Episcopacy of the Church of England was legal, and already settled,
which we have before charged as his error; and by a petitio principii he all
along builds upon it; but must go to the Temple, and beg some help of the
Lawyers to prove Id quod erat demonstrandum.

Secondly, Admitting the dictates of Nature, and discoveries of the Old
Testament to direct the circumstances of an Oath; that the Oath with etc. in
it, will be found as lawful and sacred as the Covenant, is a mere non sequitur:
For the dictates of nature do authorize any person to vow in his place,
calling, and capacity to endeavor the extirpation of what he conceives or
experienceth evil; but that Oath binds against the giving consent to alter,
what on after conviction may appear, not only al^erable at the pleasure of the
superior, to whom our consent must be subject; but in it self hu^tful, yea
sinful; and so the subserviency of the will to the understanding is superseded
by an Oath. Again, the dictates of nature, and discoveries of the Old Testament
do direct the matter of an oath to be expressed with all certainty and
clearness; and the Covenant does accordingly express all the particulars
covenanted; but this oath is so far from certainty of the matter sworn, that it
binds the conscience to an and caetera of infinite extension, and boreth a
passage into a man's conscience for whatsoever shall be fathered upon, and said
to be intended in the and caetera; which might be at least Moneks and Abbeys,
no less legal and established then this Episcopacy. Again, the dictates of
Nature, and discoveries of the Old Testament do direct, the National tie of an
oath to be stamped by the collective body of the Nation, as was the Covenant,
but not the Oath and caetera, which was by a picked, packed Convocation,
without any authority, Ecclesiastical or civil, to impose or prescribe an Oath
upon the Subjects: Nay, if we give the Doctor his fancy, and suppose the
Prelates Justices of the Peace, they run into a praemunire, who bind the Subject
to the good behavior by an oath not directed by Law.

Thirdly, That the Oath of the and caetera disseised no honest man of his
freehold or estate: I must understand him in his consequences of it, as he does
the Covenant; and then I must enquire what it means, that the Minister, or
beneficed, dignified person, refusing this Oath, after one months
consideration shall be suspended ab officio, after two months consideration, a
beneficio, after three months consideration shall be deprived of all promotion,
and execution of his function: Sure the Doctor is as well studied in the Canons
of 1640. as the Covenant 1643. Is not a Benefice the Ministers freehold and
estate, as much as the Bishopric is the Bishops? or are the suspension a
beneficio, yea deprivation no disseisure of the same? and suspension, ab
officio, no injustice and impiety? Sir, Your second thoughts will sure sink
your parallel, and consequence; and your reply will be found more light and
shufling then Mr. Croftons Queries, which answer themselves by way of
expostulation, Page 14^.
proving against Dr. Gaudens assertion, that the New Testament is not the only
rule which must direct the Nationalty, or other circumstances of a Covenant
determinable by the light of nature: As to the question you pretend not
answered, it is but now started, and is not in your Analysis, [What erigents in
religion did ever put any Church or Christian Subjects upon such a way of
public covenanting, etc. Yet by your leave Sir, Mr. Crofton did say something
which may answer it: Find you a Church or Christian people, and erigents of
Religion, so capacitated for nature, number, quality, and just authority,
Analepsis p. 22. and Mr. Crofton will find such a Covenant? until then
observe Mr. Croftons Query, Must we enquire only what has been done in the
Christian Churches, to do that and no more, without regarding what may be done;
the condition of the Church so requiring. And study Mr. Crofton his Analepsis
Anelephthe, sect. 3.

The Doctor has not more shufled about Mr. Crose^f answering expostulation,
then he poorly shifts off his vindication and rescue of the Covenant from the
odium of the Ligue de Saint in France, which he (as writing after his friends
John Russels copy) in his margin, with a notorious falsehood calls Mr. Croftons
patte^n, and in the Text upbraidingly cries out, Mr. Crofton not like an
Eagle, but a meaner bird, stoops to feed on that long ago dead and noysom
carcass, the holy League in France, as a very exemplary parellel for his holy
Covenant. Doctor, are not you ashamed to father the Brats of your own fancy on
Mr: Crofton. This parellel is your own bastard, and quod fieri non debuit,
factum valet; you begot it you must keep it: Did not you in your Analysis
labor to make the Covenant odious by this example? Does Mr. Crofton own or
allow this League de Saint? Nay does he not condemn it? only stave off the
odious reflection designed by an envious Renegado and Apostate.

I pray Sir, read Mr. Croftons words again, and see whether Mr. Crofton feed on
this as a pattern, on only a fence against your assault made by it: May not the
League de Saint, and Oath and caetera in England, (there is your parallel Dr.)
though SINFVL IN THE MATTER (Sir rub your Romish spectacles) be good spurs and
directions in Christian policy? may not the same means (as abstracted from the
matter) be used to corroborate true Religion and Reformation? why may not
Popish policy teach Protestants to combine by Covenant? Reverend Sir, read my
ridle, Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth
sweetness. Sir was not Mr. Crofton herein like an Eagle on the horns of an
Heart, scattering that dust in your eyes, that caused you to throw your self
into the praecipice of false accusation? or appear, not you, like the envious
and cruel Vulture, killed by the oil of Roses, which sprang and grew out of the
dung of a noysom dead carcass. O man be honest though a Prelate.

p. 242, 243.
The Doctor tells us, Mr. Crofton stranges at Dr. Gauden, not finding the like
lineaments in the Covenant, as in the baptismal Covenant, you are again
mistaken Doctor, for Mr. Cr. stranged at the transport of so grave and serious
a Divine, to oppose the baptismal Covenant to this, Mr. Crofton did easily
admit they were disparata, but not opposita contraria: this was Dr. Gaudens
work to demonstrate, if you will believe him; he tells us the inconsistency is
plain, and fully explained by Dr. Gauden, where or how? why, if it obliges to
injustice, oppression, sedition, sacrilege, schism, and Iliades of miserable
innovations, at this rate it will appear but ifs or ands, are no proofs or
demonstrations; if they were I would soon prove your Prelacy a Papacy, and
store your Table with Episcopal plenties and dainties, for if the Elements
fall, we shall catch Larks; this way of disputing is apparently Jesuitical,
Machiavilian and barbarous, so far from baptismal, that it is plainly
irrational; what good, duty, Justice, morality, or Religion may not be ruined,
if a man's fancyed if, be reason enough against it, if the Bishopric of Exeter
be unjustly held by Dr. Gauden from Mr. Crofton, or Bath and Wells from D. B.
it is unjust and sacrilegious, and they are both bound to abandon their places,
and avoid their Seats, and to restore them, how like you the Argument? is it
not very Logical and Cogent? Sir draw up a positive charge, and prove it, Mr.
Crofton will stand to it, that he will renounce the Covenant, in the mean time
let me desire the Doctor, to take a view of the parallel between this and the
baptismal vow or covenant, proposed by Mr. Cr. in his Analepsis Analephthe
Sect. 3. page 35. and avoid it if he can, only take notice it is the honesty
of the Covenant, not all Covenanters, that Mr. Crofton pleads with confidence,
he confesses many cups may be found in his brethrens sacks, but not in any
Article of the Covenant, and Dr. Gaudens multiplied reiterated Ifs, do make me
confident of Benjamins innocence, and apt to think things unknown are thrust
upon them; but not from so pious a principle, and to so charitable an end, as
Joseph acted from and aimed at: but truly Doctor, it is a Sophistical evasion
to confound things and persons in a dispute, but this the learned Doctor does
decline as to the name, office, degree, order and Authority of a Bishop in
Scripture, Sir do you not now appear a greater dictatour then little Mr.
Crofton, Page 249.
who rationally urged his exception, and is no way afraid or unwilling in this
case to try a turn with Dr. John Gauden on the questions before propounded, who
yet will hold to his ingenuous agnition, which so much pleases you, viz. that
the Covenant is not levelled against any real excellency in the Bishops (which
is all that Mr. Crofton agnifed, Analep. Page 25.
though you according to your usual falsehood do add, authority, estate and
honor,) which Mr. Cr. noted to be unwarrantable, neither to be assumed by
them, nor attributed to them, and Sir I must tell you, ruin and extirpation of
the frame of the English Hierarchy, does no way interfere with the preservation
and esteem of any real excellency in Bishops but that Mr. Crofton may be ready
and bound (if in a capacity) to vail that pompous worldly State, and wicked
superiority, which Church Governors had obtained; a note or instance of which
he gave in Lawn sleeves, no more puerile or scurrilous, nor unbeseeming a
Scholar, or Gentleman, then the baseness and contemptible inferiority of
Presbyters, was by you marked out, in a black coat, to which that was opposed,
is below the sobriety of a man, the humility of a Primus Presbyter, and
reverence of a Christian to the poorest meanest Minister of Christ; and speaks
your prelatical Pride, much more then your Rochet and Chymer sets out your
pomp, which my baptism binds against; and will engage the Boanergesses of God
to thunder out terror against Covenant breaking? which you account a weak
Womanish flash, Page 249, 251.
yet will not be quenched by your first demonstrations, or this reply, by your
judicious self, proclaimed rational, and conscientious, though to all men
beside, proud, profane, ridiculous, weak, and wicked, whilst Mr. Crofton
seeks not to strain the ^ovenant beyond its own just and ingenuous
resolution, Page 251.
sense, operation, influence and obligation, consenting to, and rejoicing in,
its limitation to the Word of God, and dutys of our places and callings, by
which Mr. Crofton is resolved he will be judged, and is in himself assured,
that King and Kingdom accordingly keeping their Covenant, the controverted
Episcopacy will be at an end, and the commission of our present Prelate
Justices expired and useless; covenanters by their good behavior, proving the
solemn League and Covenant to be, as indeed it is Berith Anti-Baall, which Dr.
Gauden blasphemously denominateth Baal Berith, and Mr. Crofton is nor shall no
way be shye of retrospection how or by whom, to what or in what sense it binds,
and the rationality of its obligation, all which he has seriously considered
in an opposition to the Oxford Reasons, to which the Doctor so often retireth,
as he may see in my Analepsis Anelephthe, page 265.

We have seen the Doctors strength in the defense of his indirect answer, and
consideration of the Covenant, which being done, he proceeds to reinforce his
direct answer, and Goliath like, being encouraged by the stature of little Mr.
Crofton, not taking notice of his stone and sling, he triumphantly enters, and
tauntingly cries, Mr. Croftons fear (good man) is lest Dr. Gaudens down right
blows, may quite break in sunder, Page 273, 274.
whatever may be of sacred bond in the Covenant; the Reader that well regards
the strength of his book, cannot but with Laughter say, there was great cause
of fear, but the best is, it was but a fear, and so on past, for in the next
assault Mr. Crofton is victor.

Mr. Croftons note, that the paucity of the Covenanters does not discharge its
obligation, is true; had not Mr. Crofton much cause of fear and trouble? I but
in making Dr. Gauden one of the number, Mr. Crofton reckoned without his host;
when that appears, Mr. Crofton will cry true; but the Doctor does not, dare not
deny he swear it: which if he should, Mr. Crofton can tell who heard him preanh
upon the Covenant, acd saw him in the Pulpit at Bocking lift up his hand, and
swear it: He does indeed, like a shifting runnegado, labor to darken the act
which retorts on his conscience, in his now estate, and tell us, he never took
an oath, but those appointed by Law; he might reckon the Covenant to be of this
nature, for the Authority of Parliament is by the Petition of Right the legal
appointment of an Oath: He tells us a large story how he did sense the
Covenant, and with what nonsense he did approve it, understanding Extirpation
to signify Reformation, and so by general salvoes and restrictions, he cheated
others and himself, which Mr. Crofton has detected in his Review of
Reordination, page 35. but may as soon acquit his soul from the bond, as make
the words of the Covenant bear his sense; let him ^now equivocation in an Oath,
is no way short of Ananias and Saphira's lie unto the Holy Ghost; it is much
patience that the punishment has not yet proclaimed it; The Lord grant it may
lead unto repentance. He proceeds

Mr. Crofton is apt to think the Covenant national (not as in a Presbyterian
illegal and caetera sense, which the Doctor adds, but will not alter the case,
the sense being no way considerable to the Nationalty of it, but in any sense)
signifies as little as other men's thoughts to the contrary. But good Sir, weigh
the Reasons brought by Mr. Crofton, and his answer to what you have objected as
to the troubles of the Houses, absence of some members, or the like, in
Analepsis Anelepthe; sect. 6. which had you read, would have saved, or
increased your labor in your Reply. Mr. Crofton must not shufle that into this
book, and therefore shall make bold to tell you, His sacred Majesty and the
Kingdom must submit to the plain and literal sense thereof, though it seem as
sour grapes, unless we will by Gods wrath set our own and childrens teeth on
edge; for the capacity of the Covenanters does extend the obligation. But

The Doctor judges an oath extorted by fear to a man's private damage does
bind; Page 279.
sure he means a proper damage; for I cannot think he will in cool blood deny
the Parents oath to the damage of the family; or progenitors in a corporation,
to the damage of successors; or Governors to the damage of the people or
Subjects to bind, because these are sui juris; and then he yields as much as I
desire, to shut out, yea thrust out and pluck up his Episcopacy, and in this
point we shall agree. But now he shufles to defend his strange notions of
morality; Of which

The first is, Mr. Crofton carps at the Doctors owning the bonds of God, which
are moral, to have in them sufficient and indispensable obligations of the soul
to all duty. Page ^8^.
By your leave Doctor this is false: Mr. Croftons wonder was at the Doctors
Antithesis of the words of a Covenant, to Reason, Justice, Truth, Religion,
Duty: which he never denied to tie as well as Oaths, but not as much, muchless
more; as your iron adamantine bonds of Reason, morality, etc. opposed to the
cords and withs of Oaths, did suggest in your Analysis; but now indeed you
confess that Oaths do harden and soder these moral chains unto a greater
toughness; which was the thing Mr. Cr. asserted in his Analepsis: I confess
retraction of error is the best vindication; but you should be ingenuous, and
do it without shufling, and suggesting a falsehood against your Antagonist: But
Mr. Cr. will grant to you, that new Covenants cannot absolve or abrogate old
lawful Oaths; but what it may do to laws I must dispute, when done by
Legislators, I affirm it to be the fullest repeal: But if I admit it, it will
not secure your Bishops Lands, Honor, Office, or Authority, until you have
proved your Episcopacy to be established by law, which may be done by an act of
the next Parliament, if the long Parliament be not in being, as has been
affirmed; though it is out of Mr. Cr. way to determine; and he is well advised
by the Doctor to let wise men manage affairs, as is but reason; for no doubt
wisemen will hear and weigh the doubts of the meanest men, the stating of
which, proud Prelates think to be pragmatique.

But Sir, Mr. Cr. thinks whatever Jepthas vow was, it was literally fulfilled;
Page 281,
and I hope Dr. Gauden will not assert a Popish commutation of an Oath; and the
Popish Casuists conclude, Non posse promissum commutari in evidenter pejus; an
oath may not be changed for the worse: And Sir, if he vowed (which I will not
conclude) his daughters life, I think her virgin liberty to be less and worse.
And Dr. Saunderson determines Vinculum juramenti non posse remitti vel solvi
ex part per commutationem, sine consensu partium omnium: The exchange must be
by consent of all parties concerned: But the Scripture mentions not Gods
consent, nor Jeptha's exchange; what he vowed that he performed: For ubi lex
non distinguit, non est distinguendum.

His second suggestion was, That a Covenant cannot bind a man by the power of
his own imagination, Analysis, p. 15. To this Mr. Crofton excepted in his
Analepsis, page 19. and he replys It is true, that imagination or mere
presumption, cannot bind, contrary to what in Reason, Justice, Law and
Religion you owe to another. But Doctor, Page 282, ^
have you not again run from your own second suggestion? How long will you
shufle? your suggestion was of any Covenant, your reply of Covenants to the
wrong of others; and therefore you add, the measure of an erroneous conscience
may bind to things of our own injury; but not otherwise; your suggestion
opposed a man's own imagination to others interpretation; your reply opposes
our own to others wrong; where shall we hold you? can Jesuitism it self be more
subtle and sophistical? I pray come to the question, does an erroneous
conscience bind, and does it universally bind? I have sworn, and do imagine it
is no wrong to my neighbor; though I ought to be the better informed by right
reason, and rules of justice; yet whilst in my error, must I conscienciously
wrong my neighbor, or captivate my conscience by Dr. G. say so? you profess
Sir to be best in a particular case; I pray you resolve it clearly and plainly.
You boast of this second suggestion, as having as much strength as I confess
your next has; when indeed you have made it the same; and instead of defending
the second, you have spoken the third in a second book; profound disputing! I
will admit this strength, and yet your inferred safety of your Episcopacy
(which I stand by is no wrong to remove) is a plain non sequitur; grounded on
your common petitio prinipii; for I must enquire what is the right of
Episcopacy? may not the power that founded Prelacy extirpate it? Is it not sui
juris? May not Episcopacy be abolished without wrong, as well particular
Bishoprics be given to lay persons for two, three, four, five, ten, fifteen,
twenty, thirty years together, and the Sea kept vacant? tell us was the Church
so long injured? May not English authority abolish Prelacy, with as little
wrong as Denmark did? I know my horse and sadle, wife and children, Page 183.
house and lands; but yet I know not the pretended right of Episcopacy; and
conceive there is some difference between personal and political right: When
God stirs up the Kings heart to con^ider, and raises up an English
Parliament to take notice of, they will know their right in and over
Episcopacy, and make Bishops know they are their servants, horse and saddle, to
be disposed at their pleasure, without complaint of wrong. Mr. Cr. shall freely
trust them to it, and God to give them thereunto hearts of wisdom, conscience
and courage.

The Doctors assertion more then his judgment, leads him to an exclamation,
Mr. Croftons next paragraph is a factious quaerie, not worth any sober man's
Reply. It is well Sir, it is not seditious; page 2^4
for many Deputy Lieutenants are become so far the Bishops slaves and
Constables, as to resolve the peace and order of the Kingdom into owning the
Bishops, and make the contrary sedition? But Sir, what is the Query? I presume
it touches the Prelates copyhold; you cry so of faction, whether the Statute
of 17. Caroli has not cut short their horns? And you tell us of a Councellor
who resolved in the negative. Mr. Cr. knows him not, but has heard of a
Convention of Prelates, who on advice with Council discerned the affirmative,
and received the silence of the learned in the Law to their enquiry; you may if
you please take silence for consent: I am prone to think Dr. Gauden knows this
story to be true, and that the Councellor who concluded for Episcopal
Jurisdiction, did determine it could not be executed without the Kings
commission, barred by the Statute of 17 Caroli primi. But this was fit for the
Doctor to tell.

The Doctors next fling is at Mr. Croftons fear of National perjury; before
considered, page 185.
and on good grounds will convince men it is not causeless: Mr. Cr. would be
glad to see how the Nation will escape it; but he will meet Dr. Gauden on any
ground, with his Majesty's leave to maintain the Solemn League and Covenant, is
a full and formal and National obligation. This past

He finds himself grieved that Mr. Cr. charge Episcopacy to have brought
reformation to a palpable retrogradation; but like a subtle Sophister, he
coucheth Mr. Croftons demonstrative instances of the returned Liturgy, most
conform to the Romish Mass book; Inclosed-in-Altars, or railed
Communion-Tables, Crosses, Surplices, Popish Oblations, and other superstitious
Rites; to say nothing of profaned Sabbaths by bishops ^arding; suppressing
pious, painful Preachers thrust out, and profane, drunken deboist, canonical,
Common Prayer Book men forced in, wheresoever a Bishops power can reach; all
which are read in such legible characters that all can run and read them: It
may be this is the Reformation desired by our Prelates and amongst others by
Dr. G. If so I have done them wrong, they do not retrograde it, but drive it
on, like Phaeton to the apparent hazard of Charles his wain. If you say this is
rude Rhetoric, remember it is plain English: As for bringing horses to Church,
it is as much Mr. Croftons reformation, as Bishops Palaces and holiness of
Church, Chancels, or other places, which it is known he has equally opposed,
and loves no less then pulling down crosses and setting up weathercock
Covenanters, as Bishops or Priests in the Church; let what will stand on the
steeple, these will turn with every wind.

His next fret is, at Mr. Crofton? wiping his nose on the Bishops lawn sleeves;
as mannerly Sir, as with his nails at Exeter to tear them, for Linen is fit
for that use, especially when black becomes despicable by it; you now profess
love and esteem for Presbyters; but when you taught the people to know them but
as their equals and inferiors, because in black coats, Analysis, page 17. you
exposed them to contempt.

His last work is to explain himself, concerning the good, against which, his
Analysis urged, no Oath could bind, the man is become a Bishop, it is below him
to learn, at least to let the world see, that a little despicable Presbyter is
to him an instructor, who never affected to be a dictatour, and therefore in an
angry style he must correct his error, and tell us When Dr. Gauden affirmed an
Oath cannot bind against what is in nature good, he meant, so far only as that
good may be morally necessary for him and his: But Sir that we may yet know
your meaning, I should enquire what you mean by morally necessary, when Mr.
Crofton tells you, Episcopacy must not be restored against the Covenant, though
good, unless found necessary you put the case of your good horse necessary for
you; and truly Sir, I cannot see any more moral necessity in your horse, then
your Episcopal fines of Gold and silver, and other things that may be barred by
an Oath, you are the most unhappy Master of words, that I have met with, to
darken your meaning by declaring what you mean. Sir I do say all good, not good
by the necessity of nature, or divine precept, but at man's choice to take or
refuse, in order to the been esse of him or his, may be concluded by an Oath,
and charity commands me to think, this is that you would say you meant (though
you shot far wide) in your Analysis, if your many words, and whirling tongue
would let your mind regularly dictate its expressions.

We have seen the strength of Dr. Gaudens Argumentation, which truly I cannot
commend; though I think an error weakly vented, is very sinfully defended;
whilst the exceptions against him, do by his own expression appear cogent, he
should meekly yield to the conviction, and bear the shame, which struggling to
avoid, he has added folly, vanity, sophistry, and false quotations and
suggestions; the effects of a stubborn mind, unwilling to give God Glory, and
fallen under the curse of calling good evil, and evil good; and more
immediately subjected himself to Gods wrath, by hardening his neck against
reproof, and laboring not only to vindicate and defend his own apostasy, but
by his wordy influence to encourage the profane; and as far as in him lies,
plunge both King and Kingdom, under the guilt of perjury, or breach of
Covenant, the quarrel of which, the God of jealousy has avenged, as to the
civil part, and will undoubtedly avenge as to the religious part, against the
violent rejections, or fraudulent evasions of the sons of men.

FINIS.
Books written by Mr. Zach. Crofton.
Foelix scelus, Querela piorum, and Auscultato Divina; Or, Prospering
profaneness provoking Holy conference, and Gods attention, in which you have
the happy estate of the wicked, the holy exercise of the godly, the hazard and
event of both. Plainly propounded in sundry Sermons Preached at Botolphs Algate
London: and after contracted in two Sermons Preached in Peter's Church in
West-chester, July 17. 1659.

Catechizing Gods Ordinance: Or a short Treatise concerning that Ancient
Approved Soul-edifying Singularly necessary exercise of Catechizing.

The peoples need of a living Pastor: Asserted and explained in a Sermon
Preached November. 4. 1656. At the sad and solemn Funeral of that late learned,
pious and eminent hopeful Minister of the Gospel, Mr. John Frost, Bachelor in
Divinity, late fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge, and Pastor of St.
Olaves Hart-street London. Together with a Narrative of his Life and Death.

(...), Or St. Peter's bonds abide, being an answer to Dr. Gaudens sense and
solution of the Solemn League and Covenant.

(...), The fastening of St. Peter's Fetters, by seven kinds or propositions.

A serious review of Presbyters reordination by Bishops, in a Letter Written
unto a Minister in Warwicksheir, resolving this case of conscience, Whether a
Minister ordained by Presbyters may with a good conscience be reordained by a
Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon, so that they will declare their Ordination to be
merely accumalative and the man shall not renounce his Ordination by it.

Bethshemesh clouded, or some Animadverisions on the Rabbinical Talmud of Rabbi
John Rogers, of Thomas-Apostles Land.

Altar-Worship, Or bowing to the Communion Table, considered, as to the
novelty, vanity, iniquity, malignity, charged upon it.

Fraterna Correptio: Or the Saints zeal against sinful Altars: delivered in a
Sermon Preached on a day of Humiliation for the Errors, Heresies and Schisms of
our times and Nations.


