A DISCOURSE OF Spiritual Blessings: Or a Discovery I. That every Christian is
blessed with all Spiritual Blessings in Christ. In four Sermons. II. That God
has a high account of the least Grace in the Saints. In three Sermons.


By Mr. John Cromwell, late Pastor of a Church of Christ in the City of Norwich.

Col. 3.11. -- But Christ is all and in all. LONDON, Printed by T. S. for
Edward Giles, Bookseller in Norwich, near the Marketplace. 1685.

TO THE Christian Reader.
IT is the unspeakable unhappiness of all the Children of Men whilst in a
natural condition, that they are favored only with Temporal Blessings; and as
an aggravation of their misery, their Spirit stands primarily and chiefly
toward those Earthly Enjoyments, they are minding Earthly things, Phil. 3.19.
their highest pursuits are after these, they estimate and value themselves
according to the measures of these which they have enrichment with, they are
carnally minded, which is death, Romans 8.6. They are dead to the things of God,
which are of highest concernment to their Souls.

On the other hand, all, even the lowest Christians, are Privileged not only
with some, but with all Spiritual Blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. So as they are rightly
denominated Spiritual Men, 1 Cor. 2.15. Gal. 6.1. They are so in their
principles. Indeed, by a non-improvement thereof, although the standing frame
of their heart is to Spiritual things, yet many, if not most, come exceedingly
short in point of practice, that it may be said to them, as 1 Cor. 3.1. Are ye
not carnal, and walk as men? They are apt to Divisions, and so are Carnal. v.
3. To build hay and stubble, (that which will not abide the fire, and is of
little value) upon the true foundation, and so are carnal; too worldly, and do
not exercise Grace in its due height upon all occasions, and so are carnal.

To reduce or advance Christians unto their proper frame and temper of
spirituality, this eminent and judicious Minister of Jesus Christ Mr. John
Cromwell (the Author of the ensuing Sermons) has discovered what Spiritual
Blessings they are entrusted with.

It is a matter of lamentation that such a labourer in the Lords Vineyard
should so early be transplanted to eternity, and that when so many other
eminent Ministers have lately been removed from that place by death.

These Sermons were taken from his mouth by the Pen of a ready Writer; they
would have come forth in a better dress, and with much more advantage if they
had been polished with his own hand; but as they are here presented to view
they may be exceedingly useful to those whose Citizenship is in heaven, their
affections in Heaven, their conversations in Heaven whilst they are on Earth.

Indeed they evidence that he himself had arrived at a more than ordinary
strain of Spirituality, which is a great excellency, because Spiritual
Blessings are most excellent, the best of Blessings.

They have the best Original, they have the best Father, even him who is the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. They come from the best place, not
from Earth, but Heaven [in heavenly places] from Gods Throne, thence he gives
forth all these of the best nature; it may be rendered [in heavenlies] i.e. Not
only in heavenly places, but in heavenly things.

Yea Spiritual Blessings have a tendency to the imbellishing, and adorning the
noblest part, the immortal Soul; a man may be enriched with temporal Blessings,
and his Spirit may be the worse for these, but ever is the better for these
Spiritual Blessings.

They furnish for the best operations and actings; Earthly things may indispose
for the highest Services and most glorious employments, they may be clogs and
heavy weights pressing down, which must be cast off in running the Christian
race, Heb. 12.1. But Spiritual Blessings capacitate for the choicest actings;
they give the best discerning of matters which are of highest concernment and
greatest moment, 1 Cor. 2.15. The Spiritual man judges all things, i. e.
Spiritual men are enabled to pass right Judgment upon Divine matters, and what
concern themselves, their own conditions, their own Salvation and what is
conducible to it, and this far beyond what a natural man, one in a natural
condition by the greatest parts can attain unto.

They capacitate to be Spiritually helpful unto others who are fallen by
temptation, Gal. 6.1. If a man be overtaken with a fault, ye which are
Spiritual restore such a one, put him in joint again. They help to descry the
ways and methods of Satan in tempting, and of Jesus Christ in succouring. They
qualify to encounter and conflict with Spiritual enemies, and resist Spiritual
evils, which there is the greatest difficulty in the withstanding of, Ephesians.
6.12. The grace of humility helps to expel Spiritual pride, and the grace of
love helps against self-love. Spiritual Blessings will enable to make
improvement of all occurrences toward the highest advantage, he that is carnal
makes an ill use of all that is before him, he turns all to sin, to himself,
he sets corruption or sin on work by all Enjoyments, Riches, Pleasures,
Relations, yea even by the gracious actings of the Saints, but he that is
Spiritual makes use not only of enjoyments, but even of the worst befalments,
as Trials and afflictions, toward Raising, heightning and mounting, his Soul
more toward God, he by a Spiritual Chemistry can extract good out of the worst
that betideth him. Spiritual Blessings will advance to a choosing the highest
and best ends; When others have inferior, base and low ends of their actings,
such as are privileged with these will make God their ultimate and chiefest
end, they have a frame for doing all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Yea
Spiritual Blessings are discriminating, differencing of Christians from others,
1 Cor. 2. v. 14, 15. And so they are evidences of the special favor and love
of God, v. 10. Whereas a man may have other enjoyments and yet be an object of
the highest wrath and indignation of the Almighty.

And once more, Spiritual blessings they are eternal Blessings; other things
are of no continuance, a man may soon be stripped and dispossessed of them, but
Spiritual Blessings will never be lost, they will abide for ever, all which
sufficiently argue that they have a transcendent excellency far above other
things.

And all these are dispensed out in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. They may have a
large measure of temporal things, and yet be out of Christ, but these are all
vouchsafed in him, they are the fruit of his purchase, obtained by a union with
him. He is the great repository, the store house where all Spiritual Blessings
are treasured up, Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father that in him should all
fullness dwell, that we might have recourse to him for all supplies evermore.
Those in a Christless condition are destitute thereof, whatever their
seize be, and the great reason why Christians are no more replenished
therewith, is because they repair no more to him, that they may have supplies.

None are to content themselves with any lower degree; but yet those who have
the smallest portion may be supported and comforted by the second Subject, viz.
That where there is grace but as a grain of Corn, the lowest measure, yet the
Lord has a high estimation of it. And that all grace may be multiplied shall
be the Prayer of him who is

A Servant of Christ in the Gospel, SAM. PETTO.
October. 13. 1684.
SERMON I.
Ephesians 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings, in Heavenly places in Christ.


IT is the Interest of Christians, in all the Circumstances of their lives, to
enquire after and make sure of something that is Spiritual. There is nothing
that Satan designs more, then either to obstruct their Right, or to Cloud their
Right, to those Blessings that are Spiritual and Eternal. Of all lives, a Life
of Faith, conversant in things that are not seen, is the most hateful Life to
the Devil, and the most unknown Life to the World, but the properest Life that
a Christian can live, in and under all the variety of his Condition here below;
Christians, you understand the design of the Devil, and of the World, upon your
temporals; how far it will please the Majesty of Heaven, to give them leave to
prosper in their design, I cannot determine, but that you and I may have
something to bear up our Spirits withal, whatever liberty or allowance they
have from Heaven: That we may have something to rejoice our hearts withal; I
have therefore proposed to speak something to you from these words, which are a
discovery of the unseen blessedness of a Christian, in and under all the
Circumstances of his Condition in this Life.

If you should ask me what a Christian is, I would tell you as to his state
that he is a Spiritual man, Blessed with all Spiritual Blessings, by the God
and Father of Jesus Christ, in Jesus Christ. This is a Christian, and this is a
Christians state: And surely the Apostle saw great reason to rejoice, upon his
view and apprehension of this; no sooner did it begin to bubble in his Spirit,
but so soon as ever it began to work in his heart, he breaks forth into
Blessings of the author of it, Blessed, says he, be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has Blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly
places in Christ.

I shall only take notice of these 3 things, that are principally comprised in
the words.

1. And the first is the true Gospel Relative and personal state of a
Christian; he is a Blessed man. If there be any personally Blessed, it is he,
if there be any that have any reserve of personal Blessings, it is he; if there
be any that have any Relative Blessings, it is he; all Blessings, all sorts of
Blessings he is Blessed with.

2. The Second thing that I would observe out of the words is this: The
security and certainty of these Blessings, It is a work not to be done, but a
work that is already done; Blessings not lodged in deceitful hearts, but in
faithful hands; Blessings not betrusted with one that may miscarry, but with
one whom God knows cannot miscarry; and therefore you may observe the Apostle
here tells us, that the business is done, that the Blessings are given, Blessed
be the God and Father, etc. Who has Blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings in
Christ Surely our Natural Blessings, the Blessings of our Creation were very
great Blessings, our Moral Blessings were very great Blessings, but not to be
compared to these Spiritual Blessings, neither were they so ensured.

For God Blessed all the Posterity of Adam, with all Natural Blessings in Adam,
but you know what became of them, but the Blessings of the New Covenant, they
are Spiritual Blessings, no more to be trusted in the hands of any, but of one
whom God dare venture to trust withal; therefore says he, Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has Blessed us with all Spiritual
Blessings in Christ.

The third thing that is remarkable in the words is this, the Author, or the
great Blesser: Whose Glory the Apostle here does exemplify and illustrate by
his Relation unto the Lord Jesus Christ; and that seems to be represented to us
under this double consideration.

First he is the God of the Lord Jesus, that died that he might purchase these
Spiritual Blessings for us. And

Secondly, He is not only the God of the purchasing Jesus, but he is also his
Father. If there be any security or advantage arising to Christians, that God
is Christ's God, the advantage lies here, and is improvable in this Case. It is
h^ that Blesses us. If there be any advantage that results from the Relation
that God has to Christ as a Father, that was never dishonored by him, a Father
that was never displeased nor grieved with him, this redounds also unto
Christians, to illustrate the Glory of their Blessedness, and to evidence the
truth and certainty of their Eternal enjoyment of him; he is not a God that is
a God of distance in concern, but he is a God concerned, and not only concerned
in the Relations of the Gospel to us, but in all the Relations of the Gospel
unto Christ, who is related unto Christians: So that a Christian may say, the
God and Father of my Lord, of my head, has Blessed me with all Spiritual
Blessings, in my Lord, my head, The God and Father of my Husband has Blessed me
with all Spiritual Blessings in my Husband; The God and Father of my Mediator
has Blessed me with all Spiritual Blessings in my Mediator: So that, my
Friends, you may look upon God not Blessing us as a God at large, but as a God
engaged in Relation to Christ. It is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The same God that Blessed Adam; but now God appearing as a Blessing God
in another Relation, and clothing himself with another Glory; he Blessed him as
the Creator, ay but he is now Blessing Christians, as the God and Father of
Christ Jesus. And thus now I have opened the words to you.

The Propositions that lie in the words are many, but intending this only as an
occasional discourse, I shall therefore confine my self to these two or three.

That the Blessings that properly belong unto Christians, and are given to
Christians, they are all Spiritual Blessings.

Grace could never content its self, infinite grace could never bound its self,
all the blessings a sinner stands in need of to make him a Saint, and all the
Blessings a Saint stands in need of, to make him an Eternally Blessed Saint,
these are the Blessings, that are the proper portion of Christians. Let God
dispose of temporal Blessings at his pleasure; these are below the grace of
God, to make them the Childrens Portion. Let God give them to whom he please:
So he do but reserve to you these that are of a better Nature, and these you
see are Blessings without Limitation, all Spiritual Blessings are bestowed upon
Christians. Surely then Christians may cry out, and have reason to cry out. O!
What a God have we? O what a Father have we? O! What Fatherly grace works in
the heart of our Father, who has Blessed us not with some few, but with all,
Spiritual Blessings, there is not a Blessing wanting, no one shall want his
Blessing.

That all the Blessings that God has bestowed upon Christians, are all secured
to and for Christians in Christ Jesus.

Christians with all the advantage of all their possible grace, on this side
Glory, are not fit to be trusted, that is, to be made the sole Trustees of any
one Blessing, that is wrapped up in any one promise whatsoever: They are not fit
to be solely trusted with their pardon, not fit to be solely trusted with their
peace. Grace has found out a better way, Grace has chosen a better method,
and has assured all, and betrusted all for Christians in the hand of Christ.
Who has Blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings in Christ Jesus, says the
Apostle.

That the God and Father, as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ has
thus Blessed, and thus betrusted Christians Blessings in the hands of Jesus.

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. You may observe
in other Scriptures, a like Introduction of the Apostles Epistles, with this,
in 2 Cor. 1.3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, who comfort us, etc. Has any
Christian any comfort, why it is the God and Father of Jesus, that gives them
comfort, has any Christian any grace given him, Grace be to you, and Peace from
the Lord Jesus Christ. He is not only our Father, but he is the Father of our
Lord Jesus, and as he is the Father of Jesus, he is the Father and Fountain of
all our mercies.

These are the three principal Propositions that lie in the words. It is only
the first of these that I design (if the Lord please) to make the Subject of
this days discourses, and my design in discoursing upon it is this, that I may
(if it be the Lords pleasure) raise up your minds, and fix your Hearts, upon
what is Spiritual and unseen. God never estimated a Christian by any visible
Blessings he gave him here, they are not always the best Christians, that are
the richest or honourablest, but he estimates a Christian in the balance of
the Sanctuary: he is weighed with all his Spiritual Blessings; if thou be
never so accomplished, if thou be never so Blessed with temporals, yet let me
tell thee, thou may be found light, and thou may be found too light too,
when God comes to weigh thee. But God estimates and weighs a Christian by what
is Spiritual in him, by what is unseen in him.

And therefore Christians, I pray attend unto the opening of this inquiry.

What are those Spiritual Blessings, wherewith God does bless Christians in
Christ Jesus?

In the opening of this, I shall not exceed, the bounds of the discoveries,
that the Holy Ghost has made in this Chapter; here are Spiritual Blessings
enough, comprised in this Chapter, to take up our minds, and to raise our
hearts, and therefore I shall confine my discourse to what I find herein
discovered.

But before I enter into the particular resolve of it, I shall only premise
this in general, that whatsoever I mention, you must take it as the Lord
intends it, that is, with all the advantages that are here discovered; who has
Blessed us with all; here is an Allness, an Universality upon every Spiritual
Blessing.

But you will say, what are these Spiritual Blessings?



The first is this, by Spiritual Blessings I understand Eternal Election. And
Eternal Election is called Spiritual, not because the Spirit is principal in
giving being to it, but because the Spirit is principal in the manage of it,
and in the application of it; it is the Father that chooses us, but it is the
Spirit that manages the choice. It is the Father that elects us, before the
Foundations of the World, ay but it is the Spirit that is principally concerned
in the insuring, or in the accomplishing of this Election, upon this or that
Elect Person: This Blessing the Apostle speaks of, in verse 4. According says
he, as he has chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the World, that we
should be holy and without blame before him in love.

I pray do but observe, it is an Election unto grace, it is a choice, that God
has made from all Eternity, A choice of grace, and that unto the practice of
grace. Christians do but consider with your selves, you are not only chosen to
have your hearts sanctified, but to have all the graces of the Spirit in your
hearts exercised. It is not only a personal, but a practical holiness, that the
grace of God did eye in the Eternal choice that he made of you; you (it may be)
are under diverse Temptations, under diverse fears of heart, sometimes you can
see something in your hearts, and you bless God for that, but you look into
your lives, and there is but little grace there, and you look into you duties,
and it may be there is as little discoverable there; but here is the
Blessedness that I have stated, ye are chosen that your Conversations should be
filled with all practical Holiness and Godliness. The Apostle clears it in that
passage, in the 4 verse. That we should be holy, and without blame before him.
Taking us in our whole complex consideration, taking Person and Conversation,
God has chosen us, that we should pray without blame, that we should praise
him without blame, that we should love him without blame, and that we should be
without blame before him, in our whole Conversation, and I pray do but observe,
how our Lord Jesus is concerned in the manage of this, in the fifth Chapter of
this same Epistle, where the Apostle (or rather the Holy Ghost by the Apostle)
proposes the Spiritual Husband as a pattern unto Christian temporal Husbands,
says he, Husbands love your Wives, even as Christ loved the Church, verse 25.
But wherein does the excellency or eminency of Christ's Love, appear unto his
Spouse? You shall find it in the 27. verse, He loved them, and he goes on to
Love, and Love and Love; he Loves them, and he dies for them, he Loves them,
and he interceeds for them; he Loves them, and he rules them, he Loves them,
and he enlightens them, he Loves them, and he strengthens them; ay but what is
the great manifestation of his Love? Why, says he, that he might present it a
Glorious Church to himself, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but
that it should be holy and without blemish. God chose us that we might be holy,
and without blame, and Jesus Christ has such a Love to us, even as the Father
has, that we should be holy and without blame; and, my Friends, the Spirit is
all one with the Father, and the Son: Does the Father choose us, and does the
Son give himself for us, that we might be so, then comes the Spirit, and
resolves that he will make us so; and therefore you shall find the Apostle, in
his Epistle to the Galatians, giving us an account of the fruits of the Spirit,
in the fifth Chapter at the 18 verse, if so be ye be led by the Spirit, ye are
not under the Law. And then as to the energy, the workings of the Spirit, why,
says he, in the 17 verse, The Spirit lusts against the flesh. The fleshly
part in us is an unbelieving part, that is against living out of our selves
upon Christ, ay but the Spirit that works contrary, unto these natural
lustings, and natural workings of the flesh, for says the Apostle, v. 22. The
fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness,
Faith, etc. By comparing these passages together, you may raise this
observation, that even as the Father and the Son are concerned for our
practical as well as personal holiness, so also is the Spirit, he lusts, and he
works, and he strives, and he never leaves lusting and striving, and working
against the flesh, until he have brought forth these fruits of Love, Joy,
Peace, and Long-suffering, and Gentleness, and goodness, and Faith, etc. So
that this is the first particular, God has chosen us unto personal and
practical holiness, and if you do observe it, this Spiritual Blessing is also
ensured unto us in Christ, with all the contents of it, and with all the proper
effects of it. May a Poor Creature say; But how shall I come to attain to this?
And what security can I have of it? Why, says he, according as he has chosen
us in him; he has Blessed us in him, according as he has chosen us in him;
and now, says he, he has Blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings in him. But
then,

2. The Second Blessing that the Apostle takes notice of is the great Spiritual
Blessing of Adoption, which does not only discover a Relation to God, but also
a suitable frame, and a suitable becoming sense of the Relation, a sense of it,
and a frame comporting and complying with it: This you have an account of, in
the 5 verse, Having predestined us to the Adoption of Children to himself,
etc. I pray do but observe, what the Apostle here does discover, concerning the
Nature of this, it is the Adoption of Children to himself. The God and Father
of our Lord Jesus has ensured our Adoption, with all the Privileges, with all
the Blessed consequents of it unto us, in Christ Jesus: It Is the God and Father
of Christ Jesus, and he that is so, is in Christ Jesus, a God adopting us unto
himself by Jesus Christ. This you shall find the Scripture frequently making
mention of; says the Apostle to the Romans, We have not received the Spirit of
Bondage, but the Spirit of Adoption, the Spirit of Sons, and what is the proper
work of the Spirit of Adoption? You shall find what it is, Romans 8.15. Ye have
not received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear, but ye have received the
Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. Says the Apostle, ye are Sons,
ay but the Sonship is managed by the Spirit; ye are not only Sons, but the
Spirit witnesses with your Spirits, that ye are so, and that is his proper
work; and what is the issue of that? Why, says he, ye cry, Abba Father; you may
go to God in your distresses, and you may go to God under your Temptations, and
you may go to God, as the God and Father of Jesus Christ, under all your
straits and troubles, and under all your Spiritual wants, and you may say unto
him, Father hear, and Father help. Says the Apostle, ye have not received the
Spirit of Bondage again to fear. Indeed under the Law, when they were under the
Power of the Spirit of Bondage, they stood at a distance from God, they were
under fear; but now, says the Apostle, ye have not received the Spirit of
Bondage again to fear, but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby ye
cry, Abba Father. It is as natural a Privilege to a Child of God, and it is as
Natural Language to gracious hearts to cry, Abba Father, as it is for a Child
to cry to his Father, Father or Mother; ye have received the Spirit of Adoption
says he; and the same thing you have the Apostle giving us an account of, Gal.
4. v. 4, 5. God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law. Why,
what then? That we might receive the Adoption of Sons, and because ye are Sons,
says he, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying,
Abba Father. I would only observe this to you, which it may be is not so
obvious to every apprehension: Compare but these two Scriptures together, and
you shall find that in the one he is the Spirit of Adoption, as he is the
Fathers Spirit, and in the other he is the Spirit of Adoption, as he is the
Spirit of the Son, for says he, he has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into
your hearts, crying, Abba Father. The Spirit of the Lord Jesus, the same Spirit
that influenced the Humane Nature, and in which Jesus Christ always prayed to
God as a Father, and always walked with God, under all variety of providence,
as with a Father, the same Spirit he has sent forth, and this same Spirit that
cried Abba Father in Christ, cries Abba Father also in Christians.

3. The third Spiritual Blessing that the Apostle makes mention of in this
Chapter is, an universal acceptance of Christians in all cases, notwithstanding
all disobligements; one would wonder that a child should sin, and though the
sin be rejected, yet the child stand still in a state of acceptance, though
the Father scourge the Child, yet he does not unchild the Child. This you have
an account of, verse 6. to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he
has made us accepted in the beloved. I pray do but observe it: There is
nothing that a Christian can propose to himself, there is no case that the
Devil, and the world can expose a Christian to but the Christian is still
accepted in Christ Jesus, and that notwithstanding all his fears, and under all
his Jealousies, and in the face of all his conscience accusations, and his own
self-condemnations, yet the Child is accepted, the Christian is accepted, who
has made us (says he) accepted in the beloved; my friends this is a great
Spiritual Blessing indeed. There are many that have their hearts greatly
concerned, and their Spirit wonderfully disquieted about their acceptance; O
that I did but know that God did accept me! O that I did but know that I were
accepted in Christ Jesus! Why truly, Christians, this is one of your proper
Spiritual Blessings, a Blessing which the Spirit is principally concerned in
the manage of; He has made us, says he, accepted. Though there be never so
little grace in the heart, yet it is accepted; two Mites that the poor Widow
cast into the Treasury, you know what acceptance it found with the Lord Jesus
Christ; Verily, says he, I say unto you she has cast in more then they all
they of their abundance have cast into the Treasury, but she has cast in even
all that she has. O Sirs, if you have never so little grace, cast it into your
prayers, and cast it into your Sermons, and cast it into and employ it in your
conversations: Verily will Christ say, this man has done more then such a one,
he had but a few gifts and he employed them all, he has but a little grace,
and behold I see this little i^ every duty; Verily he has done more like a
Christian, then others that have a great deal, and yet not half so much
(considering their proportion) to be found in their duties. The hand of the
Lord has been open, and has fille many of your understandings, with a great
deal of Gopel light, but alas there is but little of it seen in your lives and
in your hearts; it may be you are filled with grace, ay but there is but little
of this grace to be seen in your duties: There comes a poor humble Christian
with his Mite to pray, and with his Mite to hear, and behold he casts all in,
and the Lord sees that all the grace that is in his heart he puts forth in
every duty, and he exercises in every Ordinance; Verily, says Christ, I say
unto you, she has done more then they all: Therefore, my friends, let me tell
you, the God and Father of Jesus Christ (for still we must consider him under
that notion) I say the God and father of Jesus Christ has made us accepted in
the beloved, if there be any thing that is unacceptable in thee, if there be
nothing to be seen in thee but what is disobliging, yet the Lord has made you
that are Christians accepted in the beloved, not accepted in your own graces,
not accepted in your selves, not accepted for this or that or the other, but
all your acceptance is still in Christ, who has made us accepted in the
beloved. Now my friends, that the Spirit of the Lord does manage this, this
also is evident, if we do but consider what it is wherein our personal
acceptance lies; does it lie in our gracious qualifications which we receive
from Jesus Christ? why those we receive by the Spirit; does the Lord accept us
upon the account of the exercise of any grace in any duty? why truly all this
is also from the same Spirit. There are, says the Apostle, diversity of gifts,
and diversity of operations, ay but still there is one and the same Spirit: It
is the same Spirit. It may be there is a great deal of humility in thy duty, or
in thy heart, and thou art accepted in Jesus Christ, but how came thou by
this humility? how came thou by this meekness? why the Spirit of the Lord
has rested upon thee in the form of a Dove, as the Spirit of meekness, and as
the Spirit of lowliness, and as the Spirit of selfdenial: The same spirit that
rested upon Christ, the same Spirit also has rested upon thee: So that you see
also in this third great Spiritual Blessing how far the Spirit, and how much
the son is also concerned, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he
has made us accepted in the beloved: O my friends, that there should be such a
mystery as this, and all the Privileges and advantages of it should be ensured
to all the seed in Jesus Christ! It is God that makes us, and not we our
selves, accepted in the Beloved, wherein he has made us accepted in the
Beloved. I will break off with this one short Reflection, upon what I have
already delivered.

Temporal Blessings; says Esau to his Brother Jacob, I have enough my Brother:
ay but it was only Jacob, It was only Israel that had prevailed with God, that
could say, I have all My Brother; I have all things, what did he mean? I have
God for my exceeding great reward, and I have all things in the Covenant; I
have all things in the blessing, I have all things in the promise. Now
Christians, take an occasion from hence to make an estimate of the vast
difference that there is between a Christian indeed, and one that is but a
Christian in show, one that lay under great worldly disadvantages; and yet a
Christian, and one that lay under, or that is advanced up to the top of all
secular advantages and blessings, and preferments, even by God himself. Would
you know Christians where the difference lay? why it lies here; the one has
all, and that for ever, and the other has but what he has in part, and that
not secured neither; worldlings they have not their greatness in Christ, they
have not their honor given them in Christ, they have not their Relations given
them in Christ; No, no, my Friends, but now the meanest Christian, has not
only all things, but all things ensured him in Christ; he is not only a better
man then the greatest worldling is, upon the account of the extent; but also
upon the account of the Method and Manner wherein all is give him, and secured
to him. There is not a person in the world that can say, or ever could say, I
have all things; Nebuchadnezzar in all his glory could not say, I have all
things: But a poor Christian, a poor persecuted Paul could cry out, I have all
things, and I can do all things; even then when he had nothing at all in
comparison, says he, I have all things and abound.

Now Christians, I pray you rejoice in your condition. And I beseech you
sinners, become all Christians; for whilst you are as you are, you have but
some things, and what you have is all out of Christ; but do but become
Christians, do but give up your heads and hearts to the Lord, and then you may
say, Blessed be the God and father of the Lord Jesus, who has blessed me with
all Spiritual blessings in Christ.

SERMON II.
Ephesians 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings, in Heavenly places in Christ.


THE design of the Apostle in these words seems to be to set the Crown upon the
head of Christ; and to discover that it is the intendment of the Father in all
his blessings that he bestows upon his Children to do so too; the Father
receives nothing from Christians, but he receives it from them in Christ; and
the Father gives nothing to Christians, but he gives it to them in Christ; God
was always in Christ reconciling the world to himself, and he will be always in
Christ a God and a Father to those that he has chosen out of the world, and
reconciled: Though he be the God and Father of our Lord, yet he does not look
upon it as an act below his grace to bless those that he has given to Christ;
It Is not below him to avouch the relation to them also, as he is the Father of
our Lord Jesus, he blesses all that are in Jesus, with all Spiritual blessings
in Jesus.

That Proposition which we insisted upon was this.

That God has blessed every Christian in Christ with all Spiritual blessings.

Christians have more then the world is worth in possession, but the reversions
of a Christian are not to be compared, they are not to be estimated with any
thing that God can give in this present world: It is not temporal blessings,
the blessings of the land of Canaan, but it is Spiritual blessings, the
blessings of the Kingdom of Heaven, that the God and Father of Jesus Christ
has stated upon all his Children in Christ Jesus. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus, who has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings in
Christ. Because I intend this discourse only as occasional, I shall therefore
confine the resolve and the dispatch of the doctrinal part at present to this
one inquiry.

What are those Spiritual Blessings with which it has pleased the Father to
bless his people in Christ?



The last that we mentioned was this, an universal acceptance with the Father
in all cases notwithstanding all disobligements. O, says a Poor Christian, if I
were but satisfied that God would accept me, with all the disobliging
notwithstandings of my heart and life, and of my Duties, how happy should I be!
and indeed so thou would be, if God would accept thee notwithstanding all thy
unprofitableness, notwithstanding all the treachery of thy heart,
notwithstanding all thy opposition to, and grievings of his blessed Spirit,
notwithstanding all the dishonor that thou have done unto himself, his Son,
and his blessed Spirit, if the Lord would but accept thee, thou would be
happy indeed; why Christian, here is thy spiritual blessedness, at the 6th
verse to the praise of the glory of his grace wherein he has made us accepted
in the beloved Lord (may every poor Christian say) what am I? I accepted in the
beloved? I accepted in the beloved Son? In the beloved Savior? In the beloved
high Priest? Lord what manner of grace is this! This is not the kindness of
man: Christians let me tell you, it is Gods work of grace to make you accepted,
and it is your Privilege in grace to be accepted; he has made us to be
accepted in the beloved, if there be any thing of unworthiness in you there is
the blood of the beloved to balance it, if there be any thing of emptiness or
Barrenness, there is the fullness of the beloved to counterpoise that, if there
be any unworthiness discovered in any of your Relations or carriages to God,
there is the full import of all his Relations to God to make all even. Though
you do not always carry it as Children, yet this Son of God always did, and
though you do not always live like Servants, yet this Son of God did to a
point, and though you do not always carry it like friends to God, and like the
people of God, yet behold the head of all, he carries it like such a one. God
may have abundance ('it is like) to charge against you; But this is not your
business whether you have much grace or little grace or whether you exercise
more or less. The acceptance must be in the beloved. Thus far we have proceeded.

4. Another spiritual blessing wherewith God has blessed Christians in Christ,
is the revelation of his secrets. God may reveal the secrets of his Providence
to others (as I might instance in diverse) but his saving secrets those are
made manifest only in Christ Jesus to Christians; many have a dogmatical,
discursive knowledge which God has given them, but here is the eclipse of the
glory of all their knowledge. It is not given them in Christ, here is a poor
Christian that is but broken, and now and then has a little glimmerings of the
light of God, and a little insight into the secrets of his grace: Now my
friends, this little light, and these little glimmerings that he has into the
mysteries of the will of God, these are all given him in Christ Jesus, he sees
sin in Christ, and he sees the beauty of grace and holiness in Christ. The
revelation of Gods Gospel will about sin and holiness: The beauty of holiness
and the exceeding sinfulness of sin is made manifest to him in Christ Jesus. I
pray do but observe how the Apostle expresses himself in the 9th verse, Having
made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure
which he purposed in himself. The Apostle in the 18th verse makes it his
particular supplication to God for these Christian Ephesians, that, says he,
the Eyes of your understandings being enlightened, that ye may know what is the
hope of your calling. There is the mystery of his will manifested in particular
in the hope of your calling. You are called off from sin, there is hope in that
calling, and you are called unto duty, and there is hope in that calling, and
you are called off from all your Relations unto the world, as you stand in the
World, and there is hope in that calling; now, says the Apostle, I pray for you
that your eyes may be enlightened, that you may know what is the hope of your
calling; and my Friends, you will find that the Apostle does wrap up them
together with himself in the 9th verse, and tells us there that he has made
known unto us the mystery of his will, and yet for all that he prays that the
eyes of their understandings may be enlightened that they may know what is the
hope of their calling, and what is the Riches of his inheritance in the Saints.
Now I shall show you that all this is vouchsafed to Christians in Christ; you
shall find the Apostle, Col. 2. v. 3. telling us, that in him are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Why what wisdom and knowledge? Why that
wisdom, and that knowledge, that the eternal grace of God did design for
Christians, so that we are blessed with this wisdom and knowledge in Christ.
Look into your understandings and hearts, alas there is but little there, there
is no treasures there, but look into the Lord Jesus, and there are all
treasures, even for foolish Christians, hid and lodged there; in him is hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. And that the Spirit of the Lord is alike
concerned in this you shall observe if you do but consult the Apostles
experience in 1 Cor. 2.9. Where he speaks of things that eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man to conceive: But says he at
the 10th verse, God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit. The revelation of
the secrets of the heart of God is made manifest, or is made known unto
Christians by the Spirit of God. The Apostle prosecutes and illustrates this
mystery by that which is commonly observed amongst men in v. 11. For what man
knows the things of a man save the Spirit of man which is in him? I do not
know the grace that is in another man's heart, I do not know the secret purposes
and devices that are in your hearts, but your own Spirits are privy to them,
even so says the Apostle the things of God knows no man but the Spirit of
God. Christians, let me tell you, there is no saving secret in the heart of God
the Father, there is no saving secret in the heart of Christ the Son, but the
Lord has blessed us with the knowledge and the Revelatio^ of that in Christ,
for so the Apostle says in the 16 verse. For who has known the mind of the
Lord that he may instruct him? but we have the mind of Christ Why Blessed Paul,
how came thou a persecutor to know the mind of Christ? An injurious, and
Blasphemous wretch, how came thou to be so intimate with that Jesus whom thou
persecutedst even unto death in his members? Why the Apostle tells you plainly,
not by any natural advantage of learning, though he was a learned man, not by
any advantage of his parts, though he was a man of clear natural understanding
and apprehension, but, says he, we have the mind of Christ, and that by the
Spirit of God, by the Spirit of Jesus Christ. So that you see here is another
great Spiritual blessing, a revelation of saving secrets.

5. Another spiritual blessing that I shall superadd is this, An Universal
heading under Christ, or incorporation with Jesus Christ. One would think it a
wonder that ever such a man, that was a limb of the Devil should be made a
member of the Body of Jesus: A Notorious, Drunkard, a Notorious Blasphemer, and
a dreadful and implacable persecutor of Christ and his ways, that ever such a
one should be incorporated into and made a member of the Lord Jesus is not this
a spiritual blessing indeed? A blessing wherein the Spirit of God is
principally concerned; in the manage of this the Apostle takes notice of verse
10. That in the dispensation of the fullness of times he might gather together
in one, all things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and which are on earth,
even in him. And more plainly, Ephesians. 4.12. Where he does expressly give us an
account of the Body of the Lord Jesus Christ; and he tells us there that all
the gifts that were given by Christ, were for the edifying of his body.

Do but reflect upon a passage in the 2. Chapter, and there you shall see the
state of sinners discovered to be as desperate and as vile as you can possibly
suppose a sinners state to be, Dead in trespasses and sins, Children of
disobedience in whom the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit of Hell.
did effectually work. Why Lord, shall ever those be incorporated; shall ever
those be made members of so blessed a body as the Body of Jesus? Nay this is
not all, but, says he, Ye were Children of wrath. The Wrath of God smoaked
against you, and all the threatenings and denunciations of Gods wrath against
sinners, belonged to you just as an inheritance belongs to a proper and right
Heir; and that is not all neither, but verse 12. Ye were without Christ, being
aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of
promise, having no hope and without God in the World. Lord shall such as these
be made members of such a blessed Body as the Body of the Lord Jesus Christ is?
Ay my Friends, here is the great blessing that God has Blessed us with in
Christ Jesus, that notwithstanding all this misery, and notwithstanding the
desperateness that does attend this miserable Estate yet they are to be
gathered together, and headed all under one Jesus; I pray take notice of one
expression in the conclusion of this Chapter, where he calls them all
complexively considered his Body, and his fullness, verse 23. Which is his Body,
the fullness of him that fills all in all. Now my Friends, this is another
Spiritual blessing that God has blessed us withal, and that is heading of us
under, or an incorporating us into the Body of the Lord Jesus Christ, so that
there can be no Blessing, no privilege belong to the Head, but of necessity it
falls naturally down upon the Body. So the head anointed the Garments shall be
drenched, not only Aarons Beard, but the very Skirts of his Garments shall be
drenched throughout. Is the Head advanced into glory. I tell you the Head in
glory will never rest till the members of his Body that are in a vile,
deplorable, forlorn condition here, be made like unto him; Father, says he, I
will, John 17.24. that those also whom thou have given me be with me, etc. One
would wonder that God should cast off the seed of Abraham, and implant Gentiles
in their Room, and yet you see in Romans 11. the Lord does thus, and the Apostle
concludes with this, verse 33. O the depth of the Riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God. That the natural branches should be cut off, and Idolatours
that had no promises, Idolatours that had no Relations at all but only of
Creatures to God, and who had done more to violate their Relations, and forfeit
all the Privileges of their Relations, then the very Beasts of the Field, and
the most venomous, and poisonous Toad ever did, yet says the Apostle, The
natural branches were cut off that you might be graffed in. O the depth of the
riches of Gods grace. Surely Christians, this is a great Spiritual Blessing
that the Lord is pleased to vouchsafe to us to head us under Christ. We are
blessed with this in Christ Jesus.

6. Another Spiritual Blessing is this; A reserved Inheritance of all full, and
Spiritual, and comprehensive blessednesses. My friends here we have (to allude
to the people of Israel in the wilderness) it may be, some few Cottages or
Tabernacles that are transitory, as those People had some moving
resting-places. Here is a little grace planted, a little faith and a little
love, and this grows up pretty likelily and pretty promisingly, but what is
this to the inheritance, where that which is in part shall be done way, where
there is no such thing as grace in part, no such thing as love in part, no such
thing as joy in part, no such thing as communion in part; for that which is in
part shall be done away. I think the Apostle speaks fully to our purpose where
he tells us of an inheritance reserved, 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. You see the Apostle mentions the same
Relations that are here in the Text; why what is the matter, Blessed Peter? Why
says he, the matter is this; The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again to a lively hope, by
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, to an inheritance incorruptible and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you, verse 4. Why
friends what is this inheritance? Why there I shall inherit the Covenant in its
fullness; I shall not say that either I want any Law in my heart or in my Head,
in my inward or in my outward man, I shall have no reason to complain that I
want the least blessing of the least promise. Why Christians, this is your
inheritance, and are not here Spiritual Blessings that are the proper matter of
this Inheritance? Now the Apostle tells us that he has blessed us with this in
Christ, verse 11. In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being
predestined according to ^he purpose of him that works all things after the
Counsel of his own will. How far Christ is concerned in this Spiritual blessing
^ou may easily observe, if so be that you ^ither consider the type or the
antitype; as ^o the type which was Joshua or Jesus, Mo^^s must not bring the
people into their Inheritance; indeed in Moses's Time they might have some
Bunches of the Grapes of the good land, but Moses must not bring them in, it
must be Joshua that must bring them in. So I say my Friends, it is not this, or
that, or the other, but the Lord Jesus alone that must bring his people into
the possession of this reserved inheritance; here is indeed a Cluster of
Spiritual Blessings infinitely exceeding all the capacities of the Sons and
Daughters of men, though most of all enlightened by the Spirit to comprehend, in
whom, says he, we have obtained an Inheritance; who is this whom? It is the
Lord Jesus Christ; to gather together in one all things in Christ, in whom we
have obtained an Inheritance. As much as if the Apostle had said, as the
Apostle does in Christ's own case, we see not yet all things put under him: So I
may say, you have no^ yet obtained the Inheritance, no more had Paul, no more
had these Ephesians, but ye^ he speaks as one having full assurance, in whom we
have obtained; answerable to that of our Lord, in Joh. 14.2. I go to prepar^ a
place for you. And the Apostle taken it up, and otherwise phrases it, Heb. 6.2^
Whither the forerunner is for us entered; speaking of the Inheritance that is
above, whither cur forerunner is for us entered; so that this another Spiritual
Blessing wherewith we are blessed in Christ Jesus.

7. But another spiritual blessing wherewith we are blessed in Christ Jesus is
this: The Seal and Earnest of what is to come, and the very Spirit is made the
very matter of this Blessing wherewith he has blessed us in Christ Jesus. I
pray do but cast your eyes upon verse 13. In whom ye also trusted; still he
continues his discourse, and fixes Christ at the bottom of all; in whom ye also
trusted after that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your Salvation, in
whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of
promise, verse 14. which is the Earnest of our Inheritance until the Redemption
of the purchased possession to the praise of his glory. Here is a comprehensive
spiritual blessing indeed, which is the Seal of the eternal Inheritance, and
the Earnest of it, as if the Lord should say when he sends forth his Spirit, go
my holy Spirit, go and seize upon such a heart, and seal up such a Soul for the
eternal Inheritance; and as if he should say to his Son, Lo my Son, I have
given my Spirit to such a one whom thou have shed thy blood for, and lo I send
him as the Earnest of the Inheritance that thou have purchased, as the Earnest
of my eternal love to thee, as the Earnest of my eternal Communion with thee,
as the earnest of my answering of thy prayer, and the import of all thy blood:
Lo I have sent him, and lo, he is to them an Earnest. Now Sirs, this is a great
blessing, a very glorious blessing indeed, God might have designed, and kept
the design in his own breast, or he might have divulged it, and yet have given
us no earnest or pledge of it; what needed all that between God and us? Christ
might have taken his word, and we had good reason to rest upon any report that
the Lord Christ makes of his confidence in the Father, but the Lord Christ and
the Father did concur together in this, that we should have the Blessing,
notwithstanding all notwithstandings, and that it should be sure to all the
seed. Yet, for our further satisfaction, says the Lord, behold I give my
promise, and I give the promised Spirit, and that Spirit shall be my Seal upon
their hearts, and my seal upon their understandings; so that look into your
hearts, and into your understandings, and upon this inquiry, whose are you? Do
but make a reflection whose Seal, whose Image, whose Superscription is this?
You shall find that the Spirit of the Lord is as it were Gods assuring Seal. Ay
but it may be you will say, this is a great while to come. It may be Ten, or
Twenty, or Thirty, or Forty, years to come. Well, if those do not satisfy you
that you are sealed, the Spirit also shall be an Earnest of the Inheritance, an
Earnest of the future personal blessedness and glory which God has blessed you
with in Christ. It is not only Heaven, but the personal condition and state of
Saints in Heaven that is the glory of their Inheritance, and this is another
thing.

8. But then in the 8th place, another Spiritual blessing wherewith the God and
Father of Jesus Christ does bless Christians, is this: Practical experiences of
the power of Gods grace in every providence, and such as lay open to every
Ordinance. I say, practical experiences of the power of Gods grace. O what can
the grace of God do? Nay Christians what is it that the grace of God cannot do?
That grace that could send Christ out of his eternal mansion in the bosom of
his Father, what cannot that grace do for thee? That grace that can empty (as
it were) the Second person of the Trinity of his glory, do thou think that
this grace cannot empty thy heart of sin? That grace that can fill the Covenant
with such a fullness of Blessings, Poor worm, do thou think that this grace
cannot fill thy heart with Blessings? I pray Christians, do but consider what
the Apostle says in the 19, and 20 verses of this Chap. And what is, says he,
the exceeding greatness of his power, to us ward who believe, according to the
working of his mighty power. If thy heart be hard, and be fixed within thee, so
that thou do oppose the work of Faith, he will work this work of faith with
power; if it be exceeding hard, there is exceeding power, that the grace of God
has the command of; if thou be exceeding weak, there is exceeding grace that
has the dispose of exceeding power; ay, if thou be exceeding unworthy,
there is exceeding grace that can exceedingly overlook all thy unworthiness.
Now Christians, practical experiences of the power of grace under the
ministration of the Gospel, is a great Spiritual Blessing. We have heard much
of the grace of God, of the respective persons of the blessed Trinity, what has
this grace done for thy Soul? Art thou able to set to thy Seal that there is an
exceeding power in the grace of the Father? and an exceeding power in the grace
of the Son? if thou have not as yet experienced it, truly if there be but some
beginnings of the power of God, and the finger of God has but been upon thy
heart, though in lesser power, if there be exceeding power wanting, that
exceeding power shall not always be suspended; Practical experiences of the
exceeding mighty power of God, is that which is a great Spiritual Blessing,
which we are blessed with in Christ Jesus, and for the illustration of this, do
but compare this power, if thou need as much exceeding power, to raise up
thy Soul from any Spiritual Death or Deadness, as Jesus Christ stood in need of
to raise him from the dead, that shall be at the dispose of grace, that shall
be employed by grace, and therefore he adds in the next verse, which he wrought
in Christ when he raised him from the dead. That power that raised the Son of
man from the dead, and that power that set the Son of man at his own right hand
in Heavenly places, thou, Christian, shall have experience of it; and this is
the Spiritual Blessing wherewith thou art blessed in Christ Jesus. Blessed be
the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all
Spiritual blessings in Christ; that is, he has Blessed us with a Right to an
universal and unbounded experience of the power of his grace in all cases.

9. But the last that I shall mention is this: He has blessed us with all
Spiritual blessings, that is, an universal subjection of all our Spiritual
Enemies under us. And I think this may be looked upon as a great Spiritual
Blessing. It is true indeed, (my friends) all things are put under the feet of
Jesus Christ, but all things are not yet put under our feet: But that you may
see the reason of this great privilege, how grace has laid it in Christ, do
but observe those passages that you have in v. 21, 22, 23. of this Chapter; at
the 20 verse, and has set him at his own right hand in heavenly places, far
above all principalities, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named, both in this World, and also in that which is to come. And (as if these
two words could not comprehend all) the Apostle adds in general, and has put
all things under his feet. All things that are enemies to our Spiritual
Interest, all things that are Enemies unto our purification, unto our
sanctification, unto our inlightning and strengthening, and unto any or all of
our Spiritual blessings: He has put all things under his feet.

Ay but what is all this to us, you will say?

He has put all things under his feet with a direct subserviency unto his
Church, Verse 22. and has put all things under his feet, and has given him to
be the head over all things to the Church, head over all principalities, over
all the powers of darkness, over all our Enemies in hell, and over all our
Spiritual Enemies here on Earth, and that unto his Church and People, which he
calls his Body, the fullness of him that fills all in all. Now, my friends,
this is a great Spiritual blessing, and that the Spirit is concerned in this is
evident. I pray do but observe a passage of the Apostle in his Epistle to the
Romans, chap. 8. verse^ 11. compared with Verse 2. at the 11th verse, If the
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised
up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his Spirit
that dwells in you. I apprehend that this has not relation primarily or
principally to the last Resurrection of the Body, but even to a Spiritual
deliverance and freedom of the Body from the remains of the law of sin and
death, which yet abide in it; says the Apostle, If the Spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in your mortal bodies, then you shall be
quickened, your mortal bodies shall be disposed and influenced so by that
Spirit, that they shall be readier than now they are, to serve the graces of
your Souls according to the dictates of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; and my
reason for this Interpretation is this, the Apostle in the conclusion of the
former Chapter had been crying out, verse 24. O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death? which he had confessed had too long
lodged in his members, in the former part of the Chapter. Now in verse 2. of
this Chap. he says, But the law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus
has made me free from the law of sin and death; where is the law of sin? It is
in my body says the Apostle, but, says he, the law of the Spirit of life has
made me free; upon this Hypothesis the Apostle does conclude in verse 11. That
if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in us, then shall
our mortal bodies be quickened, and disposed also unto Spiritual service; and if
you do but observe it, the Apostle in the Conclusion of this discourse gives
such an exhortation tending to this purpose, that they would not yield up their
members as instruments of unrighteousness unto Sin; why so? because the Spirit
of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwells in your mortal bodies, and
therefore says he, don't yield your members don't yield your hands, and don't
yield your tongues, and don't yield your ears, nor don't yield any of your
members as instruments of unrighteousness unto Sin, because the Spirit of him
that raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in your mortal bodies; and thus now I
have taken notice of these diverse Spiritual blessings, which the Apostle does
here instance in by way of illustration of this great Gospel mystery of grace,
and that is, that God has blessed every Christian with all Spiritual blessings
in Christ Jesus, I will wave the reasons, and I will also wave the resolve of
other inquiries that might be made, and wrap up all in these three or four
inferences.

Then Christians should be always Spiritual in Christ Jesus. Show me your
blessings Sirs, let it appear that your blessings are not like the blessings of
the men of this world: Nay nor only confined to the blessings that the
hypocrites of this world have received from God; don't show me your gifts in
prayer, but let your graces be discovered in your praying. Christians, you
should be Spiritual in all manner of conversation; why? because God has
blessed you in Christ Jesus with all Spiritual blessings, for a man that
pretends to this blessedness, for such a one to be carnal, for such a one to be
earthly minded, for such a one to be proud, for such a one to be debauched in
his Spirit, and Principles, and Practices, how unbecoming is this to so great a
pretense as you all make? If I should come to you one by one, and say to you,
friend, don't you hope that God has blessed you with all Spiritual blessings
in Christ? what means then this formality in duty? this is not to be Spiritual.
What means this anger and passion upon every provocation? this does not argue
that you are blessed with a Spirit of meekness; why my friends, if you be
blessed with all Spiritual blessings, then I pray let all your Spiritual
blessings appear more or less in your whole conversation; for a professor that
pretends to be so blessed, for him to be formal in his Prayer, and for him to
be dead and dull in Duty, and for him to be light, and vain, and frothy in his
Conversation, this is not like one that is blessed with all Spiritual
blessings. Christians the inference is natural, if you be blessed with all
Spiritual blessings, then show forth all your Spiritual blessings in all your
duties, be Spiritual in every thing. The Apostle has a parallel expression to
this, wherein he gives us an account of his conversation in the 3 Phil. 20. For
our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the Savior the Lord
Jesus Christ; that is the first inference.

Then let those that pretend to a being thus blessed by the God and Father of
Jesus Christ, glorify the God and Father of Jesus Christ with all their
blessings. Glorify him not only with what you have received, but also upon the
whole of the blessings that are to be received; Christians, you may rejoice in
what is in the hand of Christ for you as well as in what is in your own hearts;
I am persuaded that Adam was as perfect as God can make a creature out of
Christ, and yet you see no sooner does the Woman come and tell him that the
fruit is pleasant and fair, but he takes it and eats, and so destroys all;
surely Christians, you may rejoice in that little you have, but you may more
rejoice in that great deal that Christ has for you, you have received a little
from and by Christ; ay but Christ has received a great deal more for you, and
therefore balance all your secular wants and secular troubles with this, that
you are blessed with unseen blessings. It was Christ's advice to his disciples
to lay up treasure in Heaven, it is the practice of the grace of God; the grace
of God has done that which Jesus Christ advised his disciples and hearers to
do. What has he done? Why he has laid up treasure where neither moth can
corrupt, nor Thieves break through and steal. And therefore rejoice and glorify
God for and in the view, and under the sense and apprehension of what you are
blessed with in Christ, I will freely say this one thing, if I would choose of
the two what to rejoice in, I had rather rejoice in what I am blessed with in
Christ Jesus, then in all the gifts and graces that I have in my own heart, and
I think it is safest to do so. But then,

Then never confine and limit your expectations from God or from Jesus Christ.
This naturally follows, for why should a Christian that has liberty to expect
all, content himself with less? Christians should say upon every receipt, Lord
here is not all, and be at him for more, wait still upon Christ for more. Cry
still unto Christ for more, and say Lord here is not all: This is not all of
the Spiritual Blessings, that the Father have blessed me withal in thy self.
This is not all, and therefore under your fullest receipts still Christians
wait for more; has the grace of God been so abundant as to bless you with all,
and will you show so little grace as to be contented with a little? I do not
like (neither I am persuaded does God like) the tempers of most Professors
which is a modest, (I call it a modest because it is so generally apprehended)
but it is a sinful modest contentedness with a little; if God give you any
thing, bless God for a little, but never be satisfied with a little, but ever
and anon come to the Throne of grace, and say, Father here is not all in my
heart that thou have blessed me withal in Christ: Come to the Lord Christ, and
say, Lord here is not all the Father trusted thee withal for my Soul, here is
not all the faith, all the love; all the meekness, etc. But I am blessed with
all Spiritual Blessings. I say, Christians having received a little be still
pressing after more. But then,

Then Christians, in the midst of all your wants; and in the midst of all your
straits, be you still pressing after a more true and genuine improvement of all
your Spiritual blessings. If God has blessed you with all Spiritual blessings,
in Christ, then labor you under Christ to be Spiritual blessings unto others;
have you not Neighbors, have you not Children, have you not Husbands or Wives?
Though they be Christian, yet I appeal to you all, may not you also be a
greater Spiritual blessing unto them then you are? May you not be a greater
Spiritual blessing to your servants, or to your Children, then you are? Great
are the designs of many to lay up great things for their Children; alas! these
parents are but temporal or temporary blessings to their Children, whilst
their hearts are set upon the world for them, and truly it may be said of most
Masters, that they are but temporal blessings unto their servants they are but
Family blessings to them. O Sirs, that we could make it more our business to be
Spiritual blessings unto others; has God blessed you with all Spiritual
blessings in Christ? How do you know but he has blessed your Children with
some Spiritual blessing in you? and blessed your Servants with some Spiritual
blessing in you? Withold not that from your Children which is their right, or
at least for ought you know may be their right; if you will not give it forth,
I tell you God has other ways, but you shall lose the glory and honor of it.
Let me tell you this, when we say that God has blessed such a child with a
good Father; we mean that he has blessed that Father with Spiritual blessings
for the good of the child; and such a one is happy and blessed in such a
Husband, what do we mean but this? that God has blessed him with Spiritual
blessings for the good of his Wife? and so in all other relations what ever. O
blessed are that Church, and that people, and that family, in whom there is a
great Emulation who shall be the greatest Spiritual blessing each to other; and
this seems also to be a very natural inference: If God has blessed us in
Christ Jesus with all Spiritual blessings, then surely God may bless others in
us with some Spiritual blessing; and if God has blessed others in us with some
Spiritual blessings, then why should we withold from them that which ^s their
own? God has given them the ^ight, God has given them the blessing, why
should we withold the blessing from them? Would you be so dealt withal by our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? I row not; therefore Christians by the love you
have to Christ, by the hopes you have ^o receive out of the hands of Christ,
what ^s lodged there by the grace of the heart of God, what ever grace God has
lodged in our hearts, what ever Spiritual gifts God ^ath lodged in your heads,
improve it as a ^piritual blessing to others, even to those ^or whom you are
concerned: and then ^y friends, you may more comfortably ex^ect the fulfillment
and the accomplishment, and the sealing up of this word every day more and
more, and the experience of it that you may come by frequent renewed experience
to say; and would it not be well with you if every day you could say and every
evening you could say, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has blessed me with all Spiritual blessings in Christ?

SERMON III.
Ephesians 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of o^^ Lord Jesus Christ, who
has blesse^ us with all Spiritual Blessings, Heavenly places, in Christ.


WHat the present state of the Christian Ephesians were at the time of the
writing of this Epistle, see^ to be uncertain: It is probable it was a st^^^ of
affliction, and the probability of it, y^^ may found upon diverse passages in
(...) Scripture which I shall now wave. It see^^ most likely, what ever their
secular est^ was, that their Spiritual Estate was atten^ with more than
ordinary enjoyments, and beautified with more then ordinary privileges. But
Christians, however it was with them, you know how it is with us; under
secular, and temporal discouragements, it is the Christians wisdom to seek out
for some Spiritual encouragements, when there seems to be a confederacy on
Earth to encroach upon the remains of our temporal blessings, it is the interest
of Christians to look above, and to consider what is the combination of Heaven,
and the concurrence of the blessed Trinity about their Spiritual blessings.
Christians I do not know all your Estates, but this in general I may propose,
if you be Christians indeed, however it is with you here below, you are blessed
with all, beyond all possibility of reverse above, for says the Apostle here,
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all Spiritual blessings, in Heavenly places, in Christ. Three things lie
wrapped up in the words.

The first is a discovery of the Saints state, his Scripture, Gospel state. It
is an unalterable and universal state of Blessedness. It is not some singular,
or some single, petty blessing that is annexed and affixed, by an Irrevocable
act of grace upon him, but it is all blessings, all Spiritual blessings.

2. Secondly, You have the security of this their blessed state discovered. It
is not a blessedness lodged upon, or lodged in their own persons, such was
Adams blessedness; and you know what little safety and security there was in
that. It is not a blessedness that is fixed here below: but it is a
blessedness, that as to the principal Concerns of it is fixed above, in
Heavenly places in Christ, not in Christians, in an earthly Paradise, but in
Heavenly places in Christ.

3. Thirdly. You have in these words the author of all this blessedness; and
that is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. I have been discovering
what those Spiritual blessings are wherewith the God and Father of Jesus Christ
has blessed every Christian; my business at this time will lie in the resolve
of this inquiry.

Why, or whence is it that we are blessed with all Spiritual blessings in
Christ?

whose conversation, and whose duties are mostly empty of Spiritual service,
should be blessed with all Spiritual blessings. Certainly Sirs, the Angels in
Heaven that are privy to this transaction of grace, are filled with admiration,
that we that are senseless of that grace, should yet notwithstanding be so
blessed. Those glorious Spirits that never offended, that they should have but
their measures proportioned to their practices, and that we should have our
measures pressed down, and running over given unto us, notwithstanding our
general principles and practices are against the designs of Heaven. It is
matter of wonder to a serious Christian, a Christian that makes it his business
to inquire and examine his own frame, both by Gospel promises and by Gospel
privileges; what, Lord! I that do so little, blessed with all? What, Lord! I
that have so little in my own heart and spirit, yet I blessed with all? Will
nothing satisfy the grace of God but all blessings, and all Spiritual
blessings too? My Friends, I hope it is in your hearts thus to admire; but I
will give you the reasons: And there seem to be these five lodged in the words.
I shall take notice of them as they lie before us.

1. Don't wonder Sirs, that you Christians are blessed with all Spiritual
Blessings. For,

First, God is the God of Christ; he is the God of our Lord, and of our Savior
Jesus Christ. This is a great reason, yea this is Gods Reason why he does bless
Christians; I am the God of that Lord that is their Lord, and my Friends, I
pray consider it; This relation that God stands in unto Christ has a general
aspect upon all the Relations that are here mentioned of Christ. All Christ's
principal Relations are here taken notice of by the Apostle, and expressed; as
now he is the God of Jesus, he is the God of our Lord Jesus, he is the God of
the Lord of the Gospel, he is the God of the Jesus of the Gospel, and the God
of the Christ that is the anointed of the Gospel; so the Apostle in his other
Epistles, as if he seemed to take great pleasure and delight in this general
Relation that he here mentions, he also seems to express it in his Preface to
his other Epistles. I think the Epistle that he writ to the Colossians comes
nearest to this Epistle that he writ to the Ephesians, for its Gospel import
and nature. And in the verse 3 of the 1 Col. you find the Apostle thus
delivering himself; We give thanks to God, and (or even) the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, praying always for you. The God of our Lord Jesus Christ; I pray
Consider it, I would illustrate this in these two Branches.

The First is this, That all the advantages of Gods being a God to any, is
summed up in his being a God to Christ. I say all the advantages of the
covenant, all the blessednesses that are discovered as essential to Gods being
a God to any in either Testaments, is summed up in this relation of his unto
Jesus Christ, and therefore you shall find that he promises so much to him, and
that with reference to the discharge of all or of every particular office of
his. I have not time to instance in them, I shall only remind you of one
passage, and that is, when Christ came to die, to give an account to God of
himself, he considers himself in and under all his Gospel Relations: The Lord
employed him as his God, to preach Salvation unto sinners: The Lord as his God
employed him as his servant, to rule and govern Saints: The Lord employed him
as he was his God to reconcile his enemies to himself, by offering up his Soul
and his Body a propitiation for them; and therefore with respect to all these
relations, I pray consider what stress he laid upon this, for there seems to be
something particular, and I think the Jews in the heat of their rage mistook
the Emphasis of their own language, in Mark 15.34. And at the ninth hour: Jesus
cried with a loud voice, saying Eloi, Eloi, that is, my God, my God: The Jews
mistake Eloi here, say they verse 35. behold he calls Elias, verse 36. let
alone, let us see whether Elias will come to take him down, which was a thing
quite of another Import and Nature. The proper interpretation is given there by
the holy Ghost, my God, my God, says he. My God, my God, you see my friends the
Lord owned his Relation to him as his God, now at this time, when he was to
come to give an account to him of the discharge of all his Offices and
Relations, Eloi, Eloi, my God, my God, I have preached thy will; My God, my
God, I have governed according to thy will; My God, my God, I have made
propitiation according to thy will; this seem to be the meaning of it, and upon
this account he grounds his petition, why have thou forsaken me, or why will thou or do thou forsake me? As if he should appeal to God, My God thou
know I have preached all thy heart; and my God, thou know I have governed
according to the secrets of thy heart; and my God, thou know I have been
tender both of Saints and sinners, according to the Command I received from
thee; and my God, there is nothing that I have refused or avoided to do to
please thee; my God, thou know all this. Now Sirs, here is great reason why
we should be Blessed with all Spiritual Blessings, he is the Lords God in whom
we are blessed.

The Second thing that I would urge as an illustration of the former
particular, is this: That the Lord Jesus Christ stands in no Relations to God
but the blessedness of the Relation redounds to Christians. We will suppose the
Lord Christ pleasing his God in the discharge of all his Offices, and
Relations, we will suppose him, I say, in fullness of communion with his God in
the execution of all his Relations. Now Sirs, I pray do but observe the Apostle
in that peculiar appropriating word; he does not say, The God and Father of the
Lord Jesus Christ, but the God and Father of our Lord; as if the Apostle should
say, ye Christian Ephesians (and so I may say, ye Christians of differing
apprehensions) you that are Christians indeed, all the blessednesses and
advantages of Gods Relation to Christ, as his God, redound to you, for he is
your Lord; and I will only confirm what I have now observed to you, by an
observation grounded upon this, and upon another Scripture, if you reflect upon
the 2 verse of this Chap. you shall find that before the Apostle mentions Gods
Relation to Christ, he mentions his Relation to us; says he, Grace be unto you
from God our Father. From God our Father, as if the Apostle would have us to
understand, that whatsoever he is to Christ he is that to Christians in Christ.
And there is the first reason why God does bless us with all Spiritual
Blessings in Christ, because he is Christ's God, and has approved himself, and
carried himself toward Christ as his God, in all the circumstances wherein
Christ was or is.

2. Secondly. He is not only the God of Christ, and therefore blesses us, but
he is the Father of Christ, and therefore does bless us. Which seems to be a
Relation which our Lord does most glory in in both Testaments. I tell you,
Christians, God glories more in the Relation of a Father to Christ, then he
does in the Relation of a Creator to the whole World; I will open this also in
these two Branches.

1. And the first is this, That Christ Jesus's Relation to God, or Gods
Relation to Christ as a Father, in which he does so glory, is a Relation that
he bears to the Humane Nature. It is not his Relation to Christ as the Second
Person of the Trinity that is the glory of God in the Gospel, but his Relation
to Christ as God-man, or as man. That is the great Relation that God glories in
in both Testaments. The Relation that God stands in unto Christ as the second
Person of the Trinity is natural. It is a natural Relation. But the Relation in
which he stands to Christ as man, this is the glory of God in the dispensation
of the Gospel. The Lord by his Spirit open it unto you. I will endeavor to
open it by opening of two Scriptures. The first shall be a passage in the Old
Testament in the 2 Psalm. After the Psalmist had given us an account of the
monstrous rage of the Heathen, and the Confederacy of the people with the
Heathen in their Rage, at the 1 verse. Wherefore do the Heathen Rage, and the
people imagine a vain thing? After he had stated the result of all their
Counsels against him which is applied to him as man by the Apostle in the 4
Acts 25 verse and so on. The Psalmist brings in the Lord glorying in this,
verse 6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion; and Christ solacing
himself peculiarly in this Relation that he stands in to him as the Son of man,
verse 7. The Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee. That this has Relation to the Incarnation of Christ and to him as man, I
pray consider a passage there in Heb. 1.5. To which of the Angels said he at
any time. To which of the Angels said he? No, there is no reason why he should
say so to them, if we consider him as God, as very God. But if we consider him
as the Son of man, there is great reason that the Apostle should bring this in,
unto which of the Angels has he said, that he should pass by all the Angels in
Heaven and never say unto them or any of them, thou art my Son? But upon the
appearance of the Son of Mary, the reputed Son of Joseph, the Carpenters Son,
when he brings him into the World, he says in a way of glory, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee. To which of the Angels said he at any time thou
art my Son? But to the only begotten Son this he says; that is the first
illustration.

2. The Second illustration of it is this; That the God and Father of Jesus
Christ considers himself as his Father for our sakes. I pray observe it. God
had never been a Father to the man Jesus, had it not been for our sakes. I mean
there had never been such a Relation in being, had not Christians eternal
blessedness lien at the bottom of it. So that I may truly say, Christians, it
was our Spiritual concern that gave being to this glorious mutual Relation
between the Father and the Son of man; what need he ever to have made him man,
had it not been for the Sons, and Daughters, of men, whom he had an eternal and
an everlasting kindness for? I have sometimes with pleasure reviewed the
passage that past between the Angel and the Virgin Mary about the birth of
Christ, give me leave to observe one or two things out of it in Luke 1.28, 29.
verses. Mary she wonders at the salutation of the Angel, and well she might; a
poor Woman fit for nothing but to make a Carpenters Wife of; a poor Virgin
espoused to Joseph, who was of the house of David; and that no meaner an Angel
then Gabriel, must be sent to her, to declare the tidings; and what were the
tidings? the tidings were that out of her Body, and in her Womb should be
begotten one that should be called the Son of God, in the 35 verse. And the
Angel answered and said unto her, the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
power of the highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that holy thing that
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.

I pray what was the business of this holy thing, and what was the Fundamental
reason of this great and wonderful transaction and condescension of Christ? The
Fundamental reason was this; God had an Eternal kindness for such sinners as
you and I are, and a design to make us Children of adoption, when we had
violated our Childship by nature: When we had transgressed the Law of our
Creation Childhood, he was resolved to make us Children of Adoption, and
therefore it was that the Holy Ghost must come upon her, and the power of the
highest must overshadow her. Christ as the Son of God became the Son of man was
made the Son of man merely and principally with a design of grace upon the Sons
and Daughters of men, and therefore Sirs, if so, no great wonder that God
should bless us with all Spiritual Blessings in Christ.

3. The third Reason is this; He in whom we are blessed, is our stated Lord, he
is our absolute, our Sovereign, our certain and our stated Lord: and therefore
you shall find the Apostle here expressing it, blessed be the God and Father of
Our Lord, who has blessed us, Our Lord, that is, God has given him to be our
Lord, an universal Lord unto Christians in all their Christian concerns, and
therefore when the Apostle preached the Gospel to Cornelius and his Friends, at
their Christian Conventicle (as I may so call it) at their Christian meeting in
Cornelius's house, do but observe how he expresses himself, and introduces his
discourse, Acts. 10. vers^ 36. The word which God sent unto the Children of
Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, he (...) Lord of all, here is the word
which God sent unto Israel; what is it? It is a word of peace; what is at the
bottom of it? Jesus Christ is Lord of all, that is, he is Lord of all that
grace, that concerns our peace; he is Lord of all the pardons that concern our
peace; he is Lord of all the wisdom, that concerns and relates to our peace, he
is Lord of all the relations, which are relations of our peace, and he is Lord
of all things, and of the blessings of all things, in those Gospel relations,
preaching peace by Jesus Christ, he is Lord of all. Now Christians, I pray do
but Consider, what is the Spiritual blessing that you stand in need of? God
has made Christ the Lord of that blessing; you want peace, and you want
comfort, and you want Joy, and you want this, and that, and the other, God has
made Christ Lord of all, and if he be Lord of all, then my Friends no wonder,
that God has blessed us with all in him.

But I will open this likewise in these two Branches.

1. and the First is this, God had a peculiar relation to Christ's Lordship unto
and over our persons, when he did entrust him with all our blessings; our Lord
bears testimony of this in general in many places, but especially in the
shutting up of his ministry, and of his life here below, in Matthew. 28. Go ye
therefore, says he, and teach all nations, go ye therefore. Wherefore? At the
18 verse All power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth; if he had had only
power given him in Heaven he could not have Blessed sinners on Earth, if he had
had power given him only on Earth he could not have commanded the Blessings of
Heaven. But, says he, all power, all authority is given to me in Heaven and in
Earth. Go ye therefore and teach all nations. Lord to what end (might the
disciples say) must we go? Well says Christ, I am the Lord of all the
Blessings, I have an absolute power to dispose of all the Blessings of Heaven,
and to manage all the heavenly Blessings upon Earth. Therefore says he, Go
preach, go teach all nations: Go tell sinners that I am ready to bless them, I
have a heart that is willing to bless them, I have a treasure to supply them
fully, according to all their necessities, and according to all their straits.
Go preach the Gospel to every creature, to every Saint and to every sinner; I
am Lord of all; and therefore if you do observe it, the commission that Christ
gives to his disciples, to his Ministers, has a peculiar reference unto the
Authority that he has received, all the authority that he has received has a
peculiar reference to them, and therefore it must needs discover, that
whatsoever he received as Sovereign he received for us; and therefore no wonder
that God blesses us with all in him, because he has made him Lord of all.
Christians, want you peace? Christ is Lord of it. Want you grace? Christ is the
Anointed Lord of grace; he has made him Lord of all.

2. Secondly, The Lordship that Jesus Christ has in and over us that are to be
Blessed, and in and over all the blessings that are to be conferred upon us, he
does manage and execute in a way accommodated to the general and particular
cases of every Christian. As now suppose that I or any of you were made Lord of
the treasures that are lodged up for the poor, It may be there is one that
cannot stir out of doors, and there is another that it may be can stir, but
cannot come at the time, and to the place appointed, others may, it may be,
some cannot because of natural infirmities; now the Lord, he that is the Lord
Treasurer, the Lord Disposer of all those blessings he can accommodate himself
to the conditions of every one, he can go from house to house to see how many
poor there are, and what it is that you want; do you want Bread, or do you want
Drink? or do you want clothes? what is it that you want? I see you cannot come
abroad, and I am come to see your wants: truly so my Friends our Lord Christ
can accommodate himself to every ones condition, he sees that poor creatures
cannot make out unto him, one is blind, and another is lame, and another is
dead-hearted and discouraged, and another is tempted and fettered, and cannot
go out unto the Lord, ay but the Lord can come to them, he can come to your
cottages, to your houses, and the Lord can accommodate himself to you, and say
to you, Children, what want you? Children, what ails you? God has made me Lord
of all Spiritual blessings for you, what want you? want you wisdom? and want
you strength; and want you peace; and want you grace? what is it that you want?
I see you cannot come to me, because you want strength, and you want a heart to
come, but I can come to you, and I am come to you. Thus the Lord of all can
accommodate himself. It was a great offense that the Scribes, those devout and
superstitious Pharisees took against Christ that he could accommodate himself
to the Publicans and Harlots, and sinners of the day, that could not come out
to him, but he must go to them, and feast with them, and this was an offense to
them. O says Christ, I am sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; the
sheep do not seek the shepherd, but the shepherd is to seek the sheep: a poor
creature, it may be, cannot come to the Lord Jesus, yet he, notwithstanding all
his Lordship, and all his grandeur, and all his greatness, I tell you Sirs, he
is such a Lord as can accommodate himself to the conditions of every one, and
therefore no wonder that the God of all grace has entrusted him with all, and
has blessed us with all Spiritual blessings in him, that is the Lord and
Master of so much grace.

Fourthly, The 4th reason is this, we are blessed with all Spiritual Blessings
in him, Because he is the Jesus of the New Testament: When the Angel by a
special commission was sent from God to name the Child, he gives him this name,
Matt. 1.21. Joseph, it seems, was an honest, a sober and a good man, and upon
that he had a mind to put away Mary privily that was betrothed to him, but the
Angel appeared to Joseph, verse 20. and said unto him, Joseph, thou Son of
David, fear not to take to thee Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived in
her is of the Holy Ghost, and she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call
his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins. Now my Friends,
if you do but observe how the Justice of God has stated the Method of this
Salvation, you will see reason enough why God should bless us with all the
Blessings of our Salvation in him, I will open this also in these two Branches.

1. The Justice of God has stated the Method of our Salvaton to be in a way of
suffering, and in a way of purchase: That we should have no pardons but what
should be the price of blood, that we should have no peace but what should be
the price of blood, that we should have no communion, but what blood is at the
bottom of, that we should have no manner of fellowship with God, here or
hereafter, but what is laid and founded in the blood of the Son of God; this
was the way and method that the Justice of God had stated. Says Christ, Heb.
10.5, 6, 7. Sacrifice and Offerings thou would not, but a body have thou
prepared me; in burnt Offerings and Sacrifices for sin thou have had no
pleasure, then said I, Lo I come to do thy will, O God: As if he had said, Lord
is there any peace to be purchased for transgressors? here is my blood: Is
there any grace to be bought for sinners? Lord here is my blood for it: Is
there any reconciliation to be wrought? I am willing to offer my self to be a
propitiation, for thy Enemies; Lo here I am, Lord is there any Spiritual
Blessing to be obtained by suffering? Lo I come to do thy will, though it be to
be made a curse. Now Christians, if the case be so? is there not great reason
then that the Blessings that we have, we should be blessed with them in Christ?
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in
him.

2. But then the Second Illustration of it is this; Jesus as a Savior must not
only be a sufferer, but a Surety. He must be one that must undertake to respond
to God for all, and to satisfy the justice of God for all. Now Sirs, what are
the Blessings that we receive by his Suretiship? Why truly upon the account of
that we receive all Spiritual Blessings. Christ is Surety, that I should live
like a Child of Adoption, for the substance and main, that my heart should be
in a frame becoming those that are the Lords Adopted ones. O but where is he
that has undertaken it? why it is Jesus, and therefore you shall find the
Apostle fix it upon this very title Heb. 7.22. by so much was Jesus made a
Surety of a better Testament; by so much was Jesus: You see here is the very
Title that is given him in the Text: Jesus the Savior, and Jesus the Surety
for all that are saved; and therefore good reason that we should be Blessed
with all Spiritual blessings in him. And then,

5. Lastly, The 5th reason that is in the words is this; he has Blessed us
with all Spiritual Blessings in him, because he is the Christ: I pray do but
observe it, he is the Christ: And therefore good reason that all our Blessings
should be lodged in him. There is not another Christ in Heaven, there was none
of all the Angels of Heaven that were fit to make a Christ of, all the Sons,
and Daughters of men, put them all together, were not fit to make a Christ of,
vain are the suppositions and presumptions of the Papists. There is none but
this Jesus that is fit to make a public Christ of, and this Jesus was anointed
with all Spiritual Blessings to this end, he was anointed with them in the
fountain, in the principle. I will but turn you to one Scripture for the
confirmamation of this, that Jesus was anointed with all Spiritual blessings
for this purpose; I pray do but observe that passage there, Isaiah 61.1. verse.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me. I pray
consider it Sirs, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, for or wherewith he has
anointed me. And this is the Oil of gladness wherewith he was anointed above
all his fellows. Because the Lord has anointed me, To preach good tidings to
the meek, he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to
the Captives, and the opening the Prison to them that are Bound, etc. I pray do
but consider how he brings in the thing to my present purpose, all Spiritual
Blessings. Thou art a poor creature, a weak creature, not worthy of the least
crumb of Bread, and yet my Friends, all things are given in the Lord Christ,
because he was anointed with all for us, therefore is it that we are blessed
with all Spiritual Blessings in Christ.

SERMON IV.
Ephesians 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings, in Heavenly places, in Christ.


THe state and Condition of this Church of Christ at Ephesus we have in some
measure opened. The suitableness of this passage of the Apostle to that their
state we have also discovered. To be deprived of Temporal Blessings and exposed
to Temporal Troubles and Trials, as well as Spiritual Temptations, is easily
balanced with the discovery the Apostle here makes of being Blessed with all
Spiritual Blessings.

This universal word is not only applied to the kinds, but also to the degrees
of every kind of these Spiritual Blessings. It is all for the kind, and all
also of every kind; not only faith, or only love, but both; not only pardon, or
only peace, but both; and not only so, but all of all; who has Blessed us with
all Spiritual Blessings. Though you have but little in hand, or, as I may
rather say, little in your own hearts, yet you have all Spiritual Blessings in
the hand of Christ.

A Third inquiry is this.

Who is it that does bless us with all Spiritual Blessings, or under what
consideration are we to look upon this great Blesser?

viz.

That God as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ does bless Christians
in Christ with all Spiritual Blessings.

I would speak these mysteries with all plainness. But my Friends, there is
none of you, those that have the greatest advantage of parts and gifts, that
can understand practically what I shall say without the Spirit of the Lord lead
you into the truth, which I shall discover to you (I hope) in the Spirit. In
the prosecution therefore of it, I will only deliver my sense in these Four, or
Five, Generals, and then make improvement.

1. The first is this, when we say that God, as the God and Father of Jesus
Christ, blesses us, this seems to be employed in it, That all the advantages
that any of the people of God in either Testament have by Gods being their God,
or that hangs upon this relation, they are all summed up in this, that he, as
the God of our Lord Jesus, blesses his people with all Spiritual blessings: If
so be that you reflect upon the Old Testament, you shall find Abraham greatly
glorying in this, and the Lord laying it as a foundation of Abraham's glory,
Genesis 17.1. says he, I am God all sufficient, walk before me and be thou
perfect; and Chap 15. verse 1. you have another appearance of God to Abraham:
Says he, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward: Now Sirs, I pray
Consider, The man Jesus, the Lord Jesus, as betrusted with all our Spiritual
blessings, lies under the advantage of this relation to God, if so be that God
be the God of Abraham, much more will he be an all sufficient God in the manage
of the concerns of Abraham's seed, as the God of our Lord Jesus Christ he has
blessed us, as an all sufficient God, as a God that is the exceeding great
reward of those to whom he is God, able to do what he will, and able to give
what he pleases, he is Christ's God that has blessed us with all Spiritual
blessings in Christ.

2. Secondly, This also does discover a full assurance of an abiding engagement
of all the attributes of God to carry on the interest and the concerns of
Christ, as it is stated among Christians; I say it implies an engagement of all
the attributes of God to see to the blessings; I pray Christians don't look
upon the man Jesus only as concerned in the manage, either in the securing or
disposing of the blessings, but look upon the blessings ensured, secured and to
be disposed or managed in their disposal by him that is the God of the man
Jesus; you know the passage there in the Old Testament, where the Lord does
Covenant with Christ's Type, that is, with David, and with Solomon, but
principally with the Lord Jesus himself, Psalm 89.26. He shall cry unto me,
Thou art my Father, my God, and the Rock of my Salvation. David glories in the
Relation himself, and he speaks this by way of prophesy, to give assurance unto
all the people of God, that David's Son shall have liberty and a heart to cry
unto him in all his straits: My God, he shall cry unto me, My Father, thou art
My Father, and my God. Now I pray do but observe the Context, and you shall
find, that the great concerns of the people of God, their great Blessings are
here devolved upon him to manage, verse 19. I have laid help upon one that is
mighty, I have exalted one Chosen out of the people. A mighty one indeed there
is none to be compared to him, exalted indeed above all, he has a name given
him which is above every name, and says God, I have laid help upon him. As if
the Lord should say, I will betrust him with all their persons and I will
betrust him with all their Blessings. I know he is mighty, he is able to save,
ay but lest he should be discouraged or lest any looking upon him as the Son of
David should judge him insufficient for this employ, I pray do but observe what
he says in the 24 verse. But my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him,
and in my name shall his horn be exalted. I will set his hand also in the Sea
and his right hand in the the Rivers, and he shall cry unto me, thou art my
God. By way of acknowledgment for what has been done, thou art My God: O this
is my God that has done all this. It is he in whose name my Horn is exalted.
It is he that shall beat down my foes before my face, and plague them that hate
me; and therefore good reason he should acknowledge him; he shall cry unto me,
my God, and if there be any thing of difficulty to be done, if there be sin to
be removed; if the consequence of sin had seized, and that to be dismissed,
says God to him, he shall cry unto me, My God; and I pray, friends, do but
observe how correspondent to this prophesy, or to this promise, was the
carriage of our Lord Jesus Christ, in all his straits, in reference to the
general dispensation under which he was, which was a dispensation full enough
of straits, how the Apostle speaks of him, or rather brings him in, as fixing
upon himself, in the 2 Heb. 13. And again, says he, I will put my trust in him;
and again, behold I and the Children which God has given me. The concerns of
the Children are here upon the heart of Christ, and says Christ, I will put my
trust in him; in whom? in my God, that has given me these Children, in my God
that has given Blessings to me for them. I will put my trust in him, says he;
and again behold I and the Children that God has given me. And when he was in
the greatest strait of all, when God seemed to withdraw from him, and he under
the guilt of all the sins of the whole election of grace, and Justice executing
vengeance, or the Curse, according to the tenor of the Covenant upon him, God
frowning upon him, then he had recourse to this, to the power of God, to the
faithfulness of God, to the attributes of God; My God, My God, says he, why
have thou forsaken me? Nay my Friends, let me tell you this as an additional
illustration of it; That the Lord Jesus Christ has full liberty and privilege
to demand the universal assistance of all the attributes of the Divine nature
in the manage of this work of Mediation as he is Man.

Thirdly, The Third General is this; What ever Relation God as God is
discovered under in either Testaments, the encouragements, and all the
blessednesses of that Relation, meet in this his Relation to Christ. He is the
God and Father of Jesus Christ, and as so, he has blessed us with all
Spiritual blessings in him. There are diverse Relations that God is pleased to
cloth himself withal, and to represent himself under unto his people, in the
Old and New Testament; Now whatsoever those Relations are, The advantage, and
the blessedness that result from them, meet here in this, and that in this
particular case, as he is a God blessing Christians in Christ; I would
illustrate this to you in these 2 particulars.

1. God has discovered himself under the notion of a Creator, as God the
Creator of all flesh, the Creator of all things, so he has declared himself to
be; And yet, my Friends, the advantages that are wrapped up in this Relation, are
all summed up in this, that he is the God and Father of our Lord, blessing
Christians with all Spiritual blessings. May a poor Creature say, O my heart
will never yield to these Spiritual Blessings, they are so Spiritual, and I am
so carnal; ay but God the Creator of thy heart has blessed thee with all
Spiritual Blessings in Christ. O, says a poor Creature, I shall never be able
to understand, nor to receive these Spiritual Mysteries, which wrap up as it
were these Spiritual blessings, I am so full of Spiritual blindness, darkness,
and Ignorance; ay but God that created thy understanding, and created thy
understanding in light, as an understanding resembling his own, this God has
blessed thee with these Spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus; ay but I am so
weak, and I am so unable to manage them, Well notwithstanding all, God that
created thee; It is he that has blessed thee with all Spiritual blessings in
Christ, and that as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and as he is
considered the Creator of all by Christ, so he has blessed thee with all
Spiritual blessings, The Apostle in his Epistle to the Colossians, Chap. 1.
seems to argue from this principle, and encourage (from this mystery) poor
Creatures to wait for the Blessing, verse 19. for it pleased the Father that in
him should all fullness dwell; ay but how shall I come to be made partaker of
that fullness that dwells in Christ? my heart has been shut so many years, who
will open it? my heart has been growing in hardness so many years who can
soften it? Now observe, before the discovery of this the pleasure of his grace,
he brings in the discovery of this Relation of a Creator, verse 16. For by him
were all things Created that are in Heaven and that are in Earth, etc, by him
were all things Created, and it pleased the Father that in him should all
fullness dwell, and therefore he can Create thy heart, that is hard, he can
Create it soft, and in thy heart, that is so shut up, he can Create an open
passage for the Gospel, and the Blessings of the Gospel, out of the hands of
Christ, into thy heart, he can create this; Now, my friends, this is a great
advantage, the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, as the Creator has blessed us
with all Spiritual Blessings in Christ Jesus.

Secondly. Another Relation that God has discovered himself in, as God, unto
us in Scripture, it is a Relation of Supportation, importing a governing of all
things that are. A God whose eyes run to and fro throughout the Earth observing
both the evil and the good; Therefore you shall find that when the great
concerns of the Church were before him; he appeared thus as an Universal
Sovereign Lord and Governor of all things, of all powers and all interests
whatsoever; you have it in the 1 of Zach. There were some grand objections that
lay in the way of that mercy, that God had betrusted in the hand of Christ, to
manage for and on the behalf of his poor despised and afflicted people; You
have the management of it discovered to be betrusted with him in the 8 verse. I
saw by night, and behold A man riding upon a Red Horse; and he stood among the
Myrtle Trees that were in the bottom, and behind him were there Red Horses
speckled and White. Here was the case and concerns of the Church, and the
design was a design of mercy, that these Myrtles should be transplanted out of
the bottom, and that these Myrtles should be secured, and caused to grow in the
bottom; and therefore in the midst of the Myrtles he does appear riding upon a
Red Horse. Now my friends here was a great work that did lie upon him, and he
has his Servants, those that were behind him upon Red Horses speckled and
White. What are these? says the Prophet to the Lord; And the Angel answered,
These are they that the Lord has sent to walk to and fro through the Earth.
This Angel is the man that stood among the Myrtles, this is the man that in
verse 8 was riding upon a Red Horse, and in verse 9 the Prophet calls him his
Lord; O my Lord, says he, what are these? Then, verse 11, you have an account
given unto this angel, unto this man that stood among the Myrtle Trees of the
Transactions in the World, and the account is this: We have walked to and fro
through the Earth, and behold all the Earth sits still, and is at rest. You
may at your leisure consult the Context, and you shall find that there was a
great work here to do, great Blessings, to bestow upon a poor despised,
contemned people, and the manage of it was cast upon the man that stood among
the Myrtle Trees, and this man had the advantage of the encouragement of the
Lords Relation, as he is the Supreme and Sovereign Lord of all; so that I say,
my friends, if so be that the Sovereignty of the great Jehovah, as he is the
Supreme Governor of all, and as he is Lord of all, can be of any advantage
unto us, here lies the advantage of it, that the God of our Lord Jesus is not
only the great creating God, but the great governing God that has blessed us
with all Spiritual Blessings. O, says a poor trembling Soul, I can never secure
my Blessings from the Devil, my heart is so treacherous and deceitful, and
Satan so subtle and powerful, I can never secure them. Well, my friends, but
who is he that has Blessed you? Even God, the God of Christ Jesus the Lord,
who is the Absolute, Sovereign Governor of all the whole Creation; He it is
that has Blessed you with all Spiritual Blessings.

I will but only observe this one thing to you: Though the Devil and the powers
of the World have cast off Gods Moral government, yet God has no way at all,
by all their sin, lessened his natural Government; As he was so he is, he is as
much the Sovereign Lord and Governor of all things; now the Devils have sinned
and man has sinned; and both man and Devils have cast off his moral government;
he is as much Lord and absolute Sovereign as he was, and would have been if
they had not sinned.

Fourthly, God, as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, blesses us;
that is He stands under engagement, as Christ's God and Father, to secure what
he has given to us in Christ. As I observed to you before it is not only our
God and Father in Christ, but it is the God and Father of Christ, that has
blessed us in Christ, and if so, then he stands engaged unto Christ, in whom he
has lodged these Blessings for us, or in whom he has blessed us with these
Blessing^ to secure them unto us; The more immediate engagement lay between God
and Christ Jesus. It is a more remote relation and so by consequence, an
engagement at a greater distance, or an engagement upon a remove that he stands
in unto us that are Christians. I would fain have you to understand this, I say
he is the God of Christ that has blessed us, and therefore as he i^ the God of
Christ he stands engaged unto Christ Jesus; there lay the first and the
principal engagement? It Is true as he is ou^ God he is not to be questioned. I
am God says he, I change not and therefore, ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed,
Mal. 3.6. But, my friends, he is not only the God of the Sons of Jacob, and
therefore they are not consumed, but he is the God of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and therefore they cannot be consumed. Why? Because as he is Christ's God he
has blessed us, and so he stands engaged unto the Lord Jesus Christ. Now I
pray observe but these two things;

1. The first is this, There was never any thing of offense that ever passed
between this God, and this Christ. The Father was never offended by the Son,
and the Son was never offended by the Father, these always kept a good, a
perfect, a full correspondency each with other; indeed sometimes a Christian
has reason to fear; My God I have provoked, and my God I have dishonored, and
my God I have forsaken, and my God I have slighted. Ay, Christian, thou may
say so, but it is Blasphemy for thee to say or think, that ever Christ could
say so; in truth he never provoked his God, he never dishonored his God, he
never did any thing that might disoblige his God, Christ never did; He in whom
thou art blessed: it is God, as the God of Christ, that has blessed thee, and
therefore, Christian, great encouragement there is unto thy Soul.

Secondly, As he is Christ's God, all the promises were not only summed up in
him that were made to Christians, but the Blessedness of all the promises have
a primary respect and relation unto him. My meaning plainly is this, God has
promised thee peace, Ay but this peace has reference unto the honoring and
glorifying of the man Jesus, Whose God has Blessed thee with this peace in
him. Jesus has the glory of all, and God eyes the glory of Jesus in all the
promises he makes to us; and so, my friends, all the promises were not only
designedly given for the advancement of him, but all the promises were summed
up in him. When God made the promise of a seed to Abraham, Abraham had enough,
he was under some discontent before, but now, says God, I will not only give
thee a Child, one to be thine Heir, but I will give thee a Son, and that Son
that I will give thee, shall be my Heir; One in whom all the Nations of the
Earth shall be Blessed. Now Abraham had enough; you never find Abraham seeking
any more Children at the hands of God; no, having an Isaac, a seed in whom all
the Nations of the Earth should be blessed, Now Abraham is satisfied, and
therefore the Lord in the prophesy of the Prophet Isaiah, does thus explain
himself, when he promises the Lord Jesus Christ, Isa. 55.4. Behold I have
given him for a witness (or a Covenant) to the people. I will give him. Who? I
will give my Son Jesus for a Covenant to the people; That is as much as if God
should say, I will give him for All, he is as it were the Sums and Substance of
all, say but Christ, and you say All. When God gives Christ to a poor Creature
he gives all the Promises, all the Covenants, and all the Blessings of Earth,
and all the Blessings of Heaven, all the Blessings of providence, and all the
Blessings that are reserved in the everlasting Mansions. And thus now you see
in these respects upon what account it is, that the Apostle seems to lay the
Emphasis upon this word: Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has Blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings, etc.

I shall give you but 3 or 4 inferences.

Is it so, my friends, that God as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
has Blessed Christians with all Spiritual Blessings? Then,

In the first place, Vain are the attempts of any of the enemies of Christians
to interpose between them and their Blessings. Though they may sometimes
interpose between them and some of the means of their Blessings, yet I say,
vain are the attempts of their enemies against their Blessings; Why? Because
that God, as the God and Father of Jesus Christ, has blessed them with all
Blessings.

Now you may observe that the Devil has been all along at it, and he makes it
his design and business, from time to time, and from age to age, and from
dispensation to dispensation to interpose between the Lords people and their
Blessings, but still in vain; and therefore the Psalmist eyeing the Lord Jesus,
and eying by faith, this blessedness, wherewith the God of the man Jesus should
bless Christians, he cries out in the 2 Psalm. 1. Why do the heathen Rage, and
the people imagine a vain thing? Their great design was to keep the people of
God from those Blessings that God had designed by promise to give to them,
There they were imagining and consulting, and there they were designing well;
but observe it that very thing, that they thought would be the compleatment of
all their designs, tending to this purpose, was the greatest inlet to all
these Blessings. Certainly they were in great Joy, and had much satisfaction
upon their Spirits, when they got Christ nailed upon the Cross, but their very
nailing and crucifying of him, made way for all these Blessings; It opened as
it were all the treasures of grace, it opened all the Relations that were
discovered; and the Blessings upon the death of the Lord Jesus Christ came
flowing out of the promises, and flowing out of Relations, and the World was
filled with these Blessings: So that I say whatsoever devises the World has,
to interpose between Christians and their Blessings, they will be in vain, if
they take up one conduit; God will lay many more; And if they give an
obstruction one way, he will proceed other ways and manage it. It is the God
of Jesus Christ that has blessed Christians, and therefore Christians have
their Blessings sure.

Then methinks, Christians, you should look unto God, as the God and Father of
Christ, under all the discouragements, that arise upon your own Spirits, from
your own violations of the obligations of his Relation to you. My meaning is
this, when you cannot comfortably go to God, as your God, for a blessing, you
may comfortably go to God, as Christ's God, for any Blessing. Why, my friends,
here lay the case, O, says thy conscience, thou never come to the word of
God but thou despisest the God of the word, and thy heart is shut against the
word, even from thy Childhood, and in thy Childhood, the Devil shuts up thy
heart and the World shuts up thy heart, and thy corruptions shut up thy heart;
but whatsoever it is that shuts up thy heart, or whatsoever it is that gives
being to any disobligement thou art guilty of, be not discouraged, though thou
can not go to him for a Blessing, as thy God, because thy conscience tell
thee that thou have sinned against thy God, yet thou may go to him at that
time as Christ's God; for God, as the God of Christ Jesus, has Blessed thee
with all Spiritual Blessings. Therefore, Christians, under all your
discouragements, that arise from the sense of your own unworthiness, let this
be your way, to look upon God as the God of Christ, and go to God for
Blessings, as the God of Christ.

Then, my friends, you may here take occasion to magnify the Mystery of the
Gospel. And you may see great reason why you should glorify these persons, that
are principally concerned in the mysteries of the Gospel. No wonder the Apostle
breaks out, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, And can
your hearts hold from breaking out in the praises of God? O Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has Blessed us with all Spiritual
Blessings! Sirs, you may see here is reason enough why we should glorify the
Lord Jesus Christ, because between God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, as
related one to another, are all Spiritual Blessings laid. There is your great
security and safety; therefore, Sirs, let him be blessed by you, as the God of
Christ, and let the Lord Jesus Christ be admired, and glorified, and believed
on by you.

Then surely the natural tendency of all those Spiritual Blessings is to make
us conformable and like unto him. By this you may understand Blessings, or
distinguish between those that are pretended to be Spiritual blessings and
those that are really so, many pretend to great parts and gifts, and O their
light is Spiritual! and O their zeal is Spiritual zeal! and their inlargements
are Spiritual inlargements! and I pray God they may be all such, and O that all
had always such! But let me tell you, Sirs, a great many things of this nature,
if they be brought to the Test, will not be found to be Spiritual Blessings;
Why? Because the tendency of these Blessings is not to conform you to the God
of Christ Jesus? Do you find your hearts engaged to the God of the Lord Jesus
Christ? Do you find the tendency of that, which you call a Spiritual Blessing,
is to make you more like to the Lord Jesus Christ. If so, then there is
something in it, then it is one of the Blessings of the God and Father, of our
Lord Jesus Christ, wherewith he has Blessed you in Christ. But if the tendency
of that which you call a Spiritual Blessing be not to make you like to the God
and Father of Jesus Christ, do not miscal it and honor it with the name of a
Spiritual Blessing; for it is none of these Spiritual Blessings, with which the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ has blessed Christians.

SERMON IV.
Amos 9. Verse 9. For Lo I will Command and I will sift the House of Israel
among all Nations, as Corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain
fall to the Earth.


I Have made it my business of late to open the mystery of the grace of the
Blessed Trinity, and to discover the accommodation of that grace unto
Christians under greatest discouragements and Christians of the meanest sise
and rank. I am still in the pursuit of the same design, and therefore have I
fixed upon these words; which do discover the Sovereignty of God in the
management of all the sufferings of his own people. I pray do but observe;
Though God does employ the Nations yet he keeps the Nations in his own hand.
The Nations are but the sieve in his hand. He keeps their power, and he keeps
their interest, he keeps all the instruments that he uses still in his own
hand: Assyria, the Rod of my Anger; But yet the Rod of his Anger in his own
hand. So here the Nations the sieve of his wrath. But yet the sieve of his
wrath in his own hand. He keeps it; Lo, says he, I will command and I will sift
the House of Israel. Jesus tells his disciple Peter, that Satan would fain have
been fingering at this work, he would fain have had him in his own hand, he
would have had Christ to have left him to him; Simon, Simon, says he, Satan has
desired to have you, that he might sift you. But Christ would not part with
Peter so; he was more concerned in his disciples then to betrust them in the
Devils hand. So God is more concerned for his people then to give an Absolute,
Sovereign, Uncontrouble Power to his Enemies over and about their concerns, I,
says God, will sift the House of Israel among all nations.

2. And then Secondly, you have a gracious reserve, or a reserve of grace
appropriated unto a few that the Lord is more than ordinarily concerned for.
Why, says he, yet for all this, the least grain shall not fall to the ground;
Though God turn his people, as it were, from sieve to sieve, yet he will not
suffer the least grain under all these sifting dispensations to fall to the
ground. Not only the most promising, likely and flourishing Grace, he will not
only look after the most weighty but the least grace, and the lightest grain;
Yet, says, he, shall not the least grain fall upon the Earth. There are
diverse observations that lie in the words: I shall take notice of them, and
then fix upon those which most subserve my design.

That all the evils that befall the Israel of God, though managed by the
enemies of God, yet are the Issues of Gods Command.

The Command not of his word, but a Providential Command, when God speaks
threatening Language and Terror to his people Israel in other Prophesies, he
tells them that he will hiss for the fly, and he will call the Rod of his
anger, the Assiyrian the Rod of his anger: He will call them and employ them.
So here, says he, Lo I will Command, etc.

That God will have the managing of all his adversaries malice and the ordering
and bounding of all his adversaries power. I will order the Sifting, says he,
For Lo, I will Commands and I will Sift the House of Israel.

That both the Commission given and the restriction or limitation of the
Commission reserved, is matter of a Christians observation, of Israel's
observation.

It is the duty of Gods Israel to observe both the one and the other; to
observe that God commands such a Nation to afflict such a people; for lo, says
he, I will Command and lo I will sift. Surely this if rightly managed would be
of very great Use to Christians in a suffering day; Nay let me tell you more,
if God will make use of the Devil in this work, yet observe the restraint,
observe the limitation. Who will go for us? says God, I, says the Devil, will
go. And if the Lord does suffer him to try us and sift us with temptation upon
temptation; Yet do but observe the restraint, how often was the Devil forced to
come for the enlarging of his Commission against Job?

That notwithstanding all the sufferings of the Lords people, yet the Lord will
take care to secure the meanest of his people.

It is the least grain that is the proper matter of this promise, It is not
thos-that are highest, the biggest, and the largest wheat, but even the least
grain though there be abundance of chaff, and abundance of mixture yet the
least grain shall not fall to the ground: One would wonder to observe that the
Lord in his greatest promises should fix upon the meanest and most unlikely
professors. It may be you think there is no grace in your heart, no seed, no
grain there; that you are not a grain, but are rather tares: well but the Lord
does not proceed according to the observation that you make of yours selves,
but according to the observation that he makes of you. If God can spy a little
grace in any heart, God will look after that heart; It is the least grain that
God observes that is the matter of this promise; Yet, says he, shall not the
least grain fall upon the Earth.

In the opening of this observation I shall only give you some few reasons of
it, and then make some improvement.

Why or whence is it that such special care is taken of such inconsiderable
Christians? One whom ministers it may be make nothing of, one whom private
Christians disregard; yet God spys a little grace in him: We it may be are
ready to think it would be no great matter to lose such a little grain as this;
no great matter if the Devil should hurry such a one into such sins; no great
matter if that afflictions sweep away and such a Professor, from the
Ordinances and from communion and fellowship with God in his own appointments.
But, my Friends, here is the Case; The Lord he observes what there is within,
and the Lord does not act nor carry it either under general or particular
judgments, according to our observation or sense, but according to his own
observation and the truth of the thing: If there be grace, though it be in the
least degree; if there be grace though under very great disadvantages and under
great discouragements, yet an all-searching Eye can espy a grain of Corn in a
heap of Chaff. It may be there is a great deal of Chaff, a great deal of
vanity, a great deal of earthliness, which do not commend thee before men, but
rather discommend thee before God and man, but little grace in thy life, little
in thy prayers, little in thy heart, little in thy understanding; Ay, But if
God espy a little grace under all this Rubbish, a little grain, a grain of the
least size under all this Heap of Chaff and Rubbish. The Lord will take care of
this. Yet, says he, shall not the least grain fall to the ground.

But whence is all this kindness?



A little grace, though never so little, is distinguishing grace as well as the
greatest, though never so much: When the Lord did at first work the work of
grace upon thy heart, then he made a personal difference between thee and
others; and it is not the muchness of thy grace that gives the essential
distinction, but it is the truth of thy grace that distinguishes thee from
others. I will open this in these 2 Branches.

1. First. The least degree, or the least grain, of grace is the Issue of Gods
eternal distinguishing kindness. God from all eternity, before the foundations
of the world were laid, did elect and choose thee to receive such a measure of
grace in such a little proportion, as well as another in a large measure and in
a greater proportion; ye are chosen in him, says the Apostle. 1. Ephesians. 4. before
the Foundation of the World was laid, that ye should be Holy. God did not only
choose those that were enriched with more then ordinary Grace, those that are
full of the Holy Ghost, were not the only Persons that were in the Eye and upon
the Heart of God from all Eternity, but those that have received, though but
their measures by scantling. These are the Persons that God did from all
Eternity design, by this little grace, to make a personal difference between
them and others; Let me tell you all the moralists in the World, and all the
great ones of the World, have not so much as this little grace amounts to;
Thousands and ten thousands of hearts, will appear before the Throne, and not a
grain of grace in them, and therefore, my Friends if so then, this must needs
be clear, that either God must look after this little grace or must lose the
resolve of his Eternal Love.

2. That this little has the nature of the whole, Jesus Christ compares the
Kingdom of Heaven in hearts unto a grain of must and Seed, which is the least
of all grains. Why though it be so little, yet there is a prolifick, or a
seminal virtue and power, in that little. The least grain of Corn is wheat it
has the Nature of wheat, as well as the fullest, so the least Christian, he
that has the least grace, has the whole nature of Christianity, as well as he
that has most who despises the day of small things? Though you do, yet God
will not; it may be you take little notice, and say, it is but a little, but
yet in this little is the nature of the whole: If there be true faith, though
it be little, yet here is all the truth of faith in a little faith, and there
is all the Truth of love, the whole nature of love, in a little love; and there
is the whole nature of humility, though it be shut up as it were in a little
compass; and if it be so then this little must be and is the care of God,
because the least grain has the nature of the whole, and so here is the whole
nature of grace even in the least grace. Therefore, says God, the house of
Israel, this perverse, this rebelliuos house, this is a frothy and chaffy house
of Israel; yet I will not lose the least grain, yet not the least grain shall
fall upon the Earth.

3. That the least grace is under designments of grace as well as the greatest:
Nay let me tell you, Sirs, There are many Christians that have most at first
considering the proportion, and there are, on the other hand, many Christians
who have least at first, and yet afterward do attain to a great deal more then
those that had most at first. God does not always do as we do, or as man does.
Many times to him that has most at first there is many times most given
afterward; but God does not always do so but he gives sometimes the greatest
increase an increase like the increases of God, even unto those in whom at
first he did Create but little. One could hardly perceive the flax smoking the
other day, and now it is all on a flame; and take another Christian, and as
soon as ever the fire is put into the flax, the flax fell all into a smoke.
There was a great appearance, a great heat at first, but take him three, or
four, or five, years after, and behold a damp again; the man had great incomes
at first, but afterward there was as great an abatement, and he that had least
now has most so that I say, considering the greatness of the designment, the
unlimited designment, that relate to those that have little, may give a reason
why the Lord will look after the least grace, why special grace will be charged
with the preservation and security of the least. Satan may suggest, why what is
this, a poor thing that can hardly crawl toward Christ in a duty; so weak,
there is little or nothing to be seen of the Image of God in his heart, because
there is so little. Ay but, Christians, you do not know under what designment
this little is, what great things the Lord has to manage by this little grace,
Daniel, when the Lord showed him the great revolutions that were to be in the
world, he showed him a Mountain, a mighty mountain; And he showed him also a
little Stone, that was cut out of the Mountain without hands, and this stone
should be bigger than the Mountain. The Mountain, if you take it to be the
Roman Empire, that was as a Mountain that filled a great part of the Earth; ay
but the little Stone, that is cut out of the Mountain without hands, that shall
cover all the face of the Earth in its time. So I say do but you make it your
business to discover grace, and never prescribe any limits as to that grace; A
little grace may be under a great design; little David did more then the mighty
man Saul that was taller than all the Israelites, he was under a greater
designment; I pray consider this with me under these two branches.

1. The least grace may be under a designment for greatest service for the time
to come: Christ is Prophesied of, as a root that should grow out of a dry
ground, so Christ is compared, he promised but little, there was but a very
slender appearance of Jesus at the first, that ever he should be the man in
whom all the Promises and Prophecies should center. A Carpenters Son, this is
but the Son of a Carpenter, say they, an unlikely thing, that all the Promises
and Prophecies of the Messiah should center in him, and have their
accomplishment in him: Even so it may be with Christians, little beginnings
many times do work and boil up, and improve unto greatest undertakements. If
you nakedly consider how the Lord dealt with his own Disciples, one would
wonder that they should be his hearers, three years and and an half, and, when
all came to all, had not so much Faith, as to believe that this was really he;
that they should not have grace enough to bear them out in one brush of trial,
that they met with, in the apprehending of our Lord, but they must all forsake
him, when he was upon the Cross. That indeed was something a great trial, but
to forsake him as soon as ever he was apprehended, and for Peter to deny him as
soon as ever he was challenged, this does not discover greatness of grace.
Truly these men, as I may say, were men of little stature, and the Kingdom of
Heaven in them, during that time they lived with Christ and heard the Lord
Christ, was but as a grain of Mustard Seed; and yet these were the men that
must do the great work of God in the World. So it may be there is but a little
grace in thy Child's Heart, or in thine own Heart, but that little grace may be
under a great designment for great service, and therefore it is that the Lord
will look after a little, because he knows what it is that you are designed
for, and that every one is designed for.

2. The least grace may be under a designment for the greatest enjoyments; that
is, God may design a Person for the greatest enjoyments, that has now but the
least grace, Many times Children, that are weakest, have most of the
manifestations of the tender affections of the Mother. Truly so I may say the
Lord does lead those many times by the hand, that he has given but little
grace to, when others are as it were turned to go of themselves; the Lambs are
carried in the Bosom of the Shepherd. Isa. 40.11. the Lord promises that he
will raise up a Shepherd, that shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry
them in his Bosom. Christians, though you be but little, yet I Pray consider,
you may be under a designment of great enjoyments; the Lord does many times
give you, as it were, the sweet of the Gospel, whilst he feeds others with
courser and harsher fare. The Lord gives you the dainties of the Covenant, and
of the Promises, when he does treat with others with more course or more common
Providence. Christians, I pray consider not only for the present but for the
time to come, you may be under the greatest designments, for the greatest
enjoyments; and therefore it is that God will not lose the least grain: what
sieve soever he makes use of, to be sure his Eye and his Hand will be upon the
least grain in the sieve, because of their designment.

3. The Lord will take care of those that have the least grace, because those
that have the least grace have a full right. I pray do but observe, there is no
gradual difference in Gospel right; if I have a right to an Estate wrapped up in
a scroul of paper, it is as much as the right that another has to his Estate
that is written or enlarged upon in a sheet: truly so it is with Christians,
little grace gives a full right, and therefore the Lord will look after it; or
else he must suffer his own right to be lost, the right that he has given to
be void, if he does not look after the least grace. I will open this in these
two Branches.

1. The greatest promises are made to the least of graces: I pray turn to that
passage of our Lord in the first Sermon that ever he preached upon the Mount,
in Mat. 5. Blessed, say he, are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom
of Heaven. What can you have more than the Kingdom, not the Kingdoms of the
Earth, but the Kingdom of Heaven and the Kingdom without limitation: Theirs is
the throne of the Kingdom, and their is the Crown of the Kingdom, and theirs is
the Blessedness and the glory of the Kingdom; and who are these to whom this
Kingdom in all its glory is thus annexed by promise? It is those who are poor
in Spirit, that have but a little grace, and yet are sensible of their little.
Christians, there is no graduall variation in right, though there are always
gradual variations in the comfort of your right; you shall scarce meet with two
Christians that have in all points an equal balance of comfortable enjoyment
of their Right; and yet their Right is the same, thy promise is my promise, and
the Blessing that is a Christians by Covenant, that has attained to the
greatest measures of grace, these very Blessings, and this very Covenant, may
with all its Blessings belong to him that has least grace. May a man that is
well thriven in grace, say all this is mine, as God said to Abraham, when he
led him forth, come, says he, look toward the East, and the West, and the
North and the South, Behold all this Land will I give thee. So I may say to a
Christian, Christian, come look from the one end of the Scripture to the other,
look upwards, look downwards, look on this hand, and look on the other hand
from the East to the West, from the North to the South, Behold all this God
has given thee. Ay but I am poor, says the Christian; it is no matter, thy
poverty does not destroy thy right? thy Poverty makes no alteration in thy
right: do not say in thy Heart, this is for those that are tall Cedars, this is
for those that are fruitful, but as for me, alas I am not, well if there be but
a little, though never so little, thy right is the same; a little grace you see
does give right to the greatest blessings, and the greatest blessings are
established upon the least grace; Blessed are the poor in Spirit for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven. There is nothing in the Kingdom, but what is theirs that
are poor in Spirit, that have but little, and are sensible that they have but a
little: though they have but a little, yet blessed are the poor, for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. The same grace that gives the right makes the difference, the gradual
difference: Though there be a gradual difference in the receipt, yet it is the
same grace: It may be the Lord has given thee five Talents, it may be to
another he has given but two, and it may be he has given to another but one
Talent; well but yet I say it is the same grace that gives all those Talents,
and that gives a like right with those various or disproportioned gifts, it is
the same grace, all issue from the same Fountain, and therefore it is, that the
least grace will be looked after: He that gave thee a right to five Talents,
gave thy Brother as good and as equal a right to one, he that gave thy
Neighbor a Possession of a great measure of grace, and thereby, it may be, his
right is more manifested, it was the same grace that gave thee the Possession
of a little grace; and yet thy right is as substantial and true, because the
grace, that gives grace, differenceth in its giving, and yet gives the same
right under these different gifts.

4. The least grace discovers an interest in the greatest relations, as well,
as the highest degree of grace does. Where there is a great deal of grace, you
say, surely this is a Child of God. Ay, and there is one that has but a grain
of grace, that is as surely the Child of God, as he that has more, he is as
surely born of God, as he that has the greatest degree of grace, here is one
that, it may be, can fill a Prayer with grace, and here is another that has
hardly grace enough to stock a few Petitions, or it may be he has grace to
stock a Confession or two, and he puts forth that little grace, that he has in
his Confession or Petitions, what then; I tell you, God will take care of the
one as well as of the other, the least grain shall not fall to the ground,
because the least grain gives a discovery of an interest in the greatest
relations; thou say surely this is a Man of God, why? O he has a great deal
of grace, and I say as surely, that poor man is a Man of God, why? because he
has a little grace. A Member of Jesus Christ is that man whose grace is
flourishing, Ay, and that man is also a Member of Jesus Christ, whose grace
lies under the ashes, there are no Flamings forth as yet, Ay but, my Friends,
there is a spark under the Embers: I shall likewise open this in these two
Branches.

1. The first is this, Greatest relations do not depend upon the proportions of
the graces of the relations, nay let me tell you, that those relations, that do
discover the greatest intimacy, and bring a Man within the greatest
Blessedness, these do not depend or hang upon the proportion of the graces of
those relations. O, says the Spouse in the Conclusion of the Book of
Canticles, O that thou were as my Brother, that sucked the Breasts of my
Mother. 8. Cant. v. 1. So I may say, it is many times with the Lords People,
they cry out, O that Jesus Christ would reveal himself to me, O he discovers
himself to such and such, O that he were as my Brother! I dare not call him my
Brother, Ay, but though thou dare not call him thy Brother, thou can humbly
hope that thou art his Servant, though thou can not with that Freedom and
fullness of assurance, call him thy Brother; O that he were as my Brother as one
that sucked the Breasts of my Mother! O that I were but in full communion with
him! Well it may be thou art not yet in that fullness of Freedom of Spirit, that
thou can not as yet call him thy Brother, yet thou may do so, though thou
have but little grace: Relations do not bear proportions according to the
proportion of the graces of the related, and therefore it is, that God will
look after the least grain of grace, because the least is his. It is my little
grain of Corn, this is my little grace, this is my little Faith, and my little
Love, and this is my little meekness; the least degree of grace does discover
an interest in the greatest relations, and greatness of relation, does not bear
proportion to greatness of enjoyment.

2 Secondly, That those relations that a Christian stands in unto God,
immediately up-his entering into the relation, all the blessings of the relation
lie before him: Now the least degree of grace does admit to the Relation; and
now being admitted, all the blessedness, all the glory, all the sweetness, all
the comfort, all the happiness of the Relation, lie before this man, as well as
before him that has the greatest degree of grace. You will say, what is the
glory of the Relation? Nay what glory is there that is not in any relation that
belongs to the Gospel? In every Gospel Relation there is a fullness of glory,
and a fullness of Blessedness. Now, no sooner is a poor creature admitted into
the Relation, but all the blessedness of the Relation ly's open before him; And
the least degree of grace admits into the Relation. The Lord does not deal with
his people that are related to him as we do, first bring him into one Relation,
and then into another Relation, and then into a higher Relation, and then into
a nearer Relation. As now many times men bring one first into their Family,
take him up it may be by the high way, or a neighbors Child, and make him a
poor and mean Servant in the Family, it may be, a Scullion, or the like; and
then take him up to a higher place, after that to a higher place, till at
length he come to make him his Child, and not only his Child, but his heir: But
now I pray friends consider, God, does not deal so with his people, but he
takes them into all Relations at one and the same time. A Christian, that has
the least degree of grace, stands in the highest Relations to God: God does not
make him first a Servant, and then a Steward, and afterward adopt him, and
afterward state all his Glory and Kingdom upon him; but at one and the same
time, when grace is first wrought, then all the Relations of the Gospel lie
open together to the least degree of grace: If a Son then an Heir. The Apostle
concludes that, and that is right Gospel arguing, and that upon the least
degree of grace; if a Servant, then a Friend; if a Friend then a Son; and if a
Son, then an Heir, a joint Heir with Jesus Christ. Gospel Relations bear not
proportion to the graces of the Relation, they are not more or less as grace in
us is more or less; No but one manat the same time, that has theleast degree
of grace, all the Relations of the Gospel lie open before him. Though you have
not as much grace as others, yet there are as many Relations, and as great
Relations between God and you, as others, yea as there are between God and the
best Christian in the world; and, let me tell you, the meanest Christian in our
days has all the Relations of the Gospel, lying open to him, as well as the
best Disciples that ever Jesus Christ had either in or after his days; and if
so, my friends, then no wonder why God is so concerned about a little grace,
Yet, says he, shall not the least grain fall upon the Earth.

5. The least degree of grace bears an essential likeness to Christ, as well as
the greatest degree of grace does. I say there is an essential resemblance in
the least degree of grace unto Christ as well as in the greatest; every spark
of fire is true fire as well as the greatest fire in your Chimney. I tell you,
Christians, the least grace is Christ within you, there is the whole Image of
Christ, there is the love of Christ, and there is the holiness of Christ, and
there is the meekness of Christ, and there is the lowliness of Christ; there is
in that little an Essential Resemblance of Christ, therefore no wonder that God
takes so much care for and about a little grace

Then O do you make much of a little duty; God makes a great account of a
little grace, do you make a great account of a little duty. If you have but
little breathings of heart after God and Christ, Jesus in your heart, do not
deny it, do not say, It is not likely that these should be regarded; why?
because they are but some weak faint breathings: You see that God looks after a
little grace in your hearts and makes a great account of it; Therefore, I
beseech you, having received a little from God make you great account of that
little. I will but urge this with these two considerations.

1. Seeing God makes a great account of that little that thou have, Let me only
ask you this Question, Whether it be not better for you to follow the example
of God, than to follow the Devils example? The devil would have you to make
nothing of a little, God and Jesus Christ would have you to make great account
of a little; Satan's design is, when he cannot hinder the work, to ecclypse the
glory of the work that is wrought, and to abate and allay the beauty of the
work that is wrought, that is Satan's business and design. I pray, friends,
consider, you hear it is Gods way to make much of a little, Now, whether will
you fall in with God or with Satan? He would make little of a great deal of
grace, yea he would make nothing of it; but God he makes a great deal of a
little grace. O, Sirs, do you therefore in imitation of God and Christ Jesus,
do you also make much of it; you see God has made so much of it that he has
made it the peculiar, special matter of a distinguishing promise; well, says
he, though I will command and sift the House of Israel, and I will turn them
out of one sieve into another, yet, says he, shall not the least grain fall to
the earth. I will not lose the least grain, no not for all the Assyrians, for
all the Babylonians, no not for all the Devils in Hell, I will not lose the
least grain. God has other manner of thoughts of the least work of grace thou
have, than I am persuaded most Christians have of the greatest works of grace.

2. Truly you do not know how soon this little may grow up to a great deal. It
is the hypothesis of our Lords arguing, says he, since thou have not been
faithful in a little, who will trust thee with more? So I say, on the other
hand, if thou be faithful with a little, if thou admire the condescension of
the grace of God, to work a little grace in thy heart, how do thou know but
God may the next Sermon work a great deal more? Jesus Christ may come the next
opportunity with a full hand, and empty his hand into thy heart; thou do not
know how soon this little may be made a great deal. If you be faithful in the
improvement of a little, if you be thankful for a little, if you do make great
account, as God does, of a little, then grace will soon add more, You know not
how suddenly you may be surprised with more. I am verily persuaded, that one
great reason why men grow no more in grace, is, because they despise their
little so much: One great reason why God gives no more grace is, because they
despise their little grace so much. Christians, I beseech you, if you have but
a little, O make great account of that little, if there be but a grain; It is
one of Gods grains cast in by Jesus Christ and the Spirit of Jesus Christ, into
thy heart, make much of it, because thou do not know how soon more may come,
Says Christ, Take the Talent from him that did not use it; and give it to him
that had five even so the Lord may come and say, here is a poor creature, his
heart leapt within him for Joy because I have given him a little grace, this
Soul is always blessing me for a little, I will give him more. Truly,
Christians, a high esteem of a little grace is much becoming the best
Christians; if God has given you but a little, I am sure that little is more
than you deserve; the smallest things of the Gospel, should be spent with a
crying grace, grace. Therefore my friends in observance of God, and in
imitation of the Lord Jesus Christ, I pray set your eye and your heart upon
that little, let there be a great value and esteem put upon your little grace,
because you see here the Lord does make it the matter of a special promise:
Under all shakings, when great storms are up, and when wrath has hold of the
the Sieve and shakes it in the hand of the malicious Assyrian, or of the
malicious Babylonian, when the wrath of God shakes the Sieve, then the heart of
God is upon the least grain, and the hand of God will never suffer the least
grain to fall. For Lo, says he, I will command and sift the house of Israel in
the sieve of the Nations, as Corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least
Grain fall upon the Earth.

SERMON VI.
Amos 9. Verse 9. For Lo, I will command, and I will sift the House of Israel
among all Nations, like as Corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least
grain fall upon the Earth.


THE dependence of this Subject upon my former Discourses, and the concurrence
of it in the same general design, I cleared in the morning. As an Introduction
to this Evenings Discourse, I would only observe these two things from the
Context to you; and the first is, That it is a gracious Promise, succeeding the
dreadfulest threatenings; Israel had offended, and the Lord of Israel takes to
the offense; and therefore in a more than ordinary manner, the whole concern of
the threatening is ushered in by the Prophet, in verse 1. I saw (says he) the
Lord standing upon the Altar, and he says, Smite the Lintel, smite the Lintel
of the door, that the posts may shake; a concussion, a shaking of the
Institutions, and the Ordinances of the Temple, seems to usher in this
Prophecy; and what the smiting of the Lintel of the door that the Prophet
observes is, you may see in the succeeding verses; and the Lord's resolve is,
to take them, however they did attempt to secure themselves from him; though
they dig into Hell, thence shall my hand take them; though they climb up to
Heaven, I will bring them down. Sirs, There Is no escaping of the hand of God,
when once the Lord stands upon the Altar, and commands the Lintel of the door
to be smitten; he gives the reason and the account of that in the next verses;
I shall not intermeddle with them; but yet, notwithstanding all that he had
threatened against his People, he comes in with this promise; Yet (says he)
shall not the least grain fall upon the Earth. I the Lord (says he) will
command, and I will sift the house of Israel, and it shall be with the Sieve of
the Nations that hate the house of Israel. Lord (might Israel say) here is
nothing but desolation; yea, (says God) look to it; yet of all the Tribes of
Israel, while the Nations are sifting the House of Israel: I will look after
the grain; there shall not one grain fall to the ground, no not the least.

Another thing I would observe, That this seems to have an aspect upon
Gospel Times: Lo, (says he) I will command, and yet shall not the least grain
fall to the ground. Waving other considerations, I will only observe this one
thing, That it is at that time, when God will raise up the Tabernacle of David;
God throws his People by shovel-fulls as it were, into the Sieve of the
Nations: It is not the Chaff, but the Corn that the Nations envy: It is not
those that are formal and superstitious Professors, but the serious practical
Christians that are the hated; yet (says God) as to them, there shall not a
grain fall to the Earth; and I ground this Observation upon a passage in the
11th verse. In that day (says he) will I raise up the Tabernacle of David that
is fallen. When will God show this distinguishing kindness? and when will God
glorify himself in fulfilling the Promise? in that day when God will raise up
the Tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches; in that day.
I pray you turn to Acts 15. v. 16. and there you shall see, James he is there
vindicating some practices of Peter, in going to, and also in communicating
with the Gentiles; Simon (says he) has declared, how that God did at first
visit the Gentiles: And to this agree the words of the Prophet; Afterward I
will return, and build the Tabernacle of David that is fallen: So that here is
an Old Testament Promise fulfilled, not only upon the Jews, but upon the
Gentiles. I have not time to open the mystery that is comprised in that, only I
think it is the Gospel-Government of Christ; and at that time will the Lord
take especial care of the least grain, that it shall not fall upon the Earth:
Though he commands, and though he sifts the house of Israel according to the
Spirit in the Sieve of the Nations, yet then shall not the least grain fall to
the Earth.

This seems to me to be the true import of the Context; and I hope these
Observations will make way for the Application of what I have delivered, and
what I shall deliver to be the Cases of Christians, and the Case of the Church
of Christ in all their circumstances.

That which I laid as the foundation of the whole Discourse was this, That even
in the worst of times, God will take especial care of the least of Christians.
The meanest Christians are the especial care, and the charge of God, and
Christ, when the generality of Christians are exposed to the greatest danger:
Says God, I will command, and I will sift, Why, yet shall not the least grain
fall to the Earth.

Diverse Reasons I gave you, the fifth was this;

V. That the Lord will take special care of the meanest Christians in the
hazardousest times, because, the meanest Christian has the perfect Image of
Christ upon him; there is not indeed the perfection of degrees, yet there is a
perfect Image; they are not come to their pitch of Christianity, yet they have
all attained unto their essential being of their Christianity; every little
Grace is a full representative of Christ; the least grain of Wheat is truly
Wheat, as well as the fullest, and the most pregnant grain is; there is the
nature of Christ, and the nature of a Christian, in the meanest Christian that
breaths upon the face of the Earth, (as he was in the form of a Servant) and I
pray observe, that the express Image of his Fathers glory (as you have it) Heb.
1. The brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person was upon
him; Who is this? why the Man Jesus, he that was the Lord's Servant, and the
Servant to Rulers, and that took upon him the form of a Servant; he at that
time was the express Image of his Person, the brightness of his Glory; truly,
my Friends, so I may say, take a poor Christian under the greatest
disadvantages, suppose driven into the Wilderness, tempted of the Devil, you
may look on him and say, There goes one that is the express Image of Jesus
Christ, and another that has diverse temptations and afflictions surrounding
him, you may say, there lies one upon his Bed, there sits another in his
Corner, that is the express Image of Jesus; Ay but he has but a little grace;
well, the whole Image of Christ is in that little. Those that are well
instructed in drawing and limning, they can as well in a little compass draw
the perfect Effigies, as they can in a great compass. Truly my Friends, though
your limbs be not so big (as I may say) though your countenances be not so big,
your graces be not so big, yet here is a true representation of Christ; where is
the least grace there is a full and express Image of the Person of the Lord
Jesus Christ; and therefore the Lord will take care, because of the Image. Says
Christ, when they brought him by an ensnaring question, to give them a resolve,
why show me the penny, whose is the Image? So my Friends, if you bring your own
hearts to the Lord, the Lord will ask the question, Whose Image, whose
Superscription is it? and will answer himself, it is my own; it is my own
Superscription and Image, though it be in so small a compass. Christians, I
would have you consider, that God and Christ have great tenderness for things
without proportion; though you have not so much Faith, nor so much Love, nor so
much Humility, yet if you have true Faith, true Love, true Humility, God and
Christ will know his own; God will know his own Image, though drawn in the
least compass. I will open this in these two branches. that I might make
manifest the rationality of this proceed of the Lord; and the first is this;

1. That there is no part of the Image of Christ in any heart, but that does
discover the whole Image to be really and indeed in the heart. And my reason
is, because God creates nothing imperfectly neither in the New, nor in the Old
Creation, nothing imperfectly; he takes Adam's Rib out of his side, and he
makes a perfect Image, and representation of that; and he takes up Clay or Red
Earth, and he makes a perfect man of that. Truly Christians, let me tell you,
that all monstrous conceptions are the issues (either on the one hand or the
other) of the degeneracy, and not the products of the Creation. So here, where
God has created the likeness of Christ, in love there is (you may conclude)
the likeness of Christ in all other Excellencies; the Lord does not use to turn
the new Creatures out of his hand by peece-meal, or by parts, now a little, and
then a little, but the whole is where there is an essential part; You shall
find all along, our Lord Jesus Christ owning these principles in his carriage
toward his Disciples, and toward them with whom he did converse; you can
hardly discover, in his own disciples, so much (while he lived) as to make up a
distinct entire Christian as to parts in equal proportion, and yet
notwithstanding though Christ observed it, yet you shall find he owned them as
his own, and called them his own, Joh. 13. Having loved his own, he loved them
to the end. What think you? Was Peter like Christ? And did he express any thing
of the Image of Christ? when he knew that his Lord could have commanded Angels
for his security, yet he truckles at the accusation of a silly Girl.

2. That little grace that is in us, does discover a whole right to all Christ,
and to all the Consequences of every thing, that in any Capacity Jesus Christ
did or suffered. God does not stand with Christians (as I may say) upon such
punctilioes as one Christian stands with another upon; God is wise, and knows
that any thing of his Son, is a Gospel-evidence of full right; And therefore it
is because of his evidence, that the Lord will look after and concern himself
in the least grain. And that is the fifth reason.

I will but add one more, for I would not prevent my self in the Application,
and that is this.

VI. The least grain of grace is as really and as truly, new covenant grace, as
the greatest degree of grace is, or can be supposed to be. Or if you will, the
least Christian that has but true grace, is as really a New Covenant
Christian, as he that has most grace, and therefore God will look after him;
When he is sifting Israel in the sieve of the Nations, he will look after the
grain.

I pray do but observe these two things for the clearing of this;

1. When the Lord Covenants to write his Laws, he does not covenant to write
them all in the same proportion, in all hearts in the same proportion; But this
is the Covenant, I will write my Laws; and the proportion that is to be
written, in the hearts of the Sons, and Daughters of men, is left to his
pleasure to be done. Many are ready to question that little they have, because
they have not so much as another; pray, when did God engage himself to
proportion thy grace to thy Brothers? yet though it be in a lesser proportion,
it is as truly New Covenant writing, as the writing of a greater. Do but turn
if you please to that passage in the New Testament, Heb. 8. ver. 8. Behold the
days come that I will make a New Covenant, with the House of Israel, and the
House of Judah; not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers.
etc. But ver. 10. I will put my Laws into their minds, and write them in their
hearts. Has every one the same proportion of Gospel-knowledge in their head?
No, they have not, yet every one has a saving proportion. So as to grace in
the heart, you shall find there is a difference in the proportion, though not
in the nature of the thing that is proportioned; I will write my Laws in their
hearts. Here Is enough. And when a New Covenant promise has taken place in the
heart, the dreadfullest Old-Covenant threatening has nothing to do there. It
may be he has written but some rough Character in thy heart, at the present,
why that is enough to exempt thee from all the Old Covenant proceeds, and to
give thee right to all the New Covenant Blessings; and if you cannot see it so
well, God I am sure can.

2. But the least grace that God has created in the heart, has the most
Substantial promises made to it. I pray Christians, is it not a more
Substantial promise, that you shall be eternally filled with joy in the house
of your Father in the Kingdom of glory, than to be filled with joy while you
live here at the footstool? for my part I think if I should never have
comfortable day while I live, it would be a great happiness, to have secret
assurance that I shall have an eternal day of Blessedness; it may be my
condition may be laid open to temptation, and it may be thine, and thou may
be yet tried with a Trial that is nearer a fiery Trial, than any yet thou have
been laid under; but what then? (Says the Apostle) (that I think had his share
in Sufferings,) These light afflictions work for us a far more exceeding, and
eternal weight of glory. Now upon this account it is, that God looks after the
least grain. I shall pass to the improvement, and deliver my sense as to the
improveableness of it, in these five or six practical Conclusions.

Israel take care that the least grain do not fall to the Earth? Then let every
one look upon themselves as greatly concerned to be made Gods grains. My
meaning is, to get grace though it be never so little. Satan has two designs
by way of dilemma upon you; if you escape the one, a thousand to one, but you
fall into the other, and what are these designs of Satan? truly the design lies
here; What, should thou be content with so little, when others that have
been more sinful have more? despise and slight the little, because it is not
likely thou should ever attain to much: and how does he manage it? Thou art
old (he says to one) and therefore it is not likely thou should live long,
and therefore can not expect to grow; if thou had begun betimes, it had
been something like. And to those that are young; all in good time yet: See but
such a one, that lived a long time in the enjoyment of his pleasure, and God
looked upon him, and see how he grew up to a great deal of grace in a little
time; here is the dilemma now, between the one and the other. My friends, I
beseech you therefore fix upon a little grace. I will open this in two Branches.

1. In the midst of his severest dispensations God will find out a little
grace. It may be you will say, will God look upon me? If I were as David (may
the poor Soul say) and (may another say) if I were as the Angel of the Lord,
the Lord would find me out; nay, stay proud Soul; it is enough if thou be
but weak, and let grace take it is own time to make thee as David, the weak
shall be as David and David as the Angel of the Lord. Friends, I would beg of
you, that you would not live without a little grace, and that you would live
cheerfully with a little grace until God give more.

2. The Second is this. That a little in being is as much as all in reversion.
Art thou but a small grain? Pray who made thee a small grain? Has not he also
the residue of the Spirit? Cannot he make the dry Tree to grow out of the dry
ground? Cannot he make a little one a Nation? Surely he has the residue of the
Spirit. Let me tell you, God never begins with great things, in the most
remarkable proceeds of grace that are by past, and that are to come; but he
always begins with a little, and so glorifies both his grace, and his power in
making that little greater than all. Therefore pray Sirs, let me persuade you,
you that are young, and you that are old, if you canhope for a great deal, give
God no rest, till he give you a little; till he make you a little Christian;
give him no rest. Oh bring your Children, and cry, Lord, a little grace for
this Child; Oh bring your Servants, and cry, Lord, a little grace for this
Servant; Oh cast your hearts at the Footstool of the Throne, and say, Lord a
little grace for this graceless heart, if it be but a little, Lord. As thy Soul
lives (says the Woman to the Prophet) I have but a little meal in the barrel,
and a little oil in the cruse; What then (says the Prophet) come and make me a
Cake. So I say my friends, as the Lord lives, if he has created a little
grace, he will create more; and therefore my Friends, bless God for a little,
and be not contented without a little.

Then you may see the vast differences that are between the righteous and the
wicked, and that in God's providential proceedings. I will throw (says he) the
Tribes of Israel into the Sieve of the Nations; and what then? let the Chaff
go; let the Chaff go; let the heads that have not grain in them fall to the
Earth; Oh (says he) but the least grain shall not fall to the Earth; you have
God's Word for it. The great difference that God makes in his general Judgments
between the righteous and the wicked.

I will open this in two Branches.

1. There is more that God likes, in the least grain, than there is in heaps of
the Chaff of the wicked; there is more that God likes, in the heart of the
poorest Christian, than God can discover in a whole Nation of Hypocrites put
together: No, there is not so much as a poor Christian has, that has but a
little grace; cast them into the balance, and they are altogether lighter than
vanity. When it came to the pinch indeed, (says God,) I gave Ethiopia for
thee, and Seba for thee; So I tell you my Friends, that God makes no account of
the chaff, though it be never so bulky; but he makes much of a little grain;
the least grain shall not fall to the Earth, let the chaff go whither it will;
burn it with unquenchable fire (says the Lord) the least grain shall not fall
away, but the bulky chaff shall be burnt with unquenchable fire.

2. That little that a Christian has, can do more with God, and for God, than
all that others have can do. It may be such a one has great parts, well, and
what does he do for God? and another, he has a great bulk of gifts, what can
he do for God? What can he do? Truly all he can do is only this, to dissemble
with God, and to dishonor God. The times have been, wherein gifts have been
magnified above grace; and not long since, by many, but what is come of it? See
the providence of God, how they are wheeled about? And now grace is the only
thing that will stand us instead in our day; and all the gifts that all the
professors of England had, cannot do so much as a little grace: it may be you
have a name to live, and profess much; but where is your grace? One says, I am
of Paul, and another I am of Apollos, and what then? Where Is the Image of
Christ? you may be of Paul while you live, and go to Hell when you die; You may
be of Apollos, when you are in the Body, and when you die (for ought I know)
you may be haled to judgment by the Devils in Hell. Such a one, (you say) he
prays, he is a mighty man in Prayer; Sirs, I tell you, I value no more my own
Prayers, that are Prayers of gifts, and there is no more in them; and God is no
more glorified in them, than an empty sound. But a few sighs, and groans, sent
up to Heaven, in a way of grace; I tell you this does more for God, and with
God, than a thousand gifts can do. And if so, pray consider what difference God
makes, between the wicked, and the seed; observe the difference.

Do not trust your selves but God. There are many that trust their own graces
too much, and the grace of God too little; they think they have grace to keep
them. I am sure it is little sign of grace, when that grace does put you off
from betrusting the grace of God. Christians, trust God more, and your selves
less: alas, what can a little do Christians? I pray lay the stress of your
security, upon what God has promised. Yet (says God) there shall not the
least grain fall to the Earth. Here is a promise of free grace, and there
cannot be any thing at all in the grain, to ensue, or to merit this security:
alas Sirs, what is there in our hearts, that has most, that we should talk of
securing our selves? Let him that stands (says the Apostle) take heed lest he
fall. So I may tell you Sirs, our Zeal is no security, our Faith in it self is
no sufficient security: but it is the grace of God that made the promise, that
gives the Christian security in such a time. Such a man was tempted a while
ago, to turn his back upon Jesus Christ; and he has bidden farewell to Jesus
Christ, and is gone; I pray what security have you, that you may not be the
next? is it your graces that keep you? No, no, it is the grace of God that
secures you, and the grace of God that keeps you; and therefore I pray lay more
stress upon that, though you lay less stress upon your own.

I will open this in two Branches.

1. Grace that is in you is but a Stream, from the Fountain of Grace that is in
God; And it is but as the drop of a Bucket unto the fullness of Grace and
Holiness that is in Christ. Who made me (says Cain) my Brothers keeper? when
God asked him where his Brother Abel was: Truly I may say to you, God never made
your own Graces, the sole keepers of your own Souls: Who made them? God did not
I am sure; because our own Graces, without the Grace of God, can never keep our
Souls from the temptations we meet withal; and therefore Sirs, I pray trust a
little more to this God that has promised, yet shall not the least grain fall
to the Earth; not because it is a grain, but because God has promised, that
the least grain shall not fall.

But then, the second thing that I would say is this.

2. Your own Graces, that you have in your own hearts, are easily balanced, by
the wickedness that is in the hearts of your Enemies. And I am sure, they have
more policy, and more power to manage their wickedness against your Grace, than
you have wisdom, or power to manage your Grace against their wickedness. The
Devil has more wickedness in his nature, than you have grace in your nature;
it is top-full of wickedness; I am sure your nature is not top-full of grace.
We wrestle not (says the Apostle) with flesh and blood, but with principalities
and powers. Alas, you are neither principality, nor power in your own grace. Do
but balance your security, and you will easily see the need of trusting to
God, and not to your own grace.

Oh then, How does it concern every one to know, whether they have a grain of
grace or no. Truly my Friends, I do think it is a matter of very great
concernment, that you should be, and we should be all fully satisfied in this.
The least grain shall not fall, ay but an Ear that has no grain in it may
fall; the least grain shall not fall, ay but the Chaff God casts away; he will
thoroughly purge his floor, and the Chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.
Now my Friends, I am not enquiring after your profession of grace, but the
grace that is the matter of your profession; neither am I going about to
discover a great deal of grace, full and florid grace, but my business is to
enquire after the least grace, and to discover unto you whether you have
attained unto that blessedness, to be one of God's grains, the grain that is
here in the Promise; though it be one of the least of the grains? I would only
say this one thing before I descend to particulars: Do not say you have grace
enough, and therefore you are not concerned in the enquiry; I am sure it is no
sign of a great deal of grace, to be shie of the discovery of a little grace;
and a great deal of grace may be hid, when God chooses the discovery by a little.

But you will say, Oh that I were but one of the least of these grains of God!
Oh that I were but one of those that God has sanctified, though I were the
least of all his Saints that he has sanctified! Well my Friends, give me leave
and I will open this to you in these two particulars. Would you know whether
you be in the compass of the least of these grains?

1. Then in the first place, I pray inquire, how stands your hearts affected?
how stand your hearts affected to more? and to those in whom there is more?
Those that have a natural life, they naturally incline to manifest their love,
and their natural kindness to those that are allied: The Child is naturally
inclined to those that are allied; Nature's dictates determine the heart in
that case; so does New Nature incline to the same. How stands your hearts
affected to those that have a great deal of grace? How stand you affected to
him that has the Treasures of all grace? He that has a little, loves Jesus
Christ; he loves Christ as the Treasury of more, though Christ at present
suspends the giving of more; though he sees but little in his own heart, yet he
cannot but love Jesus Christ, that has the dispose of all. It is one sign of
true grace, that it is always inclined to have more. Now Sirs, open your
hearts for this word; How stand they affected to Christ? How stand they
affected to such Ordinances, where God does most ordinarily work grace? Says
God to Ezekiel, Thou art to this people as a lovely Song; O poor people! There
are many more pleased with the gifts of the Minister, than the grace of the
Minister. Sirs, I pray consider, How stand your hearts affected to grace? He
that has a little, would not lose a little: A Child tends naturally to have
life continued, and to have more: So I say, How stand your hearts affected to
living Ordinances? a living Mediator? a Mediator that has all grace? Let me
tell you; if you do not love Christ as the Treasury of grace, I suspect your
grace; if you do love Jesus Christ, because it has pleased the Father that in
him all fullness of grace should dwell; I do not question your grace; for it is
grace to love Christ as the Lord Treasurer of all grace.

2. Would you know whether you be one of these grains that God takes such
special care about? Then I pray do but enquire, and consider with your selves,
what thing it is that your hearts, and that your affections and minds are
mostly working toward? My meaning is plainly this; and I will illustrate it by
this expression; He that has no grace, can be contented to be what he is, so
his Conscience will be quiet; but he that has a little grace, cannot be
content with a silent Conscience, without more grace: Many there are that are
greatly concerned about the Peace of their Conscience; O they do not know what
to do! Conscience accuses, the Devil seems to be let loose, the Law comes in,
Threatenings come in, alas, they know not what to do; rise up, they have no
peace; lie down, they have no peace, under Job's circumstances, his very Bed
was a trouble to him. Now my Friends, my business is not to enquire, what
Conscience says, but what your hearts naturally incline to: Do your hearts
naturally incline to more grace? Some there are, can easily be satisfied, if
they do but apprehend they have grace to save them; but a heart that has true
grace, though it be never so little, though it does know it has enough to save
it, cannot be satisfied without it has more: Now Christians, look to your
selves; God help you that you may all of you know, whether you be indeed of
these grains that God has said shall not fall to the Earth.

Then I pray carry and demean your selves as if you were in the hands of God,
as persons that are now under the Lord's Hand, under the Lord's Eye, and under
the Lord's Promise. The Devil has given (as I may say) many a thump at the
Sieve, and yet you are in the Sieve still; you are not on the ground still; and
the powers of the World have given many a shake, and yet you are in the
enjoyment of your Privileges, and Covenant-Relations still, notwithstanding
all the blasts the Devil has raised while God has been sifting his People in
the Sieve of the Nations.

1. Now, would you carry it as you should, that the least grain should not
fall; Then, let me tell you, that it becomes you to eye God, and to glorify
God for all your keeping hitherto. I know (says the Apostle) whom I have
trusted. I pray Sirs, do but acknowledge him, and eye him, who for your sakes,
would trust no body but himself; no, would not trust the Nations, would not
trust any but himself, because he knew his own power. Now Sirs, have you been
kept in an hour of temptation? cry, Grace, grace: Have you been kept in an hour
when the Powers of Darkness have been tossing you about? Is there any fire in
your hearts still, though the Devil has been heaping of Ashes upon you? O
admire the riches of God's grace and tenderness to you! Says God, Not one grain
shall fall. Can you find that Love in your hearts, that was some years ago? Can
you discover that Faith, that you had some while since in the Lord Jesus still
abiding? O Sirs! Admire the Lord who has said, Not one grain shall fall. I
will tell you one thing (which I think is the design of the day) that God is
taking his People off from trusting to their own grace, that they might trust
more to, and acknowledge his grace. Alas, what help is in one poor, little,
light grain? The Nations they are the Sieves, and there is many a terrible
shake given; what is the reason you are still in the Sieve? O Christians!
magnify grace that your hearts are kept upon God: Magnify grace that it is
not with you, as it is with others.

2. I pray friends, if you have but a little; be always before the Throne of
God for the increase of the little. You have but little grace, and it may be if
examined, the least of Gods grains: Blessed be God you have a little grace. But
I tell you, if God has kept you all this while, it is for some good; Sure it
is for some good intent; Some good purpose: I pray Christians do but consider
with your selves; Be not satisfied with what you have, but be always crying to
God, that he would increase your little. Come (says the Prophet) let me see the
Meal in the Barrel, and pour out the Oil; O, my friends, be you always pouring
out your little Oil; Alas, it is but a little grace in the bottom of your
hearts. But be exercising it for more. Come make me a Cake (says the Prophet.)
Come Sirs, do you do something with that little for God, and do you improve
that little, while you are waiting upon God for more. This should be your
carriage. Now Sirs, what say your hearts? will they, or will they not? What
answer must I give to God? He tells you, he will keep the least grain, what
return shall be made to God? Are you willing to return this, that you will not
improve the little? Shall the Lord receive this return from your hearts at this
time? I tell you that Jesus Christ is expecting the answers of your hearts; and
what is the answer of your hearts. You say to me in your heart, I hope, O what
shall we do? How shall we carry it as becomes those that are kept as the
smallest of Gods grains? Now I tell you, you that are the least, it becomes
you to cry mightily to God that you may be more, and that this grain may be
increased with the increase of God, even to an hundred fold; in a little time,
the Lord can (if he please) make it increase so; why is that heart of thine so
backward?

then in these times, in sifting times, in winnowing times, and when the
Nations are the sieve in the Lords hand: Why then Christians, you that are the
Lords grains under the care of Gods Eye, under the protection of Gods hand, and
within the reach of the influence of Gods gracious heart; Do you Keep your
hearts always free and open. Do not think my friends, that sifting times, are
always separating times; Keep as near to God as you can. When God throws you
(as it were) from him, to be sure he will recover you again to him; and
therefore Christians I pray you now, that you would do this; that you would
keep near to God; that is your privilege, and it is also your duty. Keep but
in Gods hands, and you are well enough. Do not you, by reason of your own
Corruptions, start out of Gods way. God has the sieve in his own hand; The
Nation is but a sieve (as I may say) pray, while God would have you there, keep
there, don't step out of the Lords way till the Lord has done all his work.

I pray observe one thing for the opening of it, and that is this; Live by this
principle, let the Lord take his own course with you, to finish his own work
upon you. The Lord he is offended at Israel, and he takes the Rod of his anger
into his hand, and he breaks them, and bruses them: Ay, but there were some in
Israel that did keep in the Lords way; and what then? When the Lord has
accomplished his work upon Mount Sion, why then he will break the Rod. My
friends, do but look upon temptations, and afflictions, you meet withal as
means, and methods, that he purge you with; Is there no chaff hangs upon the
Corn? I believe there is too much; it may be God has a mind to shake thee out
of thy profession, that is, out of confidence in, or lurking under thy
profession for security. Here Is a little chaff hangs, and God has a mind it
shall be burnt, and it sticks very close, and God he will give it another shake
in the Sieve. Why Sirs, let the Lord alone in his own way; He is sifting; Ay
but he will look after the Wheat, while he is sifting; pray Christians, let God
alone. It may be God is trying you this way, it may be God is trying another,
another way; trying a Servant by a Mistress; trying a Parent by a Child, trying
a Child by a Parent, trying a Mistress by a Servant. Why, what is the meaning
of all? Why yet there is a little sticks to the grain. O Sirs, I tell you, God
would I have you all clean, and let God alone in the way of his own proceeds
with you; he will look after the grain, and it is no matte^ ^f the chaff be
burnt.

And now I pray Sirs, having thus stretched forth my hand to you, what is the
return I shall make, to him that sent me? Are you willing to abide in Gods way?
And let God alone in his own way? Christians should be willing that God should
sift, till the grain be clean. You do not take the chaff and the grain, to make
your selves bread of; it is not fit for your use till it be sisted. Well Sirs,
I tell you, there may be a little grain, but God has a mind to sift you a
little more: he will make you fit for his use, before he has done with you.
And therefore let him alone in his way; Does God afflict you? I pray keep in
Gods way, though it be in a way of affliction, though it be in a way of Trial,
do not you leap, or step out of the way of God; No, no, It is a dangerous thing
for a Christian, to be found wandering alone in an evil time. All that I shall
say as the close of the whole is this; You see my Friends, that God commands
the Sieve. Behold (says God) I will command, what will God command? Why I will
command the Assyrian into the use of a sieve, and I will command the Babylonian
into the use of a sieve, and I will command Edom into the use of a sieve; I
will command this Nation, and the other Nation; you see my Friends, what ever
instruments God makes use of, he has a peculiar regard unto the least grace,
and the least Christian; I will command them and I will sift. Christian, the
worst of thy condition is still in the Lords hand: And therefore I pray
Christians upon the review of the whole; considering God has said, that he
will do the business; if God says, I will sift such a one, in the Sieve of
Temptation, I will try him this way; I will sift another with afflictions, I
will try him that way; I pray'e let God alone. Keep your hearts always open to
him; keep in the way of God, and then you will be found inheriting of the
blessing of these Sermons, and it will be said, Lo, though the Lord has sifted
them, yet not one grain is lost. And you may say, Lo, though the Lord is
sifting me in the sieve of the Nations, yet I shall not lose one grain. For
this is his word; I will Command, and I will sift them, in the sieve of the
Nations: As Corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall to
the Earth.

SERMON VII.
Amos 9. Verse 9. For Lo, I will Command and I will sift the House of Israel
among all Nations, as Corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain
fall upon the Earth.


THe words are a reserve of grace, this and the preceding verse are a mixture
of wrath and mercy. The greatest discovery of wrath that ordinarily we meet
withal, and yet the greatest reserve of grace and mercy that ordinarily we meet
withal in the Scripture. The discovery's of wrath I shall only desire a little
to descant upon, says the Prophet in the 8. v. The Eyes of the Lord are upon a
sinful Kingdom; and what then? I will destroy it, says he, from off the face of
the Earth; and at the 9. v. says he, Lo I will command and I will sift the
House of Israel among all Nations. Nations of all Tempers, and Nations of all
Spirits, be they of an Egypttian or of a Babylonian Spirit, be they of an
Edomitish Spirit, or of any Spirit whatsoever, says God, I will sift them among
all Nations. It is as much as if God should say, I will let loose all sorts of
Spirits, that are evil, and afflictive, upon the sinful Kingdom, the House of
Israel; behold, says God, the Eyes of the Lord are upon a sinful Kingdom. I
pray observe;

That your presence with, or your relation, to a Religious People, cannot
secure you from the dreadful threatenings that are denounced against the
Irreligious, by a Holy God. Lo, says he, I will command, etc. And I do not
remember a like passage, upon the like occasion, in the Scripture; I will
command, says he, and I will sift the House of Israel, and the Eyes of the Lord
are upon a sinful Kingdom. Sirs, it is not enough to be with Christians, and to
walk with Christians, except you your selves be Christians; it is not your
being with, or walking with, the Lords People, that can secure you from the
Lords threatenings. But yet notwithstanding the dreadfulness of the threatening,
here is a double reserve of grace; in the 8. v. he concludes with a reserve of
grace, and indeed it is the manner of God, in the Old Testament, to wind up his
dreadful threatenings in the most encouraging promises of absolute grace,
saving, that I will not utterly destroy the House of Jacob, says the Lord. I
will only observe this one thing to you, that whenever you meet with the word
Jacob in Scripture, you may conclude that the Holy Ghost does intend a
discovery both of the Politic, and of the Spiritual weakness of that People,
and when you meet with the word Israel, then it has relation to that name
which the Angel of the Lord gave to Jacob upon his wrestling with him, and it
does import the strength of the People; saving, says he, that I will not
utterly destroy the House of Jacob, though they be never so contemptible,
though never so weak, yet, says he, for all my anger, and for all my
threatenings, for all my Justice and Holiness; as if he had said, yet I will not
utterly destroy the House of Jacob. The like reserve of grace you have in the
words of the Text, yet shall not the least grain fall upon the Earth; though
the Lord seems to cast them out of his hand and out of his care, yet his Heart
works toward them; if there be but, among a heap of Tares, a grain of Wheat,
though it be never so little, if there be but the Seed of God, there is Seminal
Virtue in it, yet, says God, shall not the least grain fall upon the Earth: And
the reason of Gods kindness in general is this, the enmity of the Nations is
against the grains, and the kindness and grace of God does extend unto the
least grain; and therefore notwithstanding the enmity of Hell, and of those
that are spirited by Hell, yet God has said, Lo, I will command and I will
sift, he will command and he will secure, he will secure the least grain, that
it falls not to the Earth. Brethren, you that have attained to greater measures
of grace, think not your selves unconcerned in this word, the time may come you
may see little enough, and those that have most grace, are many times least
sensible.

The observation was this,

That in the most desolating general Common Calamity of professing Nations, God
will look after the least of those that are sincere professors.

It is the least grace in the heart, and the least Christian in the company,
that Gods Eye is upon, and the Lords heart is toward, and the Lords Arm is
about; yet, says he, shall not the least grain fall to the Earth.

I shall proceed to what remains, and that is yet to give you a further account
of the Lords kindness, and of the Lords gracious care of his little ones, in
the most perilous and dangerous times: Temptations are high, persecutions are
high, corruptions are high, yet if there be but the least grace, thy Soul shall
not miscarry. In the further prosecution of this Subject, I shall only commend
to your serious consideration, these four Scripture observations.

1. And the first is this. Therefore the least Christian, that has the least
grace, shall not eternally miscarry and fall to the Earth, when the Chaff and
Tares do: Because that the Lord, in the manage of the dispensations of his
providence, will so deal with Christians, as he dealt with Christ, and let me
tell you that Christ and the Spirit of Christ, are also consenting to, and
concerned in, this resolve. What a poor thing was it, that all the Roman
Empire, and all the state of the People of Israel, the Jews, should be
concerned against a Carpenters Son, and yet they could not carry it he, singles
out only a few Fishermen for his Companions, and yet they were not able, with
all their interest, and with all their learning, to bring any thing to any
period against their attempts. The Prophet Isaiah, in the 53 Chap. of his
prophecy, gives us an account of the first sense of the People of Israel, which
was the grand practical principle of theirs, and the Romans resolve against him
the 2 verse: For he shall grow up as a tender plant, as a root out of a dry
ground, he has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no
beauty that we should desire him Is this the Messiah (as if they should say)
which is the matter of all the promises and prophecies, of the Old Testament?
No this is not he; is not this, say they (when he did appear) the Carpenters
Son, the poor Child of the contemptible Carpenter, whose Father and Mother is
with us? We know him well enough, and yet notwithstanding all the meanness of
his descent and the unlikelyness of his producing his designed success in the
World, yet he carries on all before him; whilst he was living the Pharisees
themselves and the Scribes were afraid of him: If we let this man alone, say
they, the World will run after him, and the Romans will come, and take away our
Nation from us. Such a secret sense they had of the success, and a secret power
that did begin to appear, and would further appear in the management of his
ministry. Now, my friends, we grow up all as roots out of dry ground. Take a
willow, and plant it upon the top of a mountain, which is a dry sandy ground,
it is not like to grow there; so take a Christian that has but a little light,
and but a little grace, plant him in a wicked family, amongst a company of
wicked Neighbors, you will think he is not likely to make any thing of his
Christianity there: Father is against him, Mother against him, Brethren against
him, every man's hand is against the new Professor, and yet he grows. And this
Root that is growing out of a dry ground has many a pluck, Satan gives a pluck
at it, and the World gives a pluck at it, and yet the root continues in the
ground, and this root that is thus planted in this dry ground, an unlikely
place to produce any thing to any Spiritual or eternal purpose, goes on its
way; why surely, my friends, this must needs discover a great reason why
Christians that are unlikely to be secured, unlikely to live, why they should
both live and be secured in their life; why? Because the Lord Jesus Christ was
so dealt withal. I shall give you two illustrations of this.

1. And the first is this: It is the general design of the Gospel, that all
things should be so carried on, and managed, that it might be to the
advancement of free grace: To cut off, as the Apostle says, all occasion of
boasting in our selves, for if we do consider what we have to boast of, alas,
you that are strong you were as weak as others, you that have your Hearts, as
you apprehend now, full of grace, they were once as empty as others, and you
that are now, as it were, in full communion and fellow ship with God, you once
stood at an equal distance with others, what have you to boast of? When the
Lord would cut off all occasion of boasting from the People of Israel, says he,
thy Father was an Ammorite, and thy Mother an Hitite, and thy Birth and
Nativity were of the Land of Canaan, here I pray consider in the sequel of this
discourse of his, in the 16 of Ezekiel, the general State of every professor
from first to last, I found thee in thy Blood, says he, cast out to the
loathing of thy Person. What could be presaged or presumed upon as to this but
only death, nothing but misery and ruin could atend thee, I found thee in thy
Blood, as a Child new born, cast out into the open Field, exposed unto the
varieties of Weather, says God, so I found thee. Thy Father was an Ammorite and
thy Mother an Hitite; well what then? see the design of God v. 8, when I passed
by thee and looked upon thee, behold thy time was a time of love: As if the
Lord should say, and would have us to understand, that all his dealings with us
should be acknowledged by us to be the Issues of his free grace, afterward you
shall find how the Lord decked her with Ornaments, and clothed her with
broidered work, and shod her with badgers Skins, and girded her about with fine
linen from the 10 verse, and so on. He goes on to discover her beauty and yet
she was found in her blood cast out to the loathing of her person, and yet the
Lord made her so beautiful and so comely that there was none to be compared to
her, and the same of her beauty went forth throughout all the Earth. Truly,
Christians, the Lord has discovered the same thing to be his design in the new
Testament, as the Apostle says in his Epistle to the Romans, he concludes them
all under sin; all Children of wrath, all in their blood, all polluted and what
is the design? that no flesh, says he, may glory in his sight. So that you see
here, Christians, that the Lords design is to make us conformable to Christ and
he will take care of us and about us in our low condition, and this is his
design that neither those that are weak Christians, nor those that are strong
Christians, should ascribe any thing to themselves but that we should cry,
grace, grace, to every little work of grace and to the smallest gifts of grace.

2. The Lord will take care of the meanest grace, because he will deal by them
as he dealt by his own Son that so their hearts may be more united unto Christ,
That their hearts may be more encouraged under all their Spiritual
discouragements to fall in with Christ. Why thou say alas, I am a dry Tree,
and it may be thou have been so these many years, and thou cryest out, O this
wilderness heart of mine! O this barren heart of mine; I can see nothing at all
in it, but every temptation runs me down, every body tramples upon me. Why it
was so with Christ, as to his worldly Adversaries, though not so as to his
Spiritual Adversaries; but, my friends, here lay the design of God concerning
you, that you also may be encouraged to come to Christ who was looked upon as
the least grain in all Gods. Sieve, He grew, as I observed, as a root out of a
dry ground, he was despised of the nations, and he was abhorred of the people,
that is, as he was considered under the notion of a Messiah or Mediator: so I
say the Lord Christ was despised. Well it may be so are you despised and
discouraged, and the Lord has a good end in permissive providence, and in
present positive providence about your littleness, and about your
despisedness; the Lord has a good end in it, and what is the end of the Lord
but to bring you nearer unto the Lord Jesus Christ? Why, Christians, let me
tell you, the meanest of you may say in some sense, Lord, thou were even as we
are the despised of the nations, thou wast abhorred of the people even as we
are, thou were tempted as we are. And I will but only add one thing more, that
God exposed his Son to greater servitude then ever he did, or will, or can,
expose any Christian to, than what Christ himself was exposed to; There is not
a meaner service, though honorable in its self, there is not a meaner
condition that any Christian can be exposed to: So that you may observe from
hence the meaning of that expression that he learned obedience, that is, he
learned a Gospel carriage by the things that he suffered, as you have it in the
5 Heb. 8. A Gospel carriage, how, and to whom? truly, friends, a Gospel
carriage to the meanest and poorest of Gospel Christians. This is the advantage
of all that I have said in the opening of this, that the meanest Christian may
look upon Christ as once in a meaner condition than himself; and yet he may
look upon Christ, notwithstanding the meanness of his condition as to
externals, as under a present sense and an overruleing engagment to look after
and also to receive them that are so mean.

2. The second reason why the Lord will not suffer the least grain, or the
Christian that has the least grace, to miscarry, notwithstanding all its
shakings and siftings, though in the sieve of the Nations, is, because the Lord
has taken, under both Testaments, a peculiar and primary cognizance of those
that are least in grace: there is none that lie nearer the Heart and Bosom of
God and Christ, then those that are new born. I shall open it in general, and
then illustrate it in two particulars. In general, I will only turn you to one
passage in the Prophecy of Isaiah, in the 40. Chap. 11. v. There you have the
Lord declaring his sense, and Prophesying what should be his Sons carriage to
his People, he shall feed his flock like a Shepherd. Ay, but there are Lambs,
and those that are new fallen Lambs, that are weak, that cannot go, that want
cherishing, that they are fallen in a stormy day, that is, as I conceive,
Christians begotten under Persecution for Christianity's sake, young ones not
in respect of their natural but their Spiritual Birth, what shall become of
them. The flocks are better able to bear the busle of the wind and weather and
storms, but what shall become of the lambs? Why, says he, he shall gather the
lambs with his arm, and carry them in his Bosom, and shall gently lead those
that are with young, you shall find the like care expressed by our Lord after
his resurrection, John 21.15. v. and when they had dined Jesus said to Simon
Peter, Simon Son of Jonas love thou me more then these? He says unto him,
yea Lord thou know that I love thee, he does not say if thou love me, then
go and die for me, then go and renounce thy forswearing of me, he does not say
if thou love me go and expose thy self to all hazzards for my names sake, but
the first thing that he fixes upon as the manifestation of his love to him is,
the feeding of his lambs: As if the meanest and the weakest were more the care
of Christ, and nearer the heart of Christ, than the sheep, which afterward he
is commanded to feed; if thou love me, feed my lambs. O Christians, the great
care and the great provision that is made in both Testaments, and the great
injunctions that are laid upon those that are concerned in the administration
of both Testaments, is, to look after the meanest Christians, which must needs
discover this great truth, that the meanest Christian, that is a Christian
indeed, shall not miscarry, but I shall open this further to you in two branches

1. That the least grace in the least Christian is the product of the greatest
grace that works in the Blessed Trinity. There is nothing in the least
Christian, but the great and infinite grace of the Blessed Trinity concurred to
the producing of it. This I would only illustrate to you by a passage of our
Lord in Matthew. 13. v. 31. where he compares the Kingdom of Heaven to a grain of
mustard seed, why what is the Kingdom of Heaven but the Administration of the
Gospel, according to the Eternal Counsels of God, that are past in Heaven? Now,
says he, The Kingdom of Heaven is as a grain of mustard seed. Why but Lord,
might they say, here is a grain that has brought forth and spread abundantly,
this is like the Kingdom of Heaven indeed; ay but says he, the little grain
though it be the least of all grains, is a fit similitude and comparison for
the Kingdom of Heaven; To what shall I liken the Kingdom of Heaven? The Kingdom
of Heaven, says he, is like a grain of mustardseed, which a man took and sowed
in his field: So that there is the whole resemblance of the Kingdom of Heaven,
even in a little grain, as soon as ever it is sown, as much as when it is in
its greatest flourish, after its full growth, there is a real and a
comprehensive resemblance of it in the least seed of grace, that is sown in thy
heart, there is the Grace of the Kingdom manifested in thee; the Righteousness
of the Kingdom is manifested in thee; The offices of all persons concerned in
the Kingdom, they are all manifested in thee, Jesus Christ's mediation, and the
Spirits Sanctification, and the Fathers Justification, these are all manifested
upon the least work of grace that is wrought in thee: I tell you, there is a
substantial manifestation of all the blessednesses of the Kingdom of Heaven, in
the least work of grace that is wrought upon any Heart.

2. The least work of grace, upon the Heart of the least Christian, is a
manifestation, not only of the Kingdom of Heaven, but a real demonstration of
the Kingdom of Glory. A demonstration a priori, as they call it, a
demonstration of that which is antecedent, or anantecedent demonstration, of
the Kingdom of Glory, as well as the greatest flourishes of grace. I pray,
Christians, consider, you that are young in grace, you have a demonstration in
you, an antecedent demonstration of the Kingdom of Glory, I pray what is the
Kingdom of Glory, but the flourish of that love, that I have now wrought in me,
in the Kingdom of grace? It is the increase of my likeness to God, and to Jesus
Christ in Heaven, that is now begun in me, this is the Kingdom of Glory. Now
this little work of grace is an antecedent demonstration of an incomprehensible
weight of Glory that is to be put upon the People of God, when they come in
Heaven, and this you may see evidenced in the parable, that I last mentioned,
and in the other parables, that our Lord Jesus Christ does make use of.

3. A Third Proposition is this, That the greatest and dreadfullest threatenings
are denounced against discouraging carriages toward those that have least
grace, as well as toward those that have greatest: Nay let me also tell you
this, that although they themselves be under the tokens of Gods displeasure,
yet their Relation to God does heightenthem, as aggravations of their enemies
carriage toward them. I find not a greater threatening ever came out of the
mouth of Christ Jesus, when he was on Earth, then this, It were better, says
he, for that man that he had a Millstone hanged about his neck, and he cast into
the midst of the Sea, then he should offend one of these little ones that
believes on me, he speaks not of little ones as to nature, but of little ones
as to grace. The design of the Jews was to lay stumbling blocks before the
little ones, that is, those that had a little love to Christ, those that had a
little Faith on Christ, those whose hearts were engaged by that little fire of
grace that was in them, to follow the Lord Jesus Christ. Says Christ, If any
man does offend one of these little ones, it were better for him that a
Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the midst of the Sea. But
I shall open this likewise in these two branches.

1. Gods severest execution of threatenings takes its rise from the adversaries
carriage toward the least of those that belong to him: As for instance, you
know God threatened that he would have perpetual War with Amaleck, and why with
Ameleck more then with Moab, or with Edom, or the other Nations that gave
disturbance to his People? you shall find the reason to be, because they
watched their opportunity, and smote the hinmost of the People; they did not
march upon the front of the People, but they watched their advantage, and they
smote the hinmost, and feeblest of the People, therefore, says God, I will have
perpetual War with Amaleck: and this lay as it were reserved in the Bosom of
God, till the first King that ever appeared upon the Throne of Israel. Saul was
not commanded to rally his Forces and go against Egypt, that Old Enemy, that
Old Oppressor, nor against Moab, and those that inveigled them, and enticed
them in the matter of Baal Peor, but go, says God to Saul, and utterly destroy
Amalek, 1 Samuel 15. from off the face of the Earth. And Saul he did spare none
but poor King Agag, and God was so incensed against him, that he sent Samuel
his Prophet to him, to tell him, that God had rent the Kingdom of Israel from
him, at the 28. v. because he did not execute the fierceness of his wrath
against Amalek, for smiting the hindmost of the People, and those that were
feeble amongst them, as they came out of Egypt. And truly, Friends, this is the
design, and has been all along the design of your spiritual adversaries, they
seldom march upon the Front, but in the Spirit of Amalek, they wait for their
advantage upon those that are weak and feeble: And for my part I do think, that
this will be one of the greatest aggravations of the sin of the Devils, that
they have Tempted the little ones that have followed Jesus Christ. I pray take
notice of another passage, concerning the poor and weak condition, the people
of Israel were in, the time of Obadiah; you shall find in that Prophecy that
the Assyrians came upon them, and makes a squander among the People, and here
were two or three, and there was another two or three, or it may be more in a
company, that skulkt away, from his force and cruelty, into by ways and by
places, endeavoring to shift for themselves, and save their lives. I pray do
but observe now how the Lord comes upon Edom, that was the Offspring of Esau,
Jacobs Brother, in the 10. v. of that prophecy, for thy violence against thy
Brother Jacob, shame has covered thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever.
Lord, might Edom say, did not thou say, thou would utterly destroy this
People from the Earth? and I will hiss for the Assyrian, and, Lord, have thou
not said that Assyria is the rod of thine anger in thy hand? well, my Friends,
notwithstanding all that could be objected in a way of reason, see how God
treats with Edom, v. 1.4. neither should thou have stood in the cross way, to
cut off those of his that did escape, etc. This I only produce to discover to
you the severity of Gods threatening against those, that offer disturbance and
discouragement to his People in their weakest capacities and conditions: The
like you may observe in the Revelations, and in the other passages of the New
Testament, but I will not any further proceed upon that, so that you see I have
opened a further reason of the Lords special care, and tender regard, that he
has over his own People.

4. The greatest promises lay hold upon those that are in the meanest
condition, upon those that are in the poorest, weakest, unlikeliest condition:
Be not discouraged, Christian, at the unlikeliness that is upon thy Soul, as to
the grouth of grace, though your grace be little, and your discouragements
great, yet let me tell you, there are greater promises in the word,
proportionally considered, made to you, than to others. I pray observe what the
Psalmist says, in the 72. Psa. 16. v. There shall be a handful of Corn in the
Earth, upon the top of the Mountain, the fruit thereof shall shake like
Lebanon, and they of the City shall flourish like the Grass of the Earth, They
are, in a prosperous condition, shall flourish like the Grass of the Earth;
those that prosper in seculars or in temporals, they shall not lose their
blessing, but shall flourish like the Grass of the Earth, but, says he, there
shall be at that time, when these things shall be, there shall be a People that
shall be cast into the World, as a handful of Corn that is cast upon the top of
the Mountain; alas, what can you expect from a handful of Corn, that is cast
upon the top of a mountain, but that it should be withered and dried up? why?
because there want Earth and Soil to nourish it, and the spirit of the Earth to
maintain it; therefore it cannot be expected, that it should come to any
maturity. Yet, says the Lord, when they of the City shall flourish like the
Grass, then the handful of Corn that is upon the top of the Mountain, (that is
exposed to wind and weather) the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon, they
shall grow like the Cedars in Lebanon; so that you see, my Friends, those that
are unlikely, those that are meanest, that are but as a handful of Corn cast
upon the Mountains, yet I tell you, you are under as great a promise, as any
under their greatest external flourishing, they of the City shall flourish, as
the Grass of the Earth, but those that are cast upon the Mountain shall shake
like Lebanon.

the first shall be in relation to those that are the least Christians, the
second, shall have relation to those of a bigger size, and the third Inference
shall have relation to those that are neither great nor little Christians, but
no Christians at all.

to those that are least, they are grains, but they are the least grain; my
meaning plainly is this, and I think it is the meaning of the Holy Ghost; those
that have least grace, and those that have least gifts, and those that have
done least for God, and those that have enjoyed least of God, those that have
observed least of Gods goings in his Sanctuary, that have experienced least of
Gods workings upon their Spirits; my design, Christians, is principally upon
you and therefore I shall say three or four things particularly to you, and the
first is this, be not discouraged at your littleness of grace, if there be but
truth of grace: There were many when the second Temple was built, and they saw
it did not amount to the glory of the first Temple, they fell a weeping, and
were greatly discouraged, and God was fain to raise them up a Prophet on
purpose to bear up their spirits. O there was not that Gold, there was not that
outward Glory and Splendour, that there was upon the first Temple that was
destroyed! and God raised them up a Prophet, and what says the Prophet to them,
says he, You saw the Glory of the former Temple, and I tell you, says he, that
the Glory of the latter Temple shall be greater than the Glory of the former:
They were discouraged at the plainness, and meanness of the building, and of
the furniture, and adorning of the Temple; nay, says God, if that be the thing,
do not trouble your selves about it. So I say, my Friends, you may take an
estimate of others Hearts, and compare others Hearts with yours, and you fall a
murmuring, and discouragement seizes upon you, nay but let me say to you, in
the name of the Lord, if there be but a little grace, be not discouraged at the
littleness of it; you have reason to be humbled, that it is no more, that is
very true, but yet you have no reason to be discouraged, because there is a
little, and the Lord has commanded me to tell you, that it lay in his power,
and within the reach of his grace, to make the glory of that little grace, that
is in your Heart, far exceed the Glory of that great deal, that you observe to
break forth in the Hearts of others, and therefore be not discouraged. I shall
urge this under these two considerations.

1. Thou see it may be what is in thy heart, but thou do not know what is
in Christ's hand for thy heart. Thou see what comes out of Christ's hand to thy
heart, but thou do not see what remains in Christ's hand for thee, therefore
be not discouraged because it is little. I pray do but observe a passage in
Zach. 12.8. In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem: And
he that is feeble among them (That is he that has little Courage, little
spirit, little strength; the word signifies he that is so feeble that he is
fallen amongst them fallen among the Crowd, by reason of his feebleness, he that is
feeble among them,) At that day, shall be as David, and the house of David
shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them. Now, Christian, I pray
what is the discouragement that lies upon thee? thou say thou art feeble
and thou art weak and thou art poor and thou art empty, thy heart is empty, and
thy head empty, and thy affections empty, thy prayers are empty, and thy
conversation empty; all this is true and God knows it is true and whence comes
all this? O thou art fallen in the streets by reason of the feebleness of thy
grace, and the weakness that does attend thy duties, thou can hardly set a
step but thou fallest, thou go stumbling and stambling on to Heaven, and
thou have not strength enough scarce to go through any discouragement: Well,
friend, though it be thus with thee, yet consider here is the word of the Lord
for thy encouragement, The feeble amongst them shall be as David. And I pray in
whose hand is the custody or keeping of the Blessing that is wrapped up in this
promise? Is it not in the hand of Christ? All this courage and all this
strength and all these parts and all this grace that must make thee like David,
A man after Gods own heart to fulfill actually all his will, all this is in the
hands of Christ: And the feeble shall be as David. And therefore I pray, Sirs,
though you see but little in your own hearts, yet be not discouraged, you do
not see all that is in the heart and hand of Christ for you. That is the first.

2. You complain of your feebleness and littleness; alas, you are as Corn that
is dwindled up, as we say: the least of grains. Ay but consider, there is the
seminal virtue of more in you: That little grace that is in you has a seminal
virtue in it, God knows, says the Apostle, who are his: Those that are born
of God, that have the seed of God in them God knows them. So that though thou
do not know, by reason of thy littleness, what thou art, yet God knows
notwithstanding thy littleness what thou art; he knows that there is a seed of
grace in thee, and therefore I say be not discouraged.

2. Secondly, Is it so that the Lord Jesus Christ will look after his little
ones and will not suffer the least grain to fall upon the Earth. Then be you
putting forth a little though it be but a little. Thou complainest thou art but
little; truly I am afraid that many men's complaints are attended with as much
formality as ever the Scribes and Pharisees Religion was. Now I say if it be
but a little, thou have reason the more to be putting forth that little: And
let me tell you Jesus Christ does expect that you should be putting forth your
little, that it may appear that you are wheat indeed, that you are Christians
indeed, And though you cannot do so much as another does, yet I beseech you
consider, if you be but a grain you may do more than others, that are behind
you, that have not the least grain of grace wrought in them, you may do more
than they do. I will urge this with two considerations.

1. The first is this. A little improvement made by us goes a great way with
God; A little Gospel improvement made of a little on Earth goes a great way in
Heaven: And let me tell you this also further, that there are no bounds that
can possibly be supposed to be prescribed to the acceptance, and to the reward,
of the improvement of a little grace. You know not, my friends, but a weak one
may become a Nation, and a feeble one may be multiplied, by the Blessing of
God; into many Nations; you know not how God may bless a little improvement.
Therefore my exhortation to you is, to stir up your selves to be putting forth
something; if you have but a little faith let it appear that you have a little;
and if you have but a little love to the Lord Jesus Christ, to his person and
Offices, let that little appear, Sirs: and though it do appear but little on
earth yet, let me tell you, it will go a great way in Heaven. You may observe
this, by that poor Woman that had but one poor mite to cast into the treasury;
and Jesus Christ sat at the door observing how rich men came, and cast into the
treasury of the House of the Lord a great deal, and this poor Woman comes, that
had but one mite, and she cast in all that she had. I pray observe how far this
goes with Christ; Christ could not forbear but calls his disciples to him and
says, Verily I say unto you this Woman has cast in more than they all. Why,
my friends, if you have but a mite, cast it in, though you can but sigh or
groan, though you can do but little, yet do a little for the Lord Jesus Christ,
do a little for him in your hearts, do a little for him in your families
amongst yours Children and Servants: It may be you have but little to be doing
withal, I pray be doing something with your little: It is for the Lord Christ,
you know not how far in Heaven a little that is done on Earth may go.

2. Has the Lord taken such cae to preserve his little ones, though they be
the least grains, and that, in all the Commontions and Revolutions of affairs,
when God is sifting his people in the sieve of the Nations, that he knows do
hate them wh^ perfect hatred? then methinks, This should speak encouragement
unto the little ones not only to put forth a little for Christ, but this also
should lay an engagment upon them to be willing to suffer any thing, rather
than to part with the care and protection of God and Christ. You have a little,
Sirs, well here stands the case; will you part with and for go that God and
that Christ, that have the care and the charge of your little grace, or will
you stick to him? Methings you should be willing to suffer a little for Christ,
rather than to part with that great security that is betrusted with Christ for
you. The apostle had but little of the world, yet he met with great sufferings;
it may be you have but little grace in the world, and God calls you to little
sufferings, in comparison with those thut are truly and formally great
sufferings; Why now, Sirs, I pray be willing to part with something for the
sake of the Lord Jesus Christ, suffer the loss of something. I do not speak as
to temporalls, but I speak as to those things that your hearts are most
addicted too suffer the loss of something: You see a little grace has a deal
of care; taken about it. I pray, Christians, if there be any thing in you that
is sinful do you part with it, do not only suffer the loss of a little, but
suffer the loss of your All that is offensive to the Lord Jesus Christ; because
the Lord Jesus Christ has said that, notwithstanding all your sufferings, he
will look after that little grace that is in you.

I pray do not you despise those that are less, but encourage their growth to a
greater degree; do not despise them, because they are little: This is a great
evil amongst Christians, and I tell you of it in the name of the Lord, it is an
evil, and a very great evil, even amongst old professors, that they are apt and
ready to despise those that are young. And men of great seize, that think
their heads are full, and I could wish their Hearts were fuller than their
heads, there are many that have full heads, but God knows have very empty
Hearts, but I say, Christians, I beseech you in the Lord, and by the Lord, that
you would carry it as becomes you, toward those that are little, those that
have but a little grace, do what in you ly's to increase that little, to
cherish that little. I should urge this with diverse considerations, I will
only say this, Christians, the increase of their little will be also your
increase, their blessing will be your blessing, as you are members of the
whole; It may be you have a great deal of grace, but let me tell you, suppose
you have, God may make them very useful to you, and more useful than those that
have more grace were ever made to you: It may be there are two Christians come
together, men that do pretend to a great deal of grace, they fall into
discourse together, and what is the subject of their discourse? alas it may be,
it is nothing that does concern the mutual advance of grace in each other; but
there comes a poor Christian, that has but little, and he falls of inquiring,
O how shall I get more grace? and discovers an earnestness and zeal of spirit
after more grace; and many other things of this nature might be urged, I will
but only add this: I pray, Christians, you that have a great deal of grace, how
came you by that great deal? was it not all by grace? did not other Christians
help you? did they discourage you? did they cast stumbling blocks of iniquity
before your face? did they receive you to doubtful disputations? No, no, they
were ready to cherish and encourage you, and so God gave the increase. But this
is that that I would have you to take along with you, that their little may be
better than your great deal, if they improve their little, better then you do
your great deal, and it may be true in this sense, that they that have least
may have most, and they that are last may come to be first: and therefore,
Christians, you that think you have a great deal, see that you carry it as
becomes you, to those that have but little.

that the Lord should now begin this sifting work among you, I pray what
promise have you to secure you? For ought I know, you may be sifted out of the
sieve, the Tempest may come, and blow you with the Chaff into unquencheable
fire: therefore, I beseech you, consider, there are ten thousand times ten
thousand that have been baptized in the name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost,
that are damned in the name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost, and for ought I
know this may be your case ere long, if you do not look after a little grace,
to get it in due time. I pray, Sirs, consider with your selves, what security
you have, in case there should be such a dispensation, as is here threatened?
that God should sift you, and it may be Satan may have liberty to raise the
wind, whilst God is sifting in the sieve of the Nations, what will become of
the Chaff? Christ tells you, that he will come, ay, he will come, but it is in
another sense to you, he will come, and will thoroughly purge his floor with his
Fann, and the Wheat he will gather into his garner, but the Chaff shall be
burned with unquencheable fire. I pray, Sirs, do but consider this one thing,
is it not better for you to have a promise of security now, than to defer it,
upon hopes, that you may have it hereafter? the promise reaches to the least of
the grains, and no further; and I have no commission to say any further to you,
by way of security. But then,

2. Is it so that there is such a promise made to the least grain, why, let me
tell you, the promise of security, lay's open to you: though for the present,
as you are sinners, and while you are so, I cannot say that the promise does
reach you. Yet notwithstanding you are so, I may tell you the promise is open
to you, and let me further tell you, that the Heart of the Trinity, does concur
with the promise, and does stand open to receive you: What think you of this,
sinners? the promises of Sanctification are open, the promises of Salvation by
grace are open to you. Though I cannot say, that to day thou art within the
reach of the promises, yet if I could say that, before to morrow, thou have
received grace, though but as a grain of mustard seed; to morrow I could say,
and say it in the name of the Lord, come what will come, God and Christ will
look after this Soul. Is it not better for you then to day, whilst it is called
to day, to open your Hearts for Christ, and for the Spirit of Christ, and to
get a little grace, though never so little, to day whilst it is called to day;
O Sinners! get a little grace, and be content to begin with a little: It is a
little grace that will bring you within the reach of the promise. Do not say
within your selves, then belike you think, we have no grace at all; why truly,
if you be sinners, I say you have not grace, not so much as a grain of mustard
seed, and I say, you are not yet within the reach of the promise; but I say if
you get but a little grace, though never so little, that you may but be truly
called a grain, then I may see, though it be never so little, yet the greatest
promises of protection are made to you, and you are the Persons, that are
concerned in this promise.

3. The third thing that I would say to you that are no Grains, that have no
grace at all, is this, I pray do but consider with your selves when God, and
Christ, and the Spirit come to pass judgment and to give in evidence against
you, what will you be able to answer? What will you say that grace was never
offered to you? I must be forced to appear, and all the Ministers that ever you
have heard, and that have tendered the grace of Jesus Christ, and Christ with
all his fullness to you; all our Sermons and we, shall be brought in as
evidences against you. Can you bear this? You that have heard us with delight,
and have seemed to take pleasure in what we have spoken and preached to you;
what think you now to have us; one after another with all the Sermons that have
been preached in your hearing, to be brought in as an evidence against you? And
not only so but for God to come in against you, and say I offered you grace;
and for Christ to say I offered you my blood; and the Spirit to say I strove
with you to work a work o^ grace in you; I beseech you, sirs, consider* (...)
do not speak these things to spend time, bu^ this is that my Soul longs after
that I might persuade every sinner to become a saint, and thatevery one that
has gotten a littlegrace, might make it his business to get more grace; For,
sinners, you can never have grace too soon, and, Saints, you can never have
grace too much. I shall only urge all that I have said with these 2 things.

First. If, sinners, you will now come in and close with Christ to day, while
it is called to day, (Be you young or old I value it not, be you what you will
be, whatsoever your condition be,) As soon as ever you come in, and get the
least grace, all the Trinity that is concerned in the promise will, according
to their respective Relations, pursue the design and intendment of the promise
upon you and for you, in all the succeeding circumstances of your lives. Why is
not this a thing that is desirable? It may be a wicked man may make a promise
to thee, thou art his Child and he a wicked Father, if thou will not do so and
so, he will not do this and that for thee: Why I pray now, is it not better for
you to have the promise of one God for good, and to be in the reach of one of
the promises of the blessed Trinity, than to be encompassed and environed with
all the promises of them that are enemies to God, and also to you for Gods
sake. Here now is a promise, yet shall not the least Grain fall to the Earth
when God sifts, the Nations; I pray balance this with all the promises of the
Word when God comes a sifting either by Temptation or Persecution or
afflictions; when God comes a sifting, I pray who can keep you in the Sieve?
Who can keep you out of Hell? can all your rich friends and great friends, can
all the powers of the World, keep you out of everlasting burnings? No, It is
only God can do it, yet shall not the least Grain fall upon the Earth. For my
part I think that one promise made by the Blessed God is better then to have a
thousand promises (though they were in a capacity to fulfill them) made by the
greatest Powers in the the World.

2. The last thing that I shall leave upon you is this, That the sooner you
close with Christ the sooner you will be safe; The sooner you get grace the
sooner you will have the security of grace. Great are the distractions of the
minds of men under various apprehensions of approaching dangers; and, my
friends; in a time and hour wherein the Lord says come, Christ says come and
the Spirit says come and the Gospel says come, and Ministers say come, why do
not you come? Sirs, to day, while it is called to day. For my part, I think it
is never too soon for a Soul to be safe for ever from everlasting burnings, and
therefore if you do believe the things that I have delivered, you that are
Saints of a little attainment, carry it as becomes you; You that are Saints of
a greater attainment carry it as becomes you; and you that have attained no
grace at all carry it as becomes you. And this is that that becomes you, To
come unto Jesus Christ, and be restless till the Lord make you one of his
grains though never so little.

A Catalogue of Books printed for, and are to be sold by, Edward Giles
Bookseller in Norwich, near the Market Place.
SEveral Discourses concerning Actual Providence. A Word in Season. Defensive
Armor against four of Satan's most Fiery Darts. Sermon upon the whole first and
second Chapters of the Canticles. 13 Sermons upon several useful Subjects, all
published by John Collings, D. D. The way of the Spirit, in bringing Souls to
Christ: The Glory of Christ set forth with the necessity of Faith, in several
Sermons, both by Mr. Thomas Allen, late pastor of a Church at Norwich. Enochs
walk with God and Christ, a Christians gain by Mr. Timothy Armitage late
Minister in Norwich, A Discourse of the preciousness of Precious promise^s, the
portion of overcomers: Faith, and of the preciousness of Christ, both by Mr.
John Lougher Minister in Norfolk. The Saints Ebenezer by Mr. Francis English
late Minister in Norwich. Directions to spell English right. The History of the
Protestant Reformation, as it was begun by Luther. The Dead Saint speaking,
being a Sermon Preached upon the Death of Mr. Newcome. The English
Presbyterian. The ordinary matter of prayers, drawn into Questions and Answers.
Two Treatises: The first of rejoicing in the Lord Jesus in all cases and
Conditions; The second of a Christians hope in Heaven, and Freedom from
Condemnation by Christ, both by Mr. Robert Asty late Minister of Jesus Christ
in Norwich. Obedience to Magistrates, recommended by Jonathan Clapham, Rector
of Wramplingham Norfolk. A Present for youth, and Example for the Aged.
FINIS.

