Sovereign Omnipotency The SAINT's SECURITY IN Evil Days. Discoursed and
Concluded From Romans IV. xvii, xviii.

By WILLIAM CROMPTON.

Exodus 14.13. Stand still, and see the salvation of God.

2 Chronicles. 20.12. O our God, will Thou not judge them? for we have no might
against this great Company that comes against us, neither know we what to do,
but our Eyes are upon thee.

London: Printed for Benj. Alsop, at the Angel and Bible in the Poultrey; and
are to be sold by James Cowsey, Bookseller in Exeter. 1682.

Dignissimo, Amicissimoque Affini nostro, GEORGIO YOUNG, Creditonensium, In Agro
Devoniensi Armigero: Nec-non GEORGIO LAPTHORN, Plymidensium, Mercatori
Celeberrimo: Nomine Virtutis non mihi solum noto: Vtrisque Sacrarum Literarum
Patronis Candidissimis. Conciones sequentes, tum Potentiae Divinae sum
efficacis, aeque ac Justitiae illius omnimodo incontaminabilis, Doctrinans
Dilucidantes: D. D. D. Faustaque iisdem omnia, non minus calido voto, quam
ipsimet, in hoc scripto (...) comprecatur;

Guliel. Crompton.

Sovereign Omnipotency THE SAINTS SECURITY In Evil Days.
ROMANS iv. 17, 18. Even God who quickneth the dead, and calls those things
that are not, as though they were.


THis part of the Chapter contains an Illustrious Commendation of Renowned
Abraham, and that Faith whereby he received the Promise to be the Father of
many Nations; and is described three ways, viz.

1. By the nature of it, which he discovers to be sincere; not only outwardly
professed, (though that was necessary) but inwardly rooted. It was Faith before
God, and found Access into the Divine Presence.

2. By the extent of the Relation between Abraham and the Faithful; and so, it
is defined to be Universal, as God is Father of all, Jews and Gentiles, without
distinction of Nation, Sex and Condition. Spiritual, before him whom he
believed; not Carnal, nor apprehended by men without a Revelation, 1 Cor. 2.14.
The Natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness to him, neither can he know them, for they are Spiritually
discerned.

3. From the ground of both, which is the Sovereignty and Almighty power of
God; set forth by two things, viz. Quickening the Dead, and call^ng things that
are not as though they were.

This supported Ahrahams Faith against all seeming Impossibilities; and i^ the
in^ended subject of this Discourse. In the Prosecution of which, I shall labor
first to break the Shell, by expl^ining the words, as they sh ll fall under
consideration, and then offer you the Kernel contained in it; First I shall
endeavor to unlock the Cabinet and then show you the rich Jewels laid up in
it; which you will find to be of great worth and use in these Cloudy days,
wherein the Divine Providence has cast us.

For the former Branch; 1. Gods quickening the Dead.

A Short Sentence and diversely understood by diverse Divines. I conceive, the
Resurrection is hereby meant, present in Soul, future of Body; with some
special Limitation to Abraham. As,

1. A raising of such a Seed out of his dead Body. Romans 4.19. And being not
weak in Faith, he considered not his own Body now dead, when he was about an
hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarahs Womb. i. e. Destitute of
all natural power to conceive and quicken. Yet Abraham could set his Seal to
it, by Faith, as being within the Limits of Gods power.

2. A recovering of that Seed alive from the dead, Heb. 11.19. Accounting that
God was able to raise him up, even from the Dead, from whence also he received
him in a Figure; which to nature and humane apprehension was impossible. Yet
this Abraham believed, because of the Lords All Sufficiency.

3. A reviving of the Body out of the Dust, at the last Day: which Abraham
believed the Lord was able, and would certainly do it.

The whole commends two things to our Learning.

First, To quicken the Dead, is the Lords privilege, an effect of his Almighty
Power.

Secondly, That this Divine Privilege should be to us a Ground of Fai h.

For the former. See it promised, Isa. chap. 26. ver. 19. Thy Dead Men shall
Live, together with my Dead Body shall they Arise. To be understood either in a
Physical or Moral Sense; with the Concurrent Consent of the Ancient and Learned
Modern Expositors; who observe, that there is nothing more usual for the
Church, and Holy Men therein, to Support their Hearts above all Incumbent
Afflictions, and to Secure themselves of the Comfort of promised Deliverance,
notwithstanding all the seeming Improbability thereof, by the General Doctrine
of the Resurrection. And so, John 5,21,28. The Father raises up the Dead and
Quickneth them, even so the Son quickneth whom he will. On which Ac^ount Christ
is declared to be the Son of God, by the Resurrection from the Dead; R m. 1.4.
First, Raising others; as he did the Rulers Daughter, to the Astonishment of
all Beholders present at her Funeral; and the Widow's Son of Naim, who was
carried without the City to his Grave; Christ stops the sad Train, and
Restores Life to the Young Man, and somewhat more Dear than Life to his
Mother. And the more Signally to Triumph over Death, he Pursued it to its Fort,
the Obscurity of the Grave. Lazarus was buried for four Days, his Carcass was
Corrupt, but Christ called him from the Bottom of his Tomb with that Powerful
Voice that Created the World; The Dead Answers and comes forth to the Amazement
of all that saw the Glory of God, so Clearly Manifested. In all, he Testified
his Godhead, and the Truth of his Calling and Doctrine. Thus he raised Moses
and Elias, and made them known to his Disciples by extraordinary Revelation, to
Evince his Doctrine not to be new, but the same in Substance with that Recorded
in the Law and the Prophets; both being represented by Moses and Elias; who
though they were raised before him, yet it was not without him, but by the
Fellowship of his Resurrection: As, though Light Rises before the Sun, yet it
Rises not but by the Sun; and the Mace goes before the Magistrate, but it
does so only to attend upon him.

Secondly, Raising himself. John 10,18. I have laid down my Life, that I might
take it again, no Man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self; I have
Power to lay it down, and I have Power to Raise it up again. Here is a glorious
Manifestation of his Power, that the Tomb could not Confine him, nor the
Gravestone stay him; But throwing off those Clogs, as Sampson did his Withs,
he showed himself a while to his Beloved Ones, and so took his Joyous Ascent to
the Right hand of the Father. As Love ^id Christ in the Grave, so Power Raised
him from the Grave. Love Rockt him a Sleep, and Power Awaked him again. He
broke through all Bars, Beat down all Opposition, and Sprang forth of his
yiedling Dust, as a Triumphant Conqueror over Death and Devils.

If it be objected, That Christ rose from the Dead by the Glory of the Father,
and that the Father raised him?

It is easily answered; This was not by way of supplement, to make up any
defect of power in Christ, but only by way of consent, to Christ's own Power and
Action; that so men might Honor the Son and the Father. John. 5.19,26. Or
else, by the Glory of the Father, we may understand that Glorious Power which
the Father gave unto the Son in the Flesh, to have life from himself; because
that holy Spirit which immediately quickened him, was both his and the Fathers,
and so the Action was common to both. Thus like the P^enix, he goes out of the
S^pulcher in the day of his Triumphs, al lighted and environed with Flames of
Triumphant Glory.

3. Assuring others, by his lights and s^en or, that they shall rise again. 1.
Cor. 6.14. He is called the first Fruits of them that Sleep. The Triumphant
Resurrection of our Lord, is the Root and Hope of ours; with this he sweetens
the acerbities of our present life, and replenisheth Hearts with the Antipast
of their Immortality; for, he arose not barely in a Personal, but Public
Capacity; and though it were a Damnable Heresy of Hymeneus, to say, That the
Resurrection was past already; Yet it is a truth to say, that it is begun. He
first, and we at his coming, 1 Cor. 15.25. By what is past in the head, we are
assured of what is expected in his Members; for, his Resurrection is a Pledge
and Earnest of theirs. He having paid our Debt, Death cannot detain us in
Prison for it. Yea, it is a beginning of ours, as before is noted; he being
raised who is the Head, the Body must also follow. If the Elder Brother be
sprung out of the Dust, the Younger Brethren shall not stay there. The
Vine-Plant being in Heaven, there the Branches must receive their Eternal
Flourish.

Object. 1. Is it not said, 1. Cor. 15.2. By man came the Resurrection of the
Dead?

A. It is (...), such a man as is God also; from whose Will this large Soul of
Nature had its motion, and who therein commands so universally, as he seems
to hold the Heaven and Elements under here, to be instruments of his Wonders;
it is he that lighted Stars at his Birth, and Eclipsed the Ancient Sun at his
Death, and walked on the waters as on a Pavement of Marble. It is he, that
causes the Earth to cast out her Dead.

Object. 2. Have not men done it?

Answer. 1. Stories of Men Raised by Men, are either Lies and Illusions, as the
Pythonist of Endor raised the Devil in Samuels Shape; and the Church of Rome
maintain many Idle Stories of Dead men Raised, to Walk and Live after Death.
Otherwise, Dead Men neither walk nor appear in Body or Soul, after Death. Or,
if there are any such, They are extraordinary Permissions, for Secret Ends,
only known to him that Permits them.

2. The Prophets and Apostles have done it, but in the Quality of Ministers. So
Elisha raised the Shunamites Son, 2. Kings 4.34. And Peter raised Dorcas, Acts
9.40. But not by their own Power. It only belongs to Christ to do this work,
with an Original Power, which has its Fountain in his Bosom; with an Absolute
Command, which receives no Modification in all Nature; with a Simple Will,
which needs no other Instrument. It was by Divine Influence and Assistance in
those Prophets and Apostles, to confirm their Doctrine, and to draw the Church
sooner to believe.

3. It is the Divine Nature that is the Fountain of Life; he gives, takes,
restores, to whom, when, and how he pleases. As it is with the Sea for water
and the Sun for light, in the former, all the waters are gathered together into
an Ocean, where they grow into swelling heaps, and are the source of all the
Streams that refresh the Earth; and in the latter, that great Luminarie is the
Vessel, wherein the Lord has gathered all light, which before was sattered in
the Heavens, but is now united in that bright Lamp, which, running like a fiery
Chariot, might rule the day, and illustrate the earth, making it fruitful. Thus
it is with the Deity for life, John 6.63. The Spirit quickneth, the Flesh
profits nothing; The words that I speak unto you are Spirit and Life. And by
this power he quickneth the Dead. So that it is clear, the work is his, who is
Lord of nature, and holds the Keys of life and death in his own hands. His
light only can dispel the darkness, and his voice only can break the silence of
the Grave.

The second Doctrine comes now to hand, viz.

Doct. 2. That this Divine Privilege should be to us a ground of Faith.

Genesis 17.1. I am God all-sufficient, walk before me, etc. Walk before me who am
all-sufficient, self-sufficient, Original, Universal Good; the Pillar of
Abraham's Faith. And the Apostle speaks by way of wonder that any should not
believe it, Acts. 26.8. Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you,
That God should raise the Dead? Therefore it is that the Sacred Scripture does
frequently mind us of his power, to help our incredulity; Numb. 23.19. God is
not as man, that he should lie, nor the Son of man, that he should repent; has
he said it, and shall he not do it? or has he spoken, and shall he not make it
good? And again, Is there any thing too hard for God? So, Math. 19.27. With God
all things are possible. A main prop to an humble Suppliant, That seeing his
own vileness, and the Divine Excellencies, which are warming and enlightening,
cries out, Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean, as it is recorded,
Math. 8.^

2. This is the Rock, on which the weak Anchor of a Christians Faith may firmly
fix. You know Sampsons Riddle; Out of the Eater comes forth Sweet. The reason
why Christians should consider the power of God; out of this strong comes forth
sweetness,

In the application hereof may be found,

Use 1. Matter of Correction, and that of two sorts:

First, of such that make it too hard; denying the Resurrection in opinion. As
Pearls are dissolved in Vinegar, so is Truth in hearts made bitter with
Corruption. Thus we find many wicked and irregular Spirits, who having
renounced the blessings of the other life, against the voice of nature in the
order of the World, wherein we have the New Birth of Stars, days, Seasons,
Plants and Birds, who make a perpetual Image of the Resurrection in the World;
nay, against the touch of God, and impressions of verity on the very Gentiles,
who have professed the happiness of the Soul in the other life and the
Resurrection, even on their Tombs, to deny the Resurrection. So the Saduces of
old, Acts 23.8. Hymeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 18. which you may easily
perceive, is not only to crack the eye of a reasonable judgment, but also to
pull out the eye of Faith, all pure and caelestial as it is.

Or, in practice; Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die, 1 Cor.
15.32. Of those, I mean, who drown their Souls in their Bodies and would have
no time to live longer, than they have to sin, and when there is an end of
sinning, wish there would be an end of living. And well it would be for them,
if living like Beasts, they might be annihilated like Beasts. Thus men do err,
not knowing the power of God. That God, who out of nothing Created all things,
can certainly reduce many things into one. When the Body is gone into a
thousand substances, he can easily make an abstraction, and bring that Body
together again; as a Chemist, out of several Metals mingled together can
abstract one from the other, the Silver from the Gold, and the Alchimy from the
Silver, and reduce every Metal to its own kind. Thus should we much more
believe of God, that he is able to extract and reinvest every Soul with its own
Body, though they are mingled and confounded with many other Substances.

The Persecutors of the Primitive Christians burnt their Bodies into Ashes and
cast them into the River, and all, ad tollendam spem Resurrectionis; but all in
vain, for even they also shall arise to a better Resurrection; for, at the
Shrill Voice of the last Trumpet, the greatest Jaylors shall surrrender up all
their Prisoners; all the scattered Dust of Adams Seed shall ride upon Windy
Wings, till it meet together in a collected Body. All the Creatures in the
world, that have made their Meat of man's flesh, shall find that they have
eaten Morsels too hard for the digestion of their weak Stomach, Isa. 26.19. The
earth shall cast forth her Dead, as a woman does an untimely Birth; the Grave
shall be in travel with the Dead, and shall be delivered of them.

Secondly, Such as make this work too easy, saying they can quicken
themselves; against all sense and common reason. It is to maintain a
proposition ridiculous to all humane understanding. Can any thing make it self?
neither can any reasonable Creature raise it self to an higher rank of being
than it is. A Stone cannot make it self a Tree, to have growth and life; nor
can a Tree make it self a Beast, to have sense, nor a Beast make it self a man
to have Reason, nor a Rational man make himself a Saint. Or else, ascribe it to
the Ordinary course of Nature, depriving the Lord of his Royal Prerogative.

Use 2. Here is matter offered of strong consolation and encouragement to the
holy seed of Abraham; you believe in him who can quicken the dead. For your
sakes, let me take leave, a little to open this Cabinet, that you may view the
excellency of this powerful God in whom you believe; and be sure the prospect
will be very pleasing.

Death, and so the Dead, may be considered three ways:

1. Politice; There is a Death of Kingdoms and States; as there is a rising
and flourishing, so there is a decaying and dying, they spring, flourish and
dye; the goodliest, and stateliest Politic Bodies that ever the earth bore,
though animated with the searching Spirit of the most profound Policy,
strengthened with the resolution and valor of the most Unconquered, sighted
with Eagles eyes, of largest depths, and comprehensions of States and Crowns,
adorned with never so many prosperities, and Triumphs; yet like the natural
Body of a man, they have their revolutions and decays. Most apparent, in the
ruins of the Roman Empire, once a glorious Body; and the once splendour of the
Turkish Monarchy, and the Venetian Aristocracy, which sprang from the most
contemptible beginning; with the Spanish State, which once appeared like a
Comet, threatening destruction an^ giving Laws to all the Nations round about
her. The Beams and Ras^ors of a State may be so link^ together, so tenton'd and
set into one another, as might embolden a bare Politician to determine it an
indissoluble Constitution: But God undermines all with the Breath of his Mouth.
And Politicians have observed, that the longest lived State on Earth, suffers
great alterations and Periods within the compass of four or five hundred years.

This decay is, 1. In matters Ecclesiastical, concerning Religion. As the
Church prays, Psalm. 80.18. Quicken us, we call upon thee. And the power of
Christ Shines marvellously in the great Empire of his Church, which the Father
has put into his hands, to build, raise and cement with his Blood, illuminate
with his Light, and nourish with his Body. To confirm which, the Historian has
observed, how the Doctrine of the Albigens^s was preserved, notwithstanding all
enemies; and he hids all the Privy Counselors of Nature, who can tell where
the Swallows lie all the Winter, and how at the Spring they have a Resurrection
from their seeming deadness; Let them, s^i^h he, also inform u^, in what
invisible Sanctuary, this Doctrine did lurk, in spice of ^ll opposition and
Persecution; and how it revived out of its Ashes, at the coming of Luther. And
withal he observes, that in those parts of France, where the Albigenses were
most cruelly handled, now the Protestants (the Heirs of most of their Tenants)
most Flourish.

2. In matters Civil, touching the Law and matter of Government; as the Lord
promised, Isa. 26.19. Thy Dead Body shall live, etc. Before, they complained of
very hard labor, and that they brought forth nothing but Wind; now, thy Dead
Body shall Live. Which some refer to the Babylon^sh Captivity, wherein they
were as Dead Bones in the Grave, without any Strength, Wisdom, or visible hope
of being delivered; yet though they seemed so very much decayed, as if they
were quite withered and Consumed with Calamity and Death, he promised to raise
them again, and Clo^h them with Beauty and Glory Thus the Lord quickens the
Dead. If he burn his Phoenix, out of the very Ashes he will raise another.

2. Physice; And that is the Death of the Body, of which we have spoken
already. The E^rth shall cast forth her Dead. This is easy to God, to whom
Miracles are as easy as natural operations. A Miracle being nothing else but a
new Creation.

3. Ethice; Which is the Death of the Soul; Two fold, First, Temporary; either
by the absence of Grace or Divine Discretion; when Man is indeed Dead, or as a
dead thing, in his own apprehension, the Lord quickneth. You who were Dead he
quickneth. Man is Impotent and weak, like a dead Member in the Body, he is in
himself without Strength: And as the Organs can make no sound, unless Breath be
caused to enter into them, so neither can a dead Soul make any Harmony, till
God breathe into it, by his Blessed Spirit. Secondly, Eternal, when the person
is actually cut off from all hope, and irrecoverably shut up in the eternal
Abyss. So, the Lord does not, he will not quicken, Luke 16.26. There is a great
Gulf, a Diamond Wall between Hell and Paradise, so that they who pass from
earth to Hell cannot return, etc. Tali privatione non Datur Progressus; That
Gulf being fixed by the immutable and immovable Decree of God.

Q. How does the Lord quicken the Dead?

Answ. 1. By ordering all that falls out in the World, for the good of his
People, Ezekiel. 37.12,13. Thus says the Lord God, Behold, O my People, I will
open your Graves, and cause you to come ou^ of your Graves, and bring you into
the Land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened
your Graves, O my People, and br^ught you up out of your Graves. When things
were brought to a dead L^f^, ^hen he puts to his hand, his Strength is m^de
known; and when the danger is most felt, then his helping Arm is most welcome.
When the Daughter of the Ruler of the Synagogue was dead, then Ch is it appeared
most advantagiousl, Mark 5. That was the word he wait^d for, and longed to
hear. As Al^xander the Great solaced himself with the greatness of his Peril in
Indi^, Tand m par Animo meo periculum video; So fares it with our absolute
Monarch of the World, it is Joy to his heart to protract his time, till he see
the height and maturity of danger, that so he may get the more honor. While
things are but dying, there is hope in nature, and in respect of us; but when
they are quite dead, there is hope, if we look up to God, and believe him who
quickneth the Dead. We need not meddle with the great Current of his Counsels;
his Power in the object of our Faith. He can make light in the midst of duskie
Nights, and Havens in the most forlorn Shipwreck; and if we were with him in
the Shadow of Death, what should we fear in the Arms of Life?

2. By infusing Grace and working Life. The Method or order he observes is,
First, to kill by the Law, and then to quicken by the Gospel. First, he Wounds,
and then Heals; He uses Rod^, but such as are dipped in Balm. And so the Lord
quickens daily, and often works a Miracle; and this in bestowing Power upon his
Son ^o quicken; and thos^ ^re by degrees drawn by Christ to him^lf, and united
to him b^ Life Commu^ d to them. As the S^ res^ in the heart, ret^ns (...) ^lf,
and sends fo^th (...) into ^y united part, ^e wo^n ^i^h and the whole there i^
^ontin i y, John 5.25. Verily I say unto you, The Hour is coming and now is,
when the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, they shall hear and Live.
John 14. and 19. Because I live, ye shall live also.

3. By returning every Body his own Spirit. Ezekiel. 37.5. I will cause Breath to
enter into you, and ye shall live. The same Body that dies shall rise again.
According to the hope of blessed Souls, who after the Vision of God, do yet
hope for the Resurrection of their Bodies, to which they most ardently wish to
be reunited. As they, who are represented under the Altar, Revel. 6. and at the
Tribunal of Justice, ask vengeance of their Blood, are instantly Clothed with
White Garments, in Token of that bright Flesh, which is to be joined to their
Immortal Spirits. However some have conceived, that the Soul shall be clothed
with a new Body; which if it should be granted, what would the Resurrection be,
but a new Creaton?

This Doctrine of the Resurrection, is such, that it is too deep for Reason to
wade, you must let Faith swim. It is infinitely above Reason to imagine, and we
have scarce Faith enough to believe it. Have an Eye to Christ, rest on the
Almighty Power. And so let me add in the next place.

3. An Use of Instruction, and that in two things.

First, Never to despair,

1. Not of the State, should that be as low as Israel, Ezekiel. 37.11,12. Son of
Man, those Bones are the House of Israel, behold, they say our strength is
dried, and our hope is lost; we are cut off for our parts; Therefore Prophecy
and say unto them, Thus says the Lord God, Behold, O my people, I will open
your Graves, and cause you to come up out of your Graves, and bring you into
the Land of Israel. Though things seem to Humane Apprehension, helpless and
hopeless, look up to the Supreme Power, who can, beyond all our thoughts, make
those who dwell in the Dust, to awake and Sing. This Doctrine speaks good news
in that respect. There is Balm in Gilead, and a Physician to heal, and this
Physician yet dwells in our Hemisphere, with Healing under his Wings. Despair
not, though it be brought so low as the Disciples, John 21.5. who had no Meat:
This Lord can turn Stones into Bread. Let us all pray, Lord increase our Faith!

2. Despair not of others, who are dead, and have a long time lain in the Grave
of Sin. Only speak to and for them; as Ezekiel. 37.9. Come from the four Winds, O
Breath, and breathe upon these Slain, that they may Live. You that have Sick,
Dying, yea, Dead Relations, Children, Servants, Neighbors, Let your Bowels
yearn over them; Lift up a Prayer for them; the Prayer of Faith may Heal the
Sick, and Save a Dead Soul. No better Physic to be given at a Dead Lift, in
the most desperate Case, than Prayer. All you that have felt the Disease of
Sin, and the Powerful Mercy of Christ, learn to pity others, and hope for their
Healing and Quickening. He can turn noisome Dunghils into Mines of Gold, Brands
of Hell into Lightsom Stars in his Firmament.

3. Despair not of your selves; though you have no Spiritual Life, but are all
over like a Dead Carcass; yet wait at the gate of this great Physician; there
may be a Time of Love come, Ezekiel. 16.6,8. He works at all hours. You may Reap
if you Faint not. Deus vester est Deus Vivificus.

Secondly, be Instructed, to prepare daily for the general Resurrection, for
the coming of the great day of God, wherein he may give you new Bodies,
Immortal, Agile, Incoruptible, Privileged with Favors, and Gilded with the
Bright Splendours of the Body of Christ Jesus. You are hasting toward that
Eternal Estate every day. Forsake, Forsake the Love of these slight Cottages,
those poor Ant-hills, which Enthral so many Spirits, divested of those Divine
Seeds which bud under Generous and Heavenly Breasts.

1. Use the means, and look through them to Christ; still saying, I have a Dead
Heart, O Lord, some quickening Grace! Christ is not of more Power then Sympathy.
You has he quickened, who were Dead.

2. Be thankful for Spiritual Life, in Possession or Expectation. In this God
has done more for you, than if he had made you Princes of the Earth. In this,
he has done more for you, than if he had made you Angels. O be thankful! God
in Quickening you, has done more for you, than if he had given you the World.
Let your Hearts and Mouths be filled with Praises. It is a Mercy calls for your
highest Praises in the Days of Eternity.

THe Second Branch of the Text which Illustrates the Omnipotent Sovereignty of
Christ, comes next to be Considered, viz.

Calling things that are not, as though they were.

An Effect or peculiar Property of the Deity, whereby God (with special
Reference to Christ the Son, who appeared to Abraham, and in wh^m he believing
was justified) is described.

The words are few, the Sentence short, and hard to be understood: not how it
is a ground of Faith; that easily follows; but how (...), should be in the
Divine Understanding (...), how the God of Truth should Congruously and truly
call things that are not, as though they were; this is difficult to conceive.

For the Clearing and Opening of it, to the weak Capacity of man, some have and
may, provided it be done with Reverence, Sobriety, and Reference to the
Scripture chiefly (for we cannot speak of God, but as he has spoken of
himself) take Occasion to discourse,

1. Of the Infinite Essence, Comprehending and Representing all that ever
should have being, to the Divine Understanding.

2. Of the Infinite Presence, and drawing together the whole Succession of
time, as if present, not Imaginarily but really, and Coexisting with all time.
I am that I am; i. e. The Absolute Being, the Independent and first Original of
all Essences; Jehovah, the Alpha and Omega.

But while they have gone about in their own words to bring this Infinite
Mystery under man's finite Capacity, they have left it more Obscure. I conceive
it safer to be Contented with Scripture Phrases, not as Molded this or that
way by humane Reason, but as they lie in the Text, viz. in Vniversalibus, Large
and General Expressions, and not descend to curious Particulars; rather falling
under an awful Adoration and Belief, than an exact Extrance on any such
Subject, beyond what we may be assured is Revealed. This is to be wise to
Sobriety:

Especially, Considering,

First, Our great Apostles Admiration, Romans 11.33. O the Depth of the Riches of
the Wisdom of God! where observe a Difference between Wisdom and Knowledge.
Knowledge is of things to come, though Inconvenient and Disallowed; Wisdom of
things convenient and approved. As the excellent Dr. Twiss, (Contr. Jackson)
has noted. And also his Imposed Silence, 2 Cor. 12.4. His unspeakable words,
not Lawful for any to utter. It is not for you to know -- Acts 1.

Secondly, The rash and presumptuous Adventure of some School-Divines, who,
affecting Novelty and Obscurity, deliver things hard to be understood (if not
Impossible to be so) about the Divine Attributes, those scorching and Peircing
Beams, that others may fear to hear or read. Such curious Pries there have been
into this Ark and Cabinet of Gods Secrets, not measurable by the line of Humane
Reason, or fashionable by the Plummet of any Created Understanding. And
therefore we should still cry out, with that great Doctor of the Gentiles,
(...)!

Thirdly, Considering how difficult a Passage it is; Nature helps little, and
God has spoken little of himself. How dangerous is it to Err? Homo sum non
Intelligo secreta Dei; Investigare non Audeo; hoc ipsum Temeritatis genus est:
says Salvian, Lib. 3. de Guber. Dei. And it was a grave and serious Speech of
Seneca, worthy the Consideration of the greatest Divines, Nunquam nos
Verecundiores esse debemus, quam de Deo Agitur. It should not seem strange, if
stricken with those Rays which dazzle the Eyes of Seraphins, we yield to his
Greatness, and discourse in the Secret Mysteries of the Scripture, with great
Moderation, and take heed that neither our Thoughts nor Tongues proceed any
further, than the Bounds of Gods word do extend. We should be willing to be
Ignorant, where our great Master would not let us know. And, Nescire velle quae
Magister maximus nos scire non vult, Erudita Inscitia est: as Scaliger has
expressed it. To all which I shall add that weighty Consideration of Renowned
Calvin, who, Lib. 1. Instit: cap. 13. Sect. 21. Speaks to this Effect, How may
the Mind define the Immeasurable Essence of God unseen? and therefore with
Moulin, Haec Perobscura sunt, et iimide et Religiose Tranctanda.

I shall therefore in handling this Text before us, do, as Men use to do in
great Rivers or deep Waters, keep close to the shore, and Labor to have firm
ground to walk by, both in Explaining and after in concluding those plain
Truths thence arising, most useful for us.

For Explication, we may take Notice of three things.

1. The Subject, employed, He; the Messiah, the Mediator. Christ was he that
appeared to Abraham; Christ it was in whom he believed. He gave being to things
that had no beings in the Creation. He blew the Universe into an Existency by
the Breath of his Mouth, and by his Fiat reared the Heaven and Earth with all
therein; and he preserves them in being, and Restores them in and by the
Resurrection. An Invincible Argument of Christ's Divinity against the Arrians
and Servetians, with other Enemies, who will not that Christ should Reign over
them, and will not Honor him with any personal Existence, till he was born
into the world of the Virgin-Mary; they not being able to bear so Resplendent a
Light, have endeavored to obscure it by the Fumes of their Brains.

2. The Work, Call. Taken especially three ways in the Holy Scriptures: And so

1. For the Knowledge of God, Isa. 42.6. I the Lord have called them in
Righteousness. Chap. 43.1. Fear not O Jacob, I have Redeemed thee, I have
called thee by my Name, (...), Vocavit, is used in both Texts. And so in the
147 Psalm. 4. He tells the Number of the Stars, he calls them all by Name.

And this, either of things in Act, that have been or shall be; called
Scientiam Purae Visionis; or of things Possible; Called Scientiam pro Sim^licis
Intelligentiae, so far as they are knowable.

2. It is taken for the Power of God ^alling: i. e. Causing not only things
that have no actual Existence, to ap^ear as being; but giving them being in
time. So, in the Creation he ^alled for Light, Fiat, and there was Light; and
so of other things; he calls them into being, by his Noble and Divine manner
of working, which the Scripture calls Creation, bringing them from not being
to a being, producing the matter of which they consist, preparing and sitting
it, as now it is, Investing it with all those Forms and Admirable Qualities, or
which all the Motions of their Nature do depend. And elsewhere, it i^ said, he
called for Famine and the Sword i. e. he Commanded and Effectuall^ Caused them,
Psalm. 105.16. Jer 25.29.

3. It is taken for the Manifestatio^ of both, in dispensing Means and
di^posing his Creature, according to the Right and Dominion he has ove^ them
as Creatures. Romans 8.30. and 9.^ I will call them my People which were ^ my
People etc.

3. Here is the Effect of this Wor^ (...), etc. Things that are ^ as though
they were. Not beings aft^ a manner, are caused to be.

While some understand it of t^ first, others of the Second, I cannot ^ see
Reason, why we may not unde^stand it of all. And so they offer to o^
Consideration,

1. The Omnisciency of Christ Jesus, our Mediator.

2. The Omnipotency of our God, in whom we believe.

First, The Omnisciency of Christ Jesus our Mediator. He calls, i. e. by his
Knowledge foreseeing all things presented, as if actually existing before him;
not as existing or being in the Divine Nature (as Aquinas held their real
existence in Eternity, confuted by Scotus,) except by way of Eminency: but as
to exist in time, according to the Will and Wisdom of the Creator, Psalm. 139.2.
Thou know my down-sitting and my up-rising, thou understandest my Thoughts a
far off: and Verse 6. Such Knowledge is too wonderful for me, it is high, I
cannot attain ^t: i. e. his Omnisciency. Unto which add, (lest any should
conceive this to be verified of God the Father only) John 21.17. Lord, thou
know all things, thou know that I lov^ ^hee, Spoken of Christ.

Objected here may be that of the Evang^list, M^rk 13.32. Of that Day and Hour
knows no man, no not the Angels which are in Heaven, neither the Son, but the
Father.

Answ. To which I Answer; This Text has puzzled many, Ancient and Modern; For
resolution know, 1. That Christ did not know that day as he was a Creature;
neither was it fit for a Creature to know. Though to Christ is granted a
Transcendent Knowledge: He had a Created Knowledge, answering his sinless
Capacity, in his Humane Nature: Concreated, by a Participation of the Divine
Vision; Infused, necessarily following the Hypostatical Union. Yea, the
Schoolman has observed, that Christ had an acquired and experimental
Knowledge, daily gotten by the operation of the active intellect, making
species actually intelligible, abstracting them from the Phantasms; Yet as man,
he knew not that day. There are two things to be considered in Christ; viz. His
Person; and so he is Omniscie^t: his Humane Nature, and so he was subject to a
Negative ignorance of such things, whereof the Humane Nature was not capable.
Totus Christus, was Omniscient; but not Totum Christi; he knew as he was God;
he did not know as he was man. Neither is it any dishonor to Christ, to have
such an ignorance imputed to him, since it does peculiarly belong to his Humane
Nature. But,

2. We may resolve the Text thus; that it did not appertain to his Office to
teach them of that time; So Nosce is put for Docere; 1 Cor. 2.2. I Determined
to know nothing among you but Christ Jesus and him Crucified. i. e. to Preach
any other thing, but Christ; his Name and Grace, his Spirit and Love shall
Triumph in my Discourses to you. For without doubt, then Christ knew that day.

Now to add more force to our Pen, we will here propound some Enquiries, the
resolution of which, will yield great illustration to this Doctrine.

Q. How did Christ know?

Answ. Not by discourse, as men and Angels do. We know one thing after another,
and one thing by another. But the Infinite Understanding of Christ, grasps all
things, Simel et Semel, at an Instant, without any Dilatory V^iw or long
Debate; by seeing the Determination of his own Will; all being present before
him, who is present every where. And that for diverse Reasons:

1. Because he had the Idea of all, and the Reason and Ground of all present
before him. Though the Knowledge here spoken of, is not so much direct,
Intending on the things themselves; as Reflex, by an Act of Intuition on
himself, the most clear glass he sees all things in.

2. Because his Eye was carried from all Eternity, upon and over all; and that
by Virtue of the Eternity and Immensity of his being. God is in all things, and
therefore knows all things. He is a Sphere of Infinite Greatness and Efficacy,
and whatever is besides this Sphere, must necessarily be within it, Encircled
and Folded up in it. And hence David proves Gods Omnisciency by his
Omnipresence, Psalm. 134.2.

3. The Effect does ever vertually pre-exist in the Efficient cause; either
Formally, as in Univocal Causes, or by way of Eminence, as here. All things
known by God, are God, in a more Noble Manner than in themselves.

Q. 2. How can God know things that are not; for non entis, null est Scientia?

Answ. Of no being simply, neither in Act nor Power, the Rule is true; but
those (...), not Beings, were then in esse Cognito, and should certainly be in
esse Formali; He first sees them in his own Essence, and then blows them into
being, by the Breath of his Mouth, by his commanding word.

Quest. 3. Whether this do not make something for Equivocation?

Answ. Not at all. For, 1. To call things that are not, as though they were, is
a Divine Privilege, men may not do so. 2. It is an Essential Representation,
not a Mental Reservation. One thing is not conceived and another called; but
things that are not, are called, as if they were, which shall be in time, as
they were known and called before time.

Objected than it may be, That the Lord foresaw Sin, as if it had been in Act.

Answ. Undoubtedly he did; purposing to produce and sustain the Act, and permit
the obliquity. Which cannot reflect on God, as if he were the Author of Sin, in
not preventing it; For though Sin be the worst thing in the World, yet the
existence of Sin is not Evil, for then God would not Permit it to be. Prosper
and Hilary both, with Renowned Austin, say, The Cause hereof may be unknown to
to us, but unjust it cannot it be as God.

Which Doctrine offers to us,

1. Matter of Information, in the following particulars.

First, of the Independency of the Creator, in producing and disposing of the
Creature. Nothing out of God did move him to do any thing to them. True it is,
that he knew them in himself, in their Causes, and in themselves; not by
Species resulting from them, but by Reflection on his own Nature. Extra se non
quaerit Lumen ut videat, ipse enim est qui videt and unde videt. He needs not
Light from without himself to see by, for he it is that sees, and from himself
it is that he sees; as Bernard expresses it. Jer. 5. Before I Formed thee in
the Womb, I know thee. 2 Timothy 2.19. The Lord knows who are his; (...), No
Love, no Election, no foreseen Faith or Work: for then they should have been
foreseen in God and not in Man.

Secondly, of the Necessity of the Creature, both in respect of Existence and
Operation. He calls those things which are not, as though they were, because
of the Necessity and Certainty of their being. Understand this with Reference
to the first cause. For if we look to second causes, there are three sorts,
viz. Necessary, which cannot but do this and that; as the Fire necessarily
burns, and the Sun shines. Free, to this or that Act; as the reasonable
Creature is. Contingent; beyond Expectation producing Effects accordingly: but
all known to the first Cause, before they were, as if they were. So that there
is no Room nor need for any Scientia Media.

Thirdly, we are Informed how this Divine Omniscience is a ground of Faith:
viz. On a Threefold account.

1. As it is known to be infallible; his Privilege that cannot deceive, nor be
deceived.

2. As it is known to be Immutable, subject to no Alteration or Variation, Jam.
1.17. he is described to be without variableness or Shadow of Change: As the
Sun, he Shines always with the same Rays of Brightness (Eclipses only
excepted;) an Attribute that runs through all the rest; his Mercy, Council,
Love, are all immutable, his Heart is the same to day and for ever. We may be
Changed in our opinions and Estate, but the Divine Nature never Changes.

3. As it is Incommunicable. Every Creature is Finite, and this is Infinite.
The Gods of the Gentiles were often herein challenged and found wanting: The
first Angels would have had it; but sunk under the weight of that desire; and
Adams Candle aspiring to be a Sun, has burnt the dimmer ever since.

All these laid together, will prove a strong Motive to believe.

In the Second Use of this point, is discovered the folly of men, in two
things, viz.

First, In endeavoring to prevent Gods Omnisciency, by sinning securely
because secretly, and digging deep to hide their Plots. Hear the Language of
the Prophet, Isa. 24.15,16. We to them that digg deep, to hide their Counsels
from the Lord. They think no eye sees them, not his, who can do nothing but
see: How vain! The Eyes of God are like two Flaming Torches, more resplendent
than the Sun it self; none can steal from his Lightning Flashes. Screetch-Owls
may find Holes and Nights to keep them from the day, which they cannot abide,
but he that flies from the Face of God, where can he find darkness enough to
hide himself? O blind and insensible Fugative from the Sovereign Essence, in
the Region of Nothing, whither will thou go, not to find the reproaches of thy
Crimes! Be Confident, he that can save from the deadliest extremities, can also
see in the darkest obscurities.

Secondly, In endeavoring to usurp it; and that,

1. By manifest falsehood not only of the Pope and his adherents, defining and
concluding things that are not as though they were; but others also, who
daringly call their Sins, Gods Temptations; The Woman thou gave me, etc. And
many have laid the Bastards of Heresy to the door of the Sanctuary, and called
Diabolical Seductions, Evangelical Revelations; as if the Father of Lights
could bring forth the Issues of Death. This is to usurp the Royal Prerogative
of Heaven, and to invade the Lords Incommunicable Property.

2. By Flattery; and that either of our selves or others. Of our selves;
calling Carnal Contents, Pleasure, Dissolute Passions, true Mirth;
Covetousness, Providence; Vainglory, Curiosity; Presumption, Hope; Fading
Creatures, true Riches; against our Knowledge. Solomon calls them (...), things
that are not, in comparison of true Riches, Contentment and Duration; for they
make to themselves Wings and fly away as the Eagle toward Heaven. Of others;
especially the Great and the Rich; for sooner will an hot May want flies, than
such want Flatterers, calling them to be what they are not. Such was that
Parasite who endeavored to puff up King Canutus, by telling him that all his
Dominions, nay the Seas themselves, were at his Command. And Onuphirus the
Popes Biographer, praised Hildebrand, or Gregory the Seventh, for notable Acts
and great Virtues, whom Cardinal Pembo truly described to have been a
Murderer, an Adulterer, a Conjurer, every way as bad as might be. Mark Anthony
was a Prince extremely dissolute, yet was by his Flatterers called, God
Bacchus, and he soon came to that shameful impudence, as to have that title
engraved on his Statute. Such servile Souls there are, who bind themselves like
Fishers Angling Lines, seeing their advantages to depend on impertinent
Discourse, and that the false Altars of Worldly Greatness will be served with
such Smoke, spare it no more than a man would water in a River. No Age, but has
been pestered with such Cattle. Nero's Courtiers would sooth him up for his
singing, though it were exceeding ill, with a Quam pulcher Caesar Apollo
Augustus! Like the Flatterer in the Fable, who accomodating himself to the
time, gave the Ape many specious praises, saying, He was a Vermilian Rose, and
that those that environed him, his Young Ones, were the Leaves; that he was the
Sun, and those about him were the Rays; that he was as Valiant as a Lion, all
his offspring were a Race of Young Lions. With a multitude among our selves,
who call the niggard, Bountiful; the Voluptuous, Chaste; the Proud, Humble; the
Civil Man, Religious; above their Knowledge; they are not so we see it, neither
can we make them so, and therefore should not call them so,

Use 3. In the third place, this Doctrine yields singular comfort to all the
Faithful. Your Savior,

1. Knows all your enemies to prevent them. He that sits in Heaven, Laughs them
to scorn, the Lord will have them in Derision; be they never so cunning and
politic; the Divine Providence shut up in a Cloud, Roareth over their heads,
and in a moment will overthrow the Mountains of Wind, which the Tyrants of the
World raise one upon the other, and make their silly wisdom appear like an Owl,
unfeathered and ashamed at the Rays of Noonday; though their al^itudes may be
so many Ravishments to dark the Earth. As it was once said of Anthony
concerning Augustus, so it may be of Christ and the Enemies of his people, His
Geinus goes beyond theirs.

2. He knows all our wants to supply them; inward, outward, of Soul, Body, for
Present, for Future Cheer up your drooping Spirits, in the Consideration of
your Savior. In him dwells all fullness, as he is Mediator, established and
destinated for your Salvation; so that all Perfection, Riches, Grace and
Excellencies meet there together, Divinity and Humanity filled with all the
Qualities and Properties that pertain to them, there concur; which Christ has
not for himself, but for his People; as the Sea has Water, to Convey unto the
Earth, and the great Luminary has Brightness to Enlighten the Heavens and the
Earth, that from it, as from a Common source, might Stream forth into all
things all the Flame and Warmth they want.

3. Christ knows all your Sins, to Pardon and Subdue them. He calls you now,
what you are not; Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair my Love, and there is no Spot in
thee. You shall be, because he will make you so. Your Light shall be without
any Shadow, your Beauty without the least Spot to disgrace it. Those Roses that
are now in their Blossom, shall be fully blown, and those Stars which are now
Imprisoned in a Cloud, shall be set in a Clear Sky. The Bright Diamond of your
Souls, now soiled with Corruption, shall be cleansed; all the Black Spots now
fixed there, shall be changed into radiant Lights of Heaven. Comfort one another
with these words!

Use 4. Lastly, We are hence instructed in some few Duties, viz. 1. To shun
inward Sins; Hypocrisy, Pride, Vainglory, Infidelity, as carefully as outward
and more visible Sins. God is Omniscient, and views the sins of the heart, as
well as the sins of the Life; the under Roots as well as the upper Boughs. He
sees Faults where men see none. Nay, that which shines to man's eye like a
Diamond, is in Gods Balance a Contemptible Worm. It was a wise practice,
therefore, of that Arabian we read of, who to prevent sin, represented to
himself over his head, an Eye which perpetually enlightened him, an Ear which
heard him, and an Hand which measured out all his Deportments and Demeanours.
Verily, the due consideration of Gods Eye, will blunt a thousand and a thousand
Arrows shot against the heart of a resolute Christian. If the exercise thereof,
were as familiar to us, as it is effectual; how powerful a motive would it be,
to cleanse all the impurities of our Intentions and affections, and give us
leave to arrive to the top of Perfection!

2. To seek to him for Knowledge. Ignorance is no Branch of his Image who is
Omniscient. Let it be the Mother of Popish Devotion, suffer it not so much to
be with the Profession of Christ's Religion. He gives wisdom liberally. He
descended into the Country of Darkness, to scatter Knowledge by his brightness,
and cease not to give light, and kindle in our hearts many Inspirations,
which are like so many Stars, to conduct us to the Fountain of our Happiness.
Hear him promising, All thy Children shall be taught of God. It is his
Prerogative to teach Hearts. The Sun enlightens the World, and Christ
enlightens Souls. Make it your Prayer, Lord, breathe upon us; breathe thy
Spirit into thy Word! You may read the Bible and hear Sermons over and over,
but to no purpose, till the Spirit of Christ Shine in your Hearts; and the more
Commerce you have with the Divine Essence, the more splendor you shall enjoy.
And having obtained, use all to his Glory from whom you receive all. Be
faithful Stewards. Like as small Rivers, which pay their Tribute and
acknowledgments to the great Ocean whence they came.

3. Prize the Lord Jesus Christ; set an high esteem upon him: why do we
Reverence Learned men among our selves, as those eminent Doctors, Reynolds,
both former and latter; Perkins, Bolton, Luther, Melancthon, Musculus, Beza,
Calvin, Zanchis, Chamier, Camero and others? Among our Adversaries, Lumbard,
Aquinas, Durand, Hales, etc. Among the Gentiles, Aristotle, Plutarch, Homer,
etc. With other brave Fellows, separated from us, by many Lands and Seas, yea,
by Death; and all for their Knowledge; because we have seen a Ray of their wits
upon Paper, Beams of their Knowledge, which was but a drop of his Ocean, and a
Spark of his Light, who Enlightneth every one that comes into the World; this
made them admired. If Alexander could say, That he was more Bound to Aristotle
his Schoolmaster, than to his Natural Parent; how much more are we Bound unto
and should we Prize and Praise our Omniscient Jesus?

Secondly, we have here offered to our Consideration, The Omnipotency of our
God, in whom we Believe.

He calls; i. e. he Causes things not only to appear, but also to be in
time, as they were willed and seen before time;

This Power is either Absolute; whereof sacred writings say but little, and
about which, we are not to enquire; or Actual, as Limited by his Will, and
Ordered by his Wisdom, to give being, and dispose his Creatures by means, to
their several ends. Of which we are now to discourse; giving us two
Observations; viz.

1. That our God, in whom Abraham believed, and we should belilve, is
Omnipotent.

2. That the Omnipotency of our God, in whom we should believe, is a firm
ground of Faith.

For the former; Our God is Omnipotent. He can do all things that imply not
Imperfection; as to Sin, and deny himself: to Sin, is against his Supremacy; he
has no Superior against whom he might offend; It is against his Natural
Sanctity and Omnipotency. Or, that imply not a Contradiction; as to be and not
to be at the same time, in the same Respect, because that is Repugnant to
Entity*

Thi^ is true of all the Persons; 1. Of the Father; none ever Acknowledging a
God, denying it. So we have it in the Apostles Creed, I believe in God, the
Father Almighty. Where, Almighty, is applied to the Father, Inclusively; as,
Lord, or Dominion is appropriated to the Son, not excluding the Father or the
Holy Spirit. Hence it is, that Heretics have appropriated all the Attributes
of Eternity, Omnisciency, Omnipotency, to the Father alone.

2. It is true of the Son. John 1.3. All things were made by him, and without
him was nothing made. Which latter Clause, is added for ^e more Certainty; it
being usual with the Hebrews, thus by Negation to Confirm, what before they
have affirmed, where they would assure that the thing is so indeed. He is
therefore styled, The first and the last, Revel. 1.17. It is a verity that is
written with the Rays of a vast number of Divine Witnesses.

3. It is true of the Holy Spirit. Genesis 1.2. The Spirit moved on the Face of
the Waters; i. e. he sustained them by the Power of his Sublimity. However
Interpreters have varied hereabout, yet all conclude it to be the Spirit of
God, nothing distinct from the Deity, or Infinite Active Power of God. So the
Psalmist, 95 Psalm, which our Apostle takes notice of, as spoken not by, but of
the Holy Spirit; Hebr. 3.7.

The Grounds whereof are twofold,

1. The Unity of Nature does imply, equality of Power; we say, we believe there
are three Subsistences in the Divine Essence, and that each of those Persons,
is truly and properly God: and we find such Attributes and works ascribed to
the whole Nature of the Deity, to the several Persons Subsisting in that Divine
Nature, as do evince their Power to be the same.

2. This Manifestation of power, is opus ad extra, and therefore common:
According to that constant Rule of Credit among all Divines, Opera Trinitatis
ad extr^ sunt indivisa: But especially Attributed to the Second Person here and
in most places; because that is most beneficial to the Church, and is most
opPosed by Enemies. Genesis 17.1. I am God Almighty, [Elshaddai,] signifying,
either Sufficiency, because he is sufficient of himself, as Psalm 16.2. My
Goodness extends not to thee, etc. He is Infinitely above Creatures; Infinite
in Essence and Goodness, comprehending within himself all good, and
anticipating it to all Eternity with an incomparable Eminency. Or else, it
signifies, Omnipotency (for the word will bear both) all things yielding to
him, both for their being, order and continuance. Genesis 18.14. Is there any
thing too hard for the Lord? Numb. 23.19. God is not as m^n that he should lie,
neither the Son of Man, that he should Repent; has he said, and shall he not
do it? Mat. 19.26. With God all things are possible.

But what need of proof? It is a truth written as with Rays of the Sun;
confirmed at least 70 times in the Scriptures of God, as some have taken pains
to reckon them. Add we may,

1. The Confession and practice of the Saints of God in all Ages; 2 Chronicles.
20.12. O our God will thou not judge them? 2 Chronicles. 25.9. God has power to
help and to cast down. Flying from their Enemies both inward and outward, to
rest upon his Rock of Power. Romans 7.25. I thank God through Jesus Christ. 1
Cor. 15.57. O Death where is thy Sting! Thanks be to God through Christ.

2. The works of Christ; Curing the Diseased; Mark 5.26,27. Cleansing the
Temple, Math. 21.12,13. Which Jerome Attributes to his Omnipotency; that he so
mean, should attempt a matter so considerable, against so many proud, insolent
persons, armed with Authority, and at such a time; and extolls it above raising
of Lazarus from the Dead, Restoring the Blind to sight, and the Lame to their
Limbs. This was his Divine Work. Not to omit the mentioning of his Changing
Water into Wine; John 27.

Thus as the greatness of the Sun is measured by a small Shadow on the Earth,
so many times there needs but few words to illustrate a great Virtue.

The Reasons are many, I shall choose out and insist upon two only:

1. The Unity of Nature common to all the Persons, John 17.22. As we are one.
Vnum per Vnitatem; i. e. by the absolute simplicity of Nature. Phil. 2.6. Who
-- Reckoned himself equal with God, in that incomprehensible abundance of
Perfection, whereof the supreme Adorable Nature is full; as Life, Goodness,
Immensity, Eternity, Holiness, and all other Properties, which it has in an
infallible manner. Now from the purity and Perfection of that Infinite Being,
we may thus argue for Omnipotency, viz.

That which has Being and is most distant from Passive Power, being Ens
Simplissimum, and Actus purissimus, a most Simple Being, and a most pure Act,
must partake Infinitely of Active Power; which is Omnipotency,

Again; In whom is found the Perfection of all things, in him is also found the
Perfection of Power: But in Christ is found the Perfection of all things,
Eminently, as is already proved, therefore in him, is the Perfection of Power;
which is Omnipotency, to which nothing can be added.

2. The Equality of Attributes; as is his Knowledge, so is his Will and Power,
Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven and Earth. Now
Knowledge and Power, are according to the Condition of Nature; Men know and can
do something; Angels know and can do more; but God most of all, his Knowledge is
Infinite, and so must his Power needs be.

The Second Doctrine from hence, now comes to hand, viz. That this is a
Principal Ground of Faith.

See Heb. 11.6. Without Faith it is Impossible to please God; for he that
comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him.

Genesis 17. When God would encourage Abraham, he makes himself known by the
glorious Attribute of his Almighty Power; I am God Alsufficient. Math. 8.2.
Lord if thou will, thou can make me Clean. There is no such proper Pillar to
uphold a falling Spirit, as this of the power of God; No Shade like to this,
toward off the strokes of Evil. One Shine of this Attribute in its full Luster
of Glory, is able to dispell in a moment, all the nights of Fear, Doubts,
Temptations, which may at any time overspread the Heaven of the Soul, it
causes them utterly to vanish. Here Is the Adamantine Bulwark against all
Adversary Power. The Devil is Mighty, but not Almighty, as my God and Savior
is; was that comforted Luther, that Incarnate Seraphin, and Champion of Christ.

How it is so, will further appear, if we consider,

1. The Difficulty of things offered, both for matter and manner. As that all
things should be ours again, after they were lost; that the Divine and Humane
Nature should be united; that a Virgin should Conceive and Bear a Son; what
great and admirable things are these? Here are matters which the cleerest
Understandings of Men and Angels entertain with Amazement, things in a Sphere
above Nature, beyond all Humane Disquisition; The deep things of God; the
Divine Omnipotency can only maintain Faith in the sense of their possibility.

2. His Propriety in and over all. He made all, gave them a Being according to
the Idea and Platform presented to the Divine Understanding; and he has
absolute Right to dispose of all, Romans 9.18. To do with his own as he will. His
Power is independent, and Prerogative illimited, Psalm. 8.6. to be understood of
Christ; Thou made him to have Dominion over the works of thine Hands. Which
Absolute Power flows not from the nature of Communicative Bounty, in
bestowing Gifts, to some more, to others less, and so has more or less Right
over them; for then his Power should be finite and limited, as ( Arminians
hold, only to cut off the Absolute Decree, which the Lord past by virtue of his
Right) no Creature being capable of an Infinite measure of goodness: But from
the Excellency of his Nature, being Omniscient, Omnipotent, Infinite, Eternal,
etc.

3. From the Irresistability of his power: All things do obey him. There is
nothing from Heaven to Hell which boweth not under his Laws. Romans 9.19. Who
has resisted his Will? Luke 7.7,8. Say the words, and thy Servant shall he
Healed. And this is true of Christ, as appears Math 8.27. Even the Winds and
the Seas obey him. Xerxes the Persian Monarch, threw Fetters into the Sea, as
if he would have Chained the unruly Waves; but to little purpose; but when
Christ speaks, The Winds and the Seas shall obey him. By a word he unpins the
Wheels and breaks the Axle-Tree of the whole Creation. In short, whatever the
Divine Unerstanding can Comprehend, so much the Divine Power can Execute.

4. From the Incommunicableness of this Attribute. No Creature is Capable of
being Omnipotent: and quicquid recipitur, ad modum Recipientis, Recipitur.
Besides every Creature is Resistable in the Exercise of Natural Qualities. In
him we Live and move and have our Being: he Supports, Restrains, and orders all.

But here we meet with Objections from some, who, Imitating the Sorcerers, cast
mists upon the Brightest Morning.

1 Object. May not this Omnipotency be Imputed to the Humane Nature of Christ?

Answ. By Reason of the Union Hypostatical, the Properties of both Natures may
be Communicated to the Person, and yet not mutually between the Natures. The
Natures were not Changed, nor their Properties Confounded, each Retaining
after, what was peculiar before Christ suffered and Dyed, but according to his
Humanity; Christ was Omniscient and Omnipotent, but according to his Deity.

2 Object. Is raised from that Passage of Christ himself, Math. 28.18. All
Power is given me in Heaven and in Earth; which say some, cannot be understood
of his Deity, for so he was not Capable of any Addition.

Answ. It is spoken of Christ as Mediator. Omnipotency was given to him for
Intercession, and Aplication of his Merits, for the Governing and gathering of
his Saints; That all things shall work together for good: so, John 5.22. The
Father judges no man, but has Committed all Judgment to the Son; and for
other Places of that Nature, they are to be understood, not Simply of Power,
but of Authority; according to that, 1 Cor. 15.24,25. Then the End shall come,
when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the Father, when he
shall have put down all Rule and all Authority and Power; for he must Reign
till he has Subdued all his Enemies under his Feet. Which establishes the
former answer.

3. Object. Is it not Communicated to Believers?

Answ. Christ has given very great Power to Believers, in so much as 1.
Believers can do all things; but then see whence their bow has such a back of
Steel, viz, in and from Christ, by a derived Power. Christ leaves on such as
have received him, some footsteps and Impressions of his Omnipotency: for,
whereas Divine Power Consists especially in two things viz. In Gods being able
to do all things that are Regularly possible, and his not being able to do any
thing Sinful; so, we find some Prints of both upon Christians; I can do all
things, says Saint Paul; And whosoever is born of God cannot Sin, says Saint
John: this I say, is by a derived Power, Communicated to them according to
their Capacity.

2. All things are possible to them; i. e. all things as Christ was to do for
them, or they receive from him as Mediator; all things are possible to them,
not Simply, but Respectively to that Power, unto which all things are Referred
and Subjected.

Well then; to apply the whole.

Use 1. First, Diverse Corolaries may be deduced from the whole, by way of
Information, viz.

1. That he in whom we believe, Jesus Christ, God blessed for ever, was before
all things that now have being, and gave being to all. John 8.58. Before
Abraham was, I am. John 1.2. The same was in the Beginning; in the Instant of
Creation, therefore also, before the Creation, and therefore from Eternity.
Indeed Arrius Corrupts the Greek Text, reading it thus, The Lord Created me in
the Beginning; and thence Blasphemously Inferred, that Christ was no more than
a Creature. But the Scripture says, He was set up from Everlasting; Prove.
8.23. and he is called, The Ancient of Days, Dan. 7.9. And as he was before all
things, so he gave being to all things; 1 John 3. He was not Idle with the
Father (as some Blasphemously speak) but by him as a Principal Efficient,
co-Agent, the Father and Holy Ghost, all things were made.

2. That all things (Creatures) which we see and know, once were not, and are
in the Power of God to be Reduced into nothing; or to be Disposed by him, as he
shall please, according to his Absolute Sovereignty. God has Power over every
Created being, and over every part of being; He being Jehovah, that gave being
to all and received being from none. He Confirms Scepters and Crowns; he
Raises Cities, Provinces and Monarchies; he erects States, preserves Laws, and
Travels through-out all Nature without taking pains; and can as easily Reduce
them all to nothing.

3. That there is an exact Conformity between the Decree and the Execution.
Things that had no being, were called as i^ they had been, and in time they
were, as they were before called. There is no depending Freedom in any
Creature: God sustains the Agent, and determins the Action; his Power reaches
over all.

4. That God cannot Sin, for he is Omniscient and cannot err; he is Omnipotent
and has no passive Power to receive from without, that might change his will.
Ever is to be abhorred the Blasphemous Doctrine of the Marcionites, Manichees,
and Libertines, who would make this Dreadful and Sacred Majesty the Cause of
most detestable Errors; yet with as much absurdity as they, who make the Sun
Guilty of Darkness, by whom the Heaven is enlightened; and the Sea of Dryness,
by whom the whole Earth is Moistened. And therefore Conclude against Bellarmin,
who Wickedly Imputed to Protestant Divines, that which they Detest with
greatest Loathing.

5. That we have the same ground for our Faith as Abraham had, viz. the
Omnipotency of Christ, seen in the Creation of the World, and Sustentation of
all, in bearing with all; in the great Empire and Defense of the Church and
Gospel, in the midst of Enemies; in Converting, Pardoning Sin, and Preserving
all his House from Apostasy; In all which you have a Mavelous Discovery of
his Divine Power, who makes Light to break out of Darkness, and Traces the
Rays of his Glory upon an heap of Dirt, using base and Inferior Persons and
things, for the good of his People.

6. Therefore we should not Finally doubt nor despair of our selves or others,
Math. 19.26. With God all things are possible. Romans 11.32. God is able to Graft
them in again. Saint Augustine in his third Epistle to Volusian, and
elsewhere, give Rules against distrustful Reasonings; Tota ratio facti,
Potentia Facientis; Consecra Authorem, toll Dubitationem. We must grant God to
be able to do some things, the Reason of which we are not able to Comprehend;
the whole Reason of doing, being the Power of the Doer: it is God that does
them; Consider the Author, and all doubts will cease. Let us Remember Paul *
Mary Magdalen, Ma^sses, and other Monuments of Gods Power, which has Crowned
Plants with Flowers and Fruits, that were Barren and Accursed; filled Deserts
and the most Desolate Heaths, with Exquisite and Delicate Trees; which Examples
had never come to our Hearing, had it not been for our Encouragement. With
these should every Sound Penitent be Revived and Comforted. God can turn Noisome
Dunghills into a Mine of Gold, Brands of Hell into Lightsome Stars, in the
highest Firmament; Slaves of Demons into Angels.

Doubt not, Despair not of the Church and State. Ezekiel. 37.11,12. O my People, I
will open your Graves, and cause you to come out of your Graves. What cannot
God do, who can Create? Nothing can stand before a Creating Power. He needs
no existing Matter to work upon, nor Instruments to Work with. O, what a great
thing is nothing in the Hand of God!

Use 2. Se^ondly, this Doctrine sounds sharp reproof against those, 1. Who
abuse this Atribute either in opinion or practice. In,

Opinion, as they who argue a Posse ad esse, because of the power of God; and
Attribute that to it, which implies a Contradiction; as to be a Finite Body in
Substance, and yet Infinite in Presence, to be every where. It is Christ's
Divine Property to be a^ many places at once, neither inclusively nor
exclusively. If it be said, That the Omnipotency of God may extend the
Dimensions of Christ's Body, that it may at the same time fill Heaven and Earth;
it may be easily replied, This is to make Christ a Monster, and to contradict
the very Nature of a Created Body. Yet Papists most confidently obtrude this
Principle upon the Word, and by this their Catholic Power, make a Body to be
at two places at once; as the Body of Christ in Heaven, and upon a popish Altar
at once: Which is a contradiction, and therefore a lie. Let God be true and
every man a Liar. Heaven is said to to receive Christ's Body, Acts 3.21. In

Practice; As they, First, who live as if they were Omnipotent. Such there be
in the World, who endeavor to make their Will a Law, and cause all to fall
down before them. Like Jezebel and Sennacharib; confounding Elements, and
raising Stars with the Dust of the Earth, whereby to come to the end of their
exhorbitant pretensions; Threatening to hew down Mountains, and Thunder-strike
Mortals; supposing all the ample house of Nature to be Created for them.
Swallowing the World by Avarice, and wasting it by Riot. And not only so, but
according to the improvement of their Cruel Pride, cry not, with the Old
Tyrant, for another World to plunder, but attempt the Invasion of the
Intelligible World, and commit Rapine upon Souls, making havoc of the Church
of God, to which Angels refer but as Ministering Spirits; and Lording it over
Gods Heritage, which the Apostles besought to be Reconciled to God, and never
Commanded them any thing, in their own name, and only such things, for which,
they could show unquestionable Commission. Such as these set themselves down in
the Throne of God, as Maximilian that good Emperor used to say; this being one
of those three things, the Divine Power has reserved to himself as his
Prerogative, viz. To Create, to Foretell things to come, and to Rule over
Consciences. Secondly, Living as if they cared not for him that is Omnipotent,
indeed despising his Threatenings, slighting his Promises, as if he were able to
perform neither. Whence they dare to lift an Arm against the Omnipotent! When
as all power in Heaven and in Earth, yea, all Judgment is committed to Christ.
He has Authority to relieve his Saints, to Sentence all his Enemies unto
Eternal Flames and Torments; and will make some as bright as Stars, and others
like Burning Coals in Hell. O Hear, Consider, Tremble!

2. This Doctrine casts a sharp Dart of reproof against all such that deny or
doubt of it: as those Israelites who said, Can the Lord provide Flesh also? And
that Court-Favourite, 2 Kings 7.2. Who, when the Prophet Elisha, by the Command
of God, foretold the great Plenty of Samaria, dared to say, If the Lord open
the Windows of Heaven, can these things be? Such unbelieving hearts are among
us to this day. Can the Lord do this or that? Is he able to accomplish what he
has promised, can he Heal my Backslidings, pardon my Sins, and save my Soul?
As if the Lord Jehovah, lived after the rate of Creatures. This is to reproach
the Holy One of Israel.

3. Against such as rely altogether on the Power of God, without the use of
Means. As the former sort Reproach God, so these Tempt God. The Lord could
indeed Enlighten us without the Sun, and afford us Fruit without the Earth; but
he will have the Creature Operate. The very Heathen could say, Admota manu,
Invocanda est Minerva; and the Sage Greek, Rebuked the foolish Carter, who,
when his Wagon stuck in the Mud, Cried to God, but never put his hand to help
himself: Means must be used. Though men live not by Bread alone, but by the
word of Gods Blessing proceeding out of his Mouth, yet that word is Annexed to
Bread, and not to Stones: and that man should not Trust but Tempt God, who
would have Stones turned into Bread, because God has Power so to do. And if
God have provided stairs it is not Faith but Fury, not Confidence but Madness
to go down a Precipice. Second Means must be used in Obedience to Gods order,
though not in Confidence of their help; the Creature must be the Object of our
Diligence, but God only the Object of our Trust.

Use 3. Thirdly, This Doctrine, as it is sufficient to terrify the Wicked, so
it is to give occasion of Confidence to the Faithful; since it has an Eternal
alliance with him that governs the World. Read your matchless Consolation, in
the following particulars.

1. Against Sin, Satan and all Enemies of the Church, that Christ is
Omnipotent, 2 Chronicles. 20.15. In the Words of King Jehosophat to the People of
Judah, Thus says the Lord to you, Be not afraid or dismayed because of this
great Multitude, for the Battle is not yours but Gods. 2 Chronicles. 32.7,8.
Hezekiah said to the People, Be strong and Courageous, be not Afraid or
Dismayed, for the Kings of Assyria, nor for the Multitude that is with them,
for they are more with us than with them. Whatever Power or Counsel shall be
set up against Heaven, shall not succeed against the design of Heaven. The vast
Numbers of men, trouble him no more, than those Millions of Waves in the Sea,
are a trouble to that great Ocean. All Nations before him, are but as one drop
of the Dew. He Causes whole Countries to tremble under the Force of his Word,
as under Lightning Arrows; and is attired with the Conquest and Trophies of
Souls. O the Wonders of God! He Causes the Arrows of those that Invade his
Kingdom, to Return against them that shot them; as in Julian's Case was
apparent; which we only mention. Though he thought by the help of his false
Gods, to Command the Waves of the Sea, and to walk upon the Stars, yet was he
buried in Execration and Horrors.

And as it is in Temporals, so it is in Spirituals. He can subdue the strongest
Corruptions, Break the hardest Heart, relieve the most Fainting Graces. Let all
Christ's People learn to look up, and then you will,

1. Patiently suffer and wait. He is Omniscient and Omnipotent; He knows all
and can relieve all.

2. You will learn to rest upon him, Psalm 37.3. Trust in the Lord and do good,
so shall thou dwell in the Land. You will not trust in men and frame to your
selves an arm of Straw; but confide in him, who with the Fingers of his Power
sustains the whole Globe of the Earth. You will not Adore the Favors of men,
which are like the Rainbow in Heaven, which having made show of many Splendours
and varied Paintings, leaves nothing but Water and Mortar. You will then no
more build Fortunes on Foundations of Silver, upon a Frail man, who bears all
the Fingers of Vanity. God is a Wall of Brass about his people. Lo I am with
you to the end of the World! In all Conditions. If Daniel be in the Lions Den,
he shall be visited by God, and the Lions change their Nature, for regard to
him. If the three worthiest be cast into the Fiery Furnace, Nebuchadnezzars
Hell, they shall walk entire, assisted by the Angel of God, as in a Meadow
Enameld over with Flowers: And now, when, one would have thought, that whole
Religion had been dead, the Divine Power Writes her Praises in Characters of
Fire. Whoever forsakes the Lords People, he will not forsake them. He is the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

2. This Doctrine speaks singular Comfort against losses, of Country, Friends,
Estate, Liberty, and all outward Comforts; if you be in Covenant with him that
is Omnipotent. This was Abraham's Case, Genesis 17 1. Fear not Abraham, I am thy
Shield; I am God Almighty, or All-sufficient; before whom nothing can stand
when he will accomplish his Word. This was a bottom of great Confidence to
Abraham, as we are informed, Romans 4.29. Being fully persuaded, etc. Where ever
God is engaged by his Word, his Power is especially to be eyed. Persons are apt
to ask, How can these things be? It is impossible it should be so and so to us;
but he is able, Omnipotent. It is he that made Joseph's Abasements to be his
Advancements; and that turned Balaams Curse into a Blessing. He can bring Meat
out of the Eater, and Sweet out of the Strong, and cause Grapes to be gathered
of Thorns, and Figs from Thistles, make Friends of Enemies, your Wound your
Cure, your Affliction, your Consolation. Nay, your Weakness, your Strength. So
that as the same Water is sour in the juice of a Figtree, is sweet in the
fruit; so the Troubles which in their bark are but sour and unpleasing, shall
notwithstanding in the fruit of them be exceeding sweet.

Use 4. Lastly, Be ye Instructed to be followers of Abraham, in this Winterly
Age of the World: to build on this Foundation, in your Obedience both Active
and Passive.

1. Be persuaded of this Truth, Measure not God by the Ell of man, Cloth him
not in your Fashion. Hold not that Impossible to the Divinity, what your weak
Understanding cannot Apprehend. Be persuaded,

First, That he is able to cast down the Strongest and Proudest Enemies of his
Kingdom: Isa. 37.29. Because thy Rage against me and thy Tumult is come up into
mine Ears, therefore will I put mine Hook into thy Nose, and my Bridle in thy
Lips, etc. When the Rage and Tumult of Christ's Adversaries is highest, then
will he get himself most Glory, by putting a Hook in their Nostrils, and
turning them as he pleases. Can any thing be too hard for God? this God of
Power, who Darkneth the Air with Tempests, makes Clouds to pour down in
Deluges, and Swallows up the Fleets of petty Pharo's? He who flies upon wings
of the Wind, over the Curling Waters of the Sea, Inflaming Lightnings, and
makes Blood and Scorpions to Rain on the Rebels of the Earth?

Secondly, That he is able to Raise out of the lowest Condition. Witness Job on
the Dunghill, Israel in Egypt, the Christians of the Primitive Church, and all
along, whence they were ready to cry out, There is no Hope. His Power and
Essence walk Hand in Hand; in so much, as Power in God is nothing else but the
Effective Essence of God.

Object. We all believe Gods Power, but doubt of his Will.

Answ. All do not believe his Power. The unregenerate man believes not at all.
All unbelief does secretly question the Power of God. And Renewed men believe
not Fully. Things past and present, all can believe, because they are seen, but
things promised, because they Transcend the Course of natural Causes, and the
Contrivances and Projects which they forecast, they often Flag and Falter about
them. For,

1. They limit him in their thoughts, they will have such and such Graces, so
much in the use of Means, and such Means, those of their own Choice, rather
than others; whereas God is an Independing Agent, and works where, when, and as
he will. As God is Omnipotent to Command Supplies for any help, so he is
Absolute to Choose what Means he pleaseeth, and his Wisdom shall pitch upon.

2. They Determine and often Conclude against themselves, and rashly too, and
against their present Condition; being brought to some extremity, they drew up
desperate Conclusions against Mercy it self, saying, The Lord will be gracious
no more; I shall surely fall by the strength of this Corruption and that
Temptation. Mrs. Honywoods Case is famous; who confidently affirmed, she should
be Damned, as sure as that Glass would break, that she threw against the wall.
And David in his haste said, I am cut off from before thine Eyes. If they are
advanced, then they shall never be cast down; David also in such a Case could
say, My Mountain shall never be moved: good News lifts them up, and ill News
casts them down. It argues a great Defect, in the uncertainty of the heart
with God, who is both powerful and willing.

2. Make use of this Doctrine and Truth delivered about Christ's Omnipotency,
these three ways, viz.

First, in your Faith to believe his Word. Prophecies shall be accomplished,
Promises be fulfilled. Antichrist shall fall. Psalm 2.7. Thou shall break,
them with a Rod of Iron, etc. Ezekiel. 24.14. I the Lord have spoken it, it shall
come to pass. Accordingly when the Seven Angels appeared with the seven last
Plagues, they that stood on the Sea of Glass, said in their Song, Great and
Mavelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty, etc. And when the third of them
poured out his Viol upon the Rivers of Water, an Angel of the Altar said, Even
so Lord God Almighty, etc. So that all who wish well to Sion, make full
account, that in due time the Mountain of the Lord shall be set upon the top of
all Mountains, because it has been promised of old, and be confident, as it is
expressed in 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. That the wicked one shall be consumed by the Breath
of his Mouth, etc. Because this Commination stands upon the file in Holy
Scripture, and is not yet verified. Though God do not allways fulfill his
Threatenings, but on Repentance revoke them; yet he always fulfills his
Promises to them that fear him and hope in his Mercy.

Secondly, in your Prayers, to Crave his Aid and Assistance. Whatever ye ask
the Father in my name, he will give it you. Let men be never so prone, the
Carnal Appetite uniting with a probable Object, being able of it self no more
to Resist, than a Stone can from Descending, or the Adamant from Drawing, yet
the Lord can Restrain, Renew, do away all old things, and make all to become
New. To whom shall we go? Thou have the words of Eternal Life. From his eyes
alone, are darted Rays of most Powerful Compassions.

Thirdly, In your Patience under any of his Rods, and Diseases Natural,
Spiritual, Political. Ephesians. 3.20. He is able to do abundantly above all, what
we are able to ask or think. It is a tried Case, Psalm. 3.6. I will not be
afraid of ten Thousands of People that have set themselves against me round
about. O say, Fie upon Despair and minds Affliction! Learn in all things that
appertain to you, speedily and Effectually to fix your selves on the Will of
the Omnipotent. Continually say, God sees this Affair, since nothing escapes
the Quickness of his Eye. Expect but a while, the Trouble is but a Flying
Cloud, and God will do all for the best. Thus did Abraham in the Text; Above
Hope he believed in Hope, because God quickneth the Dead, and calls things
that are not, as though they were.

Verse. 18. Who against Hope, Believed in Hope. --


THese words Contain a lively Description of Abraham's Faith, drawn from the
Internal Form, it was (...), A Phrase Difficult to be understood, but most
aptly serves to show the Difficulty of believing. Some turn the word (...) by
Praeter, besides hope; others, by Supra, above Hope; a third sort, by Absque,
without. All may be true, but not reach so fully Home, neither to the Word nor
Scope of the Apostle. Our last Translation therefore, following many, both
Ancient and Modern Divines, Reads it, Against; and so I find some Refering it,

1. To the time of Abraham's Faith; in the beginning of his Age he had hope, but
this was against that. In the middle of his Age he complained, as if there were
no hope; Genesis 15.2. Lord what will thou give me, since I go childless? But this
was after that.

2. Others refer it to the kinds of hope, or degrees of one and the same hope;
whom I rather choose to follow.

First, understand it was spoken of two Kinds of Hope; one natural, when Reason
apprehends Grounds why such a thing may be; and this is proportionably common
to men with Beasts. Another Divine; when a man waits for that he can see no
ground in himself, nor reason for. Abraham was against the first, and in the
second.

Secondly, Others take it for one and the some hope, but in different degrees,
It was weak and doubtful in the beginning but strong and firm in the end. Faith
and Hope (two individual companions; Hope springing from Faith, as the Stream
from the Fountain, or the Daughter from the Mother) meet with many oppositions,
but prove victorious in the end. Yiedling us three things Right Worthy of
Observation, viz.

1. The Connection of these two Theological Graces, Believing in Hope. Romans 5.2.
By whom also we have Access by Faith into this ^race wherein we stand, and
rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God. 1 Pet. 1.21. By whom we do believe in God
that raised him from the Dead and gave him Glory, that your [Faith and Hope]
might be in God. The Sun and the Beams go together, and so do Faith and H^pe.

The Reasons are, 1. They are infused at once, when the Spirit is given to the
Elect, as they are capable of it, before, in, or after Baptism. What they say
of the Cardinal Virtues, Su^t inter se conn^xae, they are chained together, may
be also s^id of the Graces of Gods Spirit, who pl^nts an habit of all the
Graces in the Heart. The New Creature has ^ll the Parts and Lineaments, a
mixture of all the Humors.

2. From the order and manner of Working; o^ begette h stirs up and manifest
(...) it self by another. Romans 5 3,4. And not only so, but we Glory in
Tribulations also, knowing that Tribul^ion work^th Patience; and Patience,
Experience; and Exeperience, H^p; etc. Faith there is a Mother ^cended with her
Daughters. Romans 15 13. The God of Hope fill you w th ^ll Joy and Peace in
believing, that you may abound in Hope. 1 Cor. 13.7. Charity believes all
things, Hops all things, etc. Heb. 12.1. Faith is the Substance of things not
seen. Faith lights the Lamp to hope, as the Fire of the Altar lighted the Lamps
of the Sanctuary.

2. We are hence to observe, the Difficulty of believing; it is against Hope.
Math. 19.13. a Rich man can hardly Enter into the Kingdom of God.

This appears diverse ways; viz.

1. From the Efficient necessarily required to work Faith in the Heart. Ephesians.
1.19. It is called the exceeding greatness of his Power to usward who believe.
A Difficult Work requires a great Power to accomplish it. Man, as Clem.
Alexandrinus observes, is Gods Harp; the Harp cannot sound unless it be touched
with the finger, neither can the Heart of man sound forth any Gracious Harmony,
till it be touched by the Finger of Gods Spirit; Sin having disordered the
Strings of that Harmonious Instrument, put it out of Tune, and marred its
Music, and there is nothing but Jarring; and so it continues, till that great
Musician, who tunes the whole World and makes all things keep time and measure,
set this Instrument in Tune again.

2. From the Paucity of Believers. Isa 58.1. Who has believed our Report? etc.
Luke 18.8. When the Son of man comes, shall he find Faith on the Earth? Among
the Millions at Rome, there were but few Senators; and among the swarms of
People in the World, there are but few Beleivers. In themselves, indeed
Considered, they are many, as the Stars which adorn the Azure Firmament, as the
Sands on the Sea shore for Multitude; but Comparatively, they are very few. As
in the Field there are more Weeds than sweet Flowers, and in the Earth more
Dross than Gold; Thus it is here. The Trees of Righteousness are thinly Planted
in the Worlds Orchard. There are but few Birds of Paradise, to the Birds of
Prey: Notwithstanding all the Means of Grace, Preaching, Exhorting, Reading,
etc. few Believers.

3. From the many Enemies of Faith, and other Impediments; There is Satan, Luke
22.31. Satan has desired to win^ow you as Wheat, but I have prayed, that thy
Faith fail not. This is the main thing he aims at, This he Assaults,
endeavoring to blindfold the Eye of Judgment; to allure the Will and
Affections after Toys, Pleasure, Profits and worldly Honors: persuading
sometime to presume, other-while driving to Despair. Thus he sifts and Winnows
poor Souls, to keep them in Unbelief, or Misbeleif. There is the World of
Unregenerate men, as the Scribes and Pharisees, watching to catch our Savior
that they might accuse him; Concluding, if any man did Confess Christ, he
should be put out of the Synagogue, John 9.22. Yea, for a time, Paul, a Chosen
Vessel, was used as an Instrument that way; Acts 28.23. Concerning this Sect,
it is spoken against every where. A great Discouragement. Yea, our own Natural
Abilities, which are Antipodes to Grace; Romans 1.22. Professing themselves wise,
they became Fools. 1 Cor. 1.22. The Jews Require a Sign, the Greeks seek after
Wisdom; not that which comes from above; by Wisdom they could not come to the
Knowledge of God, but proved most Vain and Corrupt, when they endeavored to be
most Exact.

So that we may Conclude with the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.10,11. etc. Finally my
Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might; put on the
whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against all the Wiles of the
Devil; For we wrestle not with Flesh and Blood, etc.

2. We observe hence, The growth, increase, and Final Victory of True Grace.

Against Hope he believed in Hope. Math. 13.32. The Kingdom of Heaven is
compared to a Grain, and to Leaven that leaveneth the whole Lump. Grace is of a
spreading nature, it swells it self into the whole man, and makes the Soul rise
as high as Heaven. Grace lies not in the Heart, as a Stone in the Earth, but
puts it self forth in vigorous Actings. To this refers that exhortation, 2 Pet.
3.17. Fall not from your Stedfastness, but grow in Grace, etc. The first
appearance of it on the Soul, may be but as the Wings of the Morning, spreading
themselves upon the Mountains, yet it is still rising higher and higher upon
it, Chasing away all filthy Mists and Vapors of Sin, till it arrive to its
Meridian height; such is the strength and force of Divinity in it. Though at
first, when it enters on the Soul, it may seem to be sown in weakness, yet it
still raise^h it self in Power: As Christ was in his Bodily appearance, still
increasing in Wi^dom and Knowledge, and Favor with God and Man, till he was
perfected with Glory; so is he also in his Gracious Appearance in his Saints,
who shall go from strength to strength, till they appear before God in Sion.

The Reasons hereof are taken,

1. From the Principle or Fountain whence Grace Flows; And that is, Christ
and his Spirit; of Infinite Value and irresistible Efficacy; so that unless
Christ be overcome, Grace cannot be overcome. Grace being a Creature, is in its
own nature perishing (for ours is no better Coin than Adams) but in Christ's
Keeping it can never perish. The Saints Graces of themselves, like Glass, may
break, but being held in the Hand of Christ, they can never be broken; 1 Pet.
1.5. We are kept by the Power of God through Faish unto Salvation. The small
Mustard Seed shall not be killed, the little Spark of Fire shall not be
quenched; there is an overflowing Power to draw them forth and perfect them.
Wherever the frame of Grace is begun, it shall be brought forth to a
compleatness, and Christ's Kingdom in that Soul shall be victorious over all
opposition of Corruption.

2. From the Nature of the Opposers of Grace: They are finite, and mortally
Wounded. Our Lord led Captivity Captive, Heb. 2.14. And through Death has
Destroyed him who has the Power of Death. So that upon serious Consideration,
I may say to all the Faithful, as Elisha sometime spoke, 2 Kings 6.16. Fear
not, for they that are with you are more than they with them. Though inward
Corruption and outward Enemies be Numerous and strong, yet they shall not
Finally prosper. Where Christ promotes his Kingdom, it is so established, that
the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Assaulted it may be, but
Conquered it can never be. As it is said of the old Romans, they lost some
Battles, but never lost a war. Christians may have some Foils, but they shall
be finally Victorious.

Use 1. In the Application hereof, I shall endeavor a little further to
Discover the Nature of this Grace of Hope, etc.

1. By way of Information; the Enquiry will be,

First, What it is?

Answ. It is a Divine Virtue, Infused by the Spirit into the Understandings and
Wills of Actual Members of the Militant Church, whereby they certainly and
patiently wait for those good things God has promised, Romans 8.24,25. We are
saved by Hope; but Hope that is seen is no Hope; for what a man sees, why does
he yet hope for? but if we hope for that we see not, then we do with Patience
wait for it.

In which Description we have expressed or Employed, four things:

1. The Principal Author, The Spirit of God; 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his Abundant mercy has
Begotten us again unto a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the Dead.

2. The Subject inclusive; partly the Understanding, partly the Will; the one
Informed, the other persuaded to expect.

3. The Object about which it is Employed; either Formal; which is God alone;
his Power, Truth and Help to obtain the promised Good: or Material; and that is
Glory, considered three ways, viz. First, of the Soul, which is Grace, and is
the Object of Hope, either in the Preparatives, whilst the Lord is Disposing
the Subject for Grace; Or, in Regard of a Fuller Measure of Degrees thereof; it
not being with the Trees of Righteousness, as it was with the Trees of
Paradise, made perfect at once. Secondly of the Body; and so all the good
things that a member of the Church Militant is capable of, are a Secondary
Object of Hope. Thirdly, the Glory of both, which is perfect Beatitude in the
Heavenly Kingdom; as the end whereunto all other means lead the Elect.

4. The Conditions of this Material Object, which Aquinas describes to be,

Good; Hope looks at some good; so it differs from Fear, whichlooks at Evil.

Future Good; so that the Saints in Heaven, have no need nor use of it: their
Expectation is drowned in Fruition.

Difficult, Hope looks on, and considers upon one side Pearls, which yet are in
the shell; and on the other side Roses; which yet it may enjoy with some Labor.

Such was Abraham's Hope, that he should be the Father of such a Posterity,
being as it were Dead; that he should enjoy a Land flowing with Milk and Honey;
yet he was to suffer Famine, and wait for it forty years. And Lastly,

Possible; So there is no Hope in the Damned. It is in those on this side the
Grave, quickened by the Living Spirit of God. Though the things they hope for
are hard to come by, yet they are possible, and this is like Cork to the Net,
keeps the heart from sinking into Despair; it being the Balm of all Grief, the
Coffin of Fear, and Cradle of Patience.

Secondly, What are opposites of this Grace?

Answ. Two, 1. Presumption; the Unbeliever hopes without ground, and will be
invincibly followed by an ill success of his pretensions. The Rays of Abraham's
Hope were grounded on a good Title; but men of another Stamp act otherwise;
their Hope is an Imposture, a Golden Dream. Like a dying man's Will, that has
neither Seal nor Witness to it: Therein he bequeaths such and such Lands and
Legacies to one and to another: but the Will being thus left naked, it
signifies little: Such is the hope of a wicked man; it promises him great
matters, that all in the Covenant of Grace is his, Christ and Heaven; but alas,
all is a mere Delusion, a Presumption of his own Heart.

2. Despair; not Legal, which was in Abraham, and others; But Evangelical,
notwithstanding all ground of Hope. So Abraham did not: Despair looks on things
through black Spectacles, and gives all for lost; Hope does the contrary.

Q How is it possible to hope against Hope?

Answ. 1. Because of the Power of Christ, upon which the Soul does in great
Straits, roll it self. Whatever Lets and Impediments do arise, between the
Promise and the fulfilling of it; though they be as high as Mountains, and as
the Gates of Hell, yet the Believer can by Faith look upon them all but as
Difficulties which cannot check the Power of Christ, but only Magnify it. For,
as jealous Thoughts of the Divine Arm, or fear that it may be encountered with
some insuperable opposition, makes the Hope of Promised Good, to be weak and
uncertain, so the faithful and serious consideration of Gods Power, a resting
upon it, produces Hope against Hope, it turns every Valley of Achor into a
door of Hope, administers Manna in the Wilderness, and draws water out of the
Rock, brings light out of darkness, comfort out of every Trial. Thus Miconius
wrote to Calvin upon view of the Churches Enemies, reflecting upon the Power of
Christ; Gaudeo quod Christus Dominus est, alioquin totus Desperassem. I am Glad
that Christ Reigns, otherwise I should utterly despair. So the Believer in the
midst of Straits, rejoices in the Power of Christ, who lives and Reigns for
ever and ever!

2. The Spirit of Christ inwardly works and nourishes some Sparks of Hope
always in the Hearts of his people. Thus it was with Job, David, Paul, and a
vast number of other faithful Souls, who sparkling with the lightning Rays of
Hope, have lift up their Palms in the midst of Hazzards, and Gained Heaven by
Violence, still laying the degrees of their Honor in the depth of suffering.
This, like an Anchor, holds the Ship of the Soul in her greatest Storms, and
like an Helmet keeps off the Blows of the Sword or Arrows from entering, 1
Thessal. 5.8. Let us who are of the day, be sober, putting on the Breast Plate
of Faith and Love, and for an Helmet the Hope of Salvation. In time of public
Calamities, the Righteous have Hope. Joel 3.16. The Lord will roar out of Zion,
the Heaven and Earth shall shake, but the Lord will be the Hope of his People.
So that if all outward hope be taken away, their hope in God is not taken away.
Upon this account it was, that the Jews being Prisoners in Babylon, are called
Prisoners of Hope, Zech. 9.10. If Heaven and Earth be ready to come together,
yet through the strength of the Divine Spirit working in their Hearts,
Believers have Hope; which as a Bow in the Heavens all furnished with Emeralds,
never loses it force.

3. Their former Experiences are a Foundation of Hope against Hope. Romans 5.4.
-- And Experience, Hope. Hos. 2.5. I will give the Valley of Achor for a door
of Hope. This Valley of Achor (so called from Achans Sacrilege, to deter men
from Sin,) some think to be the same with Engeddi, mentioned so often in the
Canticles; however, both are near to Jericho, and in it, they tasted the first
Fruits of Canaan, as an earnest of the rest: in it they saw abundance of
Plenty, and were Delighted and Refreshed therewith: all that the Lord did then
for his People, and now says, he will give it to the Church, for a door of
Hope. A Believer brings in a Catalogue of Experiences; Psalm. 119.65. Thou have
dealt well with thy Servant! In how many Cases has he had Experience of God?
when Sin and Temptation have been strong, he has come in with Auxiliary
Forces, and his Grace has proved sufficient. When the poor Soul has been even
sinking under Fear, God has recovered him out of the Quicksands, and lifted
his head above the deep Water. Psalm. 33. O Lord thou art my Glory and the
lifter up of my Head: When David was in the Mouth of Danger, the Lord delivered
him. I was plucked out of the Mouth of the Lion; so Saint Paul. The Believer
has many Experiences and these beget Hope. Thou have and wilt Deliver, says
Experimental David.

4. By looking on things, not as they are at present, or in their own power,
but as they shall be by the Lords promise. Surely says the poor Believer, He
is faithful that has promised: As he is able to fulfill the least Iota, of
whatever he has spoken, so he is infallible in what he promises. As no
impediment can arise to hinder his Power, so no contingency can fall out to
alter his Will; all his Promises being in Christ Jesus yea and Amen, 2 Cor.
1.20.

These and such like Meditations serve to uphold and keep Believers from being
injurious to God, or themselves, and to believe in Hope against Hope.

Use 2. This Doctrine administers incomparable Comfort; whosoever is Christ's,
is enabled to believe in Hope against Hope. When Comfort can neither be seen,
felt nor apprehended, when Fears and Distresses are on every side, and all hope
of safety is taken away, when nature affords no ground of Hope, or
encouragement to expect the fulfilling of a Promise, but suggesting many posing
arguments to impede and gainsay the Truths of it, and to make Faith as feeble
as their Bodies, when old and Crazy; then to hope against Hope.

1. That the Church shall be raised and preserved from so many Enemies, is
against Hope. 2 Chronicles. 20.12. O our God, will thou not judge us? for we have no
Might against this great Company that comes against us, neither know we what
to do, but our eyes are upon thee.

2. That a Wound shall be Healed; It is against Hope. Prove. 18.14. A Wounded
Spirit who can bear?

3. That many and strong Lusts shall be vanquished and subdued; Romans 7.24. O
Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me, from this Body of Sin and Death!

4. That an impure Soul shall be prepared for and received into Heaven; it is
against hope; yet see Isa. 1.18. Come let us reason together, says the Lord,
though your Sins be as Red as Crimson, I will make them white as Snow. -- To
day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Oh, strive for this Heavenly Hope.

Q. How may it be Attained?

A. As other Graces are wrought, so is this. It is the work of God; wherefore
he is called, The God of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. He is the first Planter, the
Promoter and Finisher of Grace. God is called the Father of Lights, and he must
light up this Candle in your Souls.

More particularly, it is obtained, 1. By Experience, Romans 5.4. as David
argued, 1 Samuel 17.37. And Holy Paul, 2 Cor. 1.20. Experience breeds Confidence.
Thou have, thou shall, is the ordinary argument used by the Psalmist. And so
the Church comforted her self, and Nourishes her Hope, Lament. 3.21,24. This I
Recalled to mind, therefore I hope in thee. And, The Lord is my Portion, says
my Soul, therefore will I Hope in him. The observation of Gods Merciful Acts of
Providence to his Church in general, as to any of his People in particular, is
the way to kindle Hope. 2. By Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures. Romans
15.4. As the Blood and Spirits are conveyed by the Veins and Arteries, so is
the Spirit of God by the Word and Promise, helping the Soul to lay hold on
Christ by Faith, which is a Grace, as of Union, so of Establishment.

Q. How may it be known where it is?

Answ. 1. By the Object thereof, God in Christ, things Above; not Means, not
Creatures, principally or Terminatively. A man of such hope, dares not pluck
off the Crown from the head of Free Grace, or snatch it out of the hand of
Divine Power, to set it on the head of any Creature; But he makes God his hope.
Thus is Abraham's Faith described.

2. By the manner of working. First, it begets a Care and Love to Purity. 1
John 3.3. He that has this Hope, Purifieth himself even as he is Pure. As
Lightning is to the Air, such is Hope to the Soul; It purifieth the Soul, after
an high Strain, even as God is pure; Secundum speciem, though not ad gradum; i.
e. In kind and Quality; though not in Act, yet in desire and affection. Hope
purges the Conscience from dead works, to serve the Living and True God. By it
the Soul draws nigh to God, and comes to have a sight and view of him, and is
thereby assimulated to him. Proportionable to our Faith, so is our Holiness,
and according to our expectations will be our Conversations. Secondly, It
quickens to Duty, is a Whetstone to Industry. It is Hope that carries the Ship
to Sea, and ploughs the Curled Ocean: It is Hope that weilds the Soldiers
Weapon, and steels his Helmet: It is Hope that feeds the Sower, even when he
seems to cast away his Seed; very Tears are dropped in hope; and so Mournful
Souls are led along the milky way, to the Eternal Father. Hope teaches men to
cast Bread upon the waters, where it may be fed and afterward restored. Thus
Divine Hope is active in its influence, is as Wind to the Sails, Wheels to the
Chariot, and wings to the Bird; It makes active in Religion, To Run the way of
Gods Commandments, and never cease, till its object be obtained. The Furnace
shall not terrify a man's hope in Christ: As fire, it is sparkling and Flaming:
Though the Winds blow, the Rain fall and Rage, yet Hope seated in the Heart of
a Believer, as on a Rock, grows up against Hope, and so perseveres in
expectation, till Charity, that circling endless thing, has perfected its
wings to make its Flight to the Eternal City of Repose, passing the Vail into
the Tabernacle of the Sanctuary, where JESUS the Forerunner has made his
Entry, for the Salvation of his Faithful Ones.

Glory be to God in the Highest!
The Justice of GOD ASSERTED, IN Seeming Contrariant Providence: And
Vindicated from the Cavils of Corrupt Men under them.

Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is holy in all his ways, and righteous in all his
works.

Rev. 153. Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints.

London: Printed for Benj. Alsop, at the Angel and Bible in the Poultrey; and
are to be sold by James Cowsey, Bookseller in Exeter. 1682.

THE JUSTICE of GOD ASSERTED, In Seeming Contrariant PROVIDENCE.
Job 34.17. -- Will thou Condemn him that is most just?


JOB's Great Afflictions make a great noise in the world; they Sounded so far,
as his Friends at a great Distance from him, hear of them; whether by the
Ministry of good or bad Angels, or of neither, it Skills not. Ill News is swift
of Foot, says the Greek Proverb (...), and like ill weather, which comes ere
it be sent for. The Sins and M^scries of Good People are much talked of, and
soon bruited abroad. This brings Jobs Friends out of a Desire and Design to
Condole with and Comfort him, (the Character of true Friendship, which is
suited to a day of Adversity,) though it fell out otherwise; for they tormented
him, well nigh as much as Satan himself, though it were of Ignorance and
Unwittingly, rather than of ill will or forethought Malice. Eliphaz the
Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite; all likely Idumeans,
and men much esteemed for wisdom, and Godliness; as is manifest in their
several Disputations and Discourses: in which they admonish him to Repent;
assuring him, that he could be no less than a gross Sinner, and Hypocrite,
because so grievously Afflicted, (a great Mistake in them; and usu^lly the
Reproach of the world upon the Gener^ion of the Just.) To Answer this, ^ob now
Addresseth himself, though Tormented in Body, Perpl^xed in Mind, stoutly
defending his own Inno^e^ y, and seeming to Tax the Lord; as Dogs in a Chain
Bark at their own Masters. To this his Friends make a sharp Reply, from the
15th Chap. to the 22. and he answers them again with greater Courage and
Boldness than before. Whereupon they begin a second Reply, and the Discourse
Continues, till the Parties grew weary of Job; who showed himself a Valiant and
Resolute Champion: only as every Pomegranate has some rotten Kernels in it, so
Job had his Frailties and out-bursts, Caused by Extremity of Pain and Excess of
Passion; and who amongst the best Spirits, in Strange and Heavy Accidents, do
not pay some Tribute to the Natural Passions of Men? These Ending, Elihu, a
stander by, a good Man, steps in, as being all in a Flame, undertakes to carry
on the work against and Recites Jobs Speeches, Chap. 32. but not so heartily,
and refelleth them, but not so mildly, as was meet. True it was, Job in his
Heat, had let fall many Lavish Speeches, but yet it was far from him to say,
either that himself was without Sin, or that God was unjust, as Elihu would
bear him down; very unfitly taking some sayings of his, that way Sounding.
Whence may be Noted by the way,

That Words prove not always what they Intend, but as they are Interpreted.

The words of the best men are not free from straining: they would yield Milk,
when they are forced to yield Blood: Inferences may be made upon what we say or
do, such as we never thought of. Arbitror nonnullus in quibusdam Locis Librorum
meorum Opinaturos me Sensisse quod non Sensi; aut non Sensisse quod Sensi;
says Austin. Lib. 1. de Trinitat. ad Finem; and it fell out accordingly; for
as Baronius Witnesses, after Austins Death, arose up diverse, qui ex ejus
Scriptis male Perceptis, Complures Invexerunt Errores; who out of his Writings
wrested and misconstructed, brought in many Errors, which they endeavored to
maintain, by the name and Authority of Saint Augustine. And the like may be said
of Luther. Which may teach us to set a Watch over the Door of our Lips; to
Weigh our Words in Balance, to Utter few and Seasonable Words.

Elihu, we see heated, a Fire is kindled on the Hearth of his Heart, by the
Spirit of Judgment and burning, and such as many Waters cannot Quench; Wherein,
though Elihu was somewhat Faulty, yet because he was right in the main, all was
taken well. Noting,

How apt even good men are to mingle Sin with their best Actions; To Plow with
an Ox and an Ass; but the Lord is pleased to Consider whereof we are made, and
Graciously to lay the Finger of Mercy on the Scars of our Sins; as that Limner
in the Story. He looks over what is his, and overlooks what is ours. Where
there are no Sins of Allowance in us, there shall be Grains of Allowance to us:
he will not cast away his Pearls for every Speck of Dirt.

The Ground of Elihu's Anger and Heightened Zeal is mentioned Chap. 32. verse. 2.
because Job justified himself rather than God. This he did not directly and in
so many words, but by a seeming Consequence, and Elihu was kindled at it. It is
a Blessed thing to have a Stomach for God, to be blown up in his Cause; as were
Moses Elijah, Phineas, David, Christ, and the Angel of Ephesus; to be all on a
Light Fire with Love to God, and Indignation against all that does him any
Dishonor. All true Zeal is of a Masculine Spirit. Job had uttered some
Discontented Speeches against God, which Reflected on his Honor and Justice;
he had despaired of a Restoration, and most earnestly wished for Death, and
thereby seemed to Justify himself rather than God, and this Elihu could not
brook; and therefore Continues his sharp Rebuke, in this Chapter, to the
humbling of Job, and Vindicating of God. Job was not so Righteous, but that he
deserved this Affliction; as there may be Cause in the very best, as well by
Reason of their Actual Prevarications as of their Birth-Sin. God cannot do
Wrong. It is Inconsistent, 1. With his Nature, Verse. 10. Far be it from God to
do Wickedness. He cannot Sin. In which Sense only it is said, he cannot do this
or that; not through Want, but through Height and Abundance of Power. He cannot
do Wickedly, because he is Omnipotent. It is for poor Creatures to be Liable to
such Imperfections; the Divine Understanding cannot be a Principle of
Dir^ction, and the Divine Will cannot be a Principle of Injunction, and
therefore the Divine Power cannot therein show it self to be a Principle of
Execution. 2. It appears from his Actions, Ver. 11. He is so far from doing
Wrong to any, that every man shall find according to his way. And although this
is not done forthwith, yet we may write upon it, and Reckon, that, Non dum
Omnium dierum soles Occiderunt; as sure as the Night follows the Day, Account
will come, and God will Reward unto each man according to his Works. His
Providence, like a well-drawn Picture that Eyeth every one in the Room,
observes all things. Although one Man may not know another, nor any man know
himself, yet God, following as it were all men hard at the Heels, does with his
eyes narrowly observe and mark what way every man Wolks in, he sees all his
^oings. And let none please themselves in their Sinful Practices, as if God did
not see them, because for a time they escape unpunished: for Sin and Punishment
are tied together with Chains of Adamant, and cannot be long asunder. 3. His
Will does evince it; Verse. 12. God will not do wickedly. He can do whatever he
will do: but he cannot do Wickedly because, for want of good in Sin, it cannot
become the Object of his Will. Job had said as much before, but then he
seemingly dashed all again, with his Inconsiderate Complaints and Murmurings;
and this Elisha could not bear, but again and again Celebrates the
Righteousness of God.

This whole Chapter is a Golden Flood of Grave Discourse; an Elegant Oration;
if we Consider the matter or the manner; It is a Diamond set in Gold. Each line
in its place, is adorned with the Enamel of Divine Affection, which breathes
through the Discourse.

Here, as in a Mirror, is the Lords Righteousness presented; his Justice is
displayed in most orient Colors. And when Elihu has done all he can, he seems
to say, as Cicero once did of Crassus and Antonius, Roman Orators, If any man
thought he had spoken too much in Commendation of them, he must needs be such a
one, as either knew them not, or was not able to judge of their worth.

The Text is one single demonstration of Gods Justice, carried on in an
excellent Metaphor: taken from binding up the Wounded, after the manner of
Surgeons: And then the words are translated by some thus; An qui odit
justitiam, Chirurgos imitaretur? Would he that hates Righteousness, do as
Surgeons use to do? Would God, if He were Unrighteous, bind up the
Brokenhearted, or receive into favor, as he does, a Sinner that Repents,
doing him good again, as if there had never been any breach between them? It is
noted, that a King has his name in the Greek Tongue from healing, (...) ab
(...), Medela; and that Isa. 3.7. A Governor is called Healer, or Binder up;
its the same word here in the Text. But how unfit for such an Office, must he
needs be, who does not only, not do Right, but hates it? As did Nero, Caligula,
Commodus and others, enemies of Heaven and Earth.

-- And will thou Condemn him that is most Just?

None in his right Wits will do so. This were for man to exalt himself above
the Divine Majesty, and for the dribling River to vye with the Drowning Ocean.
And yet what do they less then this, who grudg at Gods proceedings, and are
ready to think, if they had the ordering of things in their own hands, they
could dispose of them a fair deal better? As Alphonse King of Castile, the
Ointment of whose name is marred with the dead fly of his Atheistical Speech,
That if he had been in Gods stead, he would have disposed the World better than
it is. Christians beholding the Lords severer Dispensations against them, their
budding Flowers opened in a warm day, shut again in a Cold one, and their
flowing Tides to become ebbing Waters; God clothed as it were with darkness,
and they not able to cleave the Clouds to behold him walking on the Vault of
his Palace, nor trace him in his beamy walk through the midst of the Sanctuary,
among these Golden Candlest^cks which h^ve long suffered a dimness; are apt to
conceive that the Lord deals not well with them, and they deserve better from
him, God might have been a wiser and a better God. Blasphemy is the fruit of
Coffeehouse. Let none charge God foolishly. The Text will teach us to be
better Commentators upon Providence, viz. Even to justify God in all his
sayings, and to give him glory in all his doings, by our silence or Admiration.

The Summa totalis, or sense of all, falls into this entire proposition, viz.

Whatever men's apprehensions are, God in all the ways of bis Providence toward
the whole World, is a most just God.

God is most just. A universal Proposition. So he was, thus he is, and so ever
shall be: The Creatures shall be dissolved into nothing, and men as they are,
into Falsities; But God will be found just for ever.

I shall first endeavor to explain this truth, and afterward confirm it.

For Explication, know, that one may be said to be just three ways,

1. Obedi^n^ia Activa, by Active Obedience, and that Voluntary and Perfect;
both extensively, in Regard of the Object; and Intensively, in Regard of the
Suhject; So, Christ alone is said to be just here; his Heart and the Law were
Unisons; answering each other as Face answers Face in a Glass. And the Saints
shall be hereafter; when the Imperfect Lineaments of Grace in the Soul, shall
by the Pensil of the Holy Ghost, be drawn forth in their orient Beauty, and the
Vermilion of Glory be laid upon them.

If it be Objected, That the Saints are said to be just here?

I answer, true. Joseph is called a just man, Math. 1.19. so were Zechariah and
Elizabeth, Luke 1.16. said to be Righteous before God, etc. But to be
understood,

1. Not Legall^, for Righteousness of Creation, whereby God made man after his
own Image, in Holiness and Righteousness, to walk exactly according to the Rule
of Justice. Perfect man was then, though mutable, because hi^ Holiness depended
upon and flowed from a Principl^ in himself, Original Justice; now lost; and
so, none is Righteous, no not one. But,

2. Evangellically, viz (1^) In Desiderio and Conatu. The Saints do Level at
the mark of Perfection. They hunger after complete Righteousness: whence it is
said, they Sin not, John 3.9. because though they be not without Sin, yet their
Wills is against Sin; they have voted it down. When they fail, they mourn; and
this is called Gospel-Righteousness. (2) Comparative and Respectu Impiorum; in
Respect of the Wicked; and so Noah was said to be perfect in his Generation; he
being Compared with the Profane World, was a Perfect, just man. Gold in the
Oar, Compared with Lead or Brass, is perfect; a field of Wheat may have some
Thistles growing in it, yet Compared with that of Tares, is perfect Wheat. (3)
Divina Acceptatione. God does accept of them in and through Christ, Colos.
2.10. Ye are complete in him: Through the Red-glass every thing appears red; so
through the Red glass of Christ's Blood, the gracious Soul appears lovely and
Beautiful in Gods eye. They are accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1.

2. One may be said to be just, Gratia, by Grace; as the Elect and Called are
just: Justitia unionis Imputata; by the Righteousness of Christ Imputed, Jer.
33.6. This is as truly theirs to justify, as it is Christ's to bestow; and this
is a Christians Triumph, when he is defiled in himself, he is undefiled in his
Head; in his Righteousness the Saints shall shine brighter than the Angels. Or,
Justitia communionis Inherente; viz. the Graces of Christ's Spirit, Holiness of
Heart and Life; which Cajetan calls Universal Righteousness.

3. Natura, by Nature, and so two ways, 1. Dono, by Gift; as Adam was by
Creation. His will (which is the Universal Appetite of the whole man) was
Wonderfully good, Furnished with several Habits of Goodness, as the Firmament
with Glittering Stars. There was in him a propension to all good; as an
Instrument in Tune, he was full of Harmony; like a Bright Air and a pure Beauty
without the least Cloud to stain it; his Heart was without the least Tincture
of Impurity; as Wine that has no Sophistication. Such was Adams Holiness. But
this is not now to be found on Earth, we must go to Heaven for it. 2. Essentia,
by Essence; and so God only is just. Righteousness in God is as Beams in the
Sun, Water in the Fountain, and Lines in the Center, it is Original: he is the
Pattern and Prototype of all Righteousness; just ad intra, as he is; just ad
extra, as he works; every way just.

Some may understand the first only, as Osiander would every where; others the
latter only: I conceive both may and must be here understood: God is just in
himself, and in all his Ministrations to the Sons of men.

Again, He is said to be just,

1. Qui justa facit and imperat just; So does God, who never Acted or
Commanded any thing, but what was in it self equal and reasonable; although
perhaps to our shallow and corrupt Understanding it may appear otherwise; as to
our eyes, Turrets and Steeples, how upright, soever, if their height be
exceeding great, do oftentimes seem crooked, and look as if they stood awry:
But all Gracious Hearts discover that Beauty and Equity in all Gods Commands,
as draws forth their Assent and and Consent to them; they can say, Blessed be
God for his Precepts; His Commands are not Grievous.

2. Qui opera quadrat adjuris Praecepta; So does God, whose Will is the supreme
Reason; Nec Recta solum, sed and ipsa Regula; not only right, but the very Rule
of Right; And impossible it is for him to do wrong by erring from the Rule of
Righteousness. Men may overslip themselves, and miscarry or deny Justice, in
which case, Appeals have been made to God; as in the time of Hen. 3. The bold
Countess of Arundel, Appealed from the King and his bad Counselors, to the
Court of Heaven. And in the History of the Holy-War, Relation is given of a
Templar, who being to be burnt at Bordeaux, at the place of Execution, he saw
the Pope and King Philip looking out of a Window, and cried to them, Clement
thou Cruel Tyrant, seeing there is no higher among Mortals to whom I should
Appeal for my unjust death, I cite thee together with King Philip, before the
Tribunal of Christ Jesus, the Just Judge, who Redeemed me; there, both to appear
within one year and a day, where I will lay open my Cause, and Justice shall be
done without any respect: And it fell out accordingly.

3. Qui promissa servat; So does God: He is faithful that promised. One letter
of his name, whereby he has made himself known, is, Abundant in Truth; And
Christ is called the faithful and true Witness; And the Counsels of God are
said to be Faithful and True. He so much abounds in it, as he has no mixture
of the contrary; though the best of men have some; as for example; A precious
Stone, has some speckling or cloud, but light it self admits of none. God is
light, and with him is no darkness at all; so God is true, and in him is no
Falsehood at all. God that cannot lie has promised, says the Apostle, Titus 2.
God may delay his Promise, but he cannot deny his Promise.

4. Qui suum cuique tribuit, justitia distributiva; So does God; He gives to
every man his own. It is Injustice and Tyranny to invade another man's Right: An
Evil, which cannot be imputed to God without Horrid Blasphemy.

But to come nearer; we may consider God under a fourfold notion, and in each
shall find him Just.

1. Vt Dominus, as Lord; in respect of his purpose, touching man to be Created,
of glorifying his Mercy and Justice, Wisdom and Power; in Saving, Damning,
calling effectually, denying others; choosing, refusing, reprobating; Where it
is not safe to search too far; Quod nesciatur sine Crimine, ne discutietur cum
discrimine; nor strive to know with danger, what we may be ignorant of with
safety; in such things, admiration is better Piety, than apprehension;
(Curiosity is the first spawn of Sin) nor to judge that unjust, which Reason
apprehends not. Of all his Decrees, we may conclude, There is no
Unrighteousness with God. Romans 9.13. Jacob have I loved, etc. Let not Carnal
Reason dare to reprehend what it does not apprehend. Let none forbid Faith to
swim, where Reason cannot wade. Banish Socinian Blasphemy, which will needs
have a Reason of Divine Mysteries. Except they see, they will not believe;
whereby Faith is become, as some of that sort of men have made bold to call it,
Theologorum Ludibrium, Scripturarum Tyrannidem.

2. Vt Creator, with respect to the Means of Execution. Giving being,
permitting the fall, Ordaining and Governing by his Providence, preserving and
disposing both the good and bad. All these are just, 2 Timothy 4.14. The Lord
reward him according to his Works. Math. 5.45. He makes the Sun to shine on
the Evil and Good. In which, he is at an Infinite Distance from
Unrighteousness: for in these he moves according to the Council of his own
Will, and this is ever Rational; though our shallow Reason in this State of
Degeneracy and Mortallity, be not able to Fathom the Depths of its
Contrivements, and is thereupon ready to Cavil and Call in Question their
Equity.

3. Vt Pator Electorum; by special Righteousness, viz. Goodness in his
Decrees, and Faithfulness in his Promises, two principal Emanations of the
Divine Being, Respecting his Intellectual Creatures, whom he has taken into so
near a Relation to himself; all which he justifies, for and by the Obedience of
his Son, who is Constituted by the Father to be the Head of all his Elect, to
be his Members, and to be by him brought to eternal Blessedness. See 1 John
1.9. If we Confess our Sins, he is Faithful to forgive. The word [Faithful]
refers to Gods Promises, as [Just] does to the Blood of Christ, the Ransom
received, whereby the Saints are Cleansed; And it stands not with the Divine
Justice to demand the Debt twice, viz. of the Surety and the Debtor; but upon
Confession he is Faithful and Just to Forgive.

4. Vt Judex, as a Judge, to distribute Rewards according to Works; 2 Cor. 5.10.
This is the exactness of that Divine Justice which Triumphs in God. The World
is a great Book consisting of many Leaves and Pages; This Judge will peruse
every Leaf, Page, Line, and Tittle of it; and make the great Index
expurgatorius, blot out the names of thousands, take a funder this whole
Volumn, cast much into the Fire, bind up the rest as a perfect Volumn of elect
ones for Eternity. Revel. 1.7. all the World shall see their Judge, their
Crimes, their Accusers, Conscience, and Satan, if out of Christ, or if
believing in him, then Pardon sealed with the Blood of the Judge, their Heaven
smiling in his Smiles; Revel. 20.12.

In three things he agrees with upright Judges, viz. 1. In Loving Justice and
hating Iniquity. Job is said, to have accounted Justice his Robe and Diadem.
Chap. 29.14. and of Trajan that excellent Prince, that when he gave the Sword
of Power, to any whom he made Governor of any Province, he used to say, Accipe
hunc Gladium, si benefecero, utere pro me sin aliter, contra me. It was from
this Love of Justice. Of Fabricius a Senator of Rome, it is recorded as his
Encomium and left as his mark of Honor, that a man might as soon turn the Sun
from its Course, as turn him out of the Course of Justice. From this very
Principle it was, that Aristides obtained the Report of the Just from all in
his time. Now if this be so true of men, how much more must it be true of God.
The Right^ous Lord l^veth Righteousness. Psalm. 33.5. He Loves Righteousness
and Judgment!

2. In Impartiality and Equality, hearing all sides. Plutarch reports of
Alexander, that when he sat in Judgment, he was wont alteram aurem prebere
Actori, alteram vero integram servare reo, always to stop one ear to the
Plantiff, saying he kept that for the Defendant; one man's tale being good, till
another be told. Aequum me utrique parti in Disc^ptandis Controversis quam
Iutuenda Disciplina praebebo; said Justinian; I will hear both Causes etc. And
this is a Rule observed by God; Genesis 18.21. I will go down and see, etc. Spoken
according to our Dialect, after the manner of a Judge, who first examines the
Cause exactly, before he will give the Sentence. God does not make the Sword
the Judge; he Weighs things in the Balance; he ever lies Judgment to the
Line; When God is on a work of Justice he is not on a Riot, as if he cared, not
whom he did hit, but goes in the Way of a Circuit, with the Offender, I will
go down and see!

3. In passing Sentence without respect of Persons. The Just Judge fears no
man's Condition in Judgment, he beholds not the faces of any persons, but the
Cause; Like Melchizedeck he is without Pedigree, This Son of Righteousness
shines on Beggars as well as on the Nobles. Job 34.19. God accepts of no man's
Person; No not the Persons of Princes; Prove. 24.23. Kings and Nobles must come
to his Bar, and receive Sentence, as well as poor, Inferior Persons. He will
do Justice upon men, be they what they will be. Jer. 22.24.

But in three things, he surpasses all, viz.

1. In Authority, which is derived to him from none. He is Lord Paramount and
has Potestatem (...) and extends to all. Genesis 18.25. He has Jus Imperii, and
Jus Dominii; which none can have, but subordinately and derivatively from him:
His Kingdom rules over all. His Name written on his Thigh, is King of Kings.
As among men, it is one of the Jura Regalia, the Flowers of the Crown to enact
Laws and Statutes; it is much more true of God.

2. In Liberty: He is not tied to Law, in respect of time manner or measure.
The greatest and best Judges on Earth, do or should govern by Law, to the
making of which others concur as well as they; But God is a Law to himself. He
and none but he can write on his Imperial Edicts, Stat per ratione voluntas, My
Will is my Law, (which is Liberty in God, but Tyranny in man) his Will because
of the Holiness of his Nature, is always just. He can better say than ever
Constantine that Arrian Emperor could, Quod ego volo, pro Canone sit; Let my
Will be your Sovereign Rule; since things are Right because I will them, I will
not because they are Right.

3. In I^fallibility. He cannot err in deciding Controversies and Causes; being
Omniscient, nothing is hid from him, but all things are unvailed to his eye. He
is never at a stand. No ignorance dwells in his Understanding. Fair Shows can
never delude him; Colorable and False Reports cannot mislead him, as Earthly
Judges may be. He can never acquit any, who is in truth faulty or inwardly
unsound, nor upon any false suggestions pass Censure upon any. He proceeds only
upon certainty. Let the Papists conclude the Pope or his general Council
infallible and so fit to decide Controversies in matters of Religion; but we
must believe that all Mortals are more or less subject to Error and
Uncertainty. If Moses, Aaron, and Samuel, were among the best Magistrates,
Priests or Prophets that ever were; they could not satisfy in all things,
either some Unrighteousness would be in them, or they, though innocent, will be
justly accounted suspicious.

Thus much only for Explication of the Doctrine;

For Confirmation thereof I am now to address my self: Which I do not intend to
make as the Cords of a Tent stretched out to their utmost length, or
unnecessarily to enlarge, as the Pharisees did with Affectation their
Phylacteries; yet for the more full establishing thereof, it will he pertinent
to speak unto three things, viz. to prove it by Authority, and Argument, and to
clear it from Objections.

First, for Authority; which though some do impiously Question, yet to us it is
sufficiently and Invincibly binding. And this the Scripture does diversely, viz.

1. Affirmatively; when it describes God to be Just, Holy, Righteous ( Exodus
9.27. Psalm. 27.17. Jer. 12.1.) all sparkling Jewels of the Crown of Heaven,
with which it flourishes; and which, however diversified in our Conceptions,
are notwithstanding Identified with Gods essence, which is but one, though to
us they appear to be different from each other, and all from it; as the vast
Ocean, though but one, receives diverse names from the several shoars it washes
on; so however, Justice, Holiness, Righteousness, be several Names Suited to
different Operations, yet all are but one Simple Act in God, under those
various Denominations.

2. Negatively; when it removes all Injustice and Iniquity from him; ( Deutr.
32.4.10.17. Dan. 9.14. Romans 9.14.) Righteousness is the Embroidered Robe
wherewith God is Clothed. It is the Glory of the Godhead. Exodus 15. Glorious
in Holiness, is his Name. Darkness cannot be Imputed to the Sun; no more can
Sin to God. You may as soon Separate weight from Lead, or heat from Fire, as
Righteousness from the Divine Nature.

3. Affectively, When it Attributes to God, the Affection of Zeal, Anger, Fury,
etc. as Exodus 20.5.32.10. Numb. 11.20. which are not in God such Passions as
they be in men; but an act of immutable Justice, and are not to be understood
secundum Perturbationis affectum, but secundum Vltio^is Effectum. Anger and
Wrath in God, is nothing but Tranquilla Constitutio justi Supplicii; a Calm and
quiet Appointment of just Punishment, revenging Justice. And the same Justice
of God, as it simply burns against Sin, is in Scripture called his Anger; when
it does more fiercely ex candescere or sparkle out, it is called his Wrath. The
same Justice when it pronounces Sentence, is called his Judgment; when it is
brought to Execution, it is called his Vengeance: all directed against Evil.

Thus we see the Truth to have an Innate Proof, shining with its own Beams: and
by this, it should prevail over men's Minds, vanquish unbelief and chase away
the Clouds of Error. But,

Secondly, For Argument. Though the Scripture like the Sunbeams, are their own
Discovery, yet one may contract them into three Glasses, wherein we may take a
clearer View of them, and perceive a warmer Influence from them falling on our
Minds and Hearts. The Arguments grounded on the former Authority are these
following, viz.

1. God is Agens liberrimum, a Debtor to none, bound to no Law, because none
was ever given to him, therefore he cannot offend in distributive Justice.
Matthew. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do with my own as I will. Romans 9.21.
Has not the Potter power over the Clay, to make one Vessel to Honor and
another to Dishonor; i. e. He may lawfully, he has full Authority so to do:
That Is the meaning, and so runs that expression in the Hebrew Text. Jer. 18.16.
Cannot I do as this Potter; And Genesis 34.14. We cannot do this thing, i. e. We
may not do it; It is unmeet, unlawful for us to do. Now this God can do, it is
lawful, by Right he may. However by this awarding Paribus imparia, unlike
proportions to men of like Conditions, considered in the same Lump and doing
this arrbitrarily, according to the good Pleasure and Counsel of his own Will,
sets men a crying out of Iniquity in Gods proceedings; yet it is without reason
and with great Injustice, for God is free; and besides, his Will is the supreme
Rule of Righteousness.

2. He is Fons Justitia, Justice it self, the original of Righteousness, and it
is impossible for him to do, or be the Author of Sin. Out of this Fountain
cannot proceed sweet Water and bitter; no more than whiteness can black the
Wall, or heat make one cold. Every thing is just, because God does it. He
cannot do that which is contrary to his Nature. He cannot Lie, because he is
Truth it self. God cannot Sin, because he is perfect Righteousness.

3. He is Judex Mundi, as Abraham said, Genesis 18.25. And shall not the Judge of
the World do R^ght? It is Abraham's acknowledgment of God in Covenant. He adem
the World and shall judge the World. These are atributed to him
interchangeably, to make and judge the World, And he certainly will do Righ^.
We may as easily suppose God ^o cease from being Judge of the World, as cease
to do Right. He i the Maker and Monarch of all men: who is his Superior? To
whom shall he give account? Who shall expostulate with him for Injustice? Or
for fear of whom should he warp? He can cease to be, as soon as leave to be
just. The Apostle improves his very reason, to demonstrate the Righteousness of
God; Romans 3.5,6. Is God unrighteous who takes vengeance; God forbid; How shall
God judge the World? It being an Office exclusively belonging to him, by reason
of his indep^nd^nt h^bi^ual Justic^. He shall judge the World; that is a
recieved Principle; from whence he ^ers that therefore God cannot do
unrighteously. See Jer. 11.20. 2 Thessal. 1.6.

Thirdly, we come to clear this Doctrine from Objections; for this Bright and
Shining Truth is very Offensive to sore Eyes; as the most Evangelical
Discoveries are not without Fierce Oppositions. It is the Devils work to
Imprison all Truth, but the nobler and more precious Truths, must expect to be
put in the lowest and darkest Dungeon; as here now the Justice of God; the
Flower and Crown of Heaven; how would he eclipse this Fair Sun! And,

1. It is Objected, That God did Ordain some of his Creatures to Punishment and
Damnation, without Fault and Desert.

Answ. Divine Purposes are very unsearcheable, they lie wrapped up in everlasting
Darkness and are covered in a deep Abyss, none can Fathom the Bottom. Yet to
this Objector, I say, it is most false: and a Calumny usually cast upon the
Doctrine of Predest nation; and which the Rhetoric of our Adversaries, is wont
to blow up to the highest pitch of Aggravation even to the Impeaching of Gods
Justice which is most Blasphemous. But to the Answer,

1. God Created man for his own Glory, Vltimately; and if any Miscarry through
their own Default, (as it will be found they do,) God will be glorified in them
as well as in others. The Howlings of them which perish, shall render forth his
Praise, as well as the Hallelujahs of them that are Saved. They both sing unto
the Glorious Attributes of the Blessed Trinity an everlasting Canticle. Only in
this great Consort of the Intelligent Creation, the designedly Conspiring
Voices are as differing as the Condition of the respective Singers. Hell's
Darkness shall as well contribute to Gods Glory, as Heavens eternal Splendours.
As shadows Judiciously placed, do no less praise the Painter, than do the
livelier and better Colors.

2. In Ordaining, he is to be Considered as a Lord, not as a Judge. Election
and Reprobation being Acts of Power and Prerogative: so that in these the
matter of Right and Wrong are not concerned. Gods Volitions and Decrees are not
depending on any temporal Objects, as Motives thereunto; but determine without
any Respect to any Disposition in the Creature; and what Injustice can be
therein? The clay should not dispute with the Potter. None should argue against
Divine Prerogative. Ratio quosdam elegit and quosdam reprobat, non habet
rationem nisi Divinam Voluntatem. Aqu. 1 part 4. 23. Art 5.

3. He does punish none without fault, nor condemn any without Desert. God who
is pure Justice, infers no prejudice upon the Creature, but as provoked by
some Criminal miscarriage; though it be certain, that the Reprobate shall dye,
yet Sin, not the Decree is the cause of Death. Romans 5.12. By Sin Death entered
into the World. To crown or to damn is an Act of judiciary Power, and proceeds
according to the Tenor of the Revealed Gospel. The Eternal Decree of the
Damnation of the very Devils, was never determined to be Executed otherways
than for their own Misdeeds.

2. It is objected, The Author of Sin cannot be just. Ergo.

Answ. Innocence it self cannot be protected from Imputations; though the
Reproach will stick no faster, than a Bur that is cast against a Cristal; fot
it will easily appear, that God is neither Autho or Actor Peccati: He makes Sin
no more than the Sun makes the Night. Though Bellarmin labor to impose this
Blasphemy on Calvin, Beza, and Zuinglius, as their opinions; Yet the Dominicans
and some of his own Society, clear him, as saying, 1. That he wills Sin
permissively, otherwise it could not be, Miro and in^ffabili modo non fit
praeter ejus voluntatem, quod etiam fit contra ejus voluntatem; Quia non fieret
nisi sinerit, nec utique nolens sinit, sed volens: As Aug. Enchirid. And again,
Non sinerit bonus fieri male, nisi Omnipotens etiam de malo posset facere
bonum. Ibid. The Lord thought it better to do good with evil, than not to
permit it: And it is acknowledged, that Sin the worst thing that is, but the
Existence of Sin is not Evil; otherwise says Aug. God would not permit it.

2. God concurs ad Actum and Determinationem voluntatis in particulari, non ad
obliquitatem Actus. God does concur to the Action and sustains the Agent; For
it is sain, by him all things consist. Coloss. 1.17. and Acts 17.28. In him we
live and move, etc. (...), we are acted by him So that the bare Action is good
and the fault wholly remains with the Creature.

Obj. But he that does not hinder Sin when he may, is guilty. So a wicked
M^rcian asks, why the Lo^d who foresaw the event, did suffer Eve and the
Devil to confer, and if ^e were able, why did he not hinder Sin to be.

Answ. Thus men presuming upon certain A^ioms of Crooked and Distorted Reason,
will und^rtake to pass Sentence upon God. The Rule will hold true in Respect of
men, qui non vetat peccare, cum possit, jubet; but not in Respect of God, who
is bound to no Law; neither did he suffer Sin unreproved or unpunished. Prosper
and Hilarious both, with Austin, make answer to this Question, why God did not
hinder Sin? the cause may be unknown, it cannot be unjust.

3. It is Objected; God does Distribute unequally, evil things to good men and
good things to evil men.

Answ. This is a bad and common Charge. The seeming Disregard and Inequality of
Providence, has caused some to charge God foolishly. Among Heathens of old, we
find Brutus, an able Assertor of Divine Providence, such as he knew; when
finally vanquished by Antonius and saw such bad Success in so good a Cause, as
he thought his to be, disclaimed all Virtue and derided all Endeavors of
living well, as vain and bootless. And Pompey when discomfited by Caesar,
blamed Providence, as if there were a Mist over it. But both blamed the Sun,
because of their own sore eyes. And these well-tempered Heathens were not
alone, but men of other make have stumbled at the same Stone. It was David's
Case, Psalm. 73.2.3. As for me, my Step were almost gone, my Feet had well nigh
slipped, for I was envious at the Foolish etc. and the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap.
12.1. Why does the way of the Wicked prosper etc. Which is as though he had
said, Why shall such Weeds as Cumber the Ground be watered so plentifully and
grow so exceedingly, when good Co^n is so thin and Lean? Why shall the Lion and
Raven, those unclean Creatures, be spared, when the innocent Lamb and Dove are
Sacrificed? The wi^ked flourish, like a Bay Tree, and enjoy a Constant Spring
and Summer, though without Fruit, when the Saints, like good Apple Trees, have
their Autumn and Winter? This has touched good men to the quick; sore eyes
could not behold the glo^ious Sunshine of wicked men's Prosperity, without much
pain. But however God is just. Therefore to answer the Objection, I say, he
that does so finally, is unjust. Differt nunc D^us, non Determinat; God will
have men to be known. Some serve him only for a Livery; days of Adversity are
Gods fans or Furnace; non Approbat facta Impiorum; he approves not the ungodly
in their ways; though at Gods Connivance and present Immunity of their Hellish
Practices, they make damnable Inferences of his approving them. Because they
have no Changes, they fear not God.

Object. 4. Suppose two persons for natural Disposition Equal, the one is taken
and effectually called, the other left; is not here Respect of Persons?

Answ. Here is more bubling up of Carnal Reason against Divine Dispensation:
the same Answer occurs here for Substance, as to the former.

1. Certain it is that these two Terms, Righteous Judgment, and Accepting of
Persons, are differently Opposite. But here is no respect of Persons: the
Working of God, on which the Object is founded, is actus Pote^tiae Liberae,
potius quam Justitiae, an act of free Power, rather than of Justice. And
Divines have received it for a Principle, That Accepting of Persons, is not
found in Gratuitis, in Acts of Bounty, wherein the Donor is at Liberty to
dispose of his free Gift, as pleases himself; but in Debitis, in Acts of
Justice and Righteousness, wherein lies an Obligation on him that
Distributeth, to give every man his due. Hereon they Conclude, that in Divine
Choice, God is no Debtor to any of his Creatures, but Acts therein, not as a
Judge, but as a Sovereign Lord and Liberal Benefactor, choosing some, and
passing by others; as without Injustice or Wrong to any, so without show of
accepting of Persons, Augustine disputing this Question largly against the
P^lagians, brings in the Instance of a man that has two Debtors, of whom he
forgives one, and requires full Payment of the other; if any demand the Reason,
he answers, It is my Will: and so God gives Effectual Grace to one and not
to another, this is his Free Power.

2. It is just, because according to his Will and Wisdom. Romans 9.18. Therefore
has he Mercy on whom he will, etc. And therefore not injust, because hidden to
us. If this do not satisfy, I shall refer such to consider what one of our
Ancient Writers did to their Forefathers; Heron in Ep^st. ad C^esiphontem, viz.
The Apostle, says he, having discoursed of this Mystery, acknowledges their
depths, and adoreth the Wisdom of God in them, Dignare and tu ista nescire;
concede Deo potentiam sui; nequaquam te indiget Defensore: Be thou also willing
to be ignorant of such things. Leave God to himself in mod^lling of his Decrees
and Dispensations; he will be sure to do it so, as not to stand in need of any
Apology or Defense from thee!

4. Objected it is, What Justice is it in God, to command a man by his Word,
the perf^r^ce of which cannot be done by him, without the inward help of h^s
Spirit, and yet in the mean while, deny that help ^f the Spirit to him?

Answ. Fair words; but a trick whereby men of towering Thoughts labor to bring
the Royal Prerogative of Converting Grace, into the hands of sinful Clay, and
so derogate from the honor of him who is the Former of all things. But must it
needs be a blemish to Gods Honor and a stain to his Justice, to command man to
perform his Duty, though he have no strength to perform it? Once he h^d
strength, and has lost it; but G^d has not lost his Right to command, though
man has lost his Ability to obey. A Drunken Servant is not disobliged to
serve; nor a broken Merchant to pay his Creditors. It is a Right Rule to be
observed in unknitting this Knot; Mandata Dei, non sunt Mensura nostrerum
virium, sed Regula Officii and materia praecum; as Molinus Contr. Amyrald.
Precepts and Exhortations, ordinarily signify the approving Will of the
Commander, and his Duty to whom they are propounded; although sometime the Duty
of the Hearer, rather than the Will of the Speaker, be declared by them: They
show us what we ought to do, not what we can; they assure us what God will do
when he pleases, not what he is bound to do, Grace is free. Neither can any
Creature chall^g^ ^f^ct^l Grace at Gods hands, as a d^e Debt, either to his
Nature or his Labor; however some sawcil^ w^ and sp^k of God, as if he we^
bound to do this or that, to giv^ ^his or the other Grace, even* wh^ (...)
produ^e no Promise, by (...) m^de himself a Debto^ (...) is the zeal of Pet^r L
^rd. Lib. ^. Sent^n. D^stinct. 43. against such men; Vt mihi videtur, hoc
verbum [Debet] venenum habet, -- nec Deo proprium competit, quia non est
debtor nobis, nisi forte expromisso. To me, says he, this word [he ought] or,
he is bound, seems to have much poison in it, and cannot properly belong to
God, who is no Debtor to us, save only in those cases, wherein he has passed
some free Promise. And I am sure, our Savior tells his Disciples plainly, It
is given to you to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, to others it is
not given, Math. 13.11. And the Householder in the Parable, stops the Mouths of
those Murmurers that repined, as expecting more from him than it was his
pleasure to give, with the sole consideration of its being his Will so to have
it, Friend I do thee no wrong, etc. Math. 20.10,13. Dei judicia nemo plene
comprehendit, nemo just reprehendit.

5. It is Objected, God commanded Abraham to kill his Son.

Answ. 1. He may do that, which he has forbid us to do; as appears out of
Deuteronomy. 24.16. Compared with 2 Kings 14.6. For although by an express Law,
Magistrates be forbidden to put Children to Death for their Parents Sins; yet
God, who is the Author of Life and Death, has reserved to himself a Liberty of
so doing, whenever it shall so please him, by Reason of his supreme Dominion
over all; and therefore for him to Inflict inferior temporal Punishments in
that case, cannot but be accounted just; and the rather, if we Consider, that
Children may be accounted part of their Parents; for as a man's Wife is himself
divided, so his Children are himself Multiplied.

2. Gods command to Abraham was but Manda^um Explorationis, not Seductionis, a
Command of Trial, not of Seduction. God is said to Tempt, when he puts us upon
the Trial of our Faith and Obedience, that he may do us good in the latter end,
Deuteronomy. 8.26. but to Seduce he cannot be said to do. The Author of (...) Good,
cannot be the Author of Sin: as before is Noted.

Object. Did he not bid Shimei to curse David!

Answ. True; as a Punishment on David; but it was a Sin in Shimei: his ca^ was
to drive David to Despair, but God directed it to Humble him.

6. It is Objected; How it could stand with Justice in God to set forth his
Innocent Son to suffer? From this the S^cinian party cry out against us, as if
God were charged with Tyranny, in laying the Punishment of Offenders on our
Innocent Savior; which also drew from Brentius a L^t^eran, thi^ Bl^sphemy,
D^us Pater in cruce Tyrannus egit erga Filium, etc.

Answ. To which I answer, 1. It was with his Will, which is the Rule of
Justice* wi^h (...) to his Infinite Wis^om. (...) ^st jus^ ^si quia Volitum,
qu^mvis non t^um qua V^litum, s^d qu^ ^nus S^l^ntia dictatum. Dei V^tat^s est
semper licet non C^us^. This was concluded on as the most Cong^nous and
convenient mean to man^fest Mercy and Justice; an exc^llent Temperament so that
one does no^ oppos^ the o her. God will not let Sin (...), therefore he prov^
(...) ^m to be Sacrific^d for Isaac; a Mediator to come between us and Wrath.
However Reason do most gainsay this Mystery, we must say, Taceat ista Mulier in
Ecclesia; Let this woman hold her Peace in the Church. Hear what the word
says, and believe; Christ suffered that God might be just; Romans 3.26. If this
will not Satisfy, I answer farther.

2. Christ may be considered two ways, viz. as he is in himself a Natural
Body, without any Relation to us; and so no action of his concerned us, nor any
of ours concerned him; or as he i^ part of a Body Mystical; in which
Consideration, his Actions and ours concern us jointly: for if the hand be
Wounded, the ^ad will say, you ^ur^ me. Thus we read, 1 Cor. 12.26. If one M
mber suffer, all the Me^b^rs s^ffer with it. For in this R^l^ C^s^ stands to
his People by Ver^ of (...) graciou^ Covenant m^de ^ween God the Father and Ch^
^e Son, and secretly trans^ be^ween them, be^re the Crea^ion of the World. From
which Union between Ch^ and his Members is produ^ ^word w^i^h Divines call
(...), a mutual Communication of Properties; which work extends it self so far,
as that the Perfections and Excellencies which are Originally peculiar to the
Person of Christ, are Communicated unto, and truly affirmed of holy men; 1
Cor. 1.30. and so the Infirmities, yea the Sins of his Members, are
Communicated unto and Affirmed of, and Imputed to Christ. He was made Sin for
us, 2 Cor. 5.21. though in the same Breath, the Apostle says, He knew no Sin;
both which are most true; because our Sins are his Sins, by Reason of this
Union: as the Debt of the Principal is also the Debt of the Surety. In which
Sense, Christ is said to be slain from before the Foundation of the World,
Revel. 13.8. even before he was Incarnat; because of Abel, who was his Member
and Type. Christ suffered for the Sins of his People, which are his Sins in
that himself and Members are one; and no Injustice does appear as to this
Ministration.

7. It is objected; Good men are swept away in common judgments, as the wicked
are.

Answ. Outward things come alike to all. So Solomon; to Saints as well as
Sinners. What they say of Tempers, that Non datur purum elementum, there is no
pure, unmixt Temper, that is strained and sublimated and as it were framed into
such an Harmony, that it has always an healthful Predominancy, but mixed, and
whereby Diseases break in; the like may be said of Divine Dispensations toward
the best of people; there is a mixture in them; the Saints are not ever singled
out as Objects of sensible Mercies. Their Sun oftentimes sets in a Cloud; their
Ship in common Tempests is overwhelmed; But,

1. It is not so always. Noah and Lot shall be standing Witnesses thereof, so
long as the World shall stand. They were standing Monuments of Gods
Preservation, in the then Ruins of the Worlds Desolation. Though an Householder
spend and sell the greatest part of the Harvest Crop, yet he will be sure to
preserve a little Seed-Corn, to sow his ground for a new Crop. Though Sodom be
utterly destroyed by Fire, yet Jerusalem is as a Brand plucked out of the Fire.
God makes a light account of a whole City full of Sinners; he takes away the
ungodly of the earth like dross, Psalm 119.119. which is put into the Fire to
be consumed. His own people shall be preserved. Though he make a full end of
all Nations, yet he will not make a full end of his people, but correct them in
measure. He will have some to be Monuments of his Mercy, for in the midst of
Judgments he will beloved, as well as feared in his smiles.

2. Never as the wicked are; though in Afflictions, and National Calamities
especially, God oftentimes seems to make no distinction between the Objects of
his Compassion and Fury, indiscriminately involving them in the same destiny;
yet his Intention makes a vast difference, where his infliction seems to make
none: As when on the same test, and with the self-same Fire, Chemists do urge
the Gold as well as the bl^anded Lead; but withal foreknowing and designing
such a disparity in the Events, as to consume the ignoble Minerals, or blow
them off into Dross and Fumes, and make the Gold more pure and full of Luster.
Even so does God in his severe Dispensations toward his people in common with
the wicked; to the one they are destructive, to the other Purgative, Isa. 27.9.
By this shall the Iniquity if Jacob be purged, etc. When the evil of Affliction
overtakes a wicked man, it is to take away their Soul; when it comes to a godly
man, it comes only to take away his Sin. A rotten cloth if it be scoured and
rubbed, it breaks and tears; but a piece of Brass well scoured, will shine the
brighter; Judgments on wicked men's false hearts, break them, but the same on
good men, amend and better them.

Thus you see the Objections are but as opposing the shadow to the light, and a
lie to truth; and how they who go about to put out the truth of God, by
sn^ssing, make it burn the brighter. Neither indeed was it ever possible for
the enemies of Gods Righteousness by all their Engines to compass their Design;
all the vapors of men's Brains, are not able to cloud so bright a Sun. The use
of all follows.

And, 1. This Doctrine, like a direful Comet which carries with it Blood and
destruction, speaks dread and terror, and it has a double aspect;

1. On the whole Land in general, and so it sadly threatens, Considering,

First, What is done by us. Sinful we are to astonishment: that of the Prophet
may be applied to us, Hear O Heaven, and Hearken O Earth, I have brought up
Children, and they have Rebelled against me! Secure we are, fearing no evil,
setting light by the means, vapouring out the good Spirits of a pleasant Land,
in a vain Conversation. Our Calm and peaceable Gospel days have brought forth
in us Spiders and Caterpillars, and the like Vermin, even Pride, Luxury,
Profaneness, Atheism, Spirits averse to the power of Godliness, and a sound
Reformation; Witness that general Apostasy to Formality, Will Worship, and
strange Inclinations to Popery, and suchlike innovations: and which is a great
aggravation to show our inexcusableness, God has been correcting us, to amend
us, but we have been the more vile and sinful. Hos. 7.1. When I would have
Healed Israel, then the Iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, etc. Zeal is
exceedingly decayed, the word suppressed, and Religion meets with much snarling
and opposition every where. How impudent is Sin grown? God looked for purging
of the Land, and behold it is more defiled. When the Pot boyleth the Scum is
discovered. Baths bring forth Corruption (if it be in the Body) into the Skin:
God has been reforming the Land; and our Wickedness appears the more. Time was
when Sin began to be ashamed, to creep into Corners, to be out of Fashion, but
now it is grown brazen faced, walks in the open Streets, seems to be in request
more than ever. Thus our Sins testify against us, are grown up to Heaven, and
darken the Sun, put out the Moon, seal up the Constellations, to intercept the
passage of Prayer thither, and to stop the influences of the light of Heaven
from descending hither; or to knock at the Gate, to solicit for vengeance
upon us.

Secondly, what the Lord has done to others so offending; even took away his
Glory, and gave them up into the Enemies hands; bringing them into a Spiritual
Egypt: Witness the famous Asian Churches now under the Mohammedan Tyranny. There
was a time when the Vineyard, Isa. 5.4. should have afforded red Wine, and then
it might have expected Watering every moment, and Continued Preservation, but
this Vineyard Degenerating, instead of Red Wine, it brought forth Wild Grapes;
and then instead of keeping, the Lord threatened to take away the Hedge, and
pull down the Walls thereof: instead of Preserving it from hurt, to let it be
eaten up, broken down, instead of Watering, to command the Clouds to yield it
no Rain.

Thirdly, Considering, what he has done amongst us; how he goes on by
Degrees. God is just, and when the Number is up, the rod will certainly fall;
when the Corn is ripe, the Sickle is prepared. Though he break not the
Candlestick, he may, for ought we know, remove it, and not leave so much as any
quality, title or Property of a Church; he may deal with us, as he did with
Ephesus; and who knows but that the Lord has said of us in this Nation, as he
did of the old Church of the Jews, Deuteronomy. 32.32,33. Their Vine is the Vine of
Sodom, etc. Sure I am, he has already begun to cut the Vine, till it bleed;
and if Repentance steps not in to turn away Wrath, he may be provoked to say to
England as he once did to Palestina, Jer. 2.21. I Planted thee a noble Vine,
wholly a right seed; how then art thou turned a degenerate Plant of a strange
Vine unto me? And not only loan us out, but set us to wholesale; and make the
Kingdom an Holocaust to his just Indignation.

2. On the profane and ungodly in special. This Doctrine is to them an Arrow
sent from Heaven, Feathered with Wrath and headed with Ruin. It is a hand from
Heaven, an Alarm from thence. Considering,

First, what the Lord has threatened, Deuteronomy. 29.19,20. The Lord will not spare
that man, he shall not escape. Do not think the Lord to be a God of Clou ts,
one, that however he speak heavy words, yet will not do as he says; say not
with them in Isa 5.13. Words are but Wind; and with them in the Gospel, God
forbid! Do not fancy to your selves a God made up wholly of Mercy, and so act
arbitrarily, living as you please: for verily you will find, he has blows as
well as words, and that the cry of Sin, will most certainly be followed with
the echo of Wrath. Clouds contains the showers of Rain that fall on the earth,
and so do Threatenings contain the Judgments that pursue Sinners. As in the
Revelations, you never read that the Heavens opened, but some great matter
followed; so it is here. Has the Lord spoken, and shall he not do it? Verily,
his word shall not pass away unfulfilled!

Secondly, what he has done, to the Old World, Sodom, Achan, Ahab, Saul,
Herod, and such like Sinners against their own Souls. He has made Arrows of
all Wood, and vengeance of all Creatures to punish their Demerit, he has
fallen upon them more swift than Tempests, Eagles, or impetuous Storms. They
are so many visible Sermons, and speak the determinations of God, real Stories
to be read by you, that you may not become Stories for others to read. Then
shall he speak to them in his Wrath, etc. Behold these examples in a way of
particular application, as bringing Tidings of Ruin, and saying, Unless you
Repent, you shall all likewise perish. As Judges use to hang up notorious
Offender in Chains, to be a terror to all Spectators, so has the Lord done
with many obstinate Sinners; he has Thundered and Lightened over their
rebellious heads, none of them were able to resist his Justice.

Thirdly, Considering what you have deserved; even to be delivered up to a
reprobate sense, Romans 1.28. to Believe a lie, 2 These. 2.11. to be turned into
Hell, where your Horror and Lamentations should be the Music of Gods Justice,
and the Heralds of his Righteous Severity to all Eternity.

Object. But shall we be so dealt with?

Answ. Yes, without Repentance and speedy turning to God. It is but as he is
just, he will find you out. The Rocks and Mountains shall not be able to
shelter you from the Wrath of him that sits on the Throne. May the terrors of
God prevail with you! O be importunate with the most High to cut the thread of
your Wickedness, that you may not spin it out to a full Length. Put to your own
strength to break off the Match between you and Sin, and Sue out a Divorce;
Break off thy Sins by Righteousness, says Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar. Cut this
Gordian Knot. If you have any Generosity of Spirit, any sparks of Sobriety,
consider your latter end; now begin to found a retreat, fold up your Ensigns;
It is not too late, the door of Grace is yet open. Protest not to persevere in
Mischief, like Devils. There are none but enraged Spirits, that will be healed
by the Experience of their own ill, and bury themselves in their ruin. Wise men
always make a Medicine for themselves of others Folly.

Use 2. This Doctrine sounds most incomparable Comfort to all the beloved of
God, and called unto Holiness; Considering,

First, what he has promised; Pro^. 28.13. Isa. 1.18. Ezekiel. 18.22, 25,26. 1
John 1.9. etc. These are a Nosegay of sweet Flowers taken out of the
Scripture-garden; make use of them; Let your Meditation, like the Be, suck the
sweetness of them. They Will prove as Bezar-stone to keep you from fainting under
your Sins and Sorrows. Get more acquaintance with them, O Ye Sons of Adoption.
Be not like unskilful Lapidaries, little valuing the worth of such Orient
Pearls, which are the Riches and the only Treasure of the Heirs of Glory, on
this fide Heaven. Suck at these Breasts; take Courage from those Heavenly
Influences.

Secondly, Considering what he has done. He has been Mindful of his
Covenant, neither will he forget. Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous to forget
your work and labor of Love, which you have showed toward his Name, in that
ye have ministered to the Saints, and do minister. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6,7,8.

You have three sure Foundations to build upon.

1. You have his Attributes of Justi^ and Truth. Whatever he has pr^mised,
shall be performed. His promise may lie a long time, as Seed, under ground, but
it is all the while a Ripening. Shall not God be true? If not, who shall? He
will be so far from coming short of his word, that he will better it. He often
shoots beyond the Mark of his Promise, never short of it.

2. His immutable purpose; 2 Timothy 2.19. The Foundation of God stands sure,
etc. and, The Gifts and calling of God are without Repentance. It cannot be
said of God, as it is of man, that though his Goodness be sweet, yet it is
short, though he can do enough for us, yet his mind may change or his Promise
be broken; No, as he is liberal in all his expressions, so he is unchangeable
in his intentions of your good. Where he loves, he loves ever.

3. You have his Seal and Earnest, Ephesians. 4.30. 2 Cor. 5.5. called the first
Fruits of the Spirit, Romans 8.23. as Isreal's Grapes in the Wilderness, were the
first Fruits of Canaan; what pledge can be more certain than the Earnest of the
Spirit: Ephesians. 1.14. If this Foundation fail, you may well say with the Prophet
David, What shall the Righteous do? But sooner shall the huge Rock be broken
into bits, and thrown as Pebbles and Cockle-shells upon the Shore, by the
violence of Waves; sooner shall the Mountains that God has set fast by his
strength, be overturned by the breath of Tempestuous Winds, than the Promises
which are founded upon the immutable Power of God and his never failing
Goodness, be in the least Iota made void and of none effect.

Now as some kind of Artificers, after long poring on a piece of black work,
finding a dimness in their eyes, are wont to take an Emerald, or some other
green thing, by the verdure whereof they may be refreshed, and their Spirits
cheered; thus Believers when dulled and puzzled with the consideration of sad,
strange and contrariant Events in the World, may for their spiritual Relief,
make use of this Cordial, these considerations laid before them, their luster
will be exceeding cheering to the eye of Faith.

Use 3. Hence is offered som^thing of instruction; and that diversely:

First, In matters of Contentation and submission to all his Dispensations.
Providence is the best Herald to Marshal us, and we ought to fit down content,
without murmuring at Gods disposing Justice. Thus Job practiced; The Lord
gives and the Lord takes, etc. Mauritius the Emperor, when his Wife and
Children were Murdered before him, and his own eyes afterward bored out,
uttered this Speech, Justus es Domine and Recta judicia tua: Thou art Righteous
O Lord in all thy ways. That we are spared it is his Mercy; that we are
punished, cannot be unjust. However things go in the World, could we have hard
thoughts of Sin, all our thoughts of Gods dealings with us, would be most
honorable.

Secondly, in matter of Imitation; and so,

1. For Magistrates, in executing Justice. Here Is a Copy for them to write
after. See the Rule, Deuteronomy. 1.16. Judge R^ghteous Judgment, between every man
and his Brother. Justice is the Soul of Judgment. An unjust Judge, is a
Solecism, a contradiction. God will do Justice upon men, be they what they will
be; so must Magistrates execute Justice impartially. They must be the Law
enlivened; they must be (...), as Plutarch speaks, Living Images of God; who
when he is in the greatness of his Power, is most just. Though he could check
all the world that speak against him, yet he will do righteous things, Psalm
48.10. Thy Right Hand is full of Righteousness. Gods Right Hand is an embelm of
of his strength, and it is full of Righteousness. Thus should men be exalted to
highest place of Judgment, they should be full of Righteousness. It is not
enough that Justice be in the Laws, but it must be in the Judges too, else no
honor, no s^curity of a Kingdom: Justice in the Law, is like Gold in the Mine,
which while it is there only, does no man good; but when in the Magistrate, it
is like Gold coined, for Use and Honor.

2. For Ministers, to declare his Righteousness, and not to fear for any
Amazement; Concealing it before great men, covering those Sins with Silence
which they know them guilty of. Greatness must not be a Buff-coat to any man's
Wickedness. We know Physicians and Chyrurgeons (and so Ministers) are sometimes
allowed to be Cruel. The Lapping up of the Pills of Reproof, in much Pap and
Sugar, by allaying the bitterness, frequently the Operation is frustrated.
Ministers must not Complement Souls into Hell. They must not feast men's ears,
but Wound their Hearts; not lick the sores of great ones, and Bite the Sores of
poor ones. This is not just. Nathan did not so; nor John the Baptist before
Herod, nor Paul before Felix; nor Chrysostom before Eudoxia, nor Ambrose under
Theodosius; nor Bernard it seems by his Discourse to Eugenius. Let no Sinister
End divert you from the Publication of Gods Justice. It is a work of your Place
and Office. It was the work of Christ, of his Apostles and Ministers in all
ages. O, manifest some Sparklings of this Diviner Spirit, because so like that
which appeared in those Transcendants among Preachers. Lo I am with you!

3. For People in all their earthly Transactions. As one wrote to Egidius Abbot
of Norinburg, concerning the 119. Psalm. Haec non sunt Verba solum Legenda sed
Vivenda; so may I speak here to you; these things are not spoken and Written to
be heard or read only, but to be lived. This, the Grace of God which has
appeared to all men, teaches you. A Duty as necessary to Salvation, as that
which immediately refers to God himself. Moses came out of the Mount with both
Tables in his Hands; the Second as well as the first. They must go both
together; one stone in a Mill will do but little good. A Bird cannot Fly with
one Wing. Many please themselves with a Single Conscience toward God in the
first Table of the Law, having little Regard of the second toward man; this
Argues little Sincerity. You must give God and men their due: Practice
Righteousness.

Use 4 And lastly, The Use is for Reformation and Preparation to meet the Lord,
Amos 4.12. The Lord is just and the Judgment day is at Hand. Currat ergo
Paenitentia, ne praecurrat Sententia, says one. Mittamus Preces et Lachrymas
Cordis Legatos, says another. Haste, haste to meet the Lord with Entreaties of
Peace. By harkening to his Word, believing and doing it; by Humbling your
selves under his Rods, or at the Report of his Judgments. And to this end,

1. Cast away your Sins, every man his Idols. Come out of the crooked Paths of
Pride, Hypocrisy, Oppression, Barrenness and whatever is contrary to Godliness.

2. Give your selves to Fasting and Prayer, and Mourning, Joel 2.12,13,17.
Perhaps you may find Compassion. Who knows but that the Lord may Return and
leave a Blessing behind him.

3. Put on Christ, and take him in your Arms. Zeph. 2.1,2,3. Gather your selves
together, yea, gather together, O nation not desired: Before the decree come
forth, before the day of the Lords Anger come upon you. Romans 13.12,13. The day
is far spent, the night is at hand: Let us therefore cast off the Works of
Darkness, and put on the Armor of Light. Let us walk honestly as in the day;
not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife
and Envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. -- This is the Garment with
which you may come boldly before the Lord.

FINIS.

