Innocence Vindicated: In Answer to a Pamphlet Entitled, A Few Word to Nath.
Coleman's Epistle, etc. Wherein, MANY Lies, Forgeries, Blasphemy, Ranting
Doctrine, and Atheist-like Practices of the Authors, Approvers, and Licencers
of those FEW WORDS, etc. are manifest (and by their own Judgment and
Testimonies proved) and they justly reproved, according as in Scripture it is
said, VIZ. A Righteous Man hates Lying, etc. A False Witness shall not go
unpunished.
But it is hoped this following will be verified on some of you, Viz. A Reproof
enters more into him that has Understanding, than a hundred Stripes into a
Fool.
Published for clearing the Truth, not out of Love to, or Desire of Contention.
SURELY the Wicked Ones Time is short, he does so rage through his Ministers,
G. F's Preachers and Party, G. W. etc. his Brethren, of a Meeting called, The
Second-days Meeting: who have manifested themselves false Apostles,
Evil-workers, by their Pride, Envy, Forgeries, and Untruths, that they have
lately licensed and Published: Subscribed by G. W. J. F. and other such
Mercinaries, whose Qualifications are such, that little notice need be taken of
them, but to pity their State, who seem to be given up to that Lying Spirit,
which was suffered to be in the mouths of Ahab's Prophets; which have also
influenced not only G. W. etc. but also the rest of the Licensers and Approvers
of that piece of perverse Envy of theirs, Entitled, A few words to N. C. 's
Epistle (to whom this is intended) the which I shall not now detect in all the
Lies, Forgeries, and Perversions, etc. but observe some of them, that by the
Fruit the Reader may know the Tree; (i. e.) that Spirit which G. F. and G. W.
etc. be of, and of one Mind in, and that they term the Spirit of God, Christ,
Eternal, Truth, etc.

Page 2. They insinuate with the word (whilst) That they look not at things
that are, but at things that are not seen, etc. But it is evident to the
contrary, by their so much looking at G. F's Imagination of Womens-Meetings,
apart from Men, that they term them, The Great and Good Ordinances of Christ
and the Gospel. And wicked and scandalous Persons that conform to them, they
have had Unity with: but other Conscientious Persons, who cannot adore them,
they disown. Now these Meetings and Forms are seen, and they do look at them;
therefore that is a false affirmation, although insinuated with the word
(while) And thus by their justifying the Wicked, and condemning the Just, are
manifest to use false Weights and Measures, and therefore an Abomination to the
Lord, Not those you weigh or measure the Goods of Trade by, but allow your
selves in that you condemn in others.
although the chief means they enrich themselves by. And although your pretense is
against the falseness, and unsoundness of N. C's Doctrine; (in the Title page)
and you there say, (Showing them.) but I can find none of his you have shown,
therefore in your own terms, that is a Lie in the Front. But the cause why the
Dragon casts such Floods (through you) of Lies and Forgeries, and Pervertions
against N. C. and his Epistle, seems to be, because it is Printed without your
License, and so a Denial of your Supremacy; he would not receive the Beasts
Mark, therefore you will not suffer him to buy nor sell: the Spirit of Charity,
manifest in that Epistle, has given such a deadly wound to the Beast, that
Spirit of Pride and Impositon, your chief Leader; therefore you charge N. C.
with Ranterisme, Blasphemy, and unsound Doctrine, but you have not proved it
so; therefore your false Charge on him is truly your own. And for that which
you mention, page 3. of N. C's saying, Wherein they have been acting for him.
It is an Error in Printing one word, Viz. (not) left out, but was corrected
with a Pen in most of them: and should have been, Have not been acting for him.
Had you that you falsely pretend to, Viz. Discerning and Judgment on all
Occasions (as you say) God has furnished you with: you would have known so: for
the Spirit of Truth and Charity (which you are at Enmity with) had you been
acted by that, it would have shown you, that he meant not as you interpret. And
you are proved to be out of the Infallible Spirit, and so no Ministers of
Christ. G. F. says, Those that have Father and Son -- know where Sin is
standing, and where it is finished; (also he says) he could know Saints from
Devils. I could name some who have preached, and their Testimonies recorded and
owned among you (but could fall down and worship your great Image) that I
think, you dare not deny, but they had Sin standing: nor dare you say much for
their being Saints: and if you knew that such Sins were standing, you were
great Hypocrites, that you could connive thereat: your Enmity is so great
against N. C. and because you have not just cause to find fault, therefore you
unjustly quarrel with the Direction of his Epistle, (To be read in the Assembly
of God's People.) This, in your 4th. page, you call, his Prescription: if so,
your Master G. F. G. W. and most of you, who usually directed their Epistle to
the Children of Light, or People of the Lord, etc. are such. For do you not
give them out to be read: nay, your persecuting wicked Bull against J. S. was
not that given to be read in the Assemblies of Gods People? when that false
Accuser G. F. sent his Lies abroad against J. S. and ordered them to be showed
to Friends, and others, to defame J. S. Was not he then by your Rule, a very
wicked Prescriber? For shame, do not thus unmask your selves, Babels-Builders:
Judge another, and do the same thing: but seeing you so call for plain
Scripture, to prove things, why do not you by plain Scripture prove, that N. C.
ought not so to direct his Epistle. You query, in page 4. What must they reap
that sow to N. C's Orders, etc? I say, they that read his Epistle in the Spirit
of Charity and Humility (which you are far from) will reap benefit; but such as
you, that read in the Spirit of Pride and Envy, will (if they repent not) reap
Corruption: For the Plowing of the Wicked, is Sin.

And for that you seem to make an Advantage on N. C. because he said, G. F. was
raised up of God to be an Elder: know, that he is not the first good Man that
has been mistaken, as Peter, and some Martyrs; nay, one of your selves said,
He knew not what Spirit influenced him: but know, that Pharaoh was raised up of
God: also that, Esau was Elder, and came out first, as some of you boast G. F.
did.

In page 4. and 5. you also quarrel against N. C's good Counsel to Friends, To
believe in the Light, that they may be Children of it. Of this you say, O what
Confusion is here? But you prove none in his words; only show that your Babel
Spirit is confounded at the weight of N. C's sound Testimony; but your quarrel
is, because he terms them Gods Children, etc. For, say you, Those words (MAY
BE) clearly imply, they are not yet. Also you say, Are the Children of God
still in Unbelief, etc. But N. C. did not say, they were in Unbelief, etc. But
had you been employed by the Spirit of Charity and Humility, that would have
employed you better, than thus to strive about words, whereof comes Envy, etc.
And although Gods Children are not properly and strictly to be said to be in
Darkness and Unbelief, yet we find Peter term them, he wrote to the Elect
according to the foreknowledge of God, begotten of God into a lively hope, to
an Inheritance uncorruptable, reserved in Heaven (says he) for you. Yet to
them he also says, Let none of you suffer as a Murderer, etc. Also to those he
termed, HOLY BRETHREN; and in whom it is said, The Word of God did abide: yet
they are bid, Not to love the World, etc. Harden not their Hearts, etc. Many
Instances may be given from Scripture, that sufficiently clear N. C. from you
Charge him with, Viz. his Confusion, etc. But your confused Babylonish Spirit
of Strife, might have said to the Apostles, What, Can the Elect of God be
Murderers, etc. What Confusion is here? But if you regard not the Scriptures,
methinks you should have regard to your Master G. F. for he has said to some,
You are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ -- wrote with the
Spirit of the Living God, which (not shall, or will) but, has given you Life
(says he) and will bring you to the City of the Living God. These are as high
Titles as N. C's, and given to them that were then in Error; which is not the
way of Light, but rather of Darkness; which you say, is the way of the Wicked.
But they could sacrifice all Spirituals and Temporals to this Spirit of Pride
and Envy of G. F's, and term it (as you do) the Spirit of God. And surely,
notwithstanding these were such HIGH GROWN CHRISTIANS with G. F. yet their
State (as well as many more among you) need such Counsel as N. C's is, that you
term Confusion, Viz. Believe in the Light, etc. Now you have herein showed
yourselves partial, and respectors of Persons, and are found doing the same
things your selves that you condemn N. C. for; and therein do appear, not
Ministers of Christ, but false Apostles, and evil Workers: for what harm is
there in saying, to any Believe in the Light: for how often said Christ to Peter,
Love thou me. And the same Judgment you have given against N. C. G. F. is
under: for the same you meet to others, you shall have. And your
Unrighteousness is further manifest, in that you so often call for plain
Scripture to prove: But then did you as you ought, you would have proved by
plain Scripture, this Counsel of N. C's to be Coufusion; but that you cannot
do, but abuse and pervert his words, in your 5th. page where you cite a few of
his words, saying, God is feeding his Flock with the Bread of Knowledge. This
is but part of N. C's Sentence: for you leave off at the word Knowledge, where
there is not the least stop: yet N. C's Sentence is, in his 2d. page thus, Whom
he is feeding with the Bread of Knowledge and Understanding of those things
belonging to your Everlasting Peace. These ten last words you leave ont: And
indeed the words neither sound Doctrine, nor good sense, as they, wicked
Atheist-like cite them: (their own term) And that so you may abuse the Reader,
as well as belie N. C. you mention not from what page in his Book you cite
those words (your old trick) but having forged a Sentence, then you call on N.
C. for Scripture to prove it; and abuse the Scripture also: for you say in page
6. God commanded Adam that he should not eat of the Tree of Knowledge. You
leave out THE, there, and also those words next adjoining to Knowledge, Viz. of
Good and Evil: that thereby you might run down Knowledge, and nurse up
Ignorance. (By thy Complexion, O Babel, it is easy to guess whose Daughter
thou art) Out of thy own mouth art thou condemned: for you term T. C. wicked
Atheist, for leaving out some superfluous words in the Sentence, and not
material to the Matter: but for your Prof, that N. C's is, as you say, new
Doctrine, you say, Christ is the Bread of Life. Well, N. C. never said to the
contrary. But Christ said, To know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ,
whom thou have sent, is eternal Life. And this KNOWLEDGE of Christ is Meat
indeed, and I think may be fed on by the true Christians (although despised by
you) and is not, as I know of, any where forbid by God: and it is wrote, He was
to give Knowledge of Salvation unto his People, etc. This is plain Scripture:
but it seems, is New Doctrine to you New Spiritual Lords of G. F's Conclave.
And this is the Knowledge, and not the TREE of Knowledge, forbid by God, as you
would perversely insinuate that N. C. means: and seeing this is to you New
Doctrine, Viz. That God is feeding his Flock with the Knowledge of those Things
which belong to their Everlasting Peace. It is evident, yours is another Gospel
than the Scripture declares of, therefore you to be accursed: also your Forgery
is manifest in this Passage: for N. C. does not say, God is feeding with the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Fvil, forbid Adam: but he says, with the
knowledge of those things belonging to their everlasting Peace: and I think
there is not much difference in substance) between N. C's term of Feeding, and
that in the Scripture before cited, of giving; and that also of Salvation, and
N. C's term everlasting Peace. And therefore, although you impudently term N.
C. Fool and Novice, page 12. yet you appear more like such than he; also by
your continuing your Pervertion on N. C's sound words. In his third page he
says, All fear Him (i. e. God) who (says N. C.) is able to cast into HELL FIRE,
where (i. e. in Hell) the Fire never goes out, but remains for ever on the
Minds of such as disobey the Truth, which is the earnest of their everlasting
Misery, that is their Portion for ever. Then you begin to cavil and query, in
page 6 and 7. If any should be prevailed on to disobey the Truth (say you) is
there no way for their Restoration, etc. Will not that Faith that he ( i. e.
God) is Author of, procure no relief. I answer, that in HELL, as N. C. says,
where the Fire never goes out, there is no way for their Restoration, nor no
Relief; and that I will prove by Scripture; The Wicked and all that forget God
shall be cast into Hell, where their Worm never dies. Also the Parable of
Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16.26. Between us and you (says Abraham) there is a
great Gulf fixed, that those that would pass from hence to you, cannot; neither
can they pass from you to us, that would come from thence; (i. e. Hell
torments.) This is plain Scripture, and proves N. C's Doctrine not Unsound, as
you falsely say, but proves you ignorant of the Scriptures and Power of God. But
your Cavil seems to lie against his words (for ever) by your putting them in a
big and distinct Letter: which words (for ever) you pervert, as if he thereby
did leave such as disobey the Truth; as you say, no way for Restoration;
although they obtain (as you say) that Faith which he ( i. e. God) is the
Author of. That this is you meaning thus to represent him, is evident by your
serpentine way of querying; which although you are too wicked, yet you dare not
positively affirm but by insinuating it by Queries: by which your Equivocating
is evident, for in common acceptance, such manner of querying do imply the
matter queried, undeniably true: also it is further evident, that your design
is to render N. C. so uncharitable or ignorant, that if any (as you say, p. 6,
7.) should be prevailed upon, for want of watching, to disobey the Truth, that
there is no way for their Restoration, if they obtain that Faith God is Author
of. I say, it is evident, it is your design to render N. C. thus uncharitable,
because you say, What, no Place of Repentance? Or else you render your selves
to believe Hell a Place for Repentance, and do not believe everlasting torment
to them that disobey the Truth. And indeed, your unchristian Practices
considered, you give cause to fear you are too much tinctured with such
Atheistical Principles. But you wicked ones, could you not read in the same 3d.
page, N. C. says (of God) That he desires not the Death of a Sinner, but rather
desires all should repent and live. By these Words it is evident, that N. C.
believed a way for Restoration of them that disobey the Truth, and was not so
uncharitable as you represent him, and never meant nor said otherwise; although
you have wickedly endeavored to render him as uncharitable as your selves, and
have, by abusing him, drawn out your own Picture. Also your Envy or Pervertion
is further evident in this: N. C. speaks of those that disobey the Truth: now,
those that repent, and obtain that Faith which God is Author of, are not in
Truths, nor N. C's esteem, disobedient Ones therefore are not the Persons he
mentions. Also N. C. speaking of God, says, He is able to cast into Hell, Where
the Fire never goes out. And it is evident, N. C's word WHERE, refers to the
place Hell, or everlasting torment: and you would insinuate, that he means,
upon their Minds, FOR EVER, while in this Life; nay, although they obtain that
Faith God is Author of. Now N. C's Doctrine is by Scriptures proved sound, and
you false Accusers and Perverters; and indeed it is no wonder J. F. says, page
7. N. C's Epistle reaches not Gods Witness in his Conscience. I say, how should
it, for it was not directed to such as you, who manifest your selves to have
made Shipwreck of Faith and good Conscience: but know, the Fault is not in his
Epistle, but in your evil defiled Consciences, for such proud and envious
Pharisees as you, have always resisted the Truth, ever since your Father Cain,
through his Seed, to your Master G. F. and all of his Spirit, although you call
it the Spirit of God, as your Mother Babylon ever did deck and call her self
the Bride, the Lambs Wife: but he who said, what concord has Christ and
Belial? Was never so unequally yoked, as himself to be loving, long-suffering,
humble, etc. and his Bride envious, proud, lying, and not to suffer, etc. as
you be? No surely, Babel, for all your golden Cup, yet you are full of these
aforementioned, and many more Abominations; although you are suffered yet to go
on, to fulfill the measure of your Wickedness in continuing the pervertion of N.
C's sound words, saying in their page 8. to N. C. Let us have Scripture to
prove, that that Pillar of Cloud by day, and that Pillar of Fire by night
(which went before old Israel) shines in all Gods Peoples Hearts and
Consciences. Reader, observe how variously they render N. C. in these two
pages, Viz. 8. and 12. of their book, both from his 4th. page. Observe that in
this above, from their 8th. page, they are manifest Forgers, for they add into
N. C's Sentence, about the middle of it, these words, Viz. Which went before
old Israel, and change his word, The, into That, and that they do intend to
deceive the Reader, and abuse N. C. They mention not from what page of N. C.
they take those words: also that they intend this above forged Sentence as his,
is evident by their so peremptory calling for Scripture to prove it; for why
should any make a Sentence, and call to their Opponent to prove it? I say, this
shows, they designed their own Forgery should be taken for N. C. his Doctrine.

And in the 12th. page you cite the same Passage from N. C's 4th. page, thus,
say you to N. C. God, say thou, has visited -- that -- none may be drawn out
from the guidance of Gods Spirit, to join to any Form -- but as you are lead by
the Pillar of the Cloud by day, and Fire by night -- which guides the
Footsteps, etc.

Now Reader, observe, that as on their 8th. page, they add to N. C's Sentence,
eight words in the middle of it; so here in the 12th. page, they leave out of
the middle of his Sentence, these eight words, Viz. Which shines in all the
Hearts and Consciences: which is wicked Atheist-like, by their own Judgment:
and the more wicked in them here, because, by leaving out those words, they
render N. C. as directing to some other Dispensation than Christ's, as is
evident by these next adjoining words, page 12. they say, Is not this Man
become a Fool, thus to preach up the Pillar of Cloud, etc. to lead out of
Transgression, which (say they) is the Work of Christ, etc.

Thus the Reader may see the wickedness of the Spirit that acts them (which
they blasphemously term, the Spirit of God) for in both their Observations on
these words of N.C. in their 8th. and 12th. pages, in the 8th. they add to, and
in the 12th. leave out his words, and all to pervert the truth, and persuade
People that N. C. preaches up some other Dispensation than Christ's, as before
cited from the 12th. page, even as they say in page 8. A visible Cloud and
Pillar to the Outward Eye: when as N. C. only uses the terms of Cloud and Fire,
as Metaphor, and does not strictly mean as they say, a Cloud of Fire visible to
the Outward eye; and to make these their Pervertions current Gold, such as they
in page 3. say, come and buy of me. They add in page 8. Which went before old
Israel: and in page 12. leave out these words of N. C. Which Shines in all in
your Hearts and Consciences, etc. For by these words it is evident, N. C. could
not mean as they say, that visible Cloud and Fire, visible to the outward eye,
but the invisible to the carnal Eye (that they look with) Light, or Spirit of
Christ; which as N. C. truly says, shines in all their Hearts and Consciences.
And for all these Inquisitors do so often call it new Doctrine, and for
Scripture; yet they have not by Scripture proved it new or unsound; for in
Scripture Christ is termed a Door, a Vine, etc. which are but Metaphors, and
not that he is strictly such. So is N. C's meaning, as is evident from his
following words, by them left out; for, by Cloud by Day, and Pillar by Night,
is meant only the Certainty or Visibility of this Dispensation of Christ's
Light, and not that Dispensation or appearance that was visible to old Israel
in the Winderness. For although that Dispensation had differing appearances, as
a Cloud and Fire, yet it is not to be taken as two different things, but one
and the same, that appeared by day and night. And if you had lived in those
days, when the Apostle said of the Rock that followed Israel, that it was
Christ, surely you would have termed it New and Unsound Doctrine, and called
for plain Scripture to prove it, for the Light may as properly be termed, The
Pillar of Fire, or Cloud that shines in all his Peoples Hearts, as the Rock was
Christ. Page 8. Again you pervert N. C. his words: in page 6. he speaks of some
that act, and not from the Guidance of Gods Spirit: he advises them to take
heed, that they provoke not the Lord, and they perished from the Knowledge of
him in their own particulars: for, says he, for want of that (i. e. the
knowledge of him in their own particulars) the People perished in all
Generations. But you cite not his words truly, but forge a Sentence of your
own, saying to N. C. Thou, speaking of the Knowledge of God, say (say you)
for want of that the People perish. But you mention not N. C's words, which
show what Knowledge he means, Viz. The Knowledge of God in their own
particulars: but you perversely say, This Complaint was made by the Lord through
his Prophets -- but it was when the Priests Lips should keep the Peoples
Knowledge. But you care not to admit it to be the State of People now; for it
seems not your Interest, that People should know the Lord in their own
particulars (but G. F. and you of the Second-days Meeting) which is the
Knowledge N. C. says, they perish for want of; although you Forger-like leave
those words out, and pervert his meaning, as if he meant natural and common
Knowledge as Men, as is evident by your following words, saying, What think
thou, if those Men perish, will it be for want of Knowledge or for want of
Obedience. Hereby insinua^ing as if N. C. preferred Knowledge before Obedience.
But know you, new Lords, that in Scripture sense Disobedience is taken for
Ignorance, or not knowing; as in that Prophet cited by you it is said, Israel
followed her Lovers, and forgot me: And again Ephraim Provoked him with High
Places, therefore shall his Blood be poured upon him. Also it is said, Samaria
shall be Desolate, for she has rebelled against the Lord. By these it is
evident, that People were punished for Disobedience and Rebellion, and not for
want of knowing their Duty; for they could not properly be said to have forgot
God, unless they had had the Knowledge of God, and you abuse the Scripture, to
infer, as if those People in Hosea's Days, were so ignorant; for he said, My
God will cast them away, because they did not obey him. And for all that, you
make so much difference between then and now, as if their Knowledge was to come
from the Priests: yet Moses directed them to the same Word of Faith, as the
Apostles preached (and not to the Priests Lips without) saying, The Word is nigh
in the Heart and Mouth, etc. Also the Apostle says of the Gentiles, Romans
first, Because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, wherefore God
gave them up to their Hearts Lusts. Whereby it is evident that not only the
Jews, but the Gentiles also, perished for want of Obedience, and not for want of
Knowledge; and the Caution, as worded by N. C. is very proper for this
Generation, although you put it off to past Ages, for Christ said, It was
Eternal Life to know God and Jesus Christ, whom he had sent. And it is not for
want of this (i. e. eternal Life) that the People perish now: but in your
esteem the people perish for want of obeying your Laws of Womens-Meetings,
apart from Men, and they to have power to examine Men twice before they marry,
or else not to Suffer or Permit (say you) Marriages; and for not conforming to
such your new invented Laws, you have the Impudence to defame and unchristian
People: for should the Knowledge of the Lord in their own particulars, be
increased, then you, G. W. etc. (Shrine-Makers) your Craft by which you have
gotten much Gain, will be in danger.

In your Postscript, page 11. You cite N. C's words from his 2d. page, Viz. The
Kingdom of God comes not in Outward Observations, but is felt within, therefore
all gather in from that which would draw out the Mind from God, to observe
days, etc. -- But as you are inwardly drawn by the Truth in your own
particulars. Then in your 12th. page you say to N. C. May the People of God --
have their Mind by the Truth in their own particulars, inwardly drawn from God,
etc. And you go on, and say, What RANTING Doctrine is hearse asserted, that the
Trtuh may draw Peoples Minds off from God, etc. You have saved me the proving
your Doctrine Babylonish and Ranting, for you have confessed it: but I shall
prove this Doctrine not N. C's, but yours; for he says not so, nor is it
deducible from his words, for his words be sound: he warns Friends from THAT
which would draw the Mind from God: he does not say, nor mean the THAT which
would draw the Mind from God, is the Truth: for that cannot be; but N. C's
words do imply, that there is such a Principle or Spirit which he terms THAT;
even that of yours, which leads you thus to belly him, and pervert his words,
and falsely accuse your Brethren, and would compel them to fall down and
worship your great Idol; and you do, by your practice, teach, that unless
People will be circumcised with G. F's Circumcision, and keep his and your
Laws, they cannot be saved: this is the THAT which N. C. warns from, which you
call the Spirit of God and Truth; and which drew out their Minds to that
erroneous Barbados Judgment (your Principle) also, that led G. F. to send that
wicked, deceitful Letter, mentioned in 1st. 4th. and 5th. Babel's, and THAT
which would not suffer nor permit Marriages, without the consent of two of G.
F's Womens-Meetings, etc. And dare be so impudent, as to outface the Law of
God, and the Law of the Land, to make such an unalterable and perpetual Order:
also that which contrived and brought forth that abhorred Bull of 66, against
J. S. etc. and which is not only so impudently envious, but so Luciferiously
proud, as to promise People absolute acquittance in Gods Sight, on Conformity
to your Commands: also dare be so impudent, as to say, it is by the Spirit and
Power of our God: if you mean the True Eternal God; I say, O abhorred
Blasphemers. But for your God, THAT Spirit which N. C. cautions from, it is
like THAT which also terms that 66 wicked Bull, the Judgment of the Eternal
God. And that dare say, there is no way for J. S. to come to Peace with God,
but by this your Judgment; and that (THAT) is the Door he must enter at. This
Judgment or Bull, is your writing, and by you thus set in the Place of, or
above Christ and Scripture; and yet G. W. has the impudence to say in his
Book, Entitled, The Quakers Plainness, page 70.71. VIZ. Nor did we ever prefer
our Books before the Bible, but do prefer the Bible before all other Books: Our
Principle never was to bring our Books in comparison with the Scriptures. But
this Quibler G. W. will think to creep out at the word Books; he may say, this
66 Bull, or Judgment is not a Book; to which they have ascribed the very Office
of Christ, and Judgment of the Eternal God; nay, of their Womens-Meetings, and
other Inventions of G. F's, they call them the Great and Good Ordinances of God
and Christ. These blasphemous luciferian Practices and Principles of theirs, in
thus adoring the Product of their own proud and envious Spirit, do not only
manifest G. F's, and his Parties Impudence, but also G. W's great wickedness,
thus to outface such an undeniable Truth, or his wicked old quibbling Trade,
by his Jesuitical reserve of distinction between Books and Writing; and
although this be a digression, yet a manifest proof of the unjustness and
confidence of G. W. and his Abetters of G. F's Party, that dare affirm or deny
such things. I say, THAT also which led you of the Second-days Meeting to
license such Lies, wicked Forgeries, and Pervertions, as G. W. R. R. and J. F.
are proved guilty of; and doubtless, THAT lying Spirit, which said, he would be
in the mouths of Ahab's Prophets, is in G. W's, etc. mouths, that leads him and
you out from God, to entitle such Wickedness Righteous Judgment, and the
Judgment of Truth, as you do. I say again, this your Luciferian Spirit, which
you so entitle and exalt above all, is the abomination standing where it ought
not, and is THAT N. C. means, and warns Friends from, and THAT which too much
rules in your Men's and Women's Meetings of G. F's Party, giving power to such
as G. W. to send out of their mouths floods of Lies and Pervertions against J.
S. N. C. W. R. etc. whom it cannot lead out from God to adore THAT, and is THAT
which leads you to forge such blasphemous, ranting Doctrine, and blind you, so
as that after you have forged such, to father it on N. C. and then term it his,
when indeed it is Blasphemous Ranting Doctrine of your own: and therefore, O
Babel, out of thy own mouth art thou condemned, for asserting Confused,
Babylonish, Ranting Doctrine, Viz. That the Truth may draw Peoples Minds off
from God, page 12. and it is not N. C's. For the Truth as it is in Jesus, will
not draw any from God, although that you falsely call Truth, will (as it has
done you) draw all that follow it into its own nature, Pride, Envy, Lying,
Perverting, Babylonish, Ranting and Confused Doctrine. Yet N. C. does believe,
that the Truth may draw into some Outward Things, as Days and Times, etc. but
whosoever is drawn thereby to observe them, cannot be said to be drawn from
God, although into some Outward Observations, etc. page 12. You also query,
What are those days, etc. he would not have them observe? Also, What they be
which they may observe? In answer to you Inquisitors, I say, N. C. has showed
what Times, etc. he would not have observed, Viz. Outward Observations, as
Days, Times, etc. that any be drawn to by G. F. or you his chief Cardinals of
the Second-days Meeting, and not inwardly drawn by the Truth in their own
Particulars: he would have them follow the Lord's, (not G. F's) Requirings, in
themselves; and if the Truth in their own particulars draw any to your
Meetings, N. C. is not against it; but if G. F. or G.W. command them to meet in
any Place at the 11th. hour, or once a month about the 10th. hour; or if you be
so Luciferian to command, they shall not Decline, nor remove their Meetings,
this THAT which would draw out their Minds from God, to the Observation of
these Outward Things, because you so write and order -- and they not inwardly
drawn by the Truth in their own particulars; these be them N. C. would not have
them observe. And here you may see that T. C. has shown what Times, etc. he
would have observed, and what not; also N. C. has shown himself to have
(according to the advice of the Apostle) put on Charity, in that he does not
condemn, or is against observing of Days, etc. but does admit some may be
inwardly drawn thereto, although such as G. F. or the Second-days Meeting may
order. But this Spirit of Charity in N. C. torments your Spirit of Pride and
Envy, in that it allows God's People may be of various or differing Minds and
Judgment, as to outward Observations of Days, etc. Which is contrary to you,
and proves your Doctrine false, Viz. That they must be all of one Mind and
Judgment, etc. This true Charity in N. C. is that which offends you, and not
any false Doctrine, or sinful Practice, for you can connive at Wickedness, if
they conform to your Appointment: but N. C. would not have the Spirit or Power
of appointing any Form, Time, or Place, locked up only in G. F. and you of the
Second-days Meeting, to govern not only all Europe, but America also: and
therefore N. C. says truly, in page 2. The Light, etc. will let you see his (i.
e. God's, and not G. F's) Mind concerning you; for (says he) all Times and
Seasons be in his (then not in G. F's) Hand. And it is truly said, It is the
general consent of all Sound Protestants, that no Traditions nor Cannons of any
visible Church (then not of yours) but the Scriptures ONLY, interpreted by the
Spirit in us; (then not without us in G.F.) gives the final Determination of
Matters of Religion, and that only in the Conscience of every Christian to
himself. This was, and is sound Protestancy. But perhaps that may not be for
your Advancement, now to appear such; but rather on the contrary, Believe as
the Church believes: that is more likely to advance G. W. to G. F's Place of
Chief, or Archbishop of all your Party; and then why may not your Father allow
the Order of St. George, as well as of St. Francis, etc. You cannot assume a
more seeming harmless Title than your Brethren the Jesuits have, Viz. The Order
of Jesus.

Page 13. They say to N. C. Thou warns Gods People not to join to any Form. And
then they perversely paraphrase on this their Forgery, and say, Though the
Apostle exhorted to turn from those that had the Form of Godliness, and not the
Power -- yet, say you, I never read that he exhorted not to join to any Form.
Hereby rendering N. C's words in general against (any Forms) without exception;
when as N. C's words have in the same Sentence an Exception, Viz. But as you
are led by the Pillar of Cloud by Day, and Fire by Night which shines in all
your Hearts, says N. C. Now these 24 words they leave out, and take no notice
of in this Forgery, to make him appear against any (or all) Form; when as it is
evident by the following words, N. C. admits that they may be led into some
Forms by that Light which shines in their Hearts, etc. which he there
metaphorically terms, a Pillar of Fire or Cloud; which terms be not strictly,
but figuratively, used there, as G. W. says of the Titles of their Books: and I
cannot express the greatness of their Envy, and Falseness in this; for in their
using this one sentence of N. C. page 4. they 1st. in their 8th. page add in
words, and then here in the 12th. page leave out words, to pervert N. C's
words, and render him as preaching another Ministration than Christ; and also
to preach up a Visible Cloud to the Outward Eye, and that Cloud and Pillar
which appeared to Old Israel, and now also (for fear that their Wickedness
should be manifest in these absurd Forgeries on N. C.) they have another
Forgery from the same Sentence, that N. C. counsels God's People against any (
i. e. all) Forms. All which be their own Forgeries, and not N. C's words nor
sense: for by this their way of dealing, one may undertake to prove or disprove
what they please; nay, one may charge Christ himself with saying that which was
not true; for he said, Those whom thou have given me, none is lost but the Son
of Perdition. Now if one should cite only those first words, Viz. Of those
which thou have given me, none is lost; and leave out these latter words, Viz.
but the Son of Perdition (as they do by N. C.) then the sense is quite altered,
and those words a general affirmation, that none was lost: when as the Son of
Perdition was lost. Thus wicked Atheist-like do these People abuse and forge
false Sentences, and render them N. C's: and then for a further blind to their
Wickedness, in page 13. they bring in N. C's words, But as you are led by the
Pillar, etc. And then query in page 13. May they by this Pillar be drawn from
the Guidance of God's Spirit within them, etc. And again in the same 13th. page
you again set up your Inquisition Office, and say to N. C. Do thou believe
that this Pillar will lead from the Spirit of God within, etc. I say, there is
no ground from N. C's words for this Query, for he never said they may; but as
I have said before, by Pillar, he means Spirit, and that they be but one,
although differing Appellations, as many more are given in Scripture to God, as
Fire, Love, etc. yet but one; and as I said, those terms of Pillar of Fire, and
Cloud, be but figuratively, and not strictly; and N. C. means but one, and not
two distinct Principles; but the Pillar, the Spirit; and the Spirit, the
Pillar; and that cannot draw from its self, for God is not divided. And had N.
C. expressed that Pillar and Cloud that appeared to Old Israel (which you seem
by your Query to say) was visible to the Outward Eye, page 8.) yet it is
absurd, if not Blasphemy, to suppose that could or would lead from God; but
N.C's words of Exception, which follow, viz. but, etc. do, as I aforesaid,
manifest his Christian Charity, in that he does not condemn, or advise against
all Forms in general, but allow that some, may be led into some Outward
Observations by the Pillar or Spirit; and this you could not but know. If You
had quite deserted Christianity, had not you also abandoned Morality: and for
that you seem in your 13th. page to blame N. C. saying to him, Thou seems to
make the Pillar of Fire, and the Spirit, two differing things. But this also is
proved false, for N. C. means but one by those two, as is aforesaid; but you
seem to make them two differing things in your 8th. page, saying, Does not God
by his Light, and not by that Pillar Old Israel followed, shine into Men's
Hearts, etc. Also again in the 12th. page you blame N. C. for preaching up the
Pillar, etc. -- to lead out of Transgression, which (say you) is the Work of
Christ in this Gospel day. By these words, giving cause to think that you do
not believe it was Christ's Work in former days, to lead out of Transgression;
but your perverse Spirit is here manifest, in that you seem to blame N. C. for
what you do your selves ( Viz. seem to make the Spirit and Pillar two differing
things) Hereby you bring your selves under that Judgment, Viz. condemning
another, and do the same thing. And although you so despise N. C. and his good
Counsel, for supposing any whom he terms Gods People, to be in a State that
has any Night; as is evident from your Saying in page 13. Why do thou direct
the Sons of Zion to follow the Pillar of Fire by Night, etc. And then you say,
Paul said, You are all Children of the Light, you are not of the Night. Yet
among you are evil Works, which are of the Night; and therefore you are not yet
in that Jerusalem you speak of; where you say, There is no Night.

Page 14. You say, The Lord grant that they (i. e. his People) may know Jesus
to put them forth of all that is contrary to his Mind. Hereby you seem to admit
they may be in that which is contrary to his Mind; the which in your 8th. page,
you seem to condemn N.C. for, as strange Doctrine, because he exhorts as you
say, The Children of God to believe in the Light, etc. (and then you say) Are
the Children of God -- still in Unbelief? etc. And yet now in your 14th. page,
you seem to admit they may be in that which is contrary to his Mind; which
differs not much from that which you so blame N. C. for, Viz. admitting God's
Children may be in Unbelief: herein also you are guilty of doing that you
condemn others for. Again, page 14 you say to N. C. Then thy Doctrine is thus,
The Flock of God must not be drawn from the Guidance of God's Spirit within,
but as they are led by God's Spirit within. But you have not proved these words
to be N. C's, therefore not his Doctrine, but your own Forgery. For although N.
C's words in his 4th. page, do admit, that That which shines in their Hearts
and Consciences may lead to join to some Form: yet it does not therefore
follow, that such leading is a drawing from the guidance of God's Spirit
within; as you say; for the Spirit is not, nor cannot be divided, or contrary
to it self, but may lead some to join to some Form, and yet not draw from the
Guidance of God's Spirit; for whosoever is led to join to any form by the
Spirit of God, is not drawn from, but with the Guidance of God's Spirit.
Therefore herein also you are guilty of Forgery, to frame a Sentence, which you
say in page 14. is Rantisme and Blasphemy; and there falsely say, it is N. C's
Doctrine, when it is not his, but your own; and notwithstanding you have so
often termed N. C's Doctrine Blasphemy, Rantisme, etc. and call so often for
Scripture to prove it; yet you have not proved any one Sentence of his unsound;
but proved your selves Perverters, Forgers, Liars, Blasphemers, and Ranters,
false Accusers, Raylers, and like wicked Atheists, doing that you condemn
others for, as is evident by your forging so many Sentences, which your selves
say, are Blasphemy, Rantism, Confusion, etc. and for your calling for plain
Scripture to prove, and urging F. B. for your President; there is much
Difference in the Case; for F. B. desires Scripture to prove such things as you
impose as God's Laws and Ordinances on People to believe and practice, and
require Belief or Subjection to, and not for every thing you believe or
practice your selves, as to your own particular; but did you do as you would be
done by, then you should first have given F. B. plain Scripture (according to
his desire) to prove those things: but instead thereof, see your Answer in R.
S's Book, falsely termed, Righteous Judgment, p. 22. viz. If Professors should
query, Give Chapter and Verse to prove thy Practice of keeping on thy Hat, or
disprove our taking it off to Persons, etc. Had you Discerning and Judgment
from God on all Occasions (as you falsely pretend) you would have discerned that
your own Answer might serve your selves, and you would have been ashamed to
call for plain Scripture to prove, until you had thereby ratified your own
Laws, and not been so unjust, as to refuse to prove them (you impose on People)
by Scripture, and yet call for plain Scripture from others. But that which
aggravates your unchristian Dealing, is, That notwithstanding you are such
Forgers, Perverters, Liars, like Wicked Atheists, and have delivered such
Doctrine as your selves say, is Ranting and Blasphemous; yet you have the
Impudence to say to N. C. page 10. That you have given the Judgment of Truth
upon his Epistle.

But if it be true, That none that love, or make Lies, shall enter God's
Kingdom, sad is your State who have made so many, and thereby rendered your
selves Lovers of them. And I could not with satisfaction let your much
Wickedness pass (in those few words) without some notice, for information of
some who may be deceived by your good words, stole from Scripture; also to
vindicate the Innocence of N. C. and his Epistle; the tendency whereof is to
prefer the Light or Spirit of Christ in the Heart of every Man, before Man or
his Orders.

AND seeing you have acted thus wickedly by N. C. unless the Ethiopian can
change his Skin, it cannot be expected you should deal better with T. C. of
whom you say, in your 17th. page, that thy Proofs may be manifest to be but
mere Think so, and Say so, took on Sample: then for a Sample you cite J. F's
words to me thus, He takes no notice that I called on him to prove any of the
many. To which I replied in 6th. Babels, page 8. That is false; and then I
cited some words of mine in 5th. Babel's, page 11. which I had wrote in Answer
to those words: and I again referr it to the Reader, whether it is not false in
them to say, I take no notice, etc. When as I did take notice of, and answer to
those words: what, can I mention their words, and answer to them, and they be
so shameless as to say, I take no notice, etc. And now again falsely say, My
Proofs be but base Say-soes and Think-soes: For they be evident Proofs; but
their Serpentine Subtilty is much here, to be observed when they come to
paraphrase on my Answer; then they change their terms, for they were, He takes
no notice, etc. but then they turn them into, Observe how he proves, etc. page
But I say, pray observe, that those words of mine cited by them from 6th.
Babels, page 8. were in answer to that false Charge of theirs, and to prove
that I had taken notice, when they said, I had not, and were not intended (as
they falsely apply them) to prove any of the many, etc. but to prove that I had
taken notice; for I placed the Untruth there, that they said, I took no notice,
etc.

Page 11. you say, Observe how T. C. proves any of the many, etc. Do Sacrifice
all their Faith and Conscience to G. F. etc. -- And then (say you) thus he
says, 5th. Babels, p. 11. and 6th. Babels, p. 8. I think himself and R. R. have
so done, and be too many. Observe, that in citing those words of mine, they
make not so much as an (etc.) to them; whereby, as also by their reiterating
their words, How does he prove, etc. They would have the Reader think that
these eight words that they cite of mine, be all I offered to prove that too
many had Sacrificed all their Faith and Conscience to G. F. But in 5th. Babels,
p. 11. The Reader may find, I spent most of that page to prove it: I also
mentioned the Barbadces Subscribers, who said, They desire to give up their
whole Concern, Spiritual and Temporal to the Spirit of God (as they term it,
even that Spirit that leads you thus into Untruth) Now, if they did not mean,
All Faith and Conscience, then they said false. See more at large in 5th.
Babels also, for a further Proof of their Blasphemous Idolizing G. F. I cited
some Passages out of a Letter to him, Viz.

DEar and precious, One in whom my Life is bound up, -- my Strength in thee
stands, -- by thy Breathings I am nourished, by thee my Streng^h is renewed,
blessed art thou for evermore, -- blessed are all that enjoy thee, -- Life and
Strength come from thee, Holy One, -- reach unto me, that I may be strengthened
to stand in the mighty Power and Dread of the Lord, -- daily do I find thy
Presence with me, which does exceedingly preserve me, -- I cannot Reign but in
thy Presence and Power, -- Pray for me, that I may stand in thy Dread for
evermore, -- Reach through all in thy mighty Power to him, -- pray for us all,
that in thy Power we may abide for ever more, -- I am thine, begotten and
nourished by thee, -- and in thy Power am I preserved, -- Glory unto thee, Holy
One, for ever. --

These show that G. F. was too highly esteemed among Men, and therefore an
Abomination to the Lord, and these be more than base Think-soes, and Say-soes.
But for further proof of his arrogance, if not his Blasphemy. I find it in
Print, that he termed himself The Son of God; and an Establisher of
Righteousness. Also in a Relation of some Passages between him and O. C. it is
wrote that he said, He whom the World calls G. F. is (not A, but) THE Son of
God: (Is not this G. W. THE by way of eminency.) Also it is wrote, he said, My
Kingdom is not of this World (the words of Christ.) You charge N. C. with
Blasphemy; but this looks more like Blasphemy than any thing in N. C's Epistle,
and according to your way of charging others, it is so; but if not, I am sure
it proves, he talks arrogantly, and lifts up himself; therefore his Mind is
not right in him: and in all six Babels I have proved them guilty of many
Untruths and Wickednesses, which they have not, nor can clear themselves off:
and those Proofs of T. C's be not base Think-soes and Say-soes: but if I had
not proved, but said, I think so; I know not but my Thoughts may go as far, and
as well as your Brother C. T. (that Shrine-Maker) his For ought I know: nay, he
has slandered J. S. and for Proof he says, It arose in me, It opened in me,
For ought I know. Are not these, by your own Judgment, base, etc. And you go on
perverting, page 18. you say of me, He seems by his Saying, How dare J. F. etc.
to make as if it were some Crime to say T. C's Think-soes is no Proof. But
those words of mine were, How dare J. F. affirm such an Untruth, etc. were by
me used, after I had proved him in an Untruth, as in 6th. Babels, page 8. and
not in answer to that, as they now imply them; for they seem to make as if when
J. F. had said, T. C's Think-soes are no Proof, that I returned only those
eight words by them cited, in answer; but that is false, and those words were
wrote on another occasion. Herein also they be unjust.

Page 18. They charge T. C. with Lying, and for proof, they cite some words of
his 4th. Babels, p. 10. Viz. G. F. will not admit that any have the least
measure of the Spirit, who submit not to his Laws. I confess, seeing I had to
do with such perverts as you be, I should have more fully worded my Mind; but I
know also you are not so ignorant, as to understand me, as if I meant, that G.
F. nor you will not admit any such to have the Convictions of the Spirit; but,
by not having the Spirit, I meant, are not led by it; or as G. F's term is, Are
erred from it: or as your Doctrine is, All that are left with the Spirit of
Truth, they must be of one Mind. Whereby you include all from the Spirit that
be not of one Mind and Judgment with you: or if you allow others that differ
from you, to be with the Spirit, then you cut off your selves; but that I am
sure you will not do; therefore you do exclude all from the Spirit who are not
of one Mind and Judgment with you; and in this sense I meant, you will not
admit them; for G. F. says, They that the Meetings have not Unity with -- they
be erred from their Measures (but says he) the Universal Spirit has Unity with
the least measure, etc. Therefore by this Doctrine it is evident, you allow
them not to be with the Spirit, and in that sense have it not, or are without
it, as is said in Scripture of some who be without God in the World: now in
some sense none are without God or his Spirit, for by him all move, and have
their Being: add thus I know you do allow all have the Spirit. But were I in
your Spirit of Pervertion, I might give one more Example of your Lies from your
3d. page, where you say to N. C. Because thou say, I am Rich, etc. Now, I am
sure N. C. does not say so of himself, and therefore by your own Judgment, that
is a Lie; but it is you that say so, more properly than he, for you say, Come,
buy of me Gold, etc. And if this were, as you say, a Lie, you might have
deducted out of your own Account in 3d. 4th. 5th. and 6th. Babels, two for it,
and yet you stand Debtor forty still. But now Babels Filthiness begins to
appear, she is glad of any false Covering, that she thinks may hide it from her
Lovers. God grant you Repentance.

Errata. Page 6. l. 6. f. and you, r. not as you. p. 8. l. 30. f. it is, r. is
it. and l. 31. f. but, r. though.


