IT is a dangerous thing to make Innovations, if but in the Circumstances of
Gods Worship; those humane Additions which would seem to grace the Institution
of God deprave it: the foolishness of God is wiser than the wisdom of men;
Idolatry and Falsehood is commonly more gaudy and plausible than Truth, Bishop
Hall, Contemplat. on the Altar of Ahaz, lib. 20. p. 1286. Altar-Worship, Or
BOWING to the Communion Table Considered, As to the Novelty Vanity Iniquity
Malignity
charged upon it.

In an Antithesis to the Determination of Dr. Eleazar Duncon, Lately
translated, and sent into the world in a Romish Dress, with a Cross in the
Front and Fine.

By Z. Crofton Presbyter, but proved Enemy to all Fanatics.

Levit. 26.1. You shall not set up any Image in your Land to bow down unto it.
London, Printed for J. R. at the Fountain in Goldsmiths-Row in Cheapside. 1661.

HOdie tepidi sunt qui Christum cum Belial in side, Ceremoniis and moribus
conciliare satagunt: qui cum ex Babylone se egressos glorientur, bonique
evangelici haberi velint; exuvias tamen papatus, dignitates, ordines, vestes,
stolas, infulas, casulas, cruces, Imagines, Statuas, Altaria, Cereos, Lampades,
Calices, and id genus supellectilia Babylonica; pro a diaphoris in Templis and
cultu Dei, mordieus tuentur. Pareus expos. in Apocalypse. cap. 3. v. 15. The
Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
REligion (man's Glory) like Moral and Divine Virtues, is attended and often
enervated by two Extremes, Profaneness and Superstition; equally odious unto
God, incident unto men, and too commonly concomitant, and that (which is
strange) ordinarily prevalent in the same Subjects; sinking Religion by
Profaneness the Defect, and at the same time subverting it by Superstition, the
Excess thereof.

Such is man's propensity to both these, that nothing will restrain many, until
they run themselves on their own Ruin; and when the judgments of a Jealous God
has bid a stand to their furious course; hedged up their way, turned them by
weeping Cross, and bound them against the same by the sacred Bonds of most
Solemn Oaths; yet mercy is no sooner returned on them, but like backsliding
Israel, they forget God, deal falsely in his Covenant, and go a whoring after
their own Inventions.

Of this evil, England is become a most sad and sensible Emblem; concerning
whose present carriage toward Religion, we may expostulate as the Ten sometimes
(on a bare Jealousy) did with the Two Tribes of Israel, in Josh. 22.16, 17,
18, 19. What trespass is this that ye have committed against the God of Israel,
to turn away this day from following the Lord; in that you have builded you an
ALTAR, that ye might rebel this day against the Lord? Is the Iniquity of Peor
too little for us, from which we are not cleansed this day? (although there was
a Plague in the Congregation of the Lord) but that you must turn away this day
from following the Lord: and it will be, seeing ye rebel to day against the
Lord, to morrow he will be wroth with the whole Congregation of Israel:
Wherefore rebel not against the Lord, nor rebel against us, to build you an
ALTAR besides the Altar of the Lord.

How Gods Sabbaths have been profaned, and his Sanctuary polluted in our Land,
we cannot forget: and how our Kings, Princes and People have been visited by a
Jealous God, our yet bleeding wounds cannot but mind us: How his Hand has
brought our Nation under a most Solemn League and Covenant (from which no
Power, Pope, Prince or Parliament can absolve us) for the Reformation of
Religion according to his Word, all the Christian world could not but observe;
yet wretched we, not only forget, but with a fretting violence cast off, yea,
break through those Sacred bonds, returning like Dogs to our Vomit; which is
woefully witnessed by that Deluge of Profaneness and Superstition which does
overspread our Land, unto the again profane neglect of Gods Sabbath, and
polluting his Sanctuary, by the whole Mass of Humane Inventions, and Idolatrous
dregs continued among us at our first Reformation, or innovated by our late
Prelates, in their pursued accommodation and Union with Rome (that Mother of
Whoredoms) for which, notwithstanding we have sharply smarted, yet we find the
same Spirit (according to its power) forward to appear: Amongst which, Solemn
and Religious Bowing to, toward, or before the Communion Table is not the
least, though by many the least regarded.

This Ceremony (for such they would have us account it) is afresh taken up by
our now-rising Prelates, and their old Superstitious Clergy, not only in
Cathedral, but some Parish Churches: But as yet has obtained (that I observe)
few Advocates, who openly plead for this irreligious, irrational Adoration;
only one I. D. has (with a daring Impudence and Jesuitick boldness) translated
Dr. Eleazar Duncon his Determination De Adoratione Dei adversus Altar,
delivered some years since in Latin, at public Commencement in the University
of Cambridge, and that as he professes to make plain the Catholic Paths unto
Vulgar Devotion: The Epistle Dedicatory to the translation of Dr. Duncon his
Determination.
and lest you should mistake the meaning of his Term Catholic, he has affixed
to the Front and end of his Book, the Cross, that Catholic Mark of the Romish
Church: on whose Score, as his holy Mother Church, (I conceive he would be
understood) he does presume to cast the Boldness of Dedicating this
Translation to Doctor John Gauden, (one of our now active rising Prelates) whom
he applauds for his Late Signal Endeavors to vindicate her Honor, and restore
her Glory.

I cannot but (in Charity) hope to see the indignation of this Reverend Patron
expressed against this Translators Boldness; for that his Nonconformity (in
this Point (at his Late Consecration, gives me cause to think his Name is
knavishly prefixed to this Book; because his Late unhappy works may (I wish
only so) by accident prove serviceable to Englands sinful shameful return to
the Holy-Catholick-Mother-Church of Rome to which the coming abroad of this
Book in a Popish Form and Dialect, seems to be a Praeludium. I heard that a
Fool of late seeing the now Altar and Crosses over it at Westminster-Abbey, and
meeting with a Person of Honor, saluted him with a foolish embrace, and this
homely Complement, God bless you my Lord, you are reforming Religion to the
Purity it was in, in Queen Mary's days: Fools and Children do commonly speak
truths: If ALTARS be erected and adored, without, nay, contrary to Law, and
that under Honorable countenance, and be pleaded for in plain English, under
our Prelates Patronage, we can expect our Reformation to be resolved into no
other Mode.

That England may have a seasonable warning, and the Vulgar a timely Antidote
to poison thus prepared; I have opposed unto Dr. Duncons Thesis a plain
Antithesis, and explained and enforced it with those Considerations, which run
counter to the Arguments of the Doctor, and his contemporary Contestors: I have
chosen this Method for the sake of the Vulgar, who better understand plain
positive Assertions, than Polemical Debates.

Were I worthy to plead with our Rising Prelates, I would demand, Whether they
are resolved to return us to Rome, or run us upon our utter Ruin: For
otherwise they would call a College of Casuists, and resolve that great Case
of Conscience, Unto, against what, and how far the Solemn League and Covenant
does oblige our King and Kingdom? lest they run themselves, and occasion others
to run upon the violation thereof: We well know, Perjury her Prop, cannot but
much pleasure Rome: But if they will needs return into our Church the Romish
Rubbish of Humane Inventions, lately carried out, I think they may fill their
Wheel-barrows with enough, pretending to be established by Law, and need not
take up the Novellous Vanities of Altars and Altar-Worship, condemned by the
Doctrine of our Church, and excluded by the Laws of our Kingdom.

But (Courteous Reader) I have small hope of being heard by them: May I entreat
thee to read and regard this small Manual; that by seeing the groundless
ridiculous Vanity of this Superstitious, Idolatrous (worse than Popish)
Novelty, thou may be confirmed in the simplicity of thy Religion; and kept
from running into, or contending for the Excess thereof, in a pompous
Superstition, not more attended with, than tending unto a profane
Conversation, wherein be assured of the Prayers of

Feb. 8. 1660. Thine in the plainness of Gods Worship, Z. C.

The SIN of ALTAR-WORSHIP, Or, Bowing to the COMMUNION TABLE considered.
PROPOS. Solemn and Religious bowing to, toward or before the Communion Table,
is foolish and unlawful.
BOwing or Religious bending toward the Communion Table, simply considered, is
not to be condemned, no place or instrument, being excluded from use, and
access unto, as convenience shall direct; Bowing the body, or bending the knee
is an action natural, and may be directed, as to the performance of it, by some
special duty requiring that gesture, such as is Prayer, which convenience may
dispose to be performed, in, or toward the place, where the Communion Table is
situate, rather than any other place in the Church; at the solemnization of
Marriage, or celebration of the Lords Supper, the Minister, and persons to be
married kneel at, or before the Table for convenience sake: or the people in
the body of the Church, in time of public Prayer, by the order of the Seats,
may be directed toward the Chancel, and so without other change of gesture,
they kneel toward the Table, which is an action natural, by accident directed
to, or toward that place, having no ground or reason for the same, but the
convenience of the place, to the service to be performed, and so has neither
principle or form of solemn, superstitious worship of the place, or instrument,
to which such genuflection is directed. Therefore, I denominate, that
Altar-worship concerning which we enquire, a solemn and religious bowing to, or
toward the Communion Table; to denote, the Table to be the designed object;
and so, the ground, cause or reason, of that incurvation, genuflection, bowing
or bending, which is purely an Act elective, done by choice, as sacred, holy,
and solemn in its principle, ground, aim, and intention, therefore performed,
on sight of that place and instrument, and as frequently as there is any
approach to, recession from, or passing by the Table, when no action, duty, or
business is in hand, or does direct the same. And so the bowing to, or toward
the Table, is a distinct Act of worship, done solemnly and with a composed
mind, as a piece of Religion, to which the Table, Shelford 5 Treat. page 17,
18, 19, 20
and that only (to use the dialect of the assertors of bowing to the Altar, as
an holy duty) is motivum cultus, the provoking Dictator of this action, as a
duty not to be done, in any other part of the Church, nor to, or toward any
other instrument of divine Service, such as is the Desk, Pulpit, or Font, nor
to or toward, the Chancel, if the Altar, or Table were removed, and not there;
and this bowing as a piece of Religion, and point of devotion, is that, which I
affirm to be foolish, and unlawful.

SECT. II.
TO, toward or before the Table, I add in the position, because, they who
agree in the practice of, and pleading for the act, do disagree in the
expression of it.

Some (whose consciences are more livelily touched with a sense of Idolatry,
and would gladly shift off the guilt thereof) affecting this action, do pretend
to do it, not to, Morton* Inst. of the Sacram. 2. Edit. lib. 6. cap. 5. Sect.
15. page 463.
but toward the Table, not to the Table of the Lord, but to the Lord of the
Table, admitting the Table as a medium, and bowing to it as Pars Cultus, as a
part of Worship, but yet look beyond it and direct their worship to God or
Christ, as the ultimate object of the same, wherein they do not, nor can deny,
the Table to be an object, (though not the ultimate) of Adoration, and that
they worship the Table, though they stay not at the Table, but have respect
unto the God of the Table; and so the Table is to them as the Image, Pix, or
Crucifix, is to the Papists, who do profess they worship God in, and by them;
it being not to be denied, that the Table is the next, and immediate object of
the worship, as having more holiness, and more of Gods presence than any other
place, or instrument of Divine Service; and yet we well know, that the Papists
are condemned, as guilty of direct Idolatry, and breakers of the second
Commandment, in worshipping God, by, before, or toward an Image, or Crucifix,
and how bowing toward the Table, will be acquitted from the same guilt, when
found to be an action of the same Nature, I see not.

However some (more nice than wise, being willing to cheat their Consciences,
and cozen their friends) do labor to shroud themselves under this difference in
expression, we shall easily find it is a Cloak too short to cover their
knavery; for, in scripture acceptance, to worship toward or before, is, nor
imports no other than to worship to its Object: so to kneel, to bow, to worship
before God, is nothing else, but bowing, kneeling, praying to, and worshipping
God, as in Deuteronomy. 26.11. 1 Samuel 12.15, 16, 17. 2 Chronicles. 20.18. Psalm 22.37.
72.9. 86.9. 95.6. 96.9, 15.98.6, 9. Isa. 66.23. Dan. 6.10, 11. Micah 6.6. Rev.
3.9. cap. 4. v. 10. cap. 5. v. 8. and many other places; so bowing, kneeling,
and falling down before men, is all one with falling down to men, Genesis 49.8.
Exodus 11.8. 1 Samuel 25.23. 2 Samuel 14.33.24.20. 1 Kings 1.16.23. 2 Kings 2.15. So
also bowing, kneeling, or worshipping before, or toward Images or Altars is the
same in Scripture language and account, with bowing, kneeling, or worshipping
to them, 2 Chronicles. 25.14. Isa. 44.15, 17, 19. Dan. 3.5, 6. And it is worth
observation, that the good Angel would not suffer St. John to worship, or fall
down at his feet, or before him, Rev. 19.10.22.8. Whilst the Devil demanded no
more of our Lord and Savior, then fall down and worship before me, Lu. 4.7.
which he well knew would have been sufficient to have subverted man's redemption
and salvation. And all our Protestant Writers, and our own homilies against
Idolatry, and Popish adoration of Images, Crucifixes, or the Eucharist, do make
bowing to, or toward them, the same Act in the nature of it, and to leave the
same guilt on the Agent; so that such as endeavor to acquit themselves from the
guilt of Superstition and Idolatry by this distinction and expression; do but
spin a Spiders web, and can no more evade, than do the Papists, whilst they
make in their own defense, no other plea, than the entangling distinction of
bowing toward the Image and Crucifix, not to it: Shelfords Sermon of Gods
House. page 2.4.19. Widows Lawless, kneelesse Puritan. page 34.89. Ironside 7.
Quest. de Sabbat. page 279.
yet urge al kind of reasons, which may erect the Table, to be the Object of
worship, as, that it is holy, Christ's chair of State, where God is specially
present. That the Table is a memorative instrument, unto which the assistance
of Grace is never wanting, either to beget in our minds such thoughts of the
death of Christ, or to abstract from our persons such a Worship of him, if we
be not wanting to our selves; and that it is consecrated to that end, and such
like: But we must remember, that this table-worship does no more tend than it
was intended, to reconcile (I had almost said, return) us to Rome.

Others there are in this design (whose Consciences are seared with an hot
Iron, and being resolved to bring Rome to us, whilst they could not bring us to
Rome) are less sensible or more daringly resolved for downright Idolatry, wave
all kind of modesty, and presume in private exhortation, public Sermons
preached and printed, and that cum privilegio, and open Professions to persuade
to bow to the Altar (as they affect to call the Communion Table) as they do
themselves, and that as an eminent point of Devotion, and special piece of
Worship: Thus did Giles Widows in his Lawless, Kneeless, Schismatical Puritan:
Mr. Robert Shelford in his 5 Treatises, P. 17, 18, 19, 20. and The coal from
the Altar: But especially Dr. John Pocklington, in his Visitation-Sermon,
Entitled, Sunday no Sabbath: wherein he runs to this height, and if we do not
only bow or bend our bodies to this Blessed Board or Holy Altar, but fall flat
on our faces so soon as ever we approach the sight thereof, who would condemn
us for it? He might indeed in that age, well cry Who? For Archbishop Laud would
not condemn him for it; whose grand Index expurgatorius, Dr. Bray, had passed
his Sermon without control or correction, nay with his Imprimatur, who had
established Bowing to the Table in the Univer. of Oxf. by Statute and Oath, and
enforced it by Visitation-Articles, High Commission Censures, as did also Bish.
Wren, and others, and at last commended it in their Constitutions and Canons
Ecclesiastical, 1640. Yet in these gross, plain and absurd terms, not only the
Non-conformists and kneeless Puritains, but all Protestants, and many of their
own Confederates in that Rome-accomodating design, yea Papists themselves would
condemn them, as the greatest Idolaters in the world, they transubstantiating
to their fancy, the Bread in the Box, and keeping it placed on the Table or
Altar, lest they should give Divine Worship to a Joyners Frame, which they
conclude to be wicked and unlawful: And mad Gybbons of Canterbury would play
with them as with the then Dean of Canterbury, at truss-a tray, if it were
possible to laugh them out of this their folly and ridiculous act of Religion:
and he and others agreeing in this action, though disagreeing in the
expression, must give me leave to condemn them in it, as acting and advancing
an action Foolish and unlawful, as it will appear to be, to all that shall
seriously observe and consider the Novelty, Vanity, Iniquity, Malignity,
Of Solemn and Religious bowing to, toward, or before the Communion Table.

Religious, Solemn Bowing to, toward or before the Communion Table was never
digitated by any Primitive or Catholic practice or Prescript of the Church;
therefore it is a Novelty.

Religious Solemn bowing to, toward or before the Communion Table is no way
dictated by the nature or quality of the Object; and therefore it is a Vanity.

Religious, solemn bowing to, toward or before the Communion Table, is no
where directed by Gods Word; and therefore it is an Iniquity.

Religious, solemn Bowing to, toward or before the Communion Table, is an
action in the use of it, dangerous, sinful and scandalous; and therefore
chargeable with Malignity.

These things considered, and cleared, will fully conclude, that solemn
religious bowing to, toward or before the Communion Table, is Foolish and
Unlawful: Let us therefore consider them in their Order.

And First, of the First: The Novelty thereof.

SECT. III.
THE First Demonstration of the Folly and Unlawfulness of solemn and religious
Bowing to, toward or before the Communion Table, is, the Novelty thereof.

That Novelties in Religion, and matters of Divine Worship are Foolish and
Unlawful, I presume I need not stand to prove; it being granted by all men,
Heathen or Christian, Civil or Religious.

Novelty is a disposition, not more vain and childish in its subjects, than
dangerous in its effects and operations, subjecting the most stable principles,
and serious practices to unsafe and unreasonable mutations; thereby proving the
Mother of Sedition in the Commonwealth, and Superstition in the Church,
innovating vanities, good for nothing but to engender strife and contention,
verifying the Greek Proverb, (...), Novelties are vanities, and are therefore
inhibited by all Politicians or prudent Legislators, not only by their Councels
and Commands, but the Peoples Sacred and Solemn Oath. Lycurgus subjects himself
to perpetual exile, that he may supersede the changes of his Lacedaemonians; and
Plato his Rule cannot but be by all received (especially in things of religious
concernment) Ne quid in rebus ad Religionem attinentibus innovetur; That
Novelties in Religion be not admitted: Serious and sincere is the observation
of Dr. Hall, in his Contemplations, on Ahaz his new made Altar, Page 1286. It
is dangerous presumption to make innovations, though but in the Circumstances
of Gods Worship: God does no little aggravate Isreal's Idolatry and Superstition
by its Novelty: Has a Nation forsaken their gods, which are no gods? but my
people have changed their glory, Jer. 2.11. And they sacrificed unto devils,
not to God; to gods whom they knew not, to new gods, that came newly up, Deuteronomy.
32.17. And obviateth their folly, and anticipateth their vanity by a plea of
antiquity, Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations;
ask thy Father, and he will show thee; thy Elders, and they will tell thee,
Deuteronomy. 32.7. Have ye not known, have ye not heard, has it not been told you
from the beginning? Isa. 40. from v. 21. to the end of c. 41. I cannot but own
antiquity as a good witness in matter of fact, though it want the authority of
a Dictator in point of duty. I subscribe readily to Sir Francis Bacons
Aphorism, that antiquity without verity, is a Cipher without a Figure. Yet none
can deny Novelties in Divine Worship to be real vanities: The sense whereof
has in all ages acted the Devil and his Instruments to raise up scorn,
contempt, and enmity against Gods pure Worship and true Religion, with the
false charge and loud clamor of Novelty; thus the Heathen of old judged the
first planting of Christian Religion the setting forth of new gods: and the
Papists of late reproach and retard Reformation with their clamorous demand,
Where was your Religion before Luther? pretending antiquity for their greatest
Impiety and Idolatry: Eusebius Hist. Lib. 7.29.
As Paulus Samosatenus (that horrid Heretic) cast the Scripture-Psalmes out of
the Church, as newfound figments of Late Writers; by reason whereof Religious
antiquity has needed to be asserted (with an haec novitas non est novella
vanitas, res enim est antiquae religionis perfect fundata in pietate Christi,
antiqua haereditas ecclesiae) as the ancient appointment of God, and
inheritance of the Church: The same Method has been, and yet is most exactly
observed by Englands popishly affected Prelates, and their obsequious Chaplains
in their Cassandrian accommodation, for bringing Rome to England, whilst England
will not go to Rome; wherein they decline the Scripture (the only reason of
Religion and Rule of Divine Worship) and pretend Antiquity, Catholic,
Primitive and Ecclesiastical practice and prescription in their innovation of
humane Inventions, unto the obstruction of a due, necessary, inchoated, and
solemnly covenanted Reformation; though herein they are ordinarily mistaken and
confounded; it happening to them, as unto Tertullians Heretics, viderint novum
esse quod sibi est vetus, representing Novelty to be Antiquity, and Antiquity
to be Novelty; concluding some tract of time to be a sufficient plea for the
Innovation of those things in divine Worship, which must needs interfere with
the Institutions prescribed and practiced from the beginning, and so expose
themselves to the shame and guilt of folly and unlawful acting, whenever the
novelty thereof shall be detected; the which befalls them, as in other
superstitious rites, so in this of Altar-worship, or bowing to, toward or
before the Communion Table, concerning which, we shall first enquire, not so
much what was the command and institution from the beginning, which falls in its
place to be considered; as what has been the ancient custom or constitution of
the Primitive and Catholic Church, which we intend as an argument ad hominem,
calculated for the clamorous pretenders to antiquity for all their innovations
and Superstitions in divine Worship, and therein we affirm;

Solemn, religious bowing to, toward or before the Communion Table was never
digitated by the Primitive Catholic practice of the Church; wherein we must
confess it is more proper for us to deny, than to affirm, and put our assertors
and cotestors for this piece of devotion, on the proof of the primitive and
catholic use thereof, which may acquit them from the charge of novelty laid
against them, it being to us a sufficient evidence, that no authority of
antiquity does digitate it; for that though this practice does pretend to be
set by this Dial, yet the Dial is obscure, and no ways made obvious by the
innovators of this Devotion: and that rule must be our reason, non esse, and
non apparere, idem est, it is all one, not to be, and not to be seen.

I must indeed confess, that the Pulpit and the Presses have spoken it (from
more mouths and Pens than one) That bowing to the table is an ancient and
commendable practice and piece of reverence, yea we are so told, and as such,
have it commended to our practice, as fit to be revived, (which implies it to
have been in use, though then almost buried and forgotten) by the grave,
learned and judicious Suffrages of the Convocation of both Provinces, held by
the two Archbishops of York and Canterbury, cum privilegio Majestatis; in
their Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, Anno Dom. 1640. wherein they
thus express themselves; We think it meet and behooful, and heartily commend to
all good and well affected people, members of this Church, that they be ready
to tender it unto the Lord, by doing reverence and obeisance at their coming in
and going out of the said Churches and Chapels, according to the most ancient
custom of the primitive Church in the purest times, and of this Church also for
many years of the reign of Qu. El. The reviving therefore of this ancient and
laudable custom, we heartily commend to the serious consideration of all good
people, without any intention to exhibit any religious worship to the Communion
Table. I am not willing to break modesty so far, as to charge these Reverend
Fathers with a Lie and fallacious insinuation, though the laxity of their
authority, commending what their Reasons might warrant, and power might
authorize, affords a ground on which to suspect it: I shall therefore confess,
that if Obeisance and Reverence expressed by bowing to, toward or before the
Communion Table, were the most ancient custom in the Primitive Church, in the
purest times, it were well worth the serious consideration of good people in
order to the reviving thereof: But for this antiquity, we have no evidence but
their bare say-so, and although we are ready to own such assemblies as Objects
of Reverence, yet we are not resolved into such an implicit Faith, as to
apprehend their say-so a sufficient ground of credence, until we are convinced
of their infallibilities, especially in a matter of fact, which themselves can
only know by report and testimonies, they not so much as naming any Father,
Council or Ecclesiastical Historian, whom we might examine as a witness, unto
this most ancient custom of the Primitive Church in the purest times; Nor do so
much as read unto us the examination and deposition of any witness taken in
private by themselves: We are sure this is not the usual method of the Church
of England, 2 Book of Homilies, p. 21.
or her Advocates, who in her Homilies of the peril of Idolatry, spends the
second part of the Homily in producing testimony to the matter of Fact, and
ancient custom, and practice of the thing to which she persuades: Whilst
therefore they expect our consent to an ancient custom, and tie us to believe
as the Church believes, they raise our confidence that they palliate an
apparent Innovation, with the false pretense of ancient and laudable custom of
the Primitive Chapter in the purest times.

We must confess, we cannot say we never found bowing to the Table commanded
and practiced in our Church; for then we must needs be ignorant of the
Injunctions of Cardinal Pool's Visitors, Fox Acts dud Mon. p. 1781.
in the Visitation of the University of Cambridge, in the time of Queen Mary,
who amongst other things, did order the Scholars how to bow to the Altars: And
must needs be ignorant of the new Statutes made by Archbishop Laud, De Precibus
solen. and Oblationibus in d^e Comitiorum, Sect. 1. p. 2.
the then Chancellor of the University of Oxford, printed 1638. and directing
all the Scholars in their Order ad mensam Eucharistiae sacram cum debita
reverentia oblationes faciant (which by words and practices they interpreted to
be a lowly bowing to, toward or before the Table) for omission whereof they
were punishable at the pleasure of the Vice Chancellor, and to pay five
shillings: And must needs be unacquainted with the Visitation-Articles of
Bishop Wren, Bishop Pierce, Bishop Lindsey, Bishop Skinner, Bishop Mountague,
and others, who among other things, caused strict enquiry about every man's
reverent behavior at entering into the Church by bowing toward the Altar. But
yet I must be bold to say, our Church is not the most Catholic or Primitive,
nor yet the purest Church: that bowing to the table was never prescribed by the
public authority of this Church, the Convocation in 1640. did only commend it
as laudable, not command it as necessary; but left it at liberty as
indifferent; it was never universally practiced by our Church, being chiefly
practiced in University Chapels, and advanced in particular Diocesses:
according to the affections of single Prelates, who enforced it with their
personal authority: And yet it passed not without suspicion and censure of
Innovation and Novelty, by some of the Bishops, as Dr. Wright of Coventry and
Litchfield, and Dr. Williams Bishop of Lincoln, witness his Holy Table, Name
and Thing: And lastly, this makes no antiquity, it being the act of this age
only, and not able to account 60. nay scarce 30 years toward a custom, in
which time it has been more than once arrested as an Innovation, and as far
from appearing the ancient practice of the Primitive Church in the Purest
times: Nor do we observe the practice of it in the times of Qu. Elizabeth,
either first or last, with any approbation or allowance of the Church; though
now again with much earnestness it be endeavored to be revived: Against which,
I think I may be bold to say, that we have many just and considerable reasons
to believe they cannot produce one honest witness or authentic testimony, to
prove that the Primitive Church in its purest times, did ever practice or
prescribe solemn and religious bowing to, toward or before the Communion
Table, the which we shall not fear to produce unto them, that they may reprove
our censure of their Novelty, by better informing our judgments; and they are
these;

1. The zealous assertors of, and contestors for this reverence, do not produce
such testimony, however men boast and brag they have good evidence and
substantial witness, they must be cast in their actions, and condemned as
guilty, if they do not produce them: they must be taken for first Inventors and
contrivers of mischief, who are active in it, and cannot produce their author.

2. The Fathers and Ecclesiastical Historians (by whom all Rites and Ceremonies
used in the Primitive Church, are most accurately set down) do make no mention
of solemn or religious bowing to toward or before the Communion Table, Centic.
Magdub. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. c. 6. de ceremoniis and ritibus Eccles.
which of all other, had it been a thing of that moment, so ancient and
laudable a custom, and reverent acknowledgment of the Divine Majesty, as it is
recommended to be, would not have been passed over in silence by them: Nor is
there in all the writings of the Fathers which I have read (or men of more
reading than my time or affairs will afford me to attain) any passage which may
so much as seem to palliate this Novelty, with the least show of Antiquity,
unless it be that which Nazianzen mentions of his Mother, Nazianz. Ora. 8.
de funere Patris, p. 472.
quod venerandae mensae nunquam terga verteret, that she never turned her back
on the venerable board, which cannot any way be understood of bowing to the
table, but of never withdrawing from the Lords Supper when it was administered,
and so she turned not her back by neglecting to communicate, the Table being
put for the Sacrament, as it is in many of the Fathers: but should we admit
what sense can be desired of it, yet it is but one single example, and one
Swallow makes no Summer; this one example was not till after the year 370.
after Christ, and can scarce come within the computation of purest times, or
Primitive Church; Nor yet is it plain for bowing to the Table, though it might
plead for not turning the back upon it. I read indeed that Uladislaus King of
Poland after his conversion from Paganism to Christianity, Inter equitandum,
quoties-cunque turres ecclesiarum inspexit, detracto pileo, caput inclinavit,
Deum qui coleretur, in Ecclesia veneratus: when he rode abroad, he pulled of
his Hat, and bowed his head as often as he saw the towers of the Church,
worshipping God, who is adored in the Church: But this example will very little
avail, because it was far from the primitive and pure times of the Church, and
digitates an adoration to the Steeple of, not Altars in the Church, and that is
no way commended, nor commanded to us by our Novellers.

3. Because the Fathers in the Primitive and Pure times of the Church, for more
than 400. years after Christ, condemn all bowing to, toward or before Images,
or any external Symbal or representation of God, and all worshipping God in,
by, through or toward the same, affirming and teaching, all divine worship to
be a thing peculiar to God alone, and to be immediately tendered unto himself,
without any such secondary helps as Images; the which is fully cleared in the
Homily of the peril of idolatry, 2 Book of Homilies p, 21.
and by all our Protestant writers, and by Dr. Usher, in his Answer to the
Jesuits Challendge of Images and praying to Saints: How therefore they should
indulge or allow a worshipping or adoring God, in, by, to, toward or before a
Table or Joyners frame, imagined to be the Symbol or Representation of his
Majesty, and so of the very same nature with an Idolatrous Image, I cannot
conceive.

4. Because the Christians in the primitive times, and many hundred years after
Christ did prohibit the bowing the knee, Die Dominica, jejunium ne fas
ducimus, vel de jemiculis adorare, Tert. de corona militis, justin. Mar. Quest.
115. Gracian. de consecr. distinct. 3. Jerome de ecclesiasticis observationibus,
c. 29.
or kneeling on any Lords day; and from Easter to Whitsont. they forbad
kneeling on any day, and that in the very act of adoration or prayer, much more
in the time of receiving the Lords Supper: and that to them it should be a
custom and ordinary practice, in coming in, or going out, or passing by the
Communion Table, to do reverence to it, or bow toward it, who would not admit
any genuflexion in any the most serious, submisse acts of worship, I cannot
believe.

5. Lastly, that no kind of authors, not so much as the very Papists, do make
mention of bowing to Tables, otherwise than as they were Altars; whence it
undoubtedly comes to pass that the great sticklers for this Table reverence, do
affect to call the Table an Altar, and contend to have it so called, and placed
at the Eastend of the Church; under the wall as an Altar, and accordingly
furnish it with Vessels, Candlesticks, Tapers and holy Utensils belonging to an
Altar; as fancying that they may muster up many testimonies for Altar-worship
(such as they are) but not one for Table-adoration, which the Papists so much
abhor, Fox acts. Monuments Ed. ult. p. 85. 95. 97.
as that they contemptuously and scornfully call our communion-Tables,
Oyster-boards and Profane Tables, and yet this Altar-worship which our
Novellers do affect to render synonymous with Table-adoration, is so far from
being the ancient and laudable custom of the primitive Church and purest times,
Article. 35.
that the Articles of our Church, (to the verity of which the Table-Adorers
have subscribed) do teach us to believe, that for more than 250 years after
Christ, the primitive Christians had no Altars before which to worship.

The third part of the Homilies against the peril of idolatry (confirmed by the
statute, and by the Articles of our Church) does declare, Homily 2. Tom. page
41.
all Christians in the primitive Church, ( as Origin against Celsus, Ciprian
also and Arnobius do testify) were sore charged, and complained of, for that
they had no Altars and Images.

And King Edward the Sixth proposing the primitive Church, and purest times for
his example in Reformation, does by his Letter to Doctor Ridly Bishop of
London, direct him to pull down Altars, and set up Tables, and enforces his
direction with reasons, Fox Acts and Mon. Page 1211.
the fifth whereof is, it is not read that any of the Apostles or Primitive
Churches did ever use any Altar in the Ministration of the Holy Communion; the
same is affirmed by Jewel against Harding, Reynolds against Heart, Fulke and
Cartwright against the Rhemists, and all our Protestant writers against the
Papists, which they could never yet answer or avoid; and Tho. Bacon, in his
Relics of Rome, does declare his opinion that Altars were not used in the
Church before the year of our Lord 590. Fol. 82. Of the ornament of Churches.
when the Popish, Peevish, Private Mass began first to creep in; and certainly
if there were no Altars in the Primitive Church, and pure times thereof (as
good authority assures us there was not) then there was not, nor could be any
bowing to, toward, or before Altars. And when Altars were brought into the
Church; there is no probability that they were adored and worshipped as are our
Communion-Tables, for that they were continued in the middle of the Church, not
enclosed, or placed at the East end of the Church, and advanced above other
parts thereof; for many years after. Bishop Jewel in his answer to Hardings
Preface, does observe from many good Authors, that, it is apparent that the
Communion Table, in the Apostles times, and Primitive Church for more then 1300
years after Christ, stood in the middle of the Church: And William Thomas
testifies in his History of Italy, that in the year 1547. The Altar in the
Cathedral Church of Rome, stood in the time of Mass, when the Pope received
the Sacrament in the midst of the Quire; whereof he reports himself to be an
Eyewitness; and probably the Altar was advanced to its high and holy
enclosure before it was adored; moreover although we read of many expressions
of affection to the Altar, as of going up to the Altar, Praying and Trembling,
as the spurious Mass of S^. James the Apostle does direct: or of Penitents
when absolved, Bishops when consecrated, and Kings and Emperors when crowned,
kneeling before the Altar: Of Gorgonia her prostration of her self in her
sickness, before, or at the Foot of the Altar, whereupon she recovered, as
Nazianzen reports; Oration 25. and of Malefactors page 443. flying to the Altar
in time of danger, and such like carriages which were the beginnings of
superstition, and not found in the Primitive Church; yet we read not of any who
mention bowing to, or toward the Altar, De antiquo ritu Missarum Lib. 3. cap.
30. de Inclinationibus.
until Honorius Augusto-dunensis, who lived in the year 1120 (far enough from
the Primitive pure times of the Church (he is the first undoubted Writer, who
gives us any account thereof; in respect of which very practice our bowers to
the Table are Novellers: for the bowing he reports, was to the Altar only at
entrance into the Church, not at every approach to, recession from, or passing
by the Table; they bowed East and West to testify God every where present, but
our men must bow to the East, and to the East only. And after this, though Odo
Bishop of Paris in a Synod about the year 1206 did order, summa Reverentia and
honor maximus sacris Altaribus exhibeatur, that Reverence be done to the Altar,
yet he does not direct it to be done by bowing to, or toward the Altar: and
the Synod of Akens held 1583. though it decree many things concerning Altars,
as for their situation and enclosure, furniture with candlesticks, altar
clothes, and the like, yet it decrees nothing for bowing to the Altar: and
the reserved pix, or transubstantiated bread, adored by the Papists, do plainly
plead for them, that they worship not the Altar, and reflecteth the
Table-worship of the Protestants (who deny the reservation of Christ's body on
the Table) as a most foolish Novelty, ridiculous and unlawful Idolatry,
worshipping a Joyners frame without any apprehension or acknowledgment of Gods
special presence; from which they ought to acquit themselves by good and
sufficient reasons, before they innovate into his Majesty's Royal Chapel, Our
Cathedral and Parish-churches, solemn and Religious bowing to, toward, or
before the Communion Table, or can expect any conformity to their new fangled
fancy, never used in the primitive Church, nor in the Reformed Churches, nor
allowed by the constitutions of the Church of England, before the year of our
Lord 1640. in which it is recommended with an argument which appears to be an
apparent fallacy, whom we shall leave to search ancient records, with pretense
to which they make so much noise; whilst they enquire into the nature of the
object, and what reason therein can dictate this action and demeanor, honor
and incurvation, ever charged (since first acted) to be an innovation.

SECT. IV.
OUr second evidence whereby we charge solemn and religious bowing to, toward,
or before the Communion Table, to be an action foolish and unlawful, is, the
vanity thereof. I do denominate this action vanity, because it bears a show
of religion without any substance. Men that stand at a distance, and observe
the solemn, grave, and serious deportment of those who bow to the Table, must
needs imagine that they are engaged in some special act of devotion, on some
serious sense of holiness in the object, which stirs up, and engages the
same; whereas when the object is inquired into, it is found a plain simple
Joyners frame, or work of some Artificer, without any innate cause, or reason
of solemn and sacred adoration; and it befalls the serious spectators, as the
Poet speaks of the husbandmans expectation when he comes to reap his field,
which he apprehends to have flourished with full ears of Corn, but finds at
Harvest to be empty.

Sed illas expectata seges vanis illusit avenis. And therefore I urge against
this Novelty, the Vanity thereof on this account and consideration.

Solemn and religious bowing to, toward, or before the Communion Table, is no
way dictated by the nature, or quality of the Thing or Object, therefore it is
a Vanity. If Scripture do not direct, right reason must needs expect the nature
of the Object to dictate the act. They are persons and postures fit for Bedlam,
that having no prescription from superiors, cannot plead some reason from the
nature and quality of the Object: It is possible for sober children to demean
themselves with all reverence and good manners toward Squire Dunne, but if
they seem to be reproached for so honoring the Hangman, they can easily plead,
we knew him not to be the Hangman, he was in a Scarlet cloak, and seemed to us
a Gentleman of good note, however they say he is an Esquire by his place, and
so to be reverenced by our betters; let us therefore see what reasons are
pleaded, or can be imagined in the nature of the Communion Table, which can
dictate this bowing to, or toward it.

As it is a Table, none do make it the object of such adoration; being the work
of man's hands, any that knew the nature of an Idol, must needs make the worship
to, or toward it, to be plain, express Idolatry: Whatsoever therefore is
fancied to dictate this worship to, or toward it, is in that it is the
Communion Table, and in Scripture called the Lords-Table; and as such, and
under color thereof, some earnest Zealots for this adoration, do as from the
nature and quality thereof, urge as reasons for this worship, that this Table
is an Altar, an high Altar, an holy place or instrument, the best, choicest and
holiest part of the church the place of Christ's special presence, and his chair
of state; Christ's mercy seat, and the memory of the everlasting sacrifice,
there made and presented to the Trinity; a sign of the place where our Savior
was most dishonored and crucified. And lastly (which is inserted into Doctor
Mortons writings.) The Testimony of the Communion of all the faithful
Communicants thereat. Thus Widows, in his Kneelesse Puritan page 34. 89.
Doctor Duncon in his Lecture on bowing to the Altar. Shelfords Sermon of Gods
house, page 2. 4. 18, 19, 20. Reve his Exposition of the Chatechism, Mortons
Institution of the Sacrament. Edit. 2. Lib. 6. cap. 5. Sect. 15. page 463. All
which are to any serious, sober Christianman (although of slender judgment,)
most vain and ridiculous, yet because they carry a show of Holiness, and seem
to bespeak devotion from such as are willing to believe, as the Church
believes, I shall oppose them, by denying, both antecedent, and consequence,
that the Lords Table is any such thing as is suggested, and if any such thing,
yet that it is to be bowed unto, and worshipped. And thus then we proceed.

1. The Communion Table is no Altar, or high Altar, nor as such to be
worshipped. The Communion Table is no Altar; not in the name and appellation,
for herein they apparently differ, and that in all languages; nor yet in use
and nature, for an Altar is, an holy Instrument, consecrated for the offering
of Sacrifices unto God: this was the only use and nature of pagans and Jewish
Altars, so denominated from the fires and Sacrifices burning on them, as
Calepin and Isidore do note on the word, whence the Papists fancying the Mass
to be an unbloody Sacrifice offered to God, do affect to call the Ministers
Priests, and to turn the Tables into Altars, justly laughing at such Christians
as own Altars, but deny a Sacrifice; well knowing that a Table may suit a
Sacrament, but an Altar does in the very nature and notation of it suppose a
Sacrifice, and the asserting the Table to be an Altar, has led some among us
unto the subverting of the Sacrament, (Christ's institution) by suggesting the
Bread and Wine thereon used, to be a Sacrifice: Again, an Altar in the nature
of it was sacred, and did sanctify the things that were offered thereon, as
our Saviors expostulation with the Pharisees, plainly shows, Mat. 23.18, 19.
But none will dare to say that the Communion Table sanctifies the Bread and
Wine which is used on it; but on the contrary, the Adorers of the Table teach
us, that it is sanctified by the consecrated Elements and holy Service thereat
performed: And therefore the difference between an Altar and Communion Table,
appears to be no less in nature and use, than in name and appellation.

A Communion Table is no Altar, in or by divine account and appointment, the
word of God does no where so denominate it: The Table of Shewbread was in the
Temple distinct from the Altar of incense: And under the Gospel attendance on
the Altar, and partaking of the Altar, was the sign of a Jew, or Infidel
Gentile, contradistinct from the Christian, whose Character was, to partake of
the Table of the Lord; Whence Christians of old, and protestants of late, have
ever made it a note of Christ's Church, that it knows no Altar. All the
Fathers generally, all Commentators and Christian Writets do agree, that Altars
were Types of Jesus Christ: Whence the Apostles do call Jesus Christ himself
our Altar, Heb. 13.10. Rev. 6.9. c. 8.3, 9, 13. As also our Expositors and
Martyrs, and our late King James in his Paraphrase on the Revelation, do
agree: Moreover, Christians have no proper Sacricfies or burnt offerings to
tender unto God, for which God should appoint an Altar; they have indeed a
Feast of commemoration, a Passover, to be with frequencie celebrated, and this
does require a Table whereat to feed, and from whence they ought not to be
excluded by a railed-in Enclosure.

The Communion Table is no Altar; in the apprehension of the Church.

Not in the apprehension of the Primitive Church, who were estranged unto
Altars, and did determine them to be expelled the Churches, as things
unsuitable to Christians, and whereby we denied Christ the true and only Altar,
to have been offered unto God, Thus Origin does determine, the truth was in
Heaven, but the Altar, shadow and example was on the Earth, but when Christ,
this truth, came from Heaven to the earth, Altar sublatum est, the Altar was
taken away, and therefore he directs such as seem to want the Altar, to look up
to Heaven, Si Altar videris destitutum, est in coelis: So also Paschalius
Rhadbertus, repulit Dominus Altar suum de Ecclesia in qua Christus Altar
creditur esse: The Lord has thrust his Altar out of his Church, in which
Christ is believed to be the only Altar. None save an impudent Jesuit (like
Harding) will dare to say that there have been Altars even from the Apostles
times; and our Jewel has told him full well of the falsehood thereof: Origin
tells us, That 200 years after Christ the Christians were blamed by the
heathen, for that they had no Altars; and Arnobius after him declares the same
thing, all our Protestant writers have maintained it against the Papists, that
the Primitive Church never had, nor would endure Altars, but certainly they had
Communion Tables, and used them.

It is an old shift and pitiful poor plea, to tell us, that the Fathers do
often make mention of an Altar, and denominated the Communion Table an Altar,
the which was not done by any 260. years after Christ, and then only in a
figurative and improper speech, in respect of the prayers and praises performed
at the Lords Supper, as appears by many passages out of their own writings
urged by the Protestants against the Papists, by B. Jewel, Babington, Reynolds,
and others, even as they denominate the heart of godly men their Altar, and
Faith an Altar; So St. Jerome. Altar Fidelium fides est, and Altar Dei est cor
bonum, and yet they will not be admitted to be proper Altars and objects of
Adoration; How then can communion-Tables be so owned.

Communion-Tables were not Altars in the apprehension of the Reformed Churches,
or of our own Church in promoting the Reformation of Religion, which did ever
be gin, and proceed by pulling down Altars and placing tables in the Body of
the Church, as contra-distinct from the Papists Altars; Whosoever will observe
our own Book of Martyrs (the best Ecclesiastical History of the first beginning
and progress of Reformation) shall find, that at Berea, Constance, Basil,
Geneva, Ausburge, and other Cities, at the beginning of Reformation in the year
1528. they proclaimed that all Altars should be abolished; and in the year
1556. The Waldayes in Piemont covenanting the Reformation, agreed to cast down
the Altars, which they accordingly executed in the Church of Boby. And our
Edward the Sixth, beginning the Reformation, gave order to pull down Altars,
and place Tables in Churches, the which was earnestly practiced, pursued and
pressed by Bishop Hooper, in his Sermon before the King, by Bishop Farrar in
Wales, by Bish. Ridley in Saint Paul's, and other Churches in London: All which
was enforced with this consideration, That Altars were not used in the days of
the Apostles nor Primitive Church, nor did agree with the Christians Sacrament
and Profession, that Christ their true and only Altar was come. And on the
contrary, when this Reformation was stopped, and turned back in the Reign of
Queen Mary, and Popery again returned, it en^ered and proceeded by scorning,
villifying, and pulling down Communion Tables, and preaching up, building and
restoring Altars; which were again demolished and driven out, when the
Reformation revived, under Q. Elizabeth, and Communion-Tables were restored,
and fortified by Injunctions, Canons, and Statute Law, and so continued until
the attempted accommodation with Rome, did again turn our Tables into Altars.

If any therefore will observe the nature of an Altar, and how Altars and
Tables have ever been the contradislinct notes of true or false worship,
between the Primitive Christians and the Jews and Heathens, and in latter time
between the sincere Christian Protestant, and the Jewish Pagan Rapist, he must
needs conclude the Communion Table is no Altar, but a thing contradistinct from
an Altar, and therefore as such, it can not be worshipped.

And as the Antecedent of this reason is apparently false, so the Consequence
wants not its fallacy: Should we grant (what our table-cringers so much use,
and affect to call the Communion table) that it is an Altar, yet there is no
reason for their bowing to, toward, or before it; because Altars are no way
the Object of adoration, nor can be worshipped or bowed unto, without apparent
Idolatry: not materially, for so they are but common stone, or clay, or wood,
contemptible creatures, not Objects of Divine Worship. Not Formally as Altars,
for as such, they are indeed Instruments of Service to God, but not Symbols of
Divine Nature or Presence, for Altars have been, and may be without the
presence of God: And the Jews were never appointed, nor did the Gentiles by
nature apprehend it fit to bow down unto, or worship any thing but the Symbols
of divine nature and presence; and therefore though the Jews might worship
before the Arc, or the cloud which rested upon it, or toward the Temple; yet
neither Priest nor people did worship the Altar: and the Gentiles ever had the
Images of their Gods placed over their Altars; and their bowings were to their
Images, not to their Altars, as their own Poets, and Historians, and many of
the Fathers do testify: Saint Austin tells us, the Pagan Idols were placed
honorabili sublimitate, in an honorable height, ut a precantibus atque
immolantibus attendantur; that they might be regarded by them that sacrificed
and prayed unto them: And the Scripture witnesses, God for bad Isreal's bowing
to the gods of the Gentiles, Numb. 25.2. Not to their Altars, which was not
used: And when Josiah brake down the Altars, he brake also the Images of
Baalim, 2 Chr. 34.3, 4. And these two were joint acts in one and the same
Command, Exodus 34.13. And therefore the Papists themselves do keep God in a
Box, the bread fancied to be transubstantiated on their Altar, or hang a
Crucifix behind and over the Altar; knowing the Altar as such, to be no Object
of Worship, because no Symbol of divine nature and presence. It is more then
probable, that the sense hereof, brought the late Crucifix in the Glass over,
and in the Arras Hangings behind the Altar at Lambeth-Chappel, and in the Kings
Royal Chapel, so ordered by the Late Archbishop Laud, the first that ever
framed a Canon for bowing to, toward or before the Communion Table: for which
reason will require some Symboll of Divine Nature and Presence: Its being an
holy instrument of divine Service, being of no more force for the Altar then
for the Tongs, or Snuffers of the Tabernacle, or Aarons breeches under the Law,
or for Surplices, Organs, Chalices, Patens, and Canonical coats and girdles,
which are made instruments of Holy Service, by our Altar-Adorers; and if on
that reason they must be bowed unto, we shall abound in cringing not only in
every Church, but in every street; but whether it be an holy instrument, is
considered in the next reason, to which I oppose and say.

2. The Communion Table is not an holy place or instrument. In this Anithesis I
understand our Altar-Adorers in the latitude of their sense and expressions, as
speaking of the Table in its fixed form and situation in the Chancel, at the
upper end; under the wall, in the form of an Altar, and railed in, in which
frame and posture they deem it, not only an instrument, whereon Divine Service
is performed, but an holy place unto which Christ is confined as his Chair of
State, and Mercy Seat, nay a most holy place, into which not the best of
Christians, none but the Priest may enter, all others must humbly and
reverentlykneel at the rail; and thus many of them do bespeak themselves, by
proclaiming holiness of the Churchyard, more holiness of the Church, which
must needs conclude most holiness of the Chancel, to which the Table is
confined.

Holiness inherent cannot be imaged to be predicated of the Communion Table, it
being proper to none but Rational Creatures, Angels and Men.

And therefore Relative Holiness is that which must be understood of the
Communion Table; and this Holiness according to the description of our Table
cringer, is nothing else but a state of relation and peculiarity to God,
dedicated to his only service, and so alienated from all other usewhatsoever,
it is holy extra usum publicum. 2. Sanctifying, or giving power and virtue to
be more effectual and acceptable to God, whatsoever is tendered in or by it. 3.
The Object of some positive and special respect and reverence.

That there have been such places and Instruments we cannot deny, whilst we
remember the Tabernacle and Temple among the Jews before the coming of Christ;
but that the Communion Table is such an holy place or instrument, we must and
do deny. 1. Because the holiness of places and instruments, allowed under the
Law, is abolished under the Gospel; those special places and instruments, the
Tabernacle or Temple, and its utensils, have been profaned and made common,
and no other place or Instrument has been appointed in the stead thereof; the
typical use of such holy places and things is expired in the appearance and
existence of the Antitype Christ Jesus, who is no more to be shadowed by them;
and Jesus Christ the King and Prophet of his Church has expreslyabrogated all
such holiness of place and Instruments, John 4.21. Woman believe me, the hour
comes, when neither in this mountain, nor at Jerusalem (by peculiarity of
relation to God) shall ye worship the Father; and the Spirit in a Vision has
taught us, to call nothing unclean, and then every thing and place must be as
holy as the Communion Table with its railes.

2. There is no way or means by which the Communion Table can be made holy, or
set in such a state of peculiar relation to God; For the cause, way, or means
of making it holy, must be from God, or from man, or (as our Altars-adorers
teach us) from the holy services which are done therein, or thereupon, but the
Communion Table is not made holy by God immediately, for his presence is not
tied to this place or instrument, and the presence of God, is the only way by
which any place or instrument is made holy: Our Table-worshippers tells us they
worship God by the Table, and the Lord of the Table, not the Table of the Lord,
and call the Table Christ's Mercy Seat, or chair of State; and so suggest his
presence in this place, and on this Instrument; and that more than his omni
presence, which is every where, and therefore they sometimes tell us he is
specially present there, as in his chair of State, and Mercy Seat, which the
Author of the Quenchcoale will not believe, wittily enquiring whether Christ
have a Pew in every Church, and his special presence be so chained to the
Table, that he is not at the Font, Desk, or Pulpit? Or never stirs from thence;
that every time men come into the Church, they must bow to the Table, as well
when the Sacrament is not administered, as when it is; but to be more serious
with them, I should enquire what kind of presence God affords us at the
Communion Table, whereby it is made holy, and so rendered the object of such
special solemn worship.

There is recorded in holy writ a threefold special presence of God, two of
which do sanctify any place or instrument, and make it the object of solemn
adoration, so long as they, or either of them exist; but the third does not so
do.

Gods presence may be, and has been sensible to the bodily eyes of his people:
Thus he appeared to the Patriarchs, and to Moses and Joshuah and others, and
this presence will (for the time of its continuance) make a place or thing holy
as Bethel to Jacob, and the object of special reverence, as the ground whereon
Moses and Joshuah stood, Exodus 3.5. by reason whereof it is required, that they
should put their shoes from off their feet. Joshuah 5.15.

This presence of God, or Christ on the Lords Table, cannot be pretended to,
unless by a Popish Transubstantiation and real presence, which yet is affirmed
to lie latent under the accidents of Bread and Wine, but when they have made
their God, and put him prisoner in a Box, and place him on the Table, if they
tell us, he is in this sense present on the Altar, we should not believe them,
for in this case seeing is believing; this presence is as obvious to others,
(having eyes) as to them; Faith assures us the Heaven of Heavens must contain
him until the restitution of all things.

Reason apprehends it impossible for a humane person to have many bodies at one
and the same time, one in Heaven, and one on every Altar; and sense satisfies
us that a body cannot exist in its full proportion, but it must be seen. Yet I
must confess this fancy is a better fence for bowing to the Table than any
other framed by its adorers. But secondly,

God is present symbolically by some certain and special sign of his presence:
Thus God was present to Israel by the Cloud, the Tabernacle, the Temple, the
Ark, the Mercy Seat, or the like, before which the Priest or people bowed and
did approach on singular preparation, and by special washing, sanctifyng, and
clothing themselves, with suitable holy Garments; for such things were signs
inseparable from the peculiar presence of God ascertaining, not assimulating
Divine presence; convincing that God was now specially near them, not that he
did bear any such shape as appeared to them.

Sure our Altar-adorers will not say God or Christ is Symbolically present on
the Table, yet this is that they must mean when they call the Table Christ's
chair of state and Mercy-Seat; but if so, they must tell us what is the Symbol
of this peculiar presence? Is it one thing or many? And how do they know this
or that to be the sign of his presence? Is the Paten, Chalice or Elements in
them the sign of his presence? Are the Candlesticks or Candle the sign thereof?
The last is most likely, for Christ is the light of the world: But I wonder
then his presence does not light them, as it sometimes burned the Sacrifices:
Significancy of a thing or instrument, will make no symbol of Gods special
presence: they must be notes, not shapes of Gods existing; the Elements in the
Sacraments with the Actions thereto pertaining, are signs of the body and blood
of Christ, and of his Passion; but they are not Symboles ascertaining a real
special presence, from which he is not separated, but that he comes and goes,
or tarrieth with it, unless every Communicant must be concluded to eat his
God, who must then pass through his body, or abide really present in him, with
this Symbol which would make all our streets full of moving Altars, to whom
Canonical Priests must continually cringe and bow; for Gods sanctifying
presence and the Symbol never do divide; this was the reason why the Gentile
Proselites under the Law, were constrained to travel from the utmost parts of
the earth to Jerusalem, to enjoy fellowship with, and appear before God: and
Israel in Captivity were tied to pray toward the Temple, if they would
prevail; for that Gods peculiar presence was there confined as to his
habitation.

These two kinds of Divine presence (though sanctifying in themselves) confer
no holiness to the Communion table, because neither of them does thereupon
exist, whereby to make it holy, and the object of special solemn reverence; and
the third cannot do it; for in this sense it sanctifies not any thing or
place, and that is,

His spiritual presence, by the assistance and influence of his Grace and
Spirit. This presence attends persons in solemn and sacred actions, but is not
affixed to any place or Instruments, Determ. de ado. adver. Alt. p. 20.
so as to know or make (in D. Duncons Dialect) a best place in the Church, or a
most holy of housholdstuff; the promise of it is in Mat. 18.10. to persons in
any, in every place: Where two or three are met together in my Name, THERE am I
in the midst of YOU: This is with the Minister in praying or reading in the
Desk, praying or preaching in the Pulpit, him and others baptizing at the Font,
as well as at the Table, in the administration of the Lords Supper; Nay, this
spiritual presence is attendant on every of the people in every Pew, whilst
hearing, singing or attending (in composed silence) upon any Ordinance: Yea, it
is in any private place, field or Chamber with any of Gods people, praying or
performing any holy duty, and is not tied unto the Chancel or Church, or there
existent, when the Ordinances and Duties are ceased and intermitted; and can
therefore stamp no holiness, or any way make the Table Gods Mercy Seat, or an
holy Instrument to be the Object of special Reverence; And yet in which of
these senses Dr. Duncon intended Christ his presence at the Commnion Table, the
Translator of his Lecture on this Subject, or Dr. Gauden his Patron must
explain; we not knowing how to refer and understand his words [Nor can the Holy
Ghost be thought to be so strictly conjoined to the word of God, as the Son of
God to the blessed Sacrament.] Which sure must be differenced by some reality
of presence, whether sensible or symbolical; for as to the spiritual influence
and presence, the Holy Ghost (by specialty of sanctification) is more
peculiarly and strictly tied to Word and Sacraments, than is the Son of God who
(sitting at the right hand of his Father) sends his spirit to operate by his
Ordinances, and to rule the hearts of his chosen, and to convince the world of
sin.

But if the Communion Table be not sanctified by God, it may be by men: Let us
therefore consider how men can make any thing holy, and so the object of
special solemn reverence and adoration: and they must do it one of these two
ways;

Men may make a place or instrument holy ministerially, but a formal
consecration, by certain Rites, and in such order as God himself prescribes,
who chooses the place or instrument, and charge the Method Rites and Order of
its Consecration; from which his Ministers may not vary, by addition,
abstraction or alteration but use the same, very same which God has appointed
to the stamping of holiness; thus was the Tabernacle in the time of Moses, and
the Temple in the time of Solomon, and all the Vtensils thereof consecrated
according to divine direction, but since those places and instruments have been
profaned, as God never sanctified any other, so he no where in scripture has
directed any method or order of consecration, whereby to stamp holiness on
them: nor do we find any practiced by Christ or his Apostles, or any primitive
Christians professing the simplicity of the Gospel. I have indeed heard and
read of the Consecration at Lambeth, Creed Church, Giles in the Fields,
Woolver*hampton, and other places: And I have read some authors who urge it as
necessary; for that the place or Instrument cannot be holy unless it be
consecrated: But I read not of any Rites or Order prescribed by the Lord, or in
any part of the New Testament, or any other Books, the Roman, Ritual,
Pontifical, or Breviaries excepted. And I am sure our own Pilkington and
Aretius do determine such opinions to be notorious Fallacies and Fancies.
Aretii problem. tom. 2. fol. 15. de Euc.


If any do pretend the Church to have any Judical power whereby to stamp
holiness on any place or thing, and make it the object of special solemn
reverence, we must desire they will produce her Commission; that we may read
it, and understand when this power was to her committed, and how far it does
extend: I am much mistaken if time and place as to their holiness be not of the
substance of divine worship: And I am no less mistaken if ever God committed
the Substantials of his Worship, unto the judgment of men; and if God has
prescribed no form of Consecration, and men have no Judical Authority, to stamp
holiness of place or instrument; though they may in prudence determine the
convenience or inconveniency of places or instruments, as to the Service
therein, thereat or thereupon to be performed; yet they cannot without
superstitius vanity appoint the Communion Table to become the object of
reverence or adoration or as an holy place or instrument.

Seeing the Communion Table is not made holy by God or men, we might take it
for granted that it is not holy at all, and ought not to be owned as the Object
of adoration, but that our Altar-cringers have found out a new way of
sanctifying a place or instrument, and that is, by the particular holy Services
there performed: therefore one says, Profaunomast.
[in what place we have the most lively demonstration of Gods presence by
something either done or said there, as in a place or at an Instrument
appointed to that service, there is the highest Court of, and for his holiness
called the place of his Majesty,] Or by the privileges there conferred: and
therefore says another [Children washed in the Font do from thence obtain
remission of sins, become the sons of God, and are made Heirs of Heaven, Dr.
Dunc. determ. de ador. versus Altar. p. 21, 22.
large privileges indeed, and such as beget honor and sanctity in the holy
Font from which they flow: But as for the Altar, far greater and divine
privileges do enable it, for on it is celebrated that awful and most venerable
Sacrifice.

I must not stand to observe the several exceptions to which these reasons are
liable, but against their conclusive power, for which they are produced, I
cannot but observe;

That duties done and privileges received on or at any place or instrument
sanctifying that place or instrument, so as to be an object of special solemn
worship is,

Contrary to the order and method of Sanctification used under the Law, and
urged by our Savior, as an argument to convince them of folly, who so dreamed;
Ye Fools and blind, whether is greater, the Gold, or the Temple that
sanctifies the Gold? Ye Fools and blind, whether is greater the Gift, or the
Altar that sanctifies the Gift? Matthew. 23.17, 19. I shall leave our
Altar-Adorers to resolve the question; and only note, the Altar was
consecrated that it might sanctify the Sacrifice among the Jews: That it was
Folly and Blindness, to conceive otherwise: and that Folly and Ignorance are
the cogent causes and constant concomitants of superstition, though in the
devout and learned Pharisees

2. If duties done and privileges received on or at any instrument or place,
do make it holy, then every Instrument on or at which it is done must be holy
and the object of special reverence and adoration; so the Desk, Pulpit, and
Font must be bowed unto: And so if the Lords Supper be once (as it is directed
by our Lyturgy to be ordinarily) administered to the sick man, in his Chamber,
and he being poor, on his ordinary Table or Chest by his bedside, that Chest
or Table becomes holy, and must be no more profaned, but reserved and
worshipped, bowed unto as a most holy Instrument: Further, according to this
Fancy, the Patten whereon the Bread, and the Flagons and Chalice wherein the
Wine is served at the Sacrament, become most holy Instruments, and must be
bowed unto, as more holy than the Table; for as much they more immediately touch
the Bread and Wine, by the virtue whereof they sanctify the Table; and quod
Efficit tale, magis est tale: And certainly then men will have a care how they
lend Cups or Flagons to be used in the administration of the Sacrament, lest
(by the touch of those holy Elements) they become a burden to the owners, by
binding them when ever they see them, to bow before them: nay lest they be
bound from ever using them in common use any more, and be deprived of their
goods, as was Sir Nicholas Crisp, who at the consecration of the Chapel at
Hammersmith, set his silver Flagons with Wine on the Communion Table, without
any intent to bestow them; but Archbishop Laud enforced him to part with them,
saying, they were dedicated to God, and it would be sacrilege to commit them
to his private use any more. Further, if the doing of the duty or receiving the
privilege make the Instrument holy, men must forbear to use their hands in the
Sacrament, and let the Priest put the Pix into their mouths, and yet then I see
not how the Priests hand and peoples mouths will avoid this sanctifying
influence, so as not to be Objects of Adoration, and the^ our Table-bowers will
have bowing enough, when they shall not go without an Altar, so long as they
carry their own fingers about them.

3. According to this notion, there are degrees of holiness in Instrument,
according to the quality of the Ordinances administered at or by them, and
sacred Ordinances appointed by the same God, signifying the same thing, Christ
crucified, and aiming at the same end, Worship of God; and communicating the
same substantial privileges, joy and peace in believing; only differing in
their administration, according to the capacity of the subject; are differently
holy, and of a different influence in sanctifying the Instruments whereat or
where by they are performed, so as that the Desk or Pulpit must have its
reverence, the Font its holy regard, but genuflexion or bowing must be only to
the Table, as the most holy of Gods household stuff; as if Christ preached, or
his blood in baptism were not the same equally to be adored, as when the
memorial of his body and blood is celebrated.

These things are so absurd, irrational and irreligious, that they must
renounce their Reasons, and resolve to believe as the Church believes, who will
believe the Table to be sanctified by the duties done, or privileges indulged
at the same: and then they must do no less, who will affirm the Table to be an
holy Instrument, the object of special solemn worship, and yet find it not
sanctified by God, by men, or by holy Ordinances, and so by no means, not at
all made holy: And yet,

If I should admit the Holiness our Altar-worshippers Fancy, they have derived
to the Table by their sinful Superstitious Consecration; I must desire them to
produce their grounds, that will warrant their bowing before an holy
Instrument, because sanctified Extra publicu^ usum, and dedicated to the only
service of God: Did the Jews ever perform such devotion to any of the Utensils
of the Temple, which were warrantably holy? Did they (that we read of) ever bow
when Gods sensible or Symbolical presence did not call for it? Was not God
spiritually present in their Synagogues? Was he not served by the Vessels of
the Temple? Where will they prove an adoration in those places, or before those
objects? Nay do not the Heathen place their gods over their Altars? and the
Papists reserve their god in a Box on their Altar, as knowing that the Holy
Altar, (if these be absent (is not a sufficient object of special solemn
worship or genuflection?

Must not that reason be charged with vanity in which neither antecedent nor
consequent can be allowed, as true, genuine, natural, and of strength to
conclude the Proposition? We see the Communion Table is no Altar nor other holy
Instrument, not Christ his Chair of State, or Mercy-Seat, to which his special
presence can be confined, and as such, is not to be bowed to: But there are
other reasons why we must bow to the Table; it is well they give us number, for
it is apparent that we want of weight. The Reasons which followed are so
ridiculous, that to mention them, is to refute them; yet such as they are, we
will consider them; and they are these:

The third Reason from bowing to the Table, examined.
The third Reason is, Because the Table is the memory of the everlasting
Sacrifice there made and presented to the Trinity, So says Shelford, in his
Sermon of Gods House, p 2.4, 19. The Table is a memorative Instrument unto
which the assistance of Grace is never wanting, either to beget in our mind
such thoughts of the death of Christ, or to extract from our persons such a
worship of him: So says Ironside, 7. quest. of Sabbath, p. 279. On the Table
is celebrated that awful and most venerable Sacrifice, which our Lord himself
did institute of old, for the commemoration, representation, application and
exhibition of the most perfect Sacrifice, says Dr. Duncon in his Determination
de adoratione adversus Altar, p. 22.

Whosoever reads this Reason, cannot, but see we were running very fast, and
had made good progress toward a reconcilement with Rome, having admitted not
only Priests and Altars, but a Sacrifice, an awful and most venerable
Sacrifice, though we yet own it but as a memorable Sacrifice, yet it will soon
appear nonsense, that the Lord of old instituted a Sacrifice the memory of a
Sacrifice, and will necessitate us to know the nature of a Sacrifice is
propitiatory, and as such it must next time be acknowledged, and therefore
though these seem to mince the matter, another (contemporary with them, and
managing the same contest) speaks out, and tells us plainly, it is a
propitiatory Sacrifice to reconcile us unto God offended with our daily sins,
Widows his Lawl. Kneel. Schis. Puritan, page 34, 89. And sure then there
cannot want a reason for most reverent bowing to the Table.

2. Who ever made the Table the memory of the everlasting Sacrifice? When did
the Lord of old institute it? Or how does it appear that it is a memorative
instrument, to which the assistance of grace is never wanting? I read no more
of promise for the one, than precept for the other: I think the assistance of
Grace must be the assurance of God, not appointment of Man, who cannot presume
to dispense it, without arrogance and presumption; and then worship hereby
extracted is so far from being acceptable to God, that it is abominable
Superstition: Though these things might something suit the Elements, they are
absurdly predicated of the Table; and bowing to, toward, or before the one or
the other, more absurdly concluded; for that neither the Jews, Christ, his
Apostles, Primitive Churches, Fathers or Councils did ever think or teach it a
duty, to bow and worship before the place where the memory of the everlasting
sacrifice is celebrated.

The fourth Reason for bowing to the Table, examined.
A Fourth Reason urged why we should bow to the Communion Table, is this, The
Table or Altar is the sign of the place where our Savior was most dishonored,
and crucified; so reasons Giles Widows in the Book and Page before mentioned.

But by his leave, this is notoriously untrue; for the Table is no sign of
Jerusalem, Golgotha, the High Priests Hall, or of the Cross.

2. What Rule directs, or reason dictates a bowing to the sign of the place
where Christ was despised, dishonored and crucified? If there be any, they may
take bowing enough at every Map of the holy Land, or Sign of Jerusalem, hanged
at many Taverns, in many streets of the City, and will find a necessity of
restoring Crosses and Crucifixes, the most proper signs of the Instrument
whereon Christ was most dishonored and crucified.

The fifth Reason for bowing at the Table, examined.
The Last Reason I shall take notice of, and I need but note it, is this, The
like difference may be discerned between your manner of reverence in bowing
toward the Alt. for adoration of the Eucharist only, and ours in bowing as well
when there is no Eucharist on the Table, as when there is; which is not to the
Table of the Lord, but the Lord of the Table; to testify the Communion of all
the faithful Communicants thereat. Thus is Dr. Moreton made to speak in the
second Edition of his Learned Institutions of the Sacrament, Lib. 6. ca 5.
Sect. 15. I say he is made to speak, because it was not spoken in his first
Edition, and is conceived (on very confiderable Reasons) not to have been
spoken by himself being contrary to his known judgeme^t, unsuitable to his
Learning, Gravity, Acuteness, and Dialect, but to have been foysted in by some
zealous Altar Adorer that desired the authority of so Learned an Advocate, as
is at large declared in the Quench-coal, p. 289, 290, 291. But be it as it
will, it is a reason most vain, and carrying in it the least of reason, of any
yet produced: For,

How can bowing to the Table testify the Communion of all the Faithful
Co^municants at the Table? Who instituted this action unto that end? Or what
natural aptitude has this action to signify such a thing? The joint
receiving of the Lords Supper does indeed testify Communion, and is appointed
thereto; But to think that bowing to the Table when there is no Communion,
should so do, is a most ridiculous Fancy, to be derided by the very Papists who
do more really worship the Lord of the Table, by bowing to their
transubstantiated Host, and imagined real presence, than the Protestants can,
who deny the Lord to be present really, or by his Ordinance, and yet bow to the
Table on a most groundless, senceless imagination.

We see that the nature and quality of the Object does no way dictate any
colorable reason for bowing to, toward or before the Communion Table, and
that how devout soever men seem to be in this act of Religion, it is a mere
shadow, and Vanity is written on this action in characters no less legible than
those whereby we read the Novelty thereof: And therefore we must needs as yet
conclude it is a devotion foolish and unlawful, unbeseeming men of Reason,
Learning and Piety to practice in themselves, or enforce upon others, whilst
its best bottom is the pleasing of Superiors, and making Parish Churches
conform to the Cathedral and Mother Churches, whom we must decline to follow
further then they follow Christ.

SECT. V.
THough Bowing to the Communion Table be an action new and seemingly vain, yet
Gods Institution and appointment will make it good and necessary; we are not so
much to enquire the matter tendered unto God, as to observe the stamp that makes
it current: the most common and contemptible Elements are most eminent parts of
Gods worship, when used according to his own appointment: But alas, herein we
are at the greatest loss of all, for the divine authority of our adoration to,
toward or before the Communion Table, concerning which we charge it to be an
Iniquity, and render for it this Reason:

Solemn and Religious Bowing to, toward or before the Communion Table, is no
were directed in the Word of God, and is therefore an iniquity foolish and
unlawful.

Nadab and Abihu bringing fire of their own kindling unto God, are made
everlasting Monuments of Gods Jealousy, preaching to all the world, that it is
all acase to offer false worship to the true God, as to offer true worship to a
false God: As God will admit no Corrivals in the honor due to him, so he will
receive no homage that is not directed by him: It is a dangerous thing in the
service of God to deviate from his own institutions whilst we have to do with a
power which is wise, to prescribe his own worship; just, to require what he
has prescribed: and jealous, to revenge that which is offered unto him, he
having not required it: Moses might neither the add nor alter a pin in the
Tabernacle, which God prescribed; nor might Solomon decline the Pattern of the
Temple which God had made known to his Father David. Bishop Hall contemplating
the fatal chance of the Sons of Aaron, serving God with false fire, does thus
observe upon it; [When we bring Zeal without Knowledge, misconceipts of Faith,
carnal Affections, the devices of our Will Worship, superstitious devotions
into Gods Service, we bring common fire unto his Altar; these flames were never
of his kindling, He hates both Altar, Fire, Priest and Sacrifice] Let me
therefore say to our Altar-Adorers, To the Law and the Testimony; produce
divine prescription for your Devotion, and religious bowing to, toward or
before the Communion Table, that you stand not under the charge of iniquity,
even an apparent Superstition, advancing as divine worship, what is not of
divine appointment. But where shall we find a warrant for solemn and religious
bowing to, toward or before the Communion Table: The Gospel of Jesus Christ,
or Epistles, Canons, Acts or Traditions of his Apostles, afford us none; and it
being a Relative Worship of God, in the nature of it, by an outward frame or
similitude, will on a rational consideration, be found repugnant to the Second
Command, which interdicts all media cultus, external Objects to be worshipped,
though God be the ultimate object to whom such worship is intended, and so it
is much at one, as to worship God by or before an Image.

Yet lest our Zelots should fall inevitably under the charge of Superstition,
they will produce Scripture Proof to justify their Table-Adoration, and thus
they rally them;

That the Jews admonished by the Oracles of their Prophets and Priests, were
accustomed to worship the true and living God with their bodies prostrate on
the ground, and their head bowed down to the pavement of the Temple, before the
holy Altar, is plain from the Testimonies of holy Scripture, out of 1 Kings
8.22. 2 Kings 18.22. Where the most pious King Hezekiah, says, Before this
Altar bow your selves: Out of 2 Chronicles. 7.3. And again, 2 Chronicles 32.12. Before
one Altar shall ye worship; So Dr. Duncon Determ.

And Dr. Morton in the place before quoted, is made thus to speak, We bow
before the Gommunion Table, even as the people of God did in adoring him before
the Arc his Footstool, Psalm 99.5. And in 1 Chronicles. 28.2. As Daniels bowing at
prayer in Chaldea, looking toward the Temple at Jerusalem, where the Temple
of Gods worship was, Dan. 6.10. And David would be known to have done, saying
in Psalm. 5.7. I will worship toward thy holy Temple: Unto these are added by
Shelford, Reeve, Pocklington and Widows, Psalm. 99.5. Exodus 12.27. Isa. 36.7.
and the like, which are the same, or to the same purpose with those before
alleged: And shall we now say there is no direction from Scripture, for bowing
to the Communion Table: to which I say in general;

If I should say nothing by way of reply, who so reads these Scriptures, will
soon see, that he must strain his Reason, if from any or all these Texts he
infer a direction for Altar-worship: I shall not stand to examine each Text
particularly, and to show to Bedlam-Logick in irrational, theological
inferences, by which they are improved and extorted to acquit the vanity of our
Altar-worship from the iniquity of huma^e Invention, but refer my Reader to the
Quench-coal, supposed to be Mr. Prins, where he shall find them exactly
examined, page 240. 241, 242, 243, 244. I shall only detect the fallacy of this
argumentation by these more general answers:

First, Jewish practice before Christ came in the flesh, will make no warrant
or give no direction for that worship which is to be now tendered unto God;
because their practices bottomed upon special peculiar Reasons, are now
expired and abolished; serving to show us how God was worshipped, not how he is
to be worshipped; among which, the Temple, and Altar, and Adoration toward
them, was not the least, nay, these were the chiefest; and this way of
Judaizing has not been the least spring of the Superstitions sprung up in the
Church of Rome: Before therefore these Scriptures will make any warrant for a
conform carriage in us, we must know whether these practices were not
particular to the Jews? peculiar Types and Shadows, expired on the appearing
of the Substance, Jesus Christ our only Temple and Altar? which if it could be
denied, yet the case will be found different between this Adoration and our
Bowing to the Communion Table; and therefore I would admonish our
Altar-worshippers to consider whether they are not mistaken in these Three
Things, the Object, the Act, and Authority of Worship?

The Object of that Worship and adoration was either in general, Gods
Footstool, which some understand of the Earth in general, Isa. 66.1. Or in
special, the Arc, that Symbol of his presence, 1 Chronicles. 28.12. And in
particular, the Temple at Jerusalem, and the Altar in that Temple, places and
instruments sanctified by Gods especial presence, and solemnly consecrated
according to his own prescription; but these are so far from being Common
Tables in every Common Church, in any Country, Place or City, that they are not
Tables in any Synagogue (the proper pattern of our Churches) not so much as the
Holy Tables in the Temple; I presume our Table-Cringers cannot but know, there
was in the Tabernacle and Temple a Table, on which stood the Shewbread and
Silver Candlesticks; Methinks they should give us some evidence of the Priests
and People bowing to, toward or before that, which was also consecrated; for
it is most irrational to infer, the Jews worshipped toward the TEMPLE and
ALTAR, when they cannot make our Table an Altar, or Chancel a Temple, holy
place, or holy thing, as I have before noted.

2. The Act of Worship performed among the Jews, was no less different from our
bowing and cringing, than was the Object: This Act of Worship was a praying
toward the Temple, or offering of Incense or Sacrifice upon the Altar, as is
evident, Psalm 28.2. 1 Kings 8.20, 30, 33, 35, 38, 42, 44, 48. 2 Chronicles 26.20,
21. And by that of Daniel, who prayed toward the Temple, it was not a bare
bowing before it when no duty was in hand, or did direct the same, and that at
coming in, or going out, or any time passing by the Temple or Altar, as is the
devoir done to our Table; So that they must prove that a simple bowing to the
Altar or Temple without Prayer or Oblation was a single Act of Devotion and
Worship.

3. There is not more of Fallacy in this Argument by the difference of Act and
Object, than the Authority of the same; they worshipped toward the Temple and
before the Altar on warrantable Grounds and Reasons, (viz.) The Holiness God
had stamped on them by consecration. 2. The Special Presence of God was
confined to them, they were the standing Symboles from which it was not
separated; the fire came from the Lord upon the Altar, and consumed the
Sacrifices, and then indeed the people bowed themselves to the Pavement; so may
we do, when God immediately lights the Tapers which have so long stood on the
Table. 3. They had a promise of special acceptance to encourage them to pray
and worship toward the Temple, where soever and in what condition soever they
were; when we find holiness stamped on, Gods special Presence confined to our
Tables, or (as they affect to call them) Altars, and have a clear and undoubted
promise of peculiar acceptance on such a Performance, we may be persuaded to
give solemn reverence to God by religiously bowing to, toward or before
Communion Table: till then we must demand some clearer Testimony from Scripture
to convince us of the same as a duty, or lawful, or acquit themselves from the
charged Iniquity, for superstitiously innovating into Christ's Church, a way of
Worship so vain and fivoulous in it it self, and without Divine Warrant, and so
apparently foolish and unlawful.

SECT. VI.
OUR Fourth and Last Evidence that Solemn and religious Bowing to, toward, or
before the Communion Table, is foolishand unlawful is, the Malignity thereof,
which we charge upon it, because it is sinful, scandalous and dangerous in the
use of it.

Sin cannot pass without scandal to the Spectator, and danger to the Sinner; it
is of a most known malignant influence, in respect of both these, and therefore
to be avoided and abhorred.

That Solemn and Religious Bowing to the Comunion-Table is in the use of it
sinful, has been already manifested in the Novelty, Vanity, and Iniquity
thereof, before discovered; by which, all that run, must needs read, that it is
a ridiculous Superstition, innovated into the Church and Worship of God without
any Reason in the Object, or prescription of God: being in its nature a divine,
not Civil Worship, a piece of Devotion, pretending to reverence God or Christ,
as directed unto him, as the ultimate Object of the same; whilst God never
required, instituted or prescribed any such worship, nor intimated his mind
that in such a way, reverence should be done unto him. The Patriarchs and
Prophets of the Old Testament, Apostles and Primitive Christians were never
acquainted with, or did acknowledge any such act of Adoration of the Altar or
Table, or means, method and way of worship of God: Altars (under which notion
the Table is bowed unto) are utterly ceased and Abolished: all Christians and
zealous sincere Protestants have withstood and condemned it as wicked,
superstitious, and idolatrous in the Pagan and Papists, and the most zealous
assertors and observers of bowing to the Table, do enforce, justify and
maintain, with a mere plea of antiquity inpoint of practice, which can be no
warrantabl^ prescription of divine Worship; and that is only pretended and
proved by forged authorities, and false inferences, and most absurd Ridiculous
Reasons, plain and palpable results of humane inventions, and is by themselves
confessed to be but a thing indifferent, to be done, or not done without
ce^sure, which cannot be the property of Divine Worship; all which do most
clearly conclude it to be in the use of it superstitious, and so sinful,
scandalous and dangerous.

But if we well weigh the nature of solemn and Religious bowing to, toward, or
before the Communion Table, we should find it hard to acquit it from Idolatry:
by reason it is an apparent Relative worship of God, in, through or by reason
of the Communion Table, which is the formality of the worship of the Heathen,
and popish Images, Crucifixes, and Idols, and determined to be idolatry by Dr.
Morton who determines, that not only the terminating and fixing divine honor
upon any creature, is idolatry, Institu. of Sac. lib. 7. Cap. 8. Sect. 1. pa^^
47 Edit. 2.
but when Latria or divine worship is given to an Image because of the relation
it has to God or Christ, and it can not as I conceive vary, if it be given to
an Altar or Table, because of this relation; because it agrees in that which
is the forma informans of Idolatry, and which is declared so to be by our own
Homilies, and all our Protestant Writers against the Idolatry of the Papists,
and by Bellarmine himself in his book of Images, Cap. 24. for that there is
nothing pleaded by way of excuse, to acquit this Table-worship, from Idolatry,
which was not better pleaded and pleadable by the Pagans and Papists, who ever
denied to worship the stock, stone or Idol, but directed their worship to that
which inspired, or was represented by that stock or stone, and so stamped
Holiness thereupon.

Superstition in Gods Worship (much less Idolatry) cannot be used in the
Church of God without sin, so sinful and malignant in its influence, that it
must needs be a stumbling-stone and a rock of offense, dangerous to the weak,
ready to embrace Religion, devotion and reverence toward God, and run upon a
divine worship without regard and examination, because used by such as profess
God, rather than because instituted by God: and destructive to the wicked, who
are by a righteous God given over to offer him that service, which must be
rejected with, and who has required this at your hands.

But to strain Charity to its utmost bounds, and if it were possible to abate
the malignity of this table-worship by acquitting it from iniquity; we should
yet find it scandalous and dangerous, and therein sufficiently malignant,
whereby to render it foolish and unlawful, and that in these two respects.

First, Bowing to the Communion Table Symbolizeth with the worship of Pagans
and Papists; those known Idolaters, especially in that order in which it was of
late (and begins a fresh to be) used among us, in his Majesty's Royal
Chapel, Lambeth Chapel, the Cathedral and many Parish Churches, whilst the
Table must be made in the frame of an Altar, railed in, and advanced as an holy
Enclosure; fixed at the East end of the Church; and furnished with
Altar-Furniture, and Coverings, and Candlesticks with Candles in them placed
therein; the Images of God, or Christ, or the Holy Ghost placed over them in
the glass window, or some stately Crucifix in Arras hanged behind, and above
them, or some Cross in some kind of hangings, as at the Abbey at Westminster:
and so bowed unto, or bended before, when no duty in hand does direct that
genuflection, but it self is done as a distinct piece of devotion; in all which
there is a most full conformity to the heathen worship of the^r gods, by bowing
before their Altars placed in the East, and prepared according as is here
described; all which is declared by their own Poets Virgil, Eneid. lib, 4. p.
171, 172. lib 5. p. 213. lib 8. p. 279, Ovid Fastor. lib. 5. p. 88. Horace Epi.
lib. 2. Epist. 1.
Ovid and Horace: by our reformed Divines Dr. Rainold in his Treatise De
Idololatria Ecclesiae Romanae lib. 2. cap. 3. sect. 46. page 432. Bishop Jewel
and Bishop Morton, and by our own Homilies in the third part of the Homily of
the peril of Idolatry, as also by the Fathers of old, and the plain suggestions
of the Scripture, coupling together the Altars and Images of the Gentiles in
their Erection, destruction or Adoration.

And for the conformity of this practice unto the Papists, it is so legible
that all may run and read it; and I shall only enforce it with that known
story, witnessing the full agreement of the Papists Priests and English Altar
worshippers, as to this point: on Maunday Thursday, in the year of our Lord
1636. Mrs. Charnock (a gentlewoman of good quality) with her daughter and some
other friends, amongst whom one was a Papist, went to see the Kings Chapel,
where they saw an Altar with Tapers and other furniture on it, a Crucifix over
it: and presently Dr. Brown of Faiths Church, one of his Majesty's Chaplains
and a Dean in this Church with another Minister (after known to be his Curate)
came into the Chapel; Then Dean of Hereford.
and turning themselves toward the Altar, bowed Three Times: and then
performing some private devotion departed: and immediately came Two Seminary
Priests, and did as the Doctor and his Curate had done before them, on which
Mrs. Charnock, speaking to her friends, said, I never thought to have seen such
a sight in England, that our own Ministers and Popish Priests should thus
repair into the Kings Chapel, and use the self same bowings and gestures to
the Altar and crucifix, as if they were both agreed; whereunto her Papist
friend presently replied, There is no such odds or difference between you and
us, as is conceived; And one of the Priests seconded her, and said, Gentlewoman
you need not wonder at our bowing and kneeling to the Altar and crucifix; for
you see that Ministers of your own Religion do the same.

Can Idolaters find their foolish superstitions followed by, and retained among
the professors of Gods true worship, and not be obdurated in their vanity and
folly? or can any conscientious Protestants, convinced that God requires his
people to avoid the Symbol or similitude as well as substance of false worship,
and not be offended, grieved, scandalized, at this apparent conformity with
Pagans and Papists, in an action that neither Reason, nor Religion, more then
humane invention, superstitious devotion, will appoint, allow or defend?

Secondly, Solemn and Religious bowing to, toward, or before the Communion
Table is a spring of superstition and fountain of vanity, from whence it
flows in great abundance, Men do not gather Grapes of Thorns and Figs of
Thistles, such as is the Tree, such must be the fruit, such as are the
premises, must be the conclusion: If the Communion Table must be bowed unto
with solemn and Religious bowing, then it will follow

First, That holiness of places and instruments (expired and abolished by the
coming of Christ) is yet continued in, and to be regarded and reverenced by
the Church of God: and this is evident in Dr. Duncons notion, that the Lords
table is the most holy of Gods Household Stuff, and in that the Assertors of
this Table Worship, do affect to call the Table, the Altar, High Altar, the
names of holy instruments: and must not this obdurate the Jews, who know holy
places and instruments to be the Types of the Messiah, and offend the
Christian, who knows that Christ our Altar is in Heaven and has laid common
all holy places and instruments?

2. Then Communion Tables must have holiness stamped upon them, and be signally
distinguished from other places and instruments, above which they must be
signified by she solemn, special, peculiar reverence: So we see a necessity of
removing the Table out of the Body of the Church into the Chancel (the most
honorable place) and placing it close to the Wall, lest any should sit behind
it, above Jesus Christ, (says Shelford) railing it in, lest common people come
nigh and profane it; advancing it by steps, that it may be conspicuous at
coming into the Church: and consecrating it by a solemn and Religious Rite or
Order of stamping holiness; and of furnishing it with Candlesticks, Tapers,
Crosses and Crucifixes, lest we should seem to worship a simple naked Joyners
frame, if it were left without wealt or guard: all which have been made legible
by the Writings, Preaching and Practice of our Table-cringers, as the natural
Inferences, Brood and Offspring of solemn and religious Bowing to the
Communion Table.

3. Then the Lord Jesus Christ one way dispensed to his people, does stamp more
holiness, and make the Instruments of such ministration Objects of more Honor
and Reverence than the same Christ dispensed another way does or can do: The
substance and matter of the Word read, preached and sensibly administered, is
one and the same, Christ crucified; all is Verbum Dei, or Deus Verbum, although
one be visible, and the other audible; and yet the Table only not the Desk or
Pulpit, must have solemn and religious reverence: Baptism is a Sacrament, an
Ordinance of the same nature with the Lords Supper, signifying and sealing the
Blood of Christ crucified, and shed as a Sacrifice for sin, though in a
different administration, according to the different capacity of the Subject,
yet the Table must be bowed unto, and not the Font; and so different
administrations of the same substance do stamp different degrees of holiness,
though never designed nor directed of God unto that end.

4. Then Relative power is an eminent piece of Religion and Christian Devotion:
who must not be bound to go to God immediately in their solemn and religious
adoration, but making him their ultimate Object, may direct their Reverence
toward an external Object, a Frame, Altar or Table, related unto God or
Christ, and to him dedicated as the medium cultus, and then how shall we keep
out Images and Crucifixes, as likely media cultus, as Tables or Altars? and
charge folly on the Primitive Christians and Protestants, and on our own
Church, who charged papists and Pagans with Idolatry, for worshipping God by
external media and with relative worship.

Lastly, Then we must circumscribe God, and confine Jesus Christ to the
Communion Table as well when the Sacrament is not, as when it is administered;
as to his peculiar Pew in every Church, Throne, Chair of State, Mercy-Seat
among his people, otherwise we bow to the Table in the grossest way and degree
of Idolatry, as a mere Joyners Frame, the work of Man's Hand.

Many absurdities of this nature do naturally flow from this Act of Table
Worship, rendering it a most reconciling Engine between England and Rome; but on
that, among other Grounds, greatly scandalous to all sincere Worshippers of
God, and a dangerous stumbling stone for weak and wicked Christians, being in
it self an Hydra of Superstition, and setting open a Door, nay Floodgate to
many horrid Superstitions, and the very Sluice of Idolatry; and if the Subject
of such Malignity, I may sure rationally conclude, That solemn and Religious
Bowing to, toward or before the Communion Table, is an Action or Gesture
foolish and unlawful, and the rather because innovated by humane Invention,
without Divine Prescription, or any considerable Reason.

FINIS.

