THE COUNTERFEIT DISCOVERED.
A Pamphlet being delivered to the Parliament Titled the Counterfeit Convert,
etc. wherein I am abused, therefore for your Information, I entreat you to read
over these Animadversions, from which he takes occasion to pursue his former
Course of Infamising me. I am not ignorant that whoever reproves such a proud
and envious Person, as this COUNTERFEIFT G^o. Whitehead, gets himself a Blot
and Hatred. Notwithstanding the Counterfeit in his Epistle pretends a
conscientious Concern for Truth, etc. yet I desire the Reader to observe his
Note at the end of his Epistle, where he renders his Opposers, ( i. e. F. B.
and T. C.) such contemptable and infamous Persons, that their Names in his
Title would obstruct the reading his Treatise: Now I desire the impartial
Reader to judge whether this be not a malicious Slander to the Persons
concerned (in the very intent thereof, and his pretense an untruth as well as a
Slander) and much more injurious to F. B. and T. C. than if their Names had
been added to the Titles of their Books in his Title Page. Also in order to
effect his envious Designs in rendering me odious, he G. W. in his 74th. Page of
Counterfeit, etc. he says, T. C's Charge against the Quakers, etc. thereby
falsely insinuating that I charge the Quakers in general, which is utterly
false, and that to his own knowledge; for in my Title Page I charge only G. W.
and his Abettors: Also in page 7. I say, It Is not my intent to Charge the
Quakers in general, but G. W. and his Abettors. I shall not trouble you with
reciting all his wicked Ways and Quibbles he have to cover his Pride, Envy and
Falsehood, but some few of them for proof. In his Book Innocence Triumphant,
page 75. he says, F. B. Have given them All the Ill-names he can, which in
Admadversions page 32. I proved to be an untruth; but now the Counterfeit G. W.
in his 74th. page pretends, he meant All the worst of Names, but in this he
adds Sin to Wickedness, for it is also an Untruth as well as the other,
although he does quibble to mend it, for F. B. have not given them All the
worst of Names as G. W. has given him, viz. DEVIL in Carnat, and many more
such Hell-fetch'd black-mouthed Terms, which G. W. have in print given F. B.
which be recited in these Adnimadversions, etc. page 9. Also G. W. having
falsely charged F. B. That if they, (G. W. etc.) cannot for Conscience sake pay
Tithes, ^he F. B. will not (says G. W.) allow us any favor of the Government,
etc. This I have proved to be a false and scandalous Accusation, and a wilful
Untruth in Animadversions, page 17, for G. W's Abettors having been so bold as
to publish in print this cruel, unchristian Sentence following, viz. Truth
allows no Payment of Tithes at all under the New Covenant, but Condemns it, so
would you also, were your Hearts right in Truth; they who pay Tithes thereby
deny Christ to be come in the Flesh, which is a Mark of Antichrist, etc. and
this illegal, uncharitable, cruel Sentence of theirs is in opposition to a
Christian-Quaker W. R. who very Christian-like pleads only for Liberty for such
who can freely pay Tithes without constraint: Yet G. W. etc. their Pride and
Wickedness is such, that they will not allow that Liberty, as is evident by
their afore-cited cruel Sentence: Nay, the Counterfeit G. W. in his 73d page
now affirms, viz. That our Testimony against Tithes should be maintained, is
not a Law of our own making, but of Christ's. But he has not proved where it
is recorded, but I believe it is of the same stamp, as their Law and great
Ordinance, for (Female-Prelates in their Church) Women's-Meetings: Now F. B.
having (as a Christian ought to do) testified against this afore-cited
unchristian Sentence of theirs, because it reflects on and condemns, for
Deniers of Christ and Antichrists, all the Martyrs and Christians, from the
highest on the Throne to the lowest, ever since the Apostles to the end of
Time, who pay or receive Tithes; whereupon F. B. queried them, Whether they be
of the same Mind still, if you be, say he, How can you have the face to ask any
Favor of such, who not only pay and receive Tithes, but make Laws that Tithes
shall be paid, etc. From these Words of F. B's, G. W. forges a false Charge,
and a gross Untruth against him, as is made appear in these Animadversions,
pages 16, 17, so plainly, that G. W. cannot but be sensible thereof; yet he
has the face in his Counterfeit, etc. page 69, to say, He is still confirmed
in his Consequence, etc. which is a gross Untruth and base Slander, but his
Pride is such that he will not acknowledge his Error although plainly proved,
but deny and call for proofs, hoping thereby to tire and weary those that
oppose and discover his Wickedness, and others in reading such Discoveries. And
for you the 32 Subscribers to G. W's Certificate, I wish you had minded that in
Animadversions, page 16, and elsewhere, which concern you, and not suffered
your Names to have been printed again with him, for thereby you own and
justify the Wicked, which is an Abomination: It had been more for your
Reputation, as Christians and good Subjects, to have appeared to the Parliament
in testimony against that unchristian Sentence (or T^stimony) as Counterfeit,
etc. in his 72d. page, as I take his meaning, terms it; and also against G. W's
gross Untruths and Slanders, that G. W. in his printed Sheet delivered to the
Parliament. God forbid that any, who for Conscience sake, cannot pay Tithes, or
other Taxes, should be judged therefore by me.

For want of more material cause of Complaint against F. B. Counterfeit, in his
Epistle, makes a huge Noise and Bulk now as he did in former Pamphlets against
F. B's feigned Pillory, etc. for which (as I am informed) F. B. have
acknowledged to G. W. etc. that he was sorry he had done it, and that if it
were to do again, he would not do it, or to this effect; in which he have shown
more honesty than G. W. have, for all the Abuses he have formerly done against
F B etc. as proved in Animad. page 9, 10, 13. and those which G. W. have
abused, their Reptuations is as valuable as them for whom G. W. is so much
concerned for, and when G. W. etc. have been as honest in that case, as F. B.
has been, I dare say, F. B. will not be backward to give what further
satisfaction is needful; But all G. W's cause of Complaint thereabouts is
answered, in Animad. page 9.13.18. and I question not, but that on serious
consideration of what is there said, the impartial Reader will be satisfied
that G. W. etc. are as much faulty in scandelizing as F. B. (whom I do not
justify) and that if any difference be, when the Account of Injury is justly
stated, G.W. etc. will appear the debtors. And truly G. W. if thee can
accuse him, and have not at the same time, something in thine own Conscience
condemning thee for the same, thee art to be lamented, as being in a wretched
state of hard-heartedness; see Animad. page 16, 17, 32, 33.

In page 63. Counterfeit says to T. C. thou would incense the Government
against us, about our Marriages, and Non-payment of Tithes: That this is a
gross Untruth and Slander, may be seen in An^mad. page 14. for its he and his
Abettors, having power over other's Consciences, that I oppose; but for their
own Liberty in Marriages and Tithes I never Opposed, therefore his saying to me
in the 63d. page, Thou shows thy self offended, at G. W. and his Friends
having Liberty, this is also a false and slanderous insinuation, by these words
(his Friends) to persuade the Reader to believe it is the Quakers in general I
oppose, when as it is only himself, and some few such wicked Ones who I oppose.
In Epistle-page 91, says Counterfeit, I being wholly defensive in my Concern
therein, i. e. Controversy, if this be true, than I pray when, or how, did T.
C, either Assault or Invade G. W. etc. in their Rights about Marriage or
Tithes. First, As to Marriage, I only maintained my own Liberty and Right, when
publicly Accused and Defamed by them. 2dly, For Tithes, the first pretended
occasion that G. W. took to abuse me in print about Tithe, was from some words
of mine in T^stimonies, page 26. I say, If any observe not to do just as others
in Tithe, or other Civil Rights, the Law requires and ought to be observed,
unless God do by his Spirit forbid, or any for Conscience sake refuse, etc.
Romans 14. Now I desire the Impartial to judge, if in these Words I any ways
invaded or prejudiced any in their Liberty, yet this is that G. W. and his
Abettors abused me for, and now in his 63d. page says to me, Thou art greatly
concerned, forsooth, (says he) for Liberty of Conscience for the free payment
of Tithes; but for all his flouting forsooth, I bless God I have no cause to be
ashamed of what I have wrote thereabout; and then Counterfeit goes on saying,
And who hinders such, etc. In answer to this Query, I say G. W. etc. do, in
what they can, or durst, as is a-fore proved, and in Animadversions pages 16 to
20, therefore the pretense that He is wholly defensive, is Counterfeit all
over; and so is that also in beginning of his Epistle, That he is of a
peaceable and amicable Conversation, though of differing Persuasions: But
wherein he is Defensive, its on behalf of Error and Wickedness, that he excuse
and cover, as is manifest Animadversion, the Introduction, pages 3, 4, 38, 39.
Nay, for farther proof that his pretense is Counterfeit, observe that G. W.
etc. having delivered to the Parlaiment a printed Paper, wherein they had
abused, and falsely Accused F. B. as is a-fore, and in Animadv. page 16th
proved. Now against this, and other of G. W's wickedness I have testified (as I
think I ought) for its a great Scandal to the Quakers, nay, to Christianity,
that such Falsehoods should be imposed on the Parliament in the Name of the
Quakers, for thereby the whole Body of them are chargeable with his Errors,
but my charging only G. W. and his Abettors, does take the Scandal off from the
whole Body of them.

I farther desire the impartial Reader to consider and judge, whether, or no,
them contemptable Questions in Quaker's Refuge, etc. page 17, viz. Whether the
first Penman of the Scriptures was Moses or Hermes? Whether there are not many
Words in Scripture not spoken by the Spirit -- but by grand Impostors -- Some
by wise Men ill applied -- And some by true Prophets, yet false, etc. with more
such Contempt to Scripture, as in Quakerisme Withering, pages 33 to 36; also
them contemptable Expressions of the Person of our LORD JESUS, as Animadv.
pages 4.35, 36. I say, whether these and other Wickednesses that G. W. cover
and excuse, as is proved Animadv. be not as great a Scandal to Christianity, as
F. B's charging them; and therefore ought to be testified against, because it
may tend to excuse the Jews in their Cruelty to our LORD JESUS his Person, and
in their Infidelity in him: Nay, I question, whether or no, if it were
seriously and strictly considered, it may not be a hinderance and
stumbling block in the way of the Jews Conversion to Faith in our LORD JESUS,
as the true and only Messiah; nay, also Encouragement to the Mahometans. Let it
be seriously considered in the fear of God, I beseech you, it is this Work, and
Principles and Workmen that Counterfeit is defensive in, and prides himself in
saying falsely in his Epistle, Its the Living Truth, and innocent People he
defends.

I shall not trouble you with many more of his Counterfeit Pretenses, these
being enough to prove him an Enemy and Scandal to Christianity, for the
contemptable undervaluing the Person and Body of our LORD JESUS, do invalid the
Testimonies in Scripture, to the great worth and value of his Blood and Death
on the Cross, for that was, as he was the Seed of the Woman and as to his
Manhood, and not as the Almighty, Everlasting God.

In page 77 says G. W. Where Is now the contempt of his person? in answer, I
say, those who confessed Christ in words, and had in his Name done mighty
Works, yet being workers of iniquity our Lord said to them; depart from me I
know you not; so although G. W. in words pretends to own our Lord Jesus, yet his
wicked works of excusing and covering those contempts, do render him guilty
thereof, for the force of the proof of my charge against G. W. does not so much
depend on his own doctrines, as on his excusing and covering others as appears
in Animad. Introduct. page 3, 4 and 4.23 to 40. and in pa. 25. I do admit G. W.
etc. in words to pretend to own what in works they deny, and in Introduct. page
4. I say I fear to avoid contradicting G. F's. doctrines G. W. do strain and
pervert words more than otherwise he would do. And the aggravation of his
Wickedness is that he do excuse and cover those contempts contrary to his own
knowledge and judgment. To evade my charge against G. W. as terming the
doctrines in difference, pretended fudamentals, now page 57. he grants some of
them to be fundamentals; but did not say so before, but if he did really
believe so, Why did not he defend them, and G. K. who asserted them? but on the
contrary G. W. blames G. K. and excuse and cover his opposers as is in Animad.
Introduct. and in pages 3, 4, 7. 23. 40. and as for G. W. endeavoring to
restrain his word pretended as only relating to division and not to the
doctrines in difference; this is such a mean shift and quibble that it may
easily be perceived, for the difference was so considerably real that there is
no color for that word Pretended. And for his acknowledging the Resurrection
of the Body of our Lord, I did not charge him to deny it; but as endeavoring
to envalid the testimony to his Bodily or Personal Ascension as asserted by G.
K. and opposed by them G. W. excuse and cover Animad. pages 34, 36, 37. And for
all G. W's pretense of sincerity, yet he do not plainly acknowledge it; but say
the same Christ that was crucified, but before his words were the same Christ
that was THEREIN Crucified, but now he leave out of the Sentence the word
THEREIN (on which I ground my Objection) although he afterward take it in and say
page 58. Thou Quarrels with the Apostles Doctrine, which is false, for they do
not say the same Christ THEREIN Crucified, nor undervalue his Person, as they
do whom G. W. abet.

In page 59. Counterfeit queries where did we ever say that he who so suffered
was not Christ, but a Vale, a Body -- that his Body that was nailed to the
Cross was of a perishing nature. In answer I say I did not charge you as saying
so in those very words in the same order so as expres'd by you, but I desire
the impartial Reader to peruse your Doctrines Animad. introduct. and pages 35,
36. and then judge if I have not proved my charge against you; but to prevent
you of calling for more proof see Quakerism Witherin pages 16. to 26. also page
47. as follows the sufferings of the People of God in this Age is greater
sufferings, and more unjust than in the days of Christ, or of the Apostles; or
in any time since: Queen Mary's days brought not forth a suffering more crew
lin many respects, what was done to Christ, or the Apostles, was chiefly done
by a Law, and in great part, by the dre execution of a Law. These words are so
contemptious of our Lord's sufferings and over-valueing of your selves, that I
want words to express my abhorrance of them, and were there no other proof of
your contempt to our Lord Jesus but this one, its enough (and too much) and I
could hardly believe such words should be uttered by any Christian; but I find
G. W. do not deny them, but shuffle and quibble, in page 34. to hide and cover
this wicked contempt, and excuse for the cruelty of the Jews to our Lord, and
the Apostles that is expressed, and implied in them words, insomuch that G. W. is
forced to counterfeit a faint dislike: Granting the passage not so well worded
and intended, etc. Consider Reader I beseech you how calm and unconcerned
Counterfeit is, when our dear Lord and his cruel Sufferings, and the Apostles
also are so contemptiously undervalued; also observe how furiously, and with
what indignation he do represent F. B. and T. C. infamous Apostates and
scandelous to Christianity, in his Title and Epistle, and in Animad. pages 9.
10. What infamious and slanderous Names and Terms he etc. gives F. B. and T. C.
also the last words in the conclusion of my Animad. how they Envy and Infamize
T. C. for preferring the Laws of the Nation before their laws in the form of
Marriages and Tithes. All these considered if my charge against G. W. etc. be
not proved, then let me bear all the blame and shame they can put me too. For
were he conscienciously concerned for the Holy Truth, as he falsely in his
Epistle pretends, than he would testify against and disown all those
Contempts, with the same Earnestness and Zeal as he do use to cover and excuse
them, and to defame them that discover them; prove your selves (to the
Parliament and Nation) sincere Christians and good Protestants, by your
defending and maintaining the Faith in our LORD JESUS, as in Scripture, and the
succession of Christians has been believed, and suffered; for and testify
against, and disown that blasphemous Letter to G. F. in page 30 and this
afore-cited, and them by F. B. and T. C. objected against in Animad. pages 35,
36, etc. And not by framing a Belief in dubious Terms (that you may make to
mean as you please) and think its enough. You may deceive Men, but God will not
be mocked; those that confess and forsake their Errors, may hope for Mercy;
but them that will not conf^ss, but cover and excuse them, shall not prosper.

For G. W's now pretense page 58. 75. of owning some Doctrine of G. K's. cited
in Animad. Introduct. page 2. His sincerity may be questioned; first in that he
has taken such pains to blame and asperse G. K. (tho not by name) the
maintainer thereof, and excused and covered those who opposed him, and asserted
contrary Doctrines, as in Animad. page 36. Secondly if he owned them as
fundamentals, why was he so industrious to confute the Notion of the Revolution
on suspicion that it was G. K's. to infamize him, and also for the pious
Gentiles to be Christians, Animad. page 38. but all his Charity could not afford
any thing in defense of those fundamental Doctrines, nor against those contrary
Doctrines of G. K's Enemeis; now he says page 58. W^^^^ have I condemned or
opposed this Doctrine? etc. (This, and other his impertinent queries are here
before, and in Animadversions answered) but he does not plainly own nor disown;
but excuse and vindicate the opposers thereof; but if he be sincere let him
plainly own them as asserted by G. K. and disown the contrary Doctrines of G.
K's Enemies, and other unchristian Doctrines of G. Fox, etc. and then I will
acknowledge my self to have been mistaken, and to have wronged him. But however
I bless God this advantage is obtained, that the Ancient Christian Faith
according to the Evangelists has been of late more Preached in Meetings than I
have heard in many years; in which I rejoice, whatever the end of some is.

THOMAS CRISP.

Directions in what pages you may find the charges against G. W. proved, viz.
Contempt of the Person of our Lord Jesus, in Introduct. page 3, 4, 23, to 40.
Contempt of Governors pages 11. 16, 18, 20. Contempt of Scriptures and
over-valuing their own Orders, pages 21, 22, 23, 40. Blasphemous expressions
to, and of G. Fox. page 30.

