HIS HIGHNES'S COMMISSION UNDER The Great Seal OF ENGLAND: Directed to the
LORDS COMMISSIONERS of the Treasury, Barons of the Exchequer, and others, For
satisfying the FIFTHS of such DISCOVERIES As have or shall be by any person or
persons made out before the Commissioners for Discoveries at Worcester-House in
the Strand, Of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts,
Duties, Money, Plate, Jewels, Goods, Chattels, and other things, belonging to
his Highness the Lord Protector in right of the Commonwealth, and unjustly
concealed and detained; and for seizing the same by due Process out of the
EXCHEQUER.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Newcomb dwelling in Thames Street over against
Bainards Castle. 1657.

HIS HIGHNES'S COMMISSION UNDER The Great Seal of England, DIRECTED To the
Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, Barons of the Exchequer, and others.
OLIVER, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and the Dominions thereto belonging, To our right trusty and welbeloved, the
Commissioners of and for our Treasury, the Barons of our Exchequer, and our
Attorney General for the time being; And all other our Officers and Ministers
of or in our Exchequer; And all others, to whom these presents shall appertain,
and to every of them, Greeting;

Whereas by our Letters Patents under our Great Seal of England, bearing date
at Westminster the Three and twentieth day of May, in the year of our Lord God,
One thousand six hundred fifty and six, we have for the Reasons therein
expressed, nominated, constituted, and appointed Ralph Hall, Peter Elliston,
John Griffith, Edward Carey, John Wilsby, William Bridges, and Nathaniel
Stirrup, Esquires, to be our Commissioners, and have thereby empowered and
authorized, and appointed them or any four or more of them, to receive for and
on our behalf, all such Informations as should by any person or persons be
exhibited before them, touching or any way concerning our Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties, Moneys, Plate, Jewels,
Goods, Chattels, or other things belonging to us in right of the Commonwealth,
and not pardoned, but unjustly concealed and detained. And by all such good and
lawful ways and means, as to them or any four or more of them, should seem meet
to send for any Persons, Parties, Witnesses, Records, Accounts, Books, and
Writings whatsoever; And if upon any such Information, Examination, and
Inquiry, and full hearing of the parties concerned, and mature consideration
had of the whole matter, it should appear unto them our said Commissioners, or
any four or more of them, That any such Lands, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of
Rents, Debts, Duties, Moneys, Goods, Chattels, Plate, Jewels, or other things,
so belonging to us in right of the Commonwealth, and not pardoned, be unjustly
concealed or detained as aforesaid; then they our said Commissioners, or any
four or more of them should forthwith from time to time, under their Hands and
Seals, certify all such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents,
Debts, Duties, Moneys, Goods, Chattels, Plate, Jewels, and other things so
discovered; together with the whole matter, touching such Discovery or
Discoveries to you our said Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being,
to the end you our said Commissioners of our Treasury, might forthwith cause
the premises by Process out of our Court of Exchequer, to be duly seized into
our hands, and to that purpose put in charge in the great Roll of the Pipe
there; which said Commissioners for Discoveries or four or more of them, we did
in and by our said Letters Patents, command and require to meet upon Monday the
Six and twentieth day of May last past, by nine of the clock in the morning at
Worcester-House in the Strand, in the County of Middlefex, then and there to
enter upon the execution of that our Commission, and to proceed therein for the
space of one whole year, from the date of our said Commission, or until we
should signify our pleasure to the contrary.

And whereas for the Reasons in our Letters Patents at large expressed, We have
declared our will and pleasure to be, and have thereby with the advice and
consent of our Council, granted, That all and every person and persons, who
before you our said Commissioners of and for our Treasury had then discovered,
or upon any Information or Informations to be afterward exhibited before them
our said Commissioners for Discoveries, or any four or more of them should
discover, or upon any Bill or Information then exhibited, or afterward to be
exhibited in our said Court of Exchequer, had then discovered or should after
discover any such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Money, Plate, Jewels, or any other
the premises so belonging to us, and not pardoned, but unjustly concealed or
detained as aforesaid; and the respective Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns of all and thery such person and persons so discovering, should from
time to time, and at all tiems, have and enjoy to their own use and behoof, one
full Fifth part, or so much more as you our Commissioners of our Treasury for
the time being, should think fit to allow of all Annual and other sum and sums
which should be paid into the Receipt of our Exchequer, upon any such Discovery
or Discoveries, and upon the prosecution of any such person or persons so
discovering respectively; And that if any persons or persons be seized of any
such Manor, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Moneys, Plate, Jewels, Goods, or Chattels,
or owing any such Arrears of Rents, Debts, and Duties, so belonging to us, and
not pardoned, but unjustly concealed or detained as aforesaid, should
voluntarily first discover the same unto you our said Commissioners of our
Treasury for the time being, before any such discovery thereof made as
aforesaid, and should submit unto such Orders and Directions, as should by you
our said Commissioners of our Treasury be given, for the more speedy seizing
into our hands, and due charging in the great Roil of the Pipe aforesaid, all
such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties, Goods,
and Chattels; so voluntarily discovered as aforesaid, then and in such case
only; We have in and by our said Letters Patents declared our will to be, That
such person and persons so voluntarily discovering, and his, her, and their
respective Heirs and Assigns, should from time to time, and at all times have
and enjoy to their own use one full Fifth part, or so much more as you our
Commissioners of our Treasury, should think fit to allow of all Annual, or
other sum or sums of Money which should be paid into the Receipt of our
Exchequer, upon voluntary discovery or discoveries of any such Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Goods, Chattels, or other the premises; and should likewise have
Allowance, Deduction, Defalcation, and Retainer, to him, her, or themselves, of
one full Fifth part, or of so much more as you our said Commissioners of our
Treasury should think fit, to allow of all such Arrears of Reants, Debts,
Duties, Plate, Jewels, and sums of Money so voluntarily discovered, to be in
his, her, or their possession, or by him, her, or them owing, concealed or
detained as aforesaid.

And whereas in and by our said Letters Patents, we have declared our further
will and pleasure to be, That if any person or persons having compounded, and
having any Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties,
Moneys, Plate, Jewels, Goods, or Chattels, omitted out of his, her, or their
Composition or Compositions not pardoned, but unjustly concealed or detained as
aforesaid, or being then under Sequestration for the Delinquency or Recusancy;
and having any Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts,
Duties, Moneys, Plate, Jewels, Goods, or Chattels, not sequestered nor pardoned
but concealed or detained as aforesaid; or being comprised in any Act for Sale;
and having any Copihold or Customary Lands or Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties,
Goods or Chattels, not sequesrred nor pardoned, but concealed or detained as
aforesaid; Do and should before any such discovery thereof made as aforesaid,
Petition you our said Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being, to be
admitted to compound for the same; Then we have thereby willed and authorized
you our said Commissioners of our Treasury, That in such case you compound with
such person or persons so petitioning after the rate of one Fourth part of the
value of such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties,
Moneys, Goods, and Chattels respectively; and have by our said Letters Patents,
delared and granted by and with the advice and consent of our Council, That all
andevery such person and persons who should compound as aforesaid, and after
submit unto such Orders and Directions as by you our said Commissioners of our
Treasury should be given, for duly charging such sum or sums of Money as should
be due, and owing upon such Composition or Compositions in the Roll of the
Pipe, and should duly pay the same into the Receipt of our Exchequer; and the
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns of such person and persons so
compounding, submitting, and paying, should and might peaceably hold and enjoy
all such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties,
Goods and Chattels so compounded for, free and clear, of and from any Seizure,
Sequestration or Molestation whatsoever, any thing in that our said Commission
or otherwise to the contrary notwithstanding; as in and by our said Letters
Patents relation, being thereunto had more at large (amongst other things) it
does and may appear.

And whereas we have received Information, that the said Nathaniel Stirrup, one
of our Commissioners beforementioned, is lately dead, Know ye, That we by the
advice of our Council, have nominated and assigned, and by these presents, Do
nominate and assign our trusty and welbeloved Robert Griffith Esquire to be One of
our Commissioners as aforesaid, in the stead and place of him the said
Nathaniel Stirrup, deceased; to do and execute all and singular, the Powers and
Authorities in our said Letters of Commission mentioned, and all and every
other thing and things therein contained, together with our said other
Commissioners surviving, according to the purport and intent thereof; and that
in as full and ample manner and form to all intents and purposes, as if he the
said Robert Griffith had been specially and expressly named One of our said
Commissioners in that our Commission aforesaid. And our will and pleasure is,
That he the said Robert Griffith be reputed and taken as one of our
Commissioners aforesaid, by force and virtue of these presents, to do and
execute the premises accordingly; And to the intent and purpose, That our will
and pleasure in and by our said Letters Patents, so as above declared, may be
put in due execution; And all such Fifths, Allowances, Defalcations, and
Compositions, may be duly had and made according to the true intent and meaning
of our said (in part recited) Letters Patents, Know ye further, That we have
authorized and required and by these presents, do authorize and require you our
Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being, or any Two or more of you,
from time to time, to receive as well all such Certificates of any such
Discovery or Discoveries made or to be made before our said Commissioners for
Discoveries, or any four of them; as also all such voluntary Discoveries as
have been or shall be first made before you our Commissioners of our Treasury,
or any two or more of you as aforesaid: And we have authorized and required,
and by these presents do authorize and require you our Commissioners of our
Treasury, Barons of our Exchequer, and our Attorney General for the time being,
and all other our Officers and Ministers of, and in our said Exchequer, whom it
may concern, That according to the duties of your several places, you causeall
such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties, Moneys,
Plate, Jewels, Goods, Chattels and other things, so as above certified to be
discovered before our said Commissioners for Discoveries, or any four of them,
or so as above voluntarily first discovered before you our said Commissioners
of our Treasury for the time being, to be seized into our hands by due Process
out of our said Exchequer, or put in charge either in the great Roll of the
Pipe, or with the Auditors of our said Exchequer, As to you our Commissioners
of our Treasury for the time being, shall be thought most advantageous for the
Commonwealth in that behalf.

And we have authorized and required, and by these presents, do authorize and
require you our said Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being, or any
two or more of you from time to time, to allow unto all and every such person
and persons, who before you our said Commissioners of our Treasury, have, at,
or before the day of the date of our said Commission, so as above discovered,
or before our said Commissioners for Discoveries, have so as abovesaid
discovered, or shall hereafter discover; or upon any Bill or Information
exhibited or to be exhibited in our said Court of Exchequer, have so as above
discovered, or shall hereafter discover; and to the Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, of all and every such person or persons so
discovering, one full Fifth part of all such Annual and other sum or sums of
Money whatsoever; as by the joint or several Certificate or Certificates of the
Clerk of the Pells, of the Receipt of our Exchequer, and other our Officer or
Officers, unto whom it shall appertain, shall appear unto you the Commissioners
of our Treasury for the time being, or any two or more of you, to be paid into
the Receipt of our Exchequer, upon any such Discovery or Discoveries, and upon
the prosecution of such person or persons so discovering respectively.

And we do also by these presents, authorize and require you our Commissioners
of our Treasury for the time being, or any two or more of you from time to
time, to grant your Warrant or Warrants, for the due payment out of the Receipt
of our Exchequer, of such Fifth part, or Fifth parts, unto such person or
persons so discovering, and their Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, respectively. Nevertheless, if any person or persons being so as above
said, seized or possessed of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, Moneys, Plate,
Jewels, Goods, Chattels, or other things, or owing any Rents, Arrears of Rents,
Debts, or other things so as above, belonging unto us, and concealed or
detained as aforesaid, have so as above, voluntarily first discovered, or shall
voluntarily first discover the same unto you our Commissioners of our Treasury
for the time being, before any such discovery thereof, made as aforesaid; and
have submitted or shall submit unto such Orders and Directions, as by you our
Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being, or any two or more of you
have been or shall be given, for the due seizing into our hands, the premises
so voluntarily discovered or to be discovered, and putting the same in charge
in the great Roll of the Pipe, or with the Auditors of our Exchequer; Then our
will and pleasure is, and we do by these presents, authorize and require you
our Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being, or any two or more of you
from time to time; and at all times to make allowance by way of Deduction,
Defalcation, and Retainer, to such person and persons, so voluntarily
discovering, and his, her, and their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns respectively, of one full Fifth part of al such Rents, Arrears of
Rents, Moneys, and Debts, so voluntarily first discovered; and also to make
allowance unto such person and persons, so voluntarily discovering; and his,
her, and their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns respectively, of
one full Fifth part of all such Annual, and other sum and sums of Money, as by
such Certificate or Certificates of our said Clerk of the Pells, of the Receipt
of our Exchequer, and other our Officers, to whom it shall appertain, shall
appear unto you our Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being, to be
paid into the Receipt of one Exchequer, upon such voluntary Discovery or
Discoveries of any such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Plate, Jewels, Goods, and
Chattels: And also, we do by these presents authorize and require you our
Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being, or any two or more of you,
from time to time, to grant your Warrant or Warrants as well for striking of
Tallies for such Fifts by way of Deduction, Defalcation and Retainer; as also
for the due payment out of the Receipt of our Exchequer of such Fifths, of all
such Annual and other sums of Money, unto such person or persons so voluntarily
discovering and submitting, and his, her, and their Heirs; Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, respectively. And for the better satisfaction unto
all and every such person and persons, any ways entitled unto any such Fifths
as aforesaid, We do by these presents authorize and require you our said
Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being, or any two or more of you
from time to time to contract with any person or persons so entitled unto any
such Fifths for any Lease or Leases of any such Manors, Lands, or Tenements so
discovered for any term of years, to be made unto such person or persons so
entitled, in full satisfaction of such their Fifths as abovesaid: And such
Lease and Leases so to be contracted for, and made, shall pass under our Great
Seal of England, or the Seal of our Exchequer, by Warrant under the hands of
you our Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being, or of any two or more
of you: And we do by these presents, further authorize and require you our
Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being, or any two or more of you,
from time to time to receive the Petition and Petitions of all and every such
person and persons, as having compounded, and having any such Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties, Moneys, Plate, Jewels, Goods
or Chattels, omitted out of his or their Composition or Compositions, and so
unjustly concealed or detained, as aforesaid; and being now under Sequestration
for Delinquency or Recusancy, and having any such Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties, Moneys, Plate, Jewels, Goods, or
Chattels not sequestered, but concealed or detained as aforesaid, or being
comprised in any Act for Sale, and having any Copihold or Customary Lands, or
Arrears of Rents, Debts, Duties, Goods, or Chattels not sequestered, but
concealed or detained as aforesaid, or the Petition and Petitions of the Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns of such person or persons, having so
compounded, or being, or having been so under Sequestration, or being so
comprised in any Act for Sale as aforesaid respectively, as shall before any
discovery thereof made as aforesaid; and before the expiration of our said
Commission, Petition you our Commissioners of our Treasury for the time being,
to be admitted to compound for the same respectively; and to compound with all
and every such person and persons so Petitioning, after the rate of one Fourth
part of the value of such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents,
Debts, Duties, Moneys, Plate, Goods and Chattels, respectively; and also to
make and give such Orders and Directions as to you our Commissioners of our
Treasury for the time being, or any two or more of you shall be thought fit for
the due charging the great Roll of the Pipe; all and every such sum and sums of
money so due or owing upon any such Composition or Compositions respectively,
and for the speedy payment thereof into the Receipt of our Exchequer
accordingly.

And we do by these presents authorize, will and require you our Commissioners
of our Treasury, Barons of our Exchequer, and our Attorney General for the time
being, and all other our Officers and Ministers of and in our Exchequer, whom
it may concern, To permit and suffer all and every such person and persons,
that shall so Petition and Compound, and shall likewise observe and perform
such Orders and Directions, and their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns respectively, from time to time, quietly and peaceably to have hold and
occupy, all such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Arrears of Rents, Debts,
Duties, Moneys, Plate, Jewels, Goods, and Chattels, so compounded for, free and
clear, of and from any Seizure, Sequestration, or other Molestation whatsoever;
Any Law, Statute, Act, Ordinance, or any other matter or thing whatsoever to
the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding: And for so doing, and for observing
and executing our will and pleasure herein expressed, and the several
Authorities hereby given, These presents shall be unto you, and every of you
respectively, a good, absolute and sufficient discharge. In witness whereof, We
have caused these our Letters to be made Patents; witness our self at
Westminster the Twelfth day of March, One thousand six hundred fifty and six.

FINIS.

