A DECLARATION CONCERNING The Government of the three Nations OF ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND, And IRELAND, By his Highness the Lord Protector CROMWELL: And His
Speech to the Lord Commissioners of the broad Seal of England, and the Judges
in their scarlet Gowns, and Robes, immediately before he took the Chair of
State, the City Sword, and Cap of Maintenance. With the Oath taken by His
Highness; the subscribing of the Instructions tendered unto Him by the said
Judges; the full particulars of this great and honorable Solemnization; the
manner how he was proclaimed throughout the City of London, and the
proclamation of the Council, to be published throughout all Counties, Cities,
and Market Towns.

London, Printed by R. WOOD, 1653.

The Speech of his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, in Westminster Hall on
Friday last, to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of the City of London, and
the rest of the Judges of the Law, upon their investing of Him Lord Protector
of the three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
WHereas the late Parliament having upon their Dissolution delivered up their
Power and Authorities, which they received from his Excellency at their first
sitting by a Writing under their Hands and Seals: His Excellency thereupon
called a Council of Officers, and advised with other persons of Interest in the
Nation, how this great Burden of governing England, Scotland, and Ireland,
should be born, and by whom; who after several Days seeking of God, and
advising therein; It was resolved that a Council of godly able and discreet
persons should be named, consisting of 21. And that his Excellency should be
chosen Lord Protector of the three Nations. In pursuance hereof, several
persons of eminency and worth, are already made choice of to be of the said
Council. And on Friday last his Excellency went to Westminster, where he was
installed Lord Protector of the three Nations; a Narration whereof take as
follows:

His Excellency about one of the clock in the afternoon went from White Hall to
Westminster, to the Chancery Court, attended by the Lords Commissioners of the
great Seal of England, Barons of the Exchequer, and Judges in their Robes;
after them, the Council of the Commonwealth, and the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Recorder of the City of London, in their scarlet Gowns; then came his
Excellency, attended with many of the chief Officers of the Army, and a Chair
of State being set in the said Court of Chancery, His Excellency stood on the
left hand thereof uncovered, till a large Writing in Parchment, in the nature
of an Oath, was read; the substance whereof was, That he should govern the three
Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, according to the Fundamental Laws
thereof; That he should maintain the true Orthodox Ministry of the Church of
England; and that He should extirpate and abolish all Popery, Schisms, and
Heresy; and maintain and preserve the peoples Rights, Privileges, and
Liberty, etc. Unto which Paper, or Oath, his Excellency subscribed in the face
of the court, saying, to this effect, That seeing it was the will of God, and
the pleasure of the council, that he should be invested with so great an
honor, as to be Lord Protector, that he desired to rule and govern the three
Nations no longer, then it might have a perfect dependancie on the great work
of the Lord; that so the Gospel might flourish in its full splendour and purity;
and the people enjoy their just Rights and Propriety? His Speech being ended,
he sat down in the chair covered; and the Lords comissioners then delivered up
the great Seal of England to his Excellency, and the L. Major his Sword and cap
of Maintenance; all which his Excellency returned immediately to them again: the
court then rose, and his Excellency was attended back as aforesaid, to the
Banqueting house in White Hall, the Lord Mayor himself uncovered carrying the
Sword before the Protector all the way; and coming in to the Banqueting house,
there was great acclamations of joy.

So that now this Commonwealth is become the Wonder and Emulation of Europe;
nay, of the whole World: since that the Lord Protector is resolved to defend
and maintain our National Rights, Laws, Liberties, and Privileges, against
all sorts of persons whatsoever that shall dare to attempt the violation or
extirpation thereof. And indeed, deplorable is it unto many, to behold the
bird-witted Opiniators of this Age, who already begin to breath forth a
disowning and dislike of this great and unparalled Change. Alas! how great a
madness are these Antinomies captivated with, who blindly endeavor the ruin of
so prudent a Governor, so excellent a Protector. Defend Us, O God! from that
unhappiness, where our own Reason will not be our friend! We have nothing amiss
almost in England, but where our wholesome Laws, and excellent Government is
abused. Alas! how is the whole body of men well composed, but valuing their
Patrial Laws, are troubled at the present Change. But doubtless, our Protector
will consider, that in these Impressions of idle heads, their own Interest
suffers an unmannerly violation. Can it be, that ever these lunatic Brains
will be constant to their Governors, who not knovving what to ask, yet are
resolved upon impetuous malice against those Constitutions they breath under,
and would involve the Commonwealth into inextricable Labirynthes.

The Lord Major and Aldermen being returned from this great solemnization, in
pursuance thereof, on Monday went in their scarlet Gowns, to meet the Herald
of Arms, and to proclaim the Lord Protector, which was accordingly done by 12
Trumpets both in Cheapside, and at the Royal Exchange, where the ensuing
Proclamation was publicly read, to the end, that all men may conform and
submit themselves to this present Government.

By the Council.
WHereas the late Parliament dissolving themselves, and resigning their powers
and Authorities, The Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland,
Ireland, by a Lord Protector, and successive Triennial Parliaments, is now
established; And whereas O. Cromwell Captain General of all the forces of this
Commonwealth is declared Lord. Protector of the said Nations, and has accepted
thereof: We have therefore thought it necessary (as we hereby do) to make
publication of the premises, and strictly to charge and command all, and every
person or persons, of what quality and condition soever, in any of the said
three Nations, to take notice hereof, and to conform and submit themselves to
the Government so established. And all Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, and other
public Ministers, and Officers, whom this may concern, are required to cause
this Proclamation to be forthwith published in their respective counties,
cities, corporations, and Market towns; to the end none may have cause to
pretend ignorance in this behalf.

Given at White Hall this 16 day of December, 1653.

