THE VIRTUE AND VALUE OF BAPTISM: In which the Dignity and Duty of Baptism. The
due Right of Infants to Baptism. And their right above that of grown persons by
Baptism. The degrading and destructive Principles and Practices of Baptism.


ARE Catechetically propounded, plainly Preached, and now Published as an
Antidote to the Baptism-Despising-Dictates of John Simpson.

By Zachariah Crofton, Minister at Botolph Aldgate, London.

Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy.



London, Printed by D.M. for J. Nuthal living next door to the Dolphin in the
Minories, 1658.

To the Right Worshipful Richard Garforde, AND Robert Burdet, Esquires. And the
rest of his Beloved Parishioners, late Assertors of his innocence, and
Protestors against his groundless and furious Persecutions.
Right Worshipful and wel-beloved,
TO you of all men this Treatise owes its Dedication, and from you must needs
demand its Patronage: for that in order to your good in the Instruction and
establishment of you in the order of the Gospel, and Ordinances of Jesus
Christ: it has been preached once and again, and is now Printed: you cannot be
insensible how you baptized Members of the Catholic Church were dispersed, as
Sheep without any Shepherd; nay by the Congregational Anabaptistical principles
and practices, and in order to their Schismatical Church-gathering design, you
were by Rude, Rust, Foolish- Wise, and Baptism-blaspheming Simpson, paganized
and proclaimed Dogs, aliens and strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel: when
the zealous importunity of some among you, meeting in me with a real pity of
your Pagan posture, did engage me to take of you, as a Church of Jesus Christ,
the care and charge. I was constrained to lay again the Foundations these
wicked men had razed, and to inform you in the first rudiments of Religion, and
first ordinances of worship, that you might understand the dignity and duty of
your Baptism, in which I find such dullness in common capacity, that the things
you heard you must hear again, and indeed Read before many will receive them. I
being come among you, and (by Gods blessing on my Ministry) having reduced you
into some order, convinced some persons of their Rebaptized vanity, and Parents
of the sinful neglect of their Infants interest in the Covenant: have met with
violent opposition, and malicious interruptions in the work of God:
constraining me to preach unto you the Gospel of Truth through much
contentation; wherein yet through grace I have waxed bold. You are manifest
Witnesses that the Anabaptists will Baptize with fire and fury, such as they
cannot Baptize with water in the way of their folly: By what clamours have they
clouded my name (representing me uncivil, whilst for fear of the Law they durst
not render me profane) how they have by false surmizes prejudiced present
powers, by false accusations, palpable perjury, extrajudicial Process, partial
and prejudiced Judges (of their own picking) and implacable fury darkened my
credit, weakened my Ministry, disturbed my peace, and endeavored (...) stop my
mouth, you and all the Churches of God cannot but know. The guilt and odium
whereof you have taken from your selves by your seasonable Attestation to my
Innocence, and serious protest against their groundless cruelty, wherein I
bless God I can rejoice, It is the cause that makes the Martyr, and what is the
cause of all that calamity they have to me created; Let the fretting of their
spirits, when your Pulpit sounded the Sacrament of Bastism is to be
administered; your Reverend attendance on that Ordinance is desired: their
railing speeches on all occasions uttered against Infant Baptism, their
invective Letters to me written, (which I keep as Monuments of their folly and
malice) their often struggling to set up Oats, Knowls, Lamb, Simpson, to
blaspheme Gods Ordinances; and at last violent and unjust intrusion of John
Simpson into the Baptismal Season of the Sabbath, to the excluding of that
Ordinance, and vilifying the same in the sight of the People, and that not only
in its subjects, but in it self, openly teaching baptism is no ground of
Communion with the Church visible; witness to all the world, if I suffer as an
evil doer; Whose Ox or Ass have I taken? what Law have I violated? whom did I
injure in word or deed? How often have I sought for competent impartial Judges,
that might convict me? and proposed ways of Accommodation: admitted them, when
sought by my enemies, whose Return has been we will have no peace, no
agreement, no arbitration: nay, my enemies being Judges, the ground of their
quarrel and enmity, is my endeavors to return you into order; and their cry
is, He will not let Simpson preach. So that because I will not suffer that
woman Jezabel to teach and seduce the Lords people, I must be loaded with
calumny, and followed with vexation: Well be it so, I will bless God for
supporting, and wait on him for saving mercy; and pray that you may be more
confident in the truths confirmed by my Sufferings, wherein you also have bo^n
your share. I cannot but observe how Heretical Malice has trampled on your
dignities and gravities by Military insolency, and vulgar rudeness, yet has
God hitherto given you hearts, to adhere to me and the truths by me witnessed.
Whilst you have owned my Ministry; under so great a Fight of affliction, I
cannot but hope you will do it still, and be more confirmed in the virtue and
value of your received Baptism, both which are here plainly and practically
propounded to your view. Many eminent men have most fully debated the
Controversy, and defended your Infants Right to Baptism, but of their Labors,
I observe the vulgar make little use; for Practical conviction of sin, I find
to be the best confutation of error, and have therefore attempted it in the
ensuing Treatise for its style and method, suited to vulgar capacity; receive
it as a token of my true affection to your Souls, and Gods holy Ordinances,
read it as the direction of your duty, learn by it to prize Baptism, as the
high Privilege of you and yours, and in doing and suffering, show forth the
virtue and value of the Covenant of God on your flesh, living as Baptized into
the name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to which end you may be assured as of
the endeavors, so the earnest prayers of,

Your greatly reproached and persecuted, but yet really innocent, and
resolvedly zealous Pastor, Zach. Crofton.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THou can not be such a stranger in our Israel, as to be ignorant of my
sufferings by the intrusion of John Simpson into my Pulpit, and amongst my
People: I doubt not but thou may well with many other enquire the reason of
my resistance, the which is written in such legible Characters, that just men
and zealous Christians cannot but Run and Read them; I have in a small Book,
called Right Re-entered, given the world some account, as to my own personal
Reasons, wherein had I been silent, can any that know John Simpson, a man
subject to such windings and turnings, that he cannot to his own Proselytes
appear to be the same this year he was the last: A man under judicial The
Committee for Plundered Ministers.
Parliamentary censure for his Errors: a man by the most sage grave and pious
London Testimony to the truth, etc.
Ministers of his City (the place of his Residence) branded as a Seducer from
the Truth of Jesus Christ; a man for Sedition (so owned by himself) imprisoned,
banished, and afflicted, as an evil doer; a man of such violence, commotion,
division, confusion, distraction, disorder, that Bishopsgate and Aldgate must
needs lament the day of his being in the midst of them. And yet enquire why
should Master Crofton so much withstand John Simpsons preaching; but if he or
all his Adherents were (as they never can be) able to acquit him from these
Blots that must needs render him unfit for Gospel-work: yet Master Crofton has
too too just cause to withstand his Ministry, not only for his unjust
intrusion, and dis-ingenuous silence, under any propounded conveniencie for the
people, and malicious exercise of his pretended Ministry, to the mere humoring
of an envious, profane Faction, pursuing nothing but Confusion and Disorder,
not having any Assembly of his own to engage him to it. But for those
Falsehoods, that in the name of the Lord he does utter to the decrying of Gods
holy Ordinances, and danger of men's Salvation; herein he is frequent, and of
which I should (were it not that my weak people are apt to take boldness to sit
under his Ministry from my hearing him) make a full detection: Can any man
think Ministerial zeal, can in the least admit an afternoons contradiction, of
a forenoons Doctrine of Truth. I have before noted to the world, that he no
sooner violently entered my Church, and interrupted some of Gods Ordinances, but
he presently vilifying, those he could not hinder, openly averred, that to
learn a Catechism was not to worship God; you might as well take your children
to the Market or Fair, and buy them Baubles, Rattles, and Hobby Horses as
Catechisms. I well know that he did with most profane impudence in the Pulpit
at Great Al-hallows, and in my own Pulpit make a dreadful appeal to God,
Angels and Men, that he never Preached such Doctrine; but I have offered, and
do yet offer, if he will be convicted before any competent Judges, to convince
him by some of his late Proselytes, and many others that heard him speak it,
and after most wickedly deny that he spoke it; he must not think but we know
the Serpentine wisdom of Seducers leads them to deny they spoke the doctrine
they divulge, if the time and other circumstances will not defend them in it.
And yet in the Sermon wherein he would deny this notion, he does but
Familistically Spiritualize, and runs into this assertion, which is yet
Tantamount, That it is gross ignorance to say, or think that the teaching of
Catechitical heads of Religion is the way to bring any man to the knowledge of
Christ. I confess this contempt of catechizing was in my ears, but a praeludium
to the decrying of Infant Baptism, which engaged me to attend his Wednesday
Lectures for some few days, when he was from 1 Peter 3.21. Treating of Baptism,
wherein I heard many absurdities, false interpretations, and incongruous
expressions uttered; but at length found him that pretends he had His Book of
Justification in the Epist. to the Reader.
run over the bogs of Familism, yet not to have been swallowed up in them, to
have fallen up to the arm holes, if not over head and ears; for not only did he
despise Poedo-Baptism by the contemptible terms of Baby-sprinkling, cozening
Infants, and the like; but proclaimed Water Baptism, the very Ordinance it
self, to be nothing worth; and the spirit inward Grace, the answer of a good
conscience, to be all in all, even unto communion with the Church visible; and
this he did in a full Discourse, half an hour long, directed to his own
Proselytes, with many invectives against such as would not admit Communion with
the unbaptized in flesh; these nullifying notions of Gods Ordinance, I could
not bear, and resolving they should not corrupt on my stomach, or he have
liberty to make a false appeal, to God, Angels and Men, in the denial of what
he had delivered, or to complain, I dealt not fairly by him, publicly to
render him erroneous before I had charged him personally, I did on the day on
which he preached it, being the 2. of September 1657. and as soon as Sermon was
ended, repair to my Study, and writ unto him this Letter following.

Mr. Simpson,
I did this day with no little trouble hear your Discourse, and pretermitting
your incongruous, impertinent expressions, and misapplication of Scripture,
with many Ordinance-degrading and Church-confounding speeches, you laid down
this inference, That Baptism is not the ground of communion with the Church,
but real grace the answer of a good conscience, by the Resurrection of Christ
from the dead: and therefore you did declare, Though a man were altogether
ignorant of the doctrine of Baptism, and had never passed under that outward
Ordinance, you could own him as a member of the Church, and hold communion with
him, and admit him to all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ: and much to this
purpose you delivered. Sir, When I consider, the answer of a good conscience is
only known to God, I cannot believe God has made it the Ground of communion
with men, and outward Baptism to be the first Ordinance of God, to the Church
and external Seal of the Covenant, and the very door of admission into the
Church erected by Jesus Christ, and reckoned by the Apostle among the (...);
and so in all Ages of the Church made the foundation of the Church Ordinances
in foro Ecclesiae; I cannot conserv^ to communion with such as are unbaptized,
but must fear in this case, God may say to me as to them in Isa. 44.7. For
though outward baptism without inward Grace can carry no man to heaven, yet the
Church cannot without palpable, profaneness admininister other Ordinances of
Communion to the unbaptized; I pray you tell me whether you do not in vain
press me to outward Baptism, when you tell me, I may live and die in Commmunion
with the body of Christ all my days, and yet never know the Doctrine, nor
pass under the Ordinance of Water Baptism? Is Baptism become an Adiaphoron?
These things I thus timely signify to you to prevent mistakes (desiring your
arguments for your position (for that your Cited Scripture. Romans 15.7. does not
conclude it) but is far wide) to which I promise you a speedy answer, unless
they be convincing to

Zath. Crofton.
Sept. 2 1657.

Though this letter was by a messenger sent of purpose, delivered into his
hand, disingenious be never returned answer to it, either in public or private,
but suffered these contemptible notions to abide on the spirit of the people,
as it they were Gospel truths. Having observed his silence and resolving to
leave him without excuse, I wrote unto him this second Letter.

Sir, I did this day sevenday signify my dissatisfaction in your Doctrine, and
dislike of that old Familistical no^ion you published, I demanded your reasons
but have received none. Sir, Think you not that it is your duty to convince
gainsayers, or can I pass in silence, Baptisme-annilitating notions, I cannot,
I will not. Sir, I once more demand your arguments, and that as you are a man
of any ingenuity willi^g to give an account of your Doctrine.

Sept. 9. 1657. Zach. Crofton.


This also he received, but passed it in silence, and never to this day, gave
any the least answer to defend or retract his error: If therefore I find him
obstinate after the first and second admonition, I hope I shall not be blamed
for rejecting him as an Heretic, and withstanding him from filling my Peoples
Heads with low thoughts of Gods Ordinances, and the high Privileges of Grace,
whose tongues can already speak too despicably of them: God having in his
Providence brought me to the Section of Baptism in my course of Catechizing,
and given me a little breathing space from the violent persecutions of his
Abettors, I thought it to be my duty to dictate to my people, the dignity of
Baptism, and knowing that many heard his Error, who would not hear the
correction of it I have committed it to the Press, and sent it into public
view, submitting it and my opposition of the Seducer that occasioned it, to thy
Censure, desiring thou may shake off prejudice, and read with seriousness
and sobriety, whereby I doubt not but thou may find profit; for which he
prays, who sees a Divine Stamp on every ourward Gospel-Ordinance.

Zach. Crofton.

ERRATA.
Page 4. line 23. for a read as. p. 23. l. 22. r. not to. p. 24. l. 2 r. me. p.
56. l. 4. r. readily gives. p. 58.. l. 20. r. tribes, p. 87. l. 23. r. profane
nations. p. 92. l. 11. r. answerably. p. 107. l. 23. r. inveighing. p. 119. l.
19. r. justle out. p. 136. l. 7. r. weight. p. 149. l. 7. r. third. p. 186. l.
4. r. humane.

A SHORT CATECHISM, BRIEFLY Propounding, and plainly showing the VIRTUE AND
Value of BAPTISM.

OR, The following TREATISE fitted to the weak capacity of such People as
desire to be confirmed in the Nature and Necessity of BAPTISM, against the
Contempt and Neglect thereof.

By Zachariah Crofton, Minister at Botolph Algate, London.

London, Printed by D.M. for J. Nuthal living in the Minories, 1658

A Short CATECHISM, Briefly propounding, and plainly showing the virtue and
value of BAPTISM.
Q. WHat is your name?

Ans. M.

Q. Who gave you this name?

A. My Parents, the natural Authors of my being, and Instruments of my Interest
in the Covenant of God.

Q. When did they give you this name?

A. In my Baptism, when I was dedicated to God, and by the washing of my body
in pure water fitted for approach to him.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. It is a solemn and Religious application of water by the hand of a lawful
Minister to fit subjects to signify the blood of Christ, and Seal the ^ovenant
of Grace.

Q. What is the outward sign in Baptism?

A. Water, in opposition to all other elements; and pure water without any
mixture or composition; for so Christ did appoint, and his appointment does
stamp dignity on that despicable Element.

Q. What is the inward Grace in Baptism?

A. The blood of Jesus Christ with its properties and effects, the remission of
sin, and regeneration of the soul.

Q. Is Baptism only a sign to represent these things to our mind?

A. No, but also a seal to ratify them to our soul; and therefore a right unto
the Promise is the ground of Baptism, and Baptism a reason of our Faith in the
Promise to be pleaded in Prayer for obtainment.

Q. What is the form of Baptism?

A. The Application of water, by Dipping, or Sprinkling; for the manner is of
no moment, so it be done solemnly and religiously, as a sacred Ordinance by
Divine Institution, with Prayer to God, and a Dedication of the person
baptized, unto the name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Q. Who is to administer Baptism?

A. A lawful, and none but a lawful Minister; for Baptism is an act of Office
and argument of Faith; therefore to be applied by authority; and then the
Baptism of women, and private men is void and null.

Q. Who are fit subjects to be baptized?

A. Such, all such, and only such as are in Covenant with God; for the
qualification that must guide the Church in applying Baptism, must be Interest
in the Covenant; and these are two sorts. 1. Infidels converted to the Faith.
2. The Infants of one or both Christian Parents.

Q. By what must Infidels converted to the Faith be judged, within the
Covenant, and fit subjects to be baptized.

A. By making a profession of saving faith, which may be done by men in the
gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, not saving profession of faith,
importing sincerity of grace, nor by a well ordered conversation; for Gods
Ministers must judge by a present visible sign, and they cannot search the
heart: And Plants are to be set in the Church before we look for fruit; Baptism
is a Bond unto amendment of life.

Q. How can it be proved that the infants of Christian Parents are with in the
Covenant and to be baptized?

A. During the administration of Covenant in the times of the Old Testament,
the natural issue of Gods people, before they acted their faith, even as soon
as they were born, were within the Covenant. The form of the Promise is, I will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed: Circumcision the Seal of the righteousness
of faith, was set in their flesh at eight days old. God claims the natural
issue of his Vovenant People as his own, when he calls them out of Egyyt, Exodus
5.1. charge them with duty, Deuteronomy. 14.2. complains of Idolatay, Ephesians.
16.21. Chastises their sin, Amos 3.2. And Christ calls the Jews natural, the
children of his Kingdom, and places in them the Right to the mercies he
brought, whilst the Gentiles were Dogs licking up the crumbs.

Q. But what is the interest of Infants in the Old Testament to us under the
new?

A. Very much; for whilst we see they have been in Covenant, it will direct us
to see a very clear reversal and plain limitation of the Covenant before we
part with such a birthright and privilege; for common Justice will not suffer
us without good warrant to change a Fee-farm to our selves and heirs, for a
Lease for term of Life; and we need a clear reason to convert the Jews from the
old Covenant, whereby they begot an holy seed to God, unto a straiter Covenant,
that provides for the Parent, but leaves the child profane, and estranged to
God. The enemies of our Baptism, cry for an express command to baptize Infants;
but instead of showing any, we think we have good reason to say, we as such
infants, have by a long Tenure an interest in the Covenant; show us a clear
Gospel Writ of Ejection, if you think now to dispossess us.

Q. But have you any good ground in the New Testament on which infants, as the
natural issue of believing Parents may claim an interest in the Covenant?

A. Yes, very much, when we consider little sucking Babes brought in arms to be
received by the Lord Jesus to be blessed by him, to be declared members of the
Kingdom of heaven, propounded as such who ought to be received in his name, as
his disciples, and not to be offended; all which are the blessings of the
Covenant: and that the Apostle affirms of the Gentiles ingrafted in, as well as
the Jews cut off, in Romans 9. That if the first fruits, then the whole lump is
holy; if the root, then the branches are holy; and the branches do partake of
the fatness of the olive: we must cast away our reasons if we see not Infants
interest in the Covenant.

Q. But have you not yet some plai^er Scriptures to prove their title?

A. Yes, the Apostle does expressly say the Infants of one Christian Parent is
holy, 1 Cor 7.14. of real holiness none understand it; natural holin^ss taking
away the blot of bastardy, supposing Faith essential to Marriage is too
ridiculous to be received, and then it must needs mean a foederal holiness by
the extent of the Covenant, and in the esteem of the Church. And in Acts 2.38.
the Apostle says expressly, The promise is to you, and to your children: This
promise cannot be of extraordinary-Gifts, because it is extended to all that
shall be called; nor is it to children when culled, for that were not to them
as children: the Holy Ghost does not use to speak nonsense, and express
personal qualifications by terms of relation, but tells the believer, his
children as his children have a privilege in the Covenant above other men's
children; so that it is plain such Infants are within the Covenant, and
according to their capacity to enjoy the Seals and Privileges thereof.

Q. But they are not capable of being baptized, because they can act nothing in
the Ordi^ance, nor can they make a profession of Faith, and Repentance.

A. Nor is such capacity needful; for profession gives no right to Baptism,
but as an evidence of Covenant Interest: and their right to the Covenant,
manifested by their descent from such Parents is as good a reason for their
Baptism: and the subjects of the initiating Seal do not act any thing, as if
God would thereby dictate, inability to action shall be no bar to Baptism.

Q. But those we read of in Scripture that were baptized were at grown years.

A. So were those who were first circumcised; but that was occasional and
circumstancial: The Church is founded in grown Trees, but is to be edified by
infant branches.

Q. But there is no institution for infant Baptism.

A. That Baptism is instituted, cannot be denied. Age or Infancy are only
directions to whom to apply it, and therein the qualification of Covenant
Interest is according to Scripture the clear direction. Moreover Infants may be
Disciples, bearing on them the name of Christ, and are Members of Nations, and
so the Institution, directing the baptizing of Discipled Nations, is to them
extended.

Q. But all you urge for infants baptism, is by way of inference and
consequence.

A. Scripture-Inference is Gods word, binding man's conscience: it was the way
of Christ his convincing the Sadduces of the Resurrection, and of Paul's
preaching at Athens, and is your only way to warrant women's Communion at the
Lords Table, and shall it not be of force to Infants Baptism?

Q. What benefit do you receive by your Baptism?

A. Much, as I am baptized, and enjoy that Ordinance of God; and much as I was
baptized in Infancy by the early enjoyment of it.

Q. What is your benefit received by the Ordinance it self?

A. A fit qualification to draw nigh to God with confidence.

Q. What do you mean by drawing nigh to God?

A. Not only the possession of heavenly Glory when I die, which I deny not, but
such may enjoy whom the providence of God cuts off before they can be baptized:
Nor only the private and personal acts of the soul, which may be presented
(though not with much confidence) acceptably to God before a man can be
baptized after his Conversion, he not living in contempt or wilful neglect of
Baptism; but I mean an approach to God in the Assemblies of his people, to
worship before him, as a Member of his Church, and one of his peculiar people,
to bear his name in the world, and of his Royal Priesthood, to offer up
acceptable Sacrifice, and enjoying all his Ordinances; all which I do in
assurance, having my body washed with pure water.

Q. Is then Baptism the necessary qualification for approach to God?

A. Yes, it is so necessary that the unbaptized, may not appear in the
Assemblies of his people. The way of Christ his appearance in his Church as the
Messiah was prepared by Baptism; therefore John the promised Elias, is called
John the Baptist. Baptism prepared Christ for his work of Mediatorship; he
neither prayed (that we read of) nor was tempted, nor preached, nor received
the Testimony from heaven till he was baptized; and if the head were thus
sanctified, much more must the members: moreover Circumcision did sanctify
such as might come nigh to the Sanctuary, and Baptism has succeeded in the
room, signifies and seals the same Grace, and in all things serve to the same
end in the Christian Church, that Circumcision did to the Jews.

Q. What is the use of Baptism, that it should so qualify with confidence in
access to God?

A. By Baptism I am visibly interested in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.27. incorporated
into his Church 1 Cor. 12.13. made a member of the household of Faith, and
Common^ealth of Israel, consecrated unto God, Ephesians. 5.26. having holiness
stamped on my flesh, being sanctified by the washing of water by the word: And
in Covenant with God, having the seal of the promise, whereby God is become
mine, and I am dedicated to be his in faith and obedience, to God, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost: All which are clear grounds of Faith, to be improved unto my
encouragement in approach unto God.

Q. Are all that are baptized partakers of these privileges?

A. All that are baptized enjoy these Privileges Visibly and Sacramentally in
the judgment of the Church, by whose just censure they may be deprived of
them, but not Savingly and Sincerely; for to some the inward Grace is withheld
from Gods outward Ordinance according to Gods holy purpose: And many not acting
Faith to claim, lose the Privileges sealed. Baptism is in its nature and
efficacy the same to all, but by reason of the incapacity of some it is not
always a like effectual.

Q. What principles or practices are to be condemned as contrary to this use of
Baptism?

A. Many, as 1. Such as dictate to the unbaptized a liberty of access to God;
teaching that Baptism is not the ground of Communion with the Church visible,
but real Grace, the answer of a good conscience, and thereon do tender all the
Ordinances to the unbaptized, which is directly opposite to this use of the
Ordinance, and inverts the Ordinance of the Gospel, giving God cause to
complain, as once in Israel, Ezekiel. 44.7. Ye have defiled my Sanctuary by
admitting into my Sanctuary the unbaptized in flesh and in spirit.

Q. Who are further to be condemned as contrary to this consecrating nature of
Baptism?

A. Such as disown their Baptism, in drawing nigh to God, as do some Familists,
who deny all outward Ordinances and pretend to serve God altogether in Spirit,
as if divided man could draw nigh to God; or the Lord would not be adored by
the body he has redeemed, or true Grace could admit a contempt of any divine
Ordinance: Or the Anaebaptists who are so irrational as to renounce their
Baptism, because received in Infancy, as if a corruption in circumstance (if
this were one) had destroyed the essence of the Ordinance; but indeed they do
it out of ignorance, or obstinacy, de^ming Gods Institution Superstition, and
so run into the sin of Sacrilege.

Q. Is the denial of Infants Baptism the sin of Sacrilege?

A. Whilst it robs God of the children to him begotten, the Church of Members
to her born, believing Parents of a ground of Faith, and reason of hope, and
the Infants of their undoubted Interest in the Covenant, I cannot but deem it
sacriledg.

Q. Who else are to be blamed as repugnant to this consecrating nature of
Baptism?

A. Such as disregard Baptism in its application to others, as do Parents, who
pass over their childrens Baptism as a Civil Complement, and mere Formality to
please Friends, but never compose themselves to it as an act of Religion, and
Ordinance of God; pray not for a blessing on it, nor praise God for the
blessing of it; nor instruct their baptized children in the benefit and use of
it: and people who attend with some show of reverence on other Ordinances, but
rudely rush out of the Congregation when Baptism is administered, as if it were
some idle action; and as if the sanctifying of a soul to God, the sealing of
the Covenant, and admission of a Member into the Church were of no use to them,
nor worth their attendance.

Q. Who else are to be blamed, as contrary to the nature of Bapiism?

A. Such as disesteem their own Baptism, neither improving it against sin, nor
arguing to themselves the duty or dignity of their Baptism, so as to make
Baptism an Engagement against sin to holiness and encouragement of their
Spirits in holy duties.

Q. Who also are to be blamed as contrary to the consecrating nature of Baptism?

A. Such as deny the Baptized the liberty of access to God in the Assemblies of
his people, as do the Independents who gather Churches out of Churches rightly
constituted, and call the Baptized into Church way, as if they were out, and
prescribe a Covenant of their own, whereby to admit Church members, and affect
to distinguish themselves from others Baptized, by the term of Saints,
Brethren, Church, and the like, and deny to communicate with them, as if
Baptism did not incorporate into Christ his Body, and prepare for communion
with him in his Ordinances.

Q. To what course of life does your Baptism bind you?

A. To depart from all iniquity, to devote my self wholly to the Faith and
Service of one God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to whom I am dedicated, and
all my days to demean my self as a member of Christ his Church, one in Covenant
with God, on whom holiness is stamped, and that is sanctified for approaches to
him.

Q. You spoke of some benefit you reaped by your being Baptized in Infancy; Is
the early enjoyment of this Ordinance of any advantage?

A. Yes, very much in many things to be preferred before Baptism of grown
persons wherein it is more profitable.

Q. What is the first benefit of Infant Baptism?

A. Infant Baptism expresses clearly the sin of nature, and engages against
it: in that we are washed, it is evident we are unclean, but being so soon
baptized, does witness our very nature is defiled; for infancy did never admit
us to be stained with personal guilt as are men at years; and so Infant Baptism
is an unanswerable argument of our inbred corruption against which we are bound
to fight, being baptized before it had spread it self into actual sin.

Q. What is the second benefit of Infant Baptism?

A. It explaineth the method, and order of transmitting the Covenant, and
affects us with the benefit of Relation to a believing Parent. That we are
baptized speaks us in Covenant; but that we are so soon baptized before we have
in our selves any qualification for it, shows us as branches, we partake of the
fatness of the olive, and are of the same kind with our Parents: God has
graciously become the God of the Believer and his Seed, and made grace to run
through natures channel, otherwise we had never enjoyed this Privilege.

Q. What is a third benefit of Infant Baptism?

A. It enlarges the bounds, and establishes the being of the Church. Baptism
is the band of union, and Ordinance of ingrafting into the Church: But Infant
Baptism does scatter the holy seed, and send forth sprouting branches, which
succeeding into the room of old perishing stocks, does not only increase the
number of the Churches Members, but defend it from the wasting annihilating
breaches of time.

Q. What is the fourth benefit of Baptism?

A. It exciteth Repentance, representing sin in its Root and Original, the
pravity of nature; and its gracious object, the God of our Fathers, and the God
of our youth, against whom we have offended.

Q. What is the fifth benefit of Infant Baptism?

A. It enforces Faith, not only in the sealing, but also the extending of the
Covenant to the seed of Believers, a ground of Parental Prayer for Posterity,
and an early seizure of our souls, before Satan could possess us, or our own
corrupt nature could betray us unto him.

Q. What is the sixth benefit of Infant Baptism?

A. It engages duty; Parents to Christian education and instruction of those,
who by their Authority are dedicated to the service of the true God, children
to the obedience of the God of their Father, and of their youth, who extended
to them the Covenant, and so soon set the seal of it in their flesh.

Q. What is the seventh benefit of Infant Baptism?

A. It encourages under death; the knowledge of the Covenant, extended unto
Believers and their seed, has prepared young children unto Martyrdom, and
interest in the Covenant can be the only ground of hope to the Parents under
the death of their Infants, who are born the children of wrath, but by Baptism
are put into the ark of salvation; such as let go this must cheer themselves by
a dream of childrens immunity from all guilt, and so cannot be damned: Or a
Popish Limbus Infantum, or some unusual way of comfort the Scripture does not
warrant.

Q. May not these benefits redound to such as are baptized in grown years?

A. No, in no wise, for such see not the extent of the Covenant to Believers
and their seed, nor the serviceableness of Relation natural in businesses of
salvation, nor do they enjoy the same; and therefore it is our great happiness,
that we are not only Baptized, but Baptized in Infancy, under all the
advantages that either Ordinance or season can afford us.

FINIS
THE VIRTUE and VALUE OF BAPTISM, Delivered in a Summary Sermon at the close
of the Catechetical Considerations of the Doctrine of Baptism, at Botolphs
Aldgate, LONDON.
TEXT. Heb. 10. ver. 22. (the last words) -- And our bodies washed with pure
water.
THE Author of this Epistle intending a Confirmation of the Christianized Jews
in the Faith they had r^ceived, and administration of the Gospel to which ^hey
were subjected, does assert jesus Chrst to be the true Messiah, ^oth in respect
of Person, as ^e is God-Man-Mediator, and ^is Offices, as Prophet, Priest and
King, and opposes him unto all those Levitical Rites whereby he was typified,
plainly declaring that the appearance of the Substance put a period to all
those Shadowie Ceremonies whereby they had worshipped God; and necessitated
another manner of administration of Gods Covenant and Worship, fit to show that
the Messiah was come, and no longer to be expected. Which having by clear
Demonstrations confirmed in the 19 verse of this chapter, he enters upon the
Application of this Doctrine, which he manageth by,

1. Stating the principle proved, as granted and agreed on, v. 19, 20, 21.

2. Special Inference of Duty, v. 22.

In the Inference we are to note three things,

1. The Duty Inferred, Let us draw near.

2. The Dictated Qualifications of such as must draw near, and they are two,
The heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, the body washed with pure water.

3. The directed manner of drawing nigh to God, With a true heart, in the full
assurance of Faith.

I intend not a full Consideration and therefore shall not insist on a full
Comment upon the whole verse, but confine my self only to the words propounded;
and we see they are the Dictated quality of such as are required to draw nigh
to God upon the account of the High Priest, and liberty of ent^ance into the
Holy place; and therefore is to be Grammatically Read, (...), we sprinkled and
washed, let us draw near, etc. and herein there is among Expositors no
difference: but the difficulty is in the Interpretation of the words; many of
our modern Expositors differing from the Ancients in the same, the last
understanding the Sacrament of Baptism to be the qualification here spoken of;
the former, External Sanct^ty, by way of allusion unto Baptism: the
difference is not much, for if all External Sanctity be here intended, then
Baptism, and if the order of Sanctity be to be observed, that first, as it
where External Sanctity must begin, yet my judgment leads me to the
interpretation of the Ancients, and such later Expositors as follow their
steps; and so I understand by the body washed with pure water, the Person
Baptized or qualified by due subjection to the Sacrament of Baptism, and
hereunto I am guided 1. by the opposition of it, to the heart sprinkled, which
intends the real Sanctification of the whole Man; and is so interpreted in the
9 chapter 14. v. whilst the washing of the body signified External Sanctification,
always in use among the Jews, and is so used by the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.26.
Sanctified by the washing of water; as Expositors do agree. So the opposition
in this Text seems to me, to distinguish the inward grace, and outward sign in
dictating the Gospel order of access to God, to be by Baptism of water on the
body and blood, or Grace on the heart: and is the same with that in 1 Peter
3.21. Baptism that now is, saves us, not the washing of water, but the answer
of a good Conscience.

2. By the occasion, which seems to me to have been the preventing answer of
an objection, that might well be propounded by the Jews thus; You have put a
period to all holy Rites, and laid all the Administrations of the Covenant
according to Moses in the dust, and tell us positively that they which serve
the Tabernacle must not eat at your Altar, ( Heb. 13.10.) nor enjoy with you
the Privileges of Grace; we well know God is a Holy God, and will be
sanctified in such as approach unto him; and the uncircumcised in heart or in
flesh may not come nigh unto him, Ezekiel 44.9. nor enter into his Sanctuary; what
order or outward ordinance of Sanctification is then prescribed in our
approaches to God? To which the Apostle answers, in stead of Circumcision of
heart and flesh under the old, you must according to the direction of the New
Covenant and the Gospel worship, draw near to God with an heart sprinkled from
an evil Conscience, and a body washed with pure water, which will be to you a
ground of full assurance, which all the Ceremonies of the Law could not Create
unto you. So that the words seem not to me to be at all strained: but of their
own selves by a genuine Interpretation, thus to speak, that the outward sign
and inward Grace of Baptism are the only qualifications of such as will in
full assurance of Faith draw nigh to God in Gospel administrations, and the
privileges of the new Covenant; and in this sense and exposition I stand not
alone, for Aretius says expressly, Corpora Nostra debent esse abluta aqua
pura, hoc est, Baptism Christi debemus esse initiati: Our bodies washed with
pure water, that is, we ought to be initiated by the Baptism of Christ's
appointment. And Paraeus says Intelligimus nos intus sanguine and spiritu
Christi purgari, foris quod Baptismo ablui corporibus: ad Sacramentum enim
Baptismi Apostolus respicere videtur: Par. in Loc. We understand an inward
sprinkling of the Conscience with the Blood and Spirit of Christ, and an
outward washing the body by Baptism; for the Apostle looks on Baptism.

The words thus explained, do plainly present to our observation, and
consideration, this point of Doctrine.

Doctr. Baptism, or washing of the Body with pure water, is a special
qualification that fits us for confident approach to God.

In the prosecution of this Doctrine, I shall explain, confirm, and apply it
with all convenient brevity.

In the explication we are to enquire what is Baptism?

2. What it is to approach to God with confidence?

For the first, I shall not stand upon the acceptations of the word Baptism,
nor trouble you with the various senses in which it is used: but taking it in
its vulgar acceptance, as it denominates a Gospel ordinance and eminent piece
of Gods worship, you may receive of it this description.

Baptism is a Solemn and Religious application of water, by a lawful Minister
to a fit Subject; to the signifying of the Blood of Christ, and its cleansiing
property, and the Sealing of the Covenant of Grace.

In this description I will not trouble you with a logical distribution of it,
into its parts: but propound these conclusions as helpful to your
understanding of it.

Conclusion 1. Water is the outward sign and matter of Baptism; water and no
other Element; pure water without Popish mixture, or Composition with oil,
cream, spittle, or the like; for this and this only Element the Lord
appointed, and his appointment stamps on the use of it, Dignity and Authority,
and justly checks the curiosity of such as are subject to contemn the
simplicity of the Element, and advance the dignity of the Ordinance by their
own dull, but daring inventions: and yet water being an Element, cooling heat,
quenching thirst, of common use, and easy purchase, and cleansing all
filthiness; does fitly represent unto our minds the cooling and refreshing
efficacy, the plenty and easy purchase, together with the purifying property
of the Blood of Christ.

Conclus. 2. A solemn and Religious application of the water must be the form
of Baptism; That water be applied to the Subject is the essential act of
Baptism, the manner of its application, by dipping or sprinkling, is to be
guided by discretion and convenience; though we deny not dipping to have been
used in the Primitive Churches, in the hot Eastern Countries, where with safety
and convenience it might be used; and we grant (all other things concurring)
dipping to be a lawful application of the water, yet it is not essentially and
indispensably necessary, as the Anabaptists do too zealously contend: but it is
both lawful and sufficient that the water be poured or sprinkled on the
Subject which has been the allowed practice of the Church; and the word
Baptize, signifying any kind of washing, by sprinkling, pouring on, or dipping:
and the measure, or quantity of water being no more essential to Baptism then
of Bread and Wine to the Lords Supper, will allow it; and the Holy Ghost
mentions the blood of Christ as Cleansing by sprinkling 1 Pet. 1.2. by way of
allusion to this act in Baptism, as the analogy thereof: and it is more then
probable that Baptism in houses, as was that of the Jaylors, Act. 16.33. was
Administered by sprinkling or pouring on, not by dipping; and the weakness of
Children, and coldness of our climate is a just Reason for this manner of
Application; so that either of these may be used without contention.

Water what way soever, must be Solemnly and religiously applied in the holy
form, and with the holy Rites which God has appointed; for every common
washing or application is not Baptism: but water consecrated by the word of
institution and prayer; and as an act of worship to God, and argument of faith
applied in the name (that is by the appointment, and to the dedication of the
person Baptized to faith in, and holy profession) of Father Son and Holy Ghost;
is the Sacrament of Baptism; so that as the Apostle does well check the horrid
profaneness of such as deemed the common eating of bread, and drinking of wine
to be the Lords Supper, by declaring The Cup of blessing which we bless is the
Communion of the blood of Christ, and the Bread which we break is the Communion
of the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16. thereby pointing unto the solemn and
Religious Rites which must distinguish the Lords Supper from common eating and
drinking; so the Solemn and Religious Application of water distinguishes the
Sacrament of Baptism from all other common washing.

Conclus. 3. Baptism must be administered by a lawful Minister; this water may
not be applied by every or any private hand; the Lord Jesus has joined it in
Commission with teaching and discipling, so that such only that have the
Authority of the one have the Authority of the other; Baptism is on all hands
agreed on to be an act of office and Authority, and not to be given by men out
of office; it is a Seal which must be stamped (not by a childish impression:
but) with Power and Authority, to make it valid, a ground of faith, pleadable
in prayer; so that the Baptism of women and private Persons (on what pretended
necessity soever it be) is wicked and profane; nay in my judgment is void and
null, and not to be salved with a quod fieri non debuit factum valet, that
unlawful things are valid when past and done; though I cannot with the
Donatists grant that the efficacy of the Ordinance depends on the dignity of
the Administrator, yet I cannot but believe that the Authority of the
institutor is essential to every Gospel Ordinance to the Church, and must be
found in every Administrator; Ordained Ministers must give us Sacraments, I and
preach the Word too if we will not be cheated of Salvation, and content our
selves with mock Ordinances; my muddy brains could never yet conceive the God
of Order to make Office and Authority essential to political transactions in
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, and yet to leave his Church in such confusion,
that the great Affairs of Salvation shall be dispensed by every common hand;
as if his care were more for the world then the Church, which if it be, I will
never go to the House of God to behold the beauty of his Holiness, which shines
more brightly in the wide Wilderness.

Conclus. 4. Baptism must be administered unto fit subjects: all Subjects suit
not the Ordinance; Creatures insensible and irrational are incapable of the
Grace of God, and these holy Administrations thereof; the baptizing of Bells,
Churches, Fonts, etc. is a piece of Consecration, neither prescribed nor
allowed in the New Testament; but to be damned as profane and superstitious;
they must be the subjects of Life and Reason that will lie in the least
Capacity of Grace and Holiness; and such are the Sons of men.

Sons of men are Subjects capable of Grace and Holiness: but the special
dispensations thereof in the Covenant of Grace, and its Seals, calls for
special qualifications; and therefore Baptism may not be given to men as men,
and merely the sons of Adam, no, they must first be the seed of Abraham, Genesis
17.13. for the Covenant of God must be in their flesh, and by Preaching they
must be discipled into the Christian Church, and see that the Promise is to
them and to their Children before they be Baptized Act. 2.38, 39. for Baptism
must be the Seal of the Righteousness of faith, which we have being not yet
Baptized, Romans 4.11. so that the fit Subjects for Baptism must be not only
men, but Faederati, such as Covenant with God, to whom the Promise may be
judged to belong: they must be made Christians, and lay hold on the Covenant of
God, and then be Baptized; I could drive out of your common discourse an
ordinary term relating to Baptism (viz such a one is Christened) if I did not
hope you well understand it: Baptism may Christianum dicere, declare and
pronounce a man a Christian: but it does not Christianum facere, make a
Christian; if your Children be not made Christ^ans by the extent of the
Covenant to believers and their seed, bring them not to me to be Baptized; most
cursedly profane was the cruelty of the Spanish Papists in America, who with
whips and scourges drove the unchristanized untaught Indians to the Fonts to be
Baptized; for that Baptism belongs to none but Christ's disciples, and Covenant
People.

Baptism belongs to all Christ's Disciples and Gods Covenant People, so that
none of them may without sin, nay sacriledg be barred from Baptism; and these
are resolved into two ranks, and known by two names in the Church (viz)
Infidells converted to the faith, and the Infants of one or both Christian
Parents: These two are the orders into which Gods faederates have been Ranked,
ever since Gods Covenant was established, and his Church was estated in
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and their seed: as to the first of them, they are on
all hands consented to as fit and proper Subjects, only our over-pious age
has started the quaery, How and when they must be judged converted to the
faith? which I must needs resolve to be by a profession of saving faith, not
the saving Profession of faith, and possession of sincere Grace which the
Congregating Anabaptists call for; sincere grace and saving Profession must be
the souls care, and ground of joy: but cannot be the sign that shall guide
the Church in giving the Sacrament of Baptism; as soon as they professed to
believe, Philip Preaching the things of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they
were Baptized both men and women, Act. 8.12. Philip required no more of the
Eunuch in v. 37. and when I hear Peter declared Simon the Sorcerer to be after
his Baptism in the Gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, as v. 23. I
perceive they in whose company he was Baptized yielded no more; and when I
remember Annanias and Saphira, Demas, and other Baptized Persons proved
hypocrites and reprobates; I cannot believe they possessed sincere Grace, or
made a saving Profession, though they professed saving Faith; I cannot yet turn
Arminian and believe true Grace, may be finally and totally lost, and a man may
be a child of God to day, and a child of the Devil to morrow; I have not faith
enough to believe that when God made me a Minister, he made me a God, and
endowed me with the property of to searching the heart: nor have I wit enough
to conceive that God making me a Steward of his Mysteries, prescribes to my as
my guide the qualification of subjects, which lies beyond my knowledge. I
believe the gross enormities of many baptized Saints (as they call themselves)
has convinced them, that true Grace is not within their sight, but they may
and have baptized hypocrites: why then do they call for that qualification God
has not directed and they can not discern? God has made the tongue the
trumpet of the heart, and I can better hope men will not play the hypocrite and
make that utter an uncertain sound, then I can know the sincerity of their
Grace.

Though Infidels converted to the Faith be generally resolved within the
Covenant, yet since the days of Balthazar Pacimontanus, (who pretending to
have derived his fancy from Luther, constrained Luther to write against him in
the year of our Lord, 1527.) The Right of Infants to the Covenant of God, and
consequently their capacity for Baptism has been called in question, and of
late years has met with most high and violent (though irrational and
unscripturall opposition) wherein I cannot but admire at the erroneous industry
of the Antipaedobaptists, to curtail Gods Covenant, cut off their seed from the
privileges of Grace, and cast away their own reasons, blinding their eyes
against plain demonstrations of Scripture, and the Ancient enjoyments of the
Church; wherein we must see better warrant before we strike hands with them,
and be of their uncharitable belief; for if I know any thing of the method of
Gods Covenant, or in the least how to Reason from Scriptures, It is as clear
as the Sun that the Infants of believing Parents, Gods Covenant People, whilst
Infants, and as their natural seed are Gods faederates, and within his
Covenant, and so fit Subjects of Baptism.

In political and all civil transactions of men, we find all the world over
that Covenants made from or to parents, do usually include children as their
children, so that by that very relation, without any new formal contract, they
claim Privileges, and stand bound to duty; and when I consider Gods way of
dealing to be according to man's capacity and humane method, I have no ground on
which to imagine that he has inverted the order, and cut off Relation in the
conveighing of the privileges of Grace, and constituting a peculiar People to
himself; for Gods special dispensations do ordinarily run in the same
Channel, though not with the same Latitude that his General Providence do:
and then when God after the manner of men assumes to himself a Kingdom,
without doubt he confers Honors on and looks for Loyalty from his subjects,
and their seed or offspring, who as their seed are born heirs of such Honor
and duty.

Further in all the transactions of God with man ever since he had a being, the
Covenant has extended to his seed, as his seed, without any personal
qualification, all that know any thing of Gods dealing with Adam, know the
Covenant of works was made to him for himself, and his seed as they were his
natural seed, he received privileges for himself and them, and so he lost
them, and by one man's disobedience we were all made sinners; if this were Gods
method in the Covenant of works, we must have good reasons to make us believe
it is altered in the extent and Administration of the Covenant of Grace: but
not to stand on General equity and demonstrations, the Scripture does by plain
and clear instances in both Old and New Testament evidence the children of men
under the Covenant of Grace, to be also in Covenant as they are their natural
issue; There is nothing plainer in Scripture then that when the Covenant of
Grace was established in Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, it was extended to their
natural seed; their children, as their children even in infancy, and before
they attained to any Personal qualifications were in Covenant, and the
children of God; This is expressed in the very form of the Covenant, Genesis 17.7.
I will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee: This is evidenced by
Circumcision, the Seal of the Covenant set in their flesh on this very ground,
and that at eight days old, whilst infants, unable to any personal acts of
Abraham's faith, and it must needs be most gross ignorance to say that
Circumsion Sealed to the natural issue of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob the land of
Canaan and Promise thereof, but not the Covenant of Grace, whilst the matter
sealed, and very ground on which every man child must be Circumcised, is
expressly declared to be, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed: whilst
the Holy Ghost tells us Circumcision was the seal of the Righteousness of
faith, which is the Covenant of Grace, Romans 4.11. and Circumcision was set on
the flesh of the Profelyted Gentiles, who never claimed nor possessed by the
virtue thereof, any portion of Canaan the land of Promise; so that if this were
the only matter Sealed by Circumcision, it did to them. Seal a blank, and
they had by it no benefit; again, God does lay an eminent claim to the
natural issue of the Jews, in their very Apostasies from him, when he calls
them out of Egypt, he does it with an especial claim, let my People go, Exodus
5.1. when he charge them with duty, he enforces it with relation, ye are the
children of the Lord your God, Deuteronomy. 14.1. when he chides their abominable
Idolatry, he aggravates it by the sacriledg, owning his own title, Thou have
taken thy sons and thy daughters which thou have born unto me, and sacrificed,
etc. Thou have slain my Children, and delivered them to cause them to pass
through the fire; for them in Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. When he chastises them, he
comes to them as a Father, Ye children of Israel you only have I known as
mine, therefore I will visit you for your iniquities, Amos. 3.1, 2. and when he
comes to deliver them from afflictions, their sins provoke to continue; the
Covenant made with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob is the only cogent reason
thereunto; this is pleaded as the prevalent argument and ground of faith in
prayer, Exodus 32.14. Isa. 64.9. And affectionately resented by the Lord, Levit.
26.42. Ezekiel 16.59, 60. I might deal with thee as thou have done when thou
did despise the Oath in breaking the Covenant, nevertheless I will
rememember my Covenant made with thee in the days of thy youth: when I
consider this carriadge of God toward Israel according to the flesh, I cannot
without blasphemy but think God to be more just then to lay such a special
claim under the series of his dispensation toward Israel, if by his Covenant
with their Fathers he had not a clear and unquestionable title to the
posterity: and it is to me a most senseless and dull evasion, to say that
Israel were Gods People by right of Creation as wool, and hemp, and flax are
his, whilst he himself tells us, he had chosen them to be a precious People
unto himself, above all people that are upon the earth, Deuteronomy. 14.2. and you
only have I known above all the families of the earth. Amos 3.2. Where does
God say of any Nation they are my people Israel excepted, and is not the
transmission of the Covenant to the Gentiles, that which makes them who were
not a People, to be the People of the living God? and unto this it may further
be added that our Savior in the very rejection of the Jews, when he declares
them to be of their father the devil denies them not to be the children of
Abraham (John 8) nay, declares them to be Children in the Right to the Grace
he brought into the world, in comparison of whom the Gentiles are called dogs,
Mat. 15.26. Nay, and ownes them as children of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
8.11. And St. Paul lamenting the rejection of his Kinsfolk, aggravates their
present miseries by their past mercies, reckoning up their privileges
Adoption, Glory, Covenants, Oracles, the giving of the Law, the Service of God,
the Promises, the Fathers, and the coming of Christ concerning the flesh, (but
not a word of Canaan, the great dreamed of Privilege in Anabaptist view) and
determines these belonged not to Israel heirs of Abraham's faith, but to Israel
his kinsfolk according to the flesh, even the natural issue of Abraham Isaac
and Jacob.

By all this, and much more that has been said by others, and might be by me,
it is more then manifest, that during the dispensations of the Covenant under
the Law, and to the Jews the children of Gods Covenant People, even as their
children and without personal acts of faith were in Covenant with God, and
subjects capable of the initiating Seal thereof; and me thinks under the
Gospel if (as undoubtedly it is) the Covenant be substantially the same,
though ministerially different: men should have more reason then to release
such a privilege without a very plain and clear reversall in the New
Testament, and limitation of the Covenant to adult and actual believers, which
my dim sight could never yet read, nor dull brain conceive: and more justice
to themselves and Postesterity then, if it be at their choice, to change a
Fee-farm to themselves and heirs for ever, for a Lease for a term of life,
and mere personal title; sure I am my little honesty would act me with such
foolish self love: more regard to the rejected Jew, who are yet the beloved of
God according to Election for the Fathers sake, Romans 11.28. And in hope to be
Re-implanted into the Olive from which they were cut off; can we with any
confidence court them to a new Covenant with straiter terms? shall we not
earnestly emulate and highly provoke them to receive the Gospel, by bidding
them to their loss? will not ingenuity engage them thus to retort? why you
persuade me to turn Christian? as I am a Jew I beget Children to the Lord, and
bring forth an Holy seed; the Privileges of the Covenant is entailed on me,
and on my Natural issue, and therefore the Covenant of God is set on the flesh
of my child as soon as born; whereas if I turn Christian, I bring forth
children of wrath, and beget children to the God of the world. I have indeed a
Personal right to the Covenant, and am provided for during my own life, but my
children are turned into the wide world, to sink or swim, and shift for
themselves, without any special Divine Protection; is not a poor pittance with
perpetuity better then more large enjoyments with so short a tenure? never tell
me of a better Testament on such tickle terms: O the hopes the hopes of
England to convert the late inlet Jews their new inhabitants! by such narrow
and Honorable treaty, and tenders of Grace and Salvation.

Lastly, Me thinks men calling themselves Saints should have more Religion then
to restrain the Grace God has extended to themselves and feed; and curtaile
the Covenant that by the New Testament is conferred on the Believer and his
issue natural, even as his child in infancy, and before he acts any Personal
faith: when I consider little infants sucking the breasts, and brought in arms,
not able to go, received by our Lord Jesus Christ by him blessed and pronouneed
with others of the like kind to be of the Kingdom of Heaven, and propounded
not only as examples of meekness and humility, but as objects of charity and
observation, not to be off^nded, but awfully received because Christ's name is
placed on them, and they are made his disciples, so as that the receiving such
a little child must be deemed the receiving of Christ; and the offending one of
these little ones, a dolor more dangerous then a millstone hanged about his neck
and being cast into the Sea; Matthew. 18.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Mark. 10.14. Luke 18.16.
And when I consider the Apostles position of the latitude of Sanctity, not
only to the Jews the natural branches, but the Christianized Gentiles
accidental branches, wild by nature, but ingrafted in, and partaking of the
fatness of the Olive, plainly affirming of both, if the first fruits were holy
so is the whole lump, if the root be holy so is the branches, Romans 11.16. And I
here by the way observe that from these privileges the natural branches were,
and accidentally may be cut off.

Lastly, When I consider the Apostles clear and serious resolve to the case of
Conscience propounded by the Corinthians concerning their children born of an
Infidel (not adulterous parent) else were your children unclean, but now are
they holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. The Anabaptist will not let us understand in this place
Real holiness, nor do we desire it; and until that they have made it to appear
that Faith is essential to Marriage (which will put marriage in a good tendency
to a Sacrament, and please the Church of Rome) it is too ridiculous to
understand a natural holiness, I mean Legititimacie and acquittance from the
blot of Bastardie, and then I am constrained to understand a Foederal holiness
in the extent of the Covenant and esteem of the Church. These things, I say,
considered, I must pluck up my reason by the very root if I do not by
undeniable consequence constrain my conscience to believe and preach this
point of Doctrine, (viz) In New Testament times under the Gospel-administration
of the Covenant of Grace, the natural issue, or infants of believing parents
are in covenant with God, and under the promises of salvation. And when I look
upon Peter's encouragement to the converting Jews to believe and be baptized,
for the promise is to you and to your children, even to all that are a far off,
as many as the Lord our God shall call, Act 2.38, 39.

I must renounce my Grammar and little skill in reading plain English, with the
least of understanding, if I do not read, Believing Jews and their children,
and also believing Gentiles and their children, have that interest in the
Promise that may be to them a Ground of Faith, and confer on them a Right to
Baptism. And the Anabaptist gloss that the promise was of extraordinary gifts
of the Holy Gh^st (for these are not extended to all that are a far off when
God does call them, nor created they any right to Baptism, for many time they
follow this Sacrament) or that children, when called to the faith of the
Parent, should have the right to the Promise (for that is to them as called,
nor as children. And my mind is very foggie, I am much out if this term of
Relation do not dictate a Privilege and Propriety by virtue of relation which
children of such parents as children should enjoy, above what children of other
parents did or could enjoy) is too short a Fescue to make me read otherwise.

Thus then it does fully and plainly appear, that under Old and New Testament
administrations of the Covenant of Grace, the infants of believing parents are
Foederati within the Covenant, and so fit and proper subjects of baptism to be
baptized. Nor is their incapacity of making a vocal profession of Faith any bar
to their baptism, for profession simply creates no right to baptism, I never
read the divil was baptized, and I believe the Dipping Saints will not now
baptize him; Yet he really believed, and more then once professed, That Jesus
Christ was the Son of God. Profession as an evidence of Covenant Interest, was
the Churches guide to baptism, and the Scripture giving another demonstration
of Covenant Interest, viz Descent from believing parents; that is also
regarded, and the one to be no bar to the other, but both in their place gives
due direction who are foederates, and to be baptized.

Nor is the Argument of any more force because the Scripture mentions vocal
profession and baptism upon it, but passes the other in silence; for
occasional and circumstantial actions are no binding precedents, or universal
direction to the Church of God. The Church is founded in grown persons, whose
Covenant Interest can be known no otherwise but by vocal profession, but it may
be edified by infant Branches, who by a course of nature partake of the
fatness of the Olive, having the birthright of the Covenant. Thus it was with
Abraham and his issue, and so with us. 2. Where the general nature of the
Covenant, with a long and particular exercise thereof does dictate, there needs
no particular expl^cite directions. God in his wisdom designing our right
understanding and rational improvement of the Covenant, and our reverend esteem
of the old Testament, in its use and necessity to the Christian Church,
representing unto us the order of the administration of the Covenant and
Circumcision, refers us thither for direction concerning baptism; and we must
needs in reason see that the change of a mere Rite or Ceremony under the
continuation of the substance and same Covenant will never admit a change of
the subjects to be sealed.

Last of all, Infants inability to action is no bar to their baptism, because
it voids not their interest in the Covenant: and the Sacrament is such wherein
they are to be merely Passive. When I observe God to have appointed the
initiating Seal of initiating grace to be such where men of the greatest
activity are altogether Passive; he seems to me to suggest these shall not act
in their admission into the Church, and receiving of my Covenant; that
inability to action may be no bar or hindrance to such as have no less
interest in the Covenant; and only Covenant Interest shall make capable of the
Seal.

Let not any Antipaedobaptist think to amaze us by crying, Why, Sir, on this
ground infants may have a right to the Lords Supper, for we say so too; they
have jus ad rem, though not jus in re, their right is not denied, though
present incapacity hinders their enjoyment.

These things considered, we must tell the Anabaptist, That infants right to
the Covenant, and enjoyment of the initiating Seal, having been continued
throughout the old world under the Law without the least control, and also
under the Gospel for more then 1600 years, without any General interruption
or the least disturbance, until within this 200 years; we must find better
warrant to divest us of it, before we part with it; and our antiquity (on so
clear a title) in the enjoyment, me thinks should be no mean argument to
ingenuity; for we say in this case as Jephthah to the King of Ammon, Judges
11.26. When Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns, in Aroer and her towns, and
in all the Cities of Arnon, three hundred years why did ye not then recover
them in that space? so whilst infant right to the Covenant, and initiating
Seal dwelt in Judea and her towns, in Asia and her towns, and in all the
Cities of the Church of God, and the borders thereof 2000 years, why did you
not recover them in that space? surely now you may despair of ever doing it;
how much soever you disturb our peace, we will never part with this privilege.

Conclus. 5. The signifying of the blood of Christ with its effects, and the
sealing of the Covenant of Grace is the end of Baptism; Baptism is both a
sign and Seal to excite our thoughts, and affect our mind with the blood of
Jesus, and assure our hearts of a right unto the Privileges of the Covenant,
so as to argue them to our soul as grounds of faith on which we are to urge
God in Prayer: herein it agrees with other Sacraments, and in special
circumcision, into whose place and end it has succeeded, in that it is a sign
and Seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. And so the analogy between
water in all its properties, and the blood of Christ does clearly hold, and the
Scripture does plainly attribute Remission, Sanctification Regeneration and
Salvation to the outward sign or act of Baptism, as the Graces to be brought
to our minds, and made sure to our Souls thereby; Mark 16.16. Acts 2.38. Ephesians.
5.26. Titus 3.3. 1 Pet. 3.21. And it is not only a Seal from God to us as a
ground of faith: but also from us to God as a reason of duty; our subjection to
it is an actual confaederation with God, that we will be called by his Name,
live as his servants in all obedience to his will; so that hereby we are bound
to believe in Christ, and forsake, nay fight against sin, this the Apostle
dictates when he demands of the Corinthians, directing them to joint
advancement of Christ, into whose name were ye Baptized? 1 Cor. 1.13. And Peter
aggravates the Apostasy of Christians, nay non-proficiency in Grace with this,
They have forgot they were washed from their old sins, 2 Pet. 1.9. Baptism
will be a monument of perfidy against profane Christians to all Eternity, and
aggravate their misery: so that although Baptism do not conveigh Grace opere
operato, by the mere work, or by any Physical natural power that is in it
self, yet it is a moral instrument by contemplation to be rationally improved
to the affecting of our hearts with our own uncleanness and the blood of Christ
Gods mercy to us, and our duty to him: nor is it nudum signum a mere sign to
excite our thoughts, but also a Real Seal, Gods holy Ordinance, Creating to
all Baptized a Right to the Covenant, by rational acts of faith to be argued,
to their own joy and duty, and pleaded to God in Prayer; so that these
privileges being not possessed by all Baptized, springs not from any defects
in the Ordinance, but neglect in the subjects: if men will not claim by a
conferred title and visible Seal, they deservedly lose their interest.

Here note that I have not wit enough to conceive that the end of the Sacrament
makes against infant Baptism, for infants are capable of Right though not of
claim and possession, and Baptism is given as a ground, not effect of
Christian claim; I see noe reason why infants may not be Sealed in the cradle
as well as Crowned in the mothers belly; nor is there any force in the
confaederation of the Baptized unless it must needs be actively and cannot be
passively done; I conceive parentall power in dedication to God, and the
Sovereign nature of the Covenant imposing on the party Sealed, the condition to
be by him performed as well as sealing the comforts to be enjoyed, does fully
enforce the confaederation of such as are at the present non-agents; It will be
a hard matter to make me believe that Gods condescension has lost his
authority any more in the Covenant of Grace then in the Covennat of Works; or
that infants are not as capable of confaederation by Baptism, as they were by
Circumcision.

I have done with the first thing to show you what Bapti^me is, and now come to
the second to show what is here meant by confident approach:

Approach to God is the act of a Baptized soul, and it is done either by the
perception of faith which is the evidence of things not seen, and substance of
things hoped for: Heb. 11.1. This is that personal and private act of the
soul whereby it sees and saluteth God at a distance with sighs and groans
which cannot be uttered, and receives an assent unto truth apprehended, which
is or cannot be expressed, and hereby we deny not the Baptized, in
extraordinary causes where the body cannot be washed by pure water; as in an
Indian Country remote from the Church, or in the Church under a limited order
and season of Baptising, as it was in some Churches in primitive times, when
they Baptized but twice in a year, may draw nigh to God; no doubt but the
Catechumeni, such as learned their Catechism in order unto Baptism, had sweet
communion with God alone whilst they wanted Communion with the Church,
otherwise they had never been able to endure Martyrdom.

Or by the possession of Glory, when the Soul departing out of the body
returns to God who gave it, and is received into Abraham's bosom, or eternal
bliss in the presence of God for ever; and this I deny not may be, and doubt
not is enjoyed by many unbaptised; I can neither with some Anabaptists grant
that all that dye in infancy, and before stained with actual guilt are
certainly saved; I see no warrant for it: nor yet with the Papists do I think
all that die unbaptized are damned; I believe Baptism is necessary by reason
of Gods command, and as the ordinary Ark or means of Salvation, and so the
sinful contempt or neglect of it to be damnable (though I will not determine
God will charge it on the helpelesse infant) yet I see not its necessity to be
so absolute that providence superceding the Ordinance by unseasonable death
sets the soul under inevitable condemnation; I have confidence to meet many an
uncircumcised Israelite in Heaven, who died before the eighth day of his age;
and if in any, in this case God will have mercy and not Sacrifice.

Or by the presentation of duty: and performance of public devoire in the
Tabernacle of the Lord, going up with his Scribes, worshipping in his Sanctuary,
and in the Assemblies of his People in all the parts of Gods Worship; this is
an appearing before God in Zion, and a drawing nigh unto him in his Holy place,
not to be admitted to the uncircumcised among the Jews, nor unbaptized among
Christians; this unto me seems to be the drawing nigh intended in the Text, and
is that I intend in the Doctrine (viz) That the Leviticall Rites being
abolished, and the way of access to God is now by Gospel Ordinances: they that
will use them must begin at Baptism, and first have their bodies washed with
pure Water, and be thereby made members of the body or Church of Christ, and be
consecrated unto God; without which such as have the charge of Gods Holy things
must keep them from intermedling with them.

Confidence is the adjunct quality of this act of approach to God, and stands
opposite un^o the tremblings and despondency of the uncircumcised Gentiles who
could expect no other but rejection and displeasure in their approach to God;
for that they were aliens and strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, without
God and without hope in the world, Ephesians. 2.11, 12. Positively forbidden approach
to God and the use of his Holy thing, Ezekiel. 44.9. And to the terrors of the
circumcised Jews, who though admitted into Gods presence, were yet kept at a
distance, and might not enter the Holy of Holies in their own Persons: but by
their High Priest, but now such was the privileges of Believers, and the
advantage of Baptism, that the Baptized might not only enter the sanctuary
whence the uncircumcised were excluded, but also the Holy of Holies, not made
with hands, but eternal in the Heavens: so that they who by Baptism have their
body washed in the outward sign, and their hearts sprinkled from an evil
Conscience, the inward Grace of this Ordinance, are required to shake off all
fears and doubts, and to encourage themselves to the enjoyment of all
Ordinances, and discharges of all duties whereby they may walk with God and
hold communion with him: for that they are the persons so qualified as that the
Church must not only admit them to outward acts of Worship, but also a liberty
of inward adoration (by the nearest approach they can possibly make to God) is
their privilege to them is given full assurance of ready acceptance, for the
way is open to, the Holiest, the Vale is rent, the High Priest gone before, and
the liberty left Common to all such (though none but such) as having their
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and their bodies washed with pure
water do draw nigh to the same; both these are necessary qualifications: for,
an approach to God without an heart sprinkled must needs be diffident, and full
of doubts, and without a body washed, dreadful and full of horror.

The Text and doctrine you have had explained, and you see the point of
doctrine plainly asserting, That Baptism or the body washed with pure water
is the especial qualification that must fit us for an approach to God.

The next thing to be done is to prove the doctrine, and it is in it self a
truth so plain that none that understand any thing of the method of Gospel
worship, and the necessity of outward acts and body qualifications in
approaches to an holy God, but do subscribe unto the truth of it; indeed the
late spiritual Chemists who have by our late overlarge liberty of conscience,
(I mean sinful toleration,) had the boldness to blaspheme all Gods holy
Ordinances, and under a pretense of spirituality, to nullify all outward acts
of worship and qualifications to duty, have denied it: and the late Intruder
into this place, has openly decried the necessity of this qualification in
access to God, offering the liberty of Church Communion and the privileges of
the Covenant to such as never passed under water Baptism, as if the order of
the Gospel were now inverted; and Gods Ordinances not capable of profanation,
or the answer of a good conscience, real grace, were obvious to every eye that
has the charge of holy things, and is a Steward of the Mysteries of Salvation;
I shall therefore briefly enforce this plain and Generally acknowledged truth
with these commonly known observations as, the reasons thereof.

Reas. 1. Baptism prepared the way of the Messiah, or Christ his appearance in
and approach to the Church: the qualification that fits the Church for Christ
his approah to her, fits the Church for approach to Christ or God; for these
are reciprocal, the one goes not without a return of the other, and the same
qualification must be in both; for that holy Majesty is present, Holiness is
in the Assembly of the Saints, when God comes to his people as well as in
Heaven where his People come to him: and all that will walk in this consuming
fire and meet this Messiah, and be made fit to enjoy him, must not only have
the heart sprinkled but also the body washed with pure water; Baptism is the
Sanctification of the People, directed to prepare them for Gods appearence in
Mount Sion: the voice of the Grand Herald crying in the wilderness prepare ye
the way of the Lord, make his paths strait, Mat. 3. Repent and be Baptized: The
Mace of Majesty borne by the Messenger of the Messiah to strike awe in, and
require subjection from the expectants of his coming, was, the Baptism of
amendment of life: The levelling Engine that pulled down and made plain all
mountainy and proud hearts that withstood the coming of Christ in his first
appearance, was Baptism, insomuch that the Scribes and Pharisees who rejected
the counsel of God against themselves not being Baptized, are all along
branded as enemies, who would not have Christ reign over them: in a word, the
promised and prophesied Elias, who was to come before the Lord to prepare his
way, is from his preparative work (which is plainly declared to have been
Preaching and Baptizing) denominated John the Baptist, and the way of the Lord
thus prepared is proclaimed as a ground of Confidence to the Church; Isa.
40.3.9.11. So that if the way of the Messiah his appearance must be the way of
the Churches approach to him: as it is evident it must in that Baptism, did
not only precede, but also follows his appearance, for John the Baptist did
not only prepare for his coming, but ever since his ascension his Ministers do
go teach and Baptize into the name of Father, Son and Holy Ghost; Baptism
has ever been the Discipling form, method of matriculation in his School,
and incorporation into his body, and solemn consecration unto communion with
him of all such as were afar off, but are now made nigh, even the people of
the living God; their Baptism is the qualification that fits for a confident
approach to God, without which we cannot be assured of acceptance.

Reas. 2. Baptism prepared Jesus Christ unto the work of Mediatorship: The way
of access to God is the same for the people as Priest; for the Head as Members;
for the Church as for Christ: the Mediator as Man must manifest himself Holy
in all things; not only in an immunity from all positive acts of sin, but also
a positive performance of all duty, he becomes in all things obedient unto the
Father; lives in Communion with the Church, and is conform to all holy
Ordinances; proclaiming himself a Member of the Church before he propose
himself a Mediator for or to the Church; he is Baptized because it thus became
him to fulfill all Righteousness, by his subjection to Ordinances, and thereby
suiting himself for his work: he does not only show but sanctify them to be
the way of access to the Father; for he as our High Priest has left open the
same way of approach, and as the Captain has marched in the same steps of
salvation in which we are to follow him, and we shall find him Baptized, and so
immediately entering on the exercise of his Mediatorship: when (and not till
then) he was Baptized, he is solemnly inaugurated into his office, coming out
of the water the Spirit came visibly on him, and the voice was heard, This is
my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him. We never read of his
praying preaching and combat with the Devil till he was Baptized, and no
sooner was he Baptized, but, as consecrated to God, he Prayed, Luke 3.21. as
confirmed to the Combat, he was led immediately into the wilderness to be
tempted. Mar. 1 12. And as one now completely fitted to transact the business
of man's salvation, he preached the Kingdom of God, Mat. 4. By all which the
Mediator does plainly dictate, That acts of holiness must move in order,
beginning at Baptism: and that Baptism does fit men to prayer, for temptation
and all public acts of Religion; and if any will in confidence of acceptance
follow the Mediator, they must have their body first washed with pure water,
and be by Baptism thereunto prepared.

Reas. 3. Circumcision was the qualification of confident aproach to God under
the old Covenant: And therefore Baptism having succeeded into the place,
standing in the stead, and serving to the end for which Circumcision served,
must be so under the new Covenant. The administration of the Covenant may be
altered, but the Covenant it self abides substancially, the same to the Church
of God both in the Old and New Testament. Sacraments are permanent and
inseparable adjuncts to the Covenant as grounds of Faith: and however the
different administration may cause a change in the Rite and outward Ceremony,
in the matter applied, or form of application, yet is there no change in their
use and signification: but what was of old signified by the Seals of the
Covenant, the same is now signified by such as have succeeded into their place;
thus the Lords Supper supplyeth the room of the Passover, and Baptism the room
of Circumcision; so that whatever Circumcision did confer on its subjects, the
same privileges are by Baptism conferred on its subjects. And Circumcision was
to the Jews the door of admission into the Church, the Ceremony of Consecration
to such as approach to the Lord: and the Character of distinction on the people
of the living God, and so the qualification that was unto them the ground of
confidence in approach to God; hence Circumcision and Uncircumcision are the
distinguishing terms between the Jews (the only people related unto God) and
the Gentiles (that were afar off, without God, and without hope in the world,
Romans 2.26. Ephesians. 2.11, 12.) and the approach of the uncircumcised unto the
Sanctuary of God, is declared to be a polluting and profaning of Gods
Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 44 7, 9. therefore such are forbidden the least approach to
God; they may not enter the Sanctuary nor observe the Lords Passover, Exodus
12.48. Nay, the uncircumcised must be cut off from the Lord people, Genesis 17.14.
And if a stranger will come nigh to God and have a place in his Sanctuary, he
must first lay hold on the Covenant of God and be Circumcised; so that by
Circumcision Jews were acknowledged and Gentiles proselyted members of the
Church, entitled to the Covenant, and entrusted with the liberty of access to
God in his Sanctuary.

That Baptism is the Ordidinance under the New Testament answering unto
Circumcision in the Old, can any that observe the order of Gospel, the
cessation of Circumcision, the regular succession of Baptism into its place,
believe some initial Seal essential to Gospel administration, and see none
established if Baptism be excluded? and find Baptism in all things fully
significant of what was signified by Circumcision, deny that Baptism is
succeeded into the room, serves to the end that Circumcision did; and so
confers the same privilege of confidence, and is Essentially necessary to such
as approach to God in acts of worship. Unto such I would in short say, D^d
Circumcision incorporate into the Church? are we not all Baptized into one
Body, 1 Cor. 12.13? did Circumcision put the name of God on any? do not as many
as are Baptized put on Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.27? Was Circumcision a sign of
Regeneration, called the Circumcision of the heart? Are not the Baptized buried
with Christ in baptism? Does not the Apostle in this very respect note the
agreement of these two distinct, but not different Seals, Col. 2.11, 12? Did
not Circumcision seal the Covenant of Grace, I will be your God? is it not
therefore called the Seal of the righteousness by Faith, Rom 4 11? Is not the
propriety to the promise of Grace, Remission and Salvation the very ground
entituling and encouraging to Baptism as the Seal thereof, Act. 2.38, 39? And
is not this agreement sufficient to demonstrate, that Baptism is now what
Circumcision was of old to the Church? What if in some things these two Seals
do differ, is the difference so essential as to deny the succession of the one
to the other? It is true, the one was by blood, the other by water; the one is
to male and femal, both sexes, the other to males only; the one limited to the
eighth day, the other left at liberty: but do these or the like hinder either
the one or other from being ordinances of Incorporation to the Church,
Consecration to God, or Confirmation to our confidence in drawing nigh to God?
Will not the differences be found as many and great between the Passover and
the Lords Supper, yet the succession of the one to the other will not be
denied? Circumstantial differences do show they are not the same in substance
and matter, but they must be essential disagreements that shall deny a
succession unto the same use and end. And if Baptism be not the Ordinance that
supplyeth the room of Circumcision, what does? How is it called? when and where
was it instit^ted? and who were ever consecrated by it so as to have the
boldness of access to God? Or is the Church defective under the New Testament
as to an initiating Seal, so that the holy things of God lie common, no visible
badge of holiness is now to describe them that may with freedom use them.

Most rude and ridiculous is that objected bar to this succession that some
Antipaedo baptists have urged and talked of among you, viz. Circumcision was a
National privilege, and only sealed the promise of Canaan to the children of
Israel. If so, how then came it to be used before Israel was a Nation? and how
came it to be used after the land was possessed and the promise accomplished?
Why does Moses mention the Covenant of Grace, I will be your God, as the ground
and reason of Circumcision? To what does the Circumcision of heart so
frequently mentioned in Scripture allude? it is often joined with the
Circumcision of flesh; What was the benefit of Circumcision to the proselyted
Gentiles? We never read that by the virtue of it they demanded, or the Jews
divided to them any portion of the Land of Canaan. And it will be an hard
matter to make me believe it did to them Seal a Blank, for that I find it in
Scripture called, A laying hold on the Covenant of God; and the Uncircumcision
are declared strangers to the Covenant, and without God, and without hope in
the world. Why does the Apostle define Circumcision to be the Seal of the
righteousness of Faith? I find this phrase to denominate the Covenant of Grace
and its Spiritual privileges; but that it ever denominated Canaan, or any
National privileges, I am yet to be informed. And the limitation of it unto
the personal faith of Abraham is so inconsistent to the scope of the Text,
absurd in it self, and smells so much of Popish Bellarmine, that I cannot but
avoid (I had almost said abhor) it. But lastly, I would Quaery whether the
adversaries of Circumcision sealing the Covenant of Grace, did ever yet observe
adjuncts separable from a Covenant to bear the name of a Covenant? or did ever
yet discern that the Land of Canaan was an appendant on the Covenant, but not
of the essence of the Covenant, which if they well study, I doubt not but they
will correct their ignorance and the errors thence arising, and so with us
conclude, That Circumcision sealed Spiritual privileges to the Jews as Baptism
does to Christians; and Baptism succeeding to its use and ends, must have the
same subjects, and is now the special ground of confident approach to God.

Reas. 4. The nature and order of Baptism does dispose unto a confident
approach to God: Baptism is a Seal and the first Seal to the Covenant of Grace
and Salvation, and so is a ground of Faith, and an encouragement in access to
God. But in the Nature of Baptism three things do dispose unto confidence in
approach to the Lord:

1. It is an Ordinance of Conjunction to the Church.

2. Consecration to God.

3. Confoederation with God. And every one of these are Reasons of boldness in
Access and assurance of Acceptance.

1. Baptism is an Ordinance of coojuuction to the Church. The Church is Christ's
Body, and every individual Christian is the members thereof, united by Baptism
as by Nerves and Sinews: None but the Church may come nigh unto God, in Zion
every one must appear before God: Christ is only conversant with his Spouse, if
the Gentiles will draw nigh to the God of Jacob, they must join themselves to
Israel the people of the Lord: and all believers that will come nigh to God,
must be added to the Church; all the promises of God are made to the Church;
and all the administrations of the Covenant are in and to the Church; Ex
Ecclesia nulla Salus, out of the Church no Salvation. They that will come nigh
to God as his children, must be the daughters of Sion, of the household of
Faith, and Commonwealth of Israel. To be cast out of the Church, is to be
debarred all privileges of grace, and delivered over to Satan: for that
relation to the Church is the only reason of every individual believers claim
of promises and privileges, and ground of confidence in all worship unto God;
and this relation is conferred by Baptism, 1 Cor. 12.13. We are all Baptized
into one Body, whether we be Jews or Greeks, bond or free. Baptism is the only
badg of distinction to the Lords people; the very door of admission into the
household of Faith; the very method of matriculation to Christ, his Disciples;
and manner of adding to the Church such as shall be saved, Act. 2.41. In a
word, Baptism is the band of union to all Gods servants, binding them to a
constant adherencie to his Name, and joint attendance on his Worship, and is
the bar of division from all others that are yet strangers to the Covenant; so
as that until baptized they may not communicate of the holy things of God with
the Church, nor come nigh with them to the Lord. In the Primitive times of the
Church the Catechumenists, who were preparing for Baptism, not having been yet
Baptized, were sent from Church Communion and holy privileges with the profane
and paenitentiaries by the cry of Sacra Sacris, holy things for holy men: but
when by Baptism they were incorporated into the Church then they continued in
prayer, breaking of bread and every act of Worship to God with confidence: so
that till the Church appear our mother we see no warrant to call God Father,
his children are no vagrants in the high way and hedges, and when begotten by
uncorruptible seed of the Word were by Baptism, placed in the lap, and laid to
the breasts of the Church, then as her children we claim all the Privileges of
the Covenant and come to the throne of Grace with confidence; nor may any
without a forfeiture of Baptism be judicially exacted by the Church deny our
relation and liberty of access to God; I never yet could conceive any
warrantable reason to deny the liberty of access to the Lords table to such
Baptized souls whose horrid profaneness and obstinate spirits did not make
them obnoxious to the censures of the Church in order to their excommunications
and dismembring from the body, and certainly Circumcision did not more firmly
incorporate unto the Church under the Law, and confer a liberty of approach
unto the Sanctuary, then Baptism does under the Gospel.

2. Baptism is an Ordinance of Consecration unto God, God is a God of Holiness
and will be sanctified in such as come unto him; none may appear before him in
their profaneness; the Mass of Mankind is so profaned with sin that men in
common may not appear before God, such as shall adore him must be adorned for
him, and if they will hold communion with him they must be consecrated to him;
God never comes nigh to Israel but he first calls to have the people
Sanctified, nor comes the Messiah before his Messenger had prepared his way;
Israel the only Nation that holds communion with and comes to God are called
an holy Nation because con^ecrated by Circumcision; hence Circumcision is the
term and title of a Sanctified people, but uncircumcision the title and term
that denominates the prophanations that might not come nigh to God: It is Gods
command that such as were not first sanctified by Circumcision must not touch
the Passover, and it is given in charge to the keepers of the Sanctuary that
the uncircumcised enter not into it to pollute it; unhallowed things much less
unhallowed persons, might not come nigh to God under the Law; the holiness of
God is the same under the Gospel, and therefore such as will come nigh unto
him most be consecrated, for he will have acceptable Sacrifice to be offered by
a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation; 1 Pet. 2.5.9. Men
must be brought out of the high ways and hedges and in his house be clothed
with a wedding garment, that with any confidence willex pect a welcome to his
wedding Super, Mat. 22. And the only Ordinance of Consecration to God is
Baptism: This is the badg of distinction and bar of division between the holy
and profane; if the Lord Jesus will present his Church to God he Sanctifies
it by the washing of water through the Word. Ephesians. 5.26. And if ever we will
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven we must be born of the water and spirit: by
Baptism we are purified from the corruptions that are in the world through
lust, and solemnly dedicated unto the name of Father Son and Holy Ghost, hereby
we are separated from the world and added to the Church; and the Baptized
continue together in the Apostles doctrine in prayer and breaking of bread, and
all acts of worship, so that being thus consecrated, called out of the mass of
mankind and constituted a peculiar and holy people to the Lord: Let us draw
nigh in full assurance having our bodies washed with pure water.

3. Baptism is an Ordinance of Confaederation with God; two cannot walk
together except they be agreed; God is a consuming fire to man if he condescend
not a Covenant, as a shreene to prevent its scorching heat; I will be your God
and ye shall be my people is the only argument of encouragement to Abraham to
walk with God and assurance of Believers acceptance with God; guilty man cannot
come nigh offended God without some assurance that wrath is appeased and God
Reconciled: none since Adams fall can come nigh to God as a Creator, and
Redemption must be transmitted by a Covenant, and the Administrations of the
Covenant must be the only pledge of assurance and encouragement unto access to
God; the Covenant of God with Levi is the only liberty of the Priests entrance
in the Sanctum Sanctorum, the Covenant of Mediatorship is the confidence of
Jesus Christ, his intercession, and the Covenant of Circumcision the Israelites
title to the Passover and freedom of the Sanctuary, and the Covenant of
Baptism Christians Right to the Lords Table and freedom of drawing nigh to
God; the Baptized do confaederate with God, you have heard, before that they
must be faederati, in Covenant that are subjects of Baptism, the promise is to
you, is the ground and reason why any is Baptized; Baptism is the mutual act
of sealing the Covenant between God and the soul, by this outward sign and
pledge God assures us he will be our God, pardon our sin, subdue our
Corruption by the blood of Christ, and we answerable stipulate with God, that
we will accept him to be our God in Christ, we will be called by his name and
become his servants; so that Baptism is an argument pleadable in prayer for
the remission of sin and Sanctification, and an engagement unto duty against
all impiety to be urged under all temptation; as it is a Sacrament it is a
reciprocal bond between God and the soul: when Paul would check the
Corinthians schism he does it by this quaery, were ye Baptized into the name
of Paul? importing you are to call your selves by his name with whom you
confaederated in Baptism: so that the Baptized being Gods faederates, the
Covenant being in their flesh, they must needs be qualified with confidence to
come nigh to God, having such a ground of faith whereupon to claim the
promises as is the Seals of the Covenant; the most encouraging argument that
ever Gods people urged in access to God is, Lord remember thy Covenant; we are
thy people.

We see then, that if we will be guided in our drawing nigh, God by the way of
Christ, his appearance to his Church, or approach to his Father as a Mediator,
or if we observe the succession of Baptism to Circumcision, or nature of
Baptism as an Ordinance of confaederation with God, consecration to God,
conjunction to the Church of God, we must needs be convinced that Baptism or
the body washed with pure water is an especial qualification that fits us for
access to God. And now we proceed to the application of the Doctrine.

The first use then that we should make of this point is of information, and
that teaches us this Lesson, Baptism is an Ordinance of exceeding dign^^y and
absolute necessity to be pursued and highly prized by the people of God that
will draw nigh unto him, for it is the especial qualification that fits us
with confidence to draw nigh unto him, as it is an Ordinance of God, it is the
object of reverence and esteem and indispensably necessary by reason of Divine
command, no^ to be slighted by such as pr^fesse subjection to him: but of much
more value when considered as the Ordinance of incorporation into Christ's body,
matriculation into the household of faith, and consecration unto an holy God,
and so it does not only call for affection, esteem honor and reverence: but
also it presents it self unto our reason, and imposes it self on our
conscience as useful and indispensably necessary, whilst it appears not only
as an act of worship, but Organ of Grace and instrument of much good unto the
soul, the which though it does does not confer, opere operato by mere
application as by any Physiciall power in it self, yet it is a moral
instrument offering matter to the rational argumentations and discourses of a
believing soul, either to the encouragement of his faith or enforcement of
duty, and is by divine institution Gods method and instrument whereby he has
graciously confirmed these privileges, and so it is necessary not only
ratione precepti, a commanded duty: but also medii as a moral means to be
managed by meditation and Divine method prescribed by the Lord, as that whereby
we may claim his promise and conclude a relation to and fitness for Communion
with him, and without which we cannot ordinarily expect his blessing, and be
accounted his people; and what he does in extraordinary cases where he
providentially supersedeth an Ordinance, as by untimely death, and the like,
does no way abate the dignity or abstract from the necessity of washing the
body with pure water by the Sacrament of Baptism; the conviction of this truth
will call for a constant and reverent attendance on Baptism and conscientious
use of it in all covenient opportunity that God shall give us, and check the
contempt and profane negle^t thereof that is not a little abounded (to our
shame and with grief of heart be it spoken) in the midst of us: were men but
rightly affected with the nature of Baptism, they would see in it beauty, and
of it a great necessity. Was not washing of the flesh necessary and the holy
Garment glorious in Israel because they fitted for approach to God and entrance
into the holy place? if men were but really convinced that the body washed with
pure water was a ground of assurance, because a qualification of access to God,
that B^ptisme is the only band of union and door of admission into the
Church, the formal consecration to the service of the living God, what an
esteem of Baptism must needs possess their hearts, and make them not content
without, but careful to pursue it, as seeing into Gods presence there is no
approach to such as are not sanctified by the washing of water through the
Word? but a pressing unto Gods Ordinances, not thus prepared, must be a
presumption no less then damnable; nay how would the sense of Baptism affect
the heart with joy, whilst thereby we are made Members of Gods Church (an
higher privilege then the Coronation of a King C.) and made fit for the worship
of an holy God, the ground of all alacrity and boldness in the use of his
Ordinances? How must such a soul say what a happy condition am I now in, who
through Grace have my body washed with pure water, and joined to the household
of faith, and sanctified for the service of that consuming fire and Holy God,
whom to approach unto, it is the greatest happiness man can enjoy? whilst
others are a far off, debarred the Holy things of Grace, and dare not
intermeddle with the Holy things of God, nor draw nigh unto his Holy place; I
come with freedom into his Sanctuary, and claim the liberty and privileges
thereof by virtue of Baptism, that Covenant of God which is upon my flesh, in
this therefore I will rejoice before the Lord. Nay, the sense of Baptism as a
qualification for access to God would set our hearts into a reverent use and
dreadful attendance on the administration of it to others; whilst the Element
is weak and simple, its use and end must make it glorious and powerful; whilst
common washing is contemptible, a bathing the flesh at the door of the
Tabernacle in order to an entrance into the Holy place, and appearance before
God is dreadful; ^^^^^gh Wax and parchment a^^ poor, and viile, and base, and
common Commodities most Shops afford Commodities much higher prized, yet these
conjoined by the hand of Majesty to make a Patent, Deed or Magna Charta to
secure some Grant, privilege or great revenue, is of much more worth and
value, and received with more reverence and esteem: if we look on water, we see
it is an Element as low as common; as me^n in our esteem, as ordinary in men^
use; and this is ready to raise in our hearts contemptible thoughts, and make
us say, what a beggarly Element and base Administration is this? What profit
can be in the Application of an handful of water? But when we shall consider
that water is applied by virtue of Gods Command, as a most sacred Ordinance, to
signify the blood of Christ whereby we are cleansed from all sin; to seal
unto us the Covenant of Grace and all its privileges of Salvation, to set us
in union with the Church to the enjoyment of all Gospel Ordinances, and
Sanctify us as a peculiar people, that may and must draw nigh to God in
assurance of faith; what luster does there appear in the Ordinance? what
reverence does then raise our Spirits? what high and honorable regard do we
then see we ow unto this common and contemptible act of Baptism? oh what
prayers for efficacy? what praises for enjoyment, what pleasure in
administration? must the consecrating, qualifying and soule-encouraging
assuring nature of Baptism, effect in all such as are seriously affected with
Gods Holiness and the order of approach to him? unto all such Baptism is no
carnal beggarly and unprofitable Element, but a Glorious Spiritual
Evangelicall Administration of exceeding dignity; no Church complement and
matter of indifferency that may or may not be used without any damage, but a
complete duty by reason of Divine command and its own due nature, disposing man
into such a devout relation to God, and so of indispensable necessity.

Use 2. Is of reproof, justly to blame that disesteeme and disregard of
Baptism that is to be found among us; our age of liberty has set us so loose
to Gospel Ordinances that many can be not only content without them, but also
readily run into the contempt of them; how few in the midst of us understand
the nature and seek the use of Baptism as a ground of ^aith and Ordinance of
Consecration, and so of confident access to God; men's principles and practice
does proclaim their palpable ignorance of such privileges possessed by the
body washed with pu^e water: How many (to our shame and with grief be it
spoken) do use Baptism as a mere Church complement and convenient Ce^emony?
to the content of their wives, kinsfolk, friends or neighbors, bring their
children to be Baptized without any awe of an Ordinance of God upon their
spirit or apprehension of advantage to be by Baptism conferred, or design and
intention of solemn dedication of their children to God and his service, and
so to have Gods name and Covenant stamped upon their flesh, and them fi^ted for
access to God in the Assemblies of his people; and hence it is that they are
at cost and care for the civilities that attend the Baptism of their children,
but as for the Solemn praises of God, for the blessing of the Covenant,
prayers for a blessing on an Ordinance, and careful instruction of their
Baptized children in the consecrating nature of Baptism, the boldness it
creates, and the duty of access to God it imposes, these come not into his
thoughts, cost him no care or pains, his friends gone, and work done, he thinks
himself well rid of a piece of trouble, and pursues that days enjoyments to
no more advantage: nay how many sit so lukewarm in minds and affections to
Baptism that they think it to be a mere Ceremony, and matter of indifferency,
if their body be washed they are content, but they know no good it has done
them: and if it be not washed they are as well pleased, they see no loss they
undergo by the want of it, and they can accompany with the Baptized or
unbaptized in the Assemblies of Gods people and Administrations of Grace; they
matter not an outward Ceremony, but look after the inward and hidden Man of the
heart; true and real Grace without any outward Ordinance, shall be the ground
of their communion; but say Circumcision or Uncircumcision avails not to them;
must it not be concluded that these men yet need to be informed in the first
rudiments of the Doctrine of God, even the Doctrine of Baptismes? and to be
convinced, that the body washed with pure water, is the qualification
prescribed by a glorious God, to consecrate such as with confidence approach
before him? and so the contempt of it must needs be profane and dangerous;
nay, too many in the midst of us, open their black mouths and give their
blasphemous tongues the liberty of decrying and vilifying this Holy Ordinance,
envying against it as a carnal, base, beggarly Element, an Excrementious
Ordinance, and Antichristian Idol, and piece of abomination; so horribly
profane and impudent do impostors grow by liberty, that they will outface God,
and speak blasphemously of Divine institution, and the appointed order of
access to God in the assemblies of his people. Nay, what shall we say to the
rude recession of people from the application of Baptism to others? or their
irreverent attendance on it, as if it concerned not them, or were no part of
Gods worship; and of those eminent pretenders unto Saintship, who disown the
relation of men Baptized to God, and themselves (as the people of God) standing
at a distance from the consecrated to the Lords service, as if profane and
altogether strangers to the Covenant, and many other profane carriages that are
insuitable to so holy an Ordinance: But Generalia non pungunt; not to confine
my self to Generals, which will hardly reach the heart and consciences. Give me
leave to take notice of those principles and practices that are inconsistent
with this holy use and nature of Baptism, and do indeed profanely militate
against this doctrine that teaches you, That Baptism, or the body washed with
pure water, is the especial qualification of confidence in approach to God in
the assemblies of his people: and I shall Rank them into this order, and make
them known by these names:

They are such who,

1. Dictate to the unbaptized a liberty of access to God.

2. Disown and decline their Baptism in their approaches to God.

3. Disregard Baptism administered to others.

4. Disesteeme the privileges conferred by Baptism.

5. Declare not to theirs Baptized the dignity and duty of Baptism.

6. Deny the Baptized the liberty of access to God in the assemblies of his
people and use of his Ordinances.

Unto each of these this Doctrine does speak Reproof and Blame, as we shall
note in the particular consideration of them. And

First, If the washing of the body with pure water or Baptism be the especial
qualification of confident approach to God in the assemblies of his people,
then Generally are they too blame, who do Dictate to the unbaptized a liberty
of access to God. Many in this Remiss age of ours, can make Baptism a matter
of no moment in their Communion; they can hold Communion with baptized or
unbaptised, and cry out, Circumcision or uncircumcision is to them nothing, as
if this Ordinance of Baptism were rendered indifferent as the nullified
Ordinance of Circumcision. And they themselves complain of rigor and severity
in such as impose Baptism as the ground of Communion in the Church, and decline
the administration of holy things to the unbaptized; these call for inward
grace, the answer of a good conscience. Real love to Jesus Christ, and then
they care not whether they ever pass under the outward Ordinance or be
Baptized. And herein the Lukewarmnesse of private men is not so much to be
blamed, for that the leaders of the people cause them to err; some that stand
in the midst of you as guides, and profess themselves Ministers of Jesus
Christ, and teachers of the truth, have not been aff^aid (if I may not say
ashamed) positively to affirm, and (in this Pulpit) plainly to teach as the
very mind of God, Tha Baptism is not the ground of Church Communion, but real
Grace, the answer of a good Conscience, by the Resurrection of Christ from the
dead: and therefore did offer and affirm, That although a man were altogether
ignorant of the Doctrine of Baptism, and had never passed under that outward
Ordinance, yet he could own him as a member of the Church, hold Communion with
him, and admit him to all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ; and much to this
purpose, which stands in a direct contradiction to this truth, and declared use
of Baptism. For if it be the qualification of access to God, the door of
admission into the assemblies of Gods people, and way of consecration unto
Communion in the holy things of God: must it not needs be profaneness to
administer the holy things of God to such as are not thus qualified? and
presumption to invite such unto the participation of them? But a little to
expostulate with the asserters of this Baptism-subverting notion: Will God be
worshipped by outward Ordinaces? and must these Ordinances be enjoyed in order,
some preparing for participation to others? Is Baptism the first Ordinance of
the Gospel? Initiating Seal of the Covenant? Door of admission into the Church?
and method of Matriculation into the household of Faith? and way of consecration
unto Communion with God and his people? Is it not reckoned among the first
principles of the Word of God, to be learned by all Disciples entered into
Christ's School? And if so, must it not be horrid profaneness to decry the
knowledge of Baptism and its Doctrine? To expose communion with God and his
people to common hands never sanctified, and by body washing separated from the
heap of mankind, on whom Baptism never stamped holiness? and gross impiety to
fling open the door of Gods house that dogs and swine may enter at pleasure,
there being no baptismal badge of distinction between them and the children of
God? Is it not great prodigality to offer the privileges of the Covenant to
every hand, not having any Sealed interest whereon to claim? Is it not grievous
presumption to decline the directed order of the Gospel, and dispense the holy
things of God in a way and method contrary to that whereby Christ and his
Apostles either enjoined or administered them? Must not this needs be
Superstition, Will Worship, a laying waste Divine directions, and running from
the Rule of Scripture, and due method of holy things? Must not God in his
Jealousy needs arise and say to such Ministers as to the keepers of the
Sanctuary, Ez^k. 44.7. You have enough of all abominations, seeing ye have
brought into my house the unbaptized in flesh and in spirit. To what end do
these men Baptize any, or urge any to be Baptized? In this assertion Baptism
is proclaimed a matter of indifferency, nay, a mere nullity, an action of no
advantage, administered to no end: for if it confer not outward Privileges, it
will never conveigh inward Grace. And thus the institutions of the Lord Jesus
stands charged with folly and vanity, and the Ordinances of the Gospel are made
Complements, and bootlesse Ceremonies; but rather the Spirit of seduction is
evidenced to be profane, notoriously wicked, willingly withstanding Divine
order, and in the name of God exposing the holy God to irreverent, rude
approaches, and his Seals and sanctifying Ordinance to scorn and contempt.

Nor is this guilt thus charged in the least extenuated by the qualifica^ion
required and propounded as the ground of Communion; viz. R^al Grace, the answer
of a go^d conscience by the Resu^rect^on of Christ from the de^d: for I never
yet found this propounded in Scripture as the ground of Church communion; not
is it discernable by every eye of every common believer, who are to see such
sanctified unto God to whom they do join themselves. Nay, the very Stewards of
the mysteries of God have not that Spirit of infallible discerning the truth of
grace. Gross hypocrites have been by the very Apostles of Jesus Christ
Baptized and admitted into the Church: and so will be by all that administer
holy things, for Hypocrites void of true Grace, must be found in the Church
when the Lord Jesus Christ shall come to Judgment. And if it could be known,
yet by what authority is inward Grace divided from the outward Ordinance and
opposed thereunto? Those things which God has joined together, shall any man
dare to divide asunder? and can true Grace consist with ignorance of the
Doctrine of Baptism, and neglect and contempt of the least Ordinance of Jesus
Christ, and inversion of the order of the Gospel? But is not this most
graceless Chemistry so to spiritualize Gospel dispensation as to Deifie every
Minister that has the charge of the Sanctuary? Nay, every believer that must
hold communion in the Ordinances of the Gospel, by making them Searchers of the
heart, and infallible discerners of Real Grace, the ground of Church Communion,
and to justi^^e the washing of the body which God has made the ground of
confidence in access to him in the assemblies of his people.

Secondly, The second sort to be reproved as contradictorie to this
consecrating, faith encouraging Ord^nance of washing the body with pure water,
are such as Disown and decline Baptism in their drawing nigh to God in the
assemblies of his people: Like Priest like People; if men that ^all themselves
Ministers ^^d Teachers shall with black mouths blaspheme Baptism, it cannot
but meet with people that shall pr^fane, contemn, and cast off that holy
Ordinance. If Teachers shall dare in the Name of the Lord to declare, That
water baptism is not the ground of communion with the Church visible, no marvel
if men do sl ght Baptism in seeking such communion; nay, it were a marvel if
some should not sinfully reject and renounce it; for he is a mean man that
draws not some Clients after him. A^e there not many in the midst of us that
make their way to God by renouncing their Baptism, when once their fancy does
but dictate to them a vanity in that outward Ordinance, and their tongues are
filled with vilifying invectives, calling it beggarly Element, carnal
Ordinance, outward and groundless Ceremony, badg of Antichrist, Superstitious
administration; their hearts are as full of joy as they can hold, now they are
full of courage, can come with freedom and full assurance to God, being as they
pretend baptized with the Spirit and fire; now they boldly join themselves to
that assembly they call the Church of God, and despising all outward
Ordinances, their formal admission must be by a full renunciation of their
Baptism and all carnal acts of worship (as they phrase it) that they may serve
God in Spirit.

This generation of men must needs appear most grossly ignorant or greatly
deluded as to the method of approach to God, and manner of worship to be done
unto him. Unto them I would demand, If they be guided by Scripture directions
(not Enthusiasmes, and pretended Inspirations) whether Scripture does not
declare, That divided man must make no aprroach to God? the Spirit of all flesh
will be adored with outward acts of worsh p which h^ himself has ap^ointed.
Has God comm^nded Baptism to no use or end? May bodies not consecrated come
nigh to holy Presence? Must not the Lords immediate attendants be distinguished
from the rest of the world by some Livery that is obvious and to be seen by
every eye? Can the Spirit and Sacred Ordinances of God stand opposite one to
the other, and not consistent each with other? And must sincere Gra^e share
stakes with God, giving m^n the Body and God the Spirit? The Devil may be
content with the half of man, for he well knows by that means he does possess
the whole for God will have all or none: they that will draw nigh to his
Sanctuary must love him with all their might, heart, soul and strength: they
that will wait on him, must worship him in Body and Spirit: They that walk as
the redeemed of Christ, must gloryfie him with Soul and Body, which is their
reasonable sacrifice, Romans 12.1. For both were bought with a price, 1 Cor.
6.20. God will part with no part of his purchase, and has therefore prescribed
outward acts of adoration to be bodily performed in the sincerity of Spirit,
and appointed the washing of the body with pure water to consecrate and stamp
holiness on the outward man, as well as the sprinkling of the heart for the
inward: the exercise of the body ^n the outward acts of worship without the
Spirit, is plain hypocrisy; and the exercise of the Spirit without the Bodies
subjection to outward Ordinances, is positive profaneness; such is the Souls
influence on the Body, that if it awfully apprehend Majesty it will make the
bodily members to express it. In vain is heart Subjection pretended where the
yoke of outward Ordinances is broken from the neck: What likelihood of Loyalty
from such as scorn the Livery? Sad is that Sanctity that sets at enmity Gods
Spirit and Sacred Ordinances: Cursed is that cry of holiness that cries down
Divine order and Ordinances: Rebellious is that Assembly whose Incorporation is
a renunciation of the matter and method of Gods Worship: Dreadful must needs be
Gods approach to that people that draw nigh unto him not duly consecrated to
that end by Baptism, and touch the holy things of God in his Assembly, not
having the body washed with pure water I have lost my little skill in
Scripture-Calcuiation, if such perish not in the gain saying of Korah, and
occasion not a P^rz-vzzah in Israel

Whilst some disown Baptism as an outward Ordinance, by the Spirit of
Familism disowning all outward administrations; There are others that will join
with us in condemning them, and consent that God must be w^rshipped by bodily
acts of Religion yet they find no way of access to God, but by receding from
the baptism they had received, and disowning the consecrating,
Faith-encouraging use of the washing of their bodies in pure water to which
they have been subject. These are our Antipaedobaptist become actual
Anabaptists, who quarrelling at Infants interest unto Baptism and the
Administrators thereof, do disown all relation they have had to the Church, and
the privileges they enjoyed by their Baptism; and disavowing the holiness
thereby conferred, they declare themselves to have been cozened when Christened:
and although they have sometime deemed themselves the people of God, sanctified
by the washing of water, in Covenant with God, and sweet Communion with his
people; Now they declare themselves to be aliens and strangers to the
Commonwealth of Israel, without hope, without God, and without Christ in the
world, and therefore renouncing this b^ptism they seek another way of access
to God, and by an imagined Baptism of their own creation, they encourage their
spirits and stamp holiness upon themselves, and pretend to join themselves to
the assemblies of the Lords people, declaring all others to be dogs, and only
themselves the children of the Kingdom; all others to be in the highways and
hedges, and themselves the only Church of Christ to whom men must be joined on
p^in of Eternal Damnation. When I consider these men, I cannot but consider the
impetuous viole ce of an Erroneous judgment in hurrying to irregular practice,
and the giddy preposterous zeal that is produced by Reason-darkning fancy: this
carriage does plainly bespeak these men to be greatly irrational and grossly
ignorant.

First, They appear to be greatly Irrational, and that because they nullify
Gods Ordinances by mistaken or miscarried circumstances, which no way destroy
their essence: Their ground is, Infants ought not to be Baptized, and they were
Baptized in their infancy; their ignorant parents in their ignorance did
superstitiously cause them to be sprinkled by some unworthy Sir John or other,
and hereby they were cozened; but now they thank God they see the superstition
of Baby-sprinkling, and therefore will have their bodies washed, and join
themselves to the Baptized Saints. Unto this Plea of theirs, I wish they had
reason enough to see the irrationality of it; for presuppose (which is not
true) that infants have no right to Baptism, it w^ll not thence follow that
Infant Baptism is superst^tious, void and null. For Bap^^^^ is Gods Ordinance,
Christ's own Institution; Age or Infancy are but circumstances directing the
subject to whom it is applied, and is not essential to the Ordinance: if
Baptism be a worship according to the mind of Christ, then Infant baptism is
out of all danger or possibilty of will worship, in case infants were not (as
undoubtedly they are) within the Verge, yet their baptism can be no
Will Worship, for we set not up the Ordinance we apply to them, but make
application of the Ordinance Christ instituted; so that our utmost guilt is
misapplication of worship instituted by God not devising any worship o our own
heads; so that they do irrationally charge the corruption of an Ordinance and
misapplication of an Institution with Superstition; and this co^ruption in a
circumstan^e they imagine to nullify the Ordinance, and improve to a
nonentit^e of their Baptism; most irrationally making the Age essential to the
Ordinance, which God never did so appoint in either Old or New Testament-times,
either in the initiating Seal of Circumcision or Baptism: God did indeed direct
Circumcision to be applied at the Eighth day, but the direction of the Age is
distinct from the institution of the Ordinance, and not of the Essence thereof,
otherwise none m^g^t be Circumcized after the eighth day to have their
Circumcision valid and of force: under the New Testament we have neither
institution of the Age, nor subsequent direction for it, save only the
qualification of the subject, as being made Disciples, brought into a propriety
to the Promise, and the like, of what age soever, unless our Anabaptists will
make Christ's Baptism the institution of the Ordinance and age to which it is
to be applied; and then I do believe their latter Baptism will be as void as
the former, for I believe they are younger or elder, very few of the just direct
age of the Lord Jesus when Baptized; so that the Age can no way be made
essential to the Ordinance: the corruption circumstantial will not bring upon
it an nonentitie and necessity of rebaptization, though they might have cause
to bewail the fin of their parents in corruptly misapplying Gods Seal, but what
necessity is there of plucking it off, and Cancelling the Covenant of God to
them confirmed? I cannot believe that if a Jew had been Circumcised before the
Eighth day, that he would have renounced the Circumcision because misapplyed in
point of time by his neglective parents: deviations from order may be
profaneness to be rebuked, but cannot be destructive to the Ordinance that the
privileges thereof should be lost, and it be reiterated: I do not believe that
these men will Disfranchise themselves of the privileges of a Freeman of
London though they were incorporated before the age directed by the Rules of
the Chamber for admitting Freemen. Methink^ their Reason should be a Chancery
of more equity then to cut themselves off from the Congregation of Gods people
and cast off the liber^y of access, because of their unseason^ble and too
early Baptism If the Church on such a miscarryed circumstance should
disfranchize them, or deny their relation to the household of Faith, she were
deservedly censured for cruel severity, and her summum jus must needs be deemed
summa injuri^: the greatest wrong is to punish failed circumstances with the
highest severity due to the greatest crimes. Only blind zeal and irrational
folly is censorious to themselves to disown their own interest on such a ground
as will not warrant the Church to deprive them of it. Self-execution under the
greatest guilt, differs little from murder, but must needs be sinfully violent
when extended in measure beyond the nature of the fault. Self-excommunication
on so slight a ground cannot but be the sting of an a wakened conscience
apprehensive of the pr^viledges lost: the out cry of such a conscience must
needs be this, Oh wretch! my parents misapplyed the Seal, and therefore I have
cast off the Covenant by my own will, and deprived my self of those blessed
enjoyments the hand of justice never demanded from me. Oh cruelty! self
cruelty. How ju^^ly might God say Amen to thy self, censure and blind thee
under thy loss for ever.

But to extenuate this irrationallity in the rejection of their Baptism
received in infancy they (endeavoring to master by number of exceptions under
the want of faith) further plead, Why, but we were Baptized by some unworthy
Minister, and in a superstitious manner, with the Ceremonies of the Church and
sign of the Cross; and therefore we cannot make that baptism a ground of. Faith
in the approach to God. And hereby they do but act their irrationality the
further; for suppose ye were Baptized by an unworthy Minister, yet he was a
Minister: though the Essence of the Ordinance may depend on the Authority, yet
not on the Dignity of the Administrator. The wickedness of an Ambassador
makes not his Embassy concluded to be void and vain; the impression of a
lawfully Commissionated Judge though he be unjust, is valid and of force; the
Grant of a cruel King and profane Prince will be by these men admitted as the
substantial binding Charter of the peoples Privileges: we read often of the
pro^anenesse of the Priests of Israel, but never of a nonentitie brought upon
Gods Ordinances in their hand: If they be in Moses Chair, though we must not do
as they do, we are bound to the attention and obedience of what they say. It is
not impossible for a man to preach to others, and himself be a cast away. I
never read that the Baptism of those Baptized by the unworthy hand of Judas was
ever pronounced void or null. A pure Ordinance is unhandsome in a profane hand,
but yet its essence is not impaired: it is Gods Ordinance effectual to its end.
So that if they were Baptized by Ministers though unworthy (wherein I w^sh
charity be not violated, for that many know not who they were they do censure
as unworthy; nay, some worthy men to themselves, so known, they now call
unworthy) it is a corrup^^on consistent with the essence of the Ordinance, not
any way destructive to its being. The same is to be said for the annexed
Ceremonies that they were profanely added but yet did not nullify the
Ord^nance, but it stands in full force as a ground of confidence in access to
God.

But secondly, As they appear greatly irrational in inferring more then their
premises will allow, so they are Grossly ignorant; nay, I fear many wilfully
shutting their eyes may be charged to be grossly obstinate: They renounce their
Baptism under the notion of Superstition, not considering they run into the sin
of Sacrilege; charity must persuade us these men understand not the method and
ministration of the Covenant of Grace, otherwise they could never charge Infant
Baptism with superstition, which is the very application of Gods Ordinance to
its proper subjects, and so Sacrilegiously rob God, his Church, believing
parents, and their children of those holy duties and Dignities that belong unto
them. Have we not before noted, that they who are in Covenant with God ought to
be Baptized? and is not this the principle wherein we all agree? And if these
men know any thing of the method and and ministration of the Covenant, must
they not needs confess, That the natural issue of one or both believing
Parents are in Covenant? as we have before proved; and so fit subjects for
Baptism, that may and must be made partakers of the first initiating Seal, of
which God has made them capable in their Passive age and estate. Can any stand
convinced that such infants are as soon as born the Lords Heritage, Psalm.
127.3. The Lords servants, Lev 25.42. Children beg^tten to him, Ezekiel. 16.20,
21. Holy ones, Romans 11.16. 1 Cor. 7.14. Children of the Covenant, Act. 4.25. To
whom belongs the promise, Act. 2.28. Interressed in the pr^viledges of the
people of God, Mar. 10 14. and withhold the keeper of the Sanctuary and
Stewards of Gods household from setting of Gods mark in their flesh, or
withstand their dedication unto God? Must not we give Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, and God the things that are Gods? Will not God account it a
R^bbery that they which are his shall be withheld from him? Again, c^n any
consider the issue of believing Parents to be the Churches Children, begotten
to the Lord Ezekiel 16.20. an holy seed scattered for her increase, and yet snatch
them out of her arms, and cast them out of her bosom into the wide
wilderness of the world. Shall not the Church lament and refuse to be
comforted whilst she is bereaved of her babes, and as a Bear robed of her
whelps Will not such robbery prove her rui^e, and the drying up her seed hinder
her increase and make her b^rren and fruitless? Again, shall the children of
such believing parents be borne members into the household of Faith and not be
incorporated by Baptism? Shall Loyalty be their born duty and not Gods Livery
their dignity? Shall the Covenant of Grace be the Charter of their privilege
and the Seals not be applied to them as they are capable of receiving them?
Shall they be holy in their kind and the badg of distinction be denied them? If
any thing would make a new born babe to speak, sure this Sacrilege would do
it: there is reason for the real demand that is fabled of one Rumball, Son to
an English King, at Brack^ly in Northhamptonshire, that as soon as he was born
he requested to be Baptized for that he was a Christian. I^ it not a cruel
Sacrilege to shut out of the Ark of Salvation such whose title to entrance
cannot be denied? Yet further, is Baptism the only visible ev^dence God has
given to parents of the extent of the Covenant to their children, and shall any
deprive them of this reason of hope, cause of joy, ground of Faith in prayer
and spur to duty in dedication, to God, and education of their children for
God? So that these things considered, such as on this ground of being Baptized
in infancy do renounce their Baptism, do out of ignorance of Gods Covenant
commit most horrid Sacrilege by robbing G^d of his Heritage, the Church of
Children, and the be^efits of the administration of Baptism to infants (which
by Gods grace I shall show to be great) the children of believing parents of
their Seal of the Covenant of which they are capable, and their Parents of that
ground of Faith the administration of the Covenant does award them. And so they
g ve us cause not only to charge them with irrationality in fancrying Gods holy
Ordinance to be superstition, but in the language of the Apostle to say, Thou
that abhorrest Idols do commit Sacrilege, Romans 2 22. So that not only
Groundlesly, but even contrary to Divine method and order, they disowning the
regular washing of their body in pure water, do divest themselves of that Seal
of Sanctity and ve^ture of holiness by which they were fitted for a confident
approach to God, and decline the assembles of Gods people, in which alone the
Lord is to be adored, and join themselves to false assemblies, where they are
consecrated to, and come before God in a way that is not of his appointment,
nor can expect his approvement, how high soever false hopes and joys may carry
their s^irits. For those to whom they join are divided from the Church of
Christ and void of all commission to administer the holy things of God: if you
look at their constitution, you shall find it is no other then
se^f-congregation, with the cry of all the Lords people are holy, and
invectives against Aaron and Moses as they which take too much upon them; the
which I could never yet find warranted in Scripture, but is remarkably
condemned in the company of K^rah that were thus constituted: Ministerial
authority is no less essential to Constitute a Church of Christ, then
Magistratical to constitute a Corporation or Company: my litt e skill in
Politics could never see that self-congregation could constitute any body, but
that which is seditious or Schi matica? And as Korah seems to have been the
Counselor of their Constitution; so Jeroboam seems to be of their
Consecration, for he that will may make himself a Priest, even the lowest of
the people are Ministers to the Lord, uncalled and unqualified they presume to
administer holy things; which is a shadow and appearance of Divine worship, but
a real building of Altars besides the Altar of the L rd; and gives just cause
to the people of God (truly piou^ and pursu^ng the truth of his Ordina^c^s) to
pray as the Church in Je^obo^m^ days, Tell me, O thou wh m my Soul loves
where thou feedest thy fl ck, where th u m^kest them to rest at noon, for why
sh^^ld I turn aside by the flocks of thy companions? (so seem and pretend to
be) Cant. 1.7. So that the^r exchange of the Baptism they renounce for that
they now receive, is a profaning of themselves, who once were an holy people to
the Lord, and by false ways of sanct^ty to set themselves at a greater
distance from God, and to shake, nay to rake up the Found^tions of their Faith;
and exchange their assurance rightly grounded on their Baptism, for a fond
presumption flowing from Sacrilegious notions and false worship, which must at
the last fall into the h^nds of the living God, and be found as stubble before
a consuming fire, because unconsecrated in the presence of an holy God: for
never to be sanctified and after to be profa^ed is all one in its event and
issue; they that contemn and they that cast off Gods holy Ordinance shall fall
into the same condemnation.

The second sort to be reproved as carrying Contradictorily to this
qualification to confide t approach to God, are such as disregard the
admist^ation of Baptism unto others: These acknowledge the use and benefit of
having the body washed with pure water, but by the rudeness of the^r behavior
do declare themselves ignorant or insensible of its holy nature and
consecrating use. These are such as drive the Sacrament, in its admi^istration
i^to corners and continue not in the Congregation in the administration of it;
they think it is conv^nient children be baptized, but the solemnity thereof is
to them strange and needless, they will call some few friends together, and
call into baptize it any Minister that slubbers over the act as easily as they
desire, and in a way of complement get the work done, never considering it is a
church Ordinance, and of due belongs to the whole assembly, not particular
families or persons, nor with any reverence composing themselves to a solemn
and Religious act of ded^cation to God, many in this case carry toward the
Ordinance as a mere Complement; to please wife, kinsfolk or neighbors they
will have their Children Baptized, and the civilities thereunto belonging being
past they think themselves well rid of a piece of trouble, and never devote
themselves to any Religion in the application of this Ordinance. Incorporation
into the household of Faith, Dedication to an holy God is not in their thoughts,
their praises proclaim not any sense of a Covenant pri^iledge, nor does their
Prayers pursue God for his blessi^g on his own Ordinance, they bre^k not
through any d^fficulties to present their children to God in the Assemblies of
his people, they think not the silent suffrages of the S^ciety of any moment in
the incorporation of a Member, or supplicat^ons of any virtue to an Ordinance
of sanctification, but as unaffected with these things, they get the work done,
the child Baptized, they neither care where, how, or by whom, for when its done
they have done.

And others are in this respect no less blameworthy, who turn their backs
rudely and irreverently when Baptism is administered; wh lest the Word, Prayer
and other Ord^nances are in hand, they sit composedly in the Congregation, but
when Baptism comes in hand they post out of the Church, as if this were not
worth their attendance, or tended any way to their advantage. Unto these I
would say, Is not B^pti m an Ordinance of God and act of worship to his people
Is it not an Ordinance of Incorporation into the body of the Church of God, of
which thou art a member? ought not thou to take them into society, and by
thy presence to witness their relation, thou give them little honor who
have no^ patience to attend their solemn admission into the society of the
Saints. Is not Baptism the Seal of the Covenant, the Sanctifying Ordinance of
access to God? Adm^nistreth it not matter of Meditation concerning Man's Guilt,
Gods Grace, the Covenant of Salvation between God and man, whereby thou may
be edified? Is not the Baptism o^ a Christian of high concernme ^? Does it not
tie the Baptized to great and many engagem^nts? Are they not obnoxious to many
t^mptations, to violate the Covenant? Is not Bapt^sme the Ord^nance of
holin^sse? Gods blessing needful to make it holy and prayers of the Church the
way to obtain Gods blessing, that thou tu nest away and followest not the
Or^ina^ce with thy prayer? Can a conscience awed by the sanctity of any
Ordinance and affected with the holiness of God to be adored, dispense with
the neglect and contempt of other Ordinances equally holy, nay, in order the
first of, and that without which other Ordinances must not be used?

The fourth sort of such whose practice does militate with the consecrating
nature of Baptism, are such who disesteem their own Baptism owned and
adhaered unto: many have had their bodies washed with pure water, and would not
be without their Baptism for all the world, but yet as for any great benefit
they ever received by it, they know no reason they have to esteem it at so high
a rate: They never read any thing of Divine favor in their Baptism, nor from
it reaped either counsel or comfort; the reflections of duty and dignity are to
them strange and unusual, Baptism having once passed on the^r bodies come^ no
more into their mi^ds. It is not to them engagement to, or encouragement in
duty or drawing nigh to God; the which as it exposes the O^dinance to contempt
not imaginable, so it bespeaks such souls to be unsp^akably igno^ant or
insensible of the nature, use and end of the w^shing of the body with pure
water; for can any soul that understands and believes Baptism to be a pledge of
Divine affection, live under it without o^servation of Gods peculiar love to
them above others who want it? Can any stand convinced, That the Seal of God is
in their flesh, and not lay claim to God by so visible a ground of claim? Can
any say that by Baptism ^hey are purg^d from the corruptions that are in the
world through lust, and live in sin? Can any consider hereby they are called
out of the world and consecrated to the worship of one God, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and neglect directed acts of Adoration, the holy service that is
assigned by their Lord and King? much l^sse sh uld such Apostatize from the
Profession of that N^me, and run into open Rebellion against him with whom they
stand confederated, bound in Covenant? Can any think Baptism to be the bond of
union and nerve of incorporation with the Church of Christ, and not Sympat^ize
with her under all the changes of her condition? much less c^n such make
Schisms in, or separation from her body, and forsake the assembling of
themselves together as the manner of some is. Much is the advantage Baptism
once, received may administer to a f^ul all his days if by ra^ional^ acts of
faith it were improved, either as a moral instrument or outward sign exhib^ting
matter of meditation, or as a Divine Ordinance and Seal of the r^ghteousnesse
by Faith, established to assure of the promises of Grace and Salvat^on. And yet
(to our shame be it spoken) how little thereof is reaped by regardlesse we?
Baptism is a memorial of our misery, and Gods mercy; a manifest expression of
that natural uncleanness which sets us at a distance from God, and eminent act
of sanctifying unto an access to God; and yet how many make no use of it, nor
find matter of meditation by it? God has appointed it an instrument of
Regeneration and Salvation, how few find these effects produced by it? nay,
improve it thereunto. It is that Seal that assures of interest in all the
promises of Grace, yet when do men propound it to themselves as a ground of
Faith or plead it in prayer? How many live in such profaneness that the Church
may charge them to have forgotten that they were purged from their old sin; and
God may complain that they have broken their Baptismal Oath: yet Baptism is to
them a mean and weak argument of conviction. When I consider the dullness of
profane Christians under the enfo^cements of their Baptism, even ministerially
urged, I could wish according the sometime custom used in the Primitive times
of the Church, when men are Baptized they might leave behind them a white
garment, as a witness of their Baptism, that so we might upbraid wicked men,
as the Deacon of the Church did Elpid^phorus when revolted from the Faith,
saying, O, Elpidophorus, I will ke^p this white garm nt as a monument against
thee to all Eternity. When I consider the Scripture aggravating guilt with this
circumstance* they have forgotten that they were purged; it dictates to my mind
that the condemnation of Christians will be more grievous because of their
Baptism; If this water quench not Lust, it will make Wrath burn more
vehemently: Though I cannot consent to the Novatians cruel and groundless
conclusion, That sin after Bap ism is unpardonable; I dare affirm, That every
sin not resist^d by B^ptism will be more then ordinar^ y damnable to the Bap
ized. What an answer to every temptation unto sin is the soul furnished withal,
that is appre^ensive that in Baptism he did renou ce the flesh the world and
the devil, and devote himself to a conformity to the death of Christ, and
stands ded^cated to ^n holy God, in whose presence ^e may not presume defiled
with sin. This Argument if ^mproved by a Rational act of Faith is of more
advantage, because it is plain and common, ready at hand to refl^ct, and easy
to be understood, and obvious to the eye of men without and within the Church,
by which we are liable to be upbraided by the very enemies of Christ: That we
are Baptized the whole Church will witness, and shall not we have rec urse
unto our Baptism as a b^r to our profaneness? Shall Circumcised Israel live in
the vileness and vanit^ of the uncircumcised Gentiles? And has God made
Baptism a badg of dist^nction between the holy and profane, and shall we not
make it a bar of divi on between their unclean Lusts and our holy Lives? to
live without mortification of sin, and quickening to all holy duties, do h
clearly declare we have never yet understood the nature of Baptism, nor used it
to its end.

As this Deadness in sin, so the Despo^den^y of the Spirit in Duty, to which
even the best of men are subject, does witness a disesteem and disre^ard of
their Bapt^sm, of which they can sometime boast, though in it they cannot
rejoice. A rig^t apprehension and real sense of Baptism as the qualification
of confident appro^ch to God would dissolve many doubts, if but duly urged by
Faith. Ordinances of God are given for our encouragements, but rational acts of
Faith must pass from us to enforce them to their end: What is said of the Word
is true of Baptism, it profits not beca^^e not mingled with Faith in them that
hear it: many a s^d soul comes tremblingly in^o Gods presence and goes more
troubled out, and the reason is, they do not righty husband Gods Ordinances to
the soul; they pass from O^dinance to Ordinance, but never consider the one
entitles to and fits for the enjoyment of another. They suck no sweetness from
all Sacred administrations, sometimes they abstain from, and oftentimes
approach to God in his Ordinances and the discharge of holy duties, as afraid
they have no right to nor fitness for these privileges, yet are sanctified by
the w^shing of water; they complain they see no interest in the Covenant, and
yet the Seal of the Covenant is in their flesh; they cry out they are aliens
and strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, and yet are Baptiz^d into one
body, and incorporated into the Congregation of the Saints; they dare not ca^l
God Father, yet were ch^ldren begotten unto him, bear his mark, and as soon as
born were by him owned and pl^ced in the bosom of his Church, and do wear the
coat he prepared for his Jos^ph. They see many good things promised in the
Covenant but know not how to cl^im any of them in Prayer, and they have the
Broad-S^al of he^ven to secure their title. Unto these souls let me freely say,
Shall God give you a ground of encouragement? will you not use it? Shall he
call for an a^proach in full assurance, for that the b^dy is washed with pure
water, and will you not yield it? D^d God mock you when he gave you the dignity
of Baptism, or is it not your madness that makes it not a check to your g
iefs, and curb to your fears? Shall your pr^ctice procl^im the truth of that
which the Papists h^ve endeavored to ch^rge on the Reformed Chu^c^es, viz.
That ^hey make B^^tism a nudum signum, a bare empty sign of no use or advantage
to the Soul. Is Gods seal in vain, and sanctification by the wash^ng of water
to no purpose? and matriculation into his household a matter of no moment? that
thou make them no ground of Faith, nor encouragement to thy soul? Was not
Circumcision of great benefit to the Jews? d d not God claim them by it when
gone astr^y from him? and they claim God when deserting them? Is that an
engagement to divine faithfulness, and may not thy Faith make it thy
encouragement to appear before him? did God complement when he annexed Baptism
to the Covenant, and called it. The Seal of the righteousness of Faith? or
do not thou rather cozen thy self of the comforts the Ordinance do really and
according to divine designment exhibit? It is indeed true, Salvation is not
conferred op re operato, by the act done and mere application of the water, yet
it is thereby assured to the Soul, that by acts of Faith shall duly argue its
interest. The Privy Seal is the clearest token of affection and to be puri^^ed,
but is the Broad-Seal of no authority or advantage to be retained and improved?
The outward Ordinance is not without inward Grace to be depended on as
sufficient to Salvation, but inward grace duly reflects the outward Ordinance
as Gods great mercy and the ground of Faith and encouragement to it self. The
Moral swasion of any Ordinance is too short to sanctify or solace any Spirit
without supernatural Grace: but supernatural Grace comes not into any soul to
convince or comfort but by a moral improvement of every Ordinance by rational
meditation of its nature, use and end. Many sit under Gods Ordinances and make
most sad complaints they find no profit in them, when the reason is in
themselves; they cry out God must do all, work in them to will and to do at his
own pleasure, which is indeed true, but they consider not Gods method of
working grace or comfort in any souls; he always deals with men like
themselves as they are r^asonable creatures, and have a power of discourse, and
therefore his Ordinances are moral instruments by due discourses to enforce
their end. We have reason to check some under the Ordinances as the Disciples
we^e checked from heaven for their posture in the Lord his ascension, Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing? this Jesus that is taken from you shall so come
as you have seen him go into heaven, Act. 1.11 As if the voice had said,
Considerations of his return better become you, than silent observations of his
present going. So I say, Why do many enjoy Gods Ordinances, and not go home
and consider them? must we run so far from free will, as to run out of our
wits? Let such men, as make not their Baptism a moral engagement to, and
encouragement in their access to God, know, that they appear ignorant or
sinfully insensible of its nature, and expose it to great contempt. Can any
thing more easily cast a soul into contempt of an Ordinance, than its
unprofitableness and unusefullness? The grand cause of all the blasphemy that
our age does belch out against Baptism, is the little benefit men find it
brings them: not by reason of any defect in the Ordinance, but their own
neglect to improve it as a ground of faith, guard against sin, and special
qualification of access to God.

The fifth sort, that carry contradictorily to this consecrating nature of
Baptism, are such, who declare not to theirs baptized, the dignity and duty of
their Baptism. Men do with much zeal present their children to Baptism, but
never mind to acquaint them of their privilege, or instruct them in the
nature of so holy an Ordinance: they are careful to bring them up to some
Trade or Calling; to acquaint them with all external rights and privileges,
and the past ground of claim, to all future enjoyments in the world; but
education in the fear and nurture of the Lord, is to them unusual; and the
affecting them with baptismal privileges and Church Rites, or the acquainting
them with Covenant interest and ground of claim, as to spiritual mercies and
soul enjoyments, is the last and least of their endeavors. Well may we observe,
the men of this world are wiser in their generations, than the children of the
Kingdom. Common prudence, if Scipture were silent, would direct a more serious
instruction of our children, in the nature of their Baptism: Shall they be
begotten to the Lord, and not be made to know whose children they are? and how
they came by that relation? Shall they be incorporated into the body of the
Church, and not know the family and household to which they belong? Shall
holiness be stamped upon them, and they not be made to know that they are out
of the common lump and mass of mankind? Shall the Covenant of God be in their
flesh, and they not know the Charter sealed, and Conditions to be performed? In
a word, Shall they be sanctified by the washing of water, and not made
sensible, that they stand consecrated unto holy service, and dedicated to the
worship of an holy God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and therefore ought not
to stain themselves with guilt, but carry as an holy people peculiar to the
Lord? that must wait on him, because they wear his livery; and may worship in
his presence with confidence, because their bodies have been washed with pure
water. I did in the last branch of this Use, blame them that disesteem and
disregard their own Baptism, and that was but the effect of this sin, Our
progenitors neglected us, and we neglect our posterity, as to their instruction
in the nature of divine Ordinances. How shall they esteem that, wherein they
see no excellency; or improve that privilege, of whose nature they are
ignorant. How shall they claim the promises, who neither understand what they
are, or on what ground to be claimed? What conscience can they make of duty
who do not know themselves under sacred obligation? What confidence can they
have in access to God, who know not themselves consecrated? If men have in
them parental affection to their children, and do care for their future good,
we must needs conclude they sought no more in their B^ptisme, than friends
satisfaction, and a Formal Religious complement; and so not any special Soul
saving privileges thereby conferred? for charity forbids us to think they
would bring up their children in the ignorance and incapacity of claiming such
high privileges, and rationally improving so holy engagements, if themselves
were affected with them, or they had any sense of duty as to such Religious
education, which should indeed spur their natural affection to the discharge
thereof. Little do men consider that the same God that gave babes the right to
the initiating seals of the Covenant, did provide catechizing, as the way to
make them know their privilege. He to whom they are born, has provided milk
for their nourishment, no less than meat for stronger men, and has committed
them as his lambs, to the care of his Church, and charged it, as the duty of
their Parents, to educate them in the fear and nurture of the Lord: So that
such Parents who do not seriously instruct their seed in the solemn Bond of
their relation to God and his Church, the suitable qualification by which they
are fitted for divine communion, and the seal of the Covenant, that assures
them of the high privileges of Salvation, do not only slight this holy
Ordinance of Baptism, but also sinfully transgress Gods command, show their
natural affection to be diverted from its right channel, cure for the chiefest
good, and set their children under an inevitable necessity of sleighting the
Ordinance, and starting aside from God, to whom they know no relation. We find
it our grief, that our children are profane, when it is no other than the
production of our own neglect: We can easily complain of their impiety; but
where is the man, that as soon as his child is sensible, does season him with
the knowledge of his misery by sin, Gods mercy in the Covenant of Grace, and
his special engagement to holiness, for that he bears on him the name of God
from his very birth, and that imprinted by his Baptism, when his body was
washed with pure water.

The sixth and last sort, whose principles and practice do plainly millitate
against the nature of Baptism, and clearly do contradict the same, are such,
who deny the baptized the liberty of access to God in the assemblies of his
people. This I well know to relate unto the most eminent professors of Gospel
order and pretenders unto piety, that are among us; and therefore the most
tender rebuke will seem to be railing violence and bitterness: But be it what
it will, sin against Gods Ordinances must not pass without a zealous and
serious reproof. Such among us as affect the term of Congregational Brethren,
in the gathering of their Churches, run into an extreme as far wide on the
one hand, as the loose levelling Familists and Anabaptists are on the other:
These dictate a liberty of access to the unbaptized, and those deny it to the
baptized. We must needs imagine they agree both in one principle, that Baptism
is not the ground of communion with the Church visible, nor qualification of
access to God; For if it be otherwise, as we have noted, it must be
profaneness to admit without it; and they have need of good warrant that will
acquit themselves from impiety, in excluding the baptized from these
privileges. That such are among us, who debar the baptized from their
privileges, is so obvious to every observant eye of the now only cried up
Church way, that I need not much urge demonstrations thereof. I well know some
whose practice proclaim it, in their principles will disown it: but it is the
property of that congregating way, to couch their principles until their
practice have proved their truth and goodness, and proclaimed them to others.
But if in the terms charged any shall deny this to be acted among us, I shall
desire to understand why they declare privately and publicly men baptized, to
be strangers to God and his Covenant? why do they decline communion with, and
a care of baptized souls, as members of the Church? and dictate a necessity
of their coming into Church Way and fellowship? and why do they direct other
ways for admission of Church members? is there any terms more ordinary in the
mouths of the congregated saints toward those whom they live amongst, than
dogs, without, unbeleevers, not in a Church way? Do not the pastors ^f these
private (it may offend if I say separate) assemblies in their public
ministry, speak unto their baptized hearers as aliens, strangers, to the
Covenant and Commonwealth of Israel, men in the Highways and Hedges? Do
they not call them into their self congregated and constituted Churches, as the
only Churches of Jesus Christ? Do not the particular members of these
assemblies appropriate to themselves the title of saints, believers, the people
of God, the brethren? If they know or deal with a man professing the same God
and Christ, baptized, and of a Godly conversation, but not in their Church Way,
they cannot know him in any Christian relation; but can oppose to him a member
of their private a^^sembly, by the name of brother such an one --, as if the
other were no brother. Nay further, do not they decline communion with the
baptized even such whom they cannot charge with any visible profaneness, and
against whom the Church never proceeded in censure? Hence they withdraw
themselves from public assemblies in their special administration of Church
privileges, denominate themselves the Church, and decline all Church actions
toward such as come not into their Church-wayes; though their Pastors will
possess the places, and make a shift to compel the (late cried down)
parochial maintenance, yet of the people in common they take no charge:
Brethren will not own them as objects of first or second admonition; Pastors
will neither admit to the Lords table the unblameable parents, nor baptize or
catechize their Children, nor exercise any act of discipline toward the
disorderly, in order to their conviction and salvation; but in all things so
demean themselves toward the baptized as men without the pale of the Church,
mere heathen, for Church ministrations are as much reserved from them, as from
such who never yet had holiness stamped on them: And if any do incline to
associate with them in the holy things of God, they must be admitted Members,
and enter at the door of a Church Covenant or mutual agreement among
themselves and declaration of the work of Grace upon their hearts, and their
experiences of God, which these Congregational-men have set up. If this dialect
and deportment do not declare that liberty of access to God, in the
assemblies of his people is denied to the baptized, I know not how to judge it:
And how this will consist with the nature, use and end of Baptism, I cannot
discern. If by the washing of water, we were sanctified, how were we profaned
and again laid common? I never yet could understand any divine rejection; I am
sure it is much contrary to Gods wonted method and patience, to cast off a
people adhering to him, though subject to many aberrations and vile actions
toward him; and the extraordinary pleasure of God is yet to be manifested:
And if God count us holy, and continue the liberty of our access to him in his
Ordinance, they must produce a good commission that shall cast us out, as
profane and unclean, if they expect we should be therewithal contented. If
Baptism do incorporate into the Church of God, does it not entitle to all the
privileges of the Church, and bind us to use them, and the Church to allow us
the use of them, according to our capacity? If we are baptized into one body,
have we not the same relation to them that others have? Are we not all of one
family, members of one body, and brethren, sons of the same father? Ought
not all the Church to be the Pastors charge? Is not the rebuke of the
disorderly his duty, as well as his encouragement of the orderly? Does not
Baptism so knit us one unto another, that we are bound to watch over one
another, and do all brotherly duties? Why else does the Apostle make it an
argument, there is one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. we are all baptized into one body.
I would fain know of what use Baptism is to them: is it not the same to others
baptized? To count the baptized dogs, men without, to disown their
brotherhood, and the like, must needs deny that Baptism is the door of
admission into the Church, and yet this in terms they will not say, though they
carry toward them as without, and call them to be members of the Church, who
are members of the Church on as good a ground and as clear a method as
themselves: If this be not a solecisme in Christianity, I know not how to make
any. As for their admission into the Church by Covenant, Agreement, or
profession, it is clearly without Scripture, prescription, or primitive
president, that ever I could yet find: and I can deem it no other than an
inhumane invention (if I may not call superstition, the countenance of which it
bears in my eye, whilst it stands in the place of Baptism, and is made the
only way of consecration unto Church communion, whereby it plainly supplants
Gods Ordinance.) These things I note, but cannot stand to debate, intending a
reproof, not dispute, and to let men see the sinfulness of this sacred way of
independencie, and gathering of Churches out of Churches, whilst it stands
guilty of a contempt of Gods way of access unto him, and admission into his
Church of censorious uncharitableness toward their brethren invested with the
reason of relation to the Lords people, and constitution of Church membership,
in a way of mere humane invention. I confess I have heard it often noted, that
the difference between Independents and others, is not so much as to maintain
an irreconcilable distance: and I say so too: I could wish they were more
friendliely united. As to the single point of Discipline, they shall have my
consent for a brotherly toleration of its exercise, till they are weary of it.
But as for their separation from the Churches of Jesus Christ, self
congregation into a Church, and seclusion of baptized souls, from sacred
Ordinances, and the like, they seem to me so repugnant to truth and order, and
ruinous to Gods Church and Ordinances, that I cannot, without sin, but stand
a professed enemy thereunto. Let not men think that I allow the profaneness
of Christians, because I allege their interest in the common administration of
the Covenant; or that I think their enjoyment may not be interrupted, because I
cannot consent their interest be denied them. I have learned to distinguish
between right and possession; and where the one is clear, the other may be
justly sometimes with held. I well know profane Christians are unseemly
Saints, yet Saints; scandalous Disciples, yet Disciples; disorderly Brethren,
yet Brethren; vessels of dishonor, yet vessels in the same house to the
Masters use. That Church members be for a time suspended from particular
privileges, may be admitted; but at private brethrens pleasure to be
slighted, as no members, is not to be endured. That obstinate incurable
members be cut off, is the Church her duty; but that the Church be cast off, is
the congregational impiety? Is there baptized persons in works, denying the
God they profess? Is there a brother, a drunkard, an adulterer, and the like?
Does not Baptism appropriate them to the private admonition of particular
brethren, and public inspection of Church officers? Is not the delivering
them to Satan, for the buffeting of the flesh, that the soul may be saved,
their privilege by Baptism? If these holy men would talk of correcting,
casting out, cutting off disorderly baptized souls, it would sound well in my
^ares; but to talk of gathering Churches, coming into Churchway, admission of
members, and the like, amongst those that bears holiness in their flesh, and
have on them the qualification of access to God, sounds so harshly in my ears,
that I cannot but abhor it, as inconsistent with the nature of Baptism,
exposing it to contempt, making it of no effect, endangering the subversion of
the Church, and the ushering in of Paganism, whilst the baptized find
themselves rejected, and not looked after, as of any relation to God; they
cannot but resign up themselves to their own lusts, and run into an ignorance
of, and estrangedness to God. It seems to me a most just plea, that is made by
Christians in common. Were we baptized? why are we disowned, as to relation to
God and his Church, and cast out of all the care of the Church, as if we were
thereunto strangers? If the seal of God be on us, why do our bre^hren lift up
themselves above us, and engross to themselves the titles, terms, privileges,
that belong in common to all baptized souls? If we walk unworthy our relation,
we are willing to be corrected; but must we needs lose our interest and be
thrust out of our fathers inheritance by our brethren, our forfei^ure never
being judicially exacted. Gods Ordinances we could bear, though never so cross
to our nature, because thereunto we are bound by our Baptism; but the new ways
pursued by our brethren, and to us proposed, are grievous to us, because we
find them not in the grand Charter of our privilege; willingly we would walk
with God in duty, and draw nigh to him in the assemblies of his people, for
that we are thereunto consecrated; but herein we are debarred, and driven at a
distance, as if Dogs, not Children, Heathens, not Christians, Aliens to the
Covenant, not Heirs of Grace. If we go astray, we think those that are set
over ought to seek us as sheep, not suffer us to wander as goats. We have cause
to complain, that our Shepherds feed themselves, not the flock; they feed the
flock, and clothe them with the wool; kill the fat, but feed not the sheep:
The weak they have not strengthened, the sick they have not healed, nor have
they sought that which was lost, nor brought again, that which was driven away;
but with cruelty and rigor have they ruled us: We were scattered without a
shepherd; and when we were dispersed, every beast of the field devoured us: We
were sheep, though wandering upon every high hill and mountain: Gods flock,
though scattered through the earth, and none sought after us. If the Lord Jesus
subscribe and accept not this complaint as just and good, I know nothing of
Gospel method or order.

Thus then I have noted the vanity and vileness of those, whose carriage
contradicts the nature of Baptism, and bespeaks them insensible of it, as an
especial qualification for confidence in access to God in the assemblies of his
people.

The third and last use of this Doctrine, is by way of exhortation unto two
especial duties.

First, Acquaint we our selves with the holy nature of Baptism.

Secondly, Act we the course of our lives and carriage, as those whose bodies
are washed with pure water.

Of these give me leave to speak a word in their order, and first of the first.

Acquaint we our selves with the holy nature of Baptism Understand its end,
use, and effects: Labor we to know the holiness it stamps on any, the
privileges it confers; and how it confers them, see the divine institution
enforcing the duty of subjection to it, and the dignity received by it.
Ignorance is the Nurserie of Error, and Guard of all Profaneness: All those
O^dinance degrading, and vilifying notions that are conceived in men's minds,
blasphemies belched out of their mouths, and contemptible carriage under and
toward Baptism and the baptized, which we have before taxed, are no other
than the mists and filthy fogs of a blind mind, to be dispersed by a right
apprehension of the holy nature thereof. Ignorance is noted in Scripture as the
ground of Is^aels impiety: very often does God complain, they know not me, and
are a people who will not understand; my people perish for lack of knowledge.
Knowledge is the propounded cure of all profaneness and contempt of holy
things: it is the principle of Regeneration to be renewed in the spirit of the
mind. Our Savior corrects the profanation of the Temple by an, it is
written, my house shall be called, an house of prayer, and dispels all rude
traditions, which made the Law of God of none effect, by an exposition of the
Law: And the Apostle corrects the profane use of the Lords Supper, by
explaining the nature, form, and use thereof; telling them sometime, this is
not to eat the Lords Supper; and other times pointing to the Ordinance, by a,
The Cup of blessing which we bless, is the Communion; and an, I received from
the Lord, what I delivered unto you. The same is to be the cure of the
profaneness of every Ordinance of God, (viz.) the understanding of its use and
nature. They that know not the benefit of a Denison of England, or a Freeman of
London, must needs disesteem, disregard, and despise the privileges thereof.
Is it any marvel to hear men speak, and see men carry contemptibly toward a
sealed parchment, whose use and nature he does not understand; but such as know
thereof the use and value, will purchase them at a dear rate, and prise them
above many things simply, and in themselves more considerable. In a word, I
must say, if men knew that Gods image and authority was set on Baptism, they
would not dare to despise its simplicity and meanness: If they understood it to
be the door of admission into the Church, incorporation into Christ's body, and
method of matriculation into the household of faith, they could never scorn it,
or sit indifferent to it; but must see, as ever they will put on Christ Jesus
and be united to his body, they must be baptized; nay further, such as are
sensibly affected with it as a seal of the Covenant of Grace and so ground of
faith, as a sacred qualification of approach to God, without which we may not
come nigh unto him; and as the ordained Ark of Salvation, whereby we stand
separated from the world unto so great advantages, he could not but set on it
an high esteem, rejoicing in his Baptism, blessing God for such distinguishing
grace, and thankfully improve the same to his encour^g^ment in, and engagement
unto duty. Let it therefore be your care with all diligence, to study the
nature of the Ordinance, and understand its use, virtue and value; that by
ignorance you lose not its effects, or be led into erroneous notions, lukewarm
affections to, and profane expressions toward so holy and necessary an
Ordinance.

The second exhortation is, To act our conversation, as sensible, that the body
washed with pure water, must qualify us with confidence in access to God. Let
your knowledge of the right use and nature of Baptism appear in your lives and
carriage under and toward so holy an Ordinance: Take heed of profaning holy
things, disesteeming high privileges, and contemning special grounds of faith
and privileges of grace: and more particularly,

1. Direct. Admit not men into communion with the Church in other Ordinances
and acts of worship, that have not been baptized. Let them enter at the right
door, that receive Gods alms: Call not them the Lords people, who wear not the
Lords livery: communicate not the privileges of the Saints, with them who
stand Aliens and Strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel: Let not them
approach the presence of an holy God, who were never sanctified by the washing
of water by the word: And in a word, take heed of running into the abomination
of bringing into Gods Sanctuary, the unbaptized in flesh: Invert not Gods order
and the Gospel method of approach to God. These might have seemed needless
exhortations heretofore, but now do not; for that many in the midst of us do
not only disown their own baptism, but bring up their Issue unbaptized: And
great is the present, and greater will be the future danger of admitting to sit
at the Lords table, such as never were baptized. I could heartily wish we could
keep a Register of the unbaptized, as we do of the baptized: However, let the
administrators of holy things, make it their first enquiry, Were you baptized?
and take heed they pollute not Gods Sanctuary, by admitting thereunto the men
whose bodies were not washed with pure water. Be not deceived with a pretense
of real grace; for grace must needs be pretended, where any of Gods Ordinances
are despised and Christ's prescribed order is neglected; but if it were real,
it is not the Churches guide, who cannot know it: Outward qualifications must
be their direction, and Gospel order in peoples approach to God, is their
charge, and must be their care.

2. Direct. Attend with reverence and affection, the administration of Baptism
unto others. Turn not your backs on so holy an Ordinance and eminent action;
but consider it is an act of worship, and Ordinance of God, as well as
preaching or prayer; and our attendance on all acts of Religion, is duty; it is
a solemn and sacred action, separating persons unto God, sanctifying them for
God, stamping upon men holiness to the Lord, setting them as members of Church,
the body of Christ, and solemnly dedicating them to the service of Father,
Son, and holy Ghost. And does not this call for the attendance of all the
Lords people? Shall not the worth of union with Christ's Church, and
consecration to God, be witnessed to be of weight by the reverent attendance of
the assembly? Are not all concerned in, and to be edified by the Ordinance,
and shall they slight it, and turn back on it? Consider the reproof of the
guilt of such neglect: let it quicken you to duty: let your presence at, and
reverence in the administration of Baptism, bespeak your sense of its sacred
nature and sanctifying use; making a Church Ordinance private by confining it to
your houses, or running from its administration in the public place, must
needs be the result of low th^ughts Cland^stine Baptism, is the cloud of
Baptism; and the rude out-^unning that Ordinance, runs it into cont^mpt; be
witnesses of their incorporation with whom you must live in communion in Gods
Ordinances.

3. Direction. Argue your Baptism to your engagement to, and encouragement in
drawing nigh to God. Your bodies are washed with pure water, provoke your
spirits to draw nigh in the assurance of faith: Consider that by your baptism,
you are singled out of the world, and set in a capacity of Salvation: You are
placed in the Ark; will you perish in the common deluge of mankind? You are
sanctified unto God by the washing of water; will you stand at a distance from
God, as strangers to him? You are in the order of his own appointment, suited
for divine society; will you live as without God, without hope in the world?
You are the sealed sons and subjects of the covenant; and will you pass away
your time as Bankrupts, that possess nothing? You have put on Jesus Christ his
livery; will you not do him homage with all cheerful loyalty? You are entered
into the household of Faith and Church of God; shall not their communion be to
you comfortable? Is not Baptism a ground of faith, and encouragement; why are
you then so dispondent in appearing before God? Is it not your solemn Bond unto
divine service; why are you then so dull and backward unto duty? Was your
baptism a mere complement, that you do not mind it or make use of it now it
is past? Is it not a moral instrument to be improved by meditation, affording
matter of counsel and comfort? Nay is it not Gods Ordinance, a ground of faith,
pledge of love, badge of relation, to be argued into the awe and encouragem^nt
of our access to God? Is not Baptism an initiating seal, assuring us of
i^^tiating graces? has it not planted us into the Olive, that we might extract
^p and juice to the bringing forth fruits of Righteousness? In a word, Baptism
is greatly advantageous to hope and holiness, if but duly improved by acts of
Faith. We find no profit in it, because we look for none from it. If right
assured, be never claimed, how shall it be possessed? If sinmortifying engines
be never used, sin must needs have dominion over the soul. I would to God, I
could but persuade Ch^istians to sit down, and seriously contemplate their
Baptism in order to their holiness, and thus reflect it. I am baptized: Surely
then I am under some more than ordinary engagement: Thereby I was washed from
my old sins; shall I then live in them, or so far forget my self, as not to let
virtue, knowledge, temperance brotherly kindness, patience, godliness, all the
graces of God to abound in me? Is not Baptism the dew of Heaven, that waters
the Garden of God? Has it been distilled on me, and shall I be found idle and
unfruitful, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. I have been baptized into the death of
Christ, buried with him in Baptism, planted into the similitude of his death,
that my old man might be crucified, and the body of sin destroyed, that I
should not serve sin; but as he was raised up from the dead, I should walk in
newness of life: and shall sin reign in my mortal body, that I should obey the
lusts thereof; or shall I give my members as weapons of unrighteousness, unto
sin, Romans 6. I have by Baptism, been consecrated unto God; and shall I not
come nigh him in duty? I am incorporated into the Church; ought I not then, to
be conversant in the assembly of the first born? I have stricken Covenant with
God; will not my neglect of duty, and course of impiety be charged on me, as
the breach of the oath of God? All the promises of grace are to me sealed;
shall not I then cleanse my self from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and
perfect holiness? In a word, Baptism is the seal of the Covenant set in my
flesh, and the causing me to see the evil of my ways and doings, and to be
ashamed and forsake them; the taking away the stony heart, and giving an heart
of flesh; the putting Gods spirit within me, that I may walk in his ways, are
the promises of the Covenant; why then do not graceless I claim them, and by
prayer plead my Baptism for the obtainment of them? For he is faithful that
has promised, but will not perform, until they be asked in faith. And as our
Baptism is thus a moral argument of holiness to our selves, it is the more
helpful hereunto, because it answers all temptations unto sin. When we are
saluted with the pollutions that are in the world through lust, we may answer,
we are washed in pure water, and may not be again defiled: The cogencie of
custom must give place to the Covenant we have made in Baptism: The violent
temptations of Satan recoile upon the returns of B^ptisme: I am bapt^z^d,
silenceth all suggestions to sin: I am baptized into the Name of Father,
Son, and holy Gh^st, is the only Spel (to speak with reverence) that charms
the Devil. For it imports thus much: Shall the children of God co^verse with
his enemies? the confederates of God break his commands? the separated out of
the world, be subject to the Prince of the world? O^ does malicious Satan think
the sealed of the Lord, shall be so much slighted by their Lord, as to be
taken captive at his will? Oh! play the man in a rational m^nagement of your
Baptism, it will much advance your Christianity all your days.

As Baptism is an help to holiness, so also to hope; to be improved by due
acts of Faith, as it is an Ordinance of God, for our encouragement in access
to him: many souls stand at a distance from divine Ordinances, or draw nigh
with much trembling, which would be dispelled by due apprehensions of Baptism:
Let such therefore consider, that under the want of special, they ought to
rejoice in general expressions of Gods love, and arguments of hope; and
immediate assurances of divine favor are not to be expected, whilst we have
mediate Ordinances on which to act our Faith. Our Hope must come into the Soul
in the same way, with holiness, by a moral improvement of Gods Grace, in his
Ordinances to us extended; let therefore the desponding Christian, that
trembles to converse with Gods people, to come nigh Gods table, or claim any of
Gods promises, sit down and seriously discourse his Baptism. I am Baptized;
Was this an empty Ordinance? Shall my unbeleeving heart imagine any divine
Institution to be empty and in vain imposed? No, All the ways of God are
Truth, he never subjected Souls to any falacie, nor can do: Why then art
thou so sad Oh my Soul? Trust still in God, in him will I hope, for he has
established a Covenant of peace extended to my Parents, and through them to
me, and set the Seal thereof Baptism in my flesh; and is not Baptism a pledge
of his affection to me, a badge of my relation to him? Why then do I say he
knows me not, or I belong not to him? Do all the Sons of Adam wear this
liverie? Is there a specialty in the application of water; and has it extended
to me? shall I say I have received no favor peculiar to the Lords people, and
distinct from the mass of mankind? Nay, I am by Baptism a matriculated
Disciple in Christ his Schole, an incorporated Member of the household of Faith?
Why then do I fear to feed on childrens Bread? and to use those privileges
that do belong to the Citizens of the new-Jerusalem? Why am I as an alien and
stranger from the Commonwealth of Israel? I have by Baptism put on Jesus
Christ, and shall I fear to come before the Father? is not he his beloved
Son in whom he is well pleased? Is not Baptism a Seal of Gods Covenant?
Why then do I not claim the promises? What though I see not Gods privy
Seal, the Spirit of adoption, is the broad seal of the Covenant of no force
and value; does it in vain bear on it divine authority? why then i^ it called
the A^k of Salvation? why has God said, he that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved? Shall I lose my Salvation, for not joining faith to my
baptism? What though I find many rude Christians and p^ophane persons in the
Church, claiming privileges by their Baptism; can I deny in some things their
claim to be good, though they be wicked? And wherein it is not good to them,
breaking the Covenant, may it not be good to me, poor me, that desire to keep
the Covenant of my God? In a word, has not God sanctified me to himself, by
the washing of water; and does he call men to draw nigh to him in assurance of
faith, having the body washed with pure water, and shall I be dismayed in
access to him? Oh! the wickedness of my doubting, that does spring from
ignorance of Gods holy O^^inances, the sin of my despondencie, that de^ers me
from duty and exposes my baptism to contempt: I will sure cast off this
estate, and hence forward continue with the Church in the Word, breaking of
bread, and Prayer, and use of all other privileges of grace, and composedly
prize the benefit of Ordinances, that by rational acts of faith in them, I may
at length arrive at the fullness of assurance. Thus then Christians argue to
your selves, the duty and dignity of your Baptism, enjoy with comfort the
privileges thereby conferred: Know and approve your selves as baptized: and
thereby

Singled out of the world by Baptism, and set in a capacity of Salvation, as
was Noah's family in the Arc, 1 Pet. 3.21.

Sanctified unto God, Baptism being the solemn form of consecration, Ephesians.
5.26.

Sons and Subjects of the Covenant, invested with Christ, incorporated into his
Church, the seal of which is in your flesh by Baptism.

Suited for divine society, by the expiation of guilt, extirpation of sins
power, and exact confederation with God; all which the Scriptures note, to be
the effects of Baptism, or the washing of the body with pure water.

In the apprehension and argumentation of these privileges, let me guide your
judgments by propounding to your consideration, these several rules.

1. Rule. Salvation and sanctification, and the like privileges, are naturally
argued from Baptism, as it is an Ordinance of God ordained to that end.
Therefore the effects are to it attributed: It in all things necessary bears an
analogy with Circumcision, and propounds moral considerations to that end, to
the reasonable soul of man, to be argued by contemplative acts of faith.

2. Rule. All that will be sanctified, saved, and enjoy the before noted
privileges, must be baptized. All that will in an ordinary way possess them
(for extraordinary providence are beyond the reach of our debate) must be
baptized: not only on the necessity of a command from God, but the nature of
the Ordinance, being the means appointed rightly constituted, and readily
conclusive to such an end: So that none unbaptized, can on any ground expect to
enjoy, nor may warrantably be admitted to the privileges of a sanctified and
saved people of the Lord.

3. Rule. Some baptized, enjoy these privileges of salvation, sanctification,
and the like, visibly and symbolically; others, really sincerely, and savingly.
Some are seemingly saved and sanctified in the sight of men and esteem of the
Church: These enjoy the outward Ordinance only, and that is the guide and
ground of humane censure, and the judgment of the Church: Hence the term
Saint, Believer, Disciple, Brother, is in Scripture given, and must be by the
Church yielded to hypocrites; yea, to visible profane persons, but baptized:
but others are sincerely and savingly possessed of these privileges, not only
in the judgment of the Church, but by the testimony of their own conscience
and spirit of adoption. These enjoy not only the outward sign, but also the
inward grace of Baptism; have not only the body washed with pure water, but
also the heart spri^kled from an evil conscience. The outward Ordinance and
inward grace are sometimes divided, according to the visible and invisible
ministration of the Covenant. Baptism is to all, the same in its nature, but
not in its effects: it is in it self efficacious to all, but in some, not
meeting with due capacity, acts of faith, to improve it, it becomes not
effectual. Many baptized, and by the Church called heirs of Glory, lose their
hopes, holiness, and heaven it self; not because Baptism did not seal it, and
confer a ground or right, but because the soul acted not faith in the right
unto the claim of what was conferred: None so deservedly lose their inheritance
as those who improve not their sealed evidence to a due claim. Take heed lest
there be among you a profane Esau, heir of his fathers blessing, who for a
mess of pottage sold his birth right. Men in the Church contented with
Creature Comforts, claim not the privileges of the Covenant conferred by their
Baptism, and so lose their birthright.

4. Rule. The outward privileges of Baptism enjoyed visibly and in the
judgment of the Church, may be forfeited, and by the censures of the Church
taken away. A brother may be made as a Publicane and Heathen; a member of
Christ's body may be cut off; and a servant of God may be delivered unto Satan;
the Citizens of Jerusalem may be disfranchised: private persons may not at
pleasure disown baptized souls; but the public censure of the Church, if
unworthy their received Baptism, may discharge them Church communion, and
divest them of salvation, sanctification, interest in the Covenant, which clave
non errant. the Church: not Erring is ratified in Heaven as well as in the
Church visible upon earth.

5. Rule. Salvation, sanctification, and the privileges of the Covenant, may
by Baptism be conferred on them who are not sensible of the Ordinance, or in a
present capacity of using them. Right may be formally conferred, where it is
not presently acted. The King may be crowned in the cradle, the crown be set on
his head, as a token of right, before his hand can hold the Scepter. Present
incapacity of use is no bar to the laying the foundation of a future claim.
Many men at years, must rev^ew the Decrees concerning their estates, which were
sealed in Infancy. Infants may have their Baptism as soon as born, whereby
they must claim the Covenant, when they come to years of capacity.

6. Rule. The baptized, not arguing joy and duty from their Baptism, do sin
against the nature of the Ordinance: and either disown its institution to that
end, or deny its efficacy thereunto, and disesteem its specialty, as related
to the Covenant and people of God. Therefore deliver we our selves from sin,
and let us carefully improve our Baptism, as the qualification that fits us
for a confidence in approach to God.

The fourth exhortation, is to Parents, Christian Parents. With ardent care and
affection, present your Infants unto Baptism, and instruct them in their
baptismal privilege. Your children may, nay must, by your care, come nigh to
God. Let them then be consecrated; they are, as your natural issue, an holy
seed begotten to the Lord: Holy in the esteem of the Church, and extent of the
Covenant; partakers of the fatness of the Olives; Heirs of the promise of
Remission and Salvation; Children of the Covenant; bearing Christ his Name, as
his Disciples to be received, not offended, as we have before proved. And shall
not they come nigh to God, enter into his Sanctuary, be joined to the
assemblies of his people? Has not Christ said to the rebukers of such
approach, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for such
are of the kingdom of heaven, and capable of my blessing? and shall not then
Infants be admitted members of Christ his body, and have the seal of the
Covenant set in their flesh, and holiness stamped on them? Shall they not be
consecrated to the Lord: has not the Lord appointed the same sanctifying
Ordinance to root and branches; and will you not with care and affection pursue
it? Shall God give your children Covenant interest, and shall not your paternal
care provide for the confirmation of it, by the seal of which they are capable?
Would you not affectionately contend for their interest in a worldly estate;
neglect it not in an heavenly: but when God gives you children, be careful
with all convenient speed, to give them back again to God: When you have
brought forth heirs of the Covenant, with due reverence bring them to Gods
Church, to be enrolled, and have their interest sealed by Baptism. Provoke not
God to meet with you, as with Moses, for your neglect of sanctifying your seed
by his holy Ordinances. Let not your children have cause to curse and complain
of your neglect of their baptism. Let not your affection to your Infants
baptism be cooled, or care for it be checked by the foolish exceptions of
their adversaries, whilst you see their interest is clear. What if it be
objected, that all the arguments for their Baptism is by way of inference and
consequence: Is not Scripture consequence Gods word, binding conscience,
produced by our Savior as a ground of faith, to prove the Resurrection and his
own sufferings? Is it a sufficient warrant of women's receiving the Lords
Supper, and will it not prove Infants right to Baptism? and direct the
subjects to whom a sacred Ordinance must be applied? I have before evidenced
Infants right to Baptism, and given sufficient answer to the objections urged
against it: I would now engage you Parents to make conscience of your duty to
baptize your children. Contract not on your selves the guilt of the sacrilege
before noted; and the more to encourage you hereunto, let me show you some of
those many advantages that attend the infant season of Baptism, wherein it is
to be preferred before baptism at grown years. Reverend Mr. Forde, in his
practical use of Infant Baptism, has very affectionately enforced this
argument, and showed many benefits. I refer you seriously to read them: And for
your present help, let me wish you to consider, that Infant Baptism confers on
us these several privileges, which adult Baptism leaves us without.

1. Infant Baptism expresses sin nature.

2. Explaineth the benefit of Relation, and the method of the Covenant, and
eminently dignifyeth the children of such parents.

3. Enlarges and establishes the Church.

4. Exciteth Repentance.

5. Enforces Faith.

6. Engages duty.

7. Encourages under death.

None of these do so naturally flow from the baptism of men of grown years,
as we shall plainly see by a particular consideration of them.

The first benefit by Infant Baptism is, That it expresses the sin of nature,
and engages against it: Baptism does it self declare sin to be defiling,
but the spreading property thereof is evidenced by Infant Baptism. They are
washed, must needs witness they are unclean; but their early Baptism, must
needs note their uncleanness is in their nature, not in their persons; for
poor Babes, they have acted neither good nor evil: That Babes must bear the
pain of Circumcision bespeaks a foreskin upon their heart, that makes them
profane to God. The Baptism of men at years, does indeed mind them that
they are filthy, but that is a filthiness of their person, evidencing that they
having committed many actual corruptions, that appears to them: but that they
are transgressors from the womb, conceived in sin, and brought forth in
iniquiry, of a profane lump, and polluted in their very being; it no way at
all convinces, no, that is the language of the baptized before actual sin.
The baptism and burial of our babes, has ever been in the Church of God, two
unanswerable arguments against the Pelagian fancy, that children have no
imbred corruption, but sin by imitation: If we give away the first, it is just
God should take away the second, by giving us barren wombs. Infants Baptism
was urged by Austin against Pelagius, to the puzling of him in his denial of
original sin: yet he never denied them to be baptized, which had been a ready
answer; nor was he ever able to withstand the consequence: For if baptized
before polluted in person, they must needs be unclean in nature; before actual
sin pass from them, original sin must needs be upon them, before they are
capable of any imitation, then they must needs be the subjects of imbred
corruption: For Baptism cannot be denied to be Gods Ordinance of Remission and
Regeneration; and further, this evidence of hereditarie sin must needs engage
hereditarie enmity, and so irreconcilable hatred, much more violent and
implacable, than that which is personal, being enforced by the antiquity of the
quarrel: it runs in a blood, and passes from parents to children. I have
observed a great aptitude in the enemies of Infants Baptism, to embrace the
Arminian fancies, and deny all original sin: And it is no marvel, whilst
their principles are so near of kin; one Error will easily engender another. As
ever you will make visible the sin of nature, baptize your babes before they be
stained with actual guilt.

The second Benefit of Infant Baptism is, That it explaineth the benefit of
Relation and the method of transmitting the Covenant of Grace. Baptism, as a
seal of the Covenant, shows interest in the Covenant, and the benefit of
personal qualification, that fits for it; but it is the Infant season, that
sh^weth that God has wisely ordered Grace to run in natures channel, and
parental relation, under such a qualification as believing, to engender a
propriety to Baptism. He that first receives the Patent of honor can discern
no benefit of relation, save what is future; but if his Patent be only
personal, he sees none at all: but hereditarie honors are demonstrations of
relation and its advantage; hereby a man knows what his benefit is, in being
the child of a Baron or Earl, rather than of a common Knight or Gentleman.
Baptism applied to men of years, does indeed demonstrate a Covenant of Grace
granted on good behavior, unto every individual person; but wholly
obliterateth the seeds interest and extent of the Covenant unto natural Issue,
in order to their good behavior. It declares expressly, that as to the
specialtie of Gods Grace, relation to believing Parents, is no privilege: As
good be the child of Ammon, as of Abraham; of a Pagan, as a Christian: which
is clearly contrary to the tenure of the Covenant, I will be thy God, and the
God of thy seed: The promise is to you and your children: and the ground of
applying the initiating seal, is relation to such Parents. Therefore every
man-child at eight days old, shall be circumcised, that thereby it may appear,
the order of my Covenant is, to Parents believing and their seed, and the
benefit of relation to such Children, shall be, that I will be their God.
Relation to the Olive, is the reason of the branches fatness: The Jews relation
to their pious progenitors, is the only remaining hope of their conversion,
They are beloved of God, according to election, for the fathers sake, Romans
11.28. If we will maintain the knowledge of relative advantages in the Covenant
of Grace, carefully baptize we our Babes in their infancy, as the plainest
comment thereon: so when they shall consider themselves to have been sealed and
sanctified to God, before they had in themselves the least of personal
qualification, they will bless God for the Covenant of their fathers, and the
extent of it to the seed of believers, and giving them to be born of such
favorites to heaven. The great assertors of the Baptism of grown persons, to
defend their notion, do in the ministration of Grace, darken all relation, and
disfranchise all Posterity, interpreting the clear text of Scripture, The
promise is to you and your children, by a personal qualification, when God
shall call them; as if the Holy Ghost had spoken nonsense, and used a term of
relation in vain, and to no purpose: But certainly when God established a
Covenant of Grace, he did not invert natures course, but provided relation to
derive the privileges thereof in his Church, as well as other advantages in
the world; nor did he in the least, intend Religion to be an abridgement of
parental right, and power of dedication of their seed to the service of their
God, as well as designation to any worldly trade: and therefore he appointed a
seal of his Covenant and sacred Bond to his own service, whereby subjects
merely passive (as was before noted) might be at the pleasure of Parents to him
presented. And hereof Infant Baptism, is the only visible evidence in the
whole world: Root and branches, Parents and Children, are always homogeneal:
Nature makes all relations to be of the same kind; and Grace, not inverting
Natures order, will have the children, by the dignity of a sacred Ordinance, to
be declared of the holy kind, with their Parents; and by this religious badge
of Baptism, be distinguished from other Children of Turks, Jews, and Pagans,
who like their Parents, remain profane and estranged unto God. And thus
Infant Baptism, does not only evidence relation and its benefit, the method
and order of the Covenant to men within, but also to men without the Church,
that it may be to them an encouragement, to lay hold on the Covenant of God,
for that they do not only provide for their own personal term, but see Grace
also extended to their issue, on the very ground of relation natural unto them,
under a Christian qualification. And this is especially profitable to the Jew,
who having had the Covenant of God to themselves and seed natural, as their
seed, and that witnessed by the initiating seal of Circumcision, set in the
flesh of their children, must needs stumble at the new Covenant, if it exclude
their issue, as has been before noted: So that the Infant Baptism, so clearly
witnessing the order of the Covenant and benefit of relation to believing
Parents, to the comfort of men within the Church, and encouragement of men
without the Church, it must needs be more profitable than the Baptism at grown
years, which curtails the Covenant, cuts off Posterity, casts out of the
Church, all relation natural, and makes all ministrations of Grace to be
merely personal.

The third benefit of Infant Baptism is, That it enlarges the bounds, and
establishes the being of the Church of God; but the baptism of grown men does
much confine the borders, and hazard the being of the Church. Infant Baptism
does enlarge the Church by the spreading of it through whole Families,
Countries and Nations; persons are private and perishing but posterity is
public and flourishing; holy seed is the Churches nurserie, whilst grown
trees are fading; Lambs are the increase of Christ's Fold, when old-sheep are
few and dying, and succession is the surest title and strongest ground of
claim: when from generation to generation the Church of God is continued in a
constant Race, from Father to Son, it is much established against hellish
opposition. Nature has made all living Creatures seminall that they might
multiply and continue: the course of providence is the same to the Church that
it is to the World: certainly the only wise God well knew the best way to
enlarge and establish his own kingdom upon Earth; and he, though he founded
his Church in an old stock, yet ordered the spreading of it by natural
branches, and preservation of it by posterity: The method of God must needs
be the same in the maintenance of his Church under the new, as it was under
the old Testament, and he that takes up his Church from one Nation, on design
to extend it through all the nations of the World, would never plant it only in
personal perishing plants, but provide for their scattering an holy-seede for
its increase and succession. The promise of the Churches increase in Gospel
times, is noted to be by Children; the promise is express, I will lift up my
Standard to the Gentiles, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and
thy daughters on their shoulders, Isa. 49.22. Our own observation must needs
witness the bounds of the Church is much enlarged by Infant Baptism; more are
engaged to God by an early incorporation to his Church, then their own
personal choice, for where we see one man take up Christianity so much as to
the profession of it, on terms of choice, we see hundreds engaged therein by
parental profession, and baptismall obligation in their infancy; if an essay
hereof were made in America, how small would be the number of them that should
own God and Christ, by being baptized in grown years, and how numerous would
they be, by a timely dedication to God, and incorporation to the Church by
Infant Baptism? And again, how many generations, each after other, has
succeeded in the Churches of God in our Nation; but how soon will they be
extinct, this Orchard be overspread with the weeds of Atheism and Heathenisme,
if Anabaptists Parents do proceed to break off their branches from the
Olive, and the line of the Covenant from their Posterity?

The fourth benefit of Infant Baptism, It exciteth Repentance. Baptism in it
self is hereunto an argument, but it is more enforced from the season of
infancy than grown age; humiliatiation for past guilt, and future caution
against sin are much enforced by the season of our Baptism, and that by
pointing out unto us the inclination of our nature, and the kindness of our
God, both which, meeting with an ingenuous spirit, are very moving and melting
considerations; That we are washed in water, does witness we are unclean;
but in that we are washed in this Infant season, before stained with the least
actual sin and personal corruption, must needs witness, that in the day of our
nativity our father was an Amorite, our mother an Hittite: we were polluted in
our blood, our navel not cut; we were not washed, nor salted; no eye pitied us,
but we were cast out to the loathing of our persons. If Baptism be an
Ordinance of Remission and Regeneration, it must needs remember its infant
subjects, that in their nature there is guilt to be bewailed and pardoned, a
foreskin to be violently cut off; a pravity unto evil, to be slain; an old man,
to be crucified with Christ; a corrupt nature, to be watched against with all
care and caution, and that not acquired by any personal act or custom of our
own, as Baptism at age imports; but (the more cutting it is to consider) it is
imbred in nature, hereditarie to our being and therefore will more easily act
in us, more closely adhere to us, and does call for more care to keep it under:
true repentance always reflects on the root of sin, in iniquity was I
conceived, and in sin did my mother bring me forth, is the first complaint of
pensive David, and hereunto Infant Baptism does plainly point us.

This season of our Baptism, does not only acquaint us with our own vile
nature, but also affect us with Gods kindness, that will melt the ingenuous
soul into mourning and much care, not to offend; for the season of our Baptism
does show us Gods love to us, as he was the God of our fathers and the God of
our youth, and both of them are exceeding aggravations of guilt. God often does
charge the sin of Israel under the notion of forsaking the God of their
fathers, and the pious in Scripture, did much enforce their humiliation, by the
kindnesses God did show their fathers: And if we consider our selves sealed in
infancy by Baptism, we must needs see God was the God of our fathers, and
struck Covenant with them, and was unto them gracious, otherwise we could not
have been owned, as begotten to the Lord, and to be baptized; and therefore the
sins we commit, is against our fathers, friend, and God; nay they are against
the God of our youth, that owned us in the day of our nativity, and in the
loathing of our persons, and said unto us, Live; that took us as his own, swear
unto us, and entered into Covenant with us in our very cradle, when we could not
choose for our selves, and set the seal of his Covenant in our flesh, and
placed us on the knees of his Church, brought us up at his own costs, and
nourished us by his Ordinances, and has been our God all our days. Oh! what
aggravations of sin does this kindness of God afford? How may the Ministers
of God speak bitter things against them that daily break the Covenant of their
youth, and deal unfaithfully with the God of their fathers? Me thinks I should
hear some pensive soul sitting on its stool of repentance, thus soaking its
hard heart in its Infant Baptism, by such serious contemplations as these. I
am baptized: then surely unclean guilt is on my soul; the body of corruption
possesses me; if I be not pardoned, I perish: If this old man be not buried
with Christ in Baptism, I am undone. Must not the water of my baptism, set
the pump of my dry heart on running tears of contrition for this defiled estate
of my person: of my person; that is not all; I was baptized in infancy, before
I was in the least capable of staining my person. Oh wretched man! my very
nature is defiled: how can I dream of drawing nigh to God, that am the pudled
stream of a polluted fountain? Sin is my natural temper, and guilt the very
image of my father: In iniquity I was conceived, and in sin brought forth,
how shall I be purged from this natural blemish, or withstand this imbred
corruption? How am I necessitated to live in sin, for that it is naturalized
to my very being? How easily must I needs be drawn to sinful action, whose
very nature is sinful corruption? If ever I obtain pardon for, or power over
my sin, it must needs be an act of especial Grace, the benefit of a peculiar
Covenant: Sure I am, I can never sufficienly lament this sad estate of my
nature. Many are the sinful actions which daily flow from this bitter root,
and they sink my soul into the depth of sorrows, when I seriously consider my
self baptized: For hereby I see God, the God of my fathers, and the God of my
youth, to have been the object of my offenses, against thee, thee only have I
offended; thee, the God of my father, to whom thou shewedst favor, and called
him out of darkness into thy mavelous light, with whom thou did establish
thy Covenant of Grace, and did extend it to his seed; and made me,
miserable me, partakers of it, and so becamest my God from my very being; thou
saw me in the day of my nativity; when I lay in my blood in the loathing of
my person, thy eye pitied me, thou said unto me, Live; thou spakest kindly
unto me, swarest to me, and entred'st into Covenant with me, and made me
thine own; layedst me in the lap of thy Church, nourishedst me by thine
Ordinances: Thou by timely engaging me to thy self, did prevent my wicked
choice and Satan his malicious purpose of possessing me as a vassal of his
kingdom; all my days thou have done me good, yet wretched I, have sinned
against such a God; ungrateful I, have been ready to forsake thee my God, and
my fathers God, and have dealt falsely in thy Covenant. It might be just with
thee, to deal with me as I have dealt with thee, when I despised the oath in
breaking the Covenant; but in thy mercy, Lord, I pray thee, Remember thy
Covenant thou made to me in the days of my youth, and establish it for an
everlasting Covenant, that I may know the Lord, that I may remember and be
ashamed, and never open my mouth any more, because of my shame, when thou art
pacified toward me, for all that I have done against the God of my father, and
the God of my youth: Now will I live in loyalty to so good a God, if thou will
give me to be sanctified by the blood of sprinkling, and my old man to be
crucified by Baptism, which by thy Grace shall be the awe of my soul and
answer of my heart unto every temptation to sin against thee.

This benefit cannot be effected by adult Baptism, which affords no such
matter of meditation, apprehending the dispensations of God to be only
personal, and therefore to be personally improved.

The fifth Benefit of Infant Baptism is, that it enforces faith toward God.
Baptism, as a seal of the promise, pledge of love, and sanctifying Ordinance
of God, is a ground of faith pleadable in prayer by all its subjects, but
receives not a little force from the season of its application in infancy;
whilst it self witnesses the Covenant it seals, the season of its use
witnesses the extent of the Covenant to believers and their seed, and creates
a ground, on which to claim protection, as well by early seizure, as covenant
propriety, not to note how all the Graces of God, in order to salvation and
good things of this life, even all things pertaining to life and godliness, are
assured to the soul by Baptism, as the seal of the Covenant. The Parent can
with faith thus plead from the season. Lord, my child is thine in Covenant, to
thee begotten, to thee dedicated, by thy seal on his flesh: Oh! will thou own
him: Remember him; take care of him; establish thy Covenant with him; let all
the graces of thy promise be performed to him; let not Satan seduce him from
thy service, to which he is so soon sealed. How much do I owe to thee, that
make Grace to run through Natures channel, my loins? Lord, let him in time
know, and have faith to claim his interest: keep him from the property of
profane Esau, that he despise not his birthright in thy Covenant, which thou
have sealed to him in the sight of thy people, by his baptism. And as the
Parent so the person baptized, acting faith in the Ordinance, does thus enforce
it from his Infant season of enjoyment of it. God is a gracious God, in calling
my parents; he had respect unto my good, before I had a being; he graciously
established with them a Covenant, which he extended to their seed; I no sooner
sprang from the womb, but he owned me as his own, and called me by his name,
and set the seal of his Covenant in my flesh: as studious to forestall the
choice of my corrupt will (which would never have chosen him) he challenged me,
and caused me to be dedicated to his service, as sensible of Satan's malice; he
made an early seizure of me, and set his mark upon me, and before there was in
me the least of act or qualification; he sanctified me to himself by the
washing of water. What ever doubts may deter me, I will now draw nigh unto him,
and depend upon him; for he that was so soon gracious in extending and sealing
to me the Covenant, will faithfully perform it: My condemnation will be most
just, if I, having such grounds of faith, should be cut off by reason of
unbelief: now I will walk before, and wait upon him; for he will not now
forsake me, or suffer Satan to repossess me, and take me out of his house and
family.

The sixth Benefit of Infant Baptism is, That it engages more to duty, than
adult Baptism. Herein it is of use to the Parent and baptized child. How much
of argument does Infant Baptism press upon the Parent, to the due instruction
and education of his baptized child. Not to speak any thing of the benefit of
catechizing it self, the Parent has reason to refl^ct the Baptism of his
child in its infant estate, to convince him, That if God has been so gracious
to extend a Covenant of Salvation to his seed; he must have so much grace as to
make them know Gods goodness, and understand the extent of the Covenant: If God
has caused their loins to convey grace as well as sin, their care must be
that the grace of God be not received in vain. The child's ignorance of interest
in conceded honors and privileges, is the baseness of education, and blot of
natural affection: If by their Parental power they have dedicated them to
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, it is their part to make them know to what they
are devoted. And as it binds the Parents to the duty of education, so the
child to careful observation: Early adoption is the greatest argument of
filial observation that can be: the child taken off the Stall, is more bound to
the will of Parents, than the man at years adopted to inherit; the one is the
object of more pity, subject of more care, cost and charge, but of less
service and obedience; therefore bound more to duty than the other.
Infant Baptism gives cause to sing with Israel, He is our God and our fathers
God, we will exalt him, Exodus 15.2. and with David I am thy servant, the son of
thy handmaid; I will offer sacrifice, and call upon thy name, Psalm. 116.16.17.
We must not think as heirs of dignity to wear Gods livery in our cradles, but
must know, it makes us also heirs of duty, to yield loyalty to him all our
days. Parental dedication to God, lays on us the duty of observation: Shall
Parents proclaim days of purim to be observed in all generations, and
posterity dare to pretermit them? Whether we consider Gods pity or our Parents
power sparkling in our Infant Baptism, both impose on us duty; and the nature
of our Baptism (the effect of both) binds us to fight at Gods command under
Christ his Banner against every iniquity and vice, to the discharge of every
duty of Religion; but neither faith nor obedience can be so enforced by the
Baptism of grown persons, which deny relations natural to be of any use in
things of Salvation, and does greatly darken the method and order of the
Covenant of Grace and Salvation.

The seventh and last Benefit of Infant Baptism is, That it encourages under
death; and that either the Child or Parents. We read in primitive times of
Infant Martyrs, certainly they were thereunto prepared by a knowledge of their
interest in the Covenant. In vain should the miserable mother encourage the
scourged thirsty child, to remember the cup of which Isaac drank, and patiently
to bear its present torments, for that it should be shortly crowned with
eternal glory, if the child at eight years of age had not understood the
Covenant of God, and been catechized in its baptism. Our Anabaptists will
never afford us babie Martyrs, that will not allow us babie Christians. And as
for Parents, if their childrens interest in the Covenant and right to Baptism,
do not support them under the death of their babes, I (a parent of dead
children) do demand, what can? That they are by nature children of wrath, must
not be denied; that they fall into a limbus Infantum, must be denied by all
that abhor Popery: that they are saved there remains no hope, whilst we see
them out of the Ark of salvation. What unusual way the Anabaptists run upon for
their own comfort, they have not yet declared, nor will Scripture warrant any.
Were it not for Infants interest in the Covenant, sealed in their Baptism, I
should mourn over my dead children, as without hope.

You see now, that there is not only warrant in Scripture for the Baptism of
your Infants, but there is much of profit by it. Whilst others are beating the
controversy, do you study the practice of Infant Baptism. Let not seducers
beguile your simple souls, by pretending Infant Baptism is unlawful, because
unusefull: But seeing there is so much profit in the Ordinance, and so much in
the season of its application, prize it, pursue it, and preserve it to the
Church: Let your children be baptized in their Infancy, and catechized
according to their growing capacity, that through ignorance they may not throw
away their birthright, but may duly know the duty and dignity thereof, and
d^mean themselves as baptized souls.

The fifth and last exhortation is to Church-gathering saints, To admit the
baptized into the approaches to God, in the assemblies of his people. Make no
bar of division to such as we are the badge of union. If Baptism do
incorporate into the Church, and consecrate unto God, why do you deny the
relation of the baptized, or their fitness for divine service? either deny
Baptism to be the door of admission into the Church of Christ, or throw down
your Church Covenant agreement or experiences of graces, as to entrance into a
Church state. Deny Baptism to be the Church constituting Bond, or talk not of
gathering Churches from among baptized souls: Affect not to your selves the
terms and titles of saints, brethren, believers, Church, and the like, whil^st
those you despise have as good, na^ (by reason of your sinful schism) a
better title thereunto than your selves. If Baptism be the ground of
confidence in access to God, who are you that make it void? Is not the
straitning of the Church door as dangerous as setting it wide open? Will it not
be equally provoking to God to let dogs into his house, and to keep children
out; to pollute his holy things by the unbaptized, and bar the baptized from
his worship? If men baptized walk disorderly, endeavor by discipline to reduce
them: deny not their interest: drive them not from God: make it not your
design to paganize the Christians among whom you dwell, that some few of them
may be brought into your Church Way. Weigh well the nature of Baptism, if it do
not charge your way with wickedness, I know not how to judge. If Baptism
rightly apprehended, be not the engine to batter Independencie, I dare renounce
my skill in militaries. Let not God say, draw near in full assurance, having
your bodies washed with pure water; and you say to your baptized Brethren,
stand thou further from me, I am holier than thou.

Thus then I have noted to you the nature of Baptism, the outward Ordinance,
and the duties that flow from its consecrating nature; which rightly
understood, will convince much error, and correct many sinful practices: Which
that it may do, God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, in whose holy Name we are
baptized, follow it with his blessing. Amen.

FINIS.

