THE DECLARATION Of Lieutenant General CRUMWELL Concerning The Kingdom of
Scotland, and their invading of the Realm of England. And his Resolution to
march into the said Kingdom with his Army, for restitution of Goods and Cattle
to all His Majesty's Subjects of England, who have suffered since their first
Invasion.

ALSO, The proceedings of General Monro against him, and the Summons of the
Estates at Edinburgh to the Scottish, Nation, touching the Army of England, and
redeeming of their prisoners; with the resolution of the Scots Jockies
thereupon, and a new Army raised in Scotland by Lieut. General Lesley.

LIKEWISE, A great Blow given to the English near the Borders of Scotland, and
200 taken prisoners. As also, the resolution of the two Castles of Scarbrough
and Pomfract, and joyful News from Yarmouth.

September. 18. Printed for R. Williamson, 1648.

THE DECLARATION Of Lieutenant-Generall CRUMWEL Concerning The Kingdom of
Scotland, and his present Design and Engagement with the new levied Forces,
commanded by the Earl of Lanerick.
Right Honored,
THe Lord Lanerick in the South of Scotland is very active in levying of new
Forces for the King, who by Commission from the Committee of Estates at
Edinburgh, summons in all from the age of 16. to 60. requiring obedience from
them for the assistance of Monro, regaining of their liberties, and redeeming
of their Natives: but their appearance is but small, the Lads refusing to
engage against England, which causes the Commit of Estates to give express
Orders for an inforcement; yet all cannot prevail, the major part disserting
their own habitations, and flies to the Marquis of Argyle for shelter, whofe
gallantry toward the Commonalty, induces the whole Kingdom to adhere to him,
and have now completed three or four thousand horse and foot, for their safety
and preservation, to be commanded and conducted by the said Marquess, being
resolved to oppose Mouro and his Army, and give a check to the Results of the
Committee of Estates.

Lieut. Genesis David Lesley has raised two thousand old Soldiers, desires a
conjunction with the Marquis, who is now upon his march from the North toward
the City of Edinburgh.

But Monro uses is utmost endeavor to obstruct the same, and is now marching
from the Confines of England, to secure the said City, and Committee, being
much disturbed with new commotions and insurrections.

They are pursued exceeding close by Lieut. General Crumwell, and Major Genesis
Lambert, who are resolved to have restitution of all their plu^dered goods and
cattle, which they have so barbarously seized on, and took from the
Inhabitants in these parts, the Lieuten. Genesis having declared, That he is
resolved to hazard life, estate, and fortune, for the privilege and liberty of
the subject, and to preserve the freeborn people of this Kingdom from violence
and oppression, and therefore will give his utmost assistance, for the
restoring of them to their just rights, and remanding back the Cattle which
has been taken from them, and sent into Scotland; this gives great
satisfaction to the Country people, who are so far taken with his declaratory
expressions, that they have tendered theie service in this present Expedition,
proffering to adventure all that is near and dear unto them, for his
assistance, which was well taken, and thanks returned for their late and
present forwardness in showing themselves willing to promote so great a work,
and to root our, and disperse the enemies of Religion, King, and Kingdom.

We hear that the Royal party in Cheshire had lately a design to have
surprised the City of Chester for the King, and to have put most of the
Officers and soldiers to the sword; but even in the very nick of time, they
were discovered, and the grand Actors taken, and executed.

The like horrid and persidious complottings have been fomented in several
other parts of the Kindome, but by the providence of the great Jehovah still
frustrated.

Scarbrough holds out with great insolency, the young Gentleman Col. Bointon
denies a surrender, having fair promises of relief from the Prince, some Forces
are landed there, but no considerable party, not amounting to above three or
four hundred. Colenell Bethell the Commander in chief against it, is resolved
to storm.

The like preparations is making at Pomfra^t, the officers and others denying a
surender, Ba^ceries are raising, and skaling ladders sent for.

Newcastle 14. Sept. 1648.

Other letters say as follows.

On Satterday last the said Monro marched with his Army toward Morpeth, where
he called a Council of War, the results whereof was, to march back to the
Coal-pits, and fire them all, to augment the price of Scotch-coal, and advance
Navigation: but Sunday morning two Posts came speeding to have him come
presently back into Scotland, a good pretense for his running away, for the
Presbyterian Ministers had got hold of the civil Sword, made the renowned
Marquis of Argyle General having an Army consisting of four thousand Horse and
Foot, and much too hard for the new levied Forces of the Lord Lanerick, most of
them being totally routed and dispersed, not ten being left in a Body.

These messengers came from Crauford and Lanerick who are afraid of the
Ministers new sword, more then of all their excommunications.

And yet have they proceeded to many notable decrees, to pass by others, one
is, That in regard of the great defection to the Covenant throughout Scotland,
they will not administer the Sacrament of the supper for one year to come,
repent who will, and as soon as they will.

This ill tidings saved our Coal-pits, and sends the Scots the nearest way over
^weed, in such haste, that they had almost left their plunder behind them, had
they not preferred it before life, and thus are the Lads shifted once more out
of England toward Kelsey, leaving the confederate English by the way of
Northam, to shift for themselves.

They quartered in Banburg Hundred, and being thus deserted, they repair to
Barwick for safety, from the Parliaments Forces, whom they thought at their
backs though above fifty miles from them.

But ths Governor Lieut. Col. Lesly tells them plainly he could not let them
in, having no provisions, from whence it was reported, and may come to it in
time, that by directon of the Marquis of Argyle, upon his peril, he should
hold that place for the Parliament of England.

Col. Lawson is gone with his feeble company toward Cockermouth Castle, and
would be glad of quarter upon mercy.

In Northumberland many were plundered to great values, among others Sir John
Fenwicke, from whom was taken his best movables, and many gallant horses, his
damage is estimate at 2000 l. the Sheriff of Northumberland had his share
also, not meat for a Regiment left in all that County.

By Letters from Yarmouth it is advertized, that the populous Inhabitants after
a long capitulation, they still persisting not to have any soldiers come into
them, and yet carried themselves in a newtrall way, has yielded and given way
to the income of some hundreds of Foot, and some Troops of Horse, but not till
Monday night, they stood so far out as to arm their men: the General was
necessitated down, but before he came they had agreed

There will be some men put into Garrisons, its conceived only in some Fort,
that may command both town and Harbor, and its but necessary, considering the
great danger of a foreign Army landing there, whose great threatenings may
allar'm the whole Kingdom to a posture of defense, and embrace those who have
been their safeguard and protection for these 7 or 8 years.

Letters further from the North say, that Monro is retreated from the Confines
of England, but pursued by Lieu. Genesis Crumwell, who is resolved to have
restitution made to those English that have suffered since the late invasion.
The Scottish Royalists leave no ways unattempted to raise additionall Forces
for the King, and sends fair Proposals throughout the whole Kingdom for a
compliance, but can no ways prevail. Most of Sir Philip Musgraves forces ars
routed and scattered by the Lieutenant General, and above 200 taken prisoners.

FINIS.

