THE FOUNDATION OF GOD, WITH THE Immutability thereof, Laid for the Salvation
of his Elect; with Infallible Marks and Signs of Election. Which may serve as a
Storehouse of Comfort to Religious Minds, in this Season of Danger felt and
feared.

As many as were ordained to eternal Life, believed, Acts 13.48. The Highway of
the upright is to depart from evil, Prove. 16.17. We are kept by the Power of
God, etc. 1 Pet. 1.5. LONDON, Printed for James Cowse Bookseller in Exeter.
1682.

To the Honored The Lady Susanna Holworthy; William Crompton Minister of the
Gospel,

Dedicateth the following Discourse, of the Perpetuity of a Regenerate man's
Estate.

In opposition to that pernicious Doctrine of the Saints Apostasy;

As a Testimony of the great Honor and Service so justly due from him, and all
that know her.

Presuming on her perseverance in Grace and Title to Glory.

THE FOUNDATION OF GOD, WITH THE Immutability thereof, Laid for the Salvation
of his Elect; with Infallible Marks and Signs of Election. Which may serve as a
Storehouse of Comfort to Religious Minds, in this Season of Danger felt and
feared.

As many as were ordained to eternal Life, believed, Acts 13.48. The Highway of
the upright is to depart from evil, Prove. 16.17. We are kept by the Power of
God, etc. 1 Pet. 1.5. LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

THE FOUNDATION OF GOD, With the Immutability thereof, Laid for the Salvation
of his Elect, with the Infallible Marks and Signs of Election, etc. From
2 Timothy 2.19. Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands sure, having this
Seal, the Lord knows who are his; and let every one that names the name of
Christ depart from Iniquity.


THE Penmen of Sacred Scripture, in their several discourses, had proposed to
them these ends, viz. to publish the Truth impartially; to suppress Sin and
Errors boldly; to comfort the Elect, and to persuade all men in their several
Callings to walk conscionably.

All which are observed exactly everywhere, by our Apostle; more especially in
these Epistles to Timothy, in this Chapter and Text, most punctually.

Neither may I propose unto my self any other ends in Preaching or Writing it,
than St. Paul did in penning it; viz. to explain the truth of Christ hid from
many; to suppress, by endeavor, Sin and false Opinions; to comfort the
despised Flock; to cheer up their drooping Souls against dangers felt and
feared; and to persuade all that name the Name of Christ, to depart from
iniquity!

For the more easy entrance upon the Text, we will see the whole Chapter
briefly analyzed: wherein we find diverse Exhortations of St. Paul to Timothy,
and in him to the whole Church of God. As,

First, to be valiant, cheerful and careful in the Grace and Work of Christ;
both to teach personally, and ordain men fit and able, faithfully to reach
others, Ver. 1.2.

It should be our meat and drink to do the Will of him, that has set us on
work.

Gods Ordinances suffer by irregularities; and therefore Church Governors must
be careful not to permit unlearned and irreligious men to invade the
Ministerial Office; who, like the sons of Eli, forsaking the Character of their
Dignity, will bring contempt upon the Divine Oblations, 1 Timothy 3.10.

Secondly, patiently to undergo the burden of his Office, in the pains and
sorrows necessarily attending thereon, Ver. 3. Ministers may not expect always
to see Halcyon-days, nor the shines of worldly favor. Constantines Silver Age,
like the Phoenix, comes rarely. Though their work be full of Dignity, yet its
full of danger. Ministers are Stars, but will be often muffled in Clouds; they
are Lights, but shall meet with many Winds, which shall be apt to blow them
out. Luther spoke too true, when he said, That to be a faithful Preacher and
not meet with troubles, is impossible. The Devil will raise up the whole
Militia of Hell against them; and therefore, of all men, such have need, as of
Courage so of Patience.

Of this he gives two reasons; One drawn from the bond between them and Christ,
as between a Soldier and his Captain; who must stay not only in the fair and
soft march, but in the hot and bloody Battle. The other, from the Reward,
implied in two Similitudes; the first from a Wrestler, who striving lawfully,
shall be crowned; Ver. 5. The second of an Husbandman, who after a stormy
Winter, shall see the most desireably pleasant Spring. The labor of none so
intolerable, the reward of none so incomparable as of faithful Ministers.

Thirdly, To defend two main Principles of Christian Religion, viz. the
Incarnation and Resurrection of our Lord and Savior, which were strongly
opposed in those early times of the Church, the Age immediately following. In
the 8th Ver. These may be called the Pillars of Christianity; the Articuli
stantis vel cadentis Ecclesiae (as Luther spoke in reference to the Doctrine of
Justification by faith;) and mainly opposed by Heretics and Seducers. Care
must be taken to defend them with vehemence and zealous Contention; and
therefore the great Apostle would have Timothy bestir himself about these
Points, and sets on his advice with a special Memento, Remember, a word that
imports both Affection and Action.

From hence he proceeds to take off an Objection of fear, which might be raised
in the mind of Timothy, (a young Steersman in his new Office of an Evangelist
and Lanched out into the deep, when Winds were loud and seas went high) by
reason of afflictions and persecutions which would certainly overtake him for
the same truth; in Ver. 9.10, etc. telling him,

1. That though he were bound, yet the Word of God was not bound, nor could be
from working. Men may as soon fetter up the influence of the Sun, stop the
motion of the Stars and hinder the blowing of Winds: or, whoever be bound, the
Word of the Lord shall run and be glorified, have a prevailing Power. St. Paul
preached though a Prisoner, and so did other Martyrs in Queen Mary's days.

2. That the end of those sufferings would be every way profitable. Hereby the
Word would be more effectual; as when Paul suffered, the Gospel was furthered;
Phil. 1.12; the Elect more courageous; so, the Brethren became hold by his
bonds, and were bound to speak the Word without fear: and the sufferers more
sure of reigning with Christ, who went before them in the same path, from the
Cross to Paradise, from suffering to glory. It became him to suffer and enter
into glory; and it becomes his Servants to follow their Lord. Besides, all
those who for fear shall deny Christ, or his truth, here, shall be denied
entrance into Heaven by Christ, hereafter. He is not worthy of a Crown, that
dares not bleed to obtain it.

Fourthly, He enjoins him to suppress and oppose all Verbal Controversies; Ver.
4. and doubtful Disputes, because of some evil consequents which ordinarily
follow thereupon; as

1. No profit to any: and therefore as the Shellfish amongst the Jews was
accounted unclean, because it had little meat, and required a great deal of
labor to get it; so may they be reputed, who feed upon hard Questions and
unprofitable Discourses; and to as little purpose as those in Robertus Gallus
his Dream, who laying aside the pure Manchet, fed upon hard stones, and so had
little nourishment at the Feast. Niceties and Criticisms in Religion taking up
Men's thoughts, Faith and Holiness are neglected, and and so they labor about a
Shellfish, pick Bones and feed not on Meat.

2. The Subversion of the Hearers.

Ministers therefore, should study to divide the Word aright, applying it to
the capacity of their Hearers; unmasking the Truth, that each Eye may see and
every Soul be enamored with its beauty, shunning as profane, Ver. 16. so
affected terms and curious expressions, which with their paint and meretricious
bravery, keep out the light of solid Truth. That Is the best Glass which most
truly shows the face, not that which is richly set with Pearls; and that is the
best preaching, which has most to do with the Conscience; which has plus
operis quam ostentationis, and speaks to the Ears of that which St. Peter calls
the hidden man of the heart; to which, the Plain-song always makes the best
Music. Such was the practice of that Golden-mouth of the West, of zealous Mr.
Bradford and the renowned Perkins, of whom it is said, that he came so close in
his Applications, that he was almost able to make his Hearers hearts fall down
within them.

This Evil here rebuked, he compares to a Gangrene, Ver. 17, which creeps from
part to part, till the whole be infected. So it has been with contentious
Verbalists, sophistical Wranglers; who study more for words than matter, and
dote more on a Criticism, than on a practical truth, catch more after an
Elegancy than a Promise.

For Example, he brings in Hymenaeus and Philetus; showing first their Opinion
about the Resurrection, V. 18. and then the danger of it, overthrowing the
faith of some. It must needs be a strange Opinion indeed, that none will
follow; and scarce any so monstrous, but if it has had a Mother, will also
find a Nurse. Many shall follow their pernicious ways. A sad judgment upon
them, who receive not the truth in Love.

Fifthly, He endeavors to remove the offense might arise from the falling away
of such, Ver. 19, 20, 21. showing,

1. That Gods Elect were exempted from that danger; being fixed immoveably in
their Orb, like glittering and never falling Stars; Their foundation being of
God, not in, or of themselves.

2. How Christians might be assured of their Election; than which there could
be no greater comfort on this side Heaven.

3. That there ever have been, are and will be a mixed multitude in the Church
(the Moon has her spots, and clouds are among the stars;) comparing it to a
great House, wherein are Vessels of gold, appointed to Honor; and of wood,
appointed to dishonor. Vessels of gold and silver, implying diversity of gifts
in the Elect: Vessels of wood and earth, showing a difference of sin in
Reprobates. Those of Gold, must not run from those of Wood; God is and will be
glorified in both. No final separating from the true Church, because of wicked
men, Vessels of dishonor therein. As God does not, so neither must man punish
the innocent for the nocent; I fly from the chaff, lest I should be such,
says St. Augustine; I forsake not the floor, lest I should be nothing. Which
consideration, should serve to qualify the excessive heat of some among us,
who are zealous, but not according to knowledge.

Lastly, He exhorts to a peaceable profession of Holiness; showing how
Ministers should behave themselves in the Church, to work this in the hearts of
people; viz.

1. To shun youthful Lusts. So called, because youth is most subject to them.
Neither are we men in Christ, till we have in some measure subdued them.
Understanding here, the Lust of striving, boasting, and vainglory; not
excluding other evil motions of Concupiscence.

2. To follow Righteousness, Faith and Charity; in study, conference and
disputation; that so, foolish and unlearned Questions, may be ever distasteful
to them.

3. With meekness and gentleness to reprove such as go astray, especially on
the right hand, Galat. 6.1. Set them in joint again: so that Text runs.
Reprehension is not an act of Butchery, but of Chyrurgery; and Ministers must
do as Chyrurgions use to do with broken bones and dislocated joints, who
restore them with tenderness; patiently expecting the manifestation of Divine
goodness upon them in their Repentance. Who would wound those, whom they design
to cure? A word will do more with some, than a blow with others. Downright
blows do not always pierce deepest. Stormy spirits are not often efficacious.
It is not the sparkling flame, but invisible heats, which melt metals. Furious
proceedings do often bind faster; when a loving persuasion upon certain
grounds, recovers many from Satan's snares.

By this time, this occasion of the words in hand is manifest. Hymenaeus and
Philetus teach false Doctrine, and thereby seduce others after them; such as
had but a temporary faith and made an outward profession without inward
sincerity. True justifying faith being an infused habit, cannot be destroyed,
by any act or acts of men: that were to make the foundation void or uncertain
and the building ruinous: When the Apostle tells us plainly, the foundation of
God stands sure, etc. Yet by the falling away of temporary Professors,
especially being men of eminence and worth; St. Paul saw or foresaw, that good
men were or might be offended.

1. Seeing Learned men fall away, they might begin to affect a change, to think
or say, Why should not we be of the same mind with them, they see more than we
can or do?

2. They did or might fall foul on the Church: how can that be a true Church
which breeds Heretics; wherein are so many Sects and Divisions? These are so
many stumbling blocks in their way, producing such scandals and prejudices in
their minds, as cannot easily be removed: as the Papists do with much outrage
object against the Reformed Churches, though they do it with many false
aggravations.

3. When they saw men of great account and note in the Church to destroy that
faith which once they maintained, they began to doubt of the Churches
continuance; of the Promises of God made unto it, or at least, that there was
no certainty of any thing therein; no assurance of perseverance to salvation in
that Church, when such great ones fall.

To all, our Apostle here answers, that there was no such cause of fear or
doubting: for although some of principal note, err, or be seduced and fall
away, yet the foudation of God stands sure, the Lord knows who are his, and
none can pluck them out of his hands.

So that the Text is nothing else, but a comfortable conclusion against that
damnable and Spirit-quenching doctrine of Saint-Apostacy; Which St. Paul might
foresee should be broached in the latter days, persuading them then and all
other true Churches of Christ.

That notwithstanding Phygellus and Hermogenes, Hymenoeus and Phyletus;
Pelagius, Bertius, Arminius, Thomson, Jackson, Mountague, with others since;
Pope and Popelings with all their followers and abetters, have or should err
and seduce many after them; Yet we should not be offended, nor discouraged; for
the Elect of Christ cannot finally be seduced, nor their faith destroyed
totally, because their salvation is grounded upon the Eternal and constant
purpose of God; which foundation stands firmer than to be shaken with such
blasts.

The salvation of Christ's Elect, has a firm foundation; not in man, but in
God; not wavering or undetermined, but standing surely sealed in the knowledge
of God; and that not only in the knowledge of simple intelligence, as possible,
conditionally, if they will, or if such and such things fall out; but in the
knowledge of pure Vision, infallibly and eternally decreed to be certain;
whereby the Lord particularly did and does discern his own from others, calling
them by their Names, and by his Ambassadors showing them the marks, whereby
they may know their own Election.

The parts of this Scripture are two, viz.

First, The cause and certainty of the salvation of Gods Elect. The foundation
of God stands sure.

Secondly, The marks and notes of Election, whereby men may be particularly
assured, they are of the number.

Here we have, what God did freely for his Elect before they were; What the
Elect by Gods help must and will do for themselves after they are.

Of both these in their order; and first of the former, viz.

The foundation of God. There is a twofold foundation laid: One that is God;
so the whole Trinity is a foundation to the being and existence of all things.
Christ Jesus the second Person in the Trinity is the foundation of Election and
Salvation: Other foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. Another, that is of God; and so the foundation is
twofold, viz.

First, Of Creation; Gods intent and purpose to give a Being unto things,
which, as then, had none: and this foundation remains sure; One generation
passes away and another comes, but the earth, i. e. the foundation of the
Creation, abides for ever, Eccles. 1.4. And, whereupon are the foundations
thereof founded, Job 38.6. And, who laid the foundations of the earth, that it
should not be removed for ever? Psalm 104.5.

Secondly, Of disposition, his immutable Decree and Purpose; disposing all
things created to their several ends. To which ends they must arrive by means.
The means is Service to be performed here in this World. All serve him not
alike; all were not ordained by him for one end. As the Love of God was not
alike to all his Creatures in the foundation, so the service of his Creatures
is not all alike. Some serve him necessarily, by natural inclination, as the
Heavens and Elements, with all those bright and purer Bodies contained in them,
which run their course by the mighty Word of God's Power; they live by the
Spirit's Omnipotency and immediate Acts, wherewith the Divine Nature glorifies
it self: their end is to move and work for the good of man; after his departure
hence, they shall be dissolved; either by being renewed to some other end, or
annihilated.

Some serve him constrainedly, by unwitting subjection to his all-ruling Power:
as all Reprobates, both Angels and Men, effecting the Lords purposes by his
co-active direction, not out of any good intention to obey him: with whom he
glorifies himself in his Justice; whose end is damnation! The Lord foreseeing
them in their blood, past by them before time; they actually dispose themselves
to destruction in time.

Others there are who serve him voluntarily, with purpose of heart, as sinful
men, made good by Election and effectual Vocation, whose end is salvation,
without possibility of failing, in respect of Gods foundation; whose Eternal
purpose was, by such means to bring them to such an end: and with these God
glorifies himself in respect of his mercy. God can lose no part of his glory,
neither in regard of Power, Justice or Mercy (these glorious Attributes will
shine, without an uninterrupted or bespotted splendor) therefore none of these
can miss their proper ends.

To give an Example of this last. Hymenoeus and Paul, Pelagius and Augustine,
were of the same matter, had the same power of Will, but Gods disposition of
them in the foundation, put a difference in their actual service; two of them
err and destroy the faith; the other, both preach the truth and build up the
faith of many. Even so, all things created, were eternally in the secret
Counsel of God, disposed and pre-ordained to their several ends by means,
according to the good pleasure of his Will; Whether to return to no being, to a
worse or a better-being; and this, I conceive, is the foundation of God, here
meant.

Stands sure. Immutable and inevitable. And that,

1. Ex part Dei, in regard of the Decree it self; which knits together the end
and means unseparably. So that the Creature cannot but persevere, in using the
means to attain their pre-ordained ends: not so much by any Virtue connate or
inherent in themselves, or by any outward Agent violently impelling, but by the
power of God, gently disposing of what he finds in them, or bestows upon them,
according to his own purpose.

2. Ex part rei, in respect of the Subject of this foundation; elected ones
after their effectual Calling, are assured, not by a direct act of the
Understanding and Will, assenting to the Work and Promise of God, but by
reflection upon themselves in special, do believe, believing apprehend,
apprehending apply, and by applying are particularly assured, not only for the
time present (which Jesuits and Arminians may admit), but for the time to come,
that they shall persevere and be saved, by virtue of Gods free love and grace
as the foundation, and by the meritorious sufferings of Christ as the means of
salvation. And this is the certainty here meant.

Having this Seal. When Darius with his Lords had cast Daniel into the Lions
Den ( Dan. 3.17.) the entrance was sealed with the Kings own Signet and that of
his Lords, that the purpose might not be changed concerning Daniel: so when the
King of Heaven decreed to take up all his Daniels, his beloved ones, out of the
Den of the roaring Lion, he put his Seal unto the Decree, that the purpose
might not be changed or altered. This Seal is twofold:

First, there is the Seal of God in Man, of which we shall be led to discourse
in managing the latter part of the Text.

Secondly, There is the Seal of God unto this foundation in God, the Lord
knows who are his.

The Lords knowledge is infinite; eternal as himself and infallible, from all
Eternity fore-knowing all things that ever should come to pass; not by
discourse or succession, as to know this by that, or that after this; nor by
that metaphysical manner of knowing, by way of composition or Division, which
pre-supposes distinct acts for several Objects; but by one single individual
act (if we may lawfully speak of so high a mystery), foreseeing and knowing
every thing in himself by way of Eminency; in their second causes before they
were, and in themselves as if they had been; Universals and particulars, which
were to be made or done, being laid before him from all Eternity, as if they
had been already made or done. The Lord knows who are his, and who are not; but
his own he knows with an especial knowledge of Love and approbation, as he does
not others: Matthew. 25.12. Verily I say unto you, I know you not. Therefore
there is a book of Life; none of Death, mentioned in Scripture: this book of
Life, is this Knowledge here mentioned, wherein Gods own do stand firmly
recorded. We know, this Knowledge of God is as himself, and can be no more
divided than himself; yet for our better conceiving of things, so known by him,
we distinguish of it. There is in God,

First, A necessary natural knowledge, which respects the Power and Providence
of God, concerning all things done or possible to be done. This is not here
meant.

Secondly, A free knowledge, which goes hand in hand with the foundation of God,
respecting only things that should actually come to pass with his approbation,
and has reference to his mercy: and this is the knowledge here spoken of.

The Lord knows with a free and everlasting Knowledge, with the knowledge of
Election and Reprobation, who were then decreed and should ever remain to be
his: so that such men once so known, can never cease to be his, or known to
belong to any other. His may fall from themselves and pluck off the Seal in
themselves, not from him, nor the Seal in him. None can pluck them out of my
Fathers hands. Majesty it self may as soon be dethroned, the Crown plucked from
his Head who is the supreme King, and the golden Scepter wrested out of his
hand; as soon may the Apple be pulled out of his Eye, and the Deity
annihilated, as the Elect be pulled out of Hands, as he be robbed of one of his
Jewels.

This Knowledge goes along with the Decree; it ties together the Cause, the mean
and the end; Election, Vocation and Justification both by imputed Righteousness
and imparted, with final salvation, which no force nor fraud, persuasion or
temptation can dissolve or separate. The will of his people being determined by
infallible grace; which way they shall necessarily yet freely dispose of
themselves, even in Conditional things.

Which clearly overthrows that Scientia media, invented by Jesuits, fostered by
Arminians, whereby God should foreknow, but leave the Will simply to it self
undetermined; so man in the choice of good should be independent, give the
praise and glory to himself, not to the free grace of God, disposing the Will,
to make a good choice. For, those things which were to us contingents, or are
offered to us conditionally, were certainly determined by this free knowledge of
God, how they should fall out, and what we should choose necessarily yet freely;
gently subduing by his Spirit Resistibility in the Will, placing instead
thereof, a sense of the want and a secret longing after Grace.

To manifest this Seal somewhat farther, this knowledge of God, the foundation
(not only inchoative and terminatively, but dispositive also) of our salvation,
is, as we find in Scripture.

First, The eternal disposing cause of all Events. The Will of God is the cause
of all things, it self without cause, as St. Augustine speaks. Nothing now comes
to pass, but as he knew then it should. Acts 4.28. Herod, Pontius, Gentiles and
Jews, were gathered together, to do whatsoever the hand and counsel of God had
determined before to be done. All things have their futurition from his eternal
Purpose: Whence also is in the eternal Mind the Idea of all things, with their
circumstances that shall be: that is the first Mover, continuing it self
immovable, giving to every thing a regular motion, according to the impression
which it does receive: for known are all his works, from the beginning of the
world, Acts 15.18.

Secondly, It is certain and immutable; the foundation stands sure. Whom the
Lord once Loves with this knowledge of approbation to be his, he loves and knows
them ever. All his Saints are letters of Gold, engraven on Christ's heart, which
cannot be razed out. His Love is a Divine Flame that no Water can quench.
Nulloe sunt lituroe in libro vitoe. His Book admits not of any Deleatur or
expurgatory Index. God is so full of Light, as there is no shadow of change in
him, Job 17.23. In that admirable Prayer made for the Church, Christ thus
speaks unto his Father; Thou have loved them, as thou have loved me. i. e. with
a certain and immutable Love. If Christ can perish and fall from the love of
his Father, then may the Elect be seduced totally to fall away and perish
finally.

Thirdly, It is of a certain number. The Lord knows who are his. Which cannot
admit of any universal Election in Gods intention. See Job 10.3. He knows his
own sheep so, as he calls them all by name. Job 13.18. I speak not of you all,
I know whom I have chosen. Revel. 7.4. I heard the number of them which were
sealed, etc. Cap. 6.10, 11. They cried with a loud voice, saying, etc. and it
was said unto them, that they should rest for a little season until their
fellow servants and their Brethren that should be killed as they were, should
be fulfilled. From the Collation of which Texts, it may most easily be
inferred, that their number is set and shall in due time be completed: for
that is the thing related unto in the word (...), shall be fulfilled. So certain
is the number of the Elect, that one cannot be added, nor taken away; which
could not be, without this pre-determining and present-disposing knowledge of
God. The best man in his pure naturals, would wholly cast himself away, were he
left to his own dispose. Therefore sufficiently-effectual saving grace is not
universally offered to all men: Grace is not extended beyond the Decree. Gods
foreknowledg limits both the end and the means: were the building larger than
the foundation, it must needs prove ruinous.

Fourthly, It is a free knowledge and foundation, not laid on any thing in us,
either done or foreseen to be done; but only the free will and power of God.
You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. Called therefore it is, a
fore-knowledg; past before we had done good or evil. Romans 9.11. To clear this
by a familiar instance or example; suppose a child may die before it had done
either good or evil, this child was either elected or reprobated, without
foresight of either of good or evil actual; nothing he did, nothing therefore
was foreseen he should do. If any reply, true, nothing was foreseen he did,
but something he might have done, had he longer lived? The answer is ready;
This argument is prevented and cut off by the former distinction; Gods knowledge
was of things that actually should come to pass, and not of things that might
be only. St. Augustine, in his discourse of Predestination, uses three arguments
to confirm this truth in hand; sharply condemning the Opinion of Pelagius and
in him all Jesuits and Arminians at this day; concluding that the Lord chose us
not for faith, but to faith; he chose not such as were worthy, but by choosing
made them worthy.

The sum of all may be collected into one positive conclusion, or doctrinal
Instruction, viz.

That there is a foundation laid in God, for the salvation of his Elect, that
nothing can alter this foundation of God, seduce his Chosen finally from him,
nor hinder them totally from assurance of salvation.
Matthew. 24.24. False Christ's and false Prophets shall arise, to seduce, if it
were possible, the very Elect. If it were possible, implying, not a difficulty,
as Bellarmine would have it and the Remonstrants expound it; but a reseptive
impossibility; as it will plainly appear to any, perusing the Text impartially,
with the circumstances and intent of the Speaker. False Christ's and Prophets,
with lying Signs and Wonders, shall deceive or seduce many; but for the Elect,
that they should be seduced, it is impossible, in respect of Gods immutable
Purpose and Decree; Let them be of good comfort, the foundation stands sure.

That there is such a foundation, appears, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. According as he had
chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy
and without blame before him in love: having predestined us with the adoption
of children by Jesus Christ, etc.

Romans 8.29, 30. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the image of his Son, etc.

1 Thessal. 5.9. For God has not appointed us to unto wrath, but to obtain
salvation by Jesus Christ.

2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us and called us with an holy Calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace.

Titus 1.12. -- According to the faith of Gods elect -- in hope of eternal
life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the world began.

That this foundation is sure; see Psalm 125. v. 1, 2. They that trust in the
Lord, shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abides for ever.

Jer. 31.3. -- I have loved thee with an everlasting love.

John 10.28, 29. I give unto them everlasting life, and they shall never
perish, etc.

What can be spoken more plainly?

Jer. 32.4. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, and I will put my
fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

All which are so plain and full, as should put an end to all altercations and
silence all Disputes in this Point. We may conclude, nothing can change or
alter the foundation of God: none can reverse the Seal of the Almighty, nor
break one link of that golden Chain. The Creature, as it had no influence upon
the foundation; so neither has it any power to alter it.

First, Heretics nor wicked Seducers cannot. It is the plain Doctrine of our
Apostle here; his only aim being to comfort the Church against Seducers and men
seduced; neither one or the other were laid in the foundation.

Secondly, Not the gates of Hell; Matthew. 16.18, i. e. all the power and policy
of Hell combined; all the wiles of the Devil cannot conquer one Soldier in
Christ's Camp, much less shall rout the whole Army.

Thirdly, Not the Will of man it self; because God by infallible grace, ceases
not to govern and dispose the acts of the Will in them he has known and
called. As an inferior Orb cannot alter the motion of the first Sphere,
because it is moved with and by it; no more can the Will of man alter the
foundation of God, because the acts thereof are guided by and disposed
according to Gods Will and fore-knowledg in the foundation.

Again, The gates of Hell are stronger than the will of man, they overcame it,
when it had most strength and freedom in Paradise; therefore if the gates of
Hell, which are stronger, cannot alter nor prevail against the foundation, the
will of man which is weaker and depends thereon, cannot do it. Satan by his
instruments, Hymenaeus, Philetus, Pelagians, Jesuits and Arminians, with other
secret Enemies to God and a Divine Life; may and do destroy the temporary faith
of such as were left out of the foundation, but can never destroy the
justifying faith of such, as were then taken, known and marked out to be the
Lords.

But the Doctrine consists of two parts; we will sever them a while, to join
them together more firmly: as the breaking of a bone, does finally occasion it
to become stronger in its Union.

The first part concerns the foundation? which is the Purpose and Will of God,
whereby he eternally determined to create and dispose of Angels and Men, to
their several Ends, by certain means. Not all to one end; the Creatures end, is
according to the Creators Love; his Love was not alike to all (diversity of
gifts and services shows it), being tied to none. Justice and Mercy both, as
well as Knowledge, Power and Providence, took place in laying the foundation,
that God might be glorified in both.

This is expressed by our Savior, Matthew. 24.40. Two shall be in the field, the
one is taken, the other left. There is two of a Tribe and one of a Family, as
the Prophet speaks, Jer. 3.14. As it is and shall be in the execution of the
Decree, so it was in the foundation. Two determined to be created, Angels and
Men; both falling, the one is taken, the other left. Heb. 2.6. Deus non
expectabat Angelos, sed proecipitavit, as St. Bernard expresses it; the Angel
was left without mercy, for a prey of punishment, that elder offspring of
Divine Love was expelled from the beatifick Presence, the Imperial Robe of
Heaven was descended upon Man, who lay on a Dunghill, he was drawn out, washed,
gilded over with grace, the true seed of Glory. Two Brothers in one Womb,
before they had done either good or evil; the Decree was past on them, the
foundation laid, that the one should be loved, the other hated, i. e. past
over. Two Apostles, Peter and Judas, both sin greatly, little difference in the
act, both betray him, but God puts a difference in the event, the one repents
being elected, the other despairs, being past by in the foundation, and so
ordained to perdition. So the renowned Augustine against Julian the Pelagian; In
one and the same Decree of Disposition, says he, one is rejected by Justice,
not Chance, another elected by Mercy and not Merit: by mercy in the Elector,
without any merit or act of Faith or Free Will done or foreseen to be done, in
the Person elected. Some are chosen to believe to build up their own and the
faith of others: some others, left destitute of Gods saving and assisting
grace, do err concerning the Faith, destroy both their own and the seeming
faith of others. God making thus of the same Lump, one Vessel to honor,
another to dishonor, without injustice or respect to persons. Is there
unrighteousness with God? He has mercy on whom he will have mercy and whom he
will he hardneth. Good things in good Men being effects of Gods mercy, and
comments upon Election; when as Evil things in Evil men, are but consequents of
preterition. The necessity then of every man attaining his preordained End,
comes not from the power of man's Will, freely disposing it self to this or that
Object, only through moral persuasion, ( Romans 9.16.), but from the Will and
Power of God, laying a sure foundation according to his fore-knowledg. Acts 2.
last Ver. He added daily to the Church such as should be saved. Observe the
phrase; Such as should, having reference to the foundation of God. Not such as
would, till of unwilling, they were made willing. But more fully, Acts 13.48.
As many as were ordained to eternal life believed. There was then an Ordination
in the foundation, before any actual apprehension of Christ by Faith, or
possibility thereunto. Acts 9.15. It is said of Paul, He is a chosen Vessel
unto me. John 17.12. Judas is called the child of perdition, i. e. ordained to
perdition, as St. Augustine explains it. These things we read done in time, but
we know they were ordained to be done before time. There was a foundation laid,
as of Creation, so of disposition of all things created to their several ends
by means.

The second part, concerning the certainty of it. It remains sure.

First, In regard of the Decree it self, which does so knit together, the
Cause, the Means and the End: that the known of the Lord, engraff'd into the
body of Christ, by the grace of Election, are sure to remain to the end, Matthew.
7.25. -- It fell not, because it was founded upon a Rock. 1 Pet. 1.5. They are
kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation. 1 John 3.9. -- His seed
remains in him.

This may be further confirmed.

First, from the immutability of an absolute Purpose in God: in him is no
shadow of change. Romans 8.29. Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to
be conformed to the Image of his Son, etc. Cap. 9.11. That the purpose of God
might stand, according to Election, etc.

Secondly, From the Prayer of Christ, John 17.15. in Peter for all the
faithful, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. And we are sure,
that Christ was heard in that he prayed for. There was ever a correspondency
and agreement between his and the Fathers Will: and this mediatory Prayer, does
in some sense continue. He ever lives to make intercession for us. Besides a
Promise he left us, that whatsoever we did ask the Father in his Name, it
should be granted. We ask with sighs and groans, knowing our own weakness, for
the grace of perseverance. Nay, he taught us to ask it, in every Petition of
his own Prayer, as Cyprian expounds it. Therefore we may be sure.

Thirdly, From the nature of Apostasy; which is a falling away from Faith
historical, attended refined Hypocrisy, whereby Wolves may be in the Church
for a time, undiscerned. 1 John 2.19. They went out from us, because they were
not of us, but only in show and outward appearance, they were but Meteors, not
fixed Stars, Pictures, not living Men in Religion.

Fourthly, From a main absurdity following the contrary. If any one stone could
be moved in this foundation, any of Gods Elect perish by falling totally and
finally from the grace of Faith, then all might, there being the same reason
for the falling of all, as for one. Christ and his Members make up but one
Body, one Christ: and is it possible a part of Christ should be found burning
in Hell? Can the mystical Body of Christ be dissolved? If the former be true,
so must the latter, and the death of Christ be of none effect, and all the
Promises of Grace come to nothing. Which is horrible to conceive, and
impossible to be done.

Renowned Augustine, speaking of the first Adam, says, that he had a Power
given Non peccare si vellet, not to sin if he would; to stand if he would; not
a Power to will what he might and should; but to the Elect sons of Adam, he
gives both Power and Will; they partake of Grace, qua efficitur ut Velint. Has
not Christ said it, our faith and fruit shall remain? This has wrought with
some Papists, Lumbard, Aquinas, Greg. de Valan.
that they have been constrained to confess, that Faith working by Love, is a
constant Habit in respect of it self and the Author bestowing and preserving
it; and that there is a possibility of losing it, only in respect of the
frailty of the Subject wherein it is.

Some say, the Elect of God, called and regenerate, may and do commit such sins
as deserve the total cutting off and the final losing of Grace; but that they
rise again by true Repentance and are not finally cast away, it is the work of
God; who by his Power preserves them, as he laid them in the foundation. Psalm.
37.24. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord; though he fall, he
shall not utterly be cast down, the Lord upholds him with his hand. O blessed
be God! Just men may fall from the inherent righteousness of sanctification, by
some great sin, and so bring temporal judgments, yea, death upon themselves; as
Ezekiel. 18.24. 1 Cor. 11.30. it is manifested: yet never fall from the imputed
righteousness of Justification: the foundation is sure on Gods side.

Secondly, The foundation stands sure, in respect of the Subject. The known
of the Lord, engraft into Christ, by the grace of Election, may be, are or
shall be made sure of Salvation. This certainty they gather diverse ways, viz.

1. By the testimony of the Spirit; Romans 3.16. The Spirit it self bears
witness with our spirit that we are the children of God. Only here men must be
careful to distinguish the testimony of the Spirit of God, from the subtle
illusions of Satan and the deceitful motions of their own hearts.

2. By the manifest effects of Gods Love toward us, in us. For upon all his
Elect, living till they be capable of them, he bestows these following gifts in
some measure; namely

First, A living Faith to believe in, cast themselves upon and lay hold on
Christ, John 6.29. This is the work of God, that ye believe on him, whom he
has sent. Ephesians. 2.8. Faith is the Work of God and his gift.

To which it may be replied, by a Pelagian, Jesuit or Arminian; that a man may
believe by the power of his own will, assenting to a moral persuasion, without
the efficiency of supernatural Power; and therefore the increase only of Faith
is the gift and work of God, the beginning from Nature and Free Will.

But does not this make the Law of Nature swell to so high a tide as Grace?
advance man with God, and bring the dribling River to vye with the drowning
Ocean? By this Rule, man must do the hardest work himself, and leave the easier
for God and his Grace. He that can raise himself from death to life; is much
more able to continue himself in life.

Of this Opinion was Augustine once, viz. that faith was in us and from us
primarily: but by reading Cyprian citing those words of Paul, What have thou O
man that thou have not received? renounced his Error, proving plainly, that
not only the increase, but the beginning of Faith were the gift of God, or else
we might say, we had something we did not receive.

Secondly, Love. Faith first works Love and then works by Love; as the Workman
sets an edge on his Tools, and then cuts and carves with them. And therefore
for the most part, they are in Scripture joined together. No Love, no Faith.
And Love advances by equal paces with Faith; as the heat of the day advances
with the shining of the Sun.

Thirdly, The power of Prayer and Supplication, with zeal and fervency. No
sooner was Paul converted, but the next word is, Behold he prays! Heb. 9.11.
It is reported of Luther, that when he prayed, it was with so much reverence,
as if he were praying to God, and with so much boldness, as if he had been
speaking with his Friend. Gods Spirit tunes the strings of the affections and
then they shall make sweet melody in Prayer. The symbols of the Spirit were
fiery Tongues, and a mighty rushing Wind; and wherever the Spirit is, there
will be Prayer in the Spirit. Where life is, there will be breath. God never
had, nor ever will have a still-born Child.

Fourthly, Perseverance and constancy in all these with resolution and purpose
of heart, to rely upon Christ, call upon his Name, Love his People, what ever
befall them, Philip. 1.6. We are confident of this very thing, that he which
has begun a good work in you, will perform it, unto the day of Christ. That in
the end we may say with Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, etc. Romans 8.38, 39. If God be for us, who can be against
us. I am persuaded, that neither life nor death, principalities nor powers,
things present nor things to come, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God in Christ Jesus! Therefore the Foundation of God stands sure, both in
regard of God and Man.

A Doctrine naturally flowing from the Text and meaning of the Apostle: so
expounded by the best Learned in every Age, who have by their Writings
illustrated the truth of the Gospel, confirmed in Scripture plainly, and by the
works of good men, since the Pelagian Heresy began to disturb the Church.

I may conclude it, as Gamaliel does his speech to the Jews, Act. 5.38, 39. if
the foundation of our salvation were of or in man, it might and would certainly
come to naught; but being in and from God, it cannot be destroyed; all such as
may endeavor it, shall be found fighters against God.

Use I.
In the application of this Point, we find matter of instructive information
diverse ways, viz.

First, To point out unto us the true subject of Apostasy; men past over by God
and left out of the foundation. Every plant my heavenly Father has not
planted, shall be rooted out. Such and only such are subject to Apostasy, the
rest are preserved, by the power of God unto salvation.

Secondly, It shows us the danger of false Opinions, to fret like a Canker, to
disturb, destroy, eat into the body of Church and State; one infecting another,
Arius his Heresy was at first but a little spark, yet how did it spread and
fire the whole World; what woeful waste was made of many flourishing
Congregations and Churches, when the Orthodox Bishops were exiled and their
flocks scattered? when the Donatists by their separation made a division in the
African Churches, what violences and outrages were exercised against faithful
Christians, both Pastors and People? And in like manner, when the German
Anabaptists separated themselves from the other Reformed Churches what woeful
work did they make? how much did they obstruct and even hazard the work of
Reformation begun so happily by Luther, and successfully carried on for some
years together? And thus with grief we live to see Popery and Arminianism to do
the like mischief in our days. Men should be afraid to raise such Opinions, to
bring such Owls, amidst the glorious light of Truth, that has shined so
splendidly in our Horizon; and be ashamed to receive them, being raised.
Authority should be carefully vigilant, to suppress beginnings, to oppose all
those who seek craftily to undermine the foundation of God; that they may be
cured or cut off.

Thirdly, Hence we learn, that Heretics are never able to seduce the Elect;
however they may entromb themselves in the ruins of that Christianity which
they once professed. Hymenaeus and Philetus destroy the faith of some,
nevertheless, the foundation of God stands sure. God will have a Church for
ever. See the answer of God, when the Prophet complained, there was none left
but he: I have left unto my self seven thousand, which never bowed the knee to
Baal. This constancy of all those fair and generous Souls, who have in all Ages
been settled in the Truth, like Pillars of Diamonds, not shaken with the
Counterbufs of damnable Error, took not rise from themselves. Noah, David,
Peter, left to themselves, to stand on their own bottom, fall strangely and
woefully, and make known to a world of Ages, that they are but sinful flesh: and
the best of men living, if left to themselves but one moment, would destroy
themselves in that moment: they are but like glasses without a bottom, which
break as soon ae they are out of hand. If they continue to shine, it is not by
their own luster, but by borrowed beams of the Sun of Righteousness, and the
light remains no longer than the Sun shines. The fairest Flowers of Paradise
would wither, if not watered with drops from Heaven. How have the mighty
fallen, when the Almighty has not stood by them. All their ability proceeds
from the Love of God in the foundation,, and the power of his grace, stirring
them to renew their repentance. Neither is there any ground here laid for
presumption, that a man should grow careless and secure, because of what God
has done; no: Grace never relaxeth the sinews of obedience in the least
degree. It is perfectly innocent of that abuse. The Poison is not in the Rose,
but in the Spider. Besides, there are signs of Election after described, which
if they cannot be found in persons, they cannot be assured of any portion in
the foundation. That man who daringly presumes, saying, Let me live as I list,
the foundation of God stands sure, and so gives way to his unswayed fancy, and
makes this a pillow for his sloth and casts off all care for the polishing
of his Soul; I will not say he was rejected in the foundation; but this I dare
affirm, he never yet felt the burden of sin, nor the comfort of grace; and
except he change his resolution and behavior, he shall never receive benefit
by it. At once, men were laid in the foundation and ordained to work out their
salvation with fear and trembling.

Fourthly, Hence we learn the duty of Learned Men, with all in Authority,
called to publish and defend the truth of Christ, seasonably, boldly, yet
discreetly to stand and contend against the enemies thereof, Politic silence
in this case, is a branch of Treason, against the King of his Church. Not to
defend the Truth is to betray it. When there are many opposits, the friends of
Christ must especially stand up with courage and resolution. Christians must
counter-work the Devil. There should be a kind of Antiperistasis in the souls
of true Believers, as in the fire, that burns hottest, when the air round about
it, is coldest. The middle Region is therefore coldest, because the greatest
heat of each, takes the reflection from the lower and upper heat above; such
an Antiperistasis should be found in Christians; they should be hottest in the
coldest times, their hearts should be fullest of activity for Christ, in times
of greatest opposition against him. Our service at such a time is most
acceptable and useful. Memorable is the courage of Luther, who obtained through
Christ a vigor of spirit which never bowed under the evils that accosted him;
being called to Worms, Malch. Adam. Vit. Luth.
and dissuaded from going, by reason of the fury he might meet with there, and
the multitude of Enemies; replied, If I knew there were as many Devils as there
are Tiles upon the Houses, yet thither I would go. Thus our Apostle here,
condems the Error and names the Authors; it cannot be unlawful to call them
Papists and Arminians, who maintain the Errors of both. The like testimony was
given by our renowned Worthies in the Reign of Qu. Mary, not only in white and
black, but red too; by which they came to shine and glitter at such a rate, as
has obtained them a Reputation, which will have a glorious mention, so long as
there be Stars above and Ages below. So it should be now: the thoughts of their
flames, should kindle zeal in us. Christ is many ways opposed this day, and we
should earnestly contend for Christ. Now there are many tempters, and seducers
and revilers, therefore now Christ should have many Champions.

Use II.
Secondly, This Doctrine does most directly serve to confute the ancient
Pelagians, in this and other parts of the World; as laboring to overthrow this
foundation of God, and to lay another upon the frail, uncertain power of man's
Will; in their doctrine, preferring Nature to and above Grace, as the Pelagians
did; maintaining partly, a total fall from Christ, as some Lutherans do; and
partly a total and final fall, as Jesuits and Arminians; who make Christians a
mere ball of Fortune, to be tossed up and down at their pleasure; representing
Grace as voluble and uncertain as the Heathen did Fortunes. Grace with them is
but a thing of Glass, which while it shines, is broken: with them the Vessels
of Glory, are little better than crazy Vessels, which may be dashed in pieces
like a Potters Vessel. They can remove them from Heaven to Hell, as often as
they please. With a daring Pen, they can blot Names out of the book of Life;
and with as much ease, reverse the Seal of Heaven when they list. They tell us,
there is no such certainty in the foundation, no such absolute Knowledge, no
such impossibility in regard of God; of falling off from Christ, of returning
again to the Wilderness, to the bondage of Egypt, of feeding upon the Milk and
Honey of the Land of Canaan; against the plain Words and meaning of our Apostle
in this place. So that St. Augustins Title, viz. The Hatchet of Heretics, may
not be unfitly applied to it. It is the Axe of Arminians, cutting down their
Opinion, that the elect of God after effectual calling, may fall away finally.
Whose assertion, like another Goliath fighting against the living God, is so
unsound, so uncomfortable, so evidently against the Divine Word, the works of
the best Men, who were the Lights of their time, the Instruments of the Holy
Ghost, in all Ages, that every David may and will fling a stone at it, crying
as of Babylon, Down with it, even to the ground and lower! For the Lord knows
who are his; the foundation of God stands sure, and the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it.

Use III.
Thirdly, Here is matter of singular comfort and establishment to all true
Believers; and that,

1. Against all Heretics, Errors and the falling away of Eminent Persons for
Gifts and Place, men of principal note in the Church; they were not of us,
though they dissembled a long time; they were not Sons, else they had remained
in the House for ever. Many follow Religion as the Hounds do the game, only for
company; they respect the Truth not for single but sinister ends: Christ is not
sweet to them for himself, but only for his Rings and Jewels. They began in
Hypocrisy, and no wonder if they end in Apostasy. Trees that are unsound at
the roots, soon cease from putting forth of fruits; and they who are for the
present corrupt, will for the future be openly profane. Let none be offended
at such, nor scandalized at the profession of Religion; the sheep does not
despise its fleece, because the Wolf has worn it, neither do any blame a
Crystal River, because some melancholy persons have drowned themselves in it.
The best drugs have their adulterate. And as long as there are true Pearls,
there will be counterfeit, Though there have been false colors, yet disesteem
not those that are dyed in grain, for such there are. Be not as bad Husbands,
who having a spot on their Coat, cut off the whole Cloth, when they should
only wash off the dirt. You make a good profession, be sure to make your
profession good. Sincerity is the basis of perpetuity.

2. Against Persecution, verbal or real. Things that are exceeding sharp, call
for Sugar to sweeten them. Troubles in the flesh, have a most ungrateful taste
for the Creatures palate; now this truth is as Sugar to make them sweet, that
they may down the better. Gods Elect may be oppressed, supppressed they cannot
be. They are kept by the power of God against all opposition. Their blood shall
be as seed; by the death of one, many will revive. Dogs that have no teeth may
bark, but cannot bite. Serpents that have no stings may hiss, but cannot hurt.
Believers like the Moon, shall wade out of their shadows, by keeping a constant
motion. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but the foundation of God stands
sure. O ye Saints of God! in the midst of your dangers, have an Eye to your
security. Providence has a beautiful face, even when it puts on its black
mask. God has fair ends in his foulest ways. If the Earth be dirty under your
feet, know for your comfort, the Heavens are not cloudy over your heads. Who
ever frown, God smiles. Suck from this breast of Consolation. Fetch you Honey
out of the Lions belly. Let this prove a Cordial to support you in all your
fainting fits.

3. Against worldly prosperity of wicked men, though they be in a flourishing
condition, vex the souls of the righteous, and deride their Persons; a day is
coming, when they shall be trodden under feet. The Sun of outward splendor
casts its rays upon them, only to warm their heads against a storm. The same
hand that pours out mercies on them like Oil, will pour down his wrath upon
them like water. Under all their prosperous gallantry, their hearts are sinful,
and in the midst of all their wealth, their estates are doleful. O, know, it is
better going to Zion through the Valley of Baca, than to pitch your tents in
the Plains of Sodom. The stalled Ox would not set so high a rate on his
Pasture, did he know, it was only to fit him for the Butcher. It is their
prosperity; but as Erasmus said, Absit a nobis, Charissimi, talis prosperitas!
From such prosperity, good Lord, deliver us! Great and Rich Men will not know
you, take no notice of you but for their own ends, yet the Lord knows you and
the foundation stands sure, which wicked men, when they have done their utmost,
cannot overthrow.

4. Against their own sinful failings, weaknesses and infirmities, to which
they are unwillingly and with sorrow subject: (so it will be whilst they are
clothed in robes of Clay; as the Mortar wherein Garlic has been stamped,
will always smell of it, so your best actions will favor something of the old
man:) Yet if the foundation of God stands sure against all things, then
against sin. Sin, cannot quench that Divine flame of Love. The Church had her
(...), her infirmities, her sleepy fits, Cant. 5.2. Though blacked and sullied,
yet is the Dove still. Christ could see her faith and wink at her failings. He
who drew Alexanders's Picture whilst there was a scar on his Face, drew him
with his Finger on his scar. Christ puts the Finger of mercy upon the scars of
his Saints. He will not throw away his Pearls, for every speck of dirt. The
Rose is a fragrant Flower, though it be surrounded with prickles. The Passover
was a Feast, though eaten with bitter herbs; and though a single string in
playing of a Lesson may jar; yet the main may be musical. God does not as men
do: we often take notice of the Evil is in others, and overlook the good; our
Eye is on the flaw in the Diamond, when we observe not its sparkling: but God
takes notice of the good in his People and from that he denominates them, and
for that he receives them. And as sin cannot, so neither can men commit such
sins, as are able to change or overthrow this foundation. Regenerate men will
not; the habit of Grace so orders and disposes of their Will, that they never
sin with full consent, delight and continuance, as natural men do; therefore
when Satan assaults us with our sins, we must run unto the foundation of God,
and the means appointed for our Redemption and Salvation.

Qu. But in what estate is a Regenerate man, falling into some grievous sin?

Ans. He is in a dangerous estate; it may be no Error to say damnable, in
respect of himself and his own act. Grievous sins do subject the best men,
meritoriously, to the condemnation of the Law, and to the forfeiture of all
that right which they had of the pardon of former sins by virtue of the
Covenant: and that these do not de facto condemn the Believer, is to be
ascribed to the grace of Election in the foundation; and in that regard we say
and truly, that the Spirit of Regeneration leaves not his residence in such a
Person, but only suspends his working for a time: Grace is not extinguished but
oppressed; it lies like the Phoenix in her ashes, till God in his appointed time
shall mercifully look again upon him, by the powerful beams of his Spirit
scattering those mists which darken and hinder the working and shining forth of
his illustrious Creature. Grace: as it did in Peter and David (than whose
Names, the Tongues of Men can hardly pronounce any thing more pleasing.) I am
the Lord, I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. My grace
is sufficient to revive; cleanse and sustein all those whom I have sealed. How
are we bound to God for his free Love? choosing us, setting his Seal upon us,
that we might be known for his in all Places and Assemblies; and that none
might ever lay claim unto us. If God be for us, who can be against us?

Object. But if the foundation be so sure, to what end is that Exhortation, 2
Pet. 1.10. Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure? It
seems here, that the certainty of Gods Decree depends on man's will.

Ans. There is a twofold certainty; 1. Of determination in Gods purpose and
decree; and so, we are not to conceive that the Exhortation is propounded with
reference to God, or that which he has done, as though our endeavor were
wanting to make it sure, or as if we could add perfection to his action, which
we can no more do, than add brightness to the Sun.

2. Of apprehension and persuasion as to our selves and others, expelling by
degrees fears and doubts; by an holy life we must be assured, and assure
others, of our effectual Calling; so that we (and others seeing our good works)
may be assured of our election to eternal life.

Qu. The foundation is sure, but is the building thereon as sure?

Ans. Men may lay a sure foundation, yet make a ruinous building. God cannot.
Where there is the same matter, Skill, Power and Will, there the foundation and
building must be of equal force and sureness; and so it is in this foundation.
Not, but that the House built on a Rock may be dashed with Waves; though the
Seal of God be of an eternal Efficacy; yet the impression thereof may be so
defaced, that it may not be so fairly visible to the Eye; though the Root and
seed of Grace cannot be lost, this excludes not, but that the flourish and
fragancy thereof may be lost; and though the eminency and beauty of it may be
lost, yet the foundation is sure.

We are now to proceed unto the second branch of the Text, concerning the Signs
and marks of Election, whereby men may know whether they were laid in the
foundation; and it runs thus:

Let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. This is
the other part of the Seal concerning the foundation; the Seal of God in Man;
and it is twofold, viz.

First, Naming the name of Christ; being called after his Name, Christians of
Christ. Which is either done virtually, as in the believing Jews and Gentiles
before Christ, or actually, in Believers after Christ: so his Disciples were
first called Christians at Antioch. Or else, calling upon his Name; which does
necessarily follow: showing the duty of Christians, to call upon the name of
Christ. Both these together, are certain signs of Election.

Secondly, Departing from iniquity. If this purpose be in us, joined with an
answerable practice, we may be assured of Election.

Some there have been and are, who depart from sin, without naming the name of
Christ, or believing in him; as the Heathen Philosophers, Greeks and Romans,
who attained to a mighty moral and virtuous deportment; which in St. Austins
judgment could be no other, than inferior Workings of the Divine Spirit, some
dimmer and cooler Rays of the Sun of Righteousness, as he is the light which
enlightneth every one that comes into the World.

Others again there are, who have name enough, glory in the name of Christians,
but will depart from no iniquity; a name they have, as the Angel of the Church
of Sardis had, but nothing else, and may be compared fitly to Sodoms trees and
fruits, which as Chrysostom says, are trees and no trees, fruit and no fruit,
Chrysostom. Hom. 8. in 1. ad These.
all in show and nothing in substance: or to painted fire which has no heat,
only the resemblance of fire; and to weeds in the Corn-field, which look like
flowers in the Garden, yet are not flowers; but what will the name, the
appearance profit, where the thing is wanting? God has joined these in his
Seal, naming and departing, as evidences of Election, let none put them asunder
in their lives and conversations; but labor really to express so much of
Christ, as may declare him to be substance and themselves substantial
Christians; that Religion and Grace is not a vain Notion, but a real, vital,
energetical Principle; for so it is and will appear to be wherever it is.

Men may name the name of Christ three ways:

1. Inwardly only; in the heart: as Joseph and Nicodemus did, believing in
Christ, not professing for fear of the Jews. Which was the blot of the latter
of the two; he was a Nightbird.

2. Outwardly only; professing not believing; as all Formalists, Hypocrites,
temporizers do. Such a Divine and amazing Majesty there is in goodness, that
all desire to wear her Livery, though few care to perform her service. Like
proud Courtiers, who would willingly be Favorites, but scorn to attend. These,
like some kind of Nuts, are all shell and no kernel; all body without a Soul,
or as false Looking-glasses, which represent those faces which are not in them.

3. Both ways, inwardly and outwardly, believing and professing. Faith and
Zeal, make a complete Christian. No zeal, no faith, no profession, no
apprehension of Christ ordinarily. Inward faith, without outward profession,
cannot be, is not sufficient to salvation. Faith justifies our Persons; but
profession justifies our faith. A dumb faith is not a Divine, but the faith of
Devils. Joh. 12.42, 43. Among the chief Rulers also many believed on him, and
because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out
of the Synagogue; for they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.
The light of Religion, must not be carried in a Dark-Lanthorn, to be shown when
our Interest will permit and to hide it at other times. Among the Romans there
was a Law, that every man should wear a badg of his Profession and Trade,
whereby he might be known. Thus does Christ require of all his Servants.
Confession of the mouth, without faith in the Heart, is gross hypocrisy; and
to pretend Faith without Confession with the mouth, is but Hypocrisy and
Cowardice. Lib. 8. c. 2.
Augustine in his Confessions has a notable story of one Victorinus, who was in
his old Age converted to Christianity; and came to Simplicianus (one at that
time eminent for Piety) whispering softly in his Ears, these words, Sum
Christianus, I am a Christian; but this holy man answered, Non credo, nec
deputabo te inter Christianos, nisi in Ecclesia Christi te videro; i. e. I do
not believe it, neither shall I reckon thee amongst the number of Christians,
unless I see thee in the public Assemblies of Christians. God requires the
Religion of the heart and also of the mouth. Romans 10.10. The Pope indeed, says
to his Vassals, my son give me thy heart; be a Papist in heart, and then
dissemble, do what you will; and the Swenkfeldians of old took away all
external service: the Libertines of later times say, That it is sufficient to
serve God with the hidden man of the heart: But God requires to be glorified
with our Spirits and our Bodies; both are his. He will have the Jewel with its
Cabinet. This is that our Savior means, Matthew. 10.32, 33. If we confess him
before men, he will confess us before the Father which is in Heaven. So the
Apostle, as before, Romans 10.10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness,
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. Whence it may be probably
gathered, that Elisha. (2 Kings 5.) did not approve of Naamans resolution,
saying, that he believed only in the God of Israel, yet went away with a
purpose to bow down in the house of Rimmon; nor gave him any warrant so to do:
If such politic pretenses were current, men might be Christians without fear
or danger; thousands of brave, generous Men and Women, had lost their blood in
vain. If dissimulation might pass for Profession, all People might go to Heaven
without martyrdom.

Suppose once again, men say, they believe in Christ, be baptized, called
Christians, partake of the Sacraments, join with the solemn Assembly, and yet
seem outwardly for the fear, love or praise of men, to profess or allow of
Idolatrous service, Opinions striking at the foundation of God, omissions of
good Duties, commissions of great sins, for profit, of profaneness of life for
carnal delight, lest they should be persecuted or miscalled; like the old
Priscillianists, whose main design was to save a whole skin, they made little
rekoning of Profession and thought they might say and unsay, swear and unswear,
so but in their hearts, they did cleave unto the truth. Hear Bellarmines
sentence of these Persons; Bellar. Tom. 1. lib. 3. de Eccles. milit. c. 13. ad
finem.
those which do not confess the Faith, but retaining it in their heart, make
outward profession of Idolatry, are not good men, neither can they be saved.

To explain this a little further, know, men may profess or allow of evil
diverse ways; viz.

1. By Authority, commanding, provoking, or tolerating evil. As Saul did by
enjoining Doeg, a villainous Butcher, to kill the Lords Priests; and Ahaz, who
sent a pattern of the Altar at Damascus to Vriah the Priest, enjoining him to
build another according to it, and offer upon it. 2 Kings 16.10. And so did
Dioclesian the Tyrant, who gave the People leave to kill the Christians, where
ever they met them. That evil which is committed by our instigation, is ours by
just imputation. Our Lord is said to be crucified at Rome, ( Revel. 11.8.)
because sentenced by a Roman Judge, executed by Roman Soldiers and put to death
by the Authority of the Roman Empire: yet the death of Christ, all along the
Scriptures, is charged upon the Jews, because though the execution of it was by
the Romans, yet the provocation was from the Jews. Acts 2.23. Again, the Kings
of the Earth are taxed, ( Revel. 18.) for not rooting out the Popish Religion,
but giving their Power to the Beast and lying under his yoke, drunk with the
Wine of his fornication. And the Historian relates of Galba,, though he were
innocent of much harm which passed under his Name, yet because he permitted
them to do it, whom he ought to have restrained, lost both his reputation and
opened a way for his destruction. In the days of Theodosius, the Arrians were
grown very bold, through his connivance, and not only had their Assemblies in
Constantinople, the chief City of the Empire, but would dispute their Opinions,
etiam in foro, and no man could prevail with the Emperor to lay a restraint
upon them, because he thought it unmerciful and too severe so to do. But, qui
peccata non corripit aliena, facit sua; i. e. he that having Power, corrects
not the faults of others, contracts them to himself.

2. By Opinion, maintaining and teaching evil. Thus the Papists sin, who
generally Canonize such Actions; as the Pharisees before them, encouraged the
People to sin, making void the Commandments of God, and teaching the traditions
of men, Mark 7.9. In the days of Henry the 4th of England, we read of great
hatred between the two great Dukes of France, Orleance and Burgundy; this
latter caused Orleance to be slain; an odious fact; yet Doctor Petit wrested
both Scripture and History, to justify the murder: the like were Dr. Shaa and
Pinkie, one before, the other after the Coronation of Richard the Usurper. It
is a bad cause indeed that finds no Abettors. Most pertinent is that relation
of the Historian, Fuller in his unfort. Politician.
who Characterizing Basilius, Patriarch of Constantinople, in the Reign of
Andronicus, says, they were Chaplain and Patron well met; for, what one made a
Law by his list, the other endeavored to make Gospel by his Learning. In
stating any Controversy, Basilius first studied to find what Andronicus
intended, or desired to do therein, then let Basilius alone to draw that
Scripture which would nor come of it self, to prove the lawfulness of what the
other would practice.

3. By Presence, favoring and consenting unto Evil. He that consents, though
but in his thoughts to another fraud, is a Felon before God. Paul before his
Conversion was consenting to the death of Stephen; but afterward he pleaded
guilty of the murder. When men hear lascivious stories, or sinful-witty
jestings and Tales of sly subtle Cheats, secretly applauding, do partake with
them. They that have an heart in the sin, have also an hand in the sin. Yea, it
is possible for the approver to be more guilty than the Actor. The greatest
guilt comes from the full consent of the Will. Thus Pilate allowed evil by
condemning Christ, however he washed his hands and dissembled the contrary; for
after he had so many times declared him innocent, he could not give judgment
without protesting himself to be unjust. And so the Lord Cromwell in the Reign
of Henry the eighth, when by the instigation of Bishop Gardener, he was
compelled by the King to read the sentence of death against Mr. Lambert the
Martyr of Jesus; whereof he afterward repented and craved forgiveness of him.

4. By indifferency and neutrality. As Lucian, who was no Papist, nor sound
Protestant; and Henry the 8th, who despised the old Religion and envied the
new. This, some in strange Language call Policy, but in true English flat
Atheism. As they in the Church of Corinth, were neither for Paul or Apollo, but
pretended for Christ, so these are neither Papists nor Protestants, a mungrel
People, just nothing. Serve God they will, but (...) engage for him. Like
Heraclius (...) ^mperour, who being imprudently carried away by some Bishops of
the Monethelites, when that Heresy was afterward condemned by the Council of
Jerusalem, was ashamed to recant, became a mere Neutralist, and held neither
one way or other. Such would be called Christians, but they depart from
nothing, nor do any thing whereby others might see what they were: they will be
and do, as the time and Company serve where they live or are; Professors among
Professors, scorners with scorners; they can change which way and when they
please, without imputation of inconstancy. On all such that speech of our
Savior falls heavy; they may hear the sentence of the supreme Deity and the
King of Kings thundering in their Ears, viz. He that is not with me, is against
me; and he that gathers not, scatters abroad.

To name the name of Christ, is to submit our Wills, to be ruled by his Word,
to subscribe to the Gospel (...) write our selves his, to be under (...)
Government of the Eternal La^^; which if we once do, we must depart.

1. From false Gods; not worship dead Gods, Images, Relics; nor dying Gods,
men or Princes; as the Samaritans worshipped Antiochus Epiphanes, stiling him
the mighty God; or as the Venetians petitioning Paul the fifth, gave him the
Title of Vice-God: nor the host of Heaven, as the Ammonites, nor the Devil as
the Indians, nor the Cross as Papists.

From Idolaters and Idolatrous service. Come out from her my People, Revel.
18.4. If Rome have left us in the foundation, we must leave her in the
superstructure; where they are fallen from God, we must fall from them.

3. From the familiar society of idolatrous wicked men, (Christ's Doves will be
sullied among the Pots), with all known impiety; yea, from evil thoughts in
endeavor and earnest desire of our hearts, with these and the like, the Name
of Christ agrees not. St. John would not remain in the Bath at Ephesus, because
Cerinthus the Heretic was there. Polycarp would not salute Marcion, but told
him, he knew him to be the firstborn of the Devil, as Irenaeus relates it; and
gives this Note also concerning the Apostles, that they could not so much as
Verbo tenus converse with them that had adulterated the truth. There must be no
harmony where the chief Musician will have a jar. We have as dear a Savior as
they had; we name the same Christ they did; but we want the courage and zeal
they had: most of us consult our own profit and pleasure, or to gain reputation
with and content others, and so concern our selves little to what company we
join our selves, what we say or do; when indeed, the general name of
Christianity will avail us nothing, without departing from iniquity.

There is a threefold departing from iniquity, viz.

1. Apparent only; when men are good in public Profession, in word and show;
but for their actions generally, indeed and in truth are quite naught. These
set a Crown of glory upon the head of Christ by Profession, and plat a Crown of
thorns for his head, by an evil Conversation. They adore Religion by their
lips, but adorn it not by their lives. These are nominal Christians; Christiani
sine Christo, as Salvian spoke: If their lives and Christ's Laws were compared,
their most solemn Vows and most perfidious violations of it, it might be
confidently concluded, aut hoec non est lex Christi, aut illi non sunt
Christiani: and so Tertullian, Justin Martyr and other Ancients are bold to
affirm of such men, that they are not Christians.

2. Constrainedly; which may be done two ways:

First, By Authority. When for fear of man only, without any respect to God or
Conscience, men depart from heretical Societies and erroneous Opinions; or from
some foul sins, punishable by Law: as, murder, stealing, polygamie, abominable
swearing, profanation of the Lords day, etc. these they may depart from for
fear of punishment by men; the Magistrate being constituted by God, to be a
terror against evil doers. Desire in the heart, may spur on such a man to sin,
yet at the same time, fear as a Curben-bit, may check and restrain him: so that
it is not the sting of the Serpent he fears, but only its crookedness. Inward
desire and outward restraint are not inconsistent. In Calvin's Epistle, mention
is made of some, that out of an inordinate love of the World, made it a case.

Qu. Whether or no, they might continue in the Popish Religion, frequent the
Popish worship, so that they kept the true faith only in Christ for
justification, and looked on those Ceremonious ways as unprofitable ^^ash?

Ans. To whom he replied; that they asked counsel of him, even as Balaam
consulted with God, as if he would willingly have known his mind about cursing
of Israel; when his heart was set wholly to it, what ever God said, though he
were outwardly restrained.

Secondly, Through want of occasion, or personal ability to follow some kind of
sins. The Gunpowder makes no noise, till the fire be put to it; and the Clock
stands still till the Weights are put on: Let a Temptation come, which is like
the hanging on of the Weights, and the heart goes on as fast in sin as ever.
The Sinner may not be able to maintain the trade of sin any longer; the
Adulterer is grown old, but like the aged Hunts-man, though he cannot run, yet
will hollow after the Dogs, he has as good mind to it as ever: the Drunkard is
grown poor, but his heart is to sin though his hand fail h^^. These depart not
from sin, sin departs from them. Others are constrained to depart from one sin
to another, which is mutatio in aliud, not in melius, only a change, no leaving.

3. Voluntary, when men, neither constrained merely, nor impeded by natural
indisposition or disability, but may follow evil either in Opinion or Action,
then to depart from both and embrace the Truth, out of knowledge of and love to
it, is a mark of Election, a sign of justifying Grace. Only thus much must
necessarily follow, that this departure be not feignedly, with a divided heart,
but sincerely in our thoughts, universally and constantly in our ways from the
willing practice of any, but especially from those sins which have most
prevailed against us and wherewith God has been dishonored by us: then may we
be assured that we are laid upon the foundation of God; that the Lord from all
eternity know us to be his own, and that he will not reject, never forsake us
in our Persons or Prayers, while we bear the name of Christ and depart from
iniquity.

Whence arises a second Conclusion for our instruction, as follows;

Doctrine 2. That inward faith in Christ, joined with an outward profession of
his Gospel and an holy Conversation, are proper notes and signs of Election.
Acts 4.12. There is no other name under heaven given among men, whereby we can
be saved. Christians then are only capable of Salvation.

1 Cor. 7.25. Faith is made a saving fruit of Gods mercy: Election is not for
faith, but to faith in Christ.

Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved through faith, etc.

Philip. 1.29. To you it is given not only to believe, but to suffer for
Christ's sake.

Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him from before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy and without blame before him in Love. Holiness of Life
then, a departing from iniquity, is a sure sign of Election.

1. For, 1. Elected we are in Christ, Ephesians. 2.10, 11. That in the dispensation
of the fullness of time, he might gather together in one, all things in Christ,
-- In whom we have obtained, being predestinate according to the purpose of him
who works all things according to the purpose of his Will,

2. Elected we are to Faith, whose property it is to purify the heart from a
delight in sin. Philip. 1.29. It is given to you not only to believe, etc.

3. All the Promises are made to such as believe and live holily. Revel. 2.10.
Be thou faithful to the death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. Heb.
12.14. Follow peace and holiness, etc. Holiness is the only Coin which passes
current in Heaven. 2 Cor. 7.1. Having such Promises, let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, etc. Besides that bright Cloud of
Witnesses, Heb. 11. who through faith and holiness obtained a lasting good
report, and are passed out of mortal Bodies, separated from the contagion of
earth, to the recompense of the faithful, enjoying and beholding the goodly
harmony of the blessednesses of the Celestial Region, having this Seal of
Election; as the ground to assure them of Salvation, whilst they were
conversant amongst men dwelling in Houses of clay.

All they who were fore-known by the Lord to be in the foundation, were
certainly also pre-ordained to the means for the execution. It is a wicked
Argument, which some make to themselves, as Heretics and carnal men did in St.
Austins time, and the like is reported of Lewis the eleventh of France, who
desperately argued, Si salvabor, salvabor; si vero damnabor, damnabor; if I
shall be saved, I shall be saved, however I live, whatever I do. A most daring
inference; it is to suck Poison out of a sweet flower, to kindle Hell out of a
spark of Truth, to dash against the Rock of Ages, to fall into the Pit, which
was dug for better purpose, to stumble at the Word, whereunto also they were
appointed. If all Persons should so argue, who should be saved? who would set
his face toward Heaven? for the same Curtain that hides Ordination to life and
salvation from one, does hide it from all, till that Curtain be drawn and
suffers it to shine upon some in the use of means: For certain it is,

1. The wisdom of God never determined the end, but it also determined the
means: and as the end is always glorious, so the means are ever powerful and
efficacious; and none can more cheerfully demonstrate their tendency and
proximity to the end, than those who are most careful in a seasonable and
thankful application of the means; and it will be found a self-deceiving
practice, a snare for such who entangle themselves with such a desperate
fallacy as the Argument forms.

2. It is a preposterous way to dispute from the less known to the more known.
As if a man should get on the highest Round of the Ladder first. We have no
Scripture-warrant to peep into those hidden Volumes of Eternity, to spell our
names in the Stars. Gods everlasting Decree, is too dazzling and splendid an
Object for us at first to set our Eyes upon: it is far easier and safer for us
to look upon the Rays of his goodness, as they are reflected in our own hearts,
and there to take pleasure in reading the mild and gentle Characters of Divine
Love to us, in our love to him and our sincere compliance with his Heavenly
Will; as it is more safe for us to behold the twinkling beauty of that Radiant,
heavenly Body the Sun, as it is fairly reflected in some Crystal stream, than
to cast up our daring Eyes upon the body thereof, which is too bright and
scorching for us. We must go to the means, which are best known unto us, and
not unto Gods Decree and fore-knowledg, which is sealed. The Windows of the
Soul must be set open for the entertaining such light as does more immediately
flow in upon it; and the Understanding must close with such Objects as are best
proportionable to it. Therefore St. Peter directs (if we account his Method
observable and wholesome) to make calling and then Election sure; as thus, if we
be effectually called and justified by faith in Christ, if we hate all sin,
make Conscience of all our ways, if we desire to live in the fear of the Lord,
at all times and this without Hypocrisy, then may we be assured of our
Election: and certainly, that is the best assurance of any man's interest in God,
which is founded upon conformity to him: as when we see the fruits of the Earth
springing up, we conclude the Sun has been there; so if we find the fruits of
Holiness springing up in our hearts, we may conclude the Sun of Righteousness
has risen there. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. God has chosen you from the beginning to
salvation, by the sanctification of the Spirit. No calculation of Election,
without Sanctification. God indeed in saving us, begins at the highest links of
the Chain; but we must begin at the lowest link and so ascend higher. Faith in
Christ, joined with a holy Life, are infallible signs of Election.

Use I.
Whence we may learn,

1. What Christianity is, viz. A naming the name of Christ and departing from
iniquity. Profession and practice of Christ's Gospel. Where one of these are
without the other, there, men are but almost Christians; in name, not in deed;
half Christians.

There are three sorts of Christians:

1. In name only; of whom it may be said, as they do of the Cinnamon Tree, that
the bark is more worth than all they have besides. Of these we read, 1 Titus
16. They profess that they know God, but in works they deny him. Such are your
mired Worldlings, glittering Hypocrites, swinish Epicures. These are abusively
called Christians, without Christ; they are Christians to the reproach of
Christ, Si Christus sancta docuisset, a Christianis sancta fierent: qualis
Secta, tales Sectatores. Quomodo bonus magister, cujus tam pravos videmus
discipulos? as Lactantius brings in the the Heathen upbraiding the Christians
Actions. Such is the malice lodged in the hearts of degenerated Creatures,
which will reproach the rectitude of the Rule; for the obliquity of their
Lives, who swerve and vary from it. Yet of this sort are too many among us;
such as wear Christ's Livery, but do the Devils drudgery; Wens on the face of
Religion. Their Profession is but like a fair Glove drawn over a foul Hand, or
a good Paint over a rotten Post, and the enamelling of a Dunghill with Sunbeams.
They are colored Tombs that make only an enclosure of rottenness; and no
marvel if these fall away, they never saw the Seal in, or upon themselves.

2. In deed only: as the believing Jews and Gentiles, before Christ; Children
of faithful Parents, dying before they have ability to make actual profession
of Christianity: such as are born deaf and dumb, or without the use of Reason.
Who knows what the Divine goodness has reserved for them, or how he works in
them?

3. In name and in deed; like Jewels, that have an inward worth and cast forth
a sparkling luster to the Eyes of others. These, as Solomon's Temple, are Gold
within and without. Such are Christians of ripe years, living to know,
believing what they know of Christ and professing what they believe, practicing
what they profess: these are Christians indeed, sealed up unto the day of
Redemption.

Qu. How may such be known?

Ans. It is sealed, to stay such curiosity; either to know or make a separation
in our censure or judgment before the time: infallibly to know the election of
others, certainly to determine of their inward disposition, by some few things,
we hear or see, is impossible. Such are known to themselves. Yet in the
judgment of Charity, we take all such to be the Lords, who make a good
Profession, frequent Ordinances, practice Piety in their Houses. And further,
what has God revealed to us, it is lawful for us to say, we know. Christ has
told us, by their fruits ye shall know them: as by the leaves the Tree is seen,
so by the fruit the Tree is known. All Creatures have their several Essences,
and according to the essence so are the actings. Stars that are placed in the
highest Orb shine brightest. The hand of the Dial is without in going, as the
Wheels of the Clock are within in going; as where the heart is of a good
Constitution, the life will be of a fair Complexion. When the Conduit is walled
in, how shall we judge of the Spring, but by the Water that runs out of the
Pipes.

True Christians, such as are laid upon the foundation of God, may be known, by
these following marks or fruits:

1. Humility; an unseparable badg of true Christianity. It is the great Grace;
the Crown and varnish of every grace. Of all men, the humble Saint on Earth,
looks likest to a Citizen of Heaven. The choicest Wines are laid up in the
lowest Cellars. Like your Spire Steeples, the true Saint is minimus in summo,
smallest where it is highest; or as those Orient Stars, which are less viewed,
the higher they are placed. No Gold so pure, as that which is most ductile, and
that is the best Blade which bends well, without reteining its crooked figure.
St. Augustine being asked, which was the first Grace? answered, Humility.
Which, the second and third? he answered, Humility. Empty Casks sound most,
when the well fraught Vessel, silenceth its own fullness: and the deep Rivers
pay larger tribute to the Sea, than the shallow brooks, and yet empty
themselves without noise. Thus it goes with the heirs of Heaven. As the Harp,
though they sound most sweetly, they hear not their own melody. As Violets
cover themselves with their leaves, so do gracious Persons hide their sweetest
Excellencies, under the garment of humility. They live, yet not they, but
Christ lives in them. They are willing to be a Cipher, so Christ may stand for
a figure, Prorsus Satan est Lutherus, sed vivat and regnat Christus; Let Luther
be accounted a Devil, so Christ may be exalted as God; says that Incarnate
Seraphim of himself. They say, in Herauldry, the plainest Coats are the richest
Arms; sure we may be, the most poor in spirit on Earth, are the richest
Citizens of Heaven. This they learn of their Master, at their entrance into his
School; to be meek and lowly in heart, both in regard of God and man.

2. Love; that is a Jewel Christ's Bride wears; a sparkling Diamond, which God
places in the bosom of his Elect: 1 John 4.16. He that dwells in Love,
dwells in God. As there is Love descending to us, so there is Love ascending
to God. It Is said, that Iron touched with a Loadstone, it has an inclination
of following the Loadstone; verily, when God has touched any soul with his
Love, it leaves an instinct behind it, of following after God. And where this
Love dwells, it is operative; like fire (for it is a Divine flame), it is not
idle but active, and it works diverssy.

First, Toward the Word of God. This is given as the mark of a Christian;
Psalm 1.2. His delight is in the Law of God. The Prophet David often expresses
so much. Psalm. 119. O how I love thy Law? how sweet are thy words to my taste?
yea, sweeter than the honey to my mouth; dearer unto me than thousands of gold
and silver. He roles it as Sugar under his Tongue; he takes pleasure in it, as
a man does in a bed of Roses. The covetous man takes great delight in telling
his thousands; but David has sweeter apprehensions and affections to Gods Law,
than he had to thousands. And so the Prophet Jeremiah, Chapter 15. v. 16. Thy words
were sound and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing
of my heart. To the same effect the Prophet Isaiah, Chapter 60. v. 8. Who are these
that fly as a Cloud and as Doves to their windows? Gracious souls fly as Doves
to an Ordinance upon the Wings of Love. God opens the heart of his Chosen to
love the Word; to receive it as new born Babes do the milk of the Breast;
greedily, delightfully, patiently, and profitably to grow thereby. And
therefore Luther said, speaking of wicked men, only contemn not the Word and
there is hope.

Qu. To this some or other may reply; I love the Word and have comfort from it,
though I be not so strickt and curious for my life, as others are.

Ans. It is impossible for a man to love the Word, and not reform his life by
it. David gave not only his Ear, but turned his Feet to the Commandments of
God. He walked in them. We judge not of a man's health by his high Color, but by
the pulse of the Arm; so we judge not of a Christians soundness by words; what
are they but an higher color? but by his obedient actings toward God, and
when we see his Soul tuned into a conformity with his Word and man's Will, so
far as it is discernable, perfectly to concur with Gods Will. Hear the Divine
Apostle, who wrote his Epistles with an Ear in Heaven, 1 John 2.3. By this we
know, that we know him (and by this we know that we love him) if we keep his
Commandments. John 14.21. He has has my Commandments and keeps them, he it
is that loves me. John, Epist. 2. v. 6. This is Love, that we walk in his
Commandments? Peter, Love thou me, feed my Lambs. The Crystal streams of
Divine Actions, will necessarily bubble from the pure spring of Affection.

Secondly, This Love works toward the Messengers, which bring the glad tidings
of salvation to us. They that love the Message, cannot but manifest it, by a
tender expression of love to the Messengers. How welcome are the feet of those,
who bring glad tidings from Emmanuels Land, the Country of Canaan? He it
enjoined, Philip. 2.29. Receive them with all gladness and hold such in
reputation. 1 Thessal. 5. Esteem them very highly in love, (if not for their
own, yet) for their works sake. Ministers are Gods Angels, to set forth the
Kingdom of God and eternal Life, ( non specie oestimandi sed munere;) not to be
judged of by their outside, but by their Office; as Ambrose expresses it. The
most curious Pearls are here enclosed in the ruggest shells; and the Lord
lodges rich Treasures in earthen Vessels. See Turks and Idolatrous Papists
honoring every hedg-Priest of theirs, and have them in singular esteem, above
their merits: and it is observed of the Grecians, how they gave greater respect
to their Philosophers than to their Orators, because these taught them only
how to speak, but they how to live well. Let us learn something from them, to
love faithful Ministers, who labor with Christ in the Gospel. It is a good
sign and cannot miss a Reward.

Thirdly, It works toward the People of Christ, our fellow servants;
Professors of Religion in the Power thereof; of whom we may and ought to have
this hope, that they are laid with us in the foundation of God. This sweet
Spice sends forth its smell that bears his Image, on whom it contemplateth the
Image of the first Beauty, John 13.35. By this shall all men know ye are my
Disciples, if ye have love one to another. Other men's disciples are known by
their Titles, Habits, Ceremonies, as the Popes Shavelings are: but Love is
Christ's cognizance. He who loves him who begets, loves him also that is
begotten. Gods Children are his walking Pictures; if we love God, we shall love
those on whom he has drawn his Image; yea, notwithstanding some infirmities;
as children love one another, though there be some imperfections of Nature; and
we love Gold in the Oar, notwithstanding its Drossiness. The best Saints have
their blemishes; the fairest Face may have a scar to disgrace it. Yea, though
poor, the Children of God love their Fathers Image, though hung in never so
mean a Frame. Though we have not grace or gifts in that measure and degree we
see it in others, yet if we love it in them and them for it, we may be
confident, God has begun his work in us. None can prize Grace, but they that
have it. Love of grace is the beginning of grace. Love of good men with an
expression of it according to ability, is a sign of spiritual goodness. It is a
most dangerous thing to be at enmity with those who love God; to slight or
oppose them in their gracious endeavors: yet our Savior has foretold it; In
the latter days, iniquity shall abound and the love of many shall wax cold.
Where sin reigns, there is no Love.

4. Constancy in good: professing and so perfecting holiness in the fear of
God. They are compared to Palmtrees, because they flourish soon; to Cedar,
because they continue long. The true Saint, like Coesar, is always marching
forward. Travelers that go to Sea, merely to be Sea-sick, if a black Cloud or
storm arise, their Voyage is ended, home they get to the Harbor; they went not
forth to be Weather-beaten, or to hide themselves among the boisterous billows,
but only for pleasure. But the Merchant, that is bound for a Voyage, whose
Calling it is, is not daunted at the surging Waves and fierce Winds, but drives
through with resolution. They that pretend only to Religion, if a storm meet
them in the way to Heaven, leave the way, take shelter in the Earth; as a
Snail, they put out their heads to see what weather is abroad (what countenance
Religion has among those whose names are written in greater Letters than
others are) and if the Heavens frown, they shrink into the shell; esteeming
that their happiness. But such as make Religion their business, steer not their
course by such Cards; they follow their Trade, though they meet with many
Trials. The scorching Sun of Persecution, burns not up the flower of true
Devotion. Philip. 1.6. He that has begun a good work in you, will perform it,
until the day of Christ. Like a well-drawn Picture, they have always the same
Visage; or rather, as the Deity, they continue one and the same Action; as
Prosperity cannot charm them, so neither can Adversity find Darts that are able
to abate their Christian resolution. These flowers of Paradise wither not,
because watered from Heaven. Blazing Comets may fall to the Earth, but fixed
Stars remain in their Orb: Grace may be shaken in the Soul, but shall never be
shaken out of the Soul. If any Candles have been put out, it was because they
were not carried in Christ's Lanthorn.

Thus you see the sparklings of this matchless Diamond, the plain workings of
this grace of Election; Thus do the sacred Writings set forth the beauty and
oriency of it.

Use II.
2. Hence diverse are condemned.

First, The Jews, with all unconverted Gentiles; who though they depart from
some Evils, yet they name not the name of Christ; that is to the Jews a
stumbling block and to the Greeks foolishness, 1 Cor, 1.23. As for the Jews,
they pitching in their expectations upon a glorious Prince, who should free
them from the Roman yoke; would not so endure to be disappointed, as instead
thereof to have a crucified man, one in the form of a servant to be their
Messiah; and therefore would not that he should reign over them, Luke 19.4. and
as for the Gentiles, judging it a foolish thing to expect life from a dead man,
and Glory from one who kept not himself from shame, and hearing Doctrines
wholly inconsistent with what they had sucked in, did therefore refuse to
submit to Christ. But woe be to them that stumble at this stone; if Christ be
not the Rising, he will be for the fall of men. No Disease so fatal, as that
which rejects Cordials: No state so desperate as that which thrusts away
Salvation; Acts 13.46.

Secondly, Papists; who under the name of Christ, rob him of his glory;
renounce his Free Grace, and will not endure to be shut out from all causility
toward their own Salvation, affirming their works of Condignity and Congruity
to dispose them toward him. They like not to hear of Discriminating-grace.

Thirdly, All Verbal Professors amongst us; that profess they know Christ, but
in their works deny him, being disobedient, abominable, and to every good work
reprobate. And these are either Speakers or Hearers.

1. Speakers; who are Catholic in Preaching, and heretical in Living; having
Christ in the Book but not in the Heart; speaking like Balaams-Ass to the
understanding of others, but not to their own; as the ignorant Dunce, the idle
Drone, the covetous Worldling, swynish Drunkard, profane Swearer, the riotous
mispender of time, with Cards and Dice, Hawks and Hounds; which were once not
thought fit Books for the Clergy; the usurious Symonist and ambitious
Non-resident: who pull down more, in six days, than they, with many more and
better, can build up in a year. I am loath to draw a line in any man's Picture
with a black Coal; yet how many of this color are there to be seen
everywhere? It is monstrous, as Bernard truly told Eugenius, that men should
have the highest seat in the Church, and the basest life out of the Church.
Certainly, it is a great misery, that they should have many Souls committed to
their trust and keeping, who cannot keep one, and that their own. These are
Physicians who give Cordials to others, and faint themselves. They are called
Stars, which are the Ornament of the Heavens, because they should be the
Ornament of the Church; but by their spotted and beleopar'd lives, they prove
not Stars, but stains and blemishes of the Church. They are called Salt; but if
the salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? This hinders the
conversion of People. Hence they exclaim, How can fresh and salt water flow
from the same fountain? they loath those wholesome Truths taught, as men loath
good and wholesome Meat, when it comes out of a foul Dish, or as men like not
the light of a Candle, when set on a sluttish Candlestick. Thus Elies sons made
the People abhor the Offerings of the Lord, by their wicked lives, 1 Samuel 2.7.
Such cause the Laurels of the Church to wither in their hands, they defile her
Victories, eclipse her Lights, and so become Vipers in the Church of God; yea,
fiery Torches to inflame his Temple; and as false Lights on the shore, they
lead Ships to Sands and Rocks to split them. I have read of a Gentlewoman who
turned Atheist, because she lived under the Preaching of a great Doctor, that
taught well, but lived licentiously; It was he (said she) that conjured up
those damnable thoughts in my Soul. Words blush where deeds do fail. Physician
heal thy self. He that smites another with a wounded Arm; alas, he smites but
faintly; because whilst he smites another, he bleeds himself. Lucian the
Apothecary made himself ridiculous, by selling a Medicine to cure the Cough in
others, but cured not himself: Thus he that reproves another of what himself is
guilty, foameth out his own shame. Besides, they hinder their own Salvation.
Among all others, the conversion of a Minister is a matter of great difficulty;
according to that sharp speech of Chrysostom, one of the sweetest Preachers
that ever spoke; Few Ministers should be saved: With such the Lord expostulates
the matter, Psalm 50.16. What have thou to do to take my word within thy mouth,
seeing thou hate to be reformed? Thou that say a man should not steal,
do thou steal? Romans 2. The Eyes of all are upon such; they who are blind as
Moles in their own Errors, have the Eyes of a Lynx to espy your aberrations.
Ministers must Practice as well as Preach Holiness, or they mar all. A flaw in
the Diamond, robs it of its orient splendour: a Fly in the Apothecaries box,
spoils the fragrancy of its Odor; thus it is here.

2. Hearers; that profess and speak well; having Christ often in their Ears and
upon their Tongue, but another in their Hearts and Hands. These carry a bright
Light in a Dark-Lanthorn; build their Nests among the Stars, and make their Bed
in Hell. It is better not to shine, than not to be Gold, to be Professors of
Piety and Practitioners of iniquity is a palpable contradiction; a golden
Tongue and a leaden Heart never matched together. It will prove nothing for any
one to have the Trumpet on his Lip, who has not the Torch in his Hand. Why
call ye me Lord and do not the things that I say? Such shall be miserably
rejected. Tamberlain in his Wars would not own a pot of Gold dig'd out of the
Earth and presented to him, because it had not his Fathers stamp. Certainly,
God will own none but those who have the stamp of Christ on their Actions. The
ill deportment of some who pass for Christians, has made men afraid to embrace
Religion. Hence many Pagans of old stepped back, Fullers Holy War, p. 88.
who had one foot in the Church, when they saw Christians, that believed so
well, live so ill, breaking the Commandments against the Creed. And as
Chrysostom spoke of the Contentions of the Church in his time, viz. if a
Gentile should come and say, I would be a Christian; yet when he sees such a
Spirit of dissension amongst them, one of Paul and another of Apollo, such are
their diversities, that he knows not which to choose, but must return to his
Gentilism again; the same may be said of the lives of many professed
Christians; others will be apt to think, that Religion is no more than a devout
complement; a severe Policy. Practice does speak louder than Profession only;
as the Emperor Jovinian told the Orthodox and Arrian Bishops, I cannot judge of
your Doctrine; but I can judge of your Lives. Practice of Holiness is a powerful
Loadstone to draw others to a love of Holiness. Basil observes, that Julian in
one of his Epistles writing to Arsatius, says, that the Christian Religion did
flourish by the sanctity and liberality of them who professed it. Woe be to
them, who by their irregular practices, render it odious! You were all born to
serve God; and better you had never been born, than not to serve him
unfeignedly and universally. As A. Fulvius said to his Son, when he found him
in Catalines Conspiracy; Non ego te Catalinae genui, sed Patriae; thus the Lord
says to every man, I gave you not a Soul, incomparable, more precious than the
Purple and Scepters of Kings, to suffer it to wallow in the filthiness of the
flesh, and make it an instrument of sensuality, a Vessel of Abomination,
wherein to present it as a sacrifice to the Devil. God will one day pluck the
Visard from your Face and say, All true Christians I know, but who are ye? Why
did you take my Name upon you and not depart from sin? depart from me ye
workers of iniquity. Matthew 7.23. O consider this betimes, all ye that are
Christians in Name, but Atheists in Practice! What wisdom is it to be trimming
the Scabbard, whilst the Sword is rusting? to have a name only to live and yet
be dead? A pompous Profession without suitable Conversation is worth nothing.
Consider I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

Use III.
3. This Doctrine offers matter of singular comfort to all true Christians, a
sovereign Cordial to revive and maintain their fainting spirits, under all
fears and cares about persevering to the end of their Warfare; who find the
Seal of Election in themselves, by examining and applying the Premises; Who
name the name of Christ and depart from iniquity. You are part of Gods
building, whose foundation is sure. Notwithstanding all your failings, he will
give strength to bring forth. The bruised Reed shall be turned into a brazen
Serpent, and the smoking Flax into a triumphant Flame. Christ's errand from
Heaven to Earth was, not only to kindle a Divine Life; but also to propagate
this Celestial Fire unto Perfection. He was never absent from this spark of
Divinity in any poor Sinners breast. He is an inexhaustible Fountain of
spiritual life, and ever touches any poor Soul enliven'n'd with it, by an
outstretched Ray, and freely lends his beams and disperseth his influences
unto it from the beginning to the ending. What ever change you may find in your
selves, or in any Creature, you shall find an eternal Identity in God. As there
is no shadow of turning in his Being, so not in his Love. Here is no vertical
Point. Isa. 54.7. With everlasting kindness will I have mercy, etc.

Qu. But how can a child of God, wholly depart from iniquity; seeing nothing
but death can divide sin from the Soul? Romans 6.7. He that is dead is freed from
sin.

Ans. Sin is to be considered two ways:

1. As being in and with our Nature: so, we cannot be free from it here, in our
mortal Estate, whilst blood is in our Veins, sin will be in our nature. When
the Body and Soul is separated by mortality, sin and the Soul shall be
separated to Eternity. Though in the living man Lust is mortified. Sin like
Sampsons hair, though it be cut, it will grow again and come to its strength:
as the feathers of a Fowl, pluck them off, they will come forth again, only
kill the Bird and they grow no more.

2. As reigning in us and obeyed by us in the lust thereof; so we may and must
depart from it here, or else we shall never see the Lord with comfort
hereafter. Romans 6.12. Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, etc. Heb. 12.14.
Follow peace with all men and holiness, without which, no man shall see the
Lord.

Qu. But suppose a man depart once from all sin reigning in him, will not his
after-commission of sin, annihilate and extinguish his former departure?

Ans. A man may leave sin, only from a principle of morality; as Polemon
mentioned by St. Austin; who being an Infidel, a young man deprived of the
knowledge of the true God, resigned over to all sort of intemperance; Wine, love
and play with Rashness, were the Chariot, which drew him to his downfall; but
hearing Socrates to read an Ethick Lecture of Virtue and Vice, went away
changed and no more followed his exorbitances; and some others, as Cato,
Seneca, Aristides, with diverse others sparking-brave Souls among the Romans,
who seeing a beauty in Virtue, became renowned for their excellent deportments.
From this Principle, Scipio an Heathen and a Soldier too, would not permit
certain Captive Virgins of exquisite beauty, to be brought into his Presence,
Ne quid de Virginitatis integritate delibasse, saltem vel oculis videretur, as
Florus says; i. e. that he might not seem to have sipt the honor of their
Chastity, so much as with beholding them. A man may leave one sin and take up
another which suits better with his Age and Place; forbearing sin only of
design. How good was Joash, so long as Jehojada the Priest lived? The Lion may
look demure; whilst under invincible restraint. Nero himself acted it very
worthily for the first five years, under the conduct of Seneca. Others hide
their sins; like those who shut their shop-windows, and follow their Trade
within doors: Many deal with their sins as Moses his Mother dealt with him; she
hid him in the Ark of Bulrushes, as if she had left him, but her Eye was still
upon him, and in conclusion she became his Nurse, Exodus 2.9. Many hide their
sins from the Eyes of others, when their hearts go after them, and at last they
give the breast unto them. But what avails such a practice? A hand taken off
from sinful practices, without a heart taken off from sinful principles, will
be like a piece of ground, which when sown again, yields more increase, or like
a stream that has met with a damm, will run with a greater violence, when the
Sluice is opened, so all this comes to nothing.

But this: 1. If a man once depart from sin, out of a love to God, or fear of
his Judgments and hatred of sin; if he do this freely and heartily, after-acts
of sin through infirmity, can never annihilate such a departure.

2. My reason is; When God forgives one sin, he forgives all; if once, he
forgives ever. So that an act of sin, being in and coming from a Regenerate
man, cannot dissolve the habit of justifying Grace. Grace was not got merely
with humane actions, neither can it thereby be wholly lost.

3. I say, that as wicked men may actually do that good duty, keep that
Commandment for a time, which habitually they break and disallow; so Regenerate
men, may and do habitually keep those Commandments, which they do actually
break; because they do it not with a full consent and purpose. They still
depart from that sin in heart, which in act they may out of necessary weakness
yield unto.

Many and great are the Privileges of Christ's Elect, while they name the name
of Christ and strive in the use of means against their own corrupruptions. The
Lord by his Spirit powerfully works in them Victory by degrees, with assurance
of Salvation.

Use IV.
Lastly, All may be hence exhortted, Professors or Profane, and that three
ways, viz.

1. That you would seriously consider of these two main fundamental parts of
Christianity; The foundation of God and assurance thereof; as comfortable and
seasonable in these backsliding times, wherein there are so many Errors and
such diversity of Opinions vented; so much trouble felt and feared in Church
and State, maugre the malice of Jesuits and Arminians, their Patrons and
defenders, Men or Devils; Let the servants of Christ know, The foundation of
God stands sure, the Lord knows who are his, and they shall never be known to
belong to any other. This consider, as also the signs and marks of Election,
that all may seek them, none may presume of mercy without them.

2. That you would speedily begin, if you have not done it already, to lay a
foundation in your selves, mentioned by the Apostle, Heb. 6.1, 2. Of repentance
from dead works and faith toward God. The principal reason why many
Professors fall back from, or make such monstrous buildings in their
Profession, by idle and groundless conceits, is, because they began without a
foundation, rashly running with others, not considering why or whither. God
Almighty you see, would do nothing without a Foundation, your practice must
needs be presumption.

3. That as you hope for salvation by Christ upon this foundation, you would
examine your selves, according to the former evidences. It is reported of a
famous Carver, who making a curious Image of Minerva, did secretly engrave his
own upon it; so the Lord of Heaven has interwoven his own Image in his People,
which remains as a mark whereby they may be known to be his own workmanship.
Search it out in you: allow nothing in you, which is or may be condemned by
you. Let nothing be acted in one World, which cannot be answered in another.
(They can have no hope at the general Assizes, whose Conscience condemns them
before the appearing of the Judge.) That so when the Lord comes in glory, he
may know you to be his own, sealed with his Spirit, washed in his Blood and
clothed with his Righteousness; for whom a Crown of Righteousness was
prepared, before the foundations of the world were laid.

What should hinder such Men and Women from assurance of Heaven? The foundation
of God is laid; the signs of Election are seen, both eternally sealed. Who
shall separate us from from the love of Christ? shall Satan or wicked men?
temptation or persecution? poverty or death? None of all, nothing of all: for
the foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, The Lord knows who are
his; and let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity!

Glory be to God in the Highest!

THE END.

