An Abstract of a Letter FROM Lieutenant-Generall CRVMWELL to Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX Commander in chief of the Forces raised for the defense of the
Kingdom. Date April 26. 1645.

Of a great Victory obtained by the said Lieutenant General CRVMWELL against a
party of the Earl of Northamptons Regiment, the Lord Wilmots Regiment, and the
Queens Regiment of Horse near Oxford.

200. Killed in the fight, and in the chase. 200. Prisoners taken. 400. Horse.
The Queens own Colors. And great store of Arms.
ALSO, The taking of Bletchington-house by Lieutenant General CRUMWELL, a
Garrison of the Kings near Oxford and kept by Colonel Windebanke, whether the
residue of the enemy that escaped the former fight fled. With the copy of the
Articles upon the surrender of the said house.

72 Horse more taken in this house, 300 Muskets, and great store of other Arm^s
and Ammunition.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed for Francis Coals in the Old Bailey. 1645.

AN ABSTRACT Of the Letter, sent from General Crumwell to Sir Thomas Fairfax,
Commander in chief of the Forces raised for the defense of the Kingdom.
Right Honorable:
I Met at my Randezvous at Notingham, on Wednesday last, where I staid somewhat
long for the coming up of the Body of Horse, which Gods Honor was pleased to
give me command of* After the coming whereof I marched with all expedition to
Wheatly-Bridge, having sent before to Major General Brown, for what
Intelligence he could afford me of the state of affairs in oxford, I being not
so well acquainted in those parts, and the condition and number of the Enemy in
Oxford, as himself informed me by Letters; That Prince Maurice his Forces were
not in Oxford, (as I supposed, and that as he was informed by four very honest
and faithful Gentlemen, that came out of Oxford to him a little before the
Receipt of this Letter, that there were Twelve Pieces of Ordnance, with their
Carriages and Wagons, ready for a March, and in another place Five more
Pieces, with their Carriages, another ready to Advance with their Convoy:
After I received this satisfaction from Major General Brown, I advanced this
Morning, being Thursday, the Twenty fourth of April, near Oxford, then I lay
before the Enemy perceiving it at Oxford, and they being in readiness to
advance, sent out a party of Horse against me, part of the Queens Regiment,
part of the Earl of Northamptons Regiment, and part of the Lord Wilm^tes
Regiment, who made an Infall upon me whereupon your Honors Regiment (lately
mine own) I drew forth against the Enemy (who had drawn themselves into
several Squadrons, to be ready for Action) and your Honors own Troop
therein, I commanded to Charge a Squadron of the Enemy, who performed it so
gallantly, that after a short fiering they entered the whole Squadron, and put
them to a Confusion, and the rest of my Horse presently entering after them,
they made a Total Root of the Enemy, and had the Chase of them three or
sour Miles, and killed Two Hundred, took as many Prisoners, and about Four
Hundred Horse, and the Queens Colors Richly Embrodered with the Crown in the
midst, and Eighteen Flower-Deluces wrought about all in Gold, with a Golden
Cross on the Top: many escapt to Oxford, and diverse were drowned, part of
them likewise betook themselves to a strong House in Bletchington, where
Colonel Windebanke kept a Garrison with near Two Hundred Horse and Foot
therein, which after surrounded I summoned, but they seemed very delatory in
their Answer, at last they sent out Articles to me of Surrender (which I have
sent your Honor enclosed) and after a large Treaty thereupon, the Surrender
was agreed uon between us, they left behind them between two and Three Hundred
Muskets, Seventy Horses, besides other Arms and Ammunition: I Humbly rest

25 of April, 1645. Your Honors Humble Servant Oliver Crumwell

ARTICLES OF Agreement upon the surrender of Bletchington-House: Between
Lieutenant General Cromwell, and Colonel Windebanke, April 24. Anno 1645.
1. IT is agreed that all Officers of Horse of Commission of the Garrison shall
march away with their, Horse Swords, and Pistolls. 2. That the Colonel of the
Garrison, and the Mayor march away with their Horse, Swords, and Pistolls, and
the Captains of the Fort to march with their horse and swords. 3. That all
Soldiers in the Garrison march away leaving their Arms, Colors, and Drums
behind them, and for such Officers of horse as retreated thither for safety to
march away with their swords. 4. That Master Huchington, Master Ernely, Master
Eddes, and Master Pitts, being Gentlemen that came to visit the Governor and
not engaged, shall march away with their horses, swords, and Pistolls. 5. That
all the other Arms and Ammunition shall be delivered up imediatly to
Lieutenant General Cromwell without imbezeling, except as above mentioned. 6.
That safe conduct be granted by the Lieutenant General, for all the above
mentioned to Oxford. 7. That the Colonells Wife, her two Servants and Chaplain
with their horses march along with the Colonel. 8. That the Lad of the House
shall enjoy her goods as aforesaid without plunder, and all her family.
FINIS.

