Imprimatur,

G. Jane, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Dom.
Aug. 13. 1676.
A SERMON Preached July 17. 1676. IN THE Cathedral Church of St. Peter in York,
Before the Right Honorable, Sir FRANCIS NORTH, Lord Chief Justice of the
Common PLEAS; And the Honorable, VERE BERTIE Esquire, One of the Barons of the
EXCHEQUER; His MAJESTY'S JUDGES of Assize for the Northern Circuit. BY THOMAS
CARTWRIGHT D. D. And DEAN of Ripon, Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Thomas Newcomb; and are to be sold by Richard
Lambert, Bookseller in York. 1676.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir EDMUND JENNINGS Knight, High Sheriff of the
County of YORK.
SIR,
AS I owe you my Thanks for the Honor you did me, in thinking me worthy to be
employed in so Public a Service, as that to which this Discourse relates; so I
think it would be more than a Venial Sin to offer such a violence to Gratitude,
as to decline your Commands for the Publication of it. I will not therefore use
any thing which may look like an Excuse, but instantly show how inclinable I am
to prefer your Judgment before my own; and beg leave to prefix your Name before
that, which the Nature of the Subject, no less than the Obligations of the
Preacher have made wholly yours. The chief design of the Sermon was to convince
them that heard it, that our greatest Security under Heaven is the Wisdom of
our Laws, the vigorous Execution whereof, would remove those manifold
Mischiefs, which the Relaxation of them has bred, and will cherish among us.
Your Eminent Loyalty is such, that I have good reason to believe you love the
Sermon for the Subjects sake; and if there be not also a Power in your Judgment
to oblige others to have a good opinion of it, I shall account my self strong
enough to abide their Censures, whilst I have you on my side; and endeavor to
make my self the more valuable in the World by your Friendship; with the
continuation whereof you can Honor none who puts a greater value upon it, and
who is more sincerely, than I am,

Ripon, Aug. 7. 1676. SIR, Your most obliged and humble Servant, THO.
CARTWRIGHT.

JUDGES 17. 6. In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did
that which was right in his own eyes.
THe first and great Reason of Humane Laws and Dominion, is a Prevision that
all men will not be a Law unto themselves, so as to do their Duty for love or
fear of God; and therefore though there be Judgments to come in the next Life,
denounced against all Crimes committed in this, yet did God in the very Infancy
of the World make an Edict for Magistracy: so that the Civil Power does derive
its Pedigree from Heaven, and is a part of the Government over Mankind, in
which God uses the Ministry of Angels, and the service of Men; and it has
accordingly in all Ages been found absolutely necessary for the preservation of
Community, Peace and Piety, not to leave persons to terrors at such a distance
as are those of Christ's second coming to judge the World in Righteousness, but
to put the Sword of Vengeance into one Man's hand here on Earth for the benefit
of all; because if Men should be let loose to their licentious freedom,
wickedness would increase among them even to cruelty; nor would Good Men have
any better security than Lambs in a Forest of many Wolves, if there were not
some present restraints for such exorbitant Offenders, whom the determents of
the Life to come could not overruled into subjection, that they might at least
obey for wrath, if not for Conscience sake.

We are like Children in their Minority, not fit to be trusted to our own
conduct, but to be secured at the public charge of our Superiors, to whom
next under God and his good Angels we are most beholding for our safety. Our
Breath of our Nostrils is not more necessary for our being, than our Princes
Sovereignty is to our well-being; for were he not armed with Authority to
overpower Evil doers, the Purse-proud-man would oppress the Poor, the Crafty
circumvent the Simple, the weaker party be continually exposed to the spoil and
rapine of the stronger, and we prostituted to the exorbitant Lust of every
turbulent and domineering Spirit who could prevail to lord it over us.

From hence we may easily conclude, That those days must needs be evil, wherein
the Civil Government is Unhinged, when the ancient and unquestionable
Sovereignty over any People is cut off; of which sad spectacle your Eyes and
mine have been deploring Witnesses. For what Isaias foretold, was fulfilled in
these days, The People were oppressed every one by another, Isai. 3. 5.
and every one by his Neighbor; the Child did behave himself proudly against
the Ancient, and the Base against the Honorable: When there was No King in
Israel, every one was more than a King to himself, which is the greatest
Judgment that can befall a Rebellious People in this World. For better any one a
King, than every one a King; and yet every one is more than a King, if he may
do without control what is right in his own Eyes; and therefore we are the
most Ungrateful Wretches in the World, and fit to be condemned to such repeated
Confusions, if we do not bless God, both with our Lips and in our Lives, for
the Re-establishment of that Regal Authority, to which we so evidently owe the
preservation of our Order, our Peace, and our Religion; and indeed of every
other good thing which is and ought to be dear unto us.

Moses was the first King in Israel, and when he absented himself from the
People but for forty days, they Calv'd themselves a Molten Image, and became
such Beastly Idolaters as to fall down and worship it. Their new fashion in
Religion, which they took up in his absence, (as ridiculous as it was) was
quickly followed by the Crowd; and their God of Gold (though but a Calf indeed)
did not long want Worshippers.

His next immediate Successor was Joshua, and as soon as he was dead, Micha and
his old doting Mother made them both Gods and Priests; and from what occasion
these abominable Disorders sprang, my Text tells you, the true reason was,
There was no King in Israel, none to prohibit or punish such Prophanations;
and so bless God or blaspheme him, be of any or no Religion, come to Church or
stay at home; follow any Seducer, though never so dangerous; embrace any
Heresy, though never so damnable; or espouse any Faction, though never so
desperate and seditious; turn Idolaters, or commit Sacrilege; every Man may do
what he lists, when there is no Public Magistrate to call him to an account
for it.

Thrice more we read in holy Scripture this Burden of the same Lamentation
repeated, that There was no King in Israel; and this upon no less occasions
than Idolatry and abominable Lusts, and with no less pernicious consequences
and effects than Disorder and Dissolution.

1. When there was no King in Israel, who is (...), the living Image of God,
the Tribe of Dan will have a dead Idol, they break into Micha's House, rob him
of his Priest and and consecrated things; and if you inquire how such
Sacrilege, Idolatry, Felony and Burglary could escape their deserved
punishment? It Is fully answered, that there was no King in Judge. 18. 1
Israel, no Heir of Restraint, (for so the King is called Verse. 7. of that
Chapter) because He by his Inheritance is obliged to curb and restrain all
headstrong Impieties, and to cast up Boundaries against such overflowing
Iniquities.

2. At another time we read of an horrible Rape committed, a Woman violently
and shamefully abused by the extravagant Lust of barbarous Ruffians, and the
Spirit of God renders this also for the reason of that violent Uncleanness of
Gibeah, That there was no King in Israel.

3. Lastly, The Men of Benjamin became the bold Champions of Gibeah's Lewdness;
and being fleshed with the double success of their evil cause, they persisted
in their Villainy, till all but six hundred were destroyed. These surprised the
Virgins dancing at Shiloth, ravished them away by violence from their Parents,
and enforced them to Marriage; of which Rape and Riot the reason rendered is the
same as it was of the former, In those days there was no King in Judge. 21. 23,
25.
Israel.

So that my Text, you see, is no single instance, no particular, strange,
casual, or accidental Emergence; but as it was in the beginning, so it has
been ever since, and will be undoubtedly to the Worlds end; Where there is no
King Genesis 36. 3. Deuteronomy. 33. 5
(that is, no ordinary Judge or Governor, as the word is elsewhere taken)
every one will do that which is right in his own eyes.

My Text is made up of Confusion, Anarchy, and the sad Effects of it divide it
and the World; nor can you expect any perfect Method in the prosecution of such
Disorders, wherein we are concerned to take notice of these three Particulars:

I. The Tragical Antecedent, wherein the great cause of Isreal's Miseries, and
from what remarkably fatal time they bore date, is recorded; In those days
there was no King in Israel. II. The Terrible Consequent, or Isreal's dismal
condition without their King; Every one did that which was right in their own
Eyes. III. The Infallible Connection between that Cause and this Effect; the one
is so entailed upon the other, that there is but an intermediate Comma, hardly
a breathing space, between the loss of a King and Licentiousness:
Which makes the words by a clear Epiphonema to declare the great Benefit of a
Legitimate King in Israel, the Necessity of Laws, and the Happiness of those
People, who live under such a Government as takes an impartial care of their
execution, which will bring the Text home from the Jews to the Gentiles, from
those in Israel to us in England.

Now the worst beginning that any Men living ever made, was, when we of this
Nation began to be a weary of our Late Martyred Sovereign, that being the fatal
time from whence we may experimentally derive the Original Cause of all ours,
as the Holy Spirit has here done of Isreal's Miseries; which I therefore term,

1. The Tragical Antecedent: In those days there was no King in Israel. After
Sampson's death, there was an Inter-regnum, not under Othoniel, but between
Sampson's and Eli's Government, (to which Drusius and Tremellius think this
instance relates.) Others say there was no Supreme and continual ordinary
Magistrate over the whole body of the People; for the Judges were
extraordinary, raised at Gods pleasure over a part of the People, and without
absolute Authority; and therefore the People Judge. 2. 17
would not hearken unto them, because their Power was only of Direction, not of
Dominion; they could counsel, but not correct them: There were at that time
many Taskmasters over Israel, but no King in it.

Now the King is of as public and universal Influence in his Dominions, as is
the Sun in the Firmament, He being the Public Ballancer of each Private
Interest, with which he is entrusted as the proper Guardian of Equity and
Justice, Custos utriusque Tabulae, to whose Sacred Custody God has committed
the Two Tables of the Law, and entrusted Him to see that we live soberly among
our selves, religiously toward God, and righteously toward our Neighbors.

Rerum prima Salus and una Caesar. Martial l. 8. Epigr. 65.
He is the principal Pillar upon which the Stress of his Kingdom lies; and as
the King does not live Sibi, sed Populo, so neither does He die to his own, but
to their disadvantage; and though ten thousand others might steal out of the
World and no body mind or miss them, yet the Loss of Him will be as soon felt,
as the plucking up of a substantial Stake out of a rotten Hedge, or the removal
of a Buttress from a declining Wall. And when this Tutelar Angel of a Kingdom
is recalled, it is time for the Inhabitants to tremble, for fear of the
Destroying Angel's coming among them. A King will be suddenly and soundly
missed, not only in Edom but in Israel, which will quickly turn to a Babel
without him, in as much as that very Law by which we hold our Lives and
Liberties will be but a Dead Letter, unless it have his Authority to actuate
and enliven it. For let the Rule be never so strait and perfect, it measures
nothing out of his Hand who has skill to use it; and when the Law has defined
what is Right or Wrong, there will want a Judge to sentence for the Plaintiff
or Defendant; and let the Directive Power of the Law be never so good, it must
of necessity fall to the ground, if there be not a co-active to assist it.

Libertas Liberate Perit, to live as we please would be the ready way to lose
our Liberty, and undo our selves. Tyranny it self were infinitely more
tolerable than such an unbridled Liberty. For that like a Tempest might throw
down here and there a fruitful Tree, but this like a Deluge would sweep away
all before it: and Confusion has ever been found so much worse than the
hardest Subjection, and even the most corrupt Government so much better than a
Civil War, that it was overruled in Nerva's time by Fronto the Consul, Melius
est sub his Cardan. Encom. Neron. c. 5
esse, sub quibus nihil licet, quam sub quibus omnia: That it is better to live
under the severest Prince, where every Suspicion is made a Crime, and every
Crime Capital, than to have none at all but a lawless Anarchy. And therefore
the want of a King of which Israel so much complains, is a complicated
Mischief, involving many thousand Evils in it, and such as are not to be
calculated by any single person, but we must all lay our heads together to sum
them up; which that we may the better do, I proceed to examine that particular
account, which the second part of my Text gives of them, viz.

II. The Terrible Consequent, or Isreal's miserable condition without their
King, in as much as every one did that which was right in his own Eyes. Every
Man whose short-sighted Soul can see no farther than his Eye, ought not to be
empanneld to give in a Verdict of Right, of which to expect a true Judgment
from him, were to exact an account beyond the Sphere of his notice. For admit,
that some of Nature's Courser Wares may lie upon the Bulk, exposed to the
transient view of every Vulgar Eye; yet these her Choicer Jewels of Right and
Equity are locked up in her private Cabinet, for their sight who can purchase
them at their due rates of Sweat and Oil. If therefore any Man's Eye be the
competent Judge of Right, yet without peradventure not every Man's; certainly
not those of the Crowd, who prostrate their Assent to every shallow Appearance,
and defile their Judgments with each bold Conjecture that flatters them. And
indeed if every private Man had Wit and Honesty sufficient to govern himself
and his own Actions, there would be no need of Public Laws to direct, and
Magistrates to guide them: But alas! most Men's Minds are too much out of order
to have such a Trust reposed in them, as being acted by fond and absurd
Principles, and so horribly imposed upon by their Vices and Passions, that
their Determinations are as different as their Judgments, and those as their
Interests; and they who have no reason in them but their Wills, will hear none
against them, which would make Controversies and Dissentions endless, if the
Wisdom of Providence in a foresight of these Mischiefs to which we are thus
obnoxious, had not caused us all to be born Subjects to some Empire, placing a
Prince and Priest at first in every Family, and suffering none, since the World
was better peopled, to live without the Restraints of an overruling Government.

But if every Man's Eye could be supposed to be the competent Judge of some
Right, yet without peradventure not of his own Right, for we are prone to fawn
upon our selves, and to be wilfully ignorant of our own failings. Our
Affections do so easily bribe our Judgments to most apparent degrees of
inequality, that it will be in vain to expect a Right Sentence where the Judge
is a Party. We do so infinitely believe what makes for our selves, and so
easily settle in a firm persuasion of the goodness of our own Causes without
examining them, that any thing seems Right to us, if it be our Interest to have
it so; and whatsoever we see through those Selfish Spectacles, comes with such
great improvement to our Judgments, that as often as Reason is against us, so often
are we against Reason. Rectum non ex propria recti, honestique rationem, sed ex
uniuscujusque libidine definitur: Nor is there any Crime so bad but it seems as
right in some Men's Eyes, as the Worshipping of an Idol did in Micha's, or as
Rebellion under pretense of Religion did to them who had Espoused the Good Old
Cause; and in pure tenderness of Conscience to make her a Sufficient Dowry,
Joyntred her in the Blood and Estates of their Lawful Sovereign and his Loyal
Subjects, till their Gospel-Reformation was in a manner completed, and the
Godly Party came to Inherit the Fattest Portions of this Land. Nor need we go
back to them for an instance of Men's being blinded with their Passions and
Interests; for we see not the Beams in our own Eyes, but hug our very
Deformities when they bear our Names, and will hardly be persuaded they are so,
when we take our selves to be their Authors.

Nemo suae mentis motus non aestimat aequos
Quodque volunt homines, se been velle putant. Prove.

Many Men, many Minds, and each strongly addicted to his own. If therefore
every Man should be his own Judge, so as to take upon him to determine his own
Right, and according to such Determination to proceed in the maintenance of it,
not only the Government, but the Kingdom it self would quickly come to ruin:
and yet admit of the former, and you cannot exclude the latter. For the Hand
will follow the Eye, and Men do as it seems right to them, be it never so wrong
in it self: so that if a vicious Eye be seconded with strong Hands, and there
be No King to pinion them; we cannot expect more Miseries, than will infallibly
invade us, nor fewer than befell the Jews, when every Man did that which was
right in his own Eyes. Diseases in the Eye, Errors in the Judgment, are
dangerous; and there being not one Reason in us, there is the more need of one
Power over us. Yet they who see amiss, hurt none (they say) but themselves: But
how if their unquiet Opinions will not be kept at home? but proves as Thorns in
their Sides, and will not suffer them to take any rest, till from Liberty of
Thinking, they come to Liberty of Acting? (which the most Judicious Hooker
foresaw they would do, and we have seen they did.) Then without question, if we
cannot pull Men's Eyes out of their Heads, (which were inhumane to attempt) nor
beat them out of their perverse Opinions, (which were unchristian) yet at least
it is the Public Interest and the Magistrates Duty to pinion their Hands, and
bind them to the Peace; and the Kings Charge it must consequently be, to look
to His Subjects Eyes, as well as he can, that they sin not blindly for want of
Direction; and especially to their Arms, that they sin not with a high Hand for
want of Correction; to look well to Micha in matters of Religion; to take care
to pull False Worship down, and to set up the Power of Godliness in its room.
The letting loose of that string of Uniformity, which the Laws have scrued up
to its just pitch, will make greater Discords in the Harmony both of Church and
State than we can easily imagine.

Regis quisque intra se animum habet. Every Man is apt to take more Liberty
than he will allow, and to look upon the Restraints of Authority as an
Incroachment upon his Birth right; and therefore doing of Right is a smooth
term with them who are for the most part in the Wrong; and Liberty of
Conscience the plausiblest thing in the World, even among Men of no Conscience
at all. But our Wiser Progenitors who expected Protection, not only for
Themselves but their Posterities, did and might as reasonably engage for our
Obedience to them who should protect us; nor are we therefore born in a state
of absolute Liberty, to choose what Laws and Governors we please; but Subjects
to that Authority we now live under, which we are bound to preserve both in
Church and State with our Lives and Fortunes.

Nor is there any reason we should be (...), lawless, to do what we please: for
we cannot fathom the depth and deceitfulness of our own Hearts, much less of
the Hearts of other Men, which are fruitful in evil, and every day bring forth
new Inventions. Only this we know, Cui plus licet quam par est, plus velit quam
licet, We are all the worse for that which we mistake for Liberty, (mistake I
say) for to live as we please, is indeed to lose our Liberty, of which the Law
is so far from being an Abridgement, that it is the only Firm Foundation upon
which it must be built, if it stand for ever, there being no True Liberty but
under some Law; to which when Men fling off their Obedience, they bring
themselves under the Devils Yoke; nor is there any thing more unlike Liberty
than that which they then contend for with so much heat and violence. A Liberty
to manifest our folly and wickedness, to be unjust and unholy, to injure our
Brethren and our selves, is but a License and Protection for Villainy, which is
the greatest Slavery on this side Hell; and yet a little more of this Liberty
they would fain have, who have had too much already, (unless they had used it
better.) The Crowd would fain be let loose, to do what they please; which
Freedom that they may the better obtain, they are taught (by them who know best
how to set a Rebellion on foot) to pretend Conscience, and an Inward Light for
all their Aims and Actions, how dark and dangerous soever; which fond pretense
has in all Ages bid defiance to the Swords and Scepters of Sovereign Princes,
and Countermanded the Laws of their Inacting; and whenever the Rabble had a
mind to Rebel, every thing they would have introduced or altered in the
Government was their Conscience, and their foulest Villainies were ready to
justify themselves by Scripture Authority. Now by their Consciences (for the
Liberty whereof this Nation has unhappily spent that Blood and Treasure which
we might have kept for better purposes) the modestest of them meant, I think,
their Judgment, and Opinion of their own Actions; and did accordingly become
Humble Petitioners to our Martyred KING of Blessed Memory, that their Dictates
might be certain Peculiars exempt from the Jurisdictions of their Sovereigns
Decrees.

No Nation under Heaven has been more over-stock'd with such Libertines than
this of ours, where they have been laying the Foundation for above forty years
last past, of the most loose, uncertain and pernicious Religion in the World.
When they hear the Echo of their own Lust and Concupiscence speaking within
them, they tell their deluded Admirers, that it is the Voice of the Spirit; and
being once enlighted with such Illusions, they bring in God to Witness against
Himself, and to speak by them from Heaven against what he has declared before
by his Son upon Earth; upon which Foundation what a Babel of Confusion has
been erected, and what foul Sins have advanced themselves upon these specious
Principles, even to the out-facing of all Authority, we have sadly seen and
felt too much already.

Men of Distempered Minds as well as Crasie Bodies being possessed with a
discontent and dislike of things present, do naturally imagine that any thing,
the Virtue whereof they hear commended by their Friends, will help them, and
that most which they have tried least; and therefore they listen greedily to
any Alterations of that Government which is uneasy to their Humors. A Rent in
the Church they hope may make up the Breaches in their Estates and Reputations,
and the Ruins of the Kingdom build up their Fortunes; and therefore no wonder
if they desire to acknowledge No King in Israel but Christ, and every one to do
that which is right in his own Eyes, without the control of his Governors,
who are entrusted with the Sword of Justice to repress those Armed Disorders
which are embowel'd in that Trojan Horse, which these Crafty Sinons would
introduce.

Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur Atridae. If this be admitted, King
JAMES His Prophecy will be soon fulfilled, The Pope will be brought into
England upon the Puritans back: And though I am so Charitable as to hope, that
they do not in the least design it; yet I am also so purblind that I cannot see
the least danger of his entrance any other way, notwithstanding the many
Jealousies of this kind with which we are daily alarmed.

But alas, What an Insignificant Cipher, what a mere Picture of Authority would
a King be, if every private Man's persuasion, which he has learned to call his
Conscience, should give check to the Magistrates Commands? And how impossible
is it for the King to abridge them of Liberty of Conscience, the pleading for
which makes so great a noise in the World? For Liberty of Conscience rightly
stated, is an Internal and Invisible thing, seated in that part of a Man, of
whose secret Operations, which are but pure Speculations, the Civil Power can
take no Cognizance. Men may think of things according to their own persuasions,
and assert the freedom of their Judgments in their Intellectual Kingdoms
against all the Emperors in the World. Nor is such a Private Sovereignty as
this any Incroachment on the Prerogatives of Princes, because Mere Opinions as
such, have no influence upon the Good or Evil of Humane Societies, which is the
proper Object of Government; so that if the Opinion be shut up and muzled, if
it dwell quietly at home, and take not the Air to molest and endanger others,
Authority lays no restraint upon it. But when it sallies out of its own
Sanctuary, into outward Action, and invades the Magistrates Territories, till
it come from Liberty of Persuasion to Liberty of Practice, and throws (...),
such Fiery Darts of Satan among his Subjects Ephesians. 6. 16.
as may inflame and wound them, it is both his Duty and Interest to have a care
of the Public Weal, and to put a Bit in the Mouth of such an headstrong and
unbridled Liberty as would run full speed into all the Mischiefs and Enormities
imaginable. God knows the generality of Men's Consciences are very insufficient
and incompetent Judges of their own Actions; and to leave them to the
Government of their own Delusive Persuasions, were in effect to deliver them up
to Satan, to be abused and tormented with every Lust, which had debauched their
Understandings. We have seen of late years what a Cross-grained Thing this
Liberty of Conscience is, how many Rebels it Armed, and how many Drums it beat
up for Reformation, till Humor, Prejudice and Peevishness prevailed to Murder
the Best of Princes. Nor can we be reasonably startled at any greater Symptoms
of the departure of that Happy Government which God has now blessed us with,
than every Man's resolving to be overruled by none but his own Persuasions;
from the growth of which pernicious Delusion, Good Lord deliver us. For if
there were No King in our Israel, we should soon feel by these Men's Actions
what were Right in their Eyes, and be thoroughly convinced of the Truth of the
third part of my Text; viz,

III. The Infallible Connection between that Antecedent and this Consequent, the
Loss of a King and Licentiousness. In those days there was no King in Israel,
Quid plus velit ira? There was no full stop to more Miseries yet; there is but
a mere Comma, a short breathing space, and it instantly follows, Every Man did
that which was right in his own Eyes. We are not yet grown so old in our
regained Happiness, as to have out-worn the sense of our late Disorders. Those
Fatal Days are not yet forgot, wherein the Cursed Regicides pulled down Gods
Deputy to set up Devotion, defaced the Churches to introduce a Form of
Godliness, and grub'd up the soundest and straitest Cedars of it by the Roots,
to plant a Grove of crooked hollow hearted Elders in their room, till they came
to hold the Laws themselves under Sequestration, as well as the Rights and
Revenues of the Crown and Church, and of all such good Subjects and Christians
as had Courage and Conscience enough to defend either. Indeed we can hardly
name that Wickedness which was not then Tolerated, Countenanced, Encouraged and
Applauded, when the Sword of the Spirit had once found a new way to the
Conscience, even by cutting through the Flesh. From which horrible Enormities,
which a King in Israel would, and when he is Dethroned, none else can, prevent
and remedy, give me leave by way of Application to infer three things.

1. The Necessity of Laws and Governors. If all Men were Virtuous, every Man
would be a Law to himself; but there being very few who can guide themselves,
and very many who will not be guided by others without constraint, there is a
visible need both of a Directive Power to make Laws, and of a Coactive to put
them in Execution. The Law without the King is but a Dead Letter, He is (...),
the Living Law; and as without Government there would be no Communities, but
rather Herds of Men; so without such Coercive Power of his, there could be no
Government; and if the Power of which the King is possessed did not so vastly
exceed that of his Subjects who are to obey, that in case of a Contest it would
be most unreasonable for them to hope to maintain their Cause and Party against
him, we should never be free from Tumults and Seditions; and therefore Men
being more Ruled by Hopes and Fears, than by a sense of Duty and love of
Goodness, it is necessary for the Maintenance of Societies, not only that it be
declared, What Men ought to do; but also that the Penalties be set forth which
they ought to suffer upon the Violation of those Laws whereupon the Society
does subsist, for which they are to be accountable to such who by their Oaths
and Offices are bound to see the Laws obeyed, and Offenders punished: so that
although there be Kings, yet except they carefully execute their Laws, that no
Man be suffered to do what is right in his own Eyes, without suffering the
Penalties imposed by Law, Disorder and Dissolution will quickly follow.

The Laws ought to be of an Vnyielding and Inflexible Temper, and not such soft
and easy things as to bend to their humor whom they ought to command. Nor do
I know any Rule either of Policy or Piety, whereby the Conscience of the
Superior is bound to relax his Laws, because the Inferior thinks so. For if
one Man can make it necessary to change the Law in compliance with his Opinion,
then why not every one? and so no Law shall be in force, but what Malefactors
have a mind to, and every Man shall be bound to please himself in doing that
which is right in his own Eyes, which is the ready way to Nurse up Factions and
Seditions to a Grandeur so formidable, as to be able when they see their own
time to change the Government of Church and State.

It Is sometimes necessary for the Public Weal to punish Well-meaning Persons
for such Offenses into which they have been betrayed through their own
Ignorance and Inadvertency, and by the artifice of some Grand Seducers: but it
is always necessary to punish such, who unless they mean better now than they
did before, mean to bathe their Tender Consciences in the Blood of our Gracious
Sovereign and their Fellow Subjects; and therefore it is high time for them who
are in Authority, not only to consider the present, but to enlarge their
Vigilance for the times to come; to permit nothing now, which may hereafter
shake the Throne of David, and to bestir themselves against such
Anti-Monarchical, and Anti-Episcopal Spirits, as have been Conjured up in this
Rebellious and Disputing Age, till they lay such Infernal Impostors, and compel
them to that Modesty and Obedience by the Sword of Justice, to which all the
Rhetoric and Reason in the World can never court them. And I know your
Lordships understand your selves and the present Distempers of this poor
distracted Kingdom better than to hope to remove the Disease by feeding the
Humor. If the Foundations of Faith, Good Life and Government be not secured by
the due execution of the Laws, we shall neither have Truth nor Peace long among
us: From whence we may infer,

2. The great Benefit of a Legitimate King and his Government, as of that in
which our Strength lies, as did Sampsons in his Hair; which if cut off, we
should quickly betray our Weakness to the Philistines falling upon us.
Munimentum Gentis est Justitia; Justice is the Fortification of a Kingdom, and
Laws the Soul of the Body Politic, by which its parts are animated and set a
work in such Actions as the common good requires, which taught Plato to derive
their Pedigree from Heaven, (...) And indeed the World, which would otherwise
be a Salvage Wilderness, is by Government made a Terrestrial Paradise, the Type
and Representation of that which is Eternal, whilst every Man sits under his
own Vine and Figtree, gathering his own Fruit, and not reaching his Hand into
another Vineyard. Thus are Men by the Kings Power made just to others and
themselves; and as they may not offer violence, so neither need they fear to
suffer it; they may not disturb their Brethrens Peace, nor need they be jealous
of their own, no Man being permitted to do that which is right in his own Eyes,
unless it be also agreeable to the Laws of God and the King; and the Outcries
of such against the Magistrates as are thus happily bound by them to their Good
behavior, are no more to be regarded by them than those of Madmen against
their Physicians.

Nor do Kings, who are Gods among Men, go out of their way in managing the
Affairs of his Kingdom. For if none had Power to order Matters of Religion,
there would be nothing but Confusion; if any besides the Supreme Magistrate,
nothing but Division; and therefore the Jews tell us, that the Keys of the
Temple were not hung at the High Priests Girdle, but laid every Night under
Solomon's Pillow, as belonging to his charge. And for as much as the King of
England holds his Crown of God in Capite, to Him must he go, not to the Pope
for his Directions in this matter. He is to consult Moses and the Prophets, not
Him and his Cardinals. His Sword is to be guided and restrained by the Laws of
Heaven, and not controuled by those of Rome. King James one would think had
said enough to make their Papal-Bulls pull in their Horns with shame, and to
teach all Christian Kings to take heed of being tossed by them, with whom
King-Killing has passed the Muster not only of Works acceptable to God, but
also of such Meritorious Ones as may justly purchase the Crown of Martyrdom.
They call the Murder of Heretical Princes an holy and honorable Exploit, by
which they shall merit Salvation; which though St. Paul forbid the Romans to
whom he wrote under Pain of Damnation, yet, yet does the Pope of Rome and his
Assertors encourage Subjects to, as that to which they are bound under no less
a penalty, ( Conscientiae vinculo arctissimo, says Creswell.) I know there are
many Loyal Persons of the Romish Persuasion, who do abhor those Jesuitical
Principles and Practices; and I wish the Pope would be so just to himself and
us, and so kind to them, as to call those Churchmen of his in question, who
have publicly abetted such Treasonable Conspiracies, and that he would publish
his Pontifical Decree to provide for the Safety of Kings a little better than
his College of Jesuits have done, and to censure Mariana's and such other
Books as have commended Regicides, to the great scandal of Religion, and then
his Proselytes would have no occasion to complain of Persecution here in
England, which the Protestant Religion does no where teach.

All Ecclesiastical Officers are but the Kings Vnder-ministers, who being the
Head of all under Christ, ought to have an especial care of his Body the
Church, that no turbulent Papists or Phanaticks may under pretense of
Conscience and Reformation, outface and control God's and his Authority, and
raise such Quarrels in the Church about Ceremonies, as may at last imbroil his
Kingdom in the greatest Disorders and Exorbitancies imaginable. And indeed when
Men are grown so hardy as to venture upon the Mouth of any Cannon which is not
charged with Chain-shot, but with the Brutum Fulmen of a Flashy
Excommunication, which does no Execution upon their Bodies or Estates, it is
much to be feared that they will, when they see their opportunity, assault the
Power it self that set them up, if they in whom the Execution of the Laws is
entrusted, do not think fit to proportion their strictness to the stubbornness
of Grainsayers, but the Rulers permit what the Rule forbids to the
encouragement of disobedience. For unless Justice do inflict the Wrath, as well
as Conscience enact the Law, Impunity will breed Insolence, and Vice grow the
greater by prohibition. Yield them up this one Flower of the Kings Crown, and
their Incroaching Fingers will be reaching after another; their Malice being so
unreasonable, that it has been found much easier to deny them all, than having
gratified them in part to prescribe them a measure. And certainly one great
cause why this Kingdom has more Rebels than Murderers, more Schismatics than
Sodomites, more stubborn Nonconformists than High-way-men, is because there is
a more strict execution of the Laws against the one, than against the other.
Give not me therefore, but God leave, whose Minister I am here as your Honors
are on the Bench, to call upon you to remember the Church of England, when you
sit down to Consult and Judge, that her Sons may not forget your Lordships when
they kneel down to pray; and this we beg the more earnestly, because the
unsheathing of your Swords may happily prevent the destroying Angels drawing
his. I am not tempted to sin against the Public Character which has been so
deservedly given to your Lordships; nor do I in the least suspect any active or
passive Injustice in you, or that you need any encouragement of mine to act
according to the Dictates of your Consciences, and the Limits of your
Commissions; and therefore all that I have said in this matter is designed to
justify to others the Economy and Equity of your constant care and
proceedings in this kind, and not only the reasonableness, but the
indispensible necessity which lies upon you of performing that Great Trust
which God and the King have reposed in you, for the Public Good of this Church
and Kingdom.

But I know the touchiness of the times in which I speak to be as admirable as
their contempt of Authority; and do therefore expect to be told by some who are
conscious to themselves how much they have deserved to feel the smart of your
Censures in this kind; how ill it becomes a Minister of the God of Peace, whose
Mercy is above all his Works, either to be angry my self, or to incense your
Lordships against such dissenting Brethren, who sometimes perhaps obey for
wrath, and sometimes also disobey for Conscience sake; and that I should rather
in meekness instruct those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will
give them repentance to the acknowledgment of the Truth, than invite others to
persecute them. For so both the Romanists and Sectaries have agreed to call the
Execution of the Penal Laws, and to charge them upon the Church of England,
which has no hand in the Execution of them. I thank God, I never yet was, nor
ought I to be angry with any Man for not seeing with my Eyes, for not being of
my Persuasion; nor have I so much heat, nor so little light, but that I can
overlook their Misapprehensions with the coolest Indifferency imaginable, and
do daily pray from the bottom of my Heart, that God would bring into the way of
Truth all such as have erred and are deceived. But when Men will set up Altar
against Altar, and Pulpit against Pulpit, not only without, but against
Authority, and make no more of Obedience and Subjection than of a Ceremony,
(for which they seem to mistake them) I cannot imagine how the Laws could be
less severe against them than they are, nor how the Magistrate can more
seriously oblige them, than by overruling them to that degree of Conformity
which is both their Duty and Happiness.

The Church of Christ among us, which was once undoubtedly as seamless as his
Coat, these Canting Deceivers have now of late so rent by Schisms, so torn by
Separations, that it is become like Joseph's Coat, one piece is hardly colored
like another; and I pray God it prove not like it in another particular also,
that it be not once more dyed Red, and imbrued in Blood again. I need not tell
you what the Donatists did in Africa against Maximinian, nor John of Leydens
Men at Munster. The Popes of Rome, for all their Age and Holiness, have more
than once attempted to commit a Rape upon the Crown and Church of England; and
we have also smartly felt, how hard the Hearts and Hands of those Tender
Consciences were, which were Nursed up at Geneva. The Foxes did then (as they
do now) look several ways, but we find our Fields wasted, and can hardly tell,
which were the greater Trespassers; and God forbid that either of their
Dominions should ever be founded in His MAJESTY'S Grace. I hope this Nation
lies under no Disloyal Temptations to a Second Holy War, because we cannot yet
have forgot what a vast Expense of Blood and Treasure the First cost us. I
doubt not but our former Experience will Discipline us into an abhorrency of
all those Unnatural Methods which may infer the like Catastrophe. It is not
long since the Lord turned again the Captivity of our Sion; and are we already
so sick of our Liberty, and so fond to go back, as if with the malcontent
Israelites our Delight were in Egypt, and we longed to be Dancing after the
Phrygian Music of Drums and Trumpets? What is it that you want to complete
your Happiness, unless it be to understand it better, and to be more thankful
for it? Will not the Miracle of the Kings and Churches Restoration rise up in
Judgment against us, if we so soon grow a weary of our Deliverance as to
blaspheme GOD and the KING, and deflower the Beauty of his Crown with Satirical
Invectives, and gratify his Enemies with Libels against his Person and
Government? The very Heathens themselves had Divinity enough to pay Devotion to
their Princes. Imperatori tanquam praesenti and corporali Deo, Fidelis est
praestanda devotioo; and if our Religion do not improve our Loyalty beyond
theirs, it is not from above, and we shall be found Rebels against Heaven as
well as Him. For they who do not obey the King, who is a Visible God, will
never obey God, who is an Invisible King. If therefore you desire to approve
your selves good Subjects and Christians, invent not any Evil Stories of Him
whom God has set over you, falsely; believe them not easily, report them not
disloyally, aggravate them not spitefully, scatter them not industriously, but
apprehend such Disloyal Thiefs, whom you take a Pillaging your Princes Good
Name; the forward Receiver of any evil report, being as bad as he that brings
it. And remember that Railing against Kings was a Capital Crime in David's
Judgment, who commanded Solomon to put 1 Kin. 2. 9
Shimei to death for it.

Let all your things be done with Charity; but let that Charity begin at home,
and let the Father of your Country and your Mother Church taste the first
fruits of it. As many as are acted by calm and peaceable Principles, have as
much Liberty by Law as they can desire, and much good it may do them. For those
who are otherwise minded, it were an unpardonable Diminution of the Wisdom and
Authority of the King and Parliament to say they deserved it. Unless there be
five or more assembled together over and besides those of the same Household
where their Conventicle or Assembly is, the Law made Ann. 22 CAROLI Secundi,
for the Prevention and Suppression of Seditious Conventicles, takes no
Cognizance of them; and yet still they complain of Want of Liberty. Now it
cannot be a Liberty of Serving God which they want, for he has promised that
Wheresoever two or three are met together in his Name, he will be in the midst
of them; (and the Law allows them this, and as much more:) but it must be a
Liberty of increasing their Factions, till their Numbers may come to give Laws
to the Government. His MAJESTY has done nothing to impose upon their
Consciences. I wish I could also as truly say that they had done nothing to
oppose his Authority: for the Benefits whereof that we may bless God, as
becomes us, and pray the more heartily for its continuance, I shall descant in
the close of my Discourse upon,

3 Our Happiness under a Monarchical Government, which has this prescription
and advantage above all other forms, that it carries a more evident stamp of
Divine Institution than any other, and is the more likely to avoid or put an
end to all Divisions whatsoever. For where there are many Governors, there
must needs be Differences; where there are few, there easily may be; where
there is but one, there cannot, the intermediate Officers having their
Subordination either to other, and all to him, who as God said to Moses, has
need of such Under-officers, Numb 11. 17.
because he is not able to bear the burden alone. We have a KING after Gods and
our own Heart; may his Reign be long and prosperous: He is Gods High Steward
and Minister; and You, My Lords, are His, from whom you derive your Authority
for the punishment of Evildoers, that we may lead a peaceable Life in all
Godliness and Honesty. If therefore any have done what is right in their own
Eyes, (but not in those of the Law) I doubt not but that you will let them
know, that There is a King in Israel, by bringing them to suffer what is right
in yours; that whosoever will not do the Laws of our God and the King, may have
Judgment Ezra 7. 26
executed speedily upon them, whether it be death, or to banishment, or to
confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. Which benefit whilst the Country
reaps by the execution of your Trust, (who are the Kings best Lifeguard in
times of Peace) the very feet of those who bring tidings of your coming, will
be beautiful on the Mountains; and your Honors will be received with the
greatest alacrity and demonstrations of Joy imaginable, as Good Angels of God
and the King; to whom we are in such deep Arrears of Duty and Allegiance, that
we can never pay him the Interest of our Obligations. Nemo Patri Patriae parem
refert gratiam, etiamsi vitam impendat: No Man can be grateful enough to his
Prince, though he sacrifice his Life to his Service. Indeed we are blind to our
own Interest, if we do not tender him as the Apple of our Eye; Submit both our
Persons and Estates to be commanded at his pleasure; in as much as all our
private Concerns are embarked in that Public Bottom, whose Exigencies must be
supplied with Men and Money according to the Kings Discretion, who with the
Advice and Assistance of his great Council the Parliament, is the best Judge of
Public Necessity. As we are all comprehended in, so are we obliged to the good
of the Nation, upon which whatsoever we bestow returns to our selves, the King
having no more than the serious care of a Public Guardian to lay out our
Services, and some part of our Estates for our own good, of which no Revenue
remains to himself but care and trouble.

If Men did bear true Faith and Allegiance to God and the King, and would stick
to the plain Principles of the Gospel, and of a Virtuous Life, their very Souls
would be subject to the Higher Powers; and Disobedience would be to them, as it
is to God, as hateful as the Sin of Witchcraft; and contempt of Authority,
though in the smallest matters, would appear to deserve the greatest
punishment; and they would then take better care to secure their own
Consciences and the Public Peace, than to arraign the Prudence of Authority,
and the Justice of Laws at the Bar of their private Discretion, by the odious
Name of Persecution, in so licentious a manner as they now generally do, and
control the Wisdom of their Superiors because they have little or none
themselves. Then would they also perceive how just and necessary it is, that
since Men have not all one Reason in them, they should at least have one Power
over them, to render such Acts ineffectual by the due execution of Impartial
Justice, which might be done by any to the disturbance of the Community.

When there was No King or Judge in Israel, Religion first, then all went to
rack: But God having now blessed us with a King and his Judges, (thanks be to
him) we have no need to fear the return of such Disorders; neither Micha for
all his Wealth, nor Dan for all his Forces, nor Gibeah for all their Multitude,
no discontented Persons or Parties of what Faith or Faction soever, may do what
is right in their own Eyes, unless they mean to suffer what is right in yours,
who are as much bound in Conscience to execute the Laws, as they would make us
believe they were to break them. Nor will you be the worse beloved of God, or
good Men, for preserving an opinion of your Justice and Severity, but be highly
applauded here, and rewarded hereafter. Hereby may you promise your selves our
bended Knees at the Throne of Grace, for your long Lives and endless Happiness.
You will be feared of the Kings and your Enemies, and be beloved of his and
your Friends: Your Mother Church will bless you, and God for you; and your
Father which is in Heaven will bestow upon you a Crown of Eternal Glory,
saying, Well done good and faithful Servants, enter into the Joy of your
Master, where you shall be eternally blessed with what we now desire to ascribe
to the Great Judge of Heaven and Earth, all Honor, Power and Glory. AMEN.

FINIS.

