Die Jovis 5o. Februarii 1673.

ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, That the
Thanks of this House be, and are hereby, given to the Lord Bishop of Hereford,
for his pains in Preaching before the Lords in the Abbey- Church at Westminster,
on Wednesday the Fourth day of this instant February, being a Fast Day; and
that he be desired to Print and Publish his Sermon.

John Brown Cler. Parliam.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS Assembled in
PARLIAMENT, Upon the Fast Day Appointed, February 4. 1673/4.

BY HERBERT Lord Bishop of Hereford.

LONDON: Printed by Andrew Clark, for Charles Harper at the Flower-de-luce over
against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, 1674.

A Fast-Sermon.
ISA. 27. last Verse. There is no Peace, says my God, to the wicked.


THAT the Gospel is the Rule by which all Christians ought to frame their Lives
and Conversations, there can be no doubt; and this being so, there is as little
doubt, but that all Christians ought most earnestly to labor for Peace, it
being the principal part of the Gospel, and that which gives the denomination
to it; for it is called the Gospel of Peace, Romans 10.10. And with great reason,
for at the first entrance of our Savior into the world, who came to preach the
Gospel to us, he being then an Infant, and according to common course of nature
not of ability to speak himself, the Angels declared for him the thing he came
to preach, singing to the happy Shepherds, Glory to God in the highest, and on
earth Peace. This was the blessed beginning of the Gospel at our Savior's
coming into the world, Peace on earth; and when our Savior was going out of
the world, Peace was the blessed Legacy he bequeathed to his beloved Disciples;
Peace I give unto you, my Peace I leave with you, John 14.27. Well then may it
be called the Gospel of Peace, this being the Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and end of it. And well does it become all Christians to do their utmost
endeavor for the prefervation of Peace, it being so earnestly recommended to
us by our dying Lord. Our Peace was purchased by his Death, and therefore ought
to be dearer to us than our own life. But how does all this agree with that
saying of our Saviors, Matthew. 10.34. That he come not to bring Peace, etc.
This was caused by the corruptness of our perverse sinful nature, which like a
stomach filled with the overflowing of the gall, turns the sweetest things it
receives, into the same bitter humor; and so the Gospel of Peace was turned
into a cause of contention. When all mankind was banded together to work
wickedness, when all had sworn obedience to the Prince of darkness, the Light
came into the world, To give light to all that sat in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, and to guide their feet into the way of Peace. But men loved
darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil: for the light
discovering the evil of their deeds, they hated the light, and persecuted the
children of light though their nearest relations, and before dear unto them.
Our Evangelical Prophet foreseeing this, though he set forth the peace and
glory of the Gospel in most ample manner, yet he plainly declares the wicked
were not to partake of it. For in the last Chapter, ver. 10. speaking of
Jerusalem where the Gospel was to begin, he says, Rejoice ye with Jerusalem,
and be glad with her, all ye that love her, -- Ver. 12. For thus says the
Lord, Behold, I will extend Peace to her like a river, and the glory of the
Gentiles like a flowing stream. -- I beseech you mark what follows. Ver. 14.
And the hand of the Lord shall be known toward his servants, and his
indignation toward his enemies -- So then they were the servants of God, that
were to enjoy this great blessing of Peace by the Gospel; but the wicked the
enemies of God, should have no share of it; their portion was, Ver. 15.16. Fire
and sword, war and slaughter. Our Savior came not to bring peace unto them,
but a sword. There is no peace, etc.

That you may the better understand this matter, I shall divide Peace into
three parts; Peace with God, Peace with our own hearts, and Peace with others;
and show that the wicked can have no share in any of them.

First, it is apparent the wicked can have no Peace with God, who is all
holiness, righteousness, goodness. Surely then unholiness, unrighteousness,
wickedness, can have no union with these, no more then light and darkness can
consist together; the one must needs destroy the other. Wherefore in Scripture
the wicked are called Enemies unto God, Fighters against God, Haters of God.
But no man ever so wicked will confess this of himself; that he is an enemy,
and an hater of God, and you will hardly find a man that believes this of
himself; so inconsiderate are men and ignorant of their own hearts, Jer. 17.9.
The heart of man is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can
know it? Men are as blind and stupid as stocks in discovering their own hearts,
and their own wickedness, and will not believe they are so desperately wicked
as to be enemies and haters of God: but it is most evident by their deeds, daily
and hourly doing things as hateful unto God, as possible can be. If they say,
they do not the things out of any hatred to God, but only to please themselves,
so may any one say that murders another; he may say he has great pleasure in
revenge, and that he murdered the man only to please himself, not out of any
hatred to him. But this is a clear case, should any one daily do unto us things
so spiteful and hateful as we do unto God; we should without all doubt conclude
he hated us, and we should not admit of any excuse for his doing them. How then
can the wicked who are haters of God, be at peace with God? No, There is no
peace, etc.

But it is the less to be wondered, that men are so great enemies unto God,
seeing they are as great enemies unto themselves: I mean not one man an enemy
unto another, (whereof I shall treat by and by) but each man an enemy unto
himself, the greatest and most dangerous enemy unto himself of all other; for
no man can do him half the mischief he does himself; and to say truth, no other
can do him any mischief at all without his own concurrence in it; as Seneca
proves by philosophical and rational principles in a Tract which he wrote to
this purpose. And this is much more true and evident by Christian Principles,
which teach us, That all things work together for good to them that love God.
And therefore when other men contend with us, revile us, persecute us, take
away our estates, any thing; we should greatly rejoice, as our Savior bids us,
and gives a very good reason for it, For great is our reward. We shall be great
gainers by all such losses, if we bear them patiently. It is then the
contention and fighting we have within our selves which does us all the
mischief; they are our own passions which fight against our reason, and these
are the enemies that wound our souls, which no other enemy can peach. Nor do
our passions war against our reason only, but contend and fight one against
another. As our body is composed of several elements very opposite, as fire and
water, earth and air; so the affections and passions which spring from the
body, are as disagreeing and cross to each other as these elements, and are at
perpetual discord: As for example, The passion of covetousness, how does this
force a man to pinch both back and belly, to rise early and trot about, and
though he lie down wearied at night with many turmoiling affairs; yet then
solicitous care for the morrow forbids him sleep, or to take any rest: and all
this to satisfy his greedy appetite of wealth, which he has no sooner scraped
together, and hoorded up in his Closet, but a clean contrary passion of
vainglory forces open the Closet doors, tumbles out the bags, for his
Neighbor has built him a fair House, richly furnished, and he is resolved to
outdo him whatever it cost: thus Covetousness and Vainglory war in his own
breast. Again, an amorous lustful passion makes a man flatter and adore some
beautiful imperious Dame, observing all her freakish humors, till at length
she growing insolent, and desiring to show her domineering power, puts some
scornful affront upon him, which cuts him to the heart, and raises in him a
fierce indignation requiring him even to kick out of doors this insulting
Creature; yet she in spite of all his wrath and fury, holds him fast with her
amorous hook by the nose, like a Bear, making him still dance after her pipe.
Just so the ambition of gaining some honorable and powerful place at Court,
will make the most haughty aspiring man crouch to, and fawn upon all those whom
he thinks may be instrumental for the gaining of it; be they ever so unworthy
in his own estimation, yet his eager Ambition will force him, to stoop and
humble himself to these pitiful Creatures, which his proud heart abhors. Many
more such contradictory passions are perpetually clashing and fighting in the
breasts of worldly and wicked men, never suffering them to enjoy any peaceful
tranquillity. All this is briefly set forth by our Prophet in the Verse forgoing
my Text; The wicked are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose waters
cast up mire and dirt. Gregory the great Moralist descants upon this place in a
pious meditation; adding to this passage of Isaiah, that of David, Psalm.
104.26. where he speaks of that great Leviathan taking his pastime in the Sea;
which Sea he interprets, Corda mortalium tumidis cogitationibus fluctuosa; and
by Leviathan he understands, Antiquum hostem qui in eorum lubrica cogitatione
natat. The various passions which the hearts of carnal men are subject to, like
furious winds blow where they list without any control of Grace, tossing them
up and down like boisterous Waves of the Sea, wherein the great Leviathan Satan
takes his pastime, endeavoring to raise the Tempest and Confusion to the
height. When he first tempts men to sin, he turns the lessening end of his
Prospective-glass unto their eye, representing the greatest horrid Crimes as
small harmless Peccadilioes; but when he has raised the mass of their sins to
a vast deformed bulk fit to terrify them, then he turns the multiplying end to
their affrighted consciences, he raises up the mire and dirt thereof, as our
Prophet says, representing all in as foul and fearful a manner as possible he
can, never ceasing till he has overwhelmed them in the depth of despair: and
this is his masterpiece, his chief pastime, to see men thus distracted and
confounded. Miserable wretches made by sin at last such mortal enemies unto
themselves, as in raging despair to cast themselves body and soul into eternal
flames! There can be no peace to the wicked who are not at peace with God, who
have not the assistance of his Divine Grace to repel the furious blasts of
Satan. God only and his Christ are able to say effectually to the Winds, Peace;
and to the Sea, Be still; and his Disciples only can obtain this favor at his
hands. So says David, Psalm. 85.8. He will speak peace unto his people and to
his Saints. Be the Storm ever so great, and the Vessel ready to sink, a word
from his Divine powerful mouth composes all. Therefore David says again, Psalm.
119.165. Great peace have they which love thy Law, and nothing shall off end
them. But the wicked have no share in this, and therefore can have no settled
peace, neither within their own hearts, nor one with another, which is my third
and last division of Peace. Peace with others.

God is as it were the Center of all things, from whom innumerable Lines issue
forth toward the Circumference of the whole Universe; and these Lines the
nearer they are to the Center, the nearer they draw to each other, and in the
Center are all conjoined; the farther they draw from the Center, the more they
are disunited one from another. And from hence is that Maxim approved of, as
well in natural Philosophy, as Divinity; Omne quod fit unum participatione
unius fit unum; There can be no unity but by participation of the prime Unity
and Entity which is God. Ens unum verum bonum. Now the wicked man partakes only
of Gods Entity, but has no participation of his goodness or unity, and
therefore cannot be at any unity with himself or with others. The same
disordered passions which disturb his own peace and quiet, disturb the peace of
others also; and his receding from God the prime Unity, is the cause of all
division and distraction. And on the other side, the nearer the godly draw unto
God, the more they are composed in their own breasts, the more at peace and
unity with others; and in God are all as one. This we see verified in that
blessed multitude mentioned, Acts 4. The whole multitude were of one heart and
of one soul. Thus it was with the Primitive Christians, who drew near unto God:
but we Christians of this Age, as we are more remote in distance of time from
Christ, so are our hearts far more remote from him, and far divided one from
another, strangely different from those blessed Primitive Christians who were
of one heart and one soul. Where can you now find a whole Multitude, a whole
Congregation, a whole Family, of one heart, of one soul? alas! of as many
hearts almost as men. Are we then Christians? By this shall all men know, says
Christ, that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. Then by this do all
men know, that we are not Christ's Disciples, because we love not one another,
but instead of love, have malice, instead of peaceful agreement, either violent
oppression, or cunning supplanting one another; yea, fighting and murdering
one another: insomuch that it is become a Proverb among the Turks: What, fight
and kill one another, as the Christians do? Good God, that the peaceful name of
Christ should be thus horribly blasphemed! Christians who should be the blessed
example of peace to the whole world, are become the scandalous reproach of
Murderers to the whole world! So it is, a most lamentable truth which will be
laid home to our charge when we shall appear before the terrible Tribunal of
Christ our King, the Prince of Peace. And what is the cause of all our Discord?
our wicked lusts and passions. From whence come Wars and Fightings among you?
says St. James 4 1. Come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your
members? And these very lusts which war in our members, cause us to war one
with another. And what are these lusts? St. John tells us, 2.16. The lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life.

First, the lust of the flesh. What Wars and bloodshed has this wicked lust of
the flesh caused all the world over, from the beginning to the end? How early
in Scripture do we find the destruction of the Shechemites for the rape of
Dinah, Jacob's Daughter? the fleshly lust of one man brought this calamity upon
the whole City and Country to their utter ruin. And in Profane Story, the
most ancient famous ten years War of the Greeks with Troy, was it not for the
like, Paris rapture of Helen, which set all that part of the world in a flame?
This might have been a fair warning unto Greece not to offend in that kind. Yet
Sparta, a City there, once so famous for Justice, and so successful for it; but
refusing to do Justice to Scedasus of Leuctra for the ravishment of his
Daughters, suffered that lamentable Defeat in the Plains of Leuctra soon after,
where their King Cleombrotus and all their Nobility were totally routed and
killed by the Thebans. And if you please to pass from Greece into Italy, there
you will presently find that hopeful Monarchy planted by Romulus in Rome,
supplanted and totally eradicated by the Rape of Lucretia. And again, when the
Roman Empire was re-established with greater power and glory then the world
ever saw before or since, when it had conquered so many Nations, as there
scarce remained a people worth the conquering; and Rome became as it were the
Empress of the World. I beseech you, what subdued this mighty power? does not a
chief Poet of their own tell us, 'twas, Luxuria, victumque ulciscitur orbem?
Luxury so enervated the Sinews of this, before invincible people, that they
were quite overrun by several barbarous Nations, who slaughtered them as
Sheep, defaced and broke down their Triumphant Arches, and trampled all their
Glory under foot. And was it not just so afterward in the Grecian Empire? As
the Goths and Vandals overran the Romans, so the Saracens and Turks subdued
the Grecians, made by Luxury the most effeminate and most feeble Nation in the
World, and thereby exposed to Invasion and Rapine. Their splendidness and
voluptuousness of living, was an alluring bait to their greedy Neighbors; who
seeing them fatted for the slaughter, and stretched forth on their beds of
Ivory in supine negligence, took wing like hungry Ravens for the prey. And so
you may go on, and in all Histories, find Luxury the constant forerunner of
Destruction, and many dismal examples of great devastations caused by this
fleshly lust.

And as for the lust of the Eyes, by which is understood the lusting after
those things which we see others enjoy; this begets in as unsatiable desires;
and then for the satisfying of these, what animosities and feuds daily arise
among us. For as Boethius says well, the poor narrow riches of this world,
which he calls, Augustas inopesque divitias, cannot satisfy the boundless
covetousness of men; and besides, all being already possessed by some or other,
Quae ad quemque perveniunt non fit sine caeterorum injuria; What one man
acquires another must lose. Now all men being desirous at least to keep what
they have, and most men laboring to increase what they have, which cannot be
without the decay of others: this must needs cause quarrels in the world. And
thus our bickerings at Law are numberless, our military contentions endless;
Nation against Nation, Kingdom against Kingdom, and in all Nations, Family
against Family; yea the same Family divided, Brother against Brother, Children
against Parents; nay, Man and Wife, one Flesh, often divided into two deadly
Enemies. And that which makes our wickedness far more notorious, is, that not
one of a thousand, or of ten thousand, breaks this Christian peace for
necessary Food and Raiment, whereof they have no want, but rather abundance;
for a very small pittance suffices nature: so that it is not want, but
wantonness which sets them a lawing and fighting; for they who most abound, are
commonly most at Law, most in War, striving for more, even to excess, and to
what end? to consume it upon their lusts, as Saint James says. Thus wicked
Covetousness seeks it, wicked Contentions acquire it, and wicked Lusts consume
it; all wickedness, therefore no Peace, but Discord and Confusion.

And the very same unchristian Discord is caused by the pride of life; for
every one loves to be at the top, and all men hate to be under; how then is it
possible but Contention must needs accompany Ambition, seeing that which one
man affects, another detests, and will be sure to oppose to the utmost of his
power. Other Vices allow of some association; men of like corrupt affections
commonly consort together, and help each other in their designs, but, Solus
superbus odit elatum; pride divides and sets them at variance, endeavoring to
suppress one another: Both would be uppermost which cannot be; therefore one
must needs fall, that the other may get up. This has often produced great
quarrels betwixt private persons, and bloody Wars betwixt Princes; in which
large Field I could expatiate far, but want of time forbids, and makes me have
to some useful Application of what I have already said, for which I crave your
patience.

Many complaints I hear abroad the world, but very little to the purpose; not
one of a hundred considers matters aright, much less lays to heart the true
cause of that whereof they complain. All the evils men suffer arise originally
from sin; had man never sinned, he had never known misery. Sin then is the root
of all, and this we hug and cherish in our bosoms, yet cry out against the evil
fruits thereof. But shall I tell you the true causes of our misery? We have
made a League, a most unfortunate evil League; and we have made a War, a most
dangerous destructive War: A League with Satan, and a War with God: These are
the radical causes of our distraction, and unless rooted up, will be our
confusion. Wherefore our Lamentations for this or that temporal Calamity, are
very childish. In Reason and Religion we should lament the cause, not the
effect; remove the cause, the effects presently cease; but the cause remaining,
the effects, that is, Calamities will follow. Not long since we lamented a
great Plague that destroyed many thousands, that ceased; but our sin the cause
thereof, that remained: therefore another Calamity soon followed. Then we
lamented a great and dreadful Fire, which consumed our Capital City; that also
ceased, but Sin still remained. Then we lamented a dangerous War, when our
Enemies sailed up the River so near us, that it struck a terror into the hearts
of all; they likewise are gone, our Sin still remains. So we go on lamenting
one Calamity after another, and laboring still with might and main to redress
the present Grievance, but neglect the Cause. Like men in a Fever, pained
here, and pained there, we toss from side to side to find rest; we call for
this and that drink to quench our thirst, but all in vain; the Fever of Lust
still burns in our bowels, and till this be cured, no ease, no rest to be had.
So that were all things now settled just to our own satisfaction: what then? Oh
then you were happy. Can you be so simple? Has God no more Viols of Wrath to
pour upon us? Cannot he send a Famine? And truly methinks it is beginning
already. A Famine that may make us eat our own Flesh, our own Children, as it
was in Jerusalem; and you shall see by and by, that our sin is no way short of
theirs. He may rain down fire and brimstone upon us, as he did upon Sodom and
Gomorrah, and I am sure our Sin very much resembles theirs. He may cause the
earth to open and swallow us up quick, Men, Women, and Children, as he did
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; and without doubt our Rebellion against God is far
greater than theirs. And thus I might proceed without end; for the Viols of
God's wrath are as numberless as our sins, and whilst these continue, expect
them to be poured forth. I beseech you consider with all submissive reverence,
who uttered the words of my Text, There is no Peace, says my God, to the
wicked. And is he your God also? do you believe in him? do you trust in him?
Then I beseech you believe him when he says, There is no peace to the wicked.
The lusts which war in our members, and war against God, will certainly bring
down Vengeance and Calamities from God. And of the three Lusts which I have
discoursed of to you, the lust of the flesh especially is that which makes war
more desperately against God then any other; it being more directly opposite to
the Spirit of God: for as Saint Paul says, Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary
one to the other. As contrary as fire and water, they cannot possibly subsist
together. For as water quenches the fire, so the lust of the flesh quenches
the Spirit of God, and never fails to bring in Profaneness and Atheism, as
experience has fully manifested in other Nations, and now most evidently in
this lewd sinful Nation. The same observation was made by Cicero 1700 years
ago, who in his Book which he wrote De natura Deorum, tells us, The purer a man
is in his life, the more he is inclined to a belief of the Godhead; and
consequently foulness and debauchery of life, is the common road to unbelief.
Wherefore I shall now chiefly insist upon this lust of the flesh, not having
time to make reflections upon the other two, the lust of the eyes, and the pride
of life, which are grown to a vast excess; but the lust of the flesh most
horribly exorbitant in both the parts of it, Voluptuousness of Diet, and
Lasciviousness of Body. The business of Diet which formerly was the care and
talk of Women to their Cooks and Caterers, is now become the study and
discourse of Men; even Gentry, and Nobles, whose brain is sunk into their guts,
and so are become very skilful in the belly Science; for they have invented
many rarities never heard of in former Ages, and they are so early ripe in this
art, that before they have studied Philosophy or Grammar, they are Masters in
the Art of Cookery: A most noble and admirable Science! Nor are they less
skilful in Drinks than Meats, and it is a thing which adds much to their
reputation, that there is not a sort of Wine growing in any part of France,
Germany, Spain, Italy, but they have the particular names thereof far more
ready then their Creed or Paternoster, and will entertain you with a score at
least at one meal; so that even to taste them all, will distemper any man used
to a sober Diet, this is a great study in this Age. As for the study of Plato,
Aristotle, Plutarch, Seneca, and such tedious nonsense (for they afford no
delight to any of the five Senses, but only fill the brain with airy Fancies)
these are left to poor dull Servitors in Colleges, who are forced to trade
with these Authors for a livelihood. But they whom nature has stocked with
parts complete, and to whom worthy Ancestors have left a large Estate, acquired
by eminent Virtue and great industry, and consequently to be spent in bestial
Luxury, no doubt on it, why should not they enjoy themselves, please their
Palate, and fill their paunch, with whatever the air, the water, the earth
affords, Come let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. Thus having by
the lust of Voluptuousness, by curious and excessive eating and drinking
provoked the lust of Lasciviousness, They give themselves up to work all manner
of uncleanness with greediness, as Saint Paul says, both Fornication and
Adultery are not only frequently acted in private, but publicly owned. St.
Paul says, Ephesians. 5.12. That it was a shame even to speak of those things
which were done of them in secret. What would he have said, had he heard the
Actors brag of those things in public. Great Iniquities I confess have been
acted in all Ages, but certainly never so avowed. Men in the dark formerly
skulkt into lewd houses, and there had their revellings; but now men, married
men, in the light, bring into their own houses most lewd Strumpets, feast and
sport with them in the face of the Sun; mean while their neglected, scorned,
disconsolate Wives are forced to retire to their secret Closets, that they be
not spectators of these abominations. And whoever does not approve, yea and
practice such detestable wickedness, whoever is not a Devil incarnate, is
reproacht by these as a devilish Hypocrite. For they have so totally quenched
the light of the Spirit in this nasty puddle of uncleanness, they have so
seared their Consciences with burning Lust, they have so metamorphosed
themselves into lascivious Goats, as they have no more belief of God in them,
then those natural brute beasts, and so conclude the rest of men have no more
conscience or belief of God then themselves; and that all their seeming piety
is mere hypocrisy and cunning design for some Advantage. And by such scornful
reproaches on the one hand, and enticing allurements on the other, they gain
many associates, who have not the courage to resist the one, nor constancy to
withstand the other. By which means Lewdness and Atheism, which never fails to
accompany this Vice, as I showed you before, are strangely increased in Court,
City, and Country. How far some Grandees of the Nation have been a countenance
and encouragement to inferiors, is so visible as there needs no discourse to
show it. God of his infinite mercy by his miraculous omnipotent Grace (nothing
less can do it) convert and mollify their hardened hearts.

And now my Lords by whose special Command I undertook the work of this day, I
make my humble address to you. I have laid before you the Crying Sins of this
Nation, which fight against Heaven, and war against God, as it were with open
defiance; and therefore if my indignation against such beastial and Satanical
sins, have for^'d from me some severe and sharp expressions, I crave pardon:
but really my Lords, our deep festered Soars require a sharp Lance to let out
this filthy matter; and I trust your heads and hearts also loath the horrible
stench thereof; and therefore I hope you will readily grant my most humble and
most earnest request, which is this, That laying aside all other business, you
would employ all your Thoughts, and all your Endeavors to restrain this most
exorbitant Vice of Lewdness, with its evil Consequences, Profaneness and
Atheism; for unless this be done in the first place, you cannot in reason expect
that God should bless your other Endeavors for the Good of King and Kingdom,
his Kingdom being neglected and postpon'd. I hope you will be far more
concerned for God's Glory, which is mightily Eclipsed by these infernal mists,
then with your own Privileges or Properties, or any other concern of your own,
seeing you owe unto God all you have, your selves and all. I shall not press
your Lordships farther, but will now address my self to the whole Assembly,
desiring every one to examine themselves how far they are guilty before God,
either by their own sins, or by partaking with the sins of these desperate
creatures. For had we observed Saint Paul's command, To reprove the works of
darkness, and to show our indignation against them on all occasions, we might
have given a great stop to their Cariere. But we are grown so irreligiously
civil in this Age, that it passes for incivility if any one offer to reprove,
or so much as frown; nay, if you do not show some compleasance and smile at
their lewd profane discourses. And God grant there be none here farther guilty
and infected with this Epidemical, Pestilential, Fleshly, Atheistical disease.
Now that we may the better apprehend our wickedness, I desire you to remember
what I showed you in the beginning, That the wicked are Enemies and Haters of
God; but as I said then, it will be very hard to make any one here, even the
worst of this Assembly, either confess or believe this of himself; and yet I
fear the best of us all upon due examination will find this in a great measure
true of our selves. Wherefore that we may truly understand and heartily bewail
our own wicked condition, I shall for a conclusion press this matter home upon
our consciences.

What think you, were the Jews enemies and haters of Christ, who reviled him,
buffetted him, spate in his face, crowned him with thorns, scourged and
crucified him? Sure you do not doubt but these were enemies and haters of
Christ, how then can you doubt, but they who do things more hateful unto Christ
then these, are greater enemies and haters of Christ then these? Now that sin
is more hateful unto Christ then any sufferings, is evident, because he endured
all these to take away sin. Christ could endure the greatest torment in the
world, but cannot endure the least sin; for sin is not only hateful, but a flat
contradiction unto to God; For God is holiness. Is it not then most evident
what I said, that sin is more hateful unto Christ then spitting upon him,
buffeting him scourging him, crucifying him? and consequently, they who do
things more hateful unto Christ, must needs be greater enemies and haters of
Christ. And that you may farther see our sin exceeds that of the Jews; what
they did unto Christ was through ignorance; as Saint Peter witnesses for them;
but we after knowledge, after we have been enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, the Good Word of God, as it is Heb. 6.5. Surely then our
ingratitude, our iniquity far surpasses that of the Jews. Come now you that
would pass for noble and good natured men; come you sweet natured and tender
hearted women, consider well I pray you with me; what shall we think of our
foul, sinful, and hateful behavior toward this our blessed Savior Christ,
who poured forth his precious blood and sacrificed his Life on the Cross for
us? Can we be such ungrateful Beasts, such savage Wolves, such cruel Tigers,
such bloody Monsters, as yet to crucify him afresh, and put him again to open
shame? God forbid! But let us rather scourge and crucify the old man, that
hater of this our Blessed Savior; let us humble him to the dust by laying
aside all our gorgeous apparel, all our splendid pomp and vanity, all feasting
and carousing jollity; for you will find in Scripture, all such things to be
not only very unseasonable, but very sinful also, when God so lowdly calls for
humiliation, for sackcloth, for fasting, weeping and mourning; at such a time
feasting and bravery, is an unpardonable iniquity, as plainly appears, Isa.
22.14. Wherefore now we must totally humble our selves, both outside and
inside, all gallantry must be put off, sackcloath put on; we must mortify our
carnal bestial lust, we must pinch our luxurious belly by continued fasting,
whose frequent feasting has caused such excessive lusts of uncleanness;
therefore I said, continued fasting, this day should be but the beginning of
our humiliation for such long continued sins; for which let our eyes break
forth into fountains of tears, to wash away the loathsome filth thereof: Then
let us take some sharp thorn from the Crown of our heavenly King, or a Nail
from his sacred feet to pierce our hardened hearts, that some drops of blood at
least may fall from thence, seeing what streams of blood ran down from his;
then let deep sighs and groans pierce the very heavens, that God from his mercy
seat may hear and look down with compassion upon us, and pardon all our crying
sins: for as Micah to our great comfort says, We have a God that pardons
iniquity, and delights in mercy; he will turn again, he will have compassion
upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and will cast all our sins into the
depths of the Sea, Micah 7.19. Oh then let it be our delight to praise and
serve this gracious God, who then will bless us, and pour down his benefits
upon us; he will give us our own hearts desire, as David assures us, Psalm.
37.4. Delight thou in the Lord and he will give thee thy hearts desire. He will
give us peace, plenty and prosperity. All this is again confirmed to us by
Saint Paul, with a clear convincing evidence, Romans 8.32. I beseech you mark it
well, and write it in your hearts, to your endless comfort. He that spared not
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also
freely give us all things? He that spared not his own Son, his only Son, his
infinitely beloved Son, but delivered him up for us all, yea, delivered him up
to that most reproachful and most cruel death of the Cross, How shall he not
with him also freely give us all things? He shall give us, and freely give us,
Peace, Plenty, Prosperity, all things. Now to this so infinitely gracious God
be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor, Praise, and Glory for ever and ever.
AMEN.

FINIS.

