Commonwealth blazon or coat of arms OLIVARIVS DEI GRA: REIPVB: ANGLIAE,
SCOTIAE, ET HIBERNIAE, andc PROTECTOR

PAX QVAERITVR BELLO.

By the Protector. A PROCLAMATION Commanding all Papists and all other persons,
who have been of the late Kings Party or his Sons, to depart out of the Cities
of London and Westminster, and late Lines of Communication, on or before Monday
the 8. of March, One thousand six hundred fifty seven.
HIs Highness the Lord Protector being informed of the frequent meeting of
diverse Papists and other ill-affected persons (who have born Arms against this
Commonwealth, or otherwise adhered to the Enemies in the late Wars) in, and
about the Cities of London and Westminster, and the places adjacent, and having
received of late certain intelligence of designs now on Foot, and endeavored
to be carried on by correspondencies with the King of Spain, and with Charles
Stuart, and their Agents and Accomplices, and judging it necessary to use all
means for preserving of the Peace of the Nation, and to prevent the mischiefs
which may arise by such designs, Does (by, and with the advice of his Privy
Council) straightly Charge and Command all Papists, and all other persons, who
have been at any time in Arms against the Commonwealth, or have adhered unto,
or willingly assisted the Enemies thereof in the time of the late War, being
within the Cities of London and Westminster, or the late Lines of
Communication, and not under restraint, on or before the Eighth day of March
now next coming, (or if under restraint, then within three days after their
respective enlargement) to depart out of the said Cities of London and
Westminster, and late lines of Communication, and all other places within
Twenty miles of the said late Lines, unless it be their places of habitation
for themselves and their Families, and not to return until the First day of
Easter Term next: And His Highness does Require and Command the Lord Mayor of
the City of London, and the Aldermen of the said City, and likewise the
Justices of the Peace within the said Cities, and of the several Counties of
Middlesex, Surrey, Hertford, Kent and Essex, within their Limits and
Jurisdictions, to cause strict Wards and Watches to be kept, and to make
frequent and diligent searches for, and to apprehend, or cause to be
apprehended, all such persons aforesaid, which shall be found within the said
Cities, Places, or Distance aforesaid, after the time or times before Limited
for their departure, and them and every of them to commit to Prison, and from
time to time to certify their proceedings therein, to His Highness Council,
under their Hands and Seals. And all Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, all
Captains of Guards, Officers and Soldiers, and all other the good People of
this Commonwealth, are Required to be aiding and assisting to the said Justices
of the Peace, and other Officers aforesaid, in the due execution of the
Premises, as they will answer the contrary at their utmost perils. And for the
better discovery of all Papists, and ill affected persons which now are, or
during the time aforesaid, shall resort unto the said Cities of London and
Westminster, or Places within the late Lines of Communication, His Highness,
by, and with the advice of His said Privy Council, does Charge and Require all
and every Householder and Householders, within the said Cities and Places
aforesaid, on or before the Tenth day of March now next coming, to deliver in
writing under their Hands unto the Alderman of the Ward, if such Householder
live within the City of London, or to the next Justice of the Peace, a perfect
List of the Names of all persons now lodging within the House of such
Householder, together with their Additions; and if they are Papists, to mention
the same in such List, and so from time to time within Four and twenty hours
after the receiving of any person to Lodge in his or their House and Houses, to
deliver in the Names of such person and persons in manner aforesaid, to such
Alderman or next Justice of the Peace: And the Aldermen of the respective Wards
within the said City of London, and the Justices of Peace within the said City
of Westminster, and places within the late Lines of Communication, are Required
to take care that Lists be accordingly sent in unto them from all and every
Householder aforesaid, and to make enquiry of the truth of such Lists: And all
Constables and other Officers are enjoined and required to observe the Orders
and Directions of such Alderman and Justice of Peace respectively herein, and
to yield obedience thereunto. And the said Aldermen and Justices of the Peace
respectively, are hereby likewise required to transmit true Copies of such
Lists unto the Clerks of his Highness Council, or one of them: And his Highness
does hereby declare, that all and every such Householder as shall make default
of sending in such Lists as aforesaid, or shall send in a false List, shall be
taken and deemed an Enemy to the Peace and Security of the Commonwealth.

Given at Our Palace of Westminster the 27th day of February, in the year of
Our Lord, 1657.
London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to his Highness, 1657.


