AN EXEMPLIFICATION UNDER THE Great Seal of England, OF AN ORDINANCE Of His
Highness the LORD PROTECTOR, By and with the Advice and Consent of His Council,
Dated the 26th of May, 1654. ENTITLED, An Ordinance for the Preservation of
the Works of the Great Level of the Fens;

Which Ordinance was confirmed by one Act and Declaration made in the
Parliament begun at Westminster the 17th day of September, An. Dom. 1656.

seal of the Commonwealth

LONDON: Printed by HEN: HILLS and JOHN FIELD, Printers to His Highness the
Lord PROTECTOR. 1657.

AN EXEMPLIFICATION UNDER THE Great Seal of England, OF AN ORDINANCE Of His
Highness the LORD PROTECTOR, By and with the Advice and Consent of His Council,
Dated the 26th of May, 1654.
ENTITLED, An Ordinance for the Preservation of the Works of the Great Level
of the Fens; Which Ordinance was confirmed by one Act and Declaration made in
the Parliament begun at Westminster the 17th day of September, An. Dom. 1656.
OLIVER Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland,
and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, To all to whom these
presents shall come, Greeting; We have inspected the Tenor of a certain Writ of
Certiorari, lately issued out of Our Court of Chancery, to Henry Scobell Esquire
Clerk of the Parliament directed, together with a Return made on the back of
the said Writ, remaining of Record in the Files of Our said Chancery in these
words, Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and
Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, To Henry
Scobell Esquire Clerk of the Parliament, Greeting; We willing to be certified upon
the Tenor of a certain Ordinance made and Ordained by Us and Our Council, in
the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty four, Entitled, An
Ordinance for the Preservation of the Work of the Great Level of the Fens;
which Ordinance by a certain Act made and Ordained in the Parliament begun at
Westminster the Seventeenth day of September, in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred fifty six, and then and there held and continued until the
Six and twentieth day of June following, and thence adjourned until the
Twentieth day of January then next ensuing, Entitled, An Act and Declaration
touching several Acts and Ordinances made since the Twentieth of April, One
thousand six hundred fifty three, and before the Third of September, One
thousand six hundred fifty four, and other Acts, etc. is amongst others
confirmed, Do Command you that the Tenor of the Ordinance aforesaid, with all
things touching the same, you send to Us in Our Chancery distinctly and plainly
under your Seal without delay, together with this Writ: Witness Our Self at
Westminster the Seventh day of August, in the year of our Lord, One thousand
six hundred fifty seven. Lenthal. Th. The Execution of this Writ appears in a
certain Schedule to this Writ annexed, Henry Scobell Clerk of the Parliament:
We have also inspected the Tenor of the Ordinance aforesaid, in the said Writ,
mentioned in a certain Schedule to the said Writ annexed; remaining also of
Record in the Files of Our said Chancery, in these words, In the Parliament
begun and held at Westminster the Seventeenth day of September, in the year of
our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty and six, and there continued until the
Twenty sixth day of June, in the year One thousand six hundred fifty seven, and
from thence adjourned until the Twentieth day of January next ensuing; amongst
other Acts made and ordained, one Act was made, Entitled, An Act and
Declaration touching several Acts and Ordinances, made since the Twentieth day
of April, in the year of our Lord; One thousand six hundred fifty three, and
before the Third of September, One thousand six hundred fifty four, and other
Acts, etc. in which Act it is contained as follows; Be it Enacted by His
Highness the Lord Protector and this present Parliament, and it is hereby
Enacted and Declared by the Authority of the same, That (amongst others) one
Ordinance also made in the same year, One thousand six hundred fifty four,
Entitled, An Ordinance for Preservation of the Work of the Great Level of the
Fens, shall be, and are hereby continued and confirmed, and shall stand and be
in full force and strength, to all intents and purposes, Any matter or thing to
the contrary notwithstanding: The Tenor of which Ordinance follows in these
words; viz.

WHereas by an Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the Draining of the
Great Level of the Fens, extending it self into the several Counties of
Northampton, Norfolk, Suffolk, Lincoln, Cambridge and Huntington, and the Isle
of Ely, or some of them; William Earl of Bedford, Participants and Adventurers
are thereby empowered to Drain the said Level, which is done accordingly, and
so adjudged; and to have for their recompense the proportion of ninety five
thousand Acres, which is also set out and Assigned; In and by which Act there
is not a full remedy made and provided to enforce the payment of Taxes, which
shall be laid and assessed in order to the preserving of the said Level: For
remedy whereof, and also for providing of all ways and means conducing to the
preservation thereof, Be it Ordained and Established by His Highness the Lord
Protector, with the consent of His Council, That upon any Tax or Taxes to be
made or laid, in pursuance of the said Act, that it shall and may be lawful for
any person or persons, by any Warrant under the Hands and Seals of any five or
more of the said Adventurers or Participants of the said ninety five thousand
Acres (having five hundred Acres apiece) not only to distrain upon the said
Lands which are, or shall be in arrear for such Taxes, but in case of
non-payment by the space of thirty days after the Tax so in arrear, to sell the
distress, or distresses so taken, and the moneys arising by such sale or sales,
to be employed as well to the satisfying of such Arrears of Taxes as to the
payment of two shillings in the pound for the Taxes so in arrear, to the use of
the said Earl, Participants and Adventurers, their Heirs and Assigns, for
defraying Charges occasioned in and about such Distresses and Sales, rendering
always the Surplusage upon such Sales, above the said arrear Taxes, and two
shillings in the pound aforesaid, if any be, to the Owner of the Distresses,
demanding the same, and where no sufficient distress or distresses shall be
found, after the said thirty days, when any person shall come to distrain for
such Taxes in arrear, Be it Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That in such
cases it shall and may be lawful to and for the said William Earl of Bedford,
Participants, and Adventurers, their Heirs and Assigns, or any five or more of
them, having the said proportion of five hundred Acres a piece, to lay any
Mulct or penalty for non-payment of Taxes so made or laid as aforesaid, not
exceeding the sum of three shillings and four pence in the pound for the Taxes
unpaid, and as well for the said Taxes as Penalty, to Enter, Seize and
Sequester the Lands so in arrear for want of Taxes, to and for the use of the
said Earl, Participants, and Adventurers, their Heirs and Assigns, and the
Rents and Profits of the said Sequestered Lands to receive without account,
until the said Taxes and Penalties shall be satisfied and paid.

And be it further Ordained and Established by the Authority aforesaid, That
the said William Earl of Bedford, Participants, and Adventurers, their Heirs
and Assigns, or any five or more of them, having the said Proportion of five
hundred Acres, shall and may use and exercise the same and like power, for the
making, repairing and amending of any Banks, Dams, Sluices, Sasses, Drains or
other Works, made or to be made out of the Compass and Boundaries of the said
great Level, as they, or any five of them, do or may use or exercise in the
repairing or amending of any Banks, Dams, Sluices, Sasses, Drains, or Works,
within the compass of the said Level.

And be it further Ordained and Established by the Authority aforesaid, That if
any person or persons shall unlawfully cut, cast down, burn or destroy, or
other act do for the destroying of any Bank, Dam, Sluice, Sasse, Drain, or other
Work made, or to be made, which does or shall conduce to the Draining of the
said Level, that in such cases the Commissioners in the said Act named, or such
as shall from time to time be nominated in their rooms by Act of Parliament, or
under the Great Seal of England, according to the said Act, or any three or
more of them, upon complaint and proof made before them of such unlawful
burning, casting down, cutting, or destroying, or other act doing for
destroying as aforesaid; award double Damages to the said Earl, Participants,
and Adventurers, their Heirs and Assigns, to be levied by distress and sale of
the Offenders goods, and to be employed for and toward the maintenance of the
said Works, and for want of sufficient distress to commit such Offender or
Offenders to the House of Correction, there to remain until satisfaction be
made and given of the said damages so awarded; And if such cutting, burning,
casting down or destroying shall be perverse and malicious, the Offenders
therein shall be adjudged Felons, and be proceeded against and suffer such
pains and punishments, as those who shall perversely or maliciously cut the New
Podick Bank in Marshland in the County of Norfolk, Provided that all and every
such Offender be prosecuted within four Months next after the offense committed.

And be it further Ordained and Established, That the said Commissioners, or
any three or more of them, are hereby empowered and authorized to hear, adjudge
and determine all matters and things for and concerning the disturbing the
possession or possessions of any Adventurer or Participant in the said ninety
five thousand Acres, or any part thereof, their or any of their Heirs or
Assigns, as also for and concerning all ways and passages used or belonging to
any part or parcel thereof, and upon judgment or determination given therein,
then to commit to the Common Goal all such person and persons who shall not be
conformable thereunto, there to remain until a conformity and obedience shall
be given; And the Sheriff, and all other Officers and Ministers of Justice, and
such as shall be concerned, are hereby required to be aiding and assisting to
the said Commissioners in what they shall do or command to be done, or executed
by virtue of this Ordinance; and all and every person and persons concerned or
to be concerned by this Ordinance, or which shall do any thing in Execution of
the same, may upon any Action, Suit, or Information, plead the general Issue,
and upon any Issue joined may give this Ordinance in Evidence, which shall be
of equal force and validity, as if the same had been especially pleaded; And
all Judges, Justices, Jurors, and others, are so to accept the same. Provided
that this Ordinance or any thing therein contained, shall not extend, nor be
construed to extend to invalidate any Covenant, Contract, or Agreement made by
the said Adventurers, with the purchasers of any part of the ninety five
thousand Acres, or among themselves concerning the taxing, not taxing, or the
manner of taxing of or concerning any part of the ninety five thousand Acres.

And be it further Ordained and Established, That if any person or persons of a
Foreign Nation, in League and Amity with the Commonwealth, being Protestants,
shall become Purchaser or Farmer of any Lands part of the said ninety five
thousand Acres, the said person or persons, their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators (as to the said Lands and the Rents, Profits, and proceed of the
same, and all Suits touching the same) shall be accounted free Denizons of this
Commonwealth, and enjoy the like Privileges and Advantages for descent to
their children, Dower to their wives, and otherwise, as Denizons of this
Commonwealth ought to enjoy.

Passed the Twenty sixth day of May, One thousand six hundred fifty four, I
Henry Scobell Esquire Clerk of the Parliament, by virtue of a Writ of Certiorari to
me directed, and to this Schedule annexed, Do certify that the Writing above
is the true Tenor of the Ordinance in the said Writ expressed; In Testimony
whereof, I have hereunto set my Seal, and subscribed my name this Fifteenth day
of August, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty and seven,
Henry Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.

The several Tenors therefore of the said Writ, Ordinance and Act of Parliament
aforementioned, at the Request of the said William Earl of Bedford, We have
caused to be Exemplified by these presents; In Testimony whereof We have caused
these Our Letters to be made Patents, Witness Our Self at Westminster the
Nineth day of September, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
fifty and seven.

Lenthal. Th.
Examined by us William Glascock and William Harington, Masters of Chancery in
Ordinary, 1657.



LONDON: Printed by HEN: HILLS and JOHN FIELD, Printers to His Highness the
Lord PROTECTOR. 1657.


