PAX QVAERITVR BELLO

OLIVARIVS DEI GRA: REIPVB: ANGLIAE, SCOTIAE, ET HIBERNIAE, andc PROTECTOR

blazon or coat of arms
By the Protector. A PROCLAMATION Of Assistance to the Merchant Adventurers of
England, for the better carrying on of their Trade, and for punishing of
Offenders against the same.
WHEREAS, By Our Proclamation* dated the Thirtieth day of May, in the year of
Our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty six, Entitled, A Proclamation
concerning the residence of the Merchants Adventurers of England at the City of
Dordrecht, and for settling their Staple there: We did (by, and with the advice
of Our Council) and in pursuance of an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, Passed the Twelfth day of October, in the year of Our
Lord, One thousand six hundred forty three, (amongst other things) Declare Our
pleasure to be, and did strictly Will and Enjoin, That no person of this
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, should at any time after the Tenth day of June then next coming,
Ship, Transport, Carry, or Convey, or cause to be Shipped, Transported,
Carried, or Conveyed, either from the City and Port of London, or from any
other City, Town, Port, Haven, or Creek, of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, or the Dominions thereunto belonging, by way of
Merchandise, any Woollen Clothes, or other English Woollen Manufactures, of
what sort or kind soever then made, or then after to be made, unto any the
Cities, Towns or Places in Germany, or the Seventeen Provinces of the
Netherlands, save only, and except the Mart and Staple Towns of the said
Fellowship of Merchants Adventurers of England in those parts for the time
being* or to one of them, upon pain of forfeiture of the said Woollen Clothes,
and other English Woollen Manufactures, and such further and other Pains,
Penalties, Punishments, and Forfeitures, as by the said Ordinance of
Parliament, or by any other Law, may be lawfully inflicted on such Offenders.
And we having been informed, that diverse persons out of a covetous desire to
enrich themselves (though to the endangering of the said Company of Merchant
Adventurers, and the Trade thereof; which by long experience, has been found
to be very beneficial to this nation) by Trading therein, separate from the
said Company, and have by such means brought some disturbance to the Company,
and distraction to the Trade. For preventing the further inconveniences that
may arise thereby, and to secure the said Company and Trade in time to come: We
have (by, and with the advice and consent of Our Council) thought fit again to
Publish and Declare Our Will and Pleasure to be, That no person do Ship,
Transport, Carry, or Convey, or cause to be Shipped, Transported, Carried, or
Conveyed, contrary to the said Ordinance, or Our former Proclamation, any
Woollen Cloth, or Woollen Manufacture, unto any Cities, Towns, or Places, other
then the Mart and Staple Towns of the said Fellowship. And because We intend
and expect to have a strict Account, of what obedience is given to these Our
Proclamations, which are in pursuance of the said Ordinance of Parliament; And
to the intent the Offenders may be discovered, and brought to Justice, and such
punishment inflicted on them for such their offenses, as by Law and Justice
ought to be inflicted on such, as wilfully and contemptuously transgress Our
Laws and Proclamations in pursuance of the same; We do, by, and with the advice
and consent of our Council, Will and Command, as well Our Judges of the High
Court of Admiralty of England, and the Commissioners of Our Customs, and the
several Officers attending that Service; as also all and every Our Generals at
Sea, Admirals of Our Fleet, Vice-Admirals, Commanders of Squadrons, and other
Commanders, Captains and Officers whatsoever, of any of Our Ships, or of any of
Our Castles, Blockhouses, and Forts respectively, and all other Our Officers
and Ministers in their several places* to be aiding and assisting unto the said
Fellowship and Company of Merchants Adventurers of England, and all such as
they shall employ, as well and especially in the searching for, and seizing all
such Woollen Clothes, or other English Woollen Manufactures, Prohibited by the
said Ordinance and Proclamation respectively, to be transported as aforesaid;
as also in all other Matters and Things, tending to the supportation of the
Government of the said Fellowship and Company, and regulation of their Trade,
and for preservation of the Privileges, Jurisdictions, and Franchises lawfully
granted unto them by any Act or Ordinance of Parliament.

Given at White Hall the 14th. of June, 1658.
London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness. 1658.


