blazon or coat of arms incorporating the Commonwealth Flag (1649-1651)By the
Lord Protector.
A DECLARATION of his Highness, Setting apart Tuesday the 23. of this present
May for a public day of Thanksgiving, for the Peace concluded between this
Commonwealth, and that of the United Provinces, and for the late seasonable
Rain.
THat this has been a Nation of blessings in the midst whereof so many wonders
have been brought forth by the outstretched arm of the Almighty, even to
astonishment, and wonder, Who can deny? Ask we the Nations of this matter and
they will testify, and indeed the dispensations of the Lord have been as if he
had said, England thou art my firstborn, my delight amongst the Nations, under
the whole Heavens the Lord has not dealt so with any of the people round about
us.

The Lord having added another Link to this golden Chain of his loving kindness
by giving us a Peace with Our Neighbors the United Provinces, (whereby he has
not only stopped a great issue of blood, but We trust also given us hearts to
unite Our blood and strength for the mutual defense of each other) calls for
great return of Thanks for the same.

It is therefore thought fit to set apart Tuesday, being the 23. of this
present May, as a day for Praise, and for the Thankful Acknowledgement of this
blessing of Peace, which we hope has in the womb of it many other blessings.

And let us not forget our other Mercies, was not the Earth lately so unusually
parcht up, that it threatened Famine, and did cause the Beast of the field to
mourn for want of food, and water to sustain it? And has not the Lord so
watered the Earth that he has turned those fears into the expectation of the
greatest plenty that ever was seen by any now living in this Nation? Consider
we also the way whereby the Lord imparted this mercy to us, did any amongst us,
foreknow it was coming, was it not by stirring up our hearts to seek the same
by prayer, and that immediately before the Lord vouchsafed us this mercy? And
does not this bespeak? 1. That the manner of conveying this mercy is the best
part of the mercy.

2. That the Lord has not cast us off, that his Spirit yet strives with us,
that he has a people of his love amongst us, and loves the Nation so far as to
provoke it to be in love with calling upon the Name of the Lord for better
things than Corn and Wine.

3. That he knows best how and when to answer the expectation of the
Husbandman, and when to hear, even the mourning of the brute Beast, who will
yet much more hear the desires of them that fear him, and that in the fittest
season.

4. That the Heavens having thus declared the glory of God, and the Earth
answering thereunto in its fruitfulness, Why should not we be melted and
softened, humbling our selves under these mavelous kindnesses, and abounding
unto all fruitfulness in every good word and work of love; And if every place
has been made partaker of his showers, Why should not we (laying aside our
differences) be enlarged also each to other?

5. That seeing the Lord has been thus universal in this Mercy, why should we
not universally turn from the National Evils and vain Practices which yet are
too superstitiously and customarily exercised amongst us, which we need not
repeat here, because they are too well known, and We trust will be remembered by
those godly Ministers who shall be called to preach unto the People upon this
occasion? Conclude we with the words of David, Psalm 107. v.










O that Men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the Children of Men.

Given at White Hall this 9th. of May. 1654.
London, Printed by William du-Gard and Henry Hills, Printers to his Highness
the Lord Protector, 1654.


