OP

blazon or coat of arms
A Declaration of His Highness, inviting the people of England and Wales to a
day of Solemn Fasting and Humiliation.
THat We all in these Nations have more than ordinary cause to humble Our
selves, and to lay Our mouths in the dust in Fasting and Prayer before the Lord
at this time, will undoubtedly be agreed by all.

Amongst many others let these following motives induce Us to be very solemn
and serious in this Duty.

I. We having made Peace with all Our Neighbor Nations, and upon righteous
grounds deeply engaged in a War with the Spaniard, with whom We had no peace,
but where he pleased, and from whom we could obtain none for the future,
without subjecting the Lives, Liberties and Estates of the People of these
Nations trading thither, to the bloody Inquisition, and other Papal
determinations, nor unless we would quit Our claims of satisfaction for
multiplied injuries done Us, in shedding the innocent blood of this people, and
expulsing them out of diverse Islands, of which they were justly possessed, as
is more at large expressed in the late Declaration, holding forth the grounds
and reasons of Our undertaking against them. The Lord has been pleased in a
wonderful manner to humble and rebuke Us, in that expedition to the West
Indies, which although we apprehend was not in favor of the Enemy, yet gives
Us just reason to fear, that We may have either failed in the spirit and manner
wherewith this business has been undertaken, or that the Lord sees some
abomination, or accursed thing, by which he is provoked thus to appear against
Us.

II. That whilst the Lord has thus abased Us (instead of humbling Our selves
under the mighty hand of God, and each man searching and repenting of the
plague and evil of his own heart, and mourning for so great an affliction upon
the whole Land, and more principally on the interest and profession of the
Gospel in all the world) some most unnaturally rejoice, others are apt hastily
to apply according to their fancies; being too forward to give a reason of the
Judgments of God, which are so great a deep, and particularly to assign the
reason of this sharp dispensation, not considering that the Lord may for trial
as well as in judgment, exercise the faith of his people. Others imputing the
cause only to the evil of the Magistrate, who profess (if there were no other
provocation) even for their own sins justly to have incurred all this, and much
more, and hope they can in some measure desire to redeem the loss sustained by
this heavy stroke, with their lives, desiring nothing more than a conviction
from the Lord. And have appointed this day of Humiliation, that the Magistrate,
together with all such as fear the Lord, may deal impartially with their own
souls, before the Lord, in a matter of so great Concernment.

III. That the People of God continue still in their animosities, and improve
not such strokes unto Love and Union, whilst by the advantage thereof, the
common Enemy, both at home and abroad, take encouragement to hope, that the
time hastneth wherein they shall swallow Us up; but instead thereof, some of
the same faith in all things necessary to salvation, upon private thoughts of
their own, hold up still a quarrel with, and opposition to their Brethren,
about Christ's Kingdom, or rather their own understanding of the time, and
manner of it, We mean those of them, who will not give way that others wait
upon the Spirit of God for light in this matter. Others still differing about
forms, even to the breach of the Royal Law. Others repining at the present
begun Reformation, though having much tendency to good, both as to the comfort
and security of the Godly, and discountenance of wicked men, and wickedness;
wherein through God it has had some small effect, and also, which (which is
most sad) even because it has had the success to unite more good men upon the
old principles of Love and Truth than any expedient the providence of God has
brought forth since these troubles.

IV. That still We murmur and are unquiet, unthankful to the Lord, weary of our
Peace, making it a light thing to run again into blood; We despise Magistracy,
and are become weary of the preaching of the Gospel, and other Ordinances of
Christ.

V. Oaths, profaneness, unmercyfullness, oppression covetousness, and seeking
great things in such shaking times, not mourning when the Lord calls to it, nor
being sensible of our condition.

These and many more are just causes and provocations to us to mourn;
especially taking in this aggravation that the Lord has done for us, yea even
for his people here, above what he has done for any people.

VI. Add to these the condition of the Protestant Churches abroad, the members
whereof have very lately been massacred in Piedmont without sparing age or sex,
are bleeding in Switzerland, diverse there having been put to death for no
fault, but being Protestants; the designs upon the whole interest by the
Popish party almost in all places of Europe, and the grounds of their quarrel
and persecution for Religion, more clear and avowed then in many years before.

VII. And lastly, That the Lord would pardon the iniquities both of Magistrate
and People in these Lands, wherein the Magistrate desires first to take shame
to himself and sind out his provocation, as well as lay it upon others, and
that the Lord would pardon our iniquities and convert us unto himself, and
bless our poor friends in the Indies, and go out with our Fleets, and prosper
our undertakings as formerly by his own blessed presence, and unite us in love,
causing mercy and truth to meet together, and righteousness and peace to kiss
each other, and thereby exalt his own great name, make our Land glorious and
bless his cause and people in all the world, and hasten the time of the pulling
down of Antichrist, and expelling out of these Lands the unclean Spirit, Is
this day of solemn humiliation and prayer appointed to be upon Friday the 28.
of March 1656.

Given at Whitehall this 14. of March 1655.
London Printed by Henry Hills and John Field Printers to His Highness, 1655.


