OP

blazon or coat of arms
By The Protector. A PROCLAMATION Of the Peace made betwixt this Commonwealth
and Portugal.
O Liver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland,
etc. Whereas We have (by the blessing of God) with the advice of Our Council,
made and concluded a good, true and firm Peace, betwixt this Commonwealth on
the one part, and Portugal on the other, their Lands, Countries, Dominions,
Territories, Places, and the People, Subjects and Inhabitants thereof, by Sea
and Land, Rivers, Fresh-waters, and elsewhere. By the which Peace, and the
Preliminary Articles thereof, It is, among other things, agreed, That all War
and Acts of Hostility betwixt the two Nations shall cease, and that the People
and Inhabitants of each party respectively, shall treat each other with mutual
Friendship and affection, and that neither of them, their Subjects or People,
shall do, or attempt any thing, in any Place, by Sea or Land, or in the Ports
or Rivers of either, to the prejudice of the other, nor adhere to, or entertain
the Rebels or Fugitives of either, in any their Lands or Dominions. And that
betwixt this Commonwealth and Portugal and their People, Subjects and
Inhabitants, there shall be had and enjoyed free Trade and Commerce, by Land
and Sea, in all and singular the Countries, Lands, Dominions, Territories,
Provinces, Islands, Colonies, Cities, Towns and Ports of either, with freedom
into the same to enter, and there to abide, and from thence to depart without
interruption (they observing the Laws and Customs of each Place respectively)
as by the Articles of the said Peace is more fully declared and expressed. We
do therefore strictly Charge and Require all and every Person and Persons,
belonging to this Commonwealth, of what degree, quality and condition soever
they, or any of them be, to take notice thereof, and to conform themselves
accordingly.

Given at Whitehall this 23. of January, 1656.
Printed and Published by His Highness special Commandment.

London, printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1656.


