blazon or coat of arms incorporating the Commonwealth Flag
(1649-1651)INSTRUCTIONS To be observed touching the Collection appointed by the
Declaration of his Highness and the Council hereunto annexed, inviting the
people of England and Wales to a day of Solemn Fasting and Humiliation.
I.THat the Ministers and Churchwardens of the respective Cities, Towns,
Parishes, and other Congregations, as well within the privileged places, as
without, by themselves, or with such others whose hearts the Lord shall engage
in so charitable and pious a work, do the next Lords day after the publication
of this Declaration, go from House to House within such City, Town or Parish,
and ask and receive what each Housekeeper and others will freely give, and in
the presence of the party giving, set down his or her name, with the sum by him
or her given, fairly written in a Schedule to be by them annexed to this
Declaration, and the total sum thereof to endorse upon the said Declaration,
subscribed by the said Minister, Churchwardens, and others, who shall assist
in the said Collection; That all the moneys so collected, together with the
said Schedule, and Declaration so indorsed, be returned and paid by the said
Minister and Churchwardens, within four days then next following, unto the
Mayor, or other Head Officer of such City or Town, or to the next Justice of
the Peace to the Parish where such collection shall be made, who is hereby
empowered and required to receive the same, and to give his acquittance to such
person so paying the same, and within twenty days after, or sooner, if it may
be, to return the sum and sums so received, unto Christopher Pack, the present
Lord Mayor of the City of London, and Sir Thomas Vyner Knight Alderman of the
said City, or either of them, who are hereby appointed Treasurers for receiving
the whole sum which shall be gathered upon this Collection, whose acquittance
shall be a sufficient Discharge fur such sum so paid in. And that the said
Minister and Churchwardens do within six days after such Collection certify
unto Henry Scobell Esquire Clerk of the Council, the sum so collected, in such
City, Town or Parish, to the end an exact account may be taken thereof.

II.That Sir Gilbert Gerard, Baronet, Sir John Trevor, Knight, Edward Cresset,
Esquire, Mr. Philip Nigh, Mr. Edmund Calamy, Mr. Joseph Caryl, Mr. William
Kiffen, Mr. William Jenkins, and Mr. Thomas Harrison, or any five or more of
them, be, and are hereby appointed a Committee to have the care of this
business, that the sums so collected be paid into the said Treasurers, and to
consider of the best ways and means how the same may be disposed of, for the
relief of the said poor Protestants, and to give an account thereof to the
Council, to the end the Charity afotesaid may be speedily and effectually
employed to the best advantage of the said poor Protestants, and according to
the intention of the Givers.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to his Highness, MDCLV.


