blazon or coat of arms incorporating the Commonwealth Flag (1649-1651)AN
ORDINANCE For Adjourning part of EASTER TERM. 1654.
WHereas many abuses and corruptions are crept into the ordinary course and
administration of Justice, both in Law and Equity, the Reformation whereof has
not yet been attained; Out of a tender care and desire that so necessary and
good a work may at length be brought to effect, It is held convenient and
necessary to Adjourn part of the next Term of Easter; Be it therefore Ordained
by His Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the consent of His Council,
That part of the said Term of Easter now next coming be Adjourned, That is to
say, from and after the first Return called Quindena Paschae, unto the first
Return of Trinity Term called Crastino Trinitatis; And all and every person or
persons, which have cause, or commandment to appear in any of the Courts at
Westminster, in or at any day, or time, from and after the said Return, called
Quindena Paschae, and during the said Term, called Easter Term, may tarry at
their dwellings, or where their business shall ly, without resorting to any of
the said Courts for that Cause, and without danger or forfeiture, penalty or
contempt to be in that behalf. And be it also Ordained by the Authority
aforesaid, That Writs of Adjournment shall be directed to the Justices of the
said Courts, giving them au^hority to Adjourn the said Term of Easter, as
aforesaid, that is to say, from and after the first Return, called Quindena
Paschae, until the first Return of Trinity Term, called Crastino Trinitatis, as
before is said, and the said Adjournment shall be made, as aforesaid. And be it
further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all Matters, Causes and
Suits, Depending in any of the said Courts, shall have continuance, and the
parties shall have day, from the day of the said Adjournment, until the said
Return of Crastino Trinitatis, as is aforesaid; And the Lords Commissioners of
the Great Seal are required to issue forth Writs accordingly. And be it further
Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex,
and all other Sheriffs both in England and Wales, do forthwith proclaim and
publish this Ordinance in the Chief Market Towns within their several and
respective Counties.

Thursday April 6. 1654.
ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector, and his Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith printed and published.

Henry Scobell Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by Henry Hills, and William du-Gard, Printers to His Highness
the Lord Protector, MDCLIV.


