OP

blazon or coat of arms
By the Protector. A PROCLAMATION Commanding all persons who have been in Arms,
or Assisted in the Wars against the STATE, to depart out of the Cities of
London and Westminster and late Lines of Communication, on or before the
Twelfth day of September instant.
HIs Highness foreseeing the dangerous consequence that may arise to the
Public, as at other times, so especially now the Parliament is so near at
hand, by the confluence and freedom of access unto the Cities of London and
Westminster, and places thereabouts, of those Malignant and ill-affected
persons, who have been in open hostility against the Commonwealth, and
otherwise adhered unto, assisted, and abetted the Common Enemy, whose malicious
restless spirits (notwithstanding their often disappointments, through the
wonderful mercy of God, who has hitherto infatuated their counsels, and also
notwithstanding the abundant grace and favor showed them) are still working by
all the pernicious ways and means they can, to sow seeds of sedition, secretly
to undermine the Government established within this Commonwealth, and to raise
new troubles in the bowels of these Nations* and involve them again in blood
and confusion, as is evident by their treasonable Books and Pamphlets which
they continually take the boldness to disperse and publish, thinking thereby to
poison the hearts of the well-affected people, and withdraw them from their
obedience; Therefore His Highness upon advice with his Council, holding it most
necessary to restrain the confluence and access of that party, to the said
Cities of London and Westminster and places adjoining thereunto, does hereby
Publish, Command and Enjoin, that all persons abiding and remaining within the
Cities of London and Westminster, and late lines of Communication (not under
restraint by imprisonment of their persons) who have been at any time in Arms
against the State, or adhered unto, or wittingly or willingly assisted,
encouraged, or abetted the Enemies thereof, do on or before the twelfth day of
September instant (or if any of them be under such restraint, then within five
days next after their respective enlargement) depart out of the said Cities of
London and Westminster, and the late lines of Communication and all places
within twenty miles thereof (unless it be the place of their constant
habitation and residence for themselves and their Families) as they will answer
the contrary at their perils. And that no such person do presume after the
said twelfth day of September, to come within the said Cities of London and
Westminster, or late lines of Communication, within the time hereafter limited.
And His Highness does command the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of
London, and Justices of Peace within the Cities of London and Westminster, and
the Liberties, Suburbs and Precincts thereof. As also within the several
Counties of Middlesex, Hertford, Essex, Kent and Surrey, and the several and
respective Officers of the Militia, as well within the said Cities and
Liberties, as the Borough of Southwark, and Hamlets of the Tower of London in
their respective Limits and Jurisdictions, to this purpose, to cause strict
wards and watches to be kept, and to make frequent and diligent searches for,
and apprehend or cause to be apprehended, all and every such person and persons
as aforesaid, who shall be found within the said Cities or distance aforesaid,
after the said twelfth day of this instant September, and forthwith to certify
their names, qualities and other circumstances unto His Highness or Council, to
the end that such Offenders may be dealt withal, and proceeded against, as
disturbers of the public peace, and contemners of authority. And all Sheriffs,
Baiilffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and all Captains of guards, Officers and
Soldiers, and others the good people of this Commonwealth, are required to be
ayding and assisting to the said Justices of the Peace, Officers and Ministers
in the due execution of the premises. And to the end the designs and plots of
the said malignant and disaffected party may be the better discovered and
prevented; His Highness does straightly charge and command all and every the
said person and persons, so appointed to depart as aforesaid, (other then such
of them as are restrained by imprisonment as aforesaid, or such sickness or
infirmity of body that they cannot travel without apparent danger of their
lives, or that have such suits in Law as inevitably require their personal
presence,) do immediately repair to their several places of dwelling or common
abode, or (not having any certain abode) to the places of their birth, or where
their parents shall be then owelling, and not return until after the end of
six Months, to be accounted from the time of publishing this our Proclamation.
And His Highness does admonish all those whom this Proclamation does concern,
to be so wary as that His Highness have not just cause to make them examples of
contempt, which he must and will do, if after the said time limited for their
departing as aforesaid, any of them shall be found to stay contrary to his said
direction herein.

Given at Whitehall the 6. day of September, in the year of our Lord, 1656.
London Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness. 1656.


