Lieut: General Cromwels LETTER TO The Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of
the Honorable House of Commons, CONCERNING His last Proceedings in the Kingdom
of Scotland, in order to the establishment of a firm and lasting Peace between
the two Nations: All the Enemies Forces there being Disbanded.

With another LETTER from the Lieutenant General to the Committee of Estates,
Representing the great Damage the Kingdom of England has received from that
Kingdom by the late Invasion.

And the Committee of Estates ANSWER thereunto.

Together With A DECLARATION of their Proceedings in opposition to the late
unlawful Engagement against ENGLAND.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters, Answer and
Declaration be forthwith printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
October. 19. 1648.

For the Honorable, William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
IN my last, wherein I gave you an account of my dispatch of Col: Bright to
Carlisle after the Rendition of Berwick, I acquainted you with my intentions to
go to the headquarters of my Horse at the Earl of Wyntons, within six miles of
Edinburgh, that from thence I might represent to the Committee of Estates, what
I had further to desire in your behalf. The next day after I came thither, I
received an Invitation from the Committee of Estates to come to Edinburgh, they
sending to me the Lord Kircudbright and Major Genesis Holborn for that purpose,
with whom I went the same day, being Wednesday 4. of this instant October. We
fell into consideration what was fit further to insist upon, and being sensible
that the late Agreement between the Committee of Estates and the Earls of
Crawford, Glencarn and Lanerick, did not sufficiently answer my Instructions,
which was, To disinable them from being in power to raise new Troubles to
England; therefore I held it my duty, not to be satisfied only with the
disbanding of them, but considering their power and Interest, I thought it
necessary to demand concerning them and all their Abettors, according to the
Contents of the Paper here enclosed; wherein (having received that very day
your Votes for giving them further assistance) I did in the close thereof
acquaint them therewith; reserving such further satisfaction to be given by the
Kingdom of Scotland, as the Parliament of England should in their wisdom see
cause to desire. The Committee of Estates sent the Earl of Cassils, L.
Warriston, and two Gentlemen more to me, to receive what I had to offer unto
them, which upon Thursday I delivered: Upon Friday I received by the said
persons this enclosed Answer, which is the original it self. Having proceeded
thus far as a Soldier, and I trust by the blessing of God not to your
disservice; and having laid the business before you, I pray God direct you to
do further as may be for his glory, the good of the Nation wherewith you are
entrusted, and the comfort and encouragement of the Saints of God in both
Kingdoms and all the world over. I do think the Affairs of Scotland are in a
thriving posture, as to the Interest of honest men, and like to be a better
Neighbor to you now, then when the great pretenders to Covenant, Religion and
Treaties (I mean D Hamilton, the Earls of Lauderdale, Traquair, Carnegy, and
their Confederates had the power in their hands; I dare say, that that party,
with their pretenses, had not only through the treachery of some in England
(who have cause to blush) endangered the whole State and kingdom of England,
but also brought Scotland into such a condition, as that no honest man that had
the fear of God, or a Conscience of Religion, the Just ends of the Covenant and
Treaties, could have a being in that kingdom: But God, who is not to be mocked
or deceived, and is very jealous when his Name and Religion are made use of to
carry on impious Designs, has taken vengeance of such prophanity, even to
astonishment and admiration; And I wish from the bottom of my heart, it may
cause all to tremble and repent (who have practiced the like to the Blaspheming
of his Name, and the destruction of his people) so as they may never presume to
do the like again; and I think it is not unseasonable for me to take the humble
boldness to say thus much at this time.

All the Enemies Forces in Scotland are now disbanded; the Committee of Estates
have declared against all of that parties sitting in Parliament; good Elections
are made in diverse places, of such as dissented from, and opposed the late
wicked Engagement; and they are now raising a force of about 4000 Horse and
Foot, which until they can complete, they have desired me to leave them two
Regiments of Horse, and two Troops of Dragoons; which accordingly I have
resolved, conceiving I have warrant by your late Votes so to do, and have left
Major Genesis Lambert to Command them. I have received, and so have the Officers
with me, many Honors and Civilities from the Committee of Estates, the City of
Edinburgh, and Ministers, with a Noble Entertainment, which we may not own as
done to us, but as your Servants. I am now marching toward Carlisle; and I
shall give you such further accounts of your Affairs as there shall be
occasion. I am, Sir,

Your humble Servant, O. CROMWELL.
Dalhousie, 9 October. 1648.
The Lieutenant Generals Letter to the Committee of Estates of SCOTLAND.
Right Honorable,
I Shall ever be ready to bear witness of your Lordships forwardness to do
right to the Kingdom of England, in restoring the Garrisons of Berwick and
Carlisle; and having received so good a pledge of your Resolutions to maintain
Amity and a good Understanding between the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, it
makes me not to doubt, but that your Lordships will further grant what in
Justice and Reason may be demanded: I can assure your Lordships, That the
Kingdom of England did foresee that wicked Design of the Malignants in
Scotland, to break all Engagements of Faith and Honesty between the Nations,
and to take from the Kingdom of England the Towns of Berwick and Carlisle: And
although they could have prevented the loss of those considerable Towns without
breach of the Treaty, by laying Forces near unto them; yet such was the
tenderness of the Parliament of England, not to give the least suspicion of a
breach with the Kingdom of Scotland, that they did forbear to do any thing
therein: And it is not unknown to your Lordships, when the Malignants had
gotten the power of your Kingdom, how they protected and employed our English
Malignants, though demanded by our Parliament, and possessed themselves of
those Towns; and with what violence and unheard of Cruelties they raised an
Army, and began a War, and invaded the kingdom of England, and endeavored to
the uttermost of their power, to engage both kingdoms in a perpetual Quarrel;
and what blood they have spilt in our kingdom, and what great loss and
prejudice was brought upon our Nation, even to the endangering the total ruin
thereof: And although God did by a most mighty and strong hand, and that in a
wonderful manner destroy their Designs; yet it is apparent, that the same
ill-affected Spirit still remains, and that there are diverse persons of great
quality and power, who were either the Contrivers, Actors or Abettors of the
late unjust War made upon the kingdom of England, now in Scotland, who
undoubtedly do watch for all advantages and opportunities to raise dissensions
and divisions between the Nations: Now forasmuch as I am Commanded to prosecute
the remaining part of the Army that invaded the Kingdom of England wheresoever
it should go, to prevent the like miseries; and considering that diverse of that
Army are retired into Scotland, and that some of the heads of those Malignants
were raising new Forces in Scotland to carry on the same Design, and that they
will certainly be ready to do the like upon all occasions of advantage; and
forasmuch as the Kingdom of England has lately received so great damage by the
failing of the Kingdom of Scotland, in not suppressing Malignants and
Incendiaries as they ought to have done, and by suffering such persons to be
put into places of great Trust in the Kingdom, who by their Interest in the
Parliament and Countries, brought the Kingdom of Scotland so far as they could,
by an unjust Engagement to invade and make War upon their Brethren of England.
My Lords, I hold my self obliged, in prosecution of my Duty and Instructions,
to demand, That your Lordships will give assurance in the Name of the Kingdom
of Scotland, that you will not admit or suffer any who have been active in, or
consenting to the said Engagement against England, or have lately been in Arms
at Sterling or elsewhere in the maintenance of that Engagement, to be employed
in any public Place or Trust whatsoever; and this is the least Security I can
demand. I have received an Order from both Houses of the Parliament of England,
which I hold fit to communicate to your Lordships, whereby you will understand
the readiness of the Kingdom of England to assist you who were Dissenters from
the Invasion; and I doubt not but your Lordships will be as ready to give such
further satisfaction, as they in their wisdoms shall find cause to desire.

Your Lordships most humble Servant, O. CROMWELL.
Edinburgh, 5 October. 1648. For the Right Honorable, The Committee of Estates of
Scotland.
The Answer of the Committee of (...) Generals Letter of the 5th instant.
SIR,
HAving considered your Letter of the fifth instant, We return this Answer,
That as we did dissent from, and protest against the taking of the towns of
Berwick and Carlisle, and likewise against the late Engagement against England;
And as we did rise in arms against the Contrivers and Abettors of that
Engagement, and have been forward in using our best endeavors for restoring
your Garrisons; so before the receipt of yours, We had passed some Acts upon the
22 of Sept. last, and the 4 of this Month; and had resolved to put forth a
Declaration to the kingdom, which We do herewith communicate unto you; by which
you will perceive, That it has been our earnest care and real endeavors to do
the same things which you demand in your Letter.

In the large Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms in Anno 1641. We did desire, That
honest men of known Integrity and Ability might be employed in the places of
greatest Trust and Power within this kingdom; and sad experience has taught
us, That no bonds nor ties betwixt the kingdoms, even the strictest of
Covenants or Treaties, can restrain men of corrupt minds and judgments, but
that when ever they find an opportunity, they will be ready to pursue their
own ends and Designs, to the hazard of the Peace, and breaking the Union
between the Kingdoms.

In the year 1643. When some Members of both Houses assembled at Oxford, had
voted both Kingdoms Traitors, We did desire from the Honorable Houses, and it
was granted, and mutually agreed upon in the Propositions of both kingdoms;
presented to the Kings Majesty at Oxford, That the Members of either House of
Parliament, who had not only deserted the Parliament, but also voted both
kingdoms Traitors, should be removed from. His Majesties-Counsels; and be
restrained from coming within the verge of the Court; and that they should not
without the Advice and Consent of both kingdoms, bear any Office, or have any
employment concerning the State or Commonwealth. And we cannot deny, but your
demand of Assurance from this Kingdom is reasonable, That those who have been
active in, or consenting to the late unlawful Engagement against England, be
not employed in any public place or trust whatsoever.

Wherefore We do accept of this your Desire, as a real testimony of your
respects to this Kingdom, and of your Intentions to preserve the Union betwixt
the kingdoms. And We do hereby engage our selves, in the Name of the Kingdom of
Scotland, to employ our utmost endeavors, That none who have bin active in, or
consenting to the said Engagement against England; or have been lately in arms
at Sterling, or elsewhere, in maintenance or pursuance of that Engagement, be
employed in any public place or trust whatsoever, without the Advice and
consent of the Kingdom of England, That thereby they may be disabled from
renewing or reinforcing their former Engagement, or infringing the Union and
Peace between the Kingdoms. And as the Kingdom of England is now careful to
have this Assurance from this Kingdom, so we will not doubt but the Honorable
Houses of Parliament will, according to their offers of Assistance at this
time, be ready to assist us upon all other occasions hereafter, to make good
this our undertaking.

And if it shall please God to bless these covenanted Kingdoms with a settled
Peace, We trust, that in any agreement that shall be made with His Majesty, the
Kingdom of England will be careful that this may be regarded as a necessary
condition of Peace: And to the and any Peace which shall be agreed upon may be
the more durable, We do also earnestly desire, That those who shall be employed
in public place or trust in England, may be such as love to preserve Union and
Amity betwixt the Nations.

We do hold our selves very much obliged to the Honorable Houses of Parliament,
for their kind Offers of Assistance, expressed in their Votes of the 28 of
Sept. last: And shall communicate Counsels with you concerning the same, That
their affording assistance to this kingdom may be so ordered as may be most
useful to us, and least prejudicial to the affairs of England; And you may rest
very well assured, That we shall always be ready to give satisfaction to the
Honorable Houses, in every thing which may conduce to the strengthening of the
Union, and settling the Peace of these distracted Kingdoms; and to give real
evidence that We are

Edin. 6. Octo. 1648. Your affectionate Friends and Servants; Signed in Name
and by Warrant of the Committee of Estates, LOUDOUN Canc'.

For the Right Honorable, Lieut. Genesis Cromwell.
A Declaration of the Committee of Estates, concerning their Proceedings in
opposition to the late unlawful Engagement against ENGLAND.
THe manifold dangers to Religion, to the Kings Majesty, to our Laws and
Liberties, and to the Peace of these kingdoms, are so manifest, that they
cannot be hid from any, who will not wilfully shut their eyes against a clear
light: and the remedies which we have taken in this extremity, will (we doubt
not) be judged by all men of common equity and understanding, to have been most
necessary for preserving Religion from ruin, and our selves from slavery and
oppression: Yet, to prevent misinformation and misconstructions, we have
thought fit to publish a short narration of the Causes of our late undertaking
to rise in Arms, of our proceedings by way of Treaty with those that joined in
Arms for the late Engagement against England, and of our resolutions for
settling Religion, and the Peace of this distracted kingdom, and strengthening
the Union betwixt the kingdoms, which are the best foundations of Honor and
Happiness to the King; whose Throne we desire may be established in
Righteousness.

When we look back upon some proceedings in our neighbor Nation, though there
we see that the work of Reformation has been much obstructed, and many things
have been done, of which we cannot approve, and wherewith God was highly
displeased; yet we find the Fountain and Spring of all our troubles mainly to
arise at home, from the craft and malice of our Natives and Countrymen. For,
notwithstanding the Right Honorable Houses of the Parliament of England had
offered by their Commissioners to remove all disterences which had arisen
betwixt them and us, and to do whatever was just and Honorable for the
satisfaction of this kingdom: And further, had declared their readiness to join
with this kingdom in the Propositions agreed on by both kingdoms, presented to
the King at Hampton Court, for the making such further proceeding, thereupon as
should be thought fit; for the speedy settlement of the Peace of both kingdoms,
and preservation of the Union according to the Covenant and Treaties. And
further, to give satisfaction all things which should be judged necessary for
the Peace of both kingdoms, not intrenching upon the particular Interest of the
Kingdom, and Privileges of the Parliament of England: yet many of this Nation
having entered into a sinful Association and wicked combination, did join
together in Arms under the Command of the Duke of Hamiltoun, for persuance of
an unlawful Engagement, against our neighbor Nation of England, contrary to the
ends of the Solemn League and Covenant, the manifold admonitions and
exhortations of all the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, the Warnings and
Declarations of the Commission of the General Assembly, 1647. As likewise
against the unanimous proceedings of the late General Assembly in this year
1648. against the Judgment and Protestations of many Members in Parliament,
who have been most constant in the Cause, and to preserve the Union betwixt the
Kingdoms; and generally against the minds and judgments of all the
well-affected in the Kingdom: And further, brought over from Ireland some
Regiments of the Scots Army to join with them in this Engagement, contrary to
the Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms of the 7 of July 1642. And having joined in an
unlawful Association with the Malignants of England, did employ some of them to
surprise and take the Garrisons of Berwick and Carlisle (and yet professed
openly before the World, they were ignorant who had done it) contrary to the
large Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms, and the Treaty of the 29 of November, 1643.
And when by miserable and cruel oppression of the people of God in this
Kingdom, they had gathered together a numerous Army, they took possession of
the Garrisons of Berwick and Carlisle, and in a hostile manner entered into our
Neighbor Nation, where the Lord of Hosts poured forth his Wrath and Indignation
upon them for their lies and hypocrifie, as was before threatened by many of the
faithful servants of God in this Kingdom.

While these men were invading England, the Earl of Lanerick and others engaged
in the same Design, stayed at home to oppress this Kingdom; and under a
pretense of raising a Guard for the Prince, did begin a new Levy of Forces,
whereby they might be able to send supply to their Army in England, if need
were; but principally to bear down the godly and well-affected in this Kingdom,
and force upon them unlawful Bands and Oaths, which they devised to be engines
and snares to compel men to make Shipwreck of their Consciences, by joining
with all their wicked ways, or in case they refused to take those accursed
Oaths, and subscribe their Bands, that then they might not only be incapable
of all public Trust, but be esteemed and used as Enemies to Religion, King and
Kingdom; and so every way to oppress all honest men in their Persons, Estates
and Consciences, as nothing was to be expected from their Government to these
who desired to fear the Lord, and adhere to their first Principles, but slavery
and ruin: for they having adjourned the Parliament till March 1650, had
assumed to themselves an Arbitrary Power, that in the mean time they might rule
at their pleasure, and make such alterations in the Kingdom as they thought
fit. Upon News of the defeat of their Army, they did give out Commissions to
prime Incendiaries, and encouraged such as were eminent and active in the
Rebellion, under the conduct of James Graham late Earl of Montross, to rise in
Arms; and sent directions to the Forces under the Command of George Monro,
which had invaded England, but were not present at the Fight, and other
Officers and Soldiers who escaped from it, to return to this Kingdom, that so
by their conjunction with the Forces lately raised, they might have a new Army
on foot to prosecute their former Design, and to tyrannize over this Kingdom,
as is evident from their Letters of the 28 of August, sent to the Earl of
Marshal Viscount of Dudhope, Clerk Register, and George Monro, (ten days after
the Defeat of their Army in England) wherein speaking of the Engagement, they
declare their resolution to recruit their Regiments, and to hazard their Lives
and Fortunes, and all that was dearest unto them for carrying on against all
opposition whatsoever that pious and loyal Service, and that they and many
others of this kingdom did intend not to live and outlive it: By all which,
and many other their like proceedings expressed in the Declarations of the
General Assembly, and their Commissioners, it is sufficiently evident, that
Religion has not only been endangered, but the whole work of Reformation in
these kingdoms for these ten years past has been very near to be wholly
overturned, our Laws and Liberties almost destroyed, Authority weakened, the
Person of the King put in hazard, and his Restitution (which they pretended)
rendered more difficult, and endeavors used to break the Union and Peace betwixt
the kingdoms, and to continue (so far as was in their power) a lasting War
betwixt this kingdom and our neighbor Nation with whom we are joined in
Covenant.

This being the true estate of Affairs, We did find it most necessary for us
to join in Arms together against these Covenant breakers, and their Adherents
who had invaded England, and were disturbing the Peace of this Kingdom (and who
under a specious pretense of seeking the Kings Honor, Freedom and safety, were
seeking their own Honor and base private ends, and have made the Kings
condition harder then ever it was before) this course being the only means
which was left us whereby to endeavor the preservation of Religion, our native
Country, and the Peace and Union betwixt the kingdoms, and our own Consciences
being ready to condemn us if we should sit still and suffer Religion to be
ruined, England to be further provoked (by detaining their Garrisons) and this
kingdom to be enslaved and brought under the yoke of a perpetual bondage.

When we had put our selves in a posture for our own defense near Edinburgh,
the Earl of Crawford, the Earl of Lanerick, George Monro, and other Commanders
of the Forces joined with them, having Marched to Inneresk, sent unto us some
Articles upon which they desired to Treat, for removing all differences betwixt
us; but these Demands being very unreasonable and inconsistent with Religion,
the Covenant and Treaties betwixt the kingdoms, We refused to admit them to be
the subject of a Treaty; yet were content if they had any other thing to
propound which might conduce to the settling of Truth and Peace according to the
Covenant, to appoint some from us to Treat with the like number authorized by
them, at any place equally distant from both Armies. Whereupon they professed a
readiness to have all differences ended by a Treaty, that an intestine War
might be prevented; but they assigned so short Dyets for us to return our
Answers about the necessary circumstances to be agreed on before a Treaty could
begin, as the time was elapsed before we could be well convened; and then they
took the advantage of marching away, whilst we continued in our Quarters in
expectation of a Treaty, by which means they gained the pass at Sterling, and
surprised our Forces there, killing some, and taking others Prisoners when they
were in security, being advertised that there was a Treaty betwixt us; All this
notwiths^a^ding so desirous were we of the Peace of this almost ruined kingd^m
as passing over all the provocations given unto us, wereadily entertained all
proffers to Treat, and upon the (...) of September, Commissioners on both sides
met at Woodside, together with some Ministers and Elders from the Commission of
the Kirk; but after three days debate, that Treaty (during which their Army was
grievously plundering the Country) produced little else but delays, they
refusing to accept of any conditions without rewards for their service, Liberty
to Transport the Irish Forces in a Body to Ireland, security for their Lives,
Estates, Honors, Fortunes and Places, and assurance that none who had been
accessory to the late Engagement should be questioned either by us, or by the
kingdom of England for any thing done by them in relation thereunto, which was
impossible for us to grant, without involving our selves in the guilt of the
Engagement, and giving occasion of quarrel against us to our Neighbor Nation,
in whose names we could promise nothing without their advice and consent. And
here we cannot but remark, that these Lords and others, who in Parliament and
otherwise pretended so great a zeal for his Majesty's Honor, Freedom and
Safety, yet in all their Demands to us in this Treaty, they never made the
least desire of any thing for the King, but were ready to close an agreement
with us when ever they could get satisfaction in what concerned their own
Honor, Feedom and Interest.

So soon as we understood that the Forces of the Parliament of England were
come to the Borders, for pursuit of the common Enemy, and reducing the Garrisons
of Barwick and Carlisle, We wrote a Letter from Falkirk to the Commander in
Chief of these Forces, and sent two from us with Instructions to acquaint him
with the estate of our Affairs, particularly our proceedings in the Treaty, and
to assure them that we would contribute our utmost endeavors for the
restitution of the Towns of Barwick and Carlisle to the Parliament of England,
to whom they do of right belong: In return whereunto we received from Lieut.
General Cromwell a Letter to this purpose, That upon the defeat of the Forces of
the Duke of Hamilton, they had received in command, to prosecute the Victory,
until the Enemy were put out of a condition or hope of growing into a new Army,
and the Garrisons of Berwick and Carlisle were reduced; in pursuance of which
commands, they had resolved to advance into Scotland with their Army, for
obtaining their Garrisons, and that the common Enemy might be the sooner brought
to a submission to reasonable conditions; withal engaging themselves, that so
soon as they should know from us, that the Enemy should yield to these things
we had proposed to them, and the Garrisons of Berwick and Carlisle were
delivered, they should forthwith depart out of this Kingdom: After receipt of
this Letter, we sent some of our number with Power and Instructions, to do
their utmost endeavor for obtaining the Towns of Berwick and Carlisle to be
surrendered to him, for the use of the Honorable Houses of the Parliament of
England, and to represent our earnest desire and firm resolution, to preserve
inviolable the Union betwixt the Kingdoms, according to the Covenant and
Treaties; and since they had resolved in obedience to the Commands laid upon
them, to send Forces into this Kingdom for pursuing the common Enemy, therefore
to desire that those which should be sent, might be such as would give no
offense or scandal to the Ministry and well-affected in this Kingdom.

Upon the 18. of September. some Propositions were sent unto us from those at
Sterling, to which we returned an Answer upon the 20. And after a new meeting
at Kirklistoun with Commissioners from them, Articles of Agreement were drawn
up and subscribed by the Commissioners on both sides, which are now published
in print: In all which proceedings, we have studied to set before our eyes the
Honor of God, and the good of Religion, the preservation of our Laws and
Liberties, and of the Union betwixt the Kingdoms. And to the end it may further
appear to this kingdom and to all the World, that no sinister end or wordly
design for self-interest, has stirred us up to this course, we do declare,

First of all, That we have both matter of deep humiliation before God, and
thanksgiving to him, when we consider his gracious dispensation toward us, in
preserving a remnant from following the evil courses of the time; and that he
was pleased so soon after a great defection and backsliding in the Land, to put
us into a condition to resist the force and fury of our Enemies, whom neither
Christian duty in so clear a Sunshine of the Gospel, nor natural affection to
their native Country, could restrain from horrid impieties and intolerable
oppressions. And we do freely acknowledge, that it had been just with the Lord
to suffer us to lie still under that yoke of bondage, which we had wreathed
upon our necks with our own hands, by compliance with Malignants and Malignant
courses, not trusting the Lord with his own work, and resting on his strength,
but following the Rules of carnal policy, whenever we were brought into
straights. It is the desire of our Souls, that for the future we may amend, and
it shall be our constant study, with Gods assistance, to avoid the rocks on
which we were ready to split, that we may neither upon the one hand put
confidence in the arm of flesh, and other worldly advantages, when things are
prosperous, nor upon the other, comply with the Enemies of the cause when we
are low, but in all estates and conditions to put our trust in God Almighty,
the Lord of Hosts, who is only wise to give counsel.

Secondly, That whatsoever Power God has already, or shall hereafter put into
our hands, we shall improve it for settling and propagating Religion, and
promoting the work of Reformation according to the Covenant, and in particular,
to have the Liberties of the Kirk ratified, which have been many ways
incroached upon and violated, as is particularly instanced in the Declaration
of the General Assembly.

Thirdly, To vindicate and establish the liberty and property of the Subjects,
who have been most grievously oppressed in their Consciences, Persons and
Estates.

Fourthly, That we shall endeavor the Kings Majesty's Restitution to the
exercise of His Royal Power, as soon as he shall give security for settling
Religion in the manner expressed in the Desires of the late Commission of the
Kirk, and shall give satisfaction in such other things as shall be found
necessary for the Peace and Safety of the kingdoms.

Fifthly, That the late unlawful Engagement against our Neighbor Nation of
England, with whom we are joined in League and Covenant, may be disclaimed and
disavowed by the Supreme Authority of this kingdom, it being most destructive
to Religion, and to the Peace and Happiness of these kingdoms.

Sixthly, To strengthen and confirm the Peace and Union between the kingdoms,
which the Malignant party has so much endeavored to break and dissolve.

Seventhly, That we shall endeavor to purge out of all the Judicatories in the
Land, Malignancy and Profaneness, and use all other good means that Justice
may be equally and impartially administered to all the Subjects in the kingdom;
and that a more effectual course may be taken throughout the whole kingdom then
heretofore, for punishing and suppressing all Profaneness, Malignancy and
Impiety.

Eighthly, All means having bin used with great industry, to get Malignants
chosen to be Commissioners to the last Parliament, and to prepossess men's
minds when they came to the Parliament, from which as a Fountain have issued
all our troubles and distractions. That we will faithfully endeavor to have a
free Parliament, consisting of such persons as have not bin accessory to, and
furtherers of the late Engagem; for which end we do again hereby require, that in
the election of Commissioners from Burghs and Shires to the Parliament, the
rules and directions set down in our Acts of 22 Sept. last, and the 4 of this
instant month of October. may be punctually observed throughout the kingdom.

And we call the searcher of hearts to record, that these are our real and true
intentions; and that we do not, nor shall, by the grace of God, pursue any
private ends or interests of our own. And we trust, the Lord our God, who
knows the sincerity of our resolutions, who has also had mercy upon us, and
has begun to do so graciously for us, will assist us herein until his work
shall be accomplished.

And now last of all, since it is agreed upon in the Treaty, that all questions
and differences about Religion be referred to the determination of the General
Assembly or their Commissioners, and that all Civil questions and differences
be referred to the determination of a Parliament, which is to sit down before
the 10 of January next; We do exhort and require all and every one of the
Subjects within this kingdom, to live peaceably and quietly, and to wait
patiently for the determination aforesaid; but in case any shall not rest
satisfied with, or shall resile from the said agreement, and shall continue, or
rise in arms, or levy any Forces without warrant from the Committee of Estates
as it is now constituted, consisting of persons not accessory to the late
Engagement, We do declare, That they shall be esteemed enemies to Religion, the
King and Kingdom, and punished as wilful disturbers of the Peace of the kingdom.

Mr. Tho: Henderson.

FINIS.

