blazon or coat of arms incorporating the Commonwealth Flag (1649-1651)
By the Lord Protector. A PROCLAMATION of his HIGHNESS, with the consent of his
Council, for continuing all Persons being in Office for the Execution of
Public Justice at the time of the late Change of Government, until his HIGHNESS
further direction.
OLIVER, LORD PROTECTOR of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
considering, That whereas the exercise of the chief Magistracy, and the
Administration of Government within the said Commonwealth, is invested and
established in his Highness, assisted with a Council, And lest thereupon the
settled and ordinary course of Justice in the Commonwealth (if remedy were not
provided) might receive interruption, his Highness in his care of the State,
and public Justice thereof, (reserving to future consideration the reformation
and redress of any abuses by misgovernment, upon better knowledge taken
thereof) is pleased, and does hereby expressly signify, declare and ordain, by
and with the advice and consent of his Council, who have power until the
meeting of the next Parliament to make Laws and Ordinances for the peace and
welfare of these Nations, where it shall be necessary, which shall be binding
and in force until Order shall be taken in Parliament concerning the same, that
all persons who on the 10. day of this instant December. were duly and lawfully
possessed of any place of Judicature, or Office of Authority, Jurisdiction or
Government, within this Commonwealth, shall be, and shall so hold themselves
continued in the said Offices and places respectively as formely they held and
enjoyed the same, and not otherwise, until his Highness pleasure be further
known; And all Commissions, Patents, and other Grants, which respect or relate
unto the doing and executing of public Justice, and all Proceedings of what
Nature soever in Courts of Common Law, or Equity, or in the Court of Admiralty,
or by Commissioners of Sewers, shall stand and be in the same and like force to
all Intents and Purposes as the same were on the said tenth day of this instant
December, until further Order given by his Highness therein; And that in the
mean time (for preservation of the public Peace, and necessary proceedings in
matters of Justice, and for Safety of the State) all the said Persons, of
whatsoever Place, Power, Degree, or Condition, may not fail, every one
severally according to his respective Place, Office or Charge, to proceed in
the performance and execution of all Duties thereunto belonging, as formerly
appertained to them and every of them, whilst the former Government was in
being.

Given at White Hall this 21. of December, in the year of our Lord 1653.
London, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to his Highness the Lord Protector,
1653.


