O P
depiction of the state arms of the Commonwealth (1649-60) consisting of the
cross of St. George (patron saint of England) and the Irish harp
By His Highness: A PROCLAMATION FOR RELIEF Of Godly MINISTERS against Suits
and Molestations by Pesons Sequestered, Ejected, or not Approved.
WHereas since the Parliament began at Westminster, the third day of November
One thousand six hundred and forty, diverse Ministers, Lecturers, Schoolmasters
and others have been sequestered or rejected from their respective Parsonages,
Rectories, Vicarages and other Ecclesiastical Benefices or Places, for
Delinquency against the Commonwealth, or for Scandal or Insufficiency, by
Ordinance or Order of Parliament, by Order of the late Committee of Parliament
for Plundered Ministers, by Committees in the counties by virtue of Ordinances
of Parliament in that behalf, and by the Commissioners appointed by the
Ordinance for Ejecting of Scandalous, Ignorant and Insufficient Ministers and
Schoolmasters; Notwithstanding which, diverse of the said Sequestered and Ejected
Persons have of late gotten into the Possession of such Places, from which they
have been sequestered or ejected, and others have commenced Suits for Recovering
the Possession from such persons as have been put into such places, or do
otherwise interrupt and trouble such persons in their Possession, to the great
vexation and discouragement of the Godly Ministry within this Nation, and to
the prejudice and disappointment of the Reformation which has bin so long
desired and endeavored: His Highness and the Council having received diverse
Complaints of this nature, and taking into consideration the dangerous Evils
likely to ensue, in case the same be not timely prevented, Do hereby Publish
and Declare, That they hold themselves obliged to take care, that as well such
persons so sequestered or ejected, or which shall by the Authority aforesaid be
sequestered or ejected, be not restored to such places from whence they have
been, or shall be so sequestered or ejected; as also that such pious and able
persons as have been, are, or shall be placed in the room of such sequestered or
ejected person, by Ordinance or Order of Parliament, or of the late Committee
for Plundered Ministers, or by any Committee in the respective counties
authorized thereunto by Ordinance of Parliament, or by Order of His Highness,
or of His Highness and the Council, be preserved and continued in their quiet
and peaceable possession and enjoyment of the Profits belonging to such
Benefice or Place, without the interruption of such sequestered or ejected
person; And therefore His Highness, by the advice of ye Council, does strictly
charge and command, That all and every such person and persons who has bin so
sequestered or ejected, and all persons claiming under him or them, do
immediately upon publication hereof, and such as shall be hereafter so
sequestered or ejected, do within one month after such sequestration or
ejection, quietly and peaceably leave and deliver up the possession of such
place, whence he has been or shall be so ejected, and of all Houses, Lands and
other Profits belonging to the same, unto such person, and persons as have been
or shall, by authority aforesaid, in that behalf, be placed in such Parsonage,
Rectory, Vicarage, Ecclesiastical Benefice, or Place, and do from henceforth
forbear to Commence, or prosecute any suit or action, for recovery of the
Possession of any such Parsonage, Vicarage, Rectory, Ecclesiastical Benefice,
or Place, or any Profits belonging to the same; And do before the thirtieth day
of July instant revoke, discharge, and release all, and every such action, or
suit, and acknowledge satisfaction upon any Judgment had or obtained upon such
action, or suit; and also shall restore the Possession, and profits received,
or the full value of such Profits, with the Damages incurred by reason of any
Judgment, and execution had thereupon, contrary to any the Orders, or
Ordinances aforesaid. And that all and every person and persons who have been,
or shall be sequestered, or ejected for any the Causes aforesaid, do permit, and
suffer such person, and persons as have bin or shall by the Authority aforesaid
be placed in such Parsonage, Rectory, Vicarage, and other Ecclesiastical
Benefice or Place, peaceably and quietly to hold, and enjoy the same, without
any their let, or interruption, suit or Molestation whatsoever. And his
Highness by the advice aforesaid, does further declare, That all, and every the
sequestered, or ejected persons aforesaid, who shall not conform, or shall do
any thing contrary hereunto, shall from thenceforth be debarred from receiving,
or claiming any the Fifths of such Parsonage, Rectory or Vicarage, or any
arrears now, or hereafter due for the same, and shall be reputed, and taken to
be disturbers of the peace, disaffected to the present Government, and opposers
of the good, and welfare of this Nation, and be proceeded against accordingly.
And whereas diverse persons, who have not been approved by the Commissioners
appointed for approbation of Public Preachers, according to the Ordinance of
his Highness, with the advice and consent of the Council in that behalf, do
nevertheless detain, and withhold the Possession of diverse Parsonages,
Rectories, Vicarages, and Public Lectures, from such persons, as, according to
the said Ordinance, have been presented, nominated, and chosen unto the same,
and received an Instrument of Approbation, and admittance, according to the
said Ordinance, whereby the good intended by the said Ordinance in supplying
such Places with godly and able Preachers, is interrupted; His Highness, by the
advice of the Council, does likewise straightly charge, and require, that all
and every person and persons, who since the first day of April 1653. have been
placed in such Benefices, or Public Lectures, and has not obtained
approbation, and admittance in the manner expressed in the said Ordinance,
within the times, which by it, or any other Ordinance of his Highness, and the
Council, has been prefixed for obtaining such approbation and admittance, do
before the thirtieth day of this instant July, leave and yield up the
possession of such Benefice, or Lecture, to such person, and persons, as
according to the said Ordinance, has been, or shall be admitted thereunto; and
all and every such person and persons as hereafter shall be presented,
nominated, or chosen to such Benefice, or Public Lecture, and shall not obtain
such approbation, and admittance by the time prefixed for that purpose, do
within one Month after demand thereof, leave and yield up the Possession of
such Benefice, or Lecture, unto such person, and persons, as shall be so
admitted thereunto, according to the said Ordinance, and in default thereof,
all and every person and persons so making default, and refusing, shall be
deemed, and taken to be disturbers of the peace, disaffected to the present
Government, and opposers of the good and welfare of this Nation, and be
proceeded against accordingly. And to the intent the premises may be the more
effectually executed, his Highness, by like advice, does further Declare, That
no suit, or plaint shall be brought, or entertained in any Court, contrary to
the true intent, and meaning of the said Orders and Ordinances; And does also
require, That no Counselors at Law, Atturneys, or other Officers be
instrumental (at their peril) in any suit, intended to be forbidden as
aforesaid. And his Highness does further Will, and require all, and every the
Sheriffs of the respective Counties to cause this Proclamation to be read at
the next Assizes holden for the respective Counties, that no person concerned
may pretend ignorance hereof.

Given at White Hall this 3d of July 1655.
Published by his Highness special command.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, MDCLV.


