O P
seal of the Commonwealth By the Protector. A PROCLAMATION Commanding all
persons, who have been of the late Kings party, or his Sons, to depart out of
the Cities of London and Westminster, and late Lines of Communication, on or
before Thursday the twelfth day of July instant.
HIs Highness taking notice of the great confluence and resort of diverse
ill-affected persons (who have born arms against the Commonwealth, and
otherwise adhered to the Enemy, in the late Wars) unto the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the parts adjacent, and are now lurking in and about the same;
and having of late received certain intelligence of Designs now in hand,
endeavored to be carried on by correspondencies with the Sons of the late King,
their Agents, and Accomplices, against the Commonwealth and present Government
(the Contrivers of which Plots may, for the better effecting the same, and with
much more ease, make use of such dangerous and discontented persons now
remaining in and about the said Cities) does (by and with the advice of his
Council) for preventing such disturbances as may thereby arise in the future,
think fit, and hereby publish, declare, and enjoin, That all persons who have
been at any time in Arms against the Commonwealth, or have adhered unto, or
willingly assisted the Enemies thereof, in the time of the late Wars, being
within the Cities of London and Westminster, or the late Lines of
Communication, and not under Restraint, nor hereafter excepted, shall on or
before the twelfth day of July instant (or if then under Restraint) within five
days next after their respective Enlargement, depart out of the said Cities of
London and Westminster, and late Lines of Communication, and all other Places
within twenty Miles of the said late Lines, unless it be their places of
Habitation for themselves and Families. And if any such person or persons shall
continue within the said late Lines, or the said distance of twenty Miles from
the hid Lines, after the said twelfth day of July instant, or if then under
Restraint, shall continue within the Distance aforesaid, above five Days after
his or their Enlargement, or shall return without License, then and in such
case, he and they shall be Apprehended, Imprisoned and otherwise proceeded
against as Disturbers of the Peace, and Contemners of Authority. And His
Highness does Command the Lord Major and Aldermen of the City of London, and
all Justices of Peace within the said City, and late Lines of Communication,
and of the several Counties of Middlesex, Hertford, Essex, Kent and Surrey, and
the respective Committees and Commissioners of, and for the Militia, within the
said City and Liberties, the City of Westminster, Borough of Southwa^k, Hamlets
of the Tower, and Suburbs, or any two or more of them in their respective
Liberties and Iurisdict^ons, to cause strict Wards and Watches to be kept, and
to make frequent Searches for, and apprehend, or caus^ to be apprehended all
such persons as aforesaid, which shall be found within the Distance aforesaid,
after the said Twelfth day of July next ensuing; And of their doings therein,
under their Hands and Seals in writing, fo^thwith to certify His Highness
Council, to the end the said Offenders may be dealt withal and proceeded
against as Disturbers of the Peace, and Contemners of Authority; And all
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all Captains of Guards, Officers and
Soldiers, and other the Good People of this Commonwealth, are Required to be
Ayding to the said Justices of Peace, Committees and Commissioners, their
Agents, Officers and Ministers, in the due and speedy Execution of His Highness
Commands in the Premises. And for the better disc^very, preventing and avoiding
of Plots and Disturbances, dangerous to the Peace of the Commonwealth, H^s
Highness does straightly Charge and Command, That all the said Persons appointed
to depart as aforesaid, and ^ot restrained or stayed, either by Imprisonment,
or such Sickness and Infirmity of Body, as they shall not be ^^le to travel
without imminent Danger of Life, repair to their place of Dwelling, or where
they usually made t^eir common Abode, or (not having any certain Abode) to the
place of their Birth, or where their Parents shal^e then dwelling, and give
notice of their coming thither, and present themselves and deliver their true
Names (...) writing, to the Minister of the Parish, and to the Constable,
Headborough or Tything-man of the Town, ^^o shall thereupon presently Enter the
same into a Book, to be kept in every Parish for that purpose; And the sai^
Minister, Constable, Headborough or Tything-man, are hereby commanded to
certify the same in writing to ^e Justices of the Peace of the same County, at
the next General, or Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be held or the same
County, there to be Entered by the Clerk of the Peace upon the Rolls of the same
Session upon ^ecord. And it is further Declared, That these Presents shall
continue in force until the Twentieth day of Oct^^er next ensuing, and no
longer.

Given at WHITE HALL this 6th day of July, 1655. Published by His Highne^^
^^ecial Command.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Pr^ers to His Highness. MDCLV.


