A MESSAGE SENT FROM His Highness the Lord Protector, TO THE GREAT TURK, WITH
His Demands and Proposals; and the releasing of the English Captives.

LIKEWISE, The new Edict, and Decree of the Governor of Argier; the redeeming
of all Englishmen from Thraldom and Slavery, and the bringing of them in to
Genesis Blake; the seizing of the Salley men of War, and a Narrative of the
general proceedings of the English, in order to the French, Dutch, and
Spaniards.

EXtracted out of the Original Papers; Licensed and published by special
Authority.

London, printed for Peter Mitchel, 1654.

A Message sent from his Highness the Lord Protector to the Turks, etc.
HIs Highness the Lord Protector having taken into serious consideration, the
most deplorable and suffering condition of the poor captivated English at
Argier, and other places in Turkey, graciously vouchsafed to send an Express to
the Governor of Argier, requiring a Restoration of the English Captives; and
withal, adjuring him to desist from any such future violence, against the
English Subjects: This Message was resented with so much terror and
astonishment, that the Governor immediately gave Order, for the release of all
the English; and set forth an Edict, or Proclamation, prohibiting the seizing
of any English Vessel whatsoever, upon pain of death; and to incur the seizure
of their whole Estate, in case of any obstructing, or interposing any English
man whatsoever, in their free Trade and Commerce; etc.

By an Express from General Blakes Fleet, thus. Sir, When we came into Cales
Road, we saluted the Town with 21 pieces of Ordnance, they returned us 7 for
one, both English, Spaniards, and Hollanders. The Dutch Admiral veiled his Flag
and saluted. Our General assured the Spaniards we intended nothing prejudicial
to them, who before suspected us. We sailed from thence to the Straights,
anchoring in Gibralter Road; where we went on shore, and were very courteously
received by the Governor, who promised us accommodation in whatsoever we
wanted, and the Country afforded: We were very courteously saluted by the
Clergy, and had four Officers of their Army went bare before us, conducting us
through the Town, and to the Custom House, at the request of the Goxernour,
who had there provided a very stately Collation for us. He also made
proclamation (having received Order from the King so to do) That none
whatsoever should affront the English upon pain of present Death. We had not
been long here, but one of our Victualling ships (the Dolphin) who by the late
storms was separated from us, came to us: In her way she fell among 7 great
French ships, who took her; the Admiral then called our Captain on board his
ship (which carried 56 pieces of Brass Ordnance) demanding of him where Genesis
Blake was, and what strength he had with him? He replied, That he was gone to
the Steights with 30 Men of War. The Admiral therewith was troubled; and
proffered him a great sum of money to satisfy for what his men had taken from
him, and desired him to stay, and he would enquire after those that had
plundered him, and execute them: but our Capt. refused both VVhereupon drinking
General Blakes Health, they discharged him, and he came to us with all speed.

A Letter frrom the Navy.
UPon our advance from Cadiz, further into the Levant sea, We met with many
difficulties, not only by stomy and unseasonable Weather, but by some obscure
Rocks, which our Pylots were not very well acquainted with: But having for some
time waited upon the Series of Divine Providence, we then immediately found the
Omnipotent workings of the most high Protector, and great Jehovah of Heaven for
Us; who, even in an instant, when we were all toyling and plunging through the
Deep, caused the winds to cease, and the Seas to become calm; so that our whole
Fleet (blessed be God) in few hours came within sight of each other, who
bearing up to the Ambral, our General commanded forth Captain Sacheverel with
the Pearl Frigate, and Cap. George Crapnel in the Merlin Galley, as Scouts; who
after 5 hours sail discovered a Fleet with French colors, consisting of 17 in
number, which Cap Sacheverel haled; but the French refused to answer:
whereupon, he bare up to them, being accompanied by valiant Ca. Crapnel, and
having the windward, gave them seven broad sides; which thundering Echo
arriving the Ears of our heroic General, he presently bare up with the
George, and the rest of the Fleet to the very head of them, and charged them
through and through five times together; insomuch, that the French tacked
about, and declined Engagement; but we embraced the pursuit, and in the chase
sunk 3, fired two, and took 5, which we deserted, they being so leakie, that
suddenly they sunk also. The rest fled toward Naples, where the D. of Guise is
with his Fleet; whom we are under sail to visit. But by a stratagem ('it is said)
his Highness, with the Lord St. Paul, and diverse other chief Commanders, are
surprised in the City, upon a pretense of surrender; in the mean time,
confident I am, (by divine permission) that we shall suddenly engage them; for
our men are resolved to fight them, though they be five to one. Our General
has set up the English Standard, bearing St. Georges Cross, at the Head of all
the Flag ships; which carries no little terror to the Pirates in these parts;
who abounded very much upon the Levant; but are now pretty well dispierced; for
we have put a period to above 100 of them within the space of a month; and have
taken 11 Turkish Galleys, in which Atchievment, Capain Hill with the Worcester
Frigate, and Capt. Cattens in the Lamport performed singular service; but the
Pearl lost her Mast, and some other ships their Boltsprit, and Tackling.

As touching the influence the Lord Protector has gained by his Message to the
Turks, it is a thing wonderfully to be admired; and indeed, it causes no little
admiration throughout all Christendom; for, true it is, the Argier men of War
are become Associates with the English, and will not permit a man of our Nation
to be carried captive into thraldom; but seiz and takes all their Sally ships,
and others, that have any English them, and brings them in to Genesis Blake, who
at this very instant, rides tryumphat in the Levant Ocean.

FINIS.

