A LETTER Written by Lievt. Genesis Crumwell, TO The Honorable the Commit of
Manchester.

Being a full Relation of the total routing of the Scoth Army, near Preston in
Lancashire, Aug. 18. 1648.

Whereunto is annexed another Letter dated at Whaly in Lancashire Aug. 18.
1648. wherein is contained a List of the number slain, Prisoners, Arms, and
Ammunition taken, viz.

Four thousand slain Six thousand taken Prisoners, whereof many of quality.
All their Ammunition, and Train of Artillery.

London printed by I. M. August 21. 1648.

A LETTER Written by Lievt. Genesis Cromwell TO The honorable the Committee of
MANCHESTER.
Gentlemen,
IT has pleased God this day to show a great mercy to this Ki^gdome by making
the Army successful against the Common enemy, we lay last night at Master
Sherborns of Stanhurst, 9. miles from Preston, which was within three Myies of
the Scotch quarters: we advanced betime the next morning toward Preston, with
a desire to engage the enemy; and by that time our Forlorn Hope had engaged the
enemy; we were about 4 miles from Preston, and thereupon we advanced with the
whole Army, and the enemy being drawn out upon a moor betwixt us and the Town:
the Armies on both sides engaged, and after a sharp dispute continuing for 3 or
4 hours, it pleased God to enable us to give them a defeat which we hope we
shall improve by Gods Assistance to their utter ruin: And in this service your
Countrymen had not the least share; we cannot be particular having not time to
take account of the slain and prisoners, but we can assure you we have many
prisoners, and those of quallity, and many slain, and the Army is so
discipated, a principal part whereof with Duke Hamilton is on the South side
Ribble and Darwent brldg, and we lying with the greatest part of the Army close
to them, nothing hindering the ruin of that part of the enemies Army but the
night; It will be our care that they shall not pass over beneath the bridge to
go Northward, or to come betwixt us and Whaley; we understand four of Col. Genesis
Ashtons are at Whalley, and we have 7 Troops of Horse and Dragoons that we
believe lie at or near Clithero; This night J have sent Orders expressly to them
to march to Whaley to join to those Companies, that you shall improve to the
ruin of this enemy: You perceive by this Letter how things stand, that the
enemy is broken, and most of their Horse being gone Northward, and we having
sent a considerable Party at the very heel of them: and the enemy having lost
almost all his Ammunition, and 4000 Arms, so that the great^st part of Foot are
naked, and therefore in Order to the perfecting of this work, we desire you to
raise your Country, and improve your Forces to the total ruin of the Enemy
which way soever they go; and that if you shall accordingly do your part doubt
not of their total ruin: We thought fit to speed this to you, to the end you
may not be troubled if they shall march to you. But improve your Interest as
aforesaid, and that you may give glory to God for his unspeakable mercy: This
is all for the present from

Your Humble Servant, Oliver Cromwell.

Sir,
IT has pleased God to give a great blessing unto the Forces in these parts,
under the Command of Lieutenant General CROMWELL against the insulting Enemy
Duke Hamilton, and that Rebellious Crew under him, insomuch that their whole
Army is routed and dispersed into several parts of the Country some backward
toward their own Kingdom, others toward Manchester; they having lost all their
Ammunition and above four thousand Arms, their Foot being left naked, their
Horse being scattered, are ruined: The Lieutenant General sent a Letter to our
Committee sitting at Manchester, containing a brief Narrative of the whole
business; It is wonderful in our eyes to consider the goodness of God herein: I
know it will greatly discourage many amongst you that the Duke has no better
success; but did they but feel what most in these parts have felt, I am
confident they see great cause of rejoicing and esteem it a great deliverance;
I know you desire to prize mercies and rejoice in them: Sir, I leave you till
the next opportunity; at which time expect a more perfect Relation from

Your Friend, E. S.
Whaly, August 18. 1648. Postscript.
As I was closing my Letter I was informed more particularly that there is 4000
slain, 6000 taken Prisoners and all their Arms and Ammunition.



FINIS.

