An ORDINANCE of PARDON and GRACE to the People of SCOTLAND.
HIs Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, being desirous, that the
mercies which it has pleased God to give to this Nation, by the successes of
their Forces in the late War in Scotland, should be improved for the good and
advantage of both Nations, and the People of Scotland made equal sharers with
those of England, in the present settlement of Peace, Liberty and Property,
with all other Privileges of a Free People, Does Ordain and Declare, And be it
Ordained and Declared by His Highness the Lord Protector, with the consent of
His Council, That all persons of the Scottish Nation, of what degree or quality
soever they or any of them are (except the persons hereafter in this Ordinance
particularly excepted) shall be, and are hereby, and from and after the first
day of May, in the year, One thousand six hundred fifty four, Freed, Acquitted
and Discharged, from all forfeitures, pains, penalties, mulcts, (...)rye,
restraints, imprisonment or imprisonments, punishment or punishments whatsoever
(other then is hereafter in this Ordinance expressed) for any (...)y them, or
any of them committed or done by Sea or Land, in relation to the late War, or
any preceding Wars between the two Nations; And that (...) aforesaid, there
shall be from and after the said first day of May, aforesaid, no Sequestration,
Confiscation, Fine, Penalty, Forfeiture or Punishment, (...) them, or any of
them, (otherwise than as is hereafter in this Ordinance expressed) but the same
shall be put in perpetual Oblivion.

(...) and personal of all persons of the Scottish Nation (except as is
hereafter in this Ordinance excepted and provided) shall be, and (...)h, freed,
discharged and acquitted, from all Sequestrations, Confiscations, Fines,
Penalties, and Forfeitures whatsoever, for any mat(...)f them committed or
done, in relation to the aforesaid Wars between the two Nations.

(...) out of this present Ordinance, and all benefit thereof, Henrietta Maria,
the Relict and late Queen of the late King Charles Deceased; (...) James Stuart
their second son, and all the Honors, Manors, Castles, Houses, Messuages,
Forests, Chases, Parks, and Lands, and (...) Royalties, Privileges, Franchises,
Immunities, Rents, and Appurtinances to them, or any of them in Scotland,
belonging or (...)ed or enjoyed by them, or any of them, as part or parcel
thereof; and also all the Goods and Chattels, and all the Eliates, both
(...)retofore belonging to the late King Charles Deceased, either in right of
the Crown of Scotland, or in any other right or capacity, or (...)t and late
Queen of the said King, or unto Charles Stuart their eldest son, or James Stuart
their second son, or unto any other the (...) King Charles, or otherwise
belonging unto them, or any of them, and which were in the actual seizin or
possession of them, or any (...) their Tenants, Agents, Servants, Trustees,
Officers, or Ministers in their Right, and for their use, or in trust for them,
or any of (...)th day of March, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six
hundred twenty and five, or at any time since, or for which they, or (...)wered
the profits, or might, or ought to have received the same in the year
aforesaid, or at any time since, and all reversions o^ re(...)ers of any Estate
or ^tes, to them, or any of them belonging or appertaining, and that free from
all manner of Estates, Titles, Interests, Debts, Charges, and encumbrances
whatsoever, wherewith the said Lands or premises, or any of them stand or
stood charged or chargeable with, or are pretended to stand charged or
chargeable with, at any time since the first day of May, One thousand six
hundred forty two, and not before. And also excepted out of this present
Ordinance, and all benefit thereof, James late Duke of Hamilton, deceased,
William, late Duke of Hamilton, deceased, John Earl of Crawford-Lindsey, James
Earl of Calender, Earl Marshall, Earl of Kedey, John Earl of Lawderdail, John
Earl of Lowdoun, Earl of Soaforth, Earl of Ath^l, Viscount Kenmure, Lord Lorne,
eldest son of the Marquess of Argile, Lord Machlin, eldest son of the Earl of
Lowdoun, Lord Montgomerie, eldest son of the Earl of Egglintoun, George Lord
Spynie, Lord Cranston, Lord Sinclair, Thomas Dalyel, late Major General of the
Foot in the Scottish Army, John Middletoun, late Lieutenant General of the
Horse in the Scottish Army, James Viscount Newburgh, Lord Bargany, Sir Thomas
Thomson, James E^meston, Lord of Womat, Lord Napier, William Earl of Glencarn
and all the Honors, Manors, Castles, Houses, Messuages, Forests, Chases, Parks,
and Lands, and all Tenements and Hereditaments, Royalties, Privileges,
Franchises, Immunities, Rents and Appurtenances to them, or any of them,
belonging, or appertaining or on the eighteenth day of April, in the year of
our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty eight, lawfully used or enjoyed,
with them or any of them, as part or parcel thereof, and also all the goods,
and chattels, and all the estates, both real and personal, belonging unto the
said James, late Duke of Hamilton Will. late Duke of Hamilton, John E. of
Crawford Lindsey, James E. of Calender, Earl Marshal, Earl of Kelley, John Earl
of Lawderdaile, John Earl of Lowdoun, Earl of Seaforth, Earl of Athole,
Viscount Kenmure, Lord Lorne, Lord Machlin, Lord Montgomery, George Lord
Spynie, Lord Cranston, Lord Sinclaire, Thomas Dalyell, John Middletoune, James
Viscount Newburgh, Lord Bargany, Sir Thomas Thomson, James Edmeston, Lord
Napeir, William Earl of Glencai^ne, or any of them, and which were in the
actual s;eizin or possession of them, or any of them, or of their, or either
of their Tenants, Agents, Servants, Trustees, Omcers, or Ministers, in their
right, and for their use, or in trust for them or any of them, on the
eighteenth day of April, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
forty eight, or at any time since, or for which they, or any of them, have of
right been answered the profits, or might or ought to have received the same,
at the time aforesaid, or at any time since, and all Reversions or remainders
of any Estate or Estates, to them, or any of them belonging, or appertaining,
and that free from all and all manner of Estates, Titles, Interests, Debts,
Charges, and Encumbrances whatsoever, where with the said Lands and premises
or any of them, stand, or stood charged or chargeable with, or are pretended to
stand charged or chargeable with, by force of any Act or Acts, Deed, Grant, or
other thing done by any of the Persons before named, at any time since the said
eighteenth day of April, One thousand six hundred forty and eight, and not
before. And also excepted out of this present Ordinance, and all benefit
thereof, all the Estate, right, interest, claim and demand, of James Lord
Mordington, of, in, or to, the Maudlain Field, Sunck, Cony-garth,
Constables-Batt, Two Water-mils, and a Wind-mil lying within Barwick bounds.
And also excepted out of this present Ordinance, and all benefit thereof, all
and all manner of Estates, Titles, Interests, Debts, Charges, and Encumbrances
whatsoever, claimed out of any the Estate, or Estates of any of the persons
excepted as aforesaid, or of any other person or persons as sureties for them,
or any of them, by, for, or in right, and to the use of any Person or Persons
whatsoever, who sitting as a Member or Members of the late Parliament of
Scotland, in the Year, One thousand six hundred forty and eight, did not
protest in the great Protestation made in the said Parliament, against the
proceedings of the said Parliament, by which the Army was raised under James
Duke Hamilton, or that Invaded England with the said James Duke Hamilton, in
the said year, or that sat in the late Parliament, or Committee of Estates of
Scotland, from and after the Coronation of Charles Stuart, in the year, One
thousand six hundred fifty and one, or that since the Battle of Dumbar, on the
third day of September, One thousand six hundred and fifty, served in Arms in
Scotland under the said Charles Stuart, or any Commissionated by him, or his
Authority, or that invaded England with the said Charles Stuart, or any of his
Forces, in the said year, One thousand six hundred fifty and one, which said
Estates, Titles, Interests, Debts, Charges and Encumbrances, are by Authority
aforesaid, released, and discharged (such only excepted, who have deserted the
said Charles Stuart, and not born Arms against the Parliament, since the said
third day of September, One thousand six hundred and fifty; as also such whose
merits and services to this Commonwealth, have rendered them capable of being
taken into a more favorable consideration by his Highness.)

Provided always, And be it Ordained, That all and every Person and Persons
whatsoever, claiming any Estate, Title, Interest, Debts, Charge or Encumbrance,
out of any the Estate or Estates, excepted as aforesaid, do and shall within
threescore days after Public Proclamation made of this Ordinance, in the
County where the Person making such claim does live, enter his and their
respective claims, with John Swinton, of Swinton Esquire; William Lawrence, Esquire;
George Smith, Esquire; Sir James Mac-Dowel of Garthland, Samuel Disbrow, John
Thompson, Esquires, or any three of them, and make the truth and reality of
them sufficiently appear unto the said John Swinton, William Lawrence, George
Smith, Sir James Mac-dowel, Samuel Disbrow, and John Thompson, or any three of
them, within four Months after such entry made, and obtain from them or any
three of them a Certificate of their allowance of such Claim and Claims, and
that in default thereof, the said Estates, Titles, Interests, Debts, Charges,
and Encumbrances, be, and the same are hereby Declared, as well to Sureties as
Principals, discharged, and made null and void; Provided also that all and
every the Debts, Charges, and Encumbrances, upon all and every the Estate and
Estates aforesaid, which shall be to allowed, shall be paid and satisfied by
such ways, and in such manner only, as shall be hereafter Declared and
appointed by his Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the consent of his
Council. And it is further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid; That Lands of
the clear yearly value of four hundred pounds sterling, over and above all
charges, and reprises, be settled upon the Lady Anne Hamilton, eldest Daughter
of the said James Duke Hamilton, and her Heirs, charged with the payment of the
yearly Rent of twenty pounds Sterling, to His Highness the Lord Protector, and
his Successors for ever. And that Lands of the yearly value of two hundred
pounds Sterling, over and above all charges and reprises, be settled upon the
Lady Susan Hamilton, one other of the Daughters of the said James Duke
Hamilton, and her Heirs, out of the Estate of the said James and William late
Duke Hamilton, charged with the payment of the yearly Rent of ten pounds
Sterling, to his Highness the Lord Protector and his Successors for ever. And
that Lands of the yearly value of four hundred pounds Sterling, over and above
all charges and reprises, be settled upon Elizabeth Duchess of Hamilton Widow,
and Relict of William late Duke Hamilton deceased, for term of her natural
life, and after her decease, to the four Daughters of the said William, by the
said Duchess, to be equally divided amongst them, and to their Heirs for ever,
out of the Estate of the said William or of James late Duke Hamilton, charged
with the payment of the yearly Rent of twenty pounds Sterling, to His Highness
the Lord Protector and his Successors for ever. And that Lands of the clear
yearly value of four hundred pounds Sterling, over and above all charges and
reprises, be likewise settled out of the Estate of the said John Earl Crawford,
upon Countess of Crawford, his now Wife for her life, and after her decease,
upon the issue of her body, by the said Earl begotten, and their Heirs, charged
with the payment of the yearly Rent of twenty pounds Sterling, to His Highness
the Lord Protector and his Successors for ever. And that Lands of the clear
yearly value of four hundred pounds Sterling, over and above all charges and
reprises, be settled upon Countess of Lowdoun and her Heirs for ever, out of
the Estate of the said John Earl of Lowdoun, charged with the payment of the
yearly Rent of twenty pounds Sterling, to his Highness the Lord Protector and
his Successors for ever: She the said Countess of Loudown accepting thereof, in
lieu of all Joyntore, Dower, or any other Interest or Title the has, or may
cla^m, in possession, reversion, or remainder of, in, or to the Estate of the
said John Earl of Lowdoun, or Lord Mach^in, or of e^ther of them, or by them,
or either of them, claimed a right of the said Countess, and releasing the same
by the time hereafter in this Ordinance appointed, and in such manner as is
herein directed; which release shall be good and effectual in Law, to bar the
said Countess of Lowdoun and her Heirs. And be it further Ordained, That the
Countess of Calender, shall hold and enjoy all and every the Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, conveyed for her Jointure, from late Earl of Dumfermling,
her former Husband. And that Lands of the clear yearly value of two hundred
pounds Sterling, over and above all charges and reprises, be settled upon Mary
eldest Daughter of Earl Marshal, and her Heirs; And that Lands of the yearly
value of one hundred and fifty pounds Sterling, over and above all charges and
reprises, be settled on each of the other Daughters of the said Earl Marshal,
vix. Elizabeth, Isabel, and Jane, and their Heirs respectively, out of the
Estate of the said Earl Marshall, excepted as aforesaid, charged with the
payment of the yearly Rent of thirty two pounds ten shillings Sterling, unto
his Highness the Lord Protector and his Successors for ever, to be apportioned
in the Grants of the respective Lands rateably. And that Lands of the clear
yearly value of three hundred pounds Sterling, over and above all reprises, be
settled upon Countess of Lowderdaile, and the Heirs of the Body of John Earl of
Lowderdaile, of the body of the said Countess begotten, or to be begotten, out
of the Lands and Estate of the said John Earl of Lowderdaile, excepted as
aforesaid, charged with the payment of the yearly Rent of fifteen pounds
Sterling, to His Highness the Lord Protector and his Successors for ever. And
that Lands of the clear yearly value of two hundred pounds Sterling, over and
above all reprises, be settled upon the now wise of the said Lord Cranston, of
the Heirs of the Body of the said Lord Cranston, of the Body of his said Wife
begotten, or to be begotten, out of the Lands and Estates of the said Lord
Cranston, excepted as aforesaid, charged with the payment of the yearly Rent of
ten pounds Sterling, unto His Highness the Lord Protector, and his Successors
for ever. And that Lands of the clear yearly value of two hundred and fifty
pounds Sterling, over and above all reprises, be settled upon the now Wife of
Lord Bargany, and the Heirs of the Body of the said Lord Bargany, on the body
of his said now Wife begotten, or to be begotten, out of the Lands and Estate
of the said Lord Bargany, excepted as aforesaid, charged with the payment of
the yearly Rent of twelve pounds and ten shillings Sterling money, unto his
Highness the Lord Protector, and his Successors for ever. And that Lands, of
the clear yearly value of one hundred and twenty pounds sterling, over and
above all reprises, be settled upon the now Wife of the said Sir Thomas
Thompson, and the Heirs of the said Sir Thomas Thompson, of the Body of his
said now Wife begotten, or to be begotten, out of the Estate of the said Sir
Thomas Thompson; excepted as aforesaid, charged with the yearly Rent of six
pounds, to be paid unto His Highness the Lord Protector, and his Successors
for ever. Provided that before any such settlement shall be made unto any the
Persons above mentioned, out of the Lands excepted by this Ordinance, or that
any of the said Persons shall be permitted to enjoy any benefit by any the
clauses aforesaid, all and every the said Person and Persons, being the now
Wife, Child, or Children of any the Persons excepted and excluded from the
benefit of this Ordinance, shall before the five and twentieth day of December,
which shall be in the year of our LORD, One thousand six hundred fifty four,
by Deed, under her or their Hands and Seals respectively, Release all her and
their Claim, Title, and demand of Dower, Jointure, and other Interest in
possession, reversion, or remainder, of, in, or to all and every the Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, of the Husband or Father of such Person
releasing; And that all and every such release, being attested under the Hands
of two credible Witnesses, and delivered unto the Persons before in this
Ordinance appointed to receive and determine claims, or any three of them,
shall be, and is, and are hereby Declared to be valid and effectual in Law, to
bar such Person and Persons so releasing, from claiming any Right, Title,
Interest or demand, of, in, or to all and every the Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, of the Husband or Father of such Person or Persons releasing
notwithstanding the coverture, minority, infancy, or other disability of the
Person or Persons so releasing, other then such as shall be settled upon her or
them, in pursuance of the Provision aforesaid. And in default of such release,
to be made as aforesaid, all and every the Person and Persons aforesaid, so
making default, shall be from thenceforth for ever debarred, and excluded from
any benefit or advantage by this Ordinance, or any thing therein contained.

Provided also that all and every the Lands and Estate which shall by force of
this Ordinance be set out and settled, as aforesaid, for the provision of the
Wife or Children of any the Persons excepted, as aforesaid, shall nevertheless
be liable unto the satisfaction of the just and proper Debts of the respective
Person and Persons, out of whose Estate the same is so settled (in case all the
rest of his or their respective Estate and Estates shall not be sufficient to
satisfy the said respective Debts,) so far forth and in such manner as shall
be hereafter Declared and appointed by His Highness the Lord Protector by and
with the consent of his Council.

Provided also, and it is further Ordained, that the several Persons hereafter
named, do pay unto His Highness the Lord Protector his Public Receipt, the
several respective sums of money hereafter mentioned and expressed, as a fine
and fines, for and in respect of his and their estate and estates, to be paid
in such manner, and at such times, as is hereafter in this Ordinance expressed,
that is to say, David Lesley, late Lieutenant General of the Scottish Army,
four thousand pounds sterling. Marquess of Douglas, One thousand pounds
sterling. Lord Angus eldest son to the Marquess of Douglas, one thousand
pounds sterling. Earl of Selorig, one thousand pounds sterling. The Heir of
Francis late Earl of Bucleugh deceased, Fifteen thousand pounds sterling. Earl
of Galloway, Four thousand pounds sterling. William Earl of Roxburgh, six
thousand pounds sterling. William Lord Cockeram, Five thousand pounds sterling.
James Lord Forrester, two thousand five hundred pounds sterling. Philip
Amstruther, son of Sir Robert Amstruther; one thousand marks sterling. Sir
Archibald Sterling of Carden, one thousand five hundred pounds sterling. James
Drummond of Mackensey, Five hundred pounds sterling. Henry Mawl, son to the
Earl of Panmure, two thousand five hundred pounds sterling. Sir James
Levingston of Kilsith, one thousand five hundred pounds sterling. William
Murrey of Polemaise, one thousand five hundred pounds sterling. Earl of
Buchane, one thousand pounds sterling. Viscount Dudope, one thousand five
hundred pounds sterling. Preston of Craigmiller, one thousand five hundred
pounds sterling. Sir Andrew Flesher of Inner-Pether, Five thousand pounds
sterling. Sir John Wauchith of Nethery, two thousand pounds sterling. Earl of
Perth, and Lord Drummond his eldest son, Five thousand pounds sterling. (...)
of Winton, two thousand pounds sterlng. Earl of Findlater, on thousand five
hundred pounds sterling. Earl of Murrey three thousand five hundred pounds
sterling. Earl of Quinsburgh, four thousand pounds sterling. Earl of Eithy, six
thousand pounds sterling. Lord Duffus, one thousand five hundred pounds
sterling. Lord Gray, one thousand five hundred pounds sterling. Sir Henry
Nisbit, one thousand pounds sterling. Earl of Panmure, ten thousand pounds
sterling. Laitd of Lundee, one thousand pounds sterling. Earl of Arroll, two
thousand pounds sterling. Earl of Tullibardine, one thousand five hundred
pounds sterling. Earl of Southesk, three thousand pounds sterling. Earl of
Dalhousie, one thousand five hundred pounds sterling. Earl of Hartfield, two
thousand pounds sterling. William Lord Ross, three thousand pounds Sterling.
Lord Sample, one thousand pounds Sterling, Lord Elphinston, one thousand pounds
sterling. Lord Boyd, one thousand five hundred pounds sterling. James Lord
Cooper, three thousand pounds sterling. Lord Balvaird, one thousand five
hundred pounds sterling. Lord Rollock, one thousand pounds sterling. Earl of
Kinghorne, one thousand pounds sterling. Earl of Kinkardine, one thousand
pounds sterling. Lord Bamfe, one thousand pounds sterling. Mr. Robert Meldrum,
of Tillybody, one thousand pounds sterling. Sir Robert Graham, of Morphie, one
thousand pounds sterling. Sir William Scot of Harden, three thousand pounds
sterling. Hay of Nachton, one thousand pounds sterling. Renton of Lamberton,
one thousand pounds sterling. Colquhoun of Luz, two thousand pounds sterling.
Hamilton of Preston, one thousand pounds sterling. Mr. Francis Hay of Bowsey,
two thousand pounds sterling. Arnot of Ferney, two thousand pounds sterling.
Sir Robert Forquhar, one thousand pounds sterling. Sir Francis Reven, three
thousand pounds sterling. Scot of Montrosse, three thousand pounds sterling.
Lord of Rotheme-Gordon, five hundred pounds sterling. Colerney, the younger,
one thousand pounds sterling. Sir John Scot of Scots-Tarbut, one thousand five
hundred pounds sterling. Lord of Gosford one thousand pounds sterling. Lord
of Bachilton, one thousand five hundred pounds sterling. James Mercer of Aldey,
one thousand pounds sterling. Earl of Rothes one thousand pounds sterling.
Lieutenant Colonel Elliot of Stebbs, one thousand pounds sterling. Sir Lewis
Stuart, Advocate, one thousand pounds sterling. Patrick Scot of Thirlestone,
two thousand pounds sterling. Sir James Caimeghill, two thousand pounds
Sterling. Sir Patrick Cockburn of Clarkington, two thousand pounds sterling.
Sir George Morison of Preston-Grange, two thousand pounds sterling. Murrey,
Lord of Stanhop, son to Sir David Murrey deceased, two thousand pounds
sterling. All and every which sum and sums of money, shall be paid unto George
Bilton, Deputy Treasurer at Leith, one moyetie thereof, on, or by the second
day of August, One thousand six hundred fifty four; and the other moyetie, on,
or by the second day of December, then next ensuing; and in default of such
payment, all and every the real and personal Estate of every person and
persons so making default, shall from thenceforth be absolutely confiscate; and
the Commissioners for Sequestrations are hereby empowered to seiz the same
accordingly.

Provided always, and it is Ordained and Declared by the Authority aforesaid,
That this Ordinance or any thing therein contained, shall not extend, or be
construed to extend to the restoring or reviving of any Lordship, Dominion,
Jurisdiction, Tenure, Superiority, or any things whatsoever, taken away and
abolished by one other Ordinance; Entitled, An Ordinance for Uniting SCOTLAND
into one Commonwealth with ENGLAND.

Excepted and also reserved out of this present Ordinance, and all benefit
thereof, all and every other person and persons, not herein before named or
expressed, that has, or have been at any time since the first day of May, one
thousand six hundred fifty and two, or now is, or are in Arms in Scotland, in
opposition to this Commonwealth, Saving and reserving to all person and persons
whatsoever, excepted out of this Ordinance, all benefits and advantages of any
Articles of War, to them granted by His Highness, the now Lord Protector, as
General of all the Forces of this Commonwealth, or any other, by Virtue of any
Authority from him derived, any thing in this Ordinance contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further Ordained, That this Ordinance, or any
thing therein contained, shall not extend, nor be construed to extend, to the
freeing or discharging of any Prisoner or Prisoners of War, from their
respective imprisonments, or to the cancelling or discharging of any Surety,
Bond, Paroll, or Engagement, of, or for any Prisoner at War, without the
special Order of His Highness the Lord Protector, or whom he shall appoint.

Provided also, That this Ordinance, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend, nor be construed to extend to the confirming of any Patent, Gift, or
Grant made by the late King James, or the late King Charles, whereby any Rent or
other duty or Revenew belonging to the Crown of Scotland, has, contrary to the
Law of Scotland been altered, changed, converted or diminished; but that all
and every such Rent, Duty and Revenew, shall remain, and be paid in kind unto
the Lord Protector, and his Successors in the same manner, as the same were
paid before any such Patent, Gift, or Grant made.

Wednesday 12. April, 1654.
ORdered by His Highness the LORD PROTECTOR and the COUNCIL, that this
Ordinance be forthwith printed and published.

Henry Scobel, Clerk of the Council,

Printed at London, and reprinted at Leith, 1654.


