OP

blazon or coat of arms
By the Protector. A PROCLAMATION concerning the Residence of the
Merchant-adventurers of England, at the City of Dordrecht, and for settling the
Staple there.
WHereas by an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled past
the twelfth day of October in the year of our Lord 1643. It is (amongst other
things) ordained, that the fellowship of Merchants-adventurers of England shall
continue and be a Corporation, and shall have power to levy moneys on the
members of their Corporation, and their goods, for their necessary charge and
maintenance of their government; And that no person shall trade into those
parts limited by their Incorporations, but such as are free of that
Corporation, upon forfeiture of their goods; Provided that the said fellowship
shall not exclude any person from his freedom and admission into the said
fellowship which shall desire it by way of redemption (if such person by their
custom be capable thereof, and has been bred a Merchant) and shall pay one
hundred pounds for the same, if he be free and an inhabitant of the City of
London, and trade from that Port: Or fifty pounds if he be not free, and no
inhabitant of the said City, and trade not from thence; the same Ordinance to
remain in full force, until a Bill or Act shall be prepared and passed in
Parliament for the further settling, and full confirming of the privileges to
the said fellowship according to the intent and true meaning of the said
Ordinance. And whereas the said fellowship is and has been anciently
authorized from time to time to make free election and choice of such several
Cities, Towns or Places in the parts of Germany, and the 17 provinces of the
Netherlands, with the assent and agreement of the chief Governors thereof for
their Residence, Mart and Staple, as they shall think most meet, commodious and
convenient for their trade, trafique and merchandise in those Lands; and again
to leave, forsake, alter and change the same at their pleasure.

And whereas lately since the peace concluded with the Lords the States
General, the said fellowship has by special Concordates, with the Magistrates
of the City of Dordrecht in Holland, agreed and made choice of the said City of
Dordrecht for the Residence, Mart and Staple of their said trade within the
Provinces, Countries, Cities and Places under the Government of the said Lords
the States General. Forasmuch therefore as the said treaty of Concordates, with
the City of Dordrecht aforesaid, was entered into, by and with our free
knowledge and consent; We, with the advice of Our Council, having taken the
premises into our serious consideration, have hereby thought at (with the
advice aforesaid) to ratify and confirm the said Treaty of Concordates, made
and concluded between the said City of Dordrecht, and the fellowship of
Merchants-adventurers of England aforesaid. And therefore in pursuance of the
said Ordinance of Parliament and the said Treaty, We, with the advice aforesaid,
do hereby strictly will and require, that all and every person and persons,
being free of the said fellowship, and all Factors, Agents, and Servants
belonging unto any of the said fellowship, now being, or residing within any
the Provinces, Cities, or Places under the Government of the said Lords the
States General, and that therein, or in any of them do exercise, use or profess
the trade, traffic and merchandise limited to the said Incorporation, do and
shall at or before the tenth day of June now next ensuing remove themselves,
their goods, merchandises, traffic and families respectively unto the said
City of Dordrecht, and do and shall from thenceforth, therein alone reside and
exercise their trade and traffic, both for themselves and their principals,
and in no other Province, City, or Place under the government of the said Lords
the States General, during the time that they, or any of them shall continue,
and remain within the same, and shall therein use, exercise or profess the
trade of the said fellowship. And furthermore that the trade of the said
fellowship may also for the time to come, be the better reduced and continued
into and in this orderly and well governed course; We do hereby, with the
advice aforesaid, declare our pleasure to be, and do strictly will and enjoin,
that no person or persons of this Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, or the Dominions thereunto belonging, shall at any time or times from
and after the said tenth day of June now next coming, ship, transport, carry,
or convey, or cause to be shipped, transported, carried, or conveyed, either
from the City and Port of London, or from any other City, Town, Port, Haven,
and Creek of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, or the
Dominions thereunto belonging, by way of Merchandise, any woollen clothes, or
other English woollen manufactures, of what sort or kind soever, now made, or
hereafter to be made, unto any the Cities, Towns, or Places in Germany, or the
seventeen Provinces of the Netherlands, save only and except the Mart, and
Staple Towns of the said fellowship, of Merchants-adventurers of England in
those parts for the time being, or to one of them, upon pain of forfeiture of
the said woollen clothes, and other English woollen Manufactures, and such
further and other pains, penalties, punishments and forfeitures, as by the
said Ordinance of Parliament, or by any other law may be lawfully inflicted on
such Offenders. Provided nevertheless that the said fellowship shall not
exclude any person from his freedom and admission into the said fellowship who
shall desire it by way of Redemption upon such Rules, Payments, and Fines
respectively, as in and by the said Ordinance of Parliament is reserved, and as
is herein before recited. And lastly, We require and command all our Officers
and Ministers of Justice, and the Commissioners of our Customs, and the
several Officers attending that service, that they be ayding and assisting unto
the fellowship of Merchant-adventurers of England, in the supportation of their
Government and regulation of their trade, and for preservation of the
privileges, jurisdictions and franchises lawfully granted unto them by any Act
or Ordinance of Parliament.

Given at our Palace of Westminster the thirtieth day of May 1656.
London Printed by Henry Hills and John Field Printers to His Highness MDCLVI.


