blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ORDINANCE for continuing the EXCISE.
WHereas the time for receiving the Duty of Excise and New Impost, is near
expiration, and it being necessary for the peace and safety of this
Commonwealth that the same be continued, both for the satisfaction of the
public Debts charged upon the said Grand Receipt, as also for carrying on the
weighty Affairs of this Commonwealth, His Highness the Lord Protector, with the
Advice and Consent of his Council, does Ordain, and be it Ordained, That all
and every the Acts, Ordinances, and Orders of Parliament touching the Excise,
and every Clause, Sentence and Article in them or any of them contained, and
now in force, as well for the collecting, gathering and receiving, as concerning
the Government and Ordering of the Excise and New Impost, be continued, and the
Duty of Excise and New Impost, according to the several Rates in them, or any
of them expressed, be recived, collected and paid in and through England, and
Wales, and Town and Port of Barwick upon Tweed, until the five and twentyeth
day of March next coming; And that Luke Hodges, Thomas Bulstrode, and William
Parker, or any two or more of them, be and are hereby constituted and appointed
Commissioners of the Grand Excise and New Impost, and are hereby empowered and
authorized to exercise and put in execution all and every the Powers and
Authorities given or granted by, or contained in all or any the said Acts,
Ordinances, or Orders of Parliament, touching the Excise and New Impost, as
well for the collecting and receiving the Several Rates aforesaid, as
concerning the Government and Ordering of the said Excise and New Impost, as
fully and amply as any Commissioners for Excise, at the time of the making of
this present Ordinance, may or ought to have done, and shall observe such
further Orders and Directions as they shall from time to time receive from His
Highness the Lord Protector, and his Council, touching the same; And for their
Care, Pains, and Service therein, they shall have one penny in every twenty
shillings raised and levied for Excise and New Impost. Provided nevertheless,
and it is hereby declared, that from and after the nine and twentyth day of
December 1653. The Commissioners aforementioned shall not let to farm, or admit
any person or persons to farm the Excise of any Goods, Merchandises and
Manufactures that are exciseable by any Act, Ordinance, or Order of Parliament,
without the Order and Direction of such Persons as shall be appointed thereunto
by His Highness the Lord Protector, and his Council, But the said
Commissioners, or any two or more of them, shall manage and carry on the same,
according to the best of their Judgments, by such good Ways and Means as may
be most for the Ease of the People, and Advantage of the Commonwealth.

Saturday the 24. of December 1653.
Ordered by His Highness the Lord Protector, and his Council, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and Published.

HEN. SCOBEL Clerk of the Council.

London, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to His Highness the Lord Protector.
1653.


