PAX QVAERITVR BELLO OLIVARIVS DEI GRA: REIPVB: ANGLIAE, SCOTIAE, ET HIBERNIAE,
andc PROTECTOR seal of the Commonwealth

AN ORDER AND DECLARATION OF His HIGHNESS the LORD PROTECTOR and His Privy
Council, appointing a Committee for the Army, and Receivers General for the
third Six Months Assessment, commencing the 24th. of June, 1658. part of the
three years Assessment of Thirty Five Thousand pounds by the Month, commencing
the 24th. of June, 1657.
WHereas by an Act of Parliament, entitled (An Act for an Assessment, at the
Rate of Five and thirty thousand Pounds by the Month upon England, Six
thousand Pounds by the Month upon Scotland, and Nine thousand Pounds by the
Month upon Ireland, for three years, from the 24th. of June, 1657. for a
temporary Supply toward the Maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this
Commonwealth.) it is amongst other things enacted, That the several Rules,
Directions, Clauses, and Provisoes, mentioned and contained in an Act of
Parliament, entitled, (An Act for an Assessment upon England, at the Rate of
Sixty thousand Pounds by the month for three months, from the 25th. day of
March, 1657. to the 24th. day of June then next ensuing,) and the Powers and
Authorities thereby given to all and every the persons therein named or
mentioned, shall endure and have continuance, until the said three years
Assessment shall be fully and duly Collected, Levied, and Paid in, according to
the true intent and meaning of the said Act; By which last mentioned Act, it is
Provided and Declared, That in case the Ordering and Payment of the Moneys by
the said Act appointed, into the immediate Receipt of the Exchequer, shall be
found inconvenient, so as the Moneys raised thereby cannot be paid in by the
times limited in the said Act, for the seasonable Supply of the Public
Service; That then it shall and may be lawful for His Highness the Lord
Protector and Council (if they shall so judge it fit) to Order and Direct the
Managing, Levying, and Payment of the said Moneys, in such a way, method, and
manner, as the Monthly Assessments for the Army have been formerly managed,
rated, and paid: Any thing in the said Act to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Now forasmuch as the Moneys payable upon the Third Six Months of the said
Assessment for three Years, by the said first recited Act, cannot be paid in by
the respective times limited, into the immediate Receipt of Exchequer, so as
the same may be a seasonable Supply for the Public Service; and that for
payment of the Army in their several Quarters where they lie, there will be a
necessity of assigning some part of the said third Six Months of the said
Three Years Assessment, in the Counties where the said Assessments are raised:
Therefore for the more effectual and orderly managing, levying, paying,
disposing, and issuing forth of the Moneys payable upon the said third Six
Months Assessment, commencing the 24th. of June, 1658. part of the said Three
Years Assessment, and of all and every other Sum and Sums of Money already set
apart, and appointed for the use and payment of the Forces of this
Commonwealth, or that hereafter shall be set apart, and appointed for their
use, before the 25th. Day of December now next coming: It is Ordered by His
Highness the Lord Protector, by, and with the Advice and Consent of His Privy
Council, That John Clerk, Richard Lucy, Edward Horseman, James Phillips,
Gervase Bennet, and John Hildseley, Esquires, or any three of them, shall be,
and are hereby appointed and authorized to be a Committee for the Army.

And it is further Ordered, That all and every the Powers and Authorities,
Rules and Directions, which were by an Ordinance of His Highness and Council,
Entitled, (An Ordinance appointing a Committee for the Army, and Treasurers at
War,) published the 28th. of January, 1653. or by any Act or Ordinance therein
mentioned, expressed to be given to the Committee for the Army, for the
bringing in, disposing and issuing forth of the Assessments, and Moneys, in
that Ordinance mentioned, or to any other Purposes whatsoever, shall be, and
are hereby given and continued to the Committee for the Army herein named and
appointed for the managing, bringing in, disposing, and issuing forth of the
said third Six Months Assessment, commencing the 24th. of June, 1658. part of
the said Three Years Assessment of Thirty five thousand Pounds by the Month,
commencing the 24th. of June, 1657. and of all other Moneys that are, or before
the said Twenty fifth Day of December next coming, shall be set apart, or
appointed for the use of the Armies of this Commonwealth; and to all other
uses, intents, and purposes whatsoever.

And it is further Ordered, That the Treasurers at War, and also the several
and respective Commissioners, Receivers, Collectors, Sub-Collectors, and all
other Persons whatsoever, who are, have been, or shall be entrusted or employed
in the Assessing, Collecting, Levying, and Paying of the said third Six Months
Assessment, and other Moneys before mentioned, or any part thereof, shall
observe such Orders and Directions, as shall from time to time be made and
given forth by the said Committee for the Army, or any three or more of them,
in the due execution of the Powers and Trusts hereby given and committed to
them.

And it is further Ordered, That John Blackwel, and Richard Dean, Esquires,
(the present Treasurers at War) shall be, and are hereby appointed Receivers
General for the said third Six Months Assessment, commencing the said 24th. of
June, 1658. part of the said Three Years Assessment of Thirty five thousand
Pounds by the Month, commencing the said 24th. of June, 1657.

And the Receivers of the respective Counties, Cities, Towns and Places in
England and Wales, and every of them, are hereby authorized and required from
time to time, to make Payment of the several Sums, which shall be by them
received of all and every Collector and Sub-Collector, upon the said third Six
Months Assessment, unto the said Receivers General for the said third Six
Months Assessment, at Guild Hall, London, (or at such other Place as hereafter
shall be by His Highness and Council appointed and directed) to be Paid by them
into, and Accounted for in the Receipt of His Highness Exchequer. And all and
every the Acquittance and Acquitances of the said Receivers General for the
said third Six Months Assessment, shall be unto the said Receivers for the
said Respective Counties, Cities, Towns and Places, and every of them, a
sufficient Discharge.

Provided always, That none of the Powers hereby given or continued, shall
extend, or be construed to extend, to Authorize or Empower the said Committee
for the Army, or any other Persons, to Raise or Levy any of the Moneys
aforesaid by Free Quarter, or Quartering of Soldiers.

White Hall, June 3. 1658. Hen. Scobel, Clerk of the Council.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1658.


