ORDERS OF HIS HIGHNESS The Lord Protector, Made and published by and with the
Advice and Consent of His COUNCIL, FOR Putting in speedy and due Execution the
Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, made and provided against Printing Unlicensed
and Scandalous Books and Pamphlets, and for the further Regulating of PRINTING.

seal of the Commonwealth

Published by His. Highness special Command.

LONDON, Printed by HENRY HILLS and JOHN FIELD, Printers to His Highness, MDCLV.

seal of the Commonwealth
Orders of His Highness the Lord Protector, made and published by and with the
Advice and Consent of His Council, for putting in speedy and due Execution the
Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, made and provided against Printing Unlicensed
and Scandalous Books and Pamphlets, and for the further Regulating of Printing.
WHereas in default of the speedy, due, and effectual execution of the many
good Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances heretofore made and published, against
Unlicensed, Seditious, and Scandalous Books and Pamphlets; diverse evil-minded
persons, and of malicious, insolent and restless Spirits, have assumed to
themselves, and do continually take upon them a licencious boldness, to Write,
Print, Publish, and Disperse several Dangerous, Unwarrantable, Seditious,
Blasphemous, and Scandalous Pamphlets, Books and Papers, to the high Dishonor
of Almighty God, the endangering of the Peace of this Commonwealth, the
violation of all good Order and Government, and in manifest Contempt and Scorn
of the Government and Laws of the Land; Which We having taken into Our
Consideration, do hold Our selves obliged to provide Remedy to the aforesaid
Evils: And therefore (having Confidence of the Care, Diligence, Discretion, and
good Affection of you, John Barkstead Esquire Lieutenant of Our Tower of London,
John Dethick Alderman of Our City of London, and George Foxcroft, to Us, the
present Government, and Peace and Welfare of this Commonwealth) We have thought
fit, (as We hereby do) to entrust, and commit unto you, jointly and severally,
the Execution of these Orders and Directions, touching the Premises, with the
several Powers and Authorities hereafter mentioned, as well for the punishment
of such Offenders, as the timely preventing and suppressing of all Seditious,
Blasphemous, and other Libellous Pamphlets, Books, and Papers whatsoever. And
for your better and more effectual proceeding therein, Our Will and Pleasure
is, And We do hereby Authorize, and straightly Charge and Command you carefully
to observe these Orders, Rules, and Directions following: I. That without delay
you diligently search and inquire concerning the Printing-houses, Presses, and
Master-Printers, as well for the certain number of them, as also for the names
of the Master-Printers, and of the names and number of Servants, Workmen, and
Apprentices, each Master Printer has or shall hereafter retain, and how many
Presses each Master-Printer has, within Our Cities of London, and Westminster,
and Borrough of Southwark, or the Liberties, Suburbs, or the Precincts thereof,
and of what fame, quality, conversation, or condition every such Master-Printer
is, and how he, and his Servants, and Workmen stand affected to the present
Government; And that you make Certificate of all the premises unto Us, or Our
Council within eight and twenty days after your Receipt hereof. II. That you
carefully inform your selves what person or persons (not having a lawful
license in that bealf) do take upon them to print, or use, or put in practice,
or cause to be used or put in practice the Art or Mystery of Printing, or do
use or employ, by themselves or others, any Printing-Press, Rolling-Press, or
other Instrument for Printing, in any, and what place or part of this
Commonwealth. And where any such shall be found, That you cause all their
Printing-Letters and Materials for Printing to be immediately defaced, and the
Offenders prosecuted, for recovery of the forfeitures, sums of money, and
penalties by them incurred in this behalf, and cause them to be otherwise
punished according to the Laws and Statutes of the Land in such cases made and
provided. III. That you also inform your selves whether the Printers and other
persons in Our City of London, and Liberties thereof, or elsewhere, who keep
Printing-Houses, or are owners of Printing-Presses, Rolling-Presses, or other
Instruments for Printing, have entered into Bonds respectively with two
sufficient sureties, according to the purport and direction of the Act of
Parliament, Entitled, An Act against unlicensed and scandalous Books and
Pamphlets, and for better regulating of Printing; And in case they have entered
into such Bonds accordingly: Then whether they have, since that time offended;
or shall hereafter offend in any of the premises or particulars mentioned in
the said Act of Parliament: or broken the conditions of those respective Bonds,
to the end, you may in like manner prosecute them, and their sureties in Our
name for recovery of the penalties in the several obligations mentioned, and by
them forfeited by the said conditions broken, and otherwise according to Law
and their respective demerits. IV. That you take especial Care and see, That no
person or persons presume to Print, Reprint, or Publish, or cause to be
Printed, Reprinted, or Published, any Pamphlets, Books of News, Occurrences, or
other such like Papers whatsoever, unless he, or they shall be hereafter
thereunto lawfully Authorized by Command from Us, or Our Council, or unless
such News, Occurrences or such like Papers be Licenced by such as shall be
appointed thereto by Us or Our Council. And whosoever shall offend in the
premises, shall be proceeded against by you, according to the Laws established
against unlicensed and scandalous Pamphlets for such their contempt and
disobedience in the premises. V. And further, Our will and pleasure is, And
more particularly We do hereby require, Authorize, and Command you, for the
better execution of the premises, That you put in speedy and effectual
execution in all things not hereby altered or otherwise directed, the Ordinance
of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, of Septem. 1647. Entitled,
An Ordinance against unlicensed or scandalous Pamphlets, and for the better
Regulating of Printing, As also one other Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, of the 14. of June 1643. for Regulating of Printing, and
suppressing the great abuses and frequent disorders therein, and the Act of the
Common Council of Our City of London, bearing date the ninth of October, 1643.
prohibiting all persons whatsoever from crying or putting to sale about the
streets within the said City of London, and Liberties thereof, any Pamphlets,
Books, or Papers whatsoever, by way of hawking, and for punishment of the
Offenders therein; And if any person or persons has or have heretofore
offended, or hereafter shall offend in the premises, or shall abet and
countenance the same, contrary to the said Acts or Ordinances, or any other Act
or Ordinance now in force, We do hereby Will, Authorize, and Command you, that
immediately you repair to the place or places where they are or shall be
abiding, as well within Liberties as without, and to apprehend, and arrest, or
cause to be arested the bodies of them, and every of them so ofrending, and
their Accomplices and Abettors, and to cause them to be sent in safe and secure
Custody unto Bride-well, And to cause all such corporal and pecuniary
punishments to be speedily and impartially inflicted on such of the Offenders
in the premises, and the penalties duly levied for their several offenses, as
therein and thereby are mentioned and provided; And We will they shall not be
thence discharged until they shall have made full payment and satisfaction, and
received the said punishment accordingly. And the Governors of Bride-well, are
hereby required to see such Offenders as shall be sent to them punished
according to the Law. And you are hereby also Authorized and required from time
to time to make diligent search in all places where you shall think meet for
all Printing Presses, any way employed in Printing such scandalous, seditious,
and unlicensed Papers, Pamphlets, Books, or Ballads whatsoever, and to seize,
and carry away such Printing-Presses and Letters, with the Nut, Spindle, and
other Materials of every such irregular Printer, which you shall find so
mis-employed, unto the Stationers Hall in our said City of London, there to be
defaced, and made unserviceable, according to the said Acts and Ordinances of
Parliament in that behalf: As also to make diligent search and inquiry in all
suspected Printing-Houses, Warehouses, Shops, and other places whatsoever, for
such unlicensed Books, Papers, Sheet or Sheets of News whatsoever, as is herein
before directed; And the same to detein and keep, to be disposed of as We or
Our Council shall think fit; And in case of any opposition or resistance in the
premises; We hereby Authorize and require you, to break open all or any locks
or doors, and to apprehend all and every person and persons whom you shall
find so opposing or resisting, to convent or cause to be brought before the
Lord Mayor of Our City of London, or any other of Our Justices of Peace to be
examined and proceeded against according to the Law. And all Our Justices of
Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Head-Boroughs, and all and every
other Our Officers, and Ministers of Justice both Civil and Military, and other
persons whatsoever, are hereby required and commanded to be aiding, and
assisting unto you, or your Deputies, in the execution of the premises, as
they and every of them will answer the contrary at their utmost perils. And We
do hereby give you full power and authority to assign, depute, and employ any
fit and discreet persons under you by writing under your hands and seals, for
the better execution of these Orders and Directions, and to reward prosecutors
(allowance whereof shall be made unto you by the Council) and do all and every
such other thing and things as are meet and requisite to the effectual
performance of this Our service, so much conducing to the preservation of the
public peace: For all which, these presents shall be a sufficient Warrant and
discharge in this behalf.


Given at White Hall the eight and twentieth day of August, 1655.

