OLIVARIVS DEI GRA: REIPVB: ANGLIAE, SCOTIAE, ET HIBERNIAE, andc PROTECTOR
By the Protector. A PROCLAMATION Declaring the right of the FELLOWSHIP and
COMPANY of English Merchants for Discovery of New Trades (commonly called the
Muscovia Company) to the sole Fishing for Whales upon the Coasts of Green-land
and Chery-Island, and for restraining and prohibiting of all others.
WHEREAS the Discovery of the Island called Chery-Island, and the Continent of
Green-land, with the fishing for Whales upon the Seas and Coasts thereof, and
of the Islands and places thereto adjacent (having been made by the Fellowship
of English Merchants, for Discovery of New Trades commonly called the Muscovia
Company, and at their own great charges and hazards) has by experience been
found to be, and is a very great honor and advantage to this Nation and
Commonwealth, as well in the enlargement of the Dominions and Territories
thereof, as also in the advancement and increase of Navigation, and the entering
upon and gaining of the Trade of Whale-fishing, whereby great quantities of
Whale-Oyl, Whale-Fins and other Commodities are yearly hither imported, to the
enriching of this Nation, without the Exportation of any Commodities from
hence: And whereas upon consideration of the Premises, and for recompense of
the said charge and hazards in the said Discovery, and for the encouragement of
the said Company and others in time to come, several Grants and Letters Patents
under the Great Seal of England, have been heretofore made and granted to the
said Fellowship, and particularly in the Reign of the late King Philip and
Queen Mary, by which all main Lands, Isles, Havens, Ports, Creeks and Rivers,
by the said Company then discovered or to be after discovered, were forbidden
to be traffiqued unto, or visited by any the People of this Nation, without the
License of the said Company; Which Letters Patents were afterward confirmed by
Act of Parliament in the Eighth year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth,
under the penalty of forfeiting the Ships and Goods of any Trading thither
without License, and with addition of diverse other Privileges and Liberties
unto the said Fellowship and Company. And the late King James, for the further
encouragement of the said Company, and preventing others to interrupt, distract
or disturb their said Trade-fishing and Discoveries, did, in pursuance of the
said Act of Parliament, and the true intent and meaning of the same, by his
Letters Patents grant unto the said Fellowship, the sole Trading and Fishing in
those Seas and places so discovered by them, And all others were forbidden to
fish in those Seas and Coasts, or to sail thither for Trade without License of
the said Company. Notwithstanding which, the said Company as We are given to
understand, have of late received some disturbance by the interloping and
intruding of some persons into the said Whale-fishing, upon those Seas and
Coasts of Green-land and Chery-Island, whereupon the said Company having
addressed their humble Petition unto Us. And the matter having been by Us
referred to the consideration of our Privy Council, and fully heard and debated
before a Committee of Our said Council, as well on behalf of the said
particular Traders, as also on behalf of the said Fellowship and Company. And
the Act of Parliament and the Grants and Charters made to the said Fellowship
and Company showed forth and read, and the whole matter having been fully
considered, and thereupon made evident, that such particular fishing for Whales
upon those Seas, Harbors and Coasts, by persons separate from the said
Company, and trading therein by themselves apart, with like power and strength,
did not only disturb the main Trade of Fishing and taking of Whales by the
Company, but did tend to the ruin and destruction of that Fishing, and unless
prevented, might occasion Forraigners to come in and gain away that fishing and
Trading from this Nation, which might tend to the great damage and dishonor of
Us and this Nation, besides the particular damage of the said Company. And
whereas the whole state of the matter having been again represented to Our said
Privy Council and by them also fully considered, it was by them conceived to be
for the good of this Nation, to encourage the carrying on of the said
Whale-fishing and Trade, by the said Felloshwip and Company only, and to
forbid all others, except such as the said Company should License, to intrude
or meddle therein. And the said Company having further declared, that they
appropriating those parts of the said Seas called Bell Sound, and Horn Sound,
with such other places as they shall fish in, to themselves only, were well
contented, and do promise to grant Licenses gratis to all and every person of
this Nation and Commonwealth, that shall or will but ask or desire to fish for
Whales, or Trade in any other of the said Seas, or Coasts of Green-land, or
Chery-Island, where they themselves fish not. We therefore taking the Premises
into Our consideration (with the advice of Our said Privy Council) Do hereby
publish and Declare, That the whole and sole Trade and fishing for Whales, and
absolute fishing in and upon the said Seas, Coasts and parts of Green-land, and
Chery-Island, and in and upon the said Bell Sound, and Horn Sound, being part
of the said Seas and Coasts, does and ought to belong unto the said Fellowship
of English Merchants for discovery of New Trades, commonly called the Muscovia
Company, and that no other Person or Persons of this Commonwealth (other then
the said Fellowship of English Merchants for discovery of New Trades, called
the Muscovia Company) shall fish for Whales in and upon the said Seas, Coasts
of Green-land and Chery-Island, or in and upon the said Bell Sound and Horn
Sound, being part of the said Seas and Coasts. Yet so, as nevertheless the said
Company, upon their own offer and agreement aforesaid, be and shall be, and are
hereby obliged to grant License and Licenses, to all and singular the People
and Subjects of this Commonwealth, upon request in that behalf to be made
(without delay or paying any thing for the same) to fish for Whales, or trade
or fish in all or any other parts or places, of the said Seas or Coasts of
Greenland and Chery-Island, Except the Harbors and places of Bell Sound and
Horn Sound aforesaid, or where the said Company shall set out Ships to fish.
And We do hereby command, That all persons whatsoever (other then the said
Fellowship and Company) do forbear to enter into the said Bell Sound or Horn
Sound, or to fish or trade within Three Leagues of either of them, but clearly
and absolutely leave the said Bell Sound and Horn Sound, and all the sole and
whole fishing and trading thereof, unto the said Fellowship and Company, and
their Ships and Agents, and such as shall be set forth, hired or employed by
them, without making any disturbance or interruption, or giving the said
Company or their Ships or Vessels, any impediment or hinderance therein, under
pain of Our high displeasure, and such other pains and penalties as by the Laws
of this Land may be inflicted upon them for their disobedience and contempt
therein, Leaving all other the People and Subjects of this Commonwealth free
notwithstanding, to take Licenses from the said Company to trade or fish for
Whales or otherwise, in and upon all other of the said Seas, Coasts and places,
Except the said Bell Sound and Horn Sound, and such other place of Green-land,
as the said Fellowship or their Agents shall fish in, as aforesaid. And We do
hereby further will and command, as well Our Generals at Sea, Admirals of Our
Fleet, Vice-Admirals, Commanders of Squadrons, and other Commanders, Captains
and Officers whatsoever, of any Our Ships, as also Our Judges of the High Court
of Admiralty of England, and all other Our Officers and Ministers, in their
several places to be aiding and assisting, unto the said Fellowship and
Company, and all such as they shall set out and employ in their said sole Trade
and fishing, and in hindering all others hereby forbidden to use the said Trade
and fishing, otherwise then as is before mentioned. And likewise to be aiding
and assisting unto the said Fellowship and Company and their said Agents, in
doing and executing of all and singular the premises. And lastly, We do hereby
charge and Command the said Fellowship and Company, That in all Ships and
Vessels which shall from time to time be sent out by them, or employed under
them, into or in the Seas and parts aforesaid, they do employ for Harpineers,
Steersmen and Mariners, the People and Subjects of this Commonwealth, and no
other.

Given at Our Palace of Westminster the 9th day of March, in the year of Our
Lord, 1657.
London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1657.


