A REPLY to a Paper delivered to the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, Entitled, The Linnen-Drapers Answer to that part of Mr. Cary's Essay
on Trade that concerns the East India Trade.
THE Arguments therein used against prohibiting the wearing East India wrought
Silks and Calicoes in England, may be reduced to these Heads.

That plenty of Calicoes is a certain Expedient to moderate the Prises of all
our Woollen Manufactures, and thereby to preserve and increase the Foreign
Trade, and regulate the home; and that the use of Calicoes in England is a more
effectual way to beat Germany out of making Woollen Manufactures, than our
disusing their Linnens would be.

That the prohibiting the use of the Commodities of other Nations will make
them do the same by ours.

That there will be a great abatement in the King 's Customs if Indian Silks
and Calicoes be prohibited to be worn in England.

That a Home-Consumption is no advantage to a Nation, but that a Foreign
Consumption is clear profit; therefore we were better use Indian Silks and
Calicoes at home, which are cheaper than our own Manufactures, and send them
abroad to Foreign Markets.

That Trade or Commerce being the Riches of this Nation, ought to be free,
sheltered against all Prohibitions; That this has been the Practice of
Holland, whose Example we should follow in taking off all Restraints from
Commerce.

That the Dutch did once prohibit the use of Calicoes, which gave England
advantage to beat them out of that Trade, but that they soon found their
Error, and therefore recalled their Placeat, but could never retrieve their
Trade.

That the prohibiting these Commodities to be worn in England, will either
settle that noble Trade (as they call it) on the Scotch, or divide it between
them and the Dutch.

That this will prejudice our Woollen Manufactures, inasmuch as it will advance
their Prices at home, and thereby lessen their Sales aborad, because Foreign
Markets will be supplied cheaper elsewhere.

That it will hinder N^^^gation.

The Force of these Arguments, I confess, I do not understand, or how they
should prevail on a Nation, whose Wealth arises from the Labor of its People,
to encourage the Importation of Foreign Manufactures to be worn here, and
thereby prevent the use of its own.

England is happy in a People who of their own Natures incline to Labor, and
though some idle Vagrants herd among them, yet the Generality delight to be
employed. We are able to make Woollen Manufactures enough to supply not only
our Home Expense, but all Europe, and have Thousands of People, who either do
nothing, or follow Employments altogether unprofitable to the Nation, but might
be advantageously set at work on our Manufactures; we need not wear India Silks
and Calicoes at Home, that we may thereby have Manufactures enough to carry
abroad, or lest by supplying both Expenses they should become too dear for a
Foreign vent, if our People were set at work: Nor should we want Wool to make
them, having large Tracts of Land unoccupied whereon great Flocks of Sheep
might be fed, had we a suitable Expense; but instead thereof we have generally
great quantities lying on the Growers hands, who encourage the sending it to
France, because they cannot find vent at-home; by which means greater
quantities of Manufactures are made with it abroad than the same Wool would
make here; for being mixed with the Wool of that Country, which could not else
be wrought up of it self, those Markets are supplied, which must otherwise be
furnished hence; now if the wearing our Woollen Manufactures were encouraged,
our Wool would be wrought up here, and so the Expense increased, and France,
not being able to work up its own Wool by it self, must desist in its
Manufactures, and so our Foreign Trade would be increased; for this is
certain, that there is not a piece of Broad-cloath or New Drapery made in
France without the help of our Wool. I cannot here omit a Discourse I once had
with a Gentleman of Rumney Marsh about the damage sustained by the Nation in
its Manufactures by their selling their Wool to France: He agreed the Matter
of Fact, and told me the only Reason was want of a vent at home, many of their
Tenants having Three years Wool on their hands; now says he, find out a way
how we shall have Money for our Wool once a year, and we will soon rid you of
that Evil. If this be true, I know no better than by working it up; and this
can never be promoted by disusing the Commodities made of it, and wearing
Indian Silks and Calicoes in their room: If this was done, and the Manufactury
in France discouraged, 'twould exceedingly add to the value as well as the vent
of our Manufactures.

The City of Bristol has within Seven years last past increased their
Stuff-making from Sixty pounds per Week to one Thousand, by the help of the
French Refugees settled there; which shows, that if we can find Sales for our
Manufactures, we shall want neither Men nor Materials to make them.

It Is an Artifice to say that the Germains abated their making of Linen
because our Woollen Manufactures were dear; for it is well known they have not
advanced, but fallen in their Prices since the growth of Calicoes upon us: but
had they been ever so cheap, if we refuse to barter them for their Linnens, and
encourage the wearing Calicoes here in their steads, as their Sales grew slack,
so their People must either stand idle, or employ themselves in something else,
and they thought nothing so proper as Woollen, by which means they paid us in
our own Coin, and found a way to supply themselves with our Manufactures as
cheap, as when purchased from us in Barter for their Linnens.

The Spaniards would wonder to see us come clothed in Calicoes to sell them
our Woollen Manufactures; I am sure they could not think we much encouraged
their wearing them by our own Examples.

I agree that it is not wisdom for us to prohibit the use of the Commodities of
other Nations who take off ours in their stead; but how this Argument will hold
to encourage the wearing Indian Silks and Calicoes in England, I cannot see,
unless it is made out that they are the Returns of our Product and Manufactures,
and not of our Money; which the Linen Drapers do not offer to prove.

As to the loss on the King's Customs, by denying the use of those two
Commodities which pay so much at their Importation, seems an Argument made up
rather of Shadow then Substance; this being only a Modus, of raising Money,
which still comes out of the Subjects Pockets, and if not done this way may
another, for by the same reason an Argument may be framed for the Exportation
of Wool; but how this would be Englands Advantage, I leave the Gentlemen who
use the Argument to judge.

It Is true, that the Profits of a Nation do not arise from its Home
Consumption; but how this should be an Argument for the use of Foreign
Manufactures instead of our own, whilst our People stand still for want of
Employment, I cannot imagine; if it be affirmed that Indian Silks and Calicoes
are cheaper than our own Manufactures, it is a great Error: The last costs us
nothing but Labor, above the Materials whereof they are made; and since our
People must be maintained though they be idle, that is all profit to the
Nation: And therefore German and Scotch Linnens when purchased for our
Manufactures, are much cheaper to us than Calicoes, though bought for Bullion
in the East Indies at one third part they are sold for here, one pound of Wool
by the Labor of the People added to it, yielding in Manufactures from four to
twenty times what it cost first penny to the Grower, which Wool being also the
Product of Earth and Labor is all gain to the Nation.

As to the Proposition that Trade should be free, I allow, if it is thereby
meant that Trade should not be monopolized by Joint Stocks; but if the Linen
Drapers mean that no Restraint must be used in regulating Foreign Trade, it is
a Maxim they cannot defend; What do they think of the Act of Navigation? the
Prohibition laid on French Goods, where the Balance of Trade went always
against us? the Act for Regulating the Importation and Exportation of Corn? and
many other Statutes, which have been by all adjudged England's Advantage? But
more especially, what do they think of the Acts against Exportation of Wool,
and Importation of Woollen Cloth, made by King Edward the third, who in his
Voyages to Flanders and Brabant, observing that the People of those Countries
were maintained by manufacturing English Wool, by prohibiting it to be carried
out, and encouraging the Manufacturers to settle here, laid the Foundation of
the Greatness of this Kingdom; for by these Manufactures we grow rich, and
gather the Wealth of the Indies, whilst the Spaniard is unable to support the
Charge of his Government, though the first Proprietor of this Treasure, because
all he buys is purchased, either for Silver, or bare Product, without adding
any value to the latter by the Labor of the People.

The Example offered of the Dutch in this Case is not to be followed, their
Modus of Trade is adopted to their Constitution, which will not at all agree
with ours; the same Trade by which the Dutch grow rich, would soon ruin
England; the Interest of Holland in Trade is but one single Interest, they live
by buying and selling, and this Trade of Commerce does well enough there,
because being a great Number of People met together on a small spot of Land,
and having no Product of their own, they furnish each other with what they
want, which being all fetched from abroad, employs great Numbers of bulky Ships,
which they sail cheap, and are thereby also enabled to supply other parts of
Christendom with such Commodities, whereof they have an Overplus above their
own Consumption; so that Holland is now become a Magazine of Trade or Commerce,
and therefore they raise their Taxes by Methods which shall oblige all
Temporary Residents to pay toward support of their Government; for which
Reason they give greater Freedoms and Immunities in Trade than the
Circumstances of England will admit, to encourage a Concourse of People, who
pay out of what they eat, drink, or wear, whilst they are there; so that that
Government leaves every Man at Liberty as to the Modus of his Trade, provided
he pays the Taxes laid on him, and is not of ill Example, such as Dice-Players,
Cheats, and the like; these rather discouraging People from living among them,
they punish with severity: Holland having no Lands to improve the Governors and
Governed live by Commerce and Navigation; but it is not thus in England, we
have two Interests, that of the Freeholder, and that of the Trader, and these
are in themselves of different Natures: Now it has always been the Wisdom of
Your Lordships most Noble Progenitors, to regulate the Foreign Trade of
England, by such Laws as might best tend to uniting these two Interests, and
making them serviceable to each other: Thus the Freeholder raises a Product,
whilst the Trader manufactures or exports it to Foreign Markets; the former
furnishes Provisions, whilst the others are employed in Commerce, and by a
mutual Harmony both live happily: But if once these two Interests jar with each
other, and such a Freedom should be granted to the Trader, that he should cease
to depend on the Freeholder, and the Freeholder to be encouraged by him, the
Lands of England must fall; a Free-Liberty to import Corn would supply it
cheaper from other Countries than the Rents of England can afford; should a
free Liberty be granted to export Wool and import the Manufactures made
thereof, 'twould be all one to the Trader, whose Profits would arise from both,
but whether this Freedom of Commerce would be the Interest of the Freeholder,
and consequently the Interest of England, I leave to an impartial Judge:
Nothing advances the Lands of England like Manufactures, which makes their
Products valuable; but notwithstanding this, the Linnen-Drapers are for
allowing a perfect Freedom of Commerce, and Indian Silks and Calicoes must not
be prohibited to be worn in England, least they should not have so much Money
with Apprentices, whilst the Mercers who sell our own Manufactures must shut up
their Shops, and thousands of poor People starve who are employed in making
them, and the Wool of England lie on the Growers Hands, or be shipped to France
for a Market, and all to promote the wearing of Indian Silks and Calicoes, that
the Linen Drapers may get more Money by selling them: I confess it is a new
thing to me to see Arguments drawn against the promoting our own Manufactures
from the private Interests of Buyers and Sellers, and I believe it is the first
time such were ever offered to this Honorable House; had the Vintners
petitioned against the discourageing the Importation of French Wines, only
because they found them profitable in their Draughts, 'twould have seemed a
strange Argument; Buying and Seling is the most unprofitable part of the Trade
of England; transferring of Properties adds nothing to the Wealth of this
Nation; it is Husbandry, Manufactures, and Foreign Trade which make us Rich, the
last of which is always to be regulated as it may best advance the the Interest
of the Two former; but why they should be discouraged only to fill the
Linen-Drapers Pockets, I know no just Reason; a poor laboring Man that works
at the Clothing Trade brings more Profit to the Nation at the Years end, than
he that sells Ten Thousand Pounds worth of Indian Silks and Calicoes to be worn
in England.

But it is objected, That if we do not use them here, the Dutch will get the
Trade, who lost it to us by the same Error. This though (not proved) seems very
strange; for, did the Dutch ever issue out a Placeat against carrying Indian
Silks and Calicoes to England, I thought our Acts restraining Trade had denied
them that Liberty, else I am apt to think they would have brought them hither,
and sold them much cheaper than the East India Company have done, which would
have more effectually answered the Ends of the Linnen-Drapers Argument: But if
it is meant that the Dutch prohibited those Commodities from being used in
Holland, and have since recalled that Placeat, but could not again fall into
the Calico Trade; so that thereby we got the Advantage of furnishing them and
other Foreign Markets: I do not see how this Bill does hinder that Trade; for
to make use of their own Argument, as the disuse of our own Manufactures in
England would make them cheaper, and thereby fitter for Foreign Markets, so the
disuse of Indian Silks and Calicoes here by wearing our own Manufactures, will
make them cheaper, and thereby fittter for a Foreign Trade.

But all this is a Jest: The Dutch use little of them, and know not what to do
with them when brought home, except we give them Liberty to import them hither;
Germany takes few; France has prohibited their being worn many Years since;
Spain and Portugal buy Calicoes only when cheaper than other Linnens, and not
out of Fancy; Scotland consumes little of either; there are no Quantities spent
in Europe, save what is spent in England and Ireland, and what we send to our
Plantations, so that if this Act passes to disuse them here, they are at the
same time banished out of Europe, and there is an end of the Scotch East India
Company.

This is the way to make the East India Trade to become profitable to this
Kingdom, when the Traders thither shall import Materials instead of
Manufactures; and this will more encourage Navigation, when Ships shall be
filled with bulky Commodities; Saltpeter, Raw-Silks, Cotton-Yarn, Pepper, and
many such things may be found to load bigger Vessels than wrought Silks and
Calicoes can, one Ship of Six Hundred Tons filled with the latter is worth
Twelve Hundred Thousand Pounds, and consequently Six such Ships per Annum would
soon ruin this Nation, whereas, promoting our own Manufactures by passing this
Act, will make it Rich, and divide the Profits more equally, than when cub'd up
into a few Hands; 'twill be accompanied with the Prayers of the Poor for your
Lordships, and the Honorable House of Commons, who will thereby cut them out
new Employments; 'twill advance the Lands of England, and keep the People at
home, who must else go where Manufactures are encouraged, and Ireland is ready
to receive them; 'twill unite the People of England to his Majesty's Interest,
and enable them to pay their Taxes for support of this present War, which would
not be felt, if their Trade was secured Abroad, and their Manufactures
encouraged at Home.

JOHN CARRY.


