THE SPEECH OF His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR, MADE To both Houses of
Parliament at their first meeting, on Thursday the 27th of January 1658.

As also the SPEECH Of the Right Honorable Nathaniel Lord Fiennes, one of the
Lords Keepers of the Great Seal of England, made at the same time.

Published by His Highness special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the
Lord Protector: And are to be sold at the sign of the seven Stars in Fleet
street over against Dunstan's Church.

The Speech of His Highness the Lord Protector, made to both Houses of
Parliament at their first meeting, on Thursday the 27th of January, 1658.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Believe there are scarce any of you here, who expected some Months since to
have seen this great Assembly at this time, in this place, in peace;
considering the great and unexpected Change which it has pleased the
all-disposing hand of God to make in the midst of us: I can assure you, that if
things had been according to our own fears, and the hopes of our enemies, it
had not been thus with us: And therefore it will become both you and me, in the
first place as to reverence and adore the great God, possessor of Heaven and
Earth, in whose hands our breath is, and whose are all our ways, because of his
Judgments; so to acknowledge him in his goodness to these Lands, in that he
has not added sorrow to sorrow, and made the period of His late Highness his
life, and that of the Nations peace to have been in one day.

Peace was one of the Blessings of my Fathers Government; a mercy after so long
a Civil War, and in the midst of so great Division which that War bred, is not
usually afforded by God unto a People in so great a measure.

The Cause of God, and these Nations, which he was engaged in, met in all the
parts of it, as you well know, with many enemies and great opposition; The
Archers, privily and openly, sorely grieved him, and shot at him, yet his Bow
abode in strength, and the Arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of
the mighty God of Jacob.

As to himself, He died full of days, spent in great and sore Travail; yet his
eyes were not waxed dim, neither was his natural strength abated, as it was
said of Moses, He was serviceable even to the last.

As to these Nations, He left them in great Honor abroad, and in full Peace at
home: all England, Scotland and Ireland dwelling safely, every man under his
Vine, and under his Fig Tree, from Dan even to Beer sheba.

He is gone to Rest, and we are entered into his Labors; and if the Lord has
still a Blessing for these Lands (as I trust he has) as our Peace has been
lengthned out to this day, so shall we go on to reap the Fruit, and gather the
Harvest of what his late Highness has sown, and laid the foundation of.

For my own part, being by the Providence of God, and the Disposition of the
Law, my Fathers Successor, and bearing that Place in the Government that I do,
I thought it for the Public good to call a Parliament of the Three Nations,
now united, and conjoined together into one Commonwealth, under one Government.

It is agreeable not only to my Trust, but to my Principles, to govern these
Nations by the Advice of my two Houses of Parliament; I find it asserted in
the Humble Petition and Advice which is the Cornerstone of this Building, and
that which I shall adhere to) That Parliaments are the great Council of the
Chief Magistrate, in whose Advice both he and these Nations may be most safe
and happy. I can assure you I have that esteem of them: And as I have made it
the first Acts of my Government to call you together, so I shall further let
you see the value I have of you, by the Answers that I shall return to the
Advice that shall be given me by you, for the good of these Nations.

You are come up from your several Countries, as the Heads of your Tribes, and
with hearts (I persuade my self) to consult together their good: I can say I
meet you with the same desires, having nothing in my design, but the
maintenance of the Peace, Laws, Liberties, both Civil and Christian, of these
Nations; which I shall always make the Measure and Rule of my Government, and
be ready to spend my life for.

We have Summoned you up at this time to let you know the state of our Affairs,
and to have your Advice in them: And I believe a Parliament was never Summoned
upon a more important occasion.

It is true, as I have told you, We are, through the goodness of God, at this
time in Peace; but it is not thus with us because we have no Enemies: there are
enough both within us and without us, who would soon put an end to our Peace,
were it in their powers, or should it at any time come into their powers.

It will be becoming your Wisdoms to consider of the securing of our Peace
against those, who, we all know, are, and ever will be our implacable Enemies;
what the means of doing this are, I shall refer unto you.

This I can assure you, That the Armies of England, Scotland and Ireland, are
true and faithful to the Peace and good Interest of these Nations, and it will
be found so, and that they are a consisting Body, and useful for any good ends;
and if they were not the best Army in the world, you would have heard of
inconveniences, by reason of the great Arrear of Pay which is now due unto
them, whereby some of them are reduced to great necessities: But you shall have
a parti^ular account of their Arrears, and I doubt not but consideration will
be had thereupon, in some speedy and effectual way. And this being matter of
Money, I recommend it particularly to the House of Commons.

You have, you know, a War with Spain, carried on by the advice of Parliament;
He is an old enemy, and a potent one, and therefore it will be necessary, both
for the honor and safety of these Nations, that that war be vigorously
prosecuted.

Furthermore, the Constitution of Affairs in all our neighbor Countries, and
round about us (as well friends as enemies) are very considerable, and calls
upon us to be upon our Guard both at Land and Sea, and to be in a posture able
to maintain and conserve our own State and Interest.

Great and powerful Fleets are preparing to be set forth into these Seas, and
considerable Armies of several Nations and Kings are now disputing for the
Mastery of the Sound with the adjacent Islands and Countries; among which is
the Roman Emperor, with other Popish States; I need not tell you of what
Consequence these things are to this State.

We have already interposed in these Affairs, in such manner as we found it
necessary for the interest of England; and matters are yet in such a condition
in those parts, that this State may, with the assistance of God, provide that
their differences may not prejudice us.

The other things that are to be said I shall refer to my Lord Keeper Fiennes,
and close up what I have to say with only adding two or three particulars to
what I have already said.

And first, I recommend to your care the People of God in these Nations, with
their Concernments. The more they are divided among themselves, the greater
prudence should be use to cement them.

Secondly, The good and necessary work of Reformation, both in Manners and in
the Administration of Justice, that Profaneness may be discountenanced and
suppressed, and that Righteousness and Justice may be executed in the Land.

Thirdly, I recommend unto you the Protestant cause abroad, which seems at this
time to be in some danger, having great and powerful Enemies, and very few
Friends; and I hope and believe that the old English zeal to that cause is
still among us.

Lastly, My Lords, and you Gentlemen of the House of Commons, That you will in
all your Debates maintain and conserve Love and Unity among your selves, that
therein you may be the pattern of the Nation, who have sent you up in Peace, and
with their Prayers, that the Spirit of Wisdom and Peace may be among you: and
this shall also be my prayer for you; and to this let us all add our utmost
endeavors for the making this an happy Parliament.

FINIS.

