AN APOLOGY FOR THE Contemplations On the LIFE and Glory OF Holy Mary MOTHER of
JESUS.

SHOWING, The Innocence, Equity and Antiquity, of the Honor and Veneration
given to the Blessed Virgin Mother by the Holy Catholic CHURCH.

MARY, of whom was born JESUS. Matt. c. 1. v. 16. The Daughters of Tire shall
present Thee with their Offerings; and the powerful of the people shall pray
unto Thee. Psalm. 44. v. 12. By J. C. D. D.

With Allowance of Superiors.

LONDON, Printed by Nath. Thompson at the Entrance into Old Spring-Garden near
Charing Cross, MDCLXXXVII.

To Her Most Excellent Majesty MARY, OF England, Scotland, France and IRELAND,
QUEEN.
MADAM,
THE Souls of Sovereign Princes, who under God, govern the Empires of the
World, give Laws to Mortals, and with their beck, force the loftiest Cedars to
bend, and pay Homage to their Royal Crowns and Scepters, are amongst the rest
of Creatures, as the Meridian SUN amidst the Stars, of whatever Brightness and
Magnitude.

They are the Visible Images of the Majesty of God, Ministers of his Power, and
Representatives of his Infinite Adorableness; And therefore, are by the Divine
Oracles, called GODS, [Psal. 81.6.] and a strict Injunction is issued forth, to
all, that we Love their Persons, Obey their Commands, and support their Crowns
and Dignities, under severest Penalties, [Rom. 13.1. and seqq.] The consent of
all Mankind, by Divine Instinct, conspicuous in the Laws of Nature and Nations,
has so engrafted this Sacred Principle of Loyalty in Man's Heart, That Time and
Custom, as St. Austin observes, has past it, into a Natural Covenant, for the
well-being of Humane Society, in regard of their Royal Power and Majesty, to
pay Obedience to their Laws, and to Venerate their Person. [Aug. l. 3. Conf. c.
8. n. 2.]

As the Civil Excellency and Jurisdiction, derived from the Light of Nature,
confirmed by the consent of all Ages and Nations, and authorized by the Sacred
Pandects of Gods positive Law, does render Princes Illustrious and Awful, in
their Royal Thrones and Pavillions, by a due Administration of the Sword of
Justice, in Peace and War, for the Tranquillity of their People, and the Terror
of their Enemies: So has wise and gracious Providence, furnished their vast
Souls, with a more copious Train of Natural Endowments of Wisdom, Fortitude and
Vigilance; with a deeper Penetration, into the Arcana Imperii, the Maxims of
State, Interests of Nations, Humors of People, and other secret Mysteries of
Government; and with more abundant Influences of Supernatural Lights and
Helps, whereby, to prosper their Realms, propagate their Crowns, and secure
their Royal Persons and Prerogatives; That, being accomplished with all
Natural, Moral and Supernatural Supplies, they may become more Illustrious
Stars of Piety, in the Firmament of the Church, more Renowned Champions of the
Rights and Mysteries of Religion, and most impregnable Bullwarks of true Faith
and Holiness, against the public Assaults, and private Ambushes of Worldly
Wisdom. And therefore the Prophet Esaias, [cap. 49. verse. 23.] gives them the
Illustrious Characters; That Kings are the Nursing Fathers, and Queens the
Nursing Mothers of the Church: And our Blessed Lord tells us, That the several
Interests of the Church and State, are so rivited to each other, That we give
not God his Due, unless we obey Caesar, [Matt. cap. 22. verse. 21.]

These, Madam, be the stately Columns, which support the Majesty of Earthly
Princes; But if they also be fixed on the Sacred Bases of Religion, and
Christian Fortitude, That Majesty becomes much more Illustrious and Adorable.

In your Royal Person, They are enriched too, with the Magnificent Sculptures,
of a most Illustrious Birth, whereby you are linked to the Noblest, Royal and
Imperial Families of the Western World, and actuated with the lofty Blood of
the Dukes of Ferrara, and the Spirit of the most Renowned Countess, Matildis of
Modena. They are adorned with a most Majestic Reliev of a propitious Fortune,
whereby you are Espoused to the Greatest of English Monarchs, JAMES the JUST,
the VALIANT, and the VICTORIOUS; and thereby are QUEEN of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland; of the Terra Firma, and Islands of the North-East of
America; of the Golden Coasts of the Southern Africa; of a large Tract of the
Indian Asia; and of the vast Seas and Oceans, which wash their rich Shores, and
opposite Banks. And they are achieved, with the rarest Cornu-copia's of
Supernatural Blessings, whereby, to render your Soul Holy, your Virtues
Transcendent, and your Examples astonishing, and attractive.

But Madam, All these sublime Excellencies, which conspire to render your Most
Sacred Majesty, Great and Illustrious, makes this my Approach to the Throne of
your Grandeurs, more rash and unpardonable; That at so vast a Distance, I
presume with a Vulgar Eye, to view so bright a Sun; and to interrupt your Royal
Thoughts, with so Mean an Offering; your Seraphick Soul being already fixed, in
Contemplation, and Admiration of the Immense Grandeurs of your Super-Seraphick
Patroness, Holy MARY, the QVEEN of Queens, unto whose Rich Sanctuaries of all
Super-eminent Virtues, this Apology is ambitious to lead You.

The Sum of my Plea, is, First, That the Design of this Apology is
Magnificent: Secondly, That the Matter is Holy: And Thirdly, That the giving it
a public View, is a Just Debt; For, It expounds the Super-eminent Mysteries of
the Life and Glory of the Holy Mother of JESUS; It shows, in little, the
Immense Perfections of Nature, Grace and Glory, drawn to the Life, by the Power
of the Almighty, in the exactest Copy, of the Infinite Original, possible
amongst Pure Creatures: And It justifies, to a Mis-believing Generation, the
Rights and Privileges of that Divine Creature, chosen above All, and therefore
qualified above All, to be the Mother of JESUS; whose Blood therefore in JESUS,
was Satan's overthrow, Man's Ransom, and Heavens Purchase. Thus far, the Merits
of the Cause, humbly sues my Pardon, and your Majesty's Protection.

My further Plea is, Three great Excellencies, wherein your Sacred Majesty
communicates with the Divine Mother of JESUS: At the Font, you were Ennobled
with the Illustrious Name of MARY; by your Espousals, you are dignified, with
the Majesty of a QVEEN; and by your Education, you are Endowed with the
brightest Characters of Clemency, which are ever Active in you Royal Breast,
for Relief of the Oppressed. All these Perfections seem to imply a Generous
Inclination in your Sacred Majesty, to protect the Assertors of the
Prerogatives of your CHIEF, the Divine MARY, the QVEEN of Men and Angels, the
most CLEMENT Advocate of afflicted Christians; especially assaulted within your
Kingdoms, by your Subjects; by those who presume to style Themselves, Disciples
of JESUS; while they brand the Just Rights and Prerogatives of His Divine
Mother, with the most Infamous TEST of a profane IDOLATRY; and rob Her, of the
noblest Perfections of her Mysterious Life, of the choicest Privileges of
Divine Grace, of the richest Pearls of her Crown of Glory; HER most just Claims
to all Super-eminent Praises, Titles of Honor, Veneration, and Power, to aid
HER humble Clients; though con-naturally engrafted on, and inseparable from,
the Sacred Stock of HER Divine Maternity, Innocence and Holiness; whereby SHE
incomparably transcends the Highest Choires of the Glorious Angels: As the
Kings Daughter, amongst the Trains of Honorable Women; and as the QVEEN
standing at his Right Hand, clad in a Mantle of Gold, embroidered with Jewels
of an Infinite Variety, [Ps. 44. ver. 9.] Whom the brightest Seraphim, by a
Divine Commission, proclaims Blessed above All, [Luke c. 1. v. 28.] Whom the
Holy Ghost commands, to be pronounced GLORIOUS, by all Tongues, and through all
Ages, [Ib. v. 48.] Whom The Daughters of Tire shall present, with their richest
Offerings: To whom the Powers of the Earth shall bend their Knee, and offer
their Prayers, [Ps. 44. v. 12.] Whom the Daughters of the Heavenly Sion admire,
amidst the Splendors and Perfumes of HER Glory; And whom the QUEENS of the
Earth, with their Troops of Ladies and Maids of Honor, have praised; as the
Glory of their Sex, their Myrour of Perfection, and the liveliest Idea of
Christian Majesty and Grandeur: [Cant. c. 6. v. 8.]

It may indeed be some ground of just Admiration, to the Critics of this
curious Age; who nicely pry into the hidden Causes of all Truths, however
locked up in the privatest Closet of Gods All-knowing Breast, who reveals Them:
Why the Evangelists, who by Divine Inspiration, compiled the Sacred Gospel of
JESUS, for direction of our Christian Faith and Worship, speak so sparingly of
the many stupendous Mysteries of the Life and Glory of Holy MARY, the Mother
of JESUS? Whereas they so exactly enlarge themselves in reporting the Grand
Mystery of Christian Religion, the most transcendent Sacrament of Gods Love to
Man, the Prodigy of the Almighties Power and Providence, for Man's
Sanctification and Glory, the Incarnation of Gods only Son, Equal and
Con-substantial to Himself; especially since Holy MARY had so near a Report to
that amazing Wonder of Mercy; and did thereby lay the Noble Foundation of our
Christian Faith, and of all our Religious Duties; open the rich Source of our
Sanctification and supernatural Felicity; and erect the Basis, of all the
sublime Grandeurs, of Her own surpassing Innocence, Holiness and Glory.

But Madam, this Grand Motive of Man's Admiration, is the very True Reason of
those Divine Scribes profound Silence; If that Voice may be called Silence,
which with loudest Echoes proclaims Holy Mary's Immense Prerogatives, and
fills Heaven and Earth with a Sacred Amazement, of the Prodigy of Gods Love, in
the Amplitude and Magnificence of her Excellency, Perfections and Splendor;
For her Divine Maternity once allowed, it by a connatural sequel of a Wise and
Gracious Providence, ushers in, all the stupendous Train of super-eminent
Gifts and Privileges, Catholic Tradition, and the most ambitious Affections
of HER devout Clients, can attribute to the most Innocent, most Holy, most
Glorious Mother of JESUS.

Thus, the design of the sacred Publishers of the Gospel of JESUS, being to
proclaim to the World, the Mysteries of JESUS; and therein to create a Belief
of the Divinity of the Son of Holy Mary, of the Sacraments of his Mercy, and of
the Wonders of his Grace; This mavelous Alliance of Divine JESUS, to Holy
MARY, is the most lofty, the most voluminous, and most illustrious Panegyric
possibly to be uttered, to the Majesty of the most excellent and most perfect
PURE CREATURE, and will extend the Glory and Veneration of the Mother of JESUS,
as far as any Apostle or Preacher of Christian Truth, ever did, or ever shall,
carry the Empire, Majesty and Glory of the holy Name of JESUS.

This St. Matthew seems openly to express, when having reckoned up the renowned
Genealogy of JESUS; as Man, descending from the most powerful Monarchs, the
most illuminated Prophets, and most Victorious Captains, the Sun ever beheld;
He makes a brief Transition to his Divine Nature according to the Prediction of
Esaias, [c. 7. v. 14.] thence to show, in short, what an Eminent Creature, how
richly qualified in all degrees of Excellency, Holy Mary must be, since JESUS,
that great God-Man, was born of MARY. [Matt. c. 1. v. 16.]

So that, Madam, this one Glorious Title of the Mother of JESUS, sums up, in a
word, whatever Excellencies, possibly, by the Almighty Power of God, may meet,
in One PVRE CREATVRE; whereby, suitably to Gods miraculous Design, to fit Her,
to that Ineffable Grandeur of a Mother of GOD; which con-naturally creates the
most Illustrious Idea, of a Creature, by Birth, the noblest and most Beautiful;
by Grace, the Holiest and most Innocent; and by Predestination, the Happiest
and most Powerful; the Providence of an Omnipotent God of all Glory, the Wisdom
of a most endearing Lord of all Majesty, and the Tenderness of a most liberal
Father of all pure Lights, could prepare in the Divine bosom of holy MARY, for
the Reception, Inauguration, Espousals, and Priesthood, of his Son JESUS.

No wonder then, that the Evangelists of the Glory of JESUS, having proclaimed
holy MARY, the Mother of JESUS; and thereby laid a most solid Foundation,
whereon to build up a most Magnificent Temple of Glory, to the holy Name of
MARY; They leave the Superstructures of all Her Super-eminent Praises, Titles
of Honor, Worship and Invocation, to be propagated and finished, by the holy
and emulous Tongues, Pens and Affections of all succeeding Ages.

And herein, the sacred Design of Providence has been already, so
stupendiously successful, that there seems to have been an holy Envy, in the
most Illustrious Persons, of all States, Nations and Times, of the Catholic
Church; even from the first blossoming of Christianity, to these days; (wherein
through the Mercy of our good God, the Zeal of our gracious Sovereign, and the
Piety of your Sacred Majesty, the Buds and Blossoms of Christian Religion,
begin again to appear in these Lands; and the British Empire speaks the
Language of the Saints, in her public Oratories and Liturgies,) to Magnify
the Name of holy Mary, the Mother of JESUS, to Worship Her Prerogatives and
Royal Power, and to crave Her Prayers and Protection. Every True Christian,
inspired with the Spirit of the Discipleship of Her Son JESUS, accounting it
his special Duty, to Praise and Honor the Memory of the Sacred Mother, since
they daily offer their Sacrifices at the Altars of the Son; and to Petition
holy Mary, to become their Advocate at the Throne of Gods Mercy, while they
adore JESUS, with their TEARS and AFFECTIONS.

These, Madam, be also the sublime Thoughts, the Seraphick Desires, the zealous
Exercises of your Sacred Majesty's Royal and Religious Breast; in Imitation of
your Illustrious Ancestors, whose stately Fabrics, rich Endowments, and
Exemplar Lives, consecrated to the Memory of holy MARY, the Mother of JESUS;
and who, to propagate Her Grandeurs, ennobled your Rising Sun, at the Sacred
Font, with the Magnificent Name of MARY; wherewith you now ennoble the Imperial
Crown of the British Monarchy; have enriched Your generous and lofty Soul, with
a pious Emulation of Her imitable Virtues, and their Memorable Actions. Thus to
perpetuate the Truth of King Solomon's Prophetic Song, That the QVEENS of the
Earth, shall ever echo forth Canticks of Praise and Glory, to the Holy QVEEN
of Heaven, [Cant. 6. v. 8.] While by your Sacred Majesty's Religious Examples,
Your Kingdoms, and their vast Appendants, be again reclaimed to JESUS; England
once more becomes the DOWRY of MARY; and that by the powerful Mediation of the
Divine Mother, to her Bountiful Son JESUS, the British Empire may prosper, in
TRVTH, PEACE and PLENTY, under the Royal Scepters of an eternal Issue of King
JAMES the JUST, and Queen MARY the PIOUS; which is the humble, earnest, and
daily Petition of,

Madam, Your Sacred Majesty's most Humble, most Obedient, and most Faithful
Servant, and Subject, J. C.
Febr. 28. 1686/7.
The CONTENTS.
SEct. I. That there is a secure Means of arriving to the Knowledge of
Christian Religion. page. 1 Sect. II. That this secure Means of arriving to
Truth, is easy and effectual. page. 7 Sect. III. That this Authority assented
unto, all Controversies of Religion; even this of the Veneration due to the
Holy Mother of JESUS, is at an end. page. 11 Sect. IV. Two sorts of persons
oppose these Marian Contemplations, and upon what Grounds? page. 13 Sect. V.
Four kinds of Arguments used against the Contemplations, and the Case opened.
page. 20 Sect. VI. The Worship properly due to the Holy Mother of Jesus, truly
stated. page. 25 Sect. VII. What sensible Actions may lawfully express that
inward Worship, we owe to Holy Mary. page. 28 Sect. VIII. That the Worship
given to the Holy Mother of Jesus, is Religious, and Laudable. page. 31 Sect.
IX. That the Worship of the Saints, being Religious; the Doctrine and practice
thereof, in a Super-eminent degree; in the Contemplations, asserted to the
Mother of Jesus, is Pious and Just. page. 42 Sect. X. That a Super-eminent
Veneration is due to the Holy Mother of Jesus. page. 45 Sect. XI. Three
Singular Motives of the Super-eminent Veneration, due to the Holy Mother of
Jesus. page. 48 Sect. XII. That these Three most Excellent Privileges of Holy
Mary, do challenge a Super-eminent Servitude from us, as they are Her
Supernatural perfections. page. 54 Sect. XIII. That the same Excellencies of
Holy Mary, as sublime Images of the Divine Attributes, confirm Her Right of
Super-eminent Servitude. page. 61 Sect. XIV. That the Mediation of Holy Mary,
derogates not from the Dignity of our only Mediator, Jesus. page. 65 Sect. XV.
That the Exaltation of the Holy Mother of Jesus, above all the Choires of
glorified Creatures, renders, not the Contemplations useless to Christians.
page. 73 Sect. XVI. That the Contemplations, are only a Continuation, of the
Ancient Doctrine and Practice of the Catholic Church. page. 85 Sect. XVII.
Illustrious Testimonies of the Reverence, of the first Age of the Church,
toward the Holy Mother of Jesus; as a Rule to all succeeding Ages, thereof.
page. 88 Sect. XVIII. Testimonies of the Second Age. page. 97 Sect. XXI.
Testimonies of the Third Ages. page. 99 Sect. XX. Testimonies of the Fourth
Age. page. 100 Sect. XXI. Testimonies of the Fifth Age. page. 103 Sect. XXII.
Testimonies of the Sixth Age. page. 107 Sect. XXIII. Testimonies of the Seventh
Age. page. 108 Sect. XXIV. Testimonies of the Eighth Age. page. 116 Sect. XXV.
Testimonies of the Ninth Age. page. 119 Sect. XXVI. Testimonies of the Tenth
Age. page. 121 Sect. XXVII. Testimonies of the Eleventh Age. page. 122 Sect.
XXVIII. Testimonies of the Twelfth Age. page. 123 Sect. XXIX. Testimonies of
the Thirteenth Ages. page. 117 Sect. XXX. Testimonies of the Fourteenth Age.
page. 129 Sect. XXXI. Testimonies of the Fifteenth Age. page. 131 Sect. XXXII.
Testimonies of the Sixteenth Age. page. 135 Sect. XXIXII. That the Innocence,
Equity, and Antiquity of the Super-eminent Veneration, and Invocation due to
Holy Mary, with Magnificent Praises, and Titles of Honor, ought to be
acknowledged by all True Believers. page. 158
An Apology for the Contemplations on the Life and Glory of the Holy Mother of
JESUS: Showing the Innocence, Equity and Antiquity of the Honor and
Veneration given to Her, by the Holy Catholic Church.
Sect. I. That there is a secure Means of arriving to the Knowledge of Christian
Religion.
I. IGnorance and Error are the proper Birth and Growth of Man's Rebellion and
Sin; Had Man been obedient to his Good God, he had not been divested of
Original Innocence and Grace; the Lights of an abstractive Knowledge of God,
and Divine Mysteries, had suffered no Eclipse, and Man had still walked
comfortably with God, in the Splendours of the Earthly Paradise; And therefore
those Dreadful Effects and Punishments of Man's Iniquity, cannot indemnify Him
in his breach of Moral and Christian Duties, justify Heresy or Schism, or
become a rational Plea for Immunity and Impunity, at the Bar of Gods Justice;
since, as to the Essential Points, and Fundamental Obligations of Christian
Religion, both those Darknesses may be evacuated, entirely for Man's acquiring
his Supernatural End, by the Means of the Lights of Divine Revelation,
sufficiently appliable to each ones Capacity, Endeavors and Duty; partly
through internal super-infus'd Gifts of Faith and Grace, to that end ever
ready; partly through that prudently justifiable and convincing Authority, and
laborious Industry of lawful and careful Guides and Teachers, purposely
appointed, empowered and continued through all Ages, over Believers, within the
Churches Hierarchy, by a most Fatherly Providence of our gracious God; and
plentifully endowed with the Wisdom and Spirit of Jesus, the Author,
Conservator and Finisher of Christian Religion; out of which, there is no
Holiness, or Salvation. [ Hebr. 11.6. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 6. and 8. Aug. Sermon.
38. de Temp.]

II. For the Living God, being essentially Light and Truth; designing Christ's
Mission, for our improvement in Knowledge, Love and Obedience, till the
finishing of all Time; and by manifest Edicts proclaiming his sincere Will,
That none shall see, or possess Him, in the fullness of his Glory, who is not
prepared thereunto by previous Lights of Supernatural Faith, and warmth of
Divine Love; He will not be wanting to Men of good Will, in matters he so
pressingly requires of them; especially as to those more important, and most
useful Truths and Duties, on which he has built chiefly the Sacred Fabric of
Christian Religion; and by It, our Hopes of Eternal Happiness; and therefore
has God graciously covenanted with Believers, a Supply of all Necessary Aids,
for their efficacious advancement, amidst all Letts of Holiness, upon his own
Fidelity. [Rom. 3.4. and 1 Cor. 10.13. and 1 These. 5.24. and Hebr. 10.23. Trid.
Sess. 6. c. 11. Araus. c. ult. Aug. tr. 53. in Joan.] Thus says St. Augustine.
[4. Conf. c. 16.] Christians securely ripen their first Feathers in the Nest of
the Church, and nourish the Wings of their Charity by a Sound Faith.

III. But if these formidable Punishments of Man's Pride, be moreover encouraged
by Party and Passion, in opposition to the Rules of those Lights and Covenants,
offered to Christians, for their Security, in Matters relating to our present
Peace, and eternal Salvation, can any Error be less corrigible, any Precipice
more unavoidable, any Wretchedness so deplorable? It is a Slavery great enough,
that the Immortal Soul, so near related to the Seraphims, should borrow her
Lights, at least the first Sparks of All, from dull Sense and earthly Images,
that is one dreadful Effect of Sin: Penal Darknesses, says St. Augustine, [1.
Conf. c. 18.] are sprinkled over our Rebellious Concupiscences: But then,
notwithstanding this so abject dependence of Man's Soul, derived from so
shameful a Cause, whatever Sacred Lights are set up, whereby to guide our
Apprehensions in the search of Divine Mysteries, and to rectify our Judgment
and Will in the acceptance and use of them, to their due ends, still to be
puzzling in the Mists and Shadows of sensible Images; and while Divine
Revelation, for our improvement in all Christian Truths and Duties, discovers
unto us the Mysteries of his Love; and this, by so convincing a Proponent, that
although sifted by the severest Enquiry, does rationally create an Evidence of
the Credibility of those Mysteries, prudently undeniable, and absolutely above
whatever may venture to stand in opposition to it; and is moreover, approved
and recommended unto us, at our utter peril, by our Blessed Lord, for the
entire convicting our Humane Reasonings and Fallacies, and for the obliging our
Wills, to a free and firm assent; as a Means, above all Reasonable Exception;
everlastingly to fetter the Illustrious, and super-illuminated Soul, with
Arguments drawn from blind and creeping Sensuality; and this, in Matters
however transcendent and Divine, is justly proclaimed by St. Augustine, [Epist.
118. c. 5.] a most Insolent and unsufferable Madness.

IV. Yet further, amidst the whole Symbol of the Mysteries of Grace, thus
revealed; and this Revelation, so manifestly propounded and attested; through a
wretched Self-choice, the true Parent of Schism, and of all thence growing
Heresies, which Party and Passion, against the ancient and authentic Rule of
Credibility, Mishaps into revealed Truths: To admit One or some few Points of
Faith, for the securing some apparent Right, to the Title of a Christian; but
to reject all others, purely through the Suggestion of a private Opinion, or
through an overruling Power of a prevailing Society, broken off from, and in
opposition unto, the Ancient, Holy, and Undivided Body of Christians; even
such, at the first appearing of Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, and other
Vn-authoriz'd Preachers of new Lights; whereas, all Articles of Christian Faith
are alike revealed, and the Revelation of all is equally evidenced, for the
securing Catholic Unity; and the obliging all to a peaceable Submission and
Communion therein: This, without question, demonstrates evidently a willful
Separation, Perverseness and Obstinacy, in this most important Affair of Man's
Salvation; and that sinful man, not one way only, offers Sacrifice to the
Apostate Angels, [Aug. 1. Conf. c. 17.]

V. For all Christian Verities, however different, as to their Matter and
Objects, yet as they are Articles of Supernatural Faith, revealed to Man by
Truth it self, and shining to Him in a Divine Light; and as witnessed to be so
revealed, by the Authority of a prudently convincing Proponent, above all
Exception, or apparent Competition; are of One and the same Kind and Nature;
and consequently are also inseparable, if not as to actual Assent, when so
propounded; yet at least as to the actual Obligation of Assent, so as not to
contradict, or dissent from Them: And thus, whether this their Unity and
Inseparableness arise, from the only Motive of all Assent in Matters of Divine
Faith, which is Gods Veracity Revealing All; or from the Visible and Living
Proponent of this Revelation, or Divine Credibility, which is the Authority of
the Catholic Church; and which, as to all Matters within the Precincts of
Divine Faith, is the most Rational; and therefore, to every Prudent and Sober
Enquirer of revealed Truths, is the most convincing of all Humane Authorities;
The Pillar of Truth, [1 Timothy 3.16.] the true Interpreter of Gods Word, [Trid.
Sess. 4. de Edit. Libr. Sacr.] and Rule of Faith, [Aug. Epist. 118. c. 5. l.
contr. Epist. Fund. c. 5. l. 1. contr. Crescon. c. 33.] against which no
Infidelity or Malice shall prevail, [Matt. 16.18. Aug. l. 1. Symb. c. 6. and
Epist. 48.] especially if that Authority of Learned, Holy and Industrious
Pastors and Doctors, be further considered, as authorized by the express
Institution and Testimony of Christ; and as such, recommended to our pious
Obedience and Credulity, by the thence ensuing Practice of all Believers, ever
owned by an un-interrupted Series of Doctors, and an unaltered Chain of
Doctrines, to be within the Pale of the True Church. And surely, the ordinary
course of the Sun and Stars is more mavelous and useful, than the irregular
and fatal Rays of giddy and dwindling Comets.

Sect. II. That this secure Means of arriving to Truth, is Easy and Effectual.
VI. THis Authority of the Catholic Church, whose Hierarchy supposes
Superiors and Subjects, and whose Mysteries do imply Doctors and Disciples; is
Eminential or Representative; The Eminential Authority resides in One chief
Bishop, Superior and Doctor, though invested successively in each one of the
whole Series of chief Bishops, from St. Peter till now, by a Legal Mission,
governing and teaching Christ's Flock; as His Vicegerents, in His Name, and with
His Spirit; and thus forward to the Worlds end. The Representative Authority is
diffused through many subordinate Pastors, who as Superiors and Teachers of
their special Flocks, conserve the Traditions of the Ancients, and instruct
their Disciples in the Doctrine and Duties they received from above; but is
especially visible in the solemn Assemblies of these Church Governors, when
legally convened, they meet under, and with their chief Bishop, through the
several Ages of the Church; for the securing and publishing those Traditions,
against the Novelties of private and unsent Teachers: And thus, as it is no
hard Matter, for Subjects to determine the Imperial Right of, and their own
Duty to, a Prince, who claims by Legal Succession and Descent, in the
Legitimate Line of his Royal Ancestors: So neither can there be any rational
Doubt, in whom this, either Eminential or Representative Church Authority,
established by Christ, for the conserving of Peace, Truth and Obedience,
amongst Believers, does even this day reside, with all its due Prerogatives. [
Joan. 21.17. Chalced. act. 16. in Epist. ad Leon. P. Synod. 6. act. 18. and 7.
act. 2. and Florent. Decret. Union. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Athan. Ep. ad Faelic. P.
Theodoret. Ep. ad Renat. Hier. Ep. ad Dam. Aug. Ep. 162.]

VII. Now, either of these Church-Authorities, considering Man's present
dependence on superior Lights and Guides, as to Divine Mysteries, is the most
unquestionable, and most safe Evidencer of what Truths are indeed revealed by
Christ, and of their true Sense and Use, any sincere Enquirer can reasonably
appeal unto, for satisfaction and security in Matters and Controversies of a
Supernatural Religion: And hence the Fathers send us sometimes, to the
Eminential Line of Church Authority, for the justifying Catholic Faith,
against the Invasions of Schism and Heresy; [Iraen. cit. Tertul. l.
praescript. c. 32. Hier. dial. contr. Lucifer. Aug. Ep. 165. and psalm. contr.
part. Donat. and contr. Ep. fund. c. 4. Epiph. haer. 27. Optat. l. 2. contr.
Parmen.] thereby proving the Catholic Church to be the only Apostolical, as
well from the Vocation and Succession of chief Bishops, as for the perpetuity
of its Doctrines. At other times they refer us to the Body of
Church-Representatives, for the final Decision of all Controversies in Matters
of Faith and Duty. [ Gelas. Ep. ad Episc. Dardan. Cyril. l. 1. Trin. and Ep. 1.
Leo. Ep. 53, 54, 55. and 61. Greg. l. 1. Ep. 24. Ambr. Ep. 13. Naz. l. de fid.
and Orat. de Athan. and Ep. ad Cledon. Aug. l. 1. contr. Crescon. c. 33.]

VIII. These Methods therefore, of seeking the whole Symbol of Christian
Religion are easy and secure; for the Church Authority now being, is the same
with that through all Ages; visible to All, by the perpetuity of chief Bishops,
by the Synods of subordinate Pastors, and by the Communion of Christians with
both; and is efficacious enough, in guiding and obliging, even prescinding from
that Infallibility, either of those Church-Authorities have, from Gods special
Assistance asserted by Scripture; because it resides in the most Illustrious
Collection of learned and zealous Pastors and Doctors, the whole World can
offer, as a Guide to Mankind, in Matters most Important; that being also their
only business, and they therein very intent and unanimous, as to all Doctrines
and Practices necessary; But much rather, if regarded, under the Commission of
that their Authority; it being their special Institution and Office, so to
guide; to that intent authorized by Christ, successively for all Ages; that
Establishment being legally proclaimed by the Apostles; and the use of this
Commissive Power executed by Apostolical Governors, and acknowledged by an
universal and un-interrupted Practice of the Undoubted Christian Churches. In
the chief Apostolical Church, the Ecclesiastical Supremacy has ever
flourished; says St. Augustine, [Ep. 162.] and therefore, To this Church, all
others owe their being Orthodox; says Iren. cit. and S. Hier. adds, [Dial. cit.
fin.] That its perpetuity is an easy and plain Demonstration of the Duty we
owe to its Doctrines and Precepts?

Sect. III. That this Authority assented unto, all Controversies of Religion;
even this, of the Veneration due to the Holy Mother of JESUS, is at the end.
IX. THis Church Authority, so ancient, so universal, so uniform and easy,
being once admitted by all Parties, as admitting no Opposition, no Competition,
no Appeal in Decisions of Faith, the Remedy of all Ignorance and Error, in
Matters relating to Man's Sanctification, is plain and effectual; all
Separation in Judgment and Manners, as to the perilous Doubts, what Truths are
revealed, and what Precepts imposed, would become void; and the whole Body of
Christians would become Catholic, as well in Unity of Belief and Practice, as
in the Confession of One God, one Christ, one Baptism: (Mysteries as hard, and
as incomprehensible, as any assented unto, by Catholics,) by reason of that
Authority.

X. Neither would it be here needful to set forth an Apology, for my Innocent
Contemplations, on the Life and Glory of Holy Mary, the Mother of JESUS; they
being in every Point consonant to the Judgment and Practice of
Church Authority, nothing being therein asserted or used, which may give any
reasonable Jealousy of an attributed Deity; or may transcend the just
Prerogatives of a Pure Creature; since all those Praises, Titles of Honor,
Acts of Veneration, and humble Addresses therein used, imply that express
Limitation of Her being a Pure Creature; than which, nothing can more derogate
from the Perfections or Rights of a Divinity; although still we must own, to
the Holy Mother of Jesus, all those Excellencies and Duties, unto WHOM the most
Illustrious Gifts of Nature and Grace, consistent in a PURE CREATURE, seem
enough only, to qualify Her, for the super-eminent and ineffable Excellency of
a Divine Maternity; [Matt. 1.16. and Conc. Ephesians. 1. cap. 13. Greg. l. 1. Reg.
c. 1.] an Excellency, which is the most magnificent of all, communicable to a
Pure Creature; which no Christian can deny, to Holy Mary; and which, as
conferred on a Pure Creature, is the Measure of whatever is said in those
Contemplations; according to the Pious Maxim of subtle Scotus, [3. d. 3. q. 1.
n. 10.] That whatsoever is most Excellent, is due to Holy Mary, unless contrary
to the Oracles of Divine Revelation, or the Churches Authority; And thus, the
whole Body of Christianity, says St. Ansel. [libr. de Excel. Virg. c. 4.] does
acknowledge Her to be priviledg'd above all the Chores of Angels; And seated
only beneath the un-accessible Throne of the most adorable Trinity; says St.
Greg. [cit.]

Sect. IV. Two sorts of Persons oppose these Marian Contemplations, and upon
what Grounds?
XI. THE modern Opposers of these Contemplations, are of two kinds; a friendly
Trimmer, [Speculum B. V. London Printed for R. T. An. 1686.] and an open
Vigilantian, [Answ. to a Catholic Misrepresented.] To the first belong all
they, who, (whatever Judgment they have, of the Substance of the Doctrine and
Devotions of the Contemplations, wherein they are very yielding,) blame the
Excess of some Expressions; either, as unduly worded, or not cautiously trimmed
to the present Humor and Palate of such Mis-believers, who will not away with
sound and wholesome Meats, if not toothsome also; or if themselves ill digest
some Catholic Doctrines and Duties; as if therefore such Meats were not to be
offered to the Sound and Healthful. And there be of these too, who so trim, in
this great Point of Christian Piety, toward the Holy Mother of JESUS, so
ancient and renowned through all Nations and Ages of the Church; as to reduce
the whole design of the Worship of Saints, to a bare Admiration, Commemoration
and Imitation of their Virtues, [ Spec. c. p. 9. and 29.] as if the Veneration
of the glorious Saints, aecording to their several Degrees of Supernatural and
Eternal Excellencies, and our Mediation of Intercession, directed mediately or
immediately unto Them, were not in themselves Christian Virtues; or that the
Practice of these Virtues, were not due by Us, to their high Rank and Honor,
as they are the refined and excellent Images, Temples and Favorites of God; or
that our being Christians, should under peril of the heaviest Crime and Penalty
of Idolatry, oblige us to lay aside all good Manners; and whereas our Morals
teach Men to reverence and petition the more Illustrious sort, even of sinful
Mortals; The Gospel should command us, under forfeiture of all that is Sacred
and comfortable, to neglect both, toward the glorified Saints, so incomparably
above Us, and so acceptable to God, for those Excellencies; especially since
They, by reason of those their excellent virtues, and Gods Supernatural Gifts,
(the Motives and Measure of all that Praise, Honor, Worship and Intercession
we give Them) are so pressingly commended unto Us, as most eminent Idea's of
Christian Perfection, proportioned to our Capacities and Imitation. [1 Cor.
11.1. Heb. 13.7. Trid. Sess. 25. de Invoc.. Illud vero. Aug. Sermon. 47. de
Sanct. Hier. Sermon. de Assumpt. B. V.

XII. It is, doubtless, an eminent Obligation of Christian Perfection, not only
to be always busied in the exercise of Moral and Supernatural Virtues; but also
therein to imitate Holiness in its liveliest Images: So also is it a most
Excellent Virtue, to be Just, even to the Saints, (those blessed Citizens of
Heaven) by giving Them what is due to Them, by all the Laws, as well of Divine,
as of Moral Justice; both Laws own their Spiritual Excellencies; both own a
Debt of Praise, Honor and Worship to Excellent and Sacred Persons; as well as
they prescribe Rules for our Imitation of what is good and perfect; And if we
may follow the profound Maxim of Scotus, [3. d. 27. n. 4.] That goodness is
amiable, and that therefore, according to the degrees of goodness, each Thing
is to be loved; and God above all, because he is Infinite Goodness: Then also,
Holiness, Grace and Glory, being just Motives of Praise, Honor and Veneration,
these actions are due to the Glorious Saints, according to the several
Excellencies of each Ones Station in Heaven; and therefore Super-eminently to
the Mother of JESUS; though to God only above All, who alone by Essence is Holy
and Glorious. Neither is it less beneficial, toward the Advancement of Man's
Sanctification and Perseverance, in all the Duties of a Virtuous Life, by means
of those previous acts of Christian Justice, and humble Prayer, to solicit the
Protection and Confederacy of those victorious and compassionate Champions of
Piety, those Heavenly Courtiers, those Divine Images, Temples and Favorites;
amidst the manifold and perilous Assaults of Satan and Sensuality; and their
Mediation of Intercession to God, for Supernatural Lights and Aids, for the
avoiding of Sin, and the practice of Virtue; then, by neglecting and defaming
this comfortable and just Communion with the Saints, we so frequently profess
in our Creed; to aim at the exact Imitation of those their Sublime, Moral and
Supernatural Perfections.

XIII. The other Opposers of the Contemplations, would seem with much Civility,
to give me Thanks for this so seasonable a Treatise: First, as owning the
Doctrine and Practice of so Idolatrous a Worship of the Mother of Jesus; as if
the whole draught and design were new and singular; Then, for publishing both
with Superiors allowance. And lastly, that in English too, both the Doctrine
and Practice, so owned and published, being expressly against the Word of God,
and the whole sense of Christianity; The World being thus, now manifestly
convinced of Catholics Idolatry, and Damnation too, I suppose; and their
Confusion being hereby become manifest and irreparable; [ Answ. p. 29. Spec. p.
10. and 21.] and after this courteous mark of Grace, They go on, decrying the
whole substance and purpose of the Contemplations, as Idolatrous and
abominable: For giving so much to the Virgin Mary, that more cannot be given to
the Son of God, in our Nature. [Answ. p. 27. Spec. p. 21.] And to prove this,
mark a great piece of Skill; For that all said in the Contemplations, may sound
to his own Note, the Answerer purposely leaves out these most Energical and
discriminating words, In the Soul of a PVRE CREATVRE, [Answ. p. 26. lin. ult.
compared with Contempl. Epist. Dedicat. p. 4. l. 11.] Which words are the Key,
Rule and Measure of all those Super-eminent Perfections, given to the Holy
Mother of JESUS, and exacting due Acknowledgments from Us; and are a manifest
distinctive Badge, of that vast disproportion, there is, between the
Prerogatives due to Her, and those incomparably greater, proper to JESUS, the
Consubstantial Son or God, as well as the true Consubstantial Son of Holy MARY;
both Natures, in-confusedly con-subsisting, in the One Person of the Eternal
Word.

XIV. Neither is there any One single Attribute, Property or Perfection, either
due to JESUS, as God; or appropriated to Him, as Man, in right of the
reciprocal Exchange of Divine and Humane Appellatives, grounded on the Union of
those Natures, in the Person of JESUS, applied to the Holy Mother of God, as
the Speculator imposes, [ Spec. p. 10. l. 33.] All Perfections of Nature,
Grace and Glory, due, and given unto Her, being of a far inferior Rank,
proportioned to the Capacities of a Pure Creature, though of the First Form,
they being necessarily such, as may stand with the Dignity, and may be fit
Qualifications and Appendents, of her Transcendent Maternity. Thus, the
Contemplations being bounded, by the Excellencies of Holy Mary, as the Mother
of God; and She being too, a Pure Creature, though of a superlative Degree, in
Right of that ineffable Privilege: It Is manifest, first, that no Praises,
Titles of Honor, Acts of Worship, or Addresses for Intercession are given unto
HER, as a Deity; as the Speculator does impose; [ Spec. p. 17. l. 27.] And
secondly, that there is not any single Attribute of the Divinity ravished from
the Son of God, and conferred on the Mother of JESUS, as the Answerer affirms;
[ Answ. p. 28. l. 13.]

XV. This only Reflection, on the Answerers injurious dismembring the very
style of the Contemplations, in a most weighty Article, as it plainly discovers
the usual fraud of the Adversaries of the Catholic Church, in lopping the
Sacred Councils themselves, thereby to support a drooping Party, and Passion;
complained of early, by the Grecian Fathers; [Conc. Constantinop. 3. act. 2.6.
and 14. Synod. 7. act. 5.] so does it extremely justify these Innocent
Contemplations, impugn'd by such mean, and un-allowable shifts; since the whole
being duly perused, and measured with that Line, of a pure Creature, so often
repeated, it will be manifest; that no One Supernatural Gift is lodged in the
Holy Mother of JESUS, no Title of Honor is conferred upon Her; nor is any one
Act of Veneration, or Intercession directed unto Holy Mary, by virtue of those
Gifts, or these honorable Titles, but what agree with, and are qualified unto
the Condition of a Pure Creature; none exceed this inseparable Standard, of all
her Magnificent, Superlative and Super-eminent Perfections. So that, however
excellent they be in Her, in right of her Divine Maternity, yet does not any
one of Them derogate from, or approach unto, the immense and un-accessible
Attributes of God, or even the Exuberant Excellencies of the Humane Nature of
Jesus, in right of its consubsistency in the same Person, of God, with his
Divine Nature. Which for this very reason, in our Sacred Doxologies,
Timologies, Liturgies and Prayers, directed to JESUS, is not distinguished, by
any sensible specifical Character; from the Holy of Holies, the Eternal Word; [
Constantinop. 1. coll. 8. c. 9. Ephesians. 1. c. 8. Athan. libr. Incarn. and Orat.
contr. Arrian. Ambr. l. 3. de Sp. Sanct. c. 12. Aug. ps. 98. D. Thom. p. 1. q
25. Scot. 3. d. 9. n. 6. Herinx. p. 4. tr. 1. d. 3. n. 5.] And this, because
both Natures do inseparably consubsist in one Divine Person; For thus, JESUS,
as Man, so con-subsisting, is not a pure Creature; but such is Holy Mary, even
under the most Super-eminent Privileges, of the Mother of God, in their whole
Latitude; that is, as considered, Metaphysically, one with JESUS, by a
transcendent Unity of Indifferency, of their specifical Natures, even as to the
Consubstantiality of their Flesh and Spirit; or Physically, by the stupendous
Reciprocation of the Cor-relatives, of the Son and Mother of God; or
Theologically, by the annexed Interests, each have in other, of Holiness, Grace
and Glory, and their thence transcending Flames of Charity, toward Sinners.

Sect. V. Four kinds of Arguments used against the Contemplations; and the Case
opened.
XVI. THis Reflection premised, and without study of Party, and Passion, calmly
apprehended, it would not be needful, to plead at the Tribunal of the
Worshippers of JESUS, for any, or all the Privileges, of Nature, Grace and
Glory, in the Contemplations, attributed to his Sacred Mother; or to make
evident, and justify to this cool Age, the ancient Practices of Zealous
Christians, allowed by Church Authority, in their Doxologies, Timologies,
Veneration and Mediation of Prayer, addressed to Holy Mary. Howbeit, to clear
the Case, and to remove all Mistakes, of those who love, and seek Peace, in
Gods House, I shall briefly pursue this Apology, and show manifestly, the
Innocence, Equity and Antiquity, of the Doctrine and Practice offered to this
Kingdom, in the plain, allowed and English Contemplations, on the Life and
Glory of the Holy Mother of JESUS.

XVII. There be four Accusations, by several, urged against the Right, Holy
Mary has to the Doctrine and Devotions, therein asserted.

First, That the Praises addressed to Holy Mary, are either Rapsodies of Wit,
or strains of an irregular Devotion toward HER; they all being proper to the
Eternal Son of God, only; or else, that they are Sacrilegious Applications of
Psalms, Hymns and Canticks, by Divine Inspiration, and the practice of the
Church, used in the Praises of the Creator; and here, against all Rule, applied
to the Glory of a Creature.

Secondly, That the several Titles of Honor, conferred on Holy Mary, are
ambitiously extravagant, and blasphemous, equalling HER in Power, Majesty and
Holiness, to God, the Author of all Creatures, and the only Hope, Mediator and
Sanctifier of Sinners.

Thirdly, That the Worship given to the Mother of God, usurps manifestly upon
Gods Jurisdiction, over the Fealty, Homage and Servitude of all Creatures; not
communicable to Any, purely such, of what Rank, Style and Perfection soever.

Fourthly, That all Prayer, made to the Holy Virgin, now in Heaven, however
circumstanced, is, either useless, as offered to one who hears them not; or
Impious, as begging of a Creature, those Blessings, which are wholly in the
Gift of the Creator.

XVIII. Now* to clear these Mists, of Ignorance, or vain Philosophy, observe
First, That according to the Doctrine and Practice of Catholic Schools, there
is a signal Difference, between Praise, Honor, Worship and Prayer; That Praise
consists precisely in a vocal Expression of the Excellencies, of that Person,
we purpose to magnify; whether sincere, or fallacious. Honor is a sensible
Declaration of an inward real Esteem of a Person, for some Excellencies we
remark in Him; so that we may praise and honor Persons, though of an inferior
Rank, if endowed with laudable-and honorable Perfections. But Worship, not
only supposes these Perfections, we honor; but moreover, implies an inward
Submission of the mind, to the Person, by reason of them; and this, testified,
by some apt sensible Token or Sign; naturally, or through custom, acknowledging
the Dignity of that Person, so preferrable, by reason of those apprehended
Perfections. Whence it is manifest, that Worship includes three several acts;
First, an opinion, or judgment, of the due value of those inherent surpassing
Excellencies: Secondly, A Love of friendship, or sincere preference of the
Person, qualified with those Excellencies: And thirdly, A sensible mark of our
Internal submission, outwardly attesting that love and preferrence. Prayer, yet
further adds a sincere Desire of some favor, we want, and hope to obtain, by
means of the Person so preferrable, and petitioned by Us; whither by an
immediate Gift, or by a mediate Intercession, made to the absolute Giver; so
that Prayer, besides our esteem of Excellency, an inward submission, and
cordial confidence and desire of relief, includes a Practical declaration of
this Hope and Desire, at least of a Supplication for the relief of the humble
and earnest Petitioner.

XIX. Observe Secondly, That that Excellency, which is the Motive of our
Praise, Honor, Worship and Prayer, is, either infinite and independent, as God
only is, and the Worship thereon grounded, according to the Use of all
Antiquity, is called Latria, or Divine Servitude or Worship; Because it has an
infinite Perfection, for its Motive and Measure; and God, by Essence, or by
consubsistence, for its terminative object, on which it rests, [ Aug. libr.
20. contr. Faustum, c. 21. and l. 10. Civ. c. 1. Bed. in 4. Luc.] So that this
word Latria, by custom of all Nations, does now properly signify, only that
Religious Worship, which is due to God, in acknowledgment, of his absolute,
supreme and uncontrollable Dominion over all Creatures, in right of his Divine
Majesty, Wisdom, Goodness and Power. [ Deuteronomy. 6.13. Matt. 3.10. Conc. Nicen. 2.
act. 3.4. and 6. Trid. Sess. 13. cap. 5. Basil. in 1. Isaiae. Aug. l. 15. cont.
Faust. c. 9.] And therefore, the word Worship, expressed by its self, without a
restraint or limitation, by some particle annexed, according to this use,
implies Divine only, as its principal Analogate, as Philosophers spaek. Thus,
we must Worship, and serve God only; and for this reason, This Worship given to
any thing, which is not God, is properly Idolatry; [Act. 15.16. and 1 Cor.
10.7.] Or else, this Excellency is limited and dependent, as every thing is,
that is not God; and the Worship hereof, according to the same use and practice
of Antiquity, is called Dulia, or Saint-Servitude or Worship; because it has
for its Motive and Rule, a Participated or Created, and therefore a limited
only, and dependent Perfection, or Gift of Holiness, Grace and Glory; and a
Pure Creature, for its immediate, or penultimate End, or Terminative Object:
And from this Motive and Object, the Nature of the Saint-worship must be
concluded; [ Genesis 18.2. and 19.1. and Numb. 22.31. and Jos. 5.15. and Aug. and
Bed. cit. Magist. 3. d. 9. D. Thom. 2. 2. q. 103. Suar. t. 1. Relig. tr. 3. l.
3. c. 6.]

Sect. VI. The Worship properly due to the Holy Mother of JESUS, truly stated.
XX. THe supernatural participated Excellencies of Grace, being not equally
communicated to the Glorious Saints, [1 Cor. 15.41.] Saint-Servitude or
Worship, is necessarily of a higher or lower Rank, according to the different
degrees of participating those Excellencies; as is manifest in that Civil
Worship, which is given to Princes and their inferior Officers, to each in
their proper Station. Since then, next under God, by Essence, as the Holy
Trinity, One God, blessed for evermore; or by Con-subsistence, as JESUS, God
and Man, to whom Divine Worship is due; the Holy Mother of JESUS, in right of
Her Maternity, con-naturally qualified, exceeds all the Choires of Angels and
Saints, in participated supernatural Perfections, by the consent of all
Doctors, Fathers and Church Authority; for which reason, St. Athanasius [Serm.
de Deip.] applies to Her, the prophetic Vision of David, [ps. 44.10.] of that
Illustrious Queen, he saw standing at the right hand of God; whom therefore St.
Gregory Nazianzen [Traged. Christi patient.] calls (...); (...); or pre-eminent
above heavenly Orders, Lady and Queen of All; the proof and practice of which
Excellency and Magnificence, is the chief design of the Contemplations; for
this reason, that Saint-Servitude or Worship, in Right of that Excess, is, by
the same Consent, properly called Hyperdulia, or super-eminent Servitude;
[Contempl. n. 9.] and this same surpassing Excellency of supernatural
Endowments of Holy Mary, as she is the Mother of JESUS, is the precise Motive
and Measure, of all those superlative Praises, Titles of Honor, and sensible
Marks of our internal Worship, addressed unto Her: As also, of that lively and
strong Confidence we have of Her Protection and Relief, in our Mediation of Her
Intercession for Us; when we humbly offer up our Petitions, either to God,
graciously to regard her Merits, or to harken to her Requests, according to the
proportion of her excellent Acceptableness to Him; or immediately to her self,
as the Mother of JESUS, Queen of Angels, Lady of Saints, and Refuge of Sinners;
and therefore highly qualified, to become a most efficacious Advocate, at the
Throne of Mercy, for Us.

XXI. Wherefore, All Christians believing, holy Mary, to be the true Mother of
JESUS, [Symb. Apost. art. 3. Matt. 1.16. Conc. Ephesians. 1. c. 13.] it seems very
rational, according to the regular and con-natural order of Gods Providence:
First, That Holy Mary is the most sublime, and most exact Original, of all
practical Perfection, which the Omnipotency of God-ever drew, in the Soul of a
PVRE CREATVRE; [Contempl. Epist. Dedic. p. 4. l. 9.] and Secondly, That for
this reason, she claims the utmost Duty of every Christian, as a proper Homage
to her Greatness; [Ibid. p. 5. l. 10.] Which Duty, thirdly, is explained, to be
an Act of super-eminent Servitude; [Contempl. n. 9.] And fourthly, brancheth it
self by degrees, into Praises of Holy Mary, for her surpassing supernatural
participated Perfections; Illustrious Titles of Honor, suitable to those
Perfections; Protestations of a cordial Esteem of her Excellencies, of
Congratulation for her just possession thereof; of Submission to Her Grandeur,
so high above all other Pure Creatures, and so nigh and acceptable to God, by
reason of those her exuberant Perfections of Holiness, Grace and Glory, so
liberally communicated to Her; and of humble Petition of her Intercession, and
Protection, through her Maternity, and her thence flowing Prerogatives;
efficaciously, procuring those Divine Blessings upon us; which may, according
to the Rules of his Sacred Providence, be fit objects of his gracious
Liberality toward us; [ Contempl. n. 8. and 18.]

Sect. VII. What sensible Actions may lawfully express that inward Worship we
owe to Holy Mary.
XXII. AS the Voice is a sensible Representative of the hidden Notions and
Passions of the Intellectual Soul; [ Aug. 15. Trin. c. 11. and Arist. 1.
Periherm. 1.] So also other outward actions may be Signs, sensibly declarative
of our inward Affections. But those, by which we express, in our public
Worship, our high esteem of, and respect to the Majesty and Attributes of God,
which are Infinite; and of the Persons and Perfections of the Saints, in their
several subordinate Stations, though finite and dependent, are frequently the
same, as to the Material or Physical Act. For as we uncover our Head, bend our
knee, or lift up our Eyes or Hands to Heaven, in our Latreutick or Divine
Worship: So also, in our Saint-Servitude, offered to Holy and Glorious
Creatures; without the least offense of the Creator; because there is no
usurpation of Gods Divine Prerogatives, in the use of those indifferent
Actions, upon those finite Motives; and also without any just cause of
Scaendal, to a weak Believer; because nothing Divine is acknowledged, by those
sensible Marks of Worship, to be intrinsic to the Saints, to whom they are
exhibited, as to their immediate Terminative Object.

XXIII. To clear which, suppose First, That, as in the Old Law, there was a
severe Precept, under penalty of Death; [Deuter. 17.8.] So in the New, under
pain of Separation from the Church; that Gods People should learn Divine Truths
and Duties, from his Commissioners, the Eminential, or Representative Church;
and therefore also, the Nature, Rules, Design and Practice, of public Worship;
[ Matt. 18.17. and 1 Cor. 11.34.] And this, with a Spirit of Unity, by assent
to revealed Verities; and of Obedience to sublimer Powers, in Matters relating
to Manners and Discipline, Sacred. But then secondly, suppose as manifest to
All, that those sensible Signs, used in our Religious Worship, have of
themselves a manifold Signification, though with a Subordination to one chief
Analogate: And therefore thirdly, those Signs, by direction of our Judgment,
and command of the Will, are applicable to several Ends or Objects, according
to those diverse Significations, and the Nature of the Motives, apprehended, and
guiding, as their Immediate Rule and Measure; so that according to the Quality
of the Motive, Divine or participated, those general Signs are directed, and
specified, and their Use is justified.

XXIV. Thus, if our bended Knee, by direction of our Spirit, and moved by the
apprehension of the infinite Majesty, Wisdom, Goodness or Power of God,
protests an acknowledgement of those Divine Perfections, and our absolute
dependence on God, in our Being, Motion and Happiness, it is an exterior Act of
Divine Worship. But if it arises only from the apprehension of a participated
Excellency, of some glorified Creature, and by our judgment, be only directed
to acknowledge their State of Holiness and Glory; and to protest a Submission
thereunto, by reason of the vast Chaos, betwixt a Mortal Sinner, and a glorious
Saint, even in those their participated supernatural Blessings; and
consequently, their acceptableness to God, whose gracious Images, Sanctuaries
and Favorites, they thereby are; and our need of their Protection over us, and
Intercession for us; then, the bended Knee, and other Religious Postures, of
Head, Hands and Eyes, are only Marks of Saint-Servitude, or Worship, suitable
to the Motive and End; and derogate not at all, from our Latreutick Duty to the
most High.

XXV. But because these sensible Acts, by the help of our Reason and Will, may
profess a greater acknowledgement of the Grandeur of a Saint, and a firmer
confidence of their Aid, by how much more Illustrious their supernatural
Endowments are, these being their exact Motive, Rule and Measure; therefore, if
they be directed to the Holy Mother of JESUS, they signify a super-eminent
Saint-Servitude toward Her, Esteem of her supernatural State, and Confidence
in her Protection and Mediation. [Bed. Sermon. de S. Mar. Inter Varia. and
German. Patr. Constant. Theoria Rer. Eccles.] These Rules and Limits being ever
observed, in our Catholic Addresses, to the Mother of JESUS, what hazard can
there be, of dis-respect to God, by usurping the Rights of his Sacred Throne
and Dignity? What, of scandal to the Godly, by equalling a Creature to the
Creator? Such, however, is the Innocent Catholic Doctrine and Practice,
misrepresented, through Love of Party, and heat of Passion, mis-guided by
private, false Lights.

Sect. VIII. That the Worship given to the Holy Mother of JESUS, is Religious,
and Laudable.
XXVI. THe Opposers of the Contemplations cannot conceive, How a Worship can be
Religious, and not begin from a Divine Motive, tend to, and end in God, God
only; So that, if Religious Worship be given by us, to Holy Mary, they
conclude, our Worship to be Sacrilegious, because it invades the Rights of Gods
Throne, and makes her a DEITY. To disperse this Mist of Misrepresentation, it is
confessed, That Religion, though not a Theological, but Moral Virtue, and a
branch of Justice, yet has it, for its chief Act, and End, To give due Worship
to God, for his own infinite Glory; whereby he is, our Supreme and absolute
Lord, our first Cause, and last End. The exact and adequate Object of Religious
Worship, in chief, is a Collection of all those sensible Signs, which are apt,
most effectually to testify to the World, our sincere Esteem, Love and
Submission to God, in Right of those his Infinite Excellencies; and therefore,
those Divine Perfections are the original Motive and Measure of the whole
Collection of those Signs. Now, because those Divine Perfections, so
conspicuous in God, do as manifestly argue in us, an unavoidable dependence on
God, as to our whole Being, Motion and Rest; therefore do they create in us, an
indispensable obligation, of using those Signs, under fit Circumstances;
wherefore they are, not only the ultimate, but also the Immediate Motive and
Measure, of this our Religious Worship; and the End of this Religious Worship
is God, for his own infinite Excellency, by those outward Signs blessed by us,
who in himself is blessed for evermore.

XXVII. Within this Collection of sensible Signs of our Religious Worship, the
Offering of Sacrifice, is one, so proper, so due to God only; (because it
manifestly testifies, His, and His only, absolute power over Life and Death;)
That This, in all States of the Church, has been specially reserved, as the
Holy Test, of Man's dependence on, and Duty to God, his Creator, and last End;
as both Laws, and all Fathers, and Divines do affirm. [ Malach. 1.11. and 1
Cor. 11.26. Aug. l. 20. contr. Faust. c. 21. and l. 10. Civ. c. 4. Nic. 2. act.
6. Trid. Sess. 22. c. 1. D. Th. 2. 2 q. 83. Bell. l. 1. Miss. c. 6. Less. l. 2.
Just. c. 38. n. 19. Her. p. 4. tr. 3. d. 8. n. 3.] Therefore do the Fathers
condemn the Arabian Collyridians of a gross Idolatry, in offering their
Cake-Sacrifices to the Mother of JESUS; [ Epiph. haeres. 78. and 79. Baron. ad
Ann. 373. n. 30. Sander. haeres. 92. Gualter. haer. saec. 4. c. 32.] which no
ways reflects on those Lights and Perfumes, Catholics do sometimes burn, to
the honor of the holy Virgin; since by none looked on, as Sacrifices, or as
Protestations of a Supreme Dominion; but only, as outward Symbols of their own
lively Faith, and of the ascent of a clean Soul to God by Prayer; For this
Royal Virgin needs not our Vain and Counterfeit Honors; [Bern. Epist. 174.]
being dignified with real Excellencies of the first Magnitude, next beneath the
Majesty and Attributes of the Son of the Eternal God. [ Greg. in 1. Reg. 1.
Anselm. l. Excel. Virg. c. 4. Suar. de Myster. Christ. d. 18. Sect. 4. Her. 4.
tr. 1. d. 4. n. 15.]

XXVIII. But as to other sensible Actions, by Us used in our Worship of God, as
Tests, of our inward, Value of Gods Omnipotency, and Protestation of our own
absolute dependence; though they may be indifferently used by us, as well in
our Civil, as in our Sacred acts of Veneration, we owe to our Betters, in
either States; Yet being assumed, and directed by the Virtue of Religion, and
having the Majesty of God for their Motive, and the acknowledgement of his
Omnipotency, and of our dependence, for their Ends; They are properly and
perfectly Acts of Religious Worship. Yea, these same Acts, by reason of the
aforesaid Indifferency, to signify any Civil or Sacred Worship, even as used in
our Saint-Servitude, only to express our acknowledgement of their Holy and
Glorious State, may proceed from the Motive, End, and Inclination of Religion;
whereby, whether Immediately, or only Mediately, we do ever ultimately, make
profession of Gods Glory, to which all knees must bow. So that all these
indifferent Actions, even when referred to the Saints, may be called Religious;
without giving the Saints any Divine Homage, or otherwise invading the Just
Limits of Gods Sanctuary.

XXIX. For clearing this Truth, and for removing the Ismaelites Rock of
Scandal; Observe, That the participated Excellencies of Holiness, Grace and
Glory of the Saints, may be considered two ways; First, absolutely, and as
those supernatural Gifts are habitually inherent in them; and being diffused
through their Souls, do intrinsically imbellish Them, and render them really
Holy, Just, and Glorious Creatures. Secondly, Relatively, or as those
Excellencies do confer on these blessed Spirits, a special supernatural and
transfigurating Report to God, whose accomplished Images, they now are, by
consummated Holiness, Grace and Glory; and by Divine Vision, Fruition and
Tention, made One Spirit with God intentionally, in that blessed State. [2 Cor.
3.18* and 1 Jo. 3.2. and 2 Petr. 1.4. Aug. tr. 2. in 1 Jo. Dion. l. Div. Nom.
c. 4. Bon. p. 4. Centiloq. Sect. 1.] For thus, Divine Grace, as the Seed of
God, [1 Jo. 3.9] transforms glorified Creatures, into a Divine Being, by
participation of Authentic Marks and Covenants of Gods intimate Presence
within Them* of indelible Badges of his Friendship to Them, and of their
powerful Acceptableness to Him, in his Sacred Courts and Councils, for the
promoting and propagating the Communion of the Saints; and consequently by
These Excellencies, Seals the Saints with a super-naturalizing Character of
Gods Image, dignifies them with the Tale of his Temple and Sanctuary, and
adorns them with the stupendous Prerogatives of his Friends, Favorites and
adoptive Children.

XXX. Now, although the Supernatural Perfections of the Saints, positively or
absolutely considered, as their glorious Endowments, do challenge from us
Mortals, in this our State of Exile, some Servitude or Worship; and this, far
above Civil Respect, by the Rules of Moral Politics, due to the Grandees of
this World; because they confer a degree of Excellency transcending the whole
Sphere of Moral Virtue, Civil power, and Imperial Majesty; [ Jo. 12.26. and
17.22.] and do therefore claim a Right, to a more sublime Worship, than the
greatest Majesty, Power and Perfections; and the most illustrious Actions and
Designs, the exactest political Government, acting within its own bounds, can
ever aspire unto; Yet however eminent those Perfections be, in themselves,
absolutely considered, they cannot give Them any Title, to a Religious Worship
from us; because, first, those Excellencies are not really Infinite and
Independent Attributes of God, but only purely created Perfections, inherent in
them; And Secondly, that thus considered, they have no report to God, who alone
is, the Motive, and End of all Religious Worship.

XXXI. But if those Sacred Endowments be looked upon, as Signets of Divine
Likeness, transfiguring the Saints into the glorious Images of God, his
Sanctuaries, Friends, Favorites and Children; Thus, They Morally and
principally, import a Participation of the Divine Nature and Attributes; [ Ps.
46.10. and 81.6. and Jo. 10.34. and 2 Petr. 1.4.] whereof they are most special
Representatives; and with whom they do consequently communicate, not only in
their beatifical Operations, but also in the exuberancy of their Love, in
aiding, and comforting their Fellow Creatures, yet in Banishment from those
their Blessed Regions. So that as God communicates to Christ, as Man, a
fullness of Verity, Grace and Power, in Right of his Hypostatical Union; [Jo.
1.14. and Matt. 28.18.] So also does he communicate to the glorified Saints, a
certain portion of his Majesty, Holiness and Power, in Right of their
beatifical Union, [2 Petr. 1.4.] and they, thus considered, are Objects capable
of Religious Worship; The only Motive thereof still being, the Majesty,
Holiness and Glory of God, morally communicated to them, and shining in Them;
and the ultimate, and at least Mediate End and design of this Worship of them,
being, the Magnifying of God, the Author and Finisher of all Holiness, who is
glorious in the Society of the Saints. [ Luc. 2.14. and 1 Cor. 6.20.]

XXXII. I said, at least Mediate End; for all Schools agree, that although all
the Moral Actions of Christians, as of such, should have God for their Last
End; yet have they ever, their special Honesties; and therefore they have also
their own specifical Objects, subordinate to the Last; which sometimes
immediately moves and terminates our Affections, sometimes mediately only; as
appears in acts of Patience, Mercy, Justice, and the like, begun, or pursued,
through the Inclination, Motive and Purpose of Divine Charity. Thus, our
Saint-Servitude or Worship is Religious, either Immediately, or Mediately. For,
if first, it has Gods proper Excellency, as Morally communicated to glorified
Creatures, through Grace and Divine Fruition, for its Motive; And does directly
fix on God, from whose fullness, the Saints are replenished with those glorious
Perfections; it is evident, That the same Virtue of Religion, which inclines a
Christian to worship God, for his own Glory, disposes him also to a Religious
Veneration of the Saints, communicating with God, in those glorious Attributes;
So that, not the Saints, but God, is the Immediate Motive, and End of this
Worship. For as our Judgment and Will are moved to an Esteem and Love of the
Saints, by reason of the Divine Perfections, in their glorious State, shining
in Them; and our Submission is directed to God, through those Gifts morally
abiding in them: So the outward acts, which are signs of that our interior
Worship, guided by the virtue of Religion, immediately regard the Majesty of
God, by communication of his Graces, residing in them; and testifies our Value,
Love and Submission to God, as glorious in Them. Thus, the respects we give a
Friends Gift, is materially only, directed to the Gift, how ever precious this
be in it self; for Immediately, it arises from, and tends to our Friend, whom
alone we value, Love and Honor, as morally apprehended present in his Gift.
Again, when we Love our Neighbor, for Gods sake, whose Image he is, and with
whose amiableness he is morally embellished, It is really, the Love of God, as
the immediate Motive and End of Super-natual Charity, though materially, it be
the Love of a Creature. [ Aug. 8. Trin. c. 8.]

XXXIII. But Secondly, although our Worship of the Saints should immediately
fix on the Saints, as the glorious Representatives of God, by a Redundance of
his Glory in Them; Yet may it be called a Religious Worsbip; First, because,
although here, Gods Holiness and Glory, as inherent in God, or as overflowing
the Saints, is not the Motive of this Worship; and therefore, neither is God
its immediate Motive or End: So neither does this Worship arise from Grace, as
inherent in the Saints, or terminated in them, as sanctified by it; both they,
and their Grace, being Creatures, and therefore incapable of exciting us to, or
finishing of, any act of Religious Worship; But if our Respects proceed from
the Supernatural Dignity of the Saints, as derived from God, as resembling
them to God, as uniting their Souls by Extatick Operations with God, thus
relatively it imports somewhat Divine in the Saints, which may sufficiently
excite us to, and immediately fix, our Religious Veneration; And this Secondly,
because, although all these Signs of our Saint-worship, do immediately End on
the Saints, through that Divine Report they have to God by Grace; Yet Mediately
they ascend higher, and rest on God their ultimate End, and First Mover of all
Religious Worship; without the least Danger of prevaricating, against the Rules
of our Duty to God, by robbing Him of his Glory.

XXXIV. A further Reason of this, is taken from the General Principle of
Morals; That every Virtue is of the same Latitude with its Motive; So that, To
whatever material object, the formal Motive extends its objective Charms, the
Virtue it specifies, does subjectively incline our Affections to the same;
though with this difference; That the Motive being intrinsic to one chief
material Object, does thence communicate its attractive Vigor, to secondary
subordinate Matters, by reason of some Natural, Moral, or Supernatural Union
between them, according to their several Capacities, as the Virtue of the
Spring, diffuseth it self through the Strea^s* in their several Channels: In
like manner, That Virtue, which is governed by that Attractive, and according
to its impulse, gives Vigor to our Operations, is chiefly active about the
principal Object, on which the inherent Motive spends its first Charms; then
does she dilate Her self to Inferior related Matters, though still with an
ultimate report to its Chief, in which, Virtue finally rests. Thus therefore,
those Acts of Worship, which regard the Saints, as such, by reason of a Moral
Participation of Gods Holiness and Glory, having the same Motive, in its self,
or Representative, that our Worship of God, in himself has, are properly
Religious, though not of the first Rank and Perfection; Hence that usual Maxim
of the Fathers, That the Honor given the Saints, redounds to the Glory of God,
the Source and End of all Holiness and Glory. [ Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 3. and
Sess. 25. de Invoc.. Illud vero. Hier. Epist. 53. ad Ripar. Athan. l. Virg.
fin. Leont. Dial. in Nic. 2. act. 4. Dam. l. 3. c. 16.]

Sect. IX. That the Worship of the Saints, being Religious; the Doctrine and
Practice thereof, in a Super-eminent degree; in the Contemplations, asserted to
the Mother of JESUS, is Pious and Just.
XXXV. FRom these premises, That the Worship of the Saints, as such, by
Participation of Grace and Glory, Imitation of Gods glorious State, and
Transfiguration into a Divine Being, by reason of their beatifical Union; is
properly, though not principally, Religious; It follows evidently, That, the
Praises, Titles of Honor, outward Signs of Worship, and Forms of Prayer, used
by Catholics, according to the Rules of Church Authority, in their
Saint-Servitude, are Pious and Just Acts, becoming and oblidging a Christian;
Not by reason of any Portion of the Deity, or Divine Attributes inherent in the
Saints; as Pagans fancied in their Heroes, they therefore worshipped as Gods;
but in Right of their supernatural Endowments of Grace and Glory, whereby they
incomparably transcend the whole Sphere of Civil Worship, especially as they
have under that consideration, a special reference to Gods Majesty and
Holiness, which they thereby partake, imitate, and involve; and this, according
to the true degree of each ones acceptableness to God, in that their glorious
State.

XXXVI. For, in the first place, the formal Motive of those several Actions,
imports an objective Honesty, practically inclining a Christian to their use,
according to the Dictates of Reason and Faith; which moved the Royal Prophet to
cry out, [ Psalm. 83.1.] How amiable are thy Tabernacles of Virtues, O God: And
when again [ Psalm. 138.16.] speaking to God, he says, That his favorites are
exceedingly honored, and their Majesty confirmed. The End also of the devout
Christian Worshippers, is, not only an emulous Imitation of their Virtues, for
the advancement of their own Piety; but moreover an Accumulation of Gods own
Glory, extended to, and abiding in the Saints; and therefore, not only the Holy
and glorious State of those Blessed Creatures, but even our Esteem, Love and
Veneration of Them, does render Gods Glory more Magnificent and Illustrious.
And again, these Actions, are a just Debt, all owing to those glorious
Creatures, by reason of their supernatural and Unifying State of consummated
Happiness; as acknowledgments of the Majesty and Glory, they actually possess,
through Gods Bounty, above the rank of the best of Mortals.

XXXVII. All these Boundaries, of a Christians Saint-Servitude, to the
glorified Spirits, are exactly observed, in all the Praises, honorable Titles,
Expressions of Veneration, and Methods of Prayer, used in the Contemplations on
the Life and Glory, of the Holy Mother of JESUS; therefore, they are Religious,
Pious and Just; Nothing in the whole, is given to Her, which is, either due to
God only, or which derogates from the infiniteness, and independence of his
Majesty, Wisdom, Love, Power or Glory; Nothing which is above, either her
Capacity, as a glorious Creature; or her super-eminent Privileges, as the
Mother of JESUS; or our Duty, as we yet are banished Mortals, and exceedingly
obliged to Her, for that part she performed, by her acceptableness to God, and
her consent and cooperation with the Holy Ghost, in the Mysteries of the
Conception, Birth, and Life of JESUS. Wherein she seems preferrable, above the
highest Quires of Angels, however glorious Coadjutors they be in the Ministry
of the Elect; so Religious, Virtuous and Just, are those Homages we pay to the
Sacred Virgin, above the troops of other glorified Creatures; and therefore at
all times, have been performed, with stupendous Advantages to the Devotes of
Holy Mary; Nor may we deny, That the Practice of Christians is the true
Interpreter of Divine Revelations, and the most Faithful Conserver and
Conveyancer of Christian Duties, according to their Original Intent and
purpose; according to that so renowned saying of St. Basil, What we learned
from our Holy Fathers, we teach our Disciples; whence the great Vincent. Lyrin.
[l. contr. profan. Nov.] who ever departs from the Communion of their Doctrine,
let thom hearken to the Voice of the Apostle, we worship a God of Peace, and
not of Dissension. [1 Cor. 14.33.]

Sect. X. That a Super-eminent Veneration is due to the Holy Mother of JESUS.
XXXVIII. NOW, as to the Degree of Honor due to, and Confidence in, the
Protection, and Mediation of Intercession, of the Sacred Virgin, and glorious
Saints; we must observe; That, as the personal participated supernatural
Perfections of the Saints, whereby they are Images of Gods Divine Life, and
transfigur'd into God by beatifical Vision and Fruition, is the Motive of our
Praises; and our other acts of Saint-Servitude: So the Disparity of those
Perfections, is the exact Rule and Measure of their dis-proportion. For in all
Moral Actions, their Motive specifies them, and measures their Perfection; So
that, as the Majesty and Attributes of God, being Infinite and Independent,
require such acts of Worship, as are naturally in themselves, or by the
direction of our Judgment and Intention, apt to express a Worship, suitable to
that Divine Grandeur: So also the Excellency of glorious Saints, being finite
only, and infinitely beneath that of God, whereof they are only limited Idea's,
admit of such Actions only, as are expressive of a respect to their limited
Greatness, according to the proportion of Divine Gifts, wherewith God has
endowed them. Wherefore, however Magnificent our Praises of the Saints be,
however Illustrious our Titles of Honor, whatever outward signs we show of
inward Worship of those, super-naturaliz'd Spirits, they may not transcend the
exact Measure, and proportion, allowable to glorious Pure Creatures; They must
not be such Actions, as by the Consent of All, are Latreutical, and specially
appropriated, to signify and protest Gods Majesty, Perfections and
Sovereignty. So neither may our Prayers to them, exceed a confidence in their
Protection, and Intercession; though assured enough, as relying on Gods free
Promise of relief for their sake, supported by his own Truth and Fidelity, as
far as may be useful to us.

XXXIX. Since then, Holy Mary, the Mother of JESUS, by the Consent of All
Church Authority; and of all Christians, who duly apprehend, the Prerogative of
her Divine Maternity, in its self, and all its previous, concomitant and
consequent Perfections; does incomparably surpass all the Quires of Angels and
Saints, in the amplitude and stupendous Effects of Gods Love; whereby she is
the most Excellent Image, holiest Sanctuary, and choicest Favorite, amongst
all Pure Creatures; we may rationally conclude, That the highest Praises, most
Illustrious Titles of honor, most excellent Acts of Religious Worship, and the
Expressions of strongest Confidence in her protection and Intercession, which
may be conceived possibly due to a PVRE CREATVRE, dearest to God; may be
addressed to the glorious Mother of JESUS; above whatever can be claimed, by
all the Saints and Angels; next beneath, what is due to JESUS, the Son of God.
And all this, without any strain of Imagination, Figure of Rhetoric, or
Usurpation on Gods unaccessible Prerogatives; For still, although her
supernatural Excellencies be exceedingly sublime, as becomes the Person of the
Mother of God; yet are they all created Perfections, and the free Gifts of a
gracious Father of pure Lights, bestowed on a PVRE CREATVRE; and therefore, as
they in themselves, are infinitely beneath the Majesty of an Independent
Creator: So likewise, admit they, only such Acts of Worship, as directed by our
Reason and Will, transcend not, the acknowledgment of a most excellent
dependent Creature.

Sect. XI. Three Singular Motives of the Super-eminent Veneration, due to the
Holy Mother of JESUS.
XL. FOR the further clearing this Christian Truth, having first observed, with
St. Bern. [Epist. 174.] That the Mother of JESUS needs not our feigned Praises
or Applauses; being proclaimed by a Seraphim, Full of Grace, and the Mother of
JESUS; Thcn, with the subtle Scotus, [3. d. 3. q. 1. n. 10.] That whatever is
most Excellent, may be allowed to Holy Mary; if not repugnant to Divine
Revelation, and Church Authority: We must suppose, All the special Prerogatives
of the Sacred Virgin, to be, either previous and preparatory Dispositions,
fitting her in Body and Mind, to that Ineffable Mystery of her Divine
Maternity; or concurrent Qualifications, or con-natural Achievements, of that
stupendous Dignity. To which purpose, S. Ambr. [l. 2. Virg.] says, That Holy
Mary, being prepared with those excellent Endowments of Purity and Holiness,
was made worthy, ^o become the Mother of God. S. Hierom. [Epist. ad Eustoch. de
Custod. Virg.] speaks in the same Phrase; The Purity and Innocence of Holy
MARY, (says he) was so extreme and sublime, that she deserved to bring forth
the Son of the Eternal God, in our flesh. S. Anselm [l. Conc. Virg. c. 18.]
follows in the like strain, of Admiration, at her unparalled Excellencies,
when he tells us; That it is requisite above all Exception, that the most Holy
Virgin should be endowed, with such a transcendent Purity, that nothing beneath
God himself, may be conceived Greater. Wherefore, As the several Perfections,
which con-naturally accompany the Humane Nature of Jesus Christ, are
proportioned to that Immense Privilege, of its Con-subsistency, with the
Divinity, in the Person of Gods coeternal and con-substantial Son: [ Jo.
1.14.] So the Mysterious Excellencies, which embellished Holy Mary, are exactly
suitable to the high Prerogative, of her being truly and properly, the Mother
of DIVINE JESUS, [Luc. 11.27.] This singular, and most sublime Dignity, is the
very Basis, Motive and Measure, of all her previous, concurrent and subsequent
supernatural Perfections; which may be reduced, to Her incomparable Innocence,
Her fullness of Grace, and Her most sublime State of Glory, above all the
Choires of Saints and Angels; even as to all their most Excellent Perfections,
of Nature, Grace and Glory; since, by the Dignity of her Predestination, she
transcends the whole Sphere of the Elect, and is seated next to the Throne of
the Divinity, as S. Greg. speaks, [l. 1. Reg. 1.]

XLI. First then, as to the Fundamental Excellency of Holy Mary, her Divine
Maternity; (which is a Prerogative of that vast Magnitude, that no Perfection,
in the order of Grace, can be more Illustrious, more Magnificent, more
Honorable;) Its co-efficient cause, with her fecundity, was the Virtue of the
most High; Its Progress, and all its Operations, were full of Miracles; and its
product is JESUS, God and Man, by Her, united in One Person of God. And all
these Prodigies were begun and finished, in the very first positive instant of
her active Conception of JESUS; wherein Holy Mary, is an unspotted Virgin, and
the stupendous Mother of God. Whereupon Tertull. observes, [libr. Resur.
Carn.] That the whole Wisdom, Counsel and Power of God, were engaged in
finishing this great Mystery of the Maternity of Holy Mary; And by consent of
Holy Fathers and Doctors, this Divine Mother, is not therefore only, proclaimed
Blessed above Women, because dignified with the Privilege, of being the Mother
of JESUS, [Luc. 1.42. and 48.] but moreover, that by Virtue of that Generation,
she has a most special Influence, into the Salvation of Mankind; for Of Mary,
was born JESUS, (that is,) the Savior of All; [Matt. 1.16* Aug. Sermon. 2.
Annunc. Bern. hom. 3. Sup. Missus. and Andraeas Cretens. Sermon. in Salut.
Angel.] And also a special Jurisdiction over Jesus, as to the Application and
Extention of his saving Grace, through a most benign Condescension of the Mercy
of JESUS, in subjecting Himself to her Commands; [Luc. 2.51. Less. l. 2. Just.
c. 37. n. 28. Her. p. 4. tr. 1. d. 4. n. 52. Abelly p. 1. tr. 5. c. 8. Sect. 3.
n. 5. Gualter. Chron. saecul. 1. Verit. 2.. 3.]

XLII. Thus, this most transcendent Dignity of the Maternity of Holy Mary,
gives Her an unquestionable Right, to a suitable, most sublime Degree of
Praises, Titles of Grandeur, and Veneration; above whatever can be conceived
due, to all other Pure Creatures. And does moreover demonstrate, to any
considering Man, a super-eminently efficacious Power of Patronage, over Her
special Clients; and also of Mediation, or Intercession to JESUS, for her
humble and earnest Petitioners; through the filial Love, Respect, and
Condescension of JESUS to his Divine Mother, as the most Excellent Idea and
Pattern of filial Observance and Christian Perfection. Whence the Angel of the
Schools, S. Thom. [p. 1. q. 25. art. 6. ad 4.] tells us, That Holy Mary, in
Right of her strict Alliance with JESUS, in Quality of a Mother, has also a
participated Infinity of Power and Majesty; and consequently, by Virtue of
these super-eminent and Illustrious Prerogatives, she has also a special
Jurisdiction, in the Courts, of Claims of her Clients, and of Gods Mercies.
[Bern. Sermon. Sup. Signum magnum.]

XLIII. Secondly, From this prevision of the Predestination of Holy Mary, to be
the Mother of JESUS, there follows another, most sublime and peculiar
Privilege, Her Preservation, in a most perfect Purity and Innocence, from all
stain and blemish of sin; so that, she was neither defiled, with any Actual
offense against God, by a free consent of her own Will; even, as to the least
surprise of a venial defect; Nor branded with the Infamous Characters, of
Original sin, and of a Child of Wrath, albeit she was a Natural Child of the
Guilty ADAM; Nor was she any ways wounded with the fatal Sting of sinful
Concupiscence; the dreadful effect of Original sin, and Incentive of Actual.
Thus, the Great Soul of Holy Mary, was most perfectly pure and spotless,
resembling its excellent Idea, pre-conceiv'd by the Wisdom of God; even such
ever, as when she first issued forth, the Hands of Her Divine Creator. [Prov.
8.22. and Cant. 4.7.] Thus Holy Mary, in Right of her eternal Predestination,
to be the Mother of JESUS, is dignified with that most accomplished Purity,
whereby she incomparably surpasses all Mortals; [Aug. l. Not. and Great. c.
36.] Is the most exact Image of the Innocence of JESUS, possible to a Pur^
Creature; is a fit Sanctuary of the Son of God, and of the Theandrical
Operations of his Divine Soul; and is a most powerful Advocate for Sinners, at
the Tribunal of his Mercy. [ Cant. 4. 12. 13* Bern. Epist. 174. Aug. Sermon. 11.
Nativ. Dom. Anselm. Libr. Conc. Virg. c. 18. Damian. Sermon. Assumpt. Ildef. l.
de M. Virg. Ambr. l. 2. Virg. Aug. Medit. c. 40. n. 5.] The efficacy of her
Merits, soaring above the Quires of the flaming Seraphims, and approaching the
Throne of the Eternal Trinity; [Greg. in 1. Reg. 1.]

XLIV. Thirdly, These two most Excellent Prerogatives of Holy Mary, Her Divine
Maternity, and her super-seraphical Innocence, lead us, to the consideration of
the stupendous Treasure of Supernatural Gifts, of Original Justice,
Sanctifying Grace, and of the whole Train of Moral and Theological Virtues,
transfused through Her Illustrious Soul; with that fullness; intensively as to
its own Perfection in its self; and extensively, as to all its Operations, of
Holiness in this World, and blessedness in the state of Glory; That therein,
she incomparably surpasses the Holiest, and Happiest of all the Glorified
Saints and Angels; as far as is possible, for the most perfect amongst Pure
Creatures. [Cant. 4.8.] All which seems con-naturally to follow, from the
eternally pre-design'd privilege, of her being over-shadow'd, impregnated, and
enriched by the Virtue of the Holy Ghost; of her Conceiving the Holy of Holies,
Gods Consubstantial Word, within her Chaste Bowels; of her bringing forth into
this World, that stupendous Light of the Divinity, enclosed in our Nature,
prepared for the Glory of Israel, and the enlightening all Nations, to Truth and
Grace. [Luc. 2.32. and Jo. 1.17.]

Sect. XII. That these Three most Excellent Privileges of Holy Mary, do
challenge a Super-eminent Servitude from us, as they are Her Supernatural
Perfections.
XLV. THE Practice of the Saints, and the Authority of Divine Oracles, are most
un-resistable Rules of our Christian Faith and Duty; not only as to all radical
Truths and Precepts; but also, as to the con-natural consequences of both; so
that, if Majesty, Innocence, and Goodness, be aimable and honorable, they exact
a most passionate Love, a most profound Veneration, where they are in their
highest Meridian, possible to a Pure Creature; such they are, in Holy Mary,
such likewise should our Love and Reverence be toward Her, as a Just Homage,
due to her* for these Her charming Grandeurs. To train Christians up, to these
sublime Acts, the Holy Ghost has set us, a most exact Copy, when he proclaims
Her, blessed above All, and to be blessed by All; [Luc. 1.41.48, 49.] Blessed
above All; because she shall crush the Serpents head, as the Mother of JESUS;
shall be free from all sin, by Gods preserving Decrees; and shall be full of
Grace; for the dignifying the Temple of JESUS; and for these her Excellencies
All shall bless Her, by celebrating her Praises, by giving Her magnificent
Titles, by venerating this Her Majesty, Purity and Holiness; and by imploring
Her Protection and Prayers, (Now, and in the Hour of our Death,) by whom, we
have aceess to JESUS, says, S. Bern. [Serm. ult. de Assumpt.] and for the
confirming us, in this Belief and Duty, The Holy Church, in her sacred
Councils, pronounces an eternal Curse, against all those, who confess not Holy
Mary to be the most excellent, above all, Visible and Invisible Creatures.
[Synod. 2. act. 5.]

XLVI. In pursuance of this great design of the Holy Ghost, That all
Generations should confess the Grandeurs, and bless the Name and Power of the
Mother of JESUS, The venerable Pastors of the Church, Holy Fathers, and great
Masters of our Christian Schools and Pulpits, have through all Ages studiously
penned lofty Panegyricks, full of her Praises, with the most Illustrious Titles
of Honor, possibly to be given, to the most Excellent of Pure Creatures;
asserting Her fullness of supernatural Gifts, the swiftness and clearness of
her Intellectual Operations with those Gifts, her undoubted Right to all those
sensible Marks of internal Worship, possibly due to their Chief, in the most
exquisite Prerogatives of Nature, Grace, and Glory; and her surpassing
Acceptableness to her Son JESUS, for the effectual obtaining of whatever
Favors, fit for us to beg, and God to grant, through the Mediation of the
Best, amongst Pure Creatures. Hence these burning and shining Lights of the
Catholic World, frequently entitle this Divine Creature, The Miracle of the
World, Ark of the living God, Abyss of Grace and Glory, the Immense Treasury of
Holiness, stupendous Masterpiece of Gods Omnipotency, transcending the whole
Sphere of the Elect, in the Gifts of Grace, and Fruits of Meritorious Actions:
And thus acknowleding her Right to the Worship of Hyperdulia, or Super-eminent
Saint-Servitude; they style Her our Advocate and Mediatrice, and do with a most
enflamed Affection beg her Protection and Intercession. [Chrysost. Orat. in
Hypapant. Epiph. Sermon. de Laud. Deipar. Damasc. Orat. 2. Assumpt. Anselm. l.
Excel. Virg. c. 8. Greg. in 1. Reg. 1. Ephrem. Sermon. Laud. Virg. Gregor.
Neocaes. hom. Annunc. Ambr. in 2. Luc. Chrysol. Sermon. 143. D. Th. p. 3. q. 25.
Bern. Sermon. Nativ. Mar. and sup. Signum magnum. Innocent. 3. Sermon. 2. Assumpt.
Mar. Bern. Sermon. 2. Adv. Ephrem. Orat. ad B. Virg.]

XLVII. Upon the Authority of these Illuminated Oracles of the Church, some
Catholic Doctors, of an eminent Rank, do piously conclude, That the Gift of
Sanctifying Grace, infused into the Immaculate Soul of Holy Mary, in the first
positive Instant of her passive Conception, was more intense, than the
Beatifical Grace of the holiest and happiest of all other Pure Creatures. But
if the first Beams of her Grace, were of that prodigious Beauty and Luster, how
much greater were they, at the last Moment of her Holy Life? Since her whole
Life was intensely applied, in actuating her Illustrious and Flaming Soul, with
Divine Affections and Ravishments of Love, to a most sublime Degree of
Acceptableness to God, and addition of new Lights of Grace, and streams of
Merits; even to the comprehending of all those Graces, which through all the
Moments of time, have been, and shall be dispersed amongst Pure Creatures. And
farther, since all Divines agree, that the Glory of the Holy Mother of JESUS,
is proportioned to her State of accomplished Grace, as a bountiful Gift, and
just Reward of a holy Life, is suitable to the Merits and Right thereof;
therefore is she before the universal Resurrection of All, to each ones
Happiness, deservingly Assumed to Glory, and exalted above all the Choires of
Saints and Angels, to a super-excellent Fullness of the Vision and Fruition of
God, in his full Splendour, communicable to Pure Creatures; and to most copious
Dowries of Clarity, Agility, Subtility and Impassibility, which irradiated from
the glorious Lamp of her flaming Spirit, through her Immaculate Body, compleats
her Intensive and Extensive Happiness above All, only beneath JESUS.

XLVIII. These three Excellencies, the Maternity, Innocence and Sanctity of
Holy Mary, thus Illustrated, by the Holy Ghost, and the Authority of the great
Lights of the Christian World; considered precisely, as Perfections inherent in
Her, and raising her Soul, to a most sublime Degree of Majesty and Holiness,
through Gods overflowing Bounty; We may justly conclude,

First, That the holy Mother of JESUS, is worthy of the most super-lative
Praises, which the Tongue, Pen or Spirit of Man or Angel, can express, or
conceive. In Emulation whereof, the Holy Catholic Church does at special
times, set forth Her Majesty, Glory and Magnificence, in her sacred Liturgies,
Offices and Litanies; even all Generations of Believers, have ever conspired,
by a secret, but most wonderful Instinct, with a constant Zeal, and Fervor, to
proclaim Holy Mary, Blessed above all Pure Creatures.

Secondly, That the Sacred Virgin has an undisputable Right, to the most
Illustrious, and most Magnificent Titles of Majesty and Honor, which may be
possibly conceived due, to Any, of whatever Style, Rank or Dignity, amongst
pure Creatures; and this, with a most lofty pre-eminence, above all the
glorious Trains and Pomps of Men and Angels, in their richest and most
beautiful Stations of Glory. Thus is she, by the Holy Catholic Church, in her
Hymns, Anthems and Canticks of Honor; and by the holy Fathers and Doctors, in
their Panegyricks; Entitled, Lady, Queen, and Empress of Men, Angels, Heavens,
and of the whole World; Mother of Mercy and beautiful Love; The Hope, Trust and
Safeguard of Mortals, amidst the tempestuous Seas and Hurricans of their
foaming Concupiscences; The Palace of the Eternal Light, and most magnificent
Gate of Heaven and Glory.

Thirdly, That Holy Mary is more Worshipful, than the loftiest and most
Illustrious created Potentates of Earth or Heaven, in the highest Altitudes of
their Majesty, Power and Pomps; and this, by most Cordial Acts of Internal
Esteem, Love and Submission; and by the most expressive sensible Marks of this
inward Reverence, which may most fitly testify, a real and sincere
acknowledgment of her super-eminent Grandeur, above all Pure Creatures, in
Right of the most incomparable Privileges, of her Maternity, Innocence and
Holiness. Whence St. Anselm, well acquainted with the Doctrine, Practice and
Style of the Catholic Church, resolutely affirms, That the whole Body of
Christianity is agreed, That the Holy Mother of Jesus, is exalted in Glory,
above all the Choires of Angels; [1. Excel. Virg. c. 4.] Therefore, if any
Worship be due to Creatures, our Saviors Rule directs us to the true Meridian,
when he tells us; That the least, and lowest of the glorious Courtiers of his
Kingdom, are incomparably more Glorious, than the brightest Majesty, that ever
shined amongst Mortals; [Matt. 11.11.] All allow a civil Worship, even to the
empty Thrones, of earthly Kings and Princes; and shall the adoptive Children of
JESUS, refuse a Sacred Worship, to his own Throne, full of Majesty, Innocence,
Grace and Glory?

Sect. XIII. That the same Excellencies of Holy Mary, as most sublime Images of
the Divine Attributes, confirm Her Right of Super-eminent Servitude.
XLIX. BUT if these supernatural Endowments of the holy Mother of JESUS, be
considered, not precisely as Absolute Perfections, intrinsically adorning and
beautifying Her Soul, and rendering Her Illustrious, Holy and Glorious, above
all Pure Creatures; but moreover, as they are Relative Excellencies, refining
the Souls Natural Image of God, into a Divine; by an Imitation of the Infinite
Rays of his Majesty, Holiness and Glory, communicated ineffably, by the Signet
of Beatifical Grace; together, with a stupendous Representation, of the Divine
Production, and Glorious Operations, in the Order of Grace and Glory; whereby
she is dignified with the Capacity of a Religious Worship, in a most sublime
manner, transcending the precise Terms of Civil and Sacred; Thus, the Divine
Mother of JESUS, being the highest Signet of the Divine Similitude, amongst all
Pure Creatures, by her surpassing fullness of Grace, and splendours of Glory,
has an unquestionable Right, to our most profound Respects, Homage and
Veneration, even under the notion of a Religious Obligation and Duty.

L. And first, by amplifying the Theames of her Praises, according to the
several Forms, approved by the Authority of the Church; and recommended to our
use, by the Practice of her pious and prudent Devotes; who know how to
distinguish betwixt God, and the Holiest of his created and Glorious Images.
Secondly, by elevating her Dignity and Perfections, with most Illustrious
Titles of Honor, suiting to the Excellency of this Chief, of all the Glorious
Images of the Divinity, amongst all Pure Creatures. Thirdly, by acknowledging
our vast distance beneath her, by reason of that transcendent Image of Gods
Majesty, Attributes, Productions and Operations, wherewith she is dignified, by
her special Prerogative of Beatifical Grace, above all Pure Creatures, though
still infinitely inferior, to the infinite and independent Majesty and
Perfections of the Deity; the absolutely Immense Abyss, Original Cause, and
unparalled Exemplar, of Hers, and of all others, participated, finite and
dependent Perfections; of whatever Style, Luster or Magnitude; even in the most
sacred and transcendent Order of Innocence, Grace and Glory.

LI. Fourthly, Upon the same Motive, of Dei-forme Grandeurs of holy Mary, the
Mother of JESUS, she is Religiously addressed unto, by Her pious Devotes,
struggling against sinful Concupiscences, in this their Earthly Exile, with an
humble Confidence in her Acceptableness to God, as a chief Favorite, in his
Courts of Requests; a powerful Mediatrice, at the Bar of his Justice; and a
most efficacious Advocate, in all our Claims, at the Throne of Gods Mercy, for
protection against the Powers of Darkness, and Communion with the Children of
Light. For, by virtue of her transcendent supernatural Perfections, whereon the
clearness of this participated Image of the Majesty and Perfections of the
Deity, is grounded, she more intimately receives the Irradiations, not only of
the Beauty of God, and the delights of his Glory; but also, of his Knowledge,
Will and Power, as to the Merits of Christ, the efficacy of Sacraments, the
Operations of interior Grace, and Communion of the Saints; especially, as to
all the Concerns of Gods Servants, relating to their blessed State. For, all
Divines agree in this privilege of the glorious Saints; [Conc. Senonens.
Decret. fid. 13. Greg. l. 2. Mor. c. 2. Aug. l. 20. civ. c. 21. and 22. c. 29.
Anselm. l. Similitud. c. 57. Greg. l. 2. Dial. c. 35. D. Th. 2. 2. q. 180. art.
5. ad 3. Bon. Soliloq. c. 4. Smising. tr. 1. ^^6. n. 220. Less. l. 2. Sum. Bon.
c. 9.] which therefore must be allowed super-eminently to the Queen of Saints,
as to her perfect knowledge of all the Petitions of Her Devotes; And Gods
marvelous Bounty to Her, abundantly convincing us, of her wonderful
Acceptableness to God, for the confirming this our Confidence, of succeeding,
in those Prayers, we offer by Her, through Gods gracious condescendence to our
Requests, accordingly made for us.

LII. Wherein we are further confirmed, from Gods Sacred Promises, graciously
to harken to the Prayers of the Saints, and actually granting many Favors to
their Clients, upon their account; [ Genesis 26.5. Exodus 32.13.3. Reg. 11.12. and
4. Reg. 19.34. Isaiae 37.35. Eccl. 44.24. and Apoc. 5.8.] But we are much more
insur'd in this Confidence, while our Petitions are offered up to JESUS, by the
Greatest of the Saints; And our Hope is yet further enforced, from the
Contemplation of that Excellent Obedience, which Christ (though Mortal, yet a
God, as observed toward Josue 10.14.) was pleased to pay unto Her Commands;
[Luc. 2.51. and Jo. 2.8.] not only, as an Illustrious Pattern, left to all
Children, Disciples and Subjects, of their Duty; but also, as a strong
Encouragement to the Devotes of the holy Mother of JESUS, to petition Her; with
a special Hope of success, by Her pleading for us, to so kind a Son, and so
gracious a Friend and Father. So that, if the Horror of our sins, says St.
Bern. [Serm. sup. Signum magnum.] makes us dread to appear in the presence of
an Angry and Just God, let us have recourse to holy Mary, a most proper
Mediatrice, to our Mediator JESUS; Through whom, says the same holy Father,
[Serm. Nativ. Mar.] all our Hope, all Grace, all Salvation, flows down upon us.

Sect. XIV. That the Mediation of Holy Mary, derogates not from the Dignity of
our only Mediator, JESUS.
LIII. HEnce it seems manifest, to any calm Considerer, That no one Expression,
or Practice, used in the Contemplations, on the Life and Glory of the holy
Mother of JESUS; or by her Devotes, with the Approbation of Church Authority;
detracts in the least, either from the Infinite Majesty and Perfections of God,
or from the all-sufficient, and most effectual Mediation of JESUS Christ; Whom,
all still acknowledge, with the Apostle, [1 Timothy 2.5.] The One Mediator of God
and Men, who gave Himself a Redemption for many; And thus, as the same Great
Apostle speaks [ Colos. 1.20.] pacifying all, by the Blood of the Cross; and by
the consequent Fruits, derived from that attoning Sacrifice, the proper Act, of
the Office of our One Mediator JESUS; for that End, clad in our Flesh, which
could shed its blood, dye, and appease the Justice of an offended God, through
the Dignity of his Divine Person, wherein it subsists; [Heb. 9.12. and 15.]

LIVE. Wherefore, if Deeds, or exterior Acts, much rather Words, have diverse
significations, appliable to their several Analogates, by attribution to one
Chief, whose property they in some measure imitate. Thus, As with the same
bended knee, (by the direction of our Reason and Will, taking their Measures
from several Motives,) we give Divine Worship to God, Saint-Servitude to
glorified Creatures, and Civil Veneration to our Parents and Princes; because
the Saints in Heaven, by Grace; and the Monarchs of this World, by a Commissive
Power; partake with God, in his Sanctity and Sovereignty; and by appropriation,
are dignified with Titles, proper to the Divinity; [ Exodus 7.1. and 22.8. and
1. Reg. 28.13. and Ps. 46.10. and 81.6. and Jo. 10.34.] albeit the name of God,
at its first sound, creates in us an Idea, of a most Excellent, Independent and
Immortal Being; [Aug. l. 1. Doctr. Christ. c. 6.] So likewise the voice
Mediator, refers us to several Persons, as represented to us, under their
several Characters and Merits; An Vmpire, in a Reference betwixt disagreeing
Parties, is a Mediator, finishing differences between Man and Man; A Messenger
in a Treaty of Peace, betwixt warring Kingdoms, is a Mediator, reporting
Articles of Limits and Commerce, between People of different Interests; a
Petitioner, in a breach of Duty, betwixt a Subject and his Superior, is a
Mediator, pleading Pardon for past Crimes, and Protection of his Person for the
future.

LV. All these ways, Christ is properly our Mediator; first, as an Vmpire,
judging, that Peace may be reestablished with God, if he remits our faults,
and we obey his Laws; [S. Ambr. 1 Timothy c. 2.] Then, as Gods Messenger,
proclaiming, under what Conditions, Heaven is settled upon Believers; [ Hebr.
9.15.] Next, as our Advocate, still pleading at Gods Bar, for Grace and Mercy;
[Rom. 8.34.] and yet, by Appropriation, Priests, in the Tribunal of Repentance,
are Vmpires; Preachers, in their Pulpits, are Gods Messengers; and the
Ministers of the Propitiatory Sacrifice, at Gods Altars; and the Prayers,
Groans and Tears of a Penitent sinner, in his private Oratory; are Petitioners,
at the Throne of Grace. And thus at least, not only, the living Moses, [ Deuteronomy.
5.5. and Romans 15.30.] but the glorified Saints also, [ Apoc. 5.8.] are truly
Mediators, between God, and his guilty People; [ Hier. l. contr. Vigilant.]
Much rather, the Mother of JESUS, and Queen of all Saints and Angels; unless,
the more acceptable they be to God, and the greater their Glory; their Power
should be less, and their Prayers more Fruitless; which is very inconsequent,
to that glorious State, and coheirship with Christ, our great Advocate; [Apoc.
2 26. and 8.3.] and to the Communion of Saints, and that compassion of the
Heavenly Citizens, which they so eagerly practiced, toward their once
Fellow-Captives.

LVI. But that other Mediation, by way of Sacrifice, and Propitiation through
the blood of the Cross, cancelling Gods Sentence drawn up against us, by the
exuberant Dignity of the Person suffering; this is so proper to JESUS, that he
alone is the One Mediator; In substance, because the Person of God,
substantially unites the Natures of God and Man; and by Operation, because the
Merits of his Humane Nature, con-subsisting with the Divine, paid the whole
Debt of our Crimes, established Seals for our Sanctification, and through them,
gave us a co-heirship to Heaven; [1 Timothy 2.5. and 6. ubi Chrysostom. Ambr.
Theophylact. Theodoret. Aug. l. 9. Civ. c. 19. Fulgent. l. de fid. ad Petr. c.
2. Hilar. l. 9. Trin. Cyril. l. 12. These. c. 10.] So that, although Priests at
the Altar do offer, the Propitiatory and Satisfactory Sacrifice of our
Mediator, and the Saints in Heaven, may commemorate its efficacy, to move Gods
Clemency, to pardon our Crimes, through the Merits of that our Mediator,
offered and commemorated; yet not by their personal Mediation, otherwise than
by way of Application and Prayer to God. [ Apoc. 5.8. and seqq.]

LVII. In like manner, The several Expressions used by the Devotes of holy
Mary; of their Hope of her Aid, for their freedom from present or future
Calamities, of Sin, Sickness, Captivity; For her Protection, against the Powers
of Darkness, from manifold Temptations, and the dreadful Casualties of this
wretched Life; in imploring Her Mercy, to pity and bless them, and to shield
them from the severity of Gods Wrath, in the day of his Vintage, and height of
his Justice against rebellious Criminals; whereof, the Offices of the Church,
and Writings of the Fathers, are full; can raise no other Idea in the Mind of a
Right Believer, than of the peculiar efficacy of her Prayers, upon our earnest
Suit, made to God for us, for those Ends, grounded on those super-eminent
Prerogatives, of her Maternity, Innocence and Holiness; whereby, first her
Person, then her Mediation of Intercession, according to Gods Rule, in the Case
of Abel, [Gen. 4.4.] has a most sublime Acceptableness to God, for us; And
thus too, at a vast degree, beneath the Mediation of JESUS; forasmuch, as JESUS
mediates, as well by his Nature and Substance, as by his Office and Operation,
being God and Man in One Person; then, because he pays a condign Price, to the
fullness of our Debt, and not only prays for us; also, that he pleads in virtue
of his own Merits, not in right of Adoption, but of Filiation; whereas, the
Mediation of holy Mary, is only by way of Supplication, [Conc. Chalced. act.
11. and Synod. 6. c. 7.] originally depending on her Adoption, by preserving
Grace, through Gods free Gift, and Christ's foreseen Merits; though with
pre-eminence to all Pure Creatures; and therefore, to a most sublime degree, of
insuring our Hopes, Protecting our Persons, and obtaining Gods Mercies, by the
Efficacy of her Prayers, according to the proportion of that Her pre-eminent
acceptableness.

LVIII. Neither does Gods absolute Sovereignty over all Creatures,
unquestionable Power to relieve all their wants and Miseries, and Fatherly
invitation of All, to come to Him, and to plead at the Bar of his Mercies; make
void, that Duty of Servitude, all owe to their Betters, according to the
several degrees of their Civil, or Sacred preference; or restrain that charming
force of the Mediation of the Saints, in their sub-ordinate Stations of Glory,
which Christ allows to the Prayers of Sinners, however detestable, through
their Crimes and Rebellions against God; or absolutely interdict, our Addresses
to God, by his Favorites; considering on the one side, the awfulness of Gods
Majesty, and man's unworthiness by sin; and on the other, all the due
Qualifications of glorious Creatures, to obtain of God, what, through the
Merits of JESUS, we petition, by Them; either from the reflection, on our own
Demerits, or from the efficacy of our Communion with them in our Requests. For
which Reason, the great Apostle of the Gentiles thought it not, in the least to
derogate, from the Absolute Dominion of God, the Efficacy of his Power, or the
condescendency of his Fatherly Care for us, when with repeated Instances, he
begs his Converts to pray to God for Him; [Rom. 15.30. Ephesians. 6.19. Col. 4.3. and
1 These. 5.25. Hebr. 13.18.] Much less can it Eclipse the Majesty and Luster of
Gods Royalties, that Sinners, conscious of their unworthiness, and dreading
Gods Holiness, humbly Venerate, and Pray to Holy Mary, to offer up her Requests
unto Her so gracious Father, Son and Spouse, for our relief; since Gods
excessive Love has so copiously qualified Her, with the most sublime
Prerogatives, of her Divine Maternity, and a proportioned Innocence and
Holiness; whereby to render Her Person and Petitions more acceptable to
himself; and her Devotes more active in their Addresses, and more confident of
success, in their humble and reasonable Suits; This is a Demonstration, drawn
from the Intrinsic Merits of the Cause, and frequently insisted upon, by the
Holy Fathers, in their Doctrine and Practice, concerning this super-eminent,
Sacred and Religious Worship of holy Mary. Though still, with an indispensable
subordination to, and dependency on JESUS, the Son of the eternal God, our
Sovereign Mediator and Peacemaker; and the head spring of all our Hopes, and
of all Mercy, Grace and Glory; and also, of the several sub-ordinate degrees,
of the acceptableness of the Saints, in their Petitions to God for us; and
consequently, of that first Rank, the holy Mother of JESUS challenges thereby,
in the Hierarchy of our glorious Petitioners; and of all those superlative
Praises, Titles of honor, Marks of internal Worship and Mediation of
Intercession, asserted and practiced in our Innocent Contemplations; 1. as
Pious, in giving due Veneration to a glorified Creature of her Excellent Style
and Grandeur, without offense to the God of all Grace and Glory; 2. And useful,
by inviting all the Disciples of JESUS, to worship God, so glorious in the
Queen of Saints and Angels; and to seek Mercy from JESUS, through the powerful
Mediation of the holy Mother of JESUS.

Sect. XV. That the Exaltation of the Holy Mother of JESUS, above all the
Choires of glorified Creatures, renders not the Contemplations, useless to
Christians.
LIX. HAving clearly evidenced, from the true Motive, Rule and proper End, of
the Worship of the Saints, That our Catholic Devotions addressed to Them; and
upon more pressing Arguments, super-eminently due to the holy Mother of JESUS,
can no way prejudice the undispensable Right, Measure, and terminative Object
of our Divine Worship, due to God, and to Him only; and moreover, that they are
Pious in themselves, due to the Saints, and useful to the needy, humble and
confident Petitioner: I shall finish this Apology, with a further Illustration
of two Material Points; First, That the transcendent Glory of the holy Mother
of JESUS, above all the Choires of Saints and Angels, can be no just Plea,
against the use and benefit of the Contemplations. Secondly, That the
Contemplations are only a Continuation of the Ancient Practice of the Catholic
Church, recommended unto us, by the Consent and Tradition of the Holy Fathers,
through all past Ages.

LX. As to the first Position; The Opposers of the Contemplations, do allow,
first, That the Saints in Heaven, do pray for us here on Earth; then, That
Sinners may also pray unto the Saints, still their Fellow-Citizens in this
World; wherefore thirdly, if the glorious Saints in Heaven, can know by any
Means, the Requests we Sinners here make to them; It will demonstratively
follow, That it is both lawful, and beneficial, to invocate those glorious
Citizens of Heaven, Gods Favorites and our Friends; To the same intent, that
they now pray for us; and after the same manmer, we now pray to the yet living
Members of Christ.

LXI. Now, That it is possible, The Saints in Heaven should know our Petitions
here made to Them, seems easily enough conceivable; without giving those
glorious Creatures, either a Divine Being, or a Con-subsistence in a Divine
Person; or any Divine Attribute, of All-presence, or All-knowingness. First,
from the Amplitude of Gods Power, to which we must allow some Operations, whose
Means and Methods, the most subtle created Capacity comprehends not;
especially Man's, by Nature, or Sin, confined to sensible and sublunary
Productions; as is manifest, in the System of the heavenly Bodies, Generation
of Winds, Motion of Seas, Convayance of Sounds, etc. which wonders of Nature,
Philosophy, however clear-sighted, could never discover to the satisfaction of
All. Secondly, From the successful Attempts of Art; especially in this
Ingenious Age, in the discovery of Acustick Tubes, and Ophthalmick Instruments,
for the convayance of very distant Material Objects, to the Ear and Eye.
Thirdly, From most certain Matter of Fact, bearing proportion with our Lemma:
For Samuel knew the Secrets of King Saul, Elizeus of his Servant Giezi, and of
the King of Syria; Daniel of Nebuchodonozor, St. Peter of Ananias; and the holy
Prophets, of Persons, Places, and Times distant. [1 Reg. 9.19 and l. 4.5.25.
and cap. 6.9. Dan. 2.26. and Act. 5.1.]

LXII. Fourthly, From the Manner, How this knowledge of our Petitions, may
probably be convay'd unto, or acquired by, the glorified Spirits; Albeit, it
concerns not us, as Christians, who walk by Faith, that the Thing is, when
duly proposed, as a Divine Credible; to know, how that thing can be; as, how
God is one, in Three Persons? how the Word is made Flesh? how a corporal Fire
can burn a Spirit? Because Faith, having no Intrinsic Motive, assents only to
the Verity revealed; but leaves all Disputes, concerning the Manner, How? to
Philosophy; as a Curiosity, not at all appertaining to Religion; which only
teaches us, to learn our Divine Credibles, from the un-disputed Heads,
Eminential, or Representative, of the Churches Hierarchy. The Manner therefore,
How these Secret Petitions of Sinners may be imparted to the glorious Saints,
according to School-Divines, possibly may be; either by an Intuitive Vision of
our Desires, however secret and distant, either in themselves, or in the
Superior Light of Gods Essence, which is an Eminential Myrror of all Truths;
For this knowledge is an Illustrious Branch of the Theological Science of the
Saints; [Conc. Senon. Decret. 13. fid. Bern. l. 5. Consid. c. 1. Aug. l. 13.
Conf. c. 25. Dion. l. div. Nom. c. 7. Scot. 3. d. 14. q. 2. n. 20.] Or by an
Abstractive knowledge thereof, by Means of some created Images, to that end
ordained by the Almighty, for the supplying the activity of absent, or too
distant Objects, relating to the State of each Saint, according to the
Amplitude of their Merits and Glory; which the Fathers and Doctors, allow to
the Angels and Adam, in their first Creation; [ Aug. l. 4. Genesis ad lit. c. 23.
and 29. and 11. Civ. c. 7. and 29. Scot. 3. d. 3. q. 9. n. 10. and D. Bon. d.
4. a. 3. q. 1. and 2. and D. Th. 22. q. 62. a 1. ad 3.] And is therefore much
more allowable to Creatures, in their State of consummated Happiness.

LXIII. As to the Saints knowledge of our Petitions, by the Way of Intuitive
Vision, two Things are very observable; First, That we must not confine the
Science of the Saints, either to an essential dependence, on Sense or Fancy, or
to a prefixed limit of the Sphere of their Operations; since Souls in their
State of Separation, have their Intellectual Faculties, as well as Angels; and
without question, of a far greater Sphere, even according to the Course of
Nature, than any Sense, however active and comprehensive; because in their
Operations, they are exempt from material Organs and Images; and therefore the
Sphere of their Activity, as well as the method and manner of their intentional
Productions, are not distinctly comprehended by us, nor consequently may they
be prescribed and limited by us; any more than the Fecundity of the Earth, the
Influences of the Stars, or the Agility of the Intelligences. Thus, to
demonstrate, That there is no manifest Impossibility, for the Saints, in their
full Glory, to know Intuitively, in their own Natural Existence, the Prayers of
their Clients, here below, at any distance, made unto Them.

LXIV. But then secondly, The Essence of God is absolutely an infinite Myrror,
Eminentially and distinctly comprehending, and representing all possible, past,
present and future, even conditional Beings; Simple and Complex; however
Contingent, Gods will having once decreed their Futurition; absolutely, or with
reference to some condition; not as to Gods will, which is effectual, as it
passes on the Object; but as to the Thing willed, which depends on some
condition, not actuated by that Will, and which therefore remains purely in a
State of possibility. Thus, Gods Essence is the Superior and Eminential Light
of the Saints; able to supply, in a more elevated and comprehensive manner, the
Motive, Activity and Vigor of all created Objects, as to the Intuitive Vision
of each; and of this the Royal Prophet speaks, [Ps. 35.10.] That in This
Infinite Light, the Blessed shall see all the inferior Lights; The Majesty of
Gods Face, serving as a Sun, not only to discover, and embellish the glorious
Beauties of the heavenly Paradise; but also, to represent in its self, after a
most perfect Manner, whatever may con-naturally appertain to the Science of the
Saints; [Apoc. 21.23.] and consequently, the most individual Conditions of
every one of their Devotes; [ Greg. l. 12. Moral. c. 14. and l. 2. Dial. c. 35.
and l. 4. c. 33.] as our Blessed Lord expressly declares, in that Jubilee he
affirms to be amongst the Angels, upon the Repentance of every Sinner; [ Luc.
15.10] and that every glorious Soul shall then be equal to Angels; [Matt.
22.30. Luc. 20.36.] and that they All, shall retain the self-same Zeal, for the
Advancement of Gods Glory, by the Conversion of Sinners, as when yet their
fellow Mortals; [Matt. 22.39. and 1 Cor. 13.8. and 1 Jo. 4.20.] That blessed
Multitude of glorified Creatures, being ever sollicitous, for the Salvation of
our Souls, however secure they be, of their own Glory; as St. Cypr. speaks; [
Sermon. 4. de Mortal.] and ought superlatively to be applied to the Mother of
beautiful Love.

LXV. Next, as to the Abstractive knowledge, which the Saints possibly may
have, of the secret Petitions of their Clients on Earth; the Case seems clear,
above all Exception; Since Fathers and Doctors seem agreed, That the Angels
were therewith endowed, as to their Evening Science, of Creatures in their
Natural State; [ Aug. l. 4. Genesis ad Litt. c. 29. and l. 11. Civ. c. 7. and 29.
Scot. 2. d. 3. q. 9. n. 16.] and Adam in his original Innocence; [ Eccl. 17.6.]
as to the Essence of God, and the manifold Natures, Properties and Operations
of Creatures; and super-eminently must be the special Privilege of the ever
Immaculate Mother of JESUS, if allowed to any PVRE CREATVRE; [D. Thom. p. 3. q.
27. a. 1. D. Bon. 3. d. 3. q. 1. a. 1. q. 3. Scot. q. 1. n. 10. Smis. tom. 1.
d. 6. n. 299. Faelix c. 9. de Vision. diff. 2. n. 5.]

LXVI. But, as to the Manner of stating the practice of this Abstractive
knowledge; and especially, How the Saints do know, abstractively, the Prayers
of their Devotes, in their private Closets, or in the more private Cabinets of
their Souls; and this, however transcendent the glorious Station of the Saint
is; there is no manifest Repugnance, That this knowledge may be acquired,
either by Divine Revelation, or by the Ministry of Angels, to that end
appointed; And both ways, either by an Intellectual Speaking and Hearing,
whereby God, and his Angels communicate actual knowledge of their Prayers, as
the blessed Spirits do now communicate theirs to each other, at an indefinite
Distance; in their State of Glory, much amplifi'd, by the aid of supernatural
permanent Lights; Or else, by transfused Images, distinctly representing their
Requests, at whatever distance, absent; Or by some other means, possible to
God, and as it pleases Him, though neither comprehended by us.

LXVII. For, as I said, It matters not, How the Saints know their Clients
Petitions? The Church being not at all concerned, In stating that Question; or
in prying into the Quiddities, or Modalities of Revealed Truths; but humbly
acquiescing, in an Assent to the Existence, or Being of them, precisely upon
the extrinsick Testimony, of that Legal Proposer, of their being revealed; who
must be acknowledged by All, to be the most convinceing, to any prudent
Enquirer after Christian Truth; and further, to be most conspicuously
authorized, and attested, by the written Word of God. However, from these
several rehearsed ways, of Intuitive and Abstractive Knowledges, which the
Saints in Glory may have of us Mortals; and of our most secret thoughts and
Affections, at any distance; It appears evidently, That this their knowledge of
our Petitions, here made to Them, is possible; and is confirmed, from the
aforesaid Matters of Fact; several Prophets and Saints, by such a Vision, or
Revelation, or otherwise, exactly knowing Things done, or spoken, in Absence,
and at a vast Distance; even those things, which had then, no being, but in the
Divine Essence, or in their abstractive Images; as is evident, in the
Prophecies of the Birth, Wonders and Kingdom of JESUS, under the Old Law; and
of the Kingdom of GOD and the Saints, in the New.

LXVIII. Thus then, the glorious Saints, if not by the Vivacity of their own
Intellectuals, in that elevated State of bliss; yet by those other Mediate
Helps, know such Requests of their Petitioners, at whatever distance, as may
concern Them, considering their State of superabundant Charity and Pity; and
the thence amplifi'd Communion of the Saints, in spiritual Favors, amongst
themselves, and also to, and for us; God, of his Fatherly Love and Mercy,
graciously indulging the use of such Advocates for us, who were sometimes
acquainted with our Miseries; and from what they then suffered, and needed,
learned to compassion the yet afflicted Members of Christ, still groaning in
the Chains of Sensuality.

LXIX. This supposed, it is manifest, That our Addresses to the holy Mother of
JESUS, so Innocent, so full of GRACE, so exalted in Glory; (First, by Praises,
Titles of Honor, and sensible Acts of Veneration suiting with the degree of
her super-eminent Excellencies, above All Pure Creatures, of whatever Style or
Perfection; Next, by express Invocation of her Aid, for the procuring those
Favors, we hope, by Her efficacious Intercession to God, for us; grounded on
those Her endearing Grandeurs, and Gods gracious Promises;) are exceedingly
useful to us.

LXX. For, absolutely, and universally, to make void this congruous and
comfortable Advantage of Saint-worship, as to All Saints, All Requests, and All
Petitioners: It must be peremptorily resolved; First, That no Saint, ever
petitioned by Mortals, can possibly, by any power of God; or at least does not,
by any Means, know any one Thing done here; or at least, Not any one single
Request of ours; Or that knowing any, yet will not Mediate to God for our
relief; Or that Mediating for us, They cannot obtain the Grant of any one
Request, by Them, made to God, for us. Secondly, That, neither the Saint, so
petitioned by us; nor any other Saint or Angel, upon our Petition, made to
Them, or to God through them; these our Petitions, known, or not known to Them,
but seen distinctly by God; They, either Mediating in particular, for some; or
more amply, for all their Petitioners, at any time being; or yet more
Generally, for all their Co-members, here in distress; These, either begging,
or not begging their Aid, or Gods gracious Regard, to those Intercessions of
the Saints, one of those ways, made to God; It must be further Resolved, That
no Saint can be assumed, even by the absolute, and extraordinary Power, of an
Omnipotent God, at his own pleasure, as an Instrument of his Free and unlimited
Providence, for the Relief of our Necessities; And that God, in any wise,
cannot establish one Hierarchy, or Empire of Illuminating, Inflaming, and
Ministering Spirits, in the two Churches, Militant and Triumphant; and this
precisely, because He is our Sovereign Lord, can Himself relieve our Wants, and
does with a fatherly Love invite us, to come to Him, [Mat. 11.28.]

LXXI. But this surely were too great boldness, peremptorily to Assert; since,
the secrets of Gods Power and Counsels are unscrutable, and that the Mediation
of the Saints for Sinners, taught and practiced by the Catholic Church, is so
congruous, no where forbidden, nor involves any apparent Contradiction, or
Indecency. For if, any such knowledge of our Petitions, can be in the Saints;
or any such Petition be made by Them to God, or any Divine regard be had to our
Petitions, for any Saints-sake, so praised, Honored, Worshipped, or Requested
by us: It follows manifestly, That our Saint-servitude is useful to us;
Because, if any Saint, does any way know and relieve any Petitioner, to Them;
or to God, through Them; It is useful, at any time, and for any want, to
implore their Help and Acceptableness to God; who being super-abundantly Good
and Bountiful, it is likely, may then, and thus, give Relief unto us; And if
thus, for any Saint, much rather, for the Glorious Mother of JESUS,
super-eminently priviledg'd, above all Saints and Angels.

LXXII. But there be some, who would fasten upon our Catholic Addresses to the
Glorious Saints, That, either we, who pray to the Saints; or God, who reveals
to Them, our Petitions; therefore does it, That the Saints may further to God,
the knowledge, either of our Prayers, or of our Wants; in order, to work a
greater Indulgence in God to us; which is an unjustifiable Calumny, no where
hinted at, by any Catholic Tradition, Council, Father or Practice; All
agreeing, in this one Verity, That the Glorious Saints, being exceedingly in
favor with God, upon account of their participated supernatural Endowments of
Grace and Glory, inherent in Them, and transfiguring Them into a Divine
Likeness and Being; may more effectually obtain of Gods Clemency, the Grant of
our Petitions, we for our Great and Frequent sins, often deserve not. And it is
indeed, a large demonstration of our good Gods super-abundant Love to us, that
he makes known our Prayers, to the glorious Saints, by occasional Intuitive or
Abstractive Illuminations; and is kind to us, for their sakes; Albeit too, God
thereby preserves a congruous Subordination, co-herency and Communion, between
the Members of the Militant and Triumphant Churches, under the gracious
Illapses of supernatural Lights and Graces, for supporting the Dignity and
Order of the spiritual Hierarchy of the Elect; from the Supreme Monarch of
both; and for the encouraging Humble and Timorous Petitioners, by assigning us,
such glorious Advocates, such powerful Co-adjutors, at the Throne of a so often
provoked Judge, and amidst so many desperate and entangling Miseries.

Sect. XVI. That the Contemplations, are only a Continuation, of the Ancient
Doctrine and Practice of the Catholic Church.
LXXIII. THere remains now, only the second and conclusive Point of this
Apology; The showing, from the Records of all past Ages, the Doctrine and
Practice, offered to the Devotes of holy Mary, the Mother of JESUS, in the
Contemplations on Her Life and Glory, to contain nothing New, besides the
Method; and therefore to be blameless, both in the Matter and Design; being
only a new modeled Continuation of the Devotions of our Forefathers, in
several Ages, Tongues and Nations; supported by an uniform Tradition of Holy
Fathers, Doctors and Preachers; and co-herent with the un-interrupted Authority
of the suceeeding Chief, Eminential and Representative Governors of the
Catholic Church; who are the Fathers of our Faith, under Christ. And
certainly, it must appear to any Rational and considering Christian, to be an
extreme Folly, and Insolent Madness, according to St. Augustine's Rule, [
Epist. 118. ad Jan.] to dispute a Catholic Doctrine and Duty, which the whole
Church has canonized, as holy and profitable, by her perpetual Acceptance and
Practice; and whose Opposers, have still been branded, with the vilest Notes
and Characters of Ignominy, by the undoubted Rulers and Pastors of that Church;
and accounted Violators of the Majesty, Innocence, Holiness and Glory of the
Son, while they abrogate or impair the Honor of his Divine Sanctuary, Holy
Mary the Mother of JESUS. For the Ignominy and Scorns past on the Parent, is
also the contumely of the Child, [Eccl. 3.13.]

LXXIV. Nor may we abridge the Veneration, due to Holy Mary; since her Son
JESUS would not infringe a Rule of Honor to Her, engrafted by Nature in All
Children, and by Grace confirmed and recommended to all; [ Luc. 2.51.] Since
the Holy Ghost has through all States of Gods People, since Adams Fall, by the
Pens of the Divine Writers, pronounced the lofty and Magnificent Panegyricks of
the Mother of JESUS; [Gen. 3.15. Psalm 86.3. Matt. 1.16.] and since our
Sovereign Lord, has by a special Commission, made all Christians, adoptive
Children of the Mother of JESUS; and by his last breath, obliged all to accept
Her, as such; and to pay all those Marks of Honor to Her, which may become
that Duty and report, we have to JESUS; [Jo. 19.27.] So that, there cannot be a
greater Reproach, cast upon a Christian, next to his Apostasy from Christ, by
Heresy or Schism, than to contaminate this holy Sanctuary of Christ, by
ravishing the Honor and Veneration due to Holy Mary, who gave to JESUS, those
rich Springs of peacemaking Blood, which was the price of the World, the Laver
of our Souls, and purchase of our Glory; and by whom all Nations are blessed.
In pursuance of which Magnificent Favors, all Generations of the Catholic
Church, have been ever busy in the Praises, Honor and Worship of that rich
Fountain, whence those precious Streams of supernatural Blessings issued; and
in courting Her, by their humble Addresses, for Protection, and Intercession to
God for us; Whence, such copious Blessings have already flowed, in the Souls of
the Saints, the living Images of God, and Temples of his Sanctity, Grace and
Glory. All which will manifestly appear, by the following Testimonies of the
Fathers, in the several Ages of the Church; carrying in themselves, and handing
unto us, the sense and Practice of the Diffusive Church, holding Communion
with, and Obedience to, the Eminential and Representative.

Sect. XVII. Illustrious Testimonies of the Reverence, of the first Age of the
Church, toward the Holy Mother of JESUS; as a Rule to all succeeding Ages,
thereof.
LXXV. THE first Age offers to us, the sacred and venerable Testimonies of the
holy Evangelists, Apostles, and some Fathers of the Infant Church of Christ;
though only glancing briefly at the eminent Privileges, Perfections and Merits
of this Divine Creature; and the consequent efficacy of her Power, at the
throne of Mercy, of her Son JESUS. Under which Heads they have left unto all
following Ages, the most Illustrious and pithy Panegyricks on the Mother of
God, that could ever be proclaimed, by the Tongue of Men or Angels; that have
served to all succeeding Doctors and Preachers, through all Nations, as Theams
for their Sermons and Orations; and which are of that Majesty and efficacy, as
to bend the knees of all Pure Creatures, unto her, as their powerful Queen and
Advocate.

LXXVI. First then, as to the Illustrious Prerogatives of Holy Mary; she is
styled the Spouse of the Holy Ghost; What is born in Mary, is of the Holy
Ghost, Matt. 1.20. The Holy Ghost shall come down upon Thee, and the Virtue of
the most High shall over-shadow Thee, Luke 1.35.
[Matt. 1.20. Luc. 1.35.] The Mother of JESUS; Of Mary is born JESUS, Matt.
1.16. This is the Son of Mary, Mark 6.2.
[Matt. 1.16. Mar. 6.2.] and the Miraculous Instrument, of the ineffable Union
of Con-subsistence, of God and Man, in the Person of the eternal Word; and the
Rich Fountain of the Blood of JESUS, saving on the Cross, sanctifying in the
Sacraments, and pleading at the Tribunal of Gods Justice; Thou shall call his
Name JESUS, for he shall save his People from their sins, Matt. 1.21. He healed
many of their Sicknesses and Sores, and of evil Spirits; and gave sight to many
blind, Luke 7.21. Neither is there any other Name under Heaven, given to Men,
in which we have Right to be saved, Act. 4.12. God fent his Son, made of a
Woman, made subject to the Law; that he might redeem those who were under the
Law; that we might receive the Adoption of Children, Gal. 4.4, and 5. Thou were
slain, and did redeem us, in thy blood, Apoc. 5.9.
[Matt. 1.21. Luke 7.21. Act. 4.12. Gal. 4.4. and 5. and Apoc. 5.9.] Titles,
far above those of Queen of Angels and Refuge of Sinners.

LXXVII. Next, for the most sublime virtues of holy Mary, The Evangelists
recommend unto us, Her fervent Practice of Divine Contemplation, of Extatick
Prayer, and of giving praises to her Almighty Benefactor. Mary conserved all
these words, meditating on them in her heart. Luke 2.19. All persever'd in
Prayer, with one accord, with Mary the Mother of JESUS. Act. 1.14. Let my Soul
magnify my Lord, etc. Luke 1.47.
[Luke 2.19. Act. 1.14. and Luke 1.47.] Her exeellent Faith. Blessed art Thou,
who have believed. Luke 1.45.
[Luke 1.45.] Admirable Purity. The Angel was sent to a Virgin, espoused unto
Joseph, and the Name of the Virgin was Mary. Luke 1.27. How shall this be done,
for I know not Man. 34. Let it be done to Me, as thou have said. 38.
[Luke 1.27.34. and 38.] Profound Humility. Behold the Handmaid of our Lord.
Luke 1.38. Mary arising went to the Mountains. 39.
[Luke 1.38, 39.] Perfect Obedience. Mary went to the Mountains in great have.
Luke 1.39. Mary, big with Child, goes from Nazereth to Bethleem, to obey the
command of Caesar. Luke 2.5.
[Luke 1.39. and 2.5.] Her Fidelity and Obsequiousness. They found JESUS, with
Mary his Mother. Matt. 2.11. Mary remained with Elizabeth about three months.
Luke 1.36.
[Matt. 2.11. Luke 1.56.] Her incomparable Fortitude and Patience. Joseph goes
from Nazareth to Bethlehem, with Mary his Spouse, then big with Child. Luke
2.4.5. Mary, the Mother of JESUS, stood near the Cross. Jo. 19.25, The Sword of
the Sorrows of JESUS, shall penetrate thy very Soul. Luke 2.35.
[Luke 2.4. Jo. 19.25. Luke 2.35.[Her super-eminent Holiness, Merits, and
Acceptableness to God; even to a degree of Astonishment of the Angels, at the
mavelous application of Gods Liberality and Power, whereby to enforce and
heighten Them. All hail, thou who art full of Grace, our Lord is with Thee.
Blessed art thou above all Women. Luke 1.28. Thou have found acceptance in the
sight of God. 30. Thou art the blessed amongst Women. 42. God has regarded the
Humility of his Handmaid; wherefore, behold, all shall henceforth call me
blessed. 48. For he who is Almighty, has done wonderful things for me. 49.
Blessed is the Womb that bore Thee; and the Breasts that suckled Thee. Luke
11.27.
Luke 1.28.30.42.48.49. and 11.27.]

LXXVIII. Then, as to the Amplitude of the Spiritual Power of holy Mary the
Mother of JESUS, in the Empire of Grace and Divine Favors, suiting to those
her Illustrious Prerogatives, Virtues and Merits; there be two convincing
Demonstrations, recorded by the holy Evangelist St. Luke; first, the
stupendous Efficacy of her single Fiat, Be it done; for as Gods Fiat, in the
beginning of Nature, was a demonstrative Mark of his proper Omnipotency, in
extracting the whole Fabric of the World, with all its Movables and
Ornaments, out of a mere Nothing; [Gen. 1.3.] So Mary's Fiat, in the beginning
of Grace, as an evident token of her appropriated plenitude of Power,
proportioned to her fullness of Grace, cooperating with the Almighty Source of
all Goodness, gives a Being, with all con-natural Parts and Perfections, to
JESUS; That ineffable and most Divine Compound of God and Man, con-subsisting
in the One Person of Gods coeternal Word. Mary said, behold the Handmaid of
our Lord, be it done to me, according to thy word. Luke 1.38.
[ Luke 1.38.] Secondly, The miraculous Activity of her super-naturaliz'd
Voice, assumed as a special Instrument of the Sanctification of St. John
Baptist, as yet in his Mothers Womb. Behold, no sooner did the voice of thy
Salutation come to my Ears, but the child leaped for joy in my Womb. Luke 1.44.
[ Luke 1.44.]

LXXIX. The efficacy of her Mediation of Intercession to God, for Mortals,
appears manifestly, in her sollicitous Request to JESUS, at the Marriage Feast
in Cana of Galilee; The Mother of JESUS, said to Him, They have no Wine. Jo.
2.3.
[Jo. 2.3.] For the Insurance whereof, to all Intents, of our protection by
holy Mary, and of her effectual Mediation to Himself for us, our blessed Lord
formerly gave a most ample Instance, in his voluntary subjection, and
obsequiousness to her Commands, from the Age of twelve years, to thirty; JESUS
went down with Mary to Nazareth, and was subject to Her. Luke 2.51.
[ Luke 2.51.]

LXXX. No wonder now, if the Angels of Heaven become Subjects to the Mother of
JESUS; and that the Inhabitants of the Earth, be Her Devotes and Petitioners;
unto whom the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, vouchsafes to make himself a
Son and Subject. Hence it was; That the Royal Prophet reporting to Posterity, a
Magnificent Vision, wherein God showed Him, the future Majesty and Prerogatives
of this Divine Creature, tells us; Astitit Regina a dextrin tuis, in Vestitu de
aurato, circundata Varietate; Ps: 44.10.
[ Ps. 44.10.] That he saw Her Clad in a Mantle of Cloth of Gold, imbroider'd
with Jewels, of an infinite rich Variety; standing near to the Almighty
himself, even at his right hand; for St. Athan. [Serm. de Deip.] and St. Greg.
Naz. (...). Empress of the heavenly Orders, Lady and Queen of All. Naz. cit.
[Tragoed. de Christ. patient.] Explains this Prophecy, as an Essay of the
Grandeurs of holy Mary, in her Glory and Power; and therefore the same holy
Prophet, to mark out unto us, that Veneration, and Intercession, we owe to this
Glorious Queen of Angels, expressly foretells, guided by the Spirit of Prophets;
Filiae Tyri in muneribus, vultum tuum de precabuntur, omnes divites plebis.
Psalm. cit. v. 13.
[ Ps. cit. 13.] That the Gentiles, and all the Potentates of the Earth, shall
pay Homage to this Divine Mother, and shall become Her Petitioners.

LXXXI. To these Irrefragable Authorities, of the Great Oracles of the Gospel
of Grace, and Founders of our Christianity, agreeing with the Prophets of the
Old Law; evident enough, to convince this mis-believing World, of the
super-eminent Excellencies of the Glorious Mother of JESUS, and of our
Obligation to Worship and Petition her Grandeur; and to silence all bold
Invaders of her Rights; and violators of Christian Duties; we may add the
honorable Testimony of St. Andrew the Apostle, who styles her, an Immaculate
Virgin, and proper Instrument of Man's Redemption; Necessarium fuit, ut de
Immaculata Virgin natus Christus, vitam aeternam, quam omnes perdiderant,
repararet. S. Andr. cit. It was necessary, that Christ should be born of an
Immaculate Virgin, since he was to restore life everlasting, which was lost to
all.
[ Alois. Lipoman. e Presb. Achaiae.] S. Peter, the Prince of the Apostles,
expressly asserts, the wonderful Advantages of praying to the most Glorious
Mother of JESUS; and craves Mercy of God, and freedom from all Evil, through
her Mediation. (...). Liturg. S. Petr. Receive, O God, this most sacred Hymn
from our lips, and through the Intercession of the Holy Mother of God, grant us
thy Mercy and Compassion. Deliver us, we beseech thee, O Lord, from all evil,
now and for evermore, by the Intercession of our Immaculate and Glorious Lady.
Mother of God, and ever Virgin Mary.
[Liturg. S. Petr. med.] But S. James the younger, more plainly styles Holy
Mary, the most Holy, most Immaculate, and most Glorious Lady of all Believers;
and through her Mediation, begs of God, his Divine Protection, and the
Blessings of his Mercy. (...). Liturg. S. Jac. Min. Commemorating our most
Holy, Immaculate, and most glorious Lady, Mother of God, and ever-Virgin Mary,
with all the Saints and Just; let us recommend our selves, and each other, and
our whole Lives to Christ our God. Let us make a Commemoration of our most
Holy, Immaculate, most Glorious, and blessed Lady, Mother of God, and
ever-Virgin Mary, and of all the Saints and Just; that by their Prayers and
Intercessions, we may obtain Mercy. [The same Form, of commemorating the
Excellencies and Merits of the Holy Mother of JESUS, is to this day continued
in the Roman Liturgy. Communicantes and memoriam Venerantes, in primis,
Gloriosae semper Virgiuis Mariae, Genetricis Dei, and Domini nostri JESV
Christi: Ord. Miss. Romans Communicating with, and worshipping the Memory, in the
first place, of the glorious ever-Virgin Mary, the Mother of God, and our Lord
JESUS Christ.]
[ Liturg. S. Jacob. Min. med.] And S. Denis the Areopagite, in the brief
report he gives of the Illustrious Funerals of the Mother of JESUS, calls her
the Mansion House of the Divinity, and the Beginning of Life; and brings in the
College of the Apostles celebrating her Praises, with Hymns and Canticks.
Quando ad contuendum Corpus, quod vitae principium dedit, and Deum suscepit,
convenissemus. Viso sacro corpore, placuit omnibus, prout quisque poterat,
hymnis celebrare infinitam Bonitatem Divina potentiae. Epist. Dion. cit. When
we met, to behold that Body, which gave the beginning of Life, and wherein God
lodged. Having beheld the Body, each one, according to his Power, sung forth
Hymns of Glory to the Infinite Bounty of the divine Power.
[ Epist. Dion. ad Timoth. apud Damasc. Orat. 2. de Dormit. Deip.]

LXXXII. From these Illustrious Witnesses, of the Ancient and Innocent
Veneration and Invocation of the Mother of JESUS, it manifestly appears, that
albeit the Sacred Monuments of this First, and others next succeeding Ages of
the Catholic Church, either decayed by Time, or destroyed by Persecutors, or
falsifi'd by false Brethren, be few; in regard of the great Train of holy
Pastors and Teachers, who by their Doctrine and Practice, conveyed to us, the
Apostolical Faith and Holy Institutions, conserved entire to this day, by the
Divine Providence; ever assisting and guiding the Eminential and Representative
Church Authority; Yet even these few, do abundantly demonstrate the Primitive
Doctrine and Practice of this Important Article of the Communion of the Saints,
as to the Worship and Intercession of Holy Mary, the Mother of JESUS, even
under the dreadful Mystery of the Sacrifice of the Mass, the greatest Act of
Divine Worship.

Sect. XVIII. Testimonies of the Second Age.
LXXXIII. IN the Second Age, St. Irenaeus, styles the Holy Mother of JESUS, The
Advocate of the guilty Children of Eve. Suasa est Maria obedire Deo, ut Evae
Virginis Maria Virgo fieret Advocata. Iren. cit.
[Libr. 5. c. 19.] And Tertullian calls Her, The Co-adjutrice of our Savior
JESUS, in repairing the Apostasy of our first Parents, and in promoting Man's
Salvation. In Evam adhuc Virginem irrepserat Verbum aedificatorium mortis: In
Virginem aeque introducendum erat Verbum Dei extructorium Vitae; ut quod per
ejusmodi sexum abierat in perditionem, per eundem redigeretur in salutem; quod
Eva credendo deliquit, Maria credendo delevit. Tert. cit. Where, the Parallel
runs, between the efficacy of Eves sin, to perpetuate Man's ruin; and the
Excellencies of the Holiness of the Mother of JESUS, to continue Man's
Salvation; and speaking elsewhere, of the Catholic Worship of things Sacred,
and especially of the Holy Cross, he has this remarkable Saying: Ejusmodi
disciplinarum si Leges expostules Scripturarum, nullam invenies; Traditio tibi
praetendetur Auctrix, consuetudo firmatrix, and fides observatrix; [l. Cor.
Mil. c. 3.] If, says he, you require an Express Authority of Holy Scripture,
for these our observances, we allege none; we assert Tradition to be their
Introducer, Custom their Conserver, and Faith their Observer.
[l. de Carn. Christ. c. 17.] And the great St. Justin Martyr, in his
Illustrious Apology for Christian Religion, offered to Antoninus Pius the
Emperor, does in express Words vindicate this Age of the Church, from the
Imputation of Atheism, imposed by Pagans, for the practice of Saint-Servitude;
acknowledging the Fact, but denying and refuting the Crime; in that, Christians
give them, not Divine, but only Saint-Worship. (...). Justin. cit. We do, in
deed and Truth, says he, Worship, adore and venerate the most true God, and
his Son, whom he sent into the World, to teach us these things, and also the
Troops of his Followers, and Imitators of the good Angels, and the Spirits of
the Prophets; and this Doctrine we sincerely teach others, as we our selves
were taught.
[ Justin. Mart. Apol. 2. ad Antonin. Pium Imper. Vid. Apol. 1. ad Senate. and
Resp. ad q. 30. Gentil.] wherein he exactly agrees with the first Age, and the
practice of Ours.

Sect. XIX. Testimonies of the Third Age.
LXXXIV. THis Age gives us many solemn Witnesses of the Practice of Christians
in their days, in Worshipping and Invocating the Glorious Saints; and
consequently of the Holy Mother of JESUS, the Queen of Angels and Saints; [ S.
Cypr. Epist. 34. and 37. ad Clerum. Cornel. P. Epist. 1. Eusebius. Alex. hom. de
Cult. Sanct. Orig. Hom. 1. in Ezech. med. l. 8. contr. Cells. hom. 5. in Cant.
and hom. 16. in Jos.] But S. Methodius does specially dilate himself in the
Praises of Holy Mary; Salve in aeternum Ineffabile Gaudium; Ad te namque rursus
recurrimus; Tu Festivitatis nostrae Principium, Tu medium, Tu Finis, Tu sons
uberrimus totius Sanctitatis, animarum Altar; In te perbenignus Conditor,
ferventissima Charitatis flammas, quasi confer^^s solis radios, est ejaculatus.
Method. cit. All hail for ever, O Ineffable Joy; we again have recourse to thy
protection; for thou art the Beginning, the Advancement, and Conclusion of our
Festivals; the overflowing Fountain of all Holiness, the Altar of our Souls;
In thee our most bountiful Creator, has power'd forth the flames of his most
ardent Charity, as so many condensed beams of a glorious Sun.
[Orat. in Hypant. Dom.] where, having given Her many magnificent Titles of
Honor, he expresses his singular confidence in her protection, through the
whole Course of his Life; and to that end, He requests Her powerful Aid;
calling Her, the delicious Fountain of Salvation, and Altar of Propitiation,
where the Almighty Creator casts forth the powerful beams of his most ardent
Love.

Sect. XX. Testimonies of the Fourth Age.
LXXXV. THE Fourth Age abounds with a copious train of Zealous Witnesses of
this great Article of Christian Doctrine and Devotion, toward the Glorious
Mother of JESUS; received from their holy Pastors and Teachers, and by their
pious Care transmitted to their Disciples and Successors; for a clear
conviction of the Innocence, Equity and Antiquity, of the Veneration given to
Her by the Catholic Church. (...). Athan. cit. Since he, who was born of the
Virgin, is a King, Sovereign Lord and God; she also, of whom he was born, is
truly and properly a Queen, Lady, and Mother of God: Lets then say, that now it
is verified; That the Queen stands at the Right hand of JESUS, clad in a Mantle
of Gold, embroidered with Jewels of an Infinite variety. To thee we cry out,
Remember us, O most Holy Virgin, and for these our small Praises, render unto
us rich Gifts out of the Treasures of thy Graces, O thou who art full of Grace:
O Mistress, O Lady, O Queen, O Mother of God, make Intercession for us.
St. Athanasius [Serm. de Sanctis. Deipar.] proves Her Right, to the Imperial
Titles of Lady and Queen, from her being the True Mother of God, who is the
King of the World; and to that end, applies to Her, the Prophecy of that
Illustrious Queen, David saw standing in glory at the right hand of God; thence
he proclaims the Amplitude of her Power in the Spiritual Kingdom of JESUS; and
accordingly implores her Protection and Prayers.

LXXXVI. To the same purpose, speaks in this same devout Age; Omnes tibi
advolvimur, omnes te imploramus; erue nos O Intemerata, ab omni necessitate, a
canctis Diaboli tentationibus; esto nostra Consiliatrix, and Advocata in hora
Judicii; Libera nos a futuro igne and tenebris; and tui Filii Gloria, Virgo,
nos dignare. S. Ephr. Lament. Virg. ad Cruc. We all prostrate our selves before
Thee, we all implore thy protection; free us, O thou unspotted Virgin, from all
want, from all the Temptations of Satan; be thou our Counselor and Advocate at
the hour of our Judgment; preserve us from those future flames and darknesses,
and grant unto us, O Virgin, the Glory of thy Son. Vid. Orat. de Laud. Deip.
St. Ephrem, (...). S. Basil. Liturg. Sanctify our Souls and Bodies, and grant
that we may serve thee in Holiness all the days of our Lives, through the
Intercession of the Holy Mother of God.
St. Basil, Vid. n. LXXX. b. Where he calls the Mother of JESUS, Queen and
Lady, super-eminent above all the heavenly Spirits; then adds, (...). Naz.
Trag. cit. preserve us, and free us from eternal fire and darkness.
St. Gregory Nazianzen, Vt efficax sit haec mea deprecatio, Beata Mariae
Virginis suffragia peto; quam tanti meriti esse fecisti, ut prima intar
mulieres Novum munus offerret, and nulla praeter ipsam, tam Novum acciperet. S.
Ambr. Orat. 2. ante Miss. That this my Petition may be acceptable to thee, I
beg the Prayers of the blessed Virgin Mary; whose Merits were so great through
Thee, that she was the First of Women, who offered a New Gift, and none besides
her self received it.
St. Ambrose, (...). S. Epiph. Sermon. de Laud. Mar. Mary is superior to all, God
only excepted: for she is the Mediatrice of Heaven and Earth.
St. Epiphanius, Haec est virgo, quae sola interimit universam haereticam
pravitaetem; sola, post Deum, quae nos confirmet in omni veritate; suisque
commendet meritis, and precibus auxilietur: Amate quam colitis, and eolite,
quam amatis: quaecunque virgo tibi ab ea optat praemium, and implorat auxilium,
debet imitari exemplum. S. Hier. Ep. 10. ad Paul. and Eustoch. This is that
Virgin, who alone has overthrown all Heretical Impiety; she alone next to God,
is able to confirm us in all truth, can recommend us to God through her own
Merits, and can aid us by her Prayers: love Her, whom you Worship; worship Her,
whom you love: what ever Virgin expects a Reward from Her, and craves her
Protection, she must follow her Example.
and St. Hierom; all eminent Doctors, renowned Saints, and unreprovable
Witnesses of Catholic Truth, and singular Champions of the Prerogatives,
Veneration and Invocation of holy Mary, the Mother of JESUS.

Sect. XXI. Testimonies of the Fifth Age.
LXXXVII. THE Fifth Age of the Catholic Church, supported by its own Grandeur,
under the Conduct of its Apostolical Pastors and Teachers, against the Heresies
of Vigilantius, Nestorius, Eutyches, and other Enemies of the Mother of JESUS,
give us a conspicuous Continuation of the Sacred Chain of the Primitive
Doctrine and Practices of Christians, toward Her. The Council of Ephesus,
gives Her the transcendent Title of the Mother of God; [Ephes. c. 13.] from
which time, the Church salutes her with that known Prayer, Holy Mary Mother of
God, pray for my Sinners, now and in the hour of our death, [Coriolan. Annot.
ad Can. 8. Ephesians.] And thus the Most Illustrious Mother of JESUS, Conc. Ephesians.
c. 13. In tali sensu sanctos Patres fuisse comperimus; ideoque non dubitarunt,
sanctam Virginem dicere Theotocon: This we find to have been the Tradition of
the Holy Fathers, who for this cause, doubted not to call the Holy Virgin, the
Mother of God.
whose due Praises were envied by the treacherous Serpent, was honored with
more magnificent Titles and Addresses. Chrysostom. Liturg. (...). Accept, O Lord,
this Sacrifice on thy heavenly Altar, to the Honor and Memory of our highly
blessed and glorious Lady, Mother of God, and ever Virgin Mary, through her
Mediation.
S. Jo. Chrysostom. offers to God, the Divine Sacrifice, through the Memory, and to
the Honor, of the most blessed and glorious Lady, the ever-Virgin Mother of
JESUS; and begs Gods acceptance thereof, through her Mediation. [Liturg. S.
Chrysostom.] And again, He attributes the Reparation of Man's Spiritual Life, to
the Merits of Holy Mary. [Serm. de Lign. vetit.] Aug. Med. cit. Sancta and
Immaculata Virgo, Dei genetrix Maria, and Matter Domini nostri JESU Christi,
intervenire pro me digneris, apud illum, cujus meruisti effici Templum. O holy
and spotless Virgin Mary, Mother of God, and of our Lord JESUS Christ,
vouchsafe to pray for Me, to Him, whose Temple thou deservedst to be made: and
Sermon. 18. cit. O beata Maria, admit nostras preces intra sacrarium
Exauditionis tuae, and reperta nobis Antidotum Reconciliationis. O blessed
Mary, admit our Prayers into the Sanctuary of thy Compassion, and obtain an
Antidote of Reconciliation for us.
S. Augustine in like Manner; implores the Protection and Prayers of the blessed
Virgin, under most excellent Attributes of respect. [Med. c. 40. n. 5.] And
elsewhere, He admires the Privileges, and Miraculous Operations of this Divine
Creature, in promoting Man's redemption; acknowledges his own unworthiness to
become her Petitioner, and craving to be admitted to the number of her Clients,
he concludes with that Excellent, and well known Anthem: Holy Mary, succor the
distressed, aid the timorous, comfort the sorrowful, pray for the People,
intercede for the Clergy, mediate for all devout Women; and grant, that whoever
honors thy Festivals, may experience thy Favors. [Serm. 18. Sanct.] then he
calls her, the Miracle of Gods power. [Serm. 34.] and the Mediatrice of the
World. [Serm. 35.]

LXXXVIII. Many other Holy Fathers of this Learned and Pious Age, do in like
manner dilate themselves, in their Panegyricks on the Mysteries of the Holy
Virgin, and their humble Requests of Her Mediation to God, for his
supernatural Blessings; as appears in the devout Monuments of S. Proel. Sermon.
de Nativit. Christ. Ecce, and terra, and Mare Virginem honorat, donisque
cumulat; Hoc, mitia Navigentibus dorsa substernens; Illa, Viatorum vestigia
inoffense dirigens: sacra Deipara Maria, in unum nos coegit. Behold, how the
Land and Sea pays Homage to the Virgin, and heaps up their Offerings unto Her:
The Sea becomes smooth to our Ships, and our Travelers find safe passage by
Land; Holy Mary, the Mother of God, this day calls us together.
St. Proclus of Constantinople, Cyril. hom. 6. contr. Nestor. Salve Sancta
Deipara, preciosus orbis totius Thesaurus, inextinguibilis Lampas, Corona
Virginitat^* sceptrum recta Doctrina; per quam sancta Trias per Vniversum orbem
glorificatur and adoratur; exultat calum, latantur Angeli, fugantur doemones:
quis adeo valet Eloquio, ut Mariam satis celebret? Hail holy Mother of God,
rich Treasure of the World, ever-shining Lamp, Crown of Purity, and Scepter of
true Doctrine; by thee, the Holy Trinity is every where blessed and adored,
Heavens exult, Angels rejoice, and the Devils are chaced from us: who so
surpasses in Eloquence, that he is able to say enough to the Glory of Mary?
St. Cyril of Alxandria, Hesych. Sermon. 1. de Deip. (...): This Virgin
transcends all. And Sermon. 2. (...). Let all tongues call the Virgin Mother of
God, Fountain of light, Star of Life. Id. Sermon. compend. Cent. 1. c. 100.
(...). There is but one God, whose glorious Kingdom may we all possess, through
the Mediation of the most Immaculate Mother of God.
Hesychius and Chrysip. Sermon. de Deip, (...). We ought at all times, to bless,
admire, and praise the Mother of JESUS.
Chrysippus of Jerusalem, Chrysol. Sermon. 143. Vere benedicta, quae fuit major
coelo; fertior terra, orb latior, nam Deum, quem mundus non caepit, sola
capit: been gratia plena, quia caeteris per parts datur, Mariae vero simul se
totam infudit plenitudo Gratiae. Mary is indeed Blessed, she is greater than
the Heavens, more powerful than the Earth, more spacious than the whole World;
because she alone comprehends Him, whom the whole World comprehends not; she is
truly full of Grace, to others Grace is given to a proportion, but to Mary the
fullness of Grace gave it self wholly.
St. Peter Chrysologus of Ravenna; and of many Vid. Paul. Oros. l. 7. histor. c
39. S. Paulin. Ep. 31. ad Aleth. Sulpit. Sever. Ep. 2. ad Aurel. S. Maxim.
Taurinenf. hom. de S. Agnet. and hom. de SS. Petr. and Paul. Theodoret. l. 8.
de Cur. Graec. Affect. and l. 3. hist. c. 14. S. Eucher. hom. de SS. Epipod.
and Alexand. S. Leon. Magn. Sermon. 1. and 2. de SS. Apost. Victor. Vtic. l. 3.
persec. Vandal. Conc Chalced. act. 11. prays to S. Flavian Martyr, and Sozom.
lib. 7. Mirac. Deip. c. 5. reports wonderful Miracles attributed to holy Mary;
(...). All believed them to be wrought by the holy Virgin Mary, the Mother of
Christ.
others, who in general, assert the Worship and Invocation of glorified
Creatures; and whose co-herent assent, with the received Tradition of former
Ages, do manifestly evidence the Innocence, Equity and Antiquity of our
Catholic Saint-Servitude, super-eminently due to the Holy Mother of JESUS; and
consequently do vindicate the Contemplations on her Life and Glory, from the
unkind Reflections of their Opposers.

Sect. XXII. Testimonies of the Sixth Age.
LXXXIX. IN the Sixth Age, Fulgent. Sermon. de Partu Salvator. Omnes Natura Cursus
Virgo Maria in Christo suscepit, ut omnibus ad se confugientibus subveniret.
The Virgin Mary did undergo the several States of Life in Christ, that she
might the more effectually relieve all, who fly for Aid unto Her.
St. Fulgentius, with great Energy, acknowledges the holy Mother of JESUS, to
have a most ample Power, at the Tribunal of Gods Mercies, for the relief of her
earnest Petitioners. Andr. Cretens. Com. in Ave Maria. Benedicta Tu inter
foeminas, quam Beatam omnes generationes praedicant, Reges glorificant,
Potentatus adorant, cujus in conspectu ditissimi ex populo dona litant. Blessed
art thou amongst Women, whom all Generations do proclaim Blessed, Kings do
glorify, Potentates do adore, and before whom the Rich offer up their Presents.
Andreas Cretens. says, That all Princes and Powers of the Earth must adore the
Mother of JESUS, as the common Propitiatory of Sinners. Greg. 1. Reg. 1. Omnem
Electae creatura altitudinem Electionis suae dignitate transcendit Virgo Maria;
An non Mons sublimis, quae, ut ad Conceptionem verbi aeterni pertingeret,
Meritorum verticem supra omnes Angelorum Choros, usque ad solium Deitatis
erexit? The Virgin Mary transcends the Highest of the Elect; by the Excellency
of her Predestination; Is not Mary a sublime Mountain, who, to arrive unto the
Conception of Gods eternal Word, exalted the Meridian of her. Merits, above all
the Quires of Angels, next to the Throne of the Divinity?
St. Greg. Magn. seems to say, the proper Motive, of the Amplitude of Her Power
with God, and of Our Duty to Her, to be her super-eminent Merits, whereby she
transcends all the Quires of Saints and Angels, next beneath the Throne of the
ever-blessed Trinity. For which reason, we may presume, Procop. Orat. 1. de
aedif. Justin. Imp. Dei genitrici passim per Romanum Imperium multas aedes
Justinianus consecravit, adeo plane magnificas and praestantes: ut si quis unam
duntaxat conspexerit, hoc solum opus ab ipso elaboratum existimabit. Justinian,
every where, through the Roman Empire, consecrated such magnificent Temples to
the Mother of God, that each seemed to be the Work of his whole Life.
The Emperor Justinian was moved, to erect those many Sumptuous and Magnificent
Temples, to the honor of the glorious Mother of JESUS.

Sect. XXIII. Testimonies of the Seventh Age.
XC. THE Seventh Age of Christianity agrees with the former, in the Doctrine
and Practice of the Worship and Invocation of the holy Mother of JESUS. Conc.
Tol. 10. c. 1. Festivitas gloriosae Matris Verbi Incarnati eadem Observantia,
uno simul ubique Die, similique habeatur Honor. The Feast of the glorious
Mother of the Word Incarnate, shall be every where kept, the same day, with the
same Solemnity, and the like Honor.
Witness the Tenth Council of Toledo, where the Fathers enact a special Canon,
for celebrating the Festivals of the Sacred Virgin. Sigibert. Chron. An. 686.
Sergius constituit, ut in Nativitate and Assumptione Sanctae Mariae, exeant
Litaniae. Pope Sergius commanded, that on the Feasts of the Nativity and
Assumption of Holy Mary, Litanies should be sung in Procession.
Sergius Pap. 1. Appoints solemn Processions and Litanies, on the Feasts of her
Nativity and Assumption. S. Isid. Hispal. l. Vit. Sanct. c. 68. and seqq. and
l. 1. Off. c. 34. Festivitates Antiqui Patres in venerationis mysterio
celebrari Sanxerunt, vel ad excitandam Imitationem, vel ut meritis eorum
consociemur, atque orationibus adjuvemur: Ita tamen ut nulli Martyrum, sed ipsi
Deo Martyrum Offeramus, quamvis in memoriis martyrum constituamus Altaria. The
Ancient Fathers did decree, that Feasts should be kept, in the Mystery of our
Worship; either to quicken us to the Imitation of the Virtues of the Saints, or
that we may communicate in their Merits, and be helped by their Prayers; Not
that we sacrifice to any of the Saints, but to the God of the Saints only;
though we erect Altars to God, in remembrance of the Saints.
St. Isidore often dilates himself in the Praises and Worship of holy Mary; and
shows, that the Catholic Saint-Servitude derogates not from that Worship,
which is due to God only. Ildefons. l. Virginit. Mar. c. 12. Venio ad Te, sola
Virgo Matter Dei: Procido. coram Te: humilior coram Te: Rogo Te: ut obtineas
deleri facta peccati Mei; ut jubeas mundari me ab iniquitate operis Mei, ut
facias me diligere gloriam Virtutis tuae, ut reveles mihi multitudinem
Dulcedinis Filii tui; ut mihi des loqui and defendere Fidei sinceritatem Filii
tui; Concedas etiam mihi, adhaerere Deo, and Tibi: Illi, sicut factori meo:
Tibi, sicut Genitrici factoris Mei, etc. I approach to Thee, O only Virgin
Mother of God: I prostrate my self before Thee: I humble my self before Thee: I
beseech Thee, obtain the cancelling of all my sinful Works, command me to be
cleansed from the Iniquity of my Crimes, make me covet the Glory of thy
Virtues, reveal unto me the Plenty of the sweetness of thy Son; Grant that I
may profess and defend the true Faith of thy Son; and that I may adhere to God,
and Thee: To Him, as my Creator; to Thee, as to the Mother of my Creator, etc.
And St. Ildephons prostrating himself before the holy Mother of God, conjures
her by whatever is Sacred and Mysterious, in the Conception of the eternal
Word, to obtain of Him the Remission of his Sins, to command his delivery from
all Iniquity, to render him emulous of her own transcendent Virtues, and to
give Him a relish of the delicious Treasures of the Love of JESUS.

XCI. The Opposers of our Catholic Saint-Servitude, as taught and used by
Christians, of all Ages and Nations of the Apostolical Church, regarding more
the rind and Criticism of Words, than the Spirit and Truth of Christianity,
discovered by the Holy Fathers; are much offended at the Phrase of Command,
sometimes used in our Addresses to the Mother of JESUS, in order to his Divine
and Theandrick Operations, appertaining to Man's Redemption and Sanctification
by Grace; as in this passage of St. Ildefons: Thence inferring, our manifest
Idolatry, in Worshipping and Invocating Holy MARY, as the chief and absolute
Sovereign over Souls, and Author of Grace and Holiness, [ Calvin. l. 3. Instit.
c. 20. n. 22. Answer. p. 25. Specul. p. 17.]

XCII. But as the erecting of Temples, and Consecrating Altars therein, under
the Patronage and Protection of Holy Mary, the Mother of JESUS; and the
Ordaining Priests, to offer Sacrifice there, upon Her Festivals; or the
Imposing her Sacred Name, in Baptismal Regeneration; or making Holy Vows of
Evangelical Perfection, in a Religious Society, established in Memory of some
Excellent Mystery of her Life, etc. cannot be reputed Idolatry, because none of
these Acts are designed, immediately, properly and absolutely to Holy Mary, but
to God only, the Supreme Lord of all Creatures; though by Appropriation
performed in Remembrance of Her, or of some Mystery relating to Christ, or of
some signal Favor obtained of Christ, by her more powerful Intercession and
Protection, as by a super-eminent Saint, a more glorious Image of the Divine
Perfections, and most endeared Favorite in the Court of Heaven; gratefully,
piously and duly acknowleg'd by those our external Acts: So neither can those
sensible Marks, of that great Confidence, Catholics conceive, of the power of
the holy Mother of JESUS, within his Spiritual Empire, in Requesting Her, to
bestow Temporal or Spiritual Gifts, or even to command us, to be cleansed from
sin, which cannot be done, but by the power of JESUS only; in the known sense
of the holy Church, he esteemed, an Invasion of Gods Imperial Power, or a
Giving to Holy Mary, that Religious Worship, which is proper to JESUS, the Son
of the eternal God; who alone, is the absolute Creator, and Giver of Life,
Light, Grace, and of all Good Things. [Eph. 2.8. Jac. 1.17.] And the Sovereign
Lord of All, by Essence, and indispensably, in whole and in part. [ Levit.
19.4. Ps. 23.1.] Insomuch, that although God, covenanting with his Church, to
assist her Governors, Eminential, or Representative, in Teaching all Truth; to
cooperate with her Ministers of Sacraments, in Sanctifying well-dispos'd
Believers; and to give Life everlasting, to Faithful Laborours in his Vineyard,
with proportion to their Merits in Christ; by Virtue of his Fidelity, whereby,
his promise and performance still run parallel; [Matt. 28.20. Jo. 20.23. Scot.
4. d. 1. q. 5. n. 12. 2 Timothy 4.8. Trid. Sess. 6. c. ult.] Yet in Right of Gods
Essential Supremacy over all Creatures, and Independency on all, no Creature,
of whatever Spiritual magnitude, can claim any Gift of his Mercy, or power over
his Will, upon any strict Obligation of Justice; [Alens. p. 1. q. 39. m. 1. D.
Thom. q. 21. a. 1. D. Bon. 4. d. 46. a. 2. q. 1. Scot. q. 1. n. 4. and 11.
Smif. tom. 1. disp. 4. q. 5. n. 45.] But as St. Aug. [1. Conf. 4.] says, he
gives what is due, though Debtor to none; because, as St. Anselm remarks, [
Prosolog. c. 10.] God is Just, not giving as due, but doing what becomes his
Infinite Goodness; upon his promise, passed in his Gospel of Truth and Grace,
under the Seals of his most tender Love to Believers.

XCIII. Whence it is manifest, according to the Doctrine and Spirit of the
Catholic Church; First, that Faith, Remission of sins, and sanctifying Grace,
are not the principal, proper, and Physical Gifts of any, however glorious
Creature: Secondly, that God is not rigorously subject to any power beneath
himself, as to the dispensing his Gifts and Graces to us. Thirdly, That
therefore, whatever the Forms of our Prayers are, their design is, only to
desire Gods gracious and glorified Servants, to pray for us; and according to
the amplitude of their participated supernatural Dignity, and the
acceptableness of their Prayers according to the Measure of that Dignity,
covenanted for, in the Gifts of Grace, earnestly and effectually to obtain of
God, those Gifts for us, purely by their Mediation of Intercession with God;
according to the known Decree of this Sixth General Council, under Pope Agatho,
c. 7. Vnusquisque Christianus, solo Deo adorato, invocet Sanctos, ut pro se
intercedere apud Divinam Majestatem dignentur; Having given Divine Worship to
God only, let every Christian pray to the Saints, that they would vouchsafe to
interceed to the Divine Majesty for them, [Syn. Constant. Genesis 6. c. 7.] And
according to the practice of the Fathers of the Fourth General Council, under
Pope Leo the Great, act. 11. Flavianus post mortem Vivit, Martyr pro nobis
oret; Flavian, though dead, lives; Let the Martyr pray for us. [Syn. Genesis
Chalced. act. 11.]

XCIV. Wherefore, although, according to the true Spirit of the Gospel of
JESUS, Catholics do piously and confidently covet the Patronage and Protection
of the Saints, as subordinate Ministers of manifold Favors, not exceeding
their Power; such as are Illuminations, or Suggestions of holy thoughts and
desires; Restraining, or destroying the Illusions of Demons; Diverting of many
evil Accidents of Man's Life; which are the proper Effects of the Ministry of
the Angels and Saints, [Gen. 48.16. and Ps. 90.11. with Matt. 22.30.] Since the
Saints are, as the Angels of God; and therefore do offer up our Petitions to
God, and join their Prayers with ours; Yet is it not lawful, to Invocate the
Saints, of whatever Excellency they be, as chief Authors of Man's Redemption
from sin, or of his Sanctification by Grace, or of his Glory with God; this
being uncommunicably proper, effectively, to the Omnipotency of God;
meritoriously, to the Mediatorship of JESUS Christ; whereof, neither is
properly and strictly, subject to the Empire of any Creature, otherwise than
through a free condescension and Covenant of the Divine Goodness, for the
raising and supporting a Sinners Confidence, in the super-abundant Aides,
offered for Man's Salvation; and thus Man Conjures his Friend to command his
affections; and Josua's Faith commands God to arrest the Sun in its Meridian,
[Jos. 10.14.] And Christ assures us upon his Fidelity, that whatever the true
Believer asks in Prayer, God will grant his request, [Matt. 21.22.] Whence the
devout St. Augustine, [l. 5. Conf. c. 9.] Dignaris enim, quoniam in saeculum
Misericordia tua, eis, quibus omnia debita dimittis, etiam promissionibus tuis
debtor fieri. Because thy Mercy, O God, is for ever, thou vouchsafest to
become a Debtor to thy own promises; even in regard of those, whose sins thou
forgivest. Much rather, when a glorified Soul, asks for a penitent Sinner,
dreading the Justice of an offended Father, and fearing the foulness of his own
Crimes, and therefore making his Addresses, by the heavenly Courtiers; but with
the strongest confidence, by the holy Mother of JESUS, as his chief Favorite,
by privilege, 1. of her Divine Maternity, Innocence and Holiness; and 2. of
the filial Love of JESUS; through which confidence, St. Ildefons, St.
Bonaventure, St. Bernardin, and other Illuminated Servants of God, beg holy
Mary to command the dispensing of Divine Favors, in Right of Christ's gracious
promise to the Church, and of his super-abundant Love to his Mother; though
they still own Her, as a Pure Creature; and therefore as a mere Petitioner;
though of a most super-eminent Acceptableness with God.

Sect. XXIV. Testimonies of the Eighth Age.
XCV. THis pious and learned Age abounds with many Illustrious Witnesses of the
received Doctrine and Practice of the Church, as to that Worship and Invocation
of the holy Mother of JESUS, with Praises of her Heroical Virtues, and giving
Her such Titles of Honor, as are suitable to her Excellent supernatural
Prerogatives, asserted in the Contemplations on her Life and Glory. Ven. Bed.
in 1. Luc. Eadem Voce, Maria ab Elizabeth, qua a Gabriele benedicitur;
quatenus, and Angelis and Hominibus veneranda, and cunctis merito faeminis
praeferenda monstretur. Mary, with the same words, is proclaimed Blessed, by
Gabriel and Elizabeth; to show, that she is to be worshipped by Angels and Men;
and that she is incomparably more Excellent than all Women. and tom. 7. Sermon.
de Deip. Serviamus semper tali Reginae, quae non derelinquit sperantes in se;
cum diligat Jesus orationes sanctorum, and exaudiat, multo magis Matrem suam
exandit, pro peccatoribus exorantem. Let us ever serve this Illustrions Queen,
who forsakes not those, who confide in Her; since JESUS loves the Prayers of
the Saints, and grants their demands, much rather does he hearken to his own
sacred Mother, praying for Sinners.
Our holy Countryman, Venerable Bede, says, Holy Mary is to be Worshipped, by
Men and Angels, as their Queen; that she forsakes not those, who confide in her
Protection; and since God delights in the Prayers of the Saints, that he will
not reject the Petitions of his own Mother. S. Germ. Patriarch. Constant.
Theor. Rer. Eccles. (...). Because we offer up the Divine Mystery, for the
Salvation of Souls, and the Pardon of our Crimes, we address our Supplications,
in the first place, to the Mother of God, being more Excellent, than all the
Saints, and super-celestial Powers; next we have recourse to those, who are
more gracious to her Son. And a little after he calls Her, most Holy and
Immaculate, and that, (...). That we all must praise this Lady of the Universe.
And Scrm. de Assumpt. Mar. he says, Omnia observas Maria, inspectio tua ad
omnes se perrigit; Sanctissima Virgo, dignis Teipsam patefacis, neque Spiritus
efficaciam caro moratur. That she observes the Condition of all her Clients,
extends her care to all, discovers her self to all, and that her Immaculate
Flesh hinders not the Vivacity and Power of her Spirit.
St. German, Patriarch of Constantinople, tells us, That even in the holy
Sacrifice of the Mass, offered to God, for the Remission of sins, and the
Sanctification of our Souls, we in the first place implore the Prayers of the
Mother of God, as One, in all Divine Favors and Gifts, transcending all the
Saints and Heavenly Spirits. And elsewhere he acknowledges her Universal
super-intendency over Christians Wants and Petitions. Jo. Dam. Orat. 1. Not.
Deip. Domina, peccatoris Orationem accipe, ardenter tamen amantis and colentis,
teque solam gaudii spem habentis, Vitae Antistitem, in gratiam cum filio me
reducentem, firmamque salutis Arrham: Receive, O Lady, the Praycr of a Sinner,
who still passionately Loves and Worships Thee, reposes his hope of Joy in
Thee, as the Guide of my Life, my Reconciler to thy Son, and the Earnest of my
Salvation. Vid. Orat. de Dormit. Mar. and Carm. de Nativ. Christ.
St. Jo. Dam. frequently dilates himself in the Praises of the sacred Virgin,
giving her magnificent Titles, professing his Veneration toward Her, and
humbly craving her Prayers and Protection.

XCVI. The same Tradition of our Christian Worship and Invocation of the holy
Mother of JESUS, is yet further supported, by the clear Testimonies of other
Holy Fathers and Illustrious Writers of this Eighth Age. S. Cosm. Hieros. t. 8.
Bibl. Patr. hymn. 6. in fer. 5. Misericordiae Januam aperi nobis benedicta
Deipara: liberemur per Te a Calamitatibus: pete a filio tuo and Deo, modo dari
mihi remissionem malorum quae feci; serva me sub protectionem suam. Blessed
Mother of God, open to us the Gate of Mercy: Let us be freed by Thee, from all
Calamities; beg of thy Son and God, even now the forgiveness of all my sins:
Keep me under thy Protection
Cosm. Hieros. Alcuin. tr. de Usu Psalm. Rogo sanctam and Beatissimam Matrem
Mariam, in auxilium Meum. I beseech Holy Mary, the most blessed Mother of God,
to aid me.
Alcuinus, Synod. Nicen. 2. in Defin. fid. Sanctorum nostrorum, and divinorum
Patrum Dotrinae insistentes; and Catholicae Ecclesiae, in qua Spiritus Sanctus
inhabitat, Traditionem observantes, definimis: Venerandas Imagines: in templis
sanctis Dei collecandas: maxim autem Imaginem Domini and Dei servatoris nostri
JESV Christi, deinde Intemeratae Domina nostrae Deiparae: quo, scilicet per
hanc Imaginum inspectionem, omnes qui contemplantur, ad prototyporum memoriam
and desiderium veniant, ill sque salutationem, and honorariam Adorationem
exhibeant. Adhering to the Doctrine of our Holy and Divine Fathers; and
observing the Tradition of the Catholic Church, in which the Holy Ghost
abides, we define, That venerable Images shall be placed in the Holy Temples
of God: principally of our Lord and God, our Sabiour JESUS Christ; then of our
Immaculate Lady, the Mother of God: to the end, that beholding the Images, all
may have a Memory and Affection toward their Originals, and offer unto Them, a
Salvation, and honorable Adoration.
The Fathers of the Seventh General Council, under Adrian 2. Caral. Magn.
Sanct. pragm. Decebat, ut templum, quod cunctis Monasticis aedificiis, in regno
nostro, forma and structura praeesse videtur; in honorem sanctae Dei
Genetricis, a nobis regali studio fundatum, dignitate Consecrationis
praecelleret; sicut ipsa Virg^, super omnes choros sanctorum pracellens,
exaltata est. It behoved, that that Temple, by our Royal Order erected to the
Honor of the Holy Mother of God, and which excels all other Monastical
Buildings, within our Dominions, in Workmanship and Beauty, should as much
surpass all others, in the Magnificence of its Consecration, as the Holy Virgin
her self, excels, and is exalted above all the Choires of Saints.
And Charlemain in his Laws, for the observance of the Feast of the Assumption
of our Lady; and in his Pragmatical Sanction, for the Immunity of the Church of
the Holy Virgin in Aquisgran.

Sect. XXV. Testimonies of the Ninth Age.
XCVII. THe Piety of the Catholic Church, toward the Holy Mother of JESUS,
supported by an uninterrupted Tradition, of the Doctrine and Practice of all
former Ages, is confirmed by the Fathers of this Ninth: 1. In their Censure of
Claudius Bishop of Turin, who in this Age revived the Heresies of Nestorius,
the Iconoclasts and Vigilantius, all great Enemies of the Holy Mother of JESUS;
and as such are proscribed by Church Authority. [Jonas Aurel. Tom. 4. Bibl.
patr. Baron. an. 825. n. 58.] 2. In their repeated Veneration and Prayers to
the Saints. [ Niceph. Constant. Patr. Ep. ad Leon. p. 3. Haym. hom. de Laz.
Raban. Ep. ad Otgar.] And 3. in the Decree of the Eighth General Council,
justifying the ancient Tradition, of giving that Derivative Honor and
Veneration to the Images of Saints, which is given primitively to the
Originals, they represent. [Conc. Constant. 4.] And in order to the Holy
Virgin, Eorum bonorum haredes efficiamur, quae in Christo, vero Deo, reposita
sunt non indignis; Idque Immaculatae, inculpataeque Matris ejus, and omnium
sanctorum Intercessione. That we may become Heirs of those Blessings, which are
prepared in Christ, the true God, for the Worthy; and that, through the
Intercession of his Immaculate and spotless Mother, and of all the Saints. S.
Niceph. cit.
St. Nicephorus [Epist. cit.] gives an account of the constant practice of the
Greek Church, agreeing with that of former Ages, and with the Custom of the
Latin.

Sect. XXVI. Testimonies of the Tenth Age.
XCVIII. THe same received Doctrine and Practice, of the Veneration and
Invocation of Holy MARY, we find supported by the Concord of the Writers of the
Tenth Age, relating the Zeal of those Times, in propagating the Glory of the
Saints, and requesting their Protection and Prayers. [ Windechin. l. 1. Annal.
Regino, Chron. An. 655. 773. and 871. Rather. vit. S. Ursmar. Luitprand. l. 4.
hist. c. 14. S. Odo Cluinac. l. Transl. S. Mart. c. 5. tom. 7. Bibl. patr.] The
words of St. Odo are very expressive. Tu ergo, o bone Martine, pie Pater,
Pastor and Patron noster, nobis, filiis and alumnis; nec non and VENERATORIBVS
tuis, more tuo, bona confer, noxia submove; and ORATIONVM jugi instantia,
gaudia nobis Interminabilis Vitae, obtine. Thou therefore, O Holy Martin, our
Pious Father, Pastor, and Patron, continue to grant unto thy Children,
Disciples and Worshippers, thy accustomed Favors, defend us from all evils,
and by the efficacy of thy earnest Prayers, obtain for us, the Joys of a
never-ending Life.

Sect. XXVII. Testimonies of the Eleventh Age.
XCIX. IN the Eleventh Age, Suid. V. Leo. Adjecit homo profanus, ne Mariae
Intercessionem quisquam petat. This profane Man added to the rest of his
Crimes, that none should presume, through his Empire, to beg the Intercession
of Mary. And V. Constantius. Eo vesaniae and Vecordiae redactus, ut lege
sanciret, ne Mariae quidem Intercessionem quisqu^m petat, neque eam juvare
quempiam posse, neque Deipara nominetur: O audacem blasphemiam Saracenicae
Religionis, and Judaicae Sententiae! He at length grew to that degree of
Insolency and Madness, that he enacted a Law, that no Person should presume to
beg the Prayers of Mary, that she was not able to succor any one, and that she
should no more be called the Mother of God: O presumptious Blasphemy of
Saracenism and Judaism!
Suidas reproaches Leo Isauricus, and his Son Constantine, Emperors, of
profane Insolency and Madness, in forbidding the honorable Title, and
Invocation of the Mother of God; and by asserting her want of power to relieve
her Clients and Petitioners. Coccius l. de Deip. art. 4.
Hermannus Contract. shows his Piety to Holy Mary, in the Anthems, Alma
Redemptoris, and Salve Regina, used in our Church Office, and canonized by its
Authority; though severely inveighed against by our Modern Vigilantians; [First
Answ. to Misrepres. p. 19.] as other Pious Hymns and Prayers, to our Blessed
Lady, used by the same Spirit and Authority are. Also, [ Specul. B. M. p. 11.]
Petr. Dam. Sermon. 1. Not Mar. Virgo, Dei genitrix, cujus pulchritudinem sol and
luna mirantur, subveni Domina, clamantibus ad Te jugiter. O Virgin, Mother of
God, whose beauty astonishes the great Lights of the World; help, O Lady, all
those who earnestly have recourse to thee. and Sermon. de Assumpt. Caro Virginis
Maculas Adae non admisit. The Flesh of the Holy Virgin was so pure, that it was
not blemished with the least uncleanness of the sinful Adam.
St. Peter Damian, a Holy and Learned Prelate, frequently dilates himself, in
the Praises, Encomiums, Veneration and Invocation of the Holy Mother of JESUS.
And S. Anselm. l. Conc. Virg. c 18. Decens erat, ut sanctissima Virgo ea
puritate niteret, qua major, sub Deo nequit intelligi. It was but reasonable,
that the most Holy Virgin, should be adorned with that purity, then which, a
greater beneath God should not he possible. and l. Excel. Virg. c. 6. Invocato
Nomine Mariae, etsi merita invocantis non merentur, merita tamen Matris
intercedunt, ut exaudiatur. If call upon the Name of Mary, though our Merits
avail not, her Merits will plead for us. etc. 12. Subveni nobis Domina
piissima; procura ne pereamus. Help us, O gracious Lady; obtain, that we perish
not.
St. Anselm, sometime Primate of England, a glorious Light of the British
Empire, and Illustrious Champion of the Prerogatives of Holy Mary, humbly
commits all the concerns of his Life, to the Protection of the Mother of JESUS,
for the securing his Plea to Heaven.

Sect. XXVIII. Testimonies of the Twelfth Age.
C. THis Age abounds with a multitude of Illustrious Champions of the
Excellencies, Worship and Invocation of the Holy Mother of JESUS; who have left
to future Ages special Methods of Practical Devotions, for the advancement of
Christian Piety toward Her, and for the acquiring of new Clients. That of S.
Bern. Sermon. 2. adv. Vid. Sermon. ult. Assumpt. 2. and 3. sup. Missus. Sup. signum
Magnum. de Nativ. Mar. and Epist. 174.
St. Bernard is very remarkable and usual. Thou art our Lady, our Mediatrice,
our Advocate; reconcile us to thy Son JESUS, recommend us to Him, plead our
Cause before him; Grant, O thou Blessed of Women, through all those Favors
JESUS bestowed on thee, through all those Prerogatives thou deservedst of
JESUS, through that Mercy thou gave the World in giving JESUS; That he, who
through thy Mediation, would partake of our Miseries; may, through thy
Intercession make us partakers of his Glory. In like manner, other Fathers and
Doctors of this pious and learned Age, express their Veneration and humble
Supplications to the Mother of JESUS. Petr. Mirab. l. 2. Mirac. c. 29. and 30.
Petrus Mirab. Abbot of Cluny, reports many Wonders wrought by the Power of
holy Mary, for the relief of her Devotes. Rupert. l. 7. Cant. O Beata Maria,
Mons montium, Virgo Virginum, Sancta Sanctorum; ad omnes quidem convertimur
Montes aromatum: ad te prae caeteris ocules levamus, tuum prae omnibus auxilium
suspiramus. O Blessed Mary, Mountain of Mountains, Virgin of Virgins, Holy of
Holies! we have indeed recourse to all the Mountains of Spices: but to Thee
above All, do we lift up our Eyes, and sigh for thy Help, above all.
Rupert Abb. calls the Holy Virgin, the Holy of Holies, and most sublime
Mountain of Spices, to which we lift up our Eyes, and crave help. Goffr. Sermon.
3 Not. Chr. Condignis Christiani, nostrae Fidei Laeudibus, Christum, and
beatissimam ejus Matrem, Mariam Virginem, humiliter atque suppliciter
imploremus, ut sua dulcissima pietate, and suae dulcissima Matris
Intercessione, animas, and corpora nostra, a peccatis omnibus purget,
virtutibus illustret. Let us Christians, with Praises worthy our Faith, humbly
and earnestly beg of Christ, and his most Blessed Virgin Mother, that through
his gracious Bounty, and her acceptable Intercession, our Souls and Bodies may
be purified from all sin, and adorned with Virtues. Et Sermon. 7. Purif. Mar.
Matter Christi Matter Christianorum est: unde per ipsam ad ipsum recurramus, qui
pia and misericordi dispensatione, Matrem suam, nostram esse voluit, ut nobis
in nostra necessitate auxilium ferret. The Mother of Christ is the Mother of
Christians; therefore let us go to JESUS by Mary, since he through a gracious
dispensation of his Mercy, would that his own Mother should be ours too, that
she also may aid us in all our necessities. Vid. Sermon. 8. 9. 11. and 12.
Goffrid. Abb. Vindoc. invites all, to beg of her, perfect Purity and Holiness;
calls her the Mother of Christians, through Gods special bounty, that JESUS may
by her, be more effectually moved, to relieve us, as his Brethren; and that
none would perish, did they cordially implore her Prayers. Hug. de S. Vict.
Sermon. 34.
Hug. de S. Vict. begs of God, that through the Merits and Prayers of Holy
Mary, the Sun of Justice may always shine mildly upon us. Rich. de S. Vict. in
Cont. c. 23.
Rich. de S. Vict. says, that not only the Miserable, but even our Miseries
too, pray to the Mother of Mercy, and are heard by Her. Arnold. Carnot. Tr. de
Laud. Mar. Filii Gloriam, cum Matre, non tam communem judico, quam eandem; erat
una Christi and Mariae voluntas, unumque pariter Holocaustum offerebant; unde
communem in mundi salute effectum obtinuit. I judge that the Glory of the Son
and Mother, is rather one and the same, then common to both, because both acted
by one Will, and both offered the same Sacrifice, so that both wrought the
common work, which is the Salvation of Mankind.
And Arnoldus Carnot. affirms. That by reason of the Correlation of JESUS and
Mary, as Son and Mother, grounded on their Con-substantiality, they have a
mutual Interest in the Conversion of Sinners, Holiness of the Just, and Glory
of the Saints.

Sect. XXIX. Testimonies of the Thirteenth Age.
CI. IT were superfluous, no offer a Catalogue of the Asserters of the
Prerogatives and Praises of Holy Mary, and of the Veneration and Invocation due
to her, in this Age, wherein the most Learned and Holy Schoolmen, the
Illustrious Champions of Catholic Truth and Sanctity, do specially agree in
this great Point, of the Innocence, Equity and Antiquity of our Christian
Worship and Mediation of Intercession, to the Holy Mother of JESUS. Alex.
Halens. p. 3. q. 9 m. 2. p. 4. q. 26. m. 3. a. 4. Sect. 2. and L. Immac. Conc.
apud Cavell. Rosar. Saec. 13.
Alexander Hales, of an honorable and ancient Family of that Name in Kent, the
first Doctor of the Seraphical Order, the first Compiler of School Divinity,
and the first Master of the two great Lights of the Church, the Seraphical and
Angelical Doctors, S. Bonaventure and S. Thomas; does most amply and
efficaciously prove, the due use and advantages of Saint-Servitude, of their
Prayers to God for us, and their presenting our Petitions to God. S. Bon.
Specul. B. M. Offic. Compass. Coron. B. M. Carm. Super Salve. Laus B. M.
Psalter. min. and Psalter. B. Mar. Cantica, Hymmi, Symbolum and Litan. B. M.
Com. ad 11. Luc. Sermon. de B. M.
St. Bonaventure is a most singular Champion and Propagator of the Praises,
Honor, Worship and Invocation of Holy MARY, as Queen of Angels and Saints, and
endowed with all the Privileges of Grace, Glory and Power, in the Kingdon of
JESUS, communicable to the Best of Pure Creatures. S. Thom. Aquin. 1. d. 17. q.
2. a. 4. and d. 44. a. 3. Opusc. 61. grad. 10. Lact. 6. in 3. ad Gal. and 2. 2.
q. 83. a. 4. and q. 103. a 3. and 4: and p. 3. q. 25. a. 6.
St. Thom. Aquin. is another Illustrious Defender of the Prerogatives,
Immunities, and Rights of the holy Mother of JESUS: He proves, that by Virtue
of her Divine Maternity, she approaches next to God, in all communicable
Perfections; is free from all sin, is to be worshipped and Invocated with
super-eminent Saint-Servitude; and is the mighty Envoy of our Nature to God,
for the reconcilement of Mankind. Albert. Magn. Marial. c. 230.
Albertus Magnus speaks in the same Phrase: In his Marial, he says, that God,
in regard that his Son JESUS, was the Son of Mary, endowed her with a kind of
infiniteness of supernatural Perfection. S. Anton. de Pad. Thom. Cantapret.
Rich. Mediavil. Nicol. de Lyr. Jacob. de Vorag. Pelbert. Stellar.
In like manner a most Illustrious train of other learned and holy Preachers
and Doctors of this zealous Age, in their Panegyricks, Sums of
School Divinity, and Questions on the Books of Sentences, do frequently
justify and propagate this sound Doctrine and Practice of super-eminent
Servitude; with so constant an Assent, received from above. Robert. de monte.
Suppl. Chron. Sigebert. an. 1228.
The use whereof proved extremely beneficial to the People of Soisson, who
touched with the Holy fire, found a prodigious Redress, through the Mediation
of the holy Mother of JESUS. D. Bon. Spec. B. Mar. Lect. 7. consid. 6. Ipsa,
non tantum in plenitudine Sanctorum detinetur; sed etiam in plenitudine Sanctos
detinet, ne eorum plenitudo minnatur; detinet nimirum Virtutes, n^ fugiant;
detinet Merita, ne pereant; detinet Daemones, ne noceant; detinet Filium, ne
peccatores percutiat.
Whence the Seraphical Doctor might duly conclude; That Holy Mary had, not
only a comprehensive Fullness of all Perfections of the Saints; But moreover
keeps the Saints themselves in their Fullness, that it diminish not; preserves
their Virtues, that they slack not; supports theih Merits; that they perish
not; restrain the Devils, that they hurt them not; and appeases her Son, that
he punishes not.

Sect. XXX. Testimonies of the Fourteenth Age.
CII. THis Age still gives clear Evidences, of the Piety, both of Eastern and
Western Churches, toward the Holy Mother of JESUS. Nicephor. Gregor. l. 9.
Hist. Constant.
In the East, we have the Emperor Andronicus the Elder; of whom it is
reported, as a Test of the Belief and Practice of the Grecians, and as a signal
Mark of his Christian Zeal, that he ever carried in his Bosom, the Image of
Holy Mary, in witness of his special Veneration toward Her; and of his
confidence in her Protection and Prayers; for a further proof whereof, he
frequently kissed it, with Expressions of great Tenderness and Devotion toward
Her, upon his Deathbed. Scot. 3. d. 3. q. 1. n. 10. Quod est Excellentius,
videtur attribuendum Maria, si authoritatibus Sacra Scriptura, and Ecclesiae
non repugnet.
But in the West, the Zeal of this Age is wonderfully conspicuous, in Asserting
the Preservation of the Holy Mother of JESUS, from the Guilt of Original Sin,
revived, and amplified, An. 1303. by our renowned Countryman, the subtle and
Pious Doctor John Dunscot, the Glory of England, the Ornament of Oxford, the
Star of the Seraphical Order, and the Illustrious Champion, of the transcendent
Perfections of Holy Mary; of the Amplitude whereof, he prescribes this certain
RULE, That all that Excellency must be allowed to Holy Mary, which is not
against the express word of God, or the Authority of the Catholic Church.
Durand. 4. d. 49. q. 4. a. 1. Aug. Triumph. q. 17. Sum. a. 3. ad 2. Franc.
Mayr. Hug. de Prat. Petr. Aureol. Jo. Baccon. Holcot. Greg. Arim. Rusbrock.
Vid. Cavel. Rosar. Saec. 14. Her. p. 2. tr. 2. d. 6. n. 38.
To these may be added, a vast Cloud of authentic Witnesses of our Catholic
Saint-Servitude in General; and of the super-eminent Worship and Mediation of
Intercession, acknowledged through all former Ages of the Church, to be
specially due, to the holy Mother of JESUS.

Sect. XXXI. Testimonies of the Fifteenth Age.
CIII. THE Piety of this Age, toward Holy Mary, is manifest; Art. Wickleff.
48. apud Gualt. Saec. 14. tit. haer. c. 14. Castro V. Sancti. Walfingh. hist.
p. 338. Waldens. t. 3. p. 204. Ausu nimio debacchatur Wicleff in Sanctos, eos
orare prohibens; festivitates eorum, and Honores quoslibet interdicens.
Wickleff with an excessive Insolence, rages against the Glorious Saints,
denying they may be prayed unto, and forbidding their Feasts to be solemnized,
and any Honor to be given unto them. Thom. James in his Apology for Wicleff,
wherein he shows, the Conformity of that Innovators Doctrines, with that of the
now Church of England, c. 8. Sect. 24. and 25. is persuaded, that Wicleff, in
his later and more learned Works, retracted his opinion of Praying to the
Blessed Virgin Mary.
from the Judgment of Catholic Writers, who about the time of the Council of
Constans, asserted the Veneration and Invocation of the blessed Virgin, against
the then spreading Impostures of Wicleff, [l. 3. Trialog. c. 30.] against this
ancient Doctrine and Practice of the Catholic Church; of which our learned
Countryman Thom. Waldens. cit. calls Wicleff, Hostis omnium Sanctorum, a
professed Enemy of all Saints. V. eod. t. 3. Tit. 13. c. 118.
Waldensis, gives an exact account, evidently proving, That the glorious
Saints, according to the degree of their supernatural State and Grandeur,
ought to be honored, and magnificently worshipped; not Latreutically, as
Infinite and Independent Deities, as our conscious Opponents would have it
believed, the better to color their Separation from the ancient Body of
Christians, of the true Apostolical Line of Descent; but with a sub-ordinate
and relative Veneration; due to them in Right of their participated
Excellencies, of Grace and Glory. Conc. Basil. Sess. 36. Declarantur,
sententiam eam, quae tuetur, quod beata Virgo, praveniente and operante Gratia
dei singulari, Originali peccato obnoxia non fuerit, Piam, Sanctam; Cultui
Ecclesiastico, Fidei Catholica, Recta rationi, and Sanctis literis consonam;
ideoque tenendam esse. It is declared, That the Opinion which maintains, That
the Blessed Virgin, through the special preventing and operating Grace of God,
was not at all liable to Original Sin; Is Pious, Holy, and agreeable to the
Worship used toward her in the Catholic Church, to Holy Catholic Faith, to
the Principles of Reason, and Holy Scripture; and is therefore accordingly to
be retained. Again Sess. 43. Constituitur, ad turbas Ecclesia sedendas,
Pacemque and Vnionem fidelium, Intercessione divae Virginis impetrandam; Debita
solemnitate Festum Visitationis Beatae Virginis celebretur. It is decreed, That
for the appeasing all present troubles arisen in the Church; and for the
obtaining a firm Peace and Union of Believers, through the Intercession of the
Divine Virgin; the Feast of the Visitation of the Blessed Virgin, be kept with
due Solemnity.
We have also the Judgment of the Fathers of the Council of Basil, asserting as
Pious, Holy, and according to Divine Revelation, the Doctrine of the
preservation of the ever Immaculate Mother of JESUS, from all stain and
liableness to Original Sin: [ Conc. Basil. Sess. 36.] And in recommending, in a
most special manner, the Veneration and Invocation of Holy Mary, as a most
effectual Means, for the obtaining of God, the Blessings of Peace and Union
between Christian Princes; [Sess. 43.]

CIV. The same Religious Practice is confirmed, Jo. Gerson. Colloq. de Mendic.
Spir. p. 2. Virgo gloriosa, spes certa, and Refugium singular peccatorum; and
tu Sancte Angele Dei Custos bone, ac caeteri alii sancti caelestes, estote
adjutores; defendite, consulite, associate, propellite Canes illos Infernales.
O glorious Virgin, my secure Hope, and singular Refuge of Sinners; and thou O
Holy Angel of God my good Guardian; and all the other Saints of Heaven, be my
Helpers, defend me, direct me, be present with me, drive from me those Infernal
Dogs.
by the devout Chancellor of Paris, who calls the holy Mother of JESUS, The
firm Hope, and special Refuge of Sinners. Dion. Carth. Sermon. 4. de Omnib. Sanct.
Dion. Carthus. humbly begs the Protection and Prayers of the Saints. B. Laur.
Justin. Sermon. Not. Mar. Igitur ad honorem hujus Virginis praecinamus in
Confessione; Jesum veneremur in matre, matrem honoremus in filio; utrisque vota
nostra fideliter exolvamus, quatenus filium Genitrice interpeliante pro nobis,
vincamus mundum. Therefore let us sing in Confession to the Honor of this
Virgin; Let us worship JESUS in his Mother, and honor the Mother in JESUS; Let
us with all Fidelity pay our Vows to both, that the Mother interceding to the
Son for us, we may conquer the World.
Blessed Laurence Justinian, having heaped up many Excellent Praises and
Honorable Titles, as an Illustrious Monumeni of his Piety, to Holy Mary;
offers up his Vows of Fidelity to Her, beseeching God, that he may become
victorious over his sensual Passions, by her Mediation. S. Bernardin. Sermon. 15.
de Fest. Virg. Eo actu fidei and obedientiae, plus mercuit, quam meruerint
omnes sancti, omnibus actibus, ac meritis suis. That act of Faith and
Obedience, wherewith holy Mary, professing her self the Handmaid of our Lord,
consented to become the Mother of JESUS, she merited more, then all the Saints
did, by all their Acts and Merits. and Sermon. 61. Oportuit, ut sic dicam,
faeminam elevari ad quandam aequalitatem divinam, per quandam quasi infinitatem
perfectionum and gratiarum: Non timeo dicere, quod in omnem gratiarum influxus,
Jurisdictionem quandam haebuerit: Quandam Jurisdictionem, habet in temporalem
Missionem Spiritus Sancti. It behoved, (If, I may so say,) that that Woman
should be exalted to a certain degree of Divine Likeness, as to a kind of
resemblance of an Infiniteness of supernatural Perfections and Graces: I may
presume to say, that she had granted to Her, an Exuberant Power, over the
Influences of Grace: and that she had a Kind of Jurisdiction in the temporal
Mission of the Holy Ghost.
The devout St. Bernardine, in his sublime Panegyricks, frequently exhorts his
zealous Hearers, to a super-eminent Esteem of the Excellencies of Holy Mary;
and specially to confide in her Protection and Prayers, as being singularly
priviledg'd above all PVRE CREATVRES; the most powerful Advocate, Patroness and
Mediatrice of Christians; The holy Sanctuary of Propitiation, and the most
indulgent Refuge and Safeguard of penitent Sinners. It Is very remarkable, what
he affirms, [ Sermon. 15. de S. Mar.] That the high acts of Faith and Obedience,
which this Divine Creature used, in her assent to the stupendous Mystery of
the Incarnation, were incomparably more Meritorious and acceptable to God, than
the Collection of all the most inflamed Operations of the Saints. And again [
Sermon. 61.] That she was endowed with a kind of Immenseness of Sanctity, Grace
and Perfection; and with an almost unconfined Jurisdiction over the Treasuries
of heavenly Grace. Thom. a Kemp. Petr. de Alliac. S. Vincent. Ferrer. Alphons.
Tostat. S. Jo. Capistr. Nicol. Cusan. S. Antonin. Nicol. Orb^ll. Heur. Harph.
Biel. Trithom. Bapt. Mantuan.
To these we might add, an Immense Catalogue of Illustrious Schoolmen,
Controvertists, Preachers and Historians of this flourishing Age of the Church;
who often repeat this Primitive Doctrine and Practice, and with exemplar Zeal, do
humbly Venerate and Invocate the holy Mother of JESUS, as their most potent
Advocate, at the Throne of her Son JESUS, for the Blessings of this, and the
next Life.

Sect. XXXII. Testimonies of the Sixteenth Age.
CV. IN this Age the Fathers of the Illustrious Council of Trent, managed by a
special Providence of God, for securing the Ancient Doctrine and Customs of the
Catholic Church, received from above; against the Innovations of Schism and
Heresy, by monstrous super-fetations invading Gods Sanctuary, and polluting
whatever is Sacred, with their unclean private Spirit; Trid. Sess. 25. Decret.
de Invoc. Mandat Sancta Synodus omnibus Episcopis, and caeteris docendi munus,
curamque sustinentibus; Vt juxta Catholicae and Apostolica Ecclesiae usum, a
primavis Christiana Religionis temporibus receptum, sanctorumque Patrum
consentionem, and sacrorum Consiliorum decreta: fideles diligenter instruant:
Sanctos una cum Christo regnantes, Orationes suas pro hominibus Deo offerre;
bonum atque utile esse, suppliciter eos invocare; and ob beneficia impetranda,
a Deo, per filium ejus JESVM Christum, Dominum nostrum, qui solus, noster
Redemptor and Salvator est, ad eorum orationes, opem, auxiliumque confugere.
The Holy Synod commands all Bishops, and others, whose Office and Care it is,
to teach; That according to the Practice of the Catholic and Apostolic
Church, received from the first Ages of Christian Religion; the unanimous
Consent of Holy Fathers, and the Decrees of Sacred Councils; they diligently
instruct the Faithful; that the Saints who Reign with Christ, do offer to God,
their Prayers for Men; that it is Good, and useful, humbly to Invocate them;
and to have recourse to their Prayers, Help and Assistance, for the obtaining
Benefits from God, through his Son JESUS Christ our Lord, who only is our
Redeemer and Savior. Again, Sanctorum corpora, quae viva membra fuerunt
Christi, and templum Spiritus Sancti; a fidelibus veneranda esse: per quae
multa beneficia a Deo hominibus praestantur: Imagines porro Christi, Deiparae
Virginis, and aliorum Sanctorum; retinendas, eisque debitum Honerem, and
Venerationem imperiendam. That the Bodies of Saints, which were the living
Members of Christ, and the Temple of the Holy Ghost, are to be worshipped by
the Faithful; and that thereby, God bestows many favors on us: Also that the
Images of Christ, of the Holy Virgin Mother of God, and of other Saints, be
retained, and that due Honor and Worship be given unto Them.
do with great earnestness, maintain this pious and useful point of
Saint-Servitude in General; and in a special Manner, do encourage Christians to
a super-eminent Worship and Invocation of the holy Mother of JESUS; while they,
not only recommend unto us, an Imitation of the sublime Virtues of the Saints,
[Trid. Sess. 25. Decr. de Invoc. Illud vero.] and a Veneration of their Persons
and Representatives, by reason of those Virtues; by which they are the Living
Members and Temples of the Holy Ghost, [. Sanctorum.] Declarat Sancta Synodus
non esse suae Intentionis, comprehendere in hoc decreto, ubi de peccato
Originali agitur, Beatam and Immaculatam Virginem Mariam, Dei Genitricem; sed
observandas esse constitutiones. Sixth P. 4. quas innovat. This Holy Council
declares, that it intends not in this Decree, of Original Sin, to comprehend
the Blessed and Immaculate Virgin Mary, Mother of God; but that the
Constitutions of Sixtus the Fourth, be observed; which are hereby renewed. Vid.
Constable. 1. Cum praeexcelsa. where Holy Mary is called, the Queen of Heaven, Way
of Mercy, Mother of Grace, Friend of Piety, comfort of Mankind, and the earnest
and watchful Petitioner of the King of Hcaven, her Son; for the Salvation of
the Faithful, oppressed with the burden of their Sins.
But moreover lays a most solid Foundation and Motive, of all the supernatural
Grandeurs, and consequent duty of super-eminent Worship and Invocation of the
holy Mother of JESUS; for as much as that in regard of her inneffable
Privilege of her Divine Maternity, they will not conclude Her, under the
General Curse of Original Sin, [Sess. 5. Decret. de peccat. Orig.. declarat.]
whereby they show, their high Opinion, of the exuberant Amplitude of the Grace,
Holiness and Glory of the Blessed Virgin; her super-eminent Merits, and
Acceptableness to God; and of that Veneration, upon such pressing Motives, due
to Her; with a firm Confidence in the Success of her Protection and Prayers.
Vid. Beauxamis l. de Cult. Sanct. c. 24. Castro Verb. Sancti. Lindan. l. 3.
Panopl. Eck. Euchyr. c. 15. Perez. p. 3. de Tradit. Grysald. Decis. q. 27. Jod.
Cocc. t. 1. These. l. 3. and seqq. Caenis. Marial. l. 5. c. 6.
Besides these Fathers, this Learned and Zealous Age affords innumerable
eminent Doctors, who abundantly maintain this Article of Saint-super-eminent
Servitude, against the Assaults of Luther, Calvin, and other Innovators; as
most Ancient, Pious and Useful, to all, who believe, confide in, and hope for
the Communion of Saints.

Sect. XXXIII. That the Innocence, Equity and Antiquity of the Super-eminent
Veneration, and Invocation due to Holy Mary, with Magnificent Praises, and
Titles of Honor, ought to be acknowledged by all True Believers.
CVI. AS for this present Age, wherein we now live, if we humbly cast an Eye
back, on the Chain of this Doctrine and Devotion, which links us fast, to the
Apostles Times; and to the Oracles of the Evangelists, Angels, and Christ,
delivered by them, in favor of the Excellencies of holy Mary; which are thence
handed to us; and are from intrinsical Causes supported, by the super-eminent
Privileges, of the ever-Innocent, most holy and Glorious Mother of JESUS, the
Sovereign Mediator of Men and Angels; can we believe, and hope in JESUS, and
not bless holy Mary, by whom we have JESUS? can we love JESUS, and not Honor
his Sanctuary, wherein the power of the Almighty, made ^^e Word Flesh to abide
with us? Can we apprehend the Idea of a Mother of JESUS, beautified with all
the Excellencies of Nature and Grace, con-naturally sitting her, for so
stupendous an Operation, and now glorious in Heaven, next beneath JESUS, and
not bend our knee, with an humble acknowledgement of that her unaccessible
Grandeur? Or can we conceive her nearness to God, Her clear sight of the
infinite Myrrour of all Creatures, Her cooperation to Man's Redemption and
Holiness, and Her exuberant fullness of Charity; and yet deny that she offers
her Prayers still to JESUS for us; and knows those Wants, Tears and Prayers,
which we power forth in the presence of her Son JESUS? Surely, such impregnable
Motives, drawn from Authorities, Reasons, and Obligations, so convincing,
should effectually induce any sincere Enquirer of Truth, and not prepossessed
by Passion, or Party, to confess the Innocence, Equity and Antiquity of the
Veneration and Invocation of holy Mary; asserted in the Contemplations, on her
Life and Glory; and that its propagation and practice, through the Christian
World, of all Tongues, Ages and Manners, must be according to St. Augustine's
Rule, [l. 22. Civ. c. 7.] An effect of Gods Power, and not of Man's Persuasion;
And that, as Richard of St. Victor speaks, [l. 1. Trin. c. 2.] If it be an
Error, it proceeds from the irrefragable Authority of Truth it self, speaking
by such Signs and Wonders, as are proper to God only.

CVII. Yet further, even in this Critical Age, which nicely searches the most
authentic Records of Time, Monuments of Councils, and Fathers, Authorities of
Miracles, and Opinions of Schoolmen, Panegyrists, and Mystical Divines; there
be so many Illustrious Assertors of this true and solid Devotion, toward the
holy Mother of JESUS; so many conspicuous Testimonies, of the Judgment of our
Chief Bishops, amplifying the Sacred Mysteries of holy Mary, erecting Monuments
in Honor of her Name, establishing Festivals, for an encouragement of the
Doctrine and Practice of this super-eminent Saint-Servitude; and in condemning
the pretended Zeal of some few scattered Members, who against the whole torrent
of the Catholic World, have lately endeavored to asperse this Worship and
Invocation, through a pretended Indiscretion of some too credulous Devotees;
finally, there be so many convincing Arguments of its Innocence, Equity and
Antiquity, drawn from the constant Practice of the Catholic Church diffusive;
in solemnizing the Mysteries of the holy Mother of JESUS, frequenting Oratories
dedicated to God, under her Memory; and registring themselves, Disciples of
Christian Perfection, in Religious Orders, Confraternities and Sodalities,
established by Church Authority, under some Illustrious Mystery of Holy Mary,
for the improvement of Virtue, with marvellou^ Success, through all Nations of
the Christian World; That it were too great an Insolency, to impeach this Truth
and Custom, either of Novelty or Superstition.

CVIII. Conclude we then, That super-eminent Praises, Titles of Honor,
Veneration, and Invocation of Prayer, are due to the holy Mother of JESUS;
being drawn from Motives so Just, of the Almighties Love and Bounty to Her, and
Her thence ensuing Excellencies and Perfections, above all other PVRE
CREATVRES; and being conveyed unto us, by a perpetual Series of Classical
Fathers, Pastors and Doctors, from the Apostles time; without possibility of
showing, their beginning in any later Age; or any Opposition from any, but
such, as, besides their guilt of other Heresies, decried, even by our
Antidicomarians; have been, even for that Cause, cut off from the Unity of the
Catholic Communion; as appears in the Manichees, Eustathians, Vigilantians,
Claud of Turine, Pseudo-Apostles, Waldensians, Almaricus, Wicleff, Luther, and
Calvin, Enemies of the Glory of the Saints, of their acceptableness to God, and
of their Communion with the Just; as if they, who sometimes prayed with us,
should now, either not pray, or to no purpose do pray for us; and that they,
who here relieved us by their Prayers, should now, not know us, nor mind us,
nor have any power with God, to assist us. [ Cassiodor. l. 1. Institut. c. 13.]

CIX. So that, nothing does offer it self further, to incapacitate the Glorious
Saints; and above all these, the most Innocent, Holy, and Glorious Mother of
JESUS; to hear our Praises, Honorable Appellations, Expressions of Veneration,
and humble Petitions; and to help us in our Wants; since it is possible, Pious,
Authorized and Beneficial; and this, more effectually, in order to holy Mary,
by how much more glorious she is, whom we Petition; and by how much the greater
Authority, this Doctrine receives, from its ancient Tradition, as to matter of
Right and Duty; and its ancient Practice, and the many undeniable stupendous
Benefits, thereby obtained, [ Trid. Sess. 22. c. 3. de Sacrif. Miss. and Sess.
25. decret. de Invoc.] above all exception evidenced, in matter of Fact; from
the Histories of a Times, and of Classical Writers living in those times;
agreeing, both to the Doctrine received, and Devotions used, and Benefits
granted; and consequently obliging us, to the like Practice; and this, most
Eminently, toward the holy Mother of JESUS, because most excellent, in all
communicable Perfections, above all, however glorious, PVRE CREATVRES; and
therefore deserving super-eminent Praises, Titles of Honor, most profound
Veneration, and our humblest and most confident Addresses, that she vouchsafe
to become our Advocate to JESUS; The God of all Glory, the Giver of all Grace,
the Forgiver of all Sin, and the Savior of Men and Angels, from whom ever
begins; and to whom finally are directed, all Praise, Honor, Worship and
Supplication, (through the Mediation of the Glorious Queen of Men and Angels;)
as from, and to, the Head-spring of all supernatural Light, Grace and Glory.
Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed, and sold by Nathaniel Thompson, at the Entrance into the Old
Spring-Garden near Charing Cross.
A Manual of Controversies, clearly demonstrating the Truth of the Catholic
Religion, By Texts of Holy Scripture, Councils of all Ages, Fathers of the
first 500 years, Common Sense and Reason. And fully answering the principal
Objections of Protestants, and all other ^ectaries. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

A Manual of Devout Prayers, Fitted for all Persons and Occasions. To which is
added the Rosary, Latin and English, Prayers to the Blessed Virgin Mary, etc.
The Prayers of St. Bridget, and other most devout Prayers upon several
Occasions, never before published. With a Catholic Calendar, and Exposition of
all the Holy Days.

A most excellent way of hearing Mass, with profit and Devotion. Containing the
whole Mass in Latin and English; with diverse choice select Prayers before and
after Confession and Communion, and an Examen of Conscience: To which is added
the Rosary of our Blessed Lady, Prayers to the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Prayers
of St. Bridget, etc. And several other most Devout Prayers to our Blessed
Redeemer. Also the Vespers or Even-Song, in Latin and English, as it is Sung in
all Catholic Churches. Newly Corrected.

Veritas Evangelica, Or the Gospel Truth, asserted in Sixteen Useful Questions,
which being seriously searched into, will open the way to find out assuredly
the True, and Saving Faith of Christ, which is but One, as the ^postle affirms;
Ephesians. 4. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. written by T. K. and now published by
R. C. Price 1 s. 6 d.

A brief Discourse of Confession to a Lawful Priest, wherein is treated of the
last Judgment. 24o. Price bound 1 s.

Janua Scientiarum; Or, a compendious Introduction to Geography, Chronology,
Government, History, Philosophy, and all gentile sorts of LITERATURE. price
bound 1 s.

The Sucession of the Church and Sacraments, from Christ and his Apostles from
the end of the World, cleared, and stated according to the ancient Doctrine o^
the Greek and Latin Churches: price 6 d.

A brief Explanation of several Mysteries of the H Mass, and of the Actions of
the Priest Celebrating: Very necessary for all Roman Catholics, for the better
understanding thereof: Together with certain Reflections upon the Apostles
Creed, touching the B. Sacrament; and also diverse Meditations and Prayers bot^
before and after Communion: price 1 s.

Popery Anatomis'd: Or, the Papists cleared from the false Aspersion of
Idolatry: price 4 d.

A Papist misrepresented and Represented: Or (...) twofold Character of
Popery, etc. price 1 s,

Ordo Recitandi Divini Officii, pro Anno Domini 168^ price 6 d.

A Net for the Fishers of Men, being the same which Christ gave to his
Apostles; wherein the points co^troverted betwixt Catholics and all Sectaries,
are brie^ly vindicated by way of Dilemma: By two Gentlemen Converts; the Second
Edition Corrected; price 4 d.

An Explanation of the Holy Ornaments and Ceremonies which the Priest uses at
Mass: price 2 d.

The State of the Church Affairs in this Island of Great Britain, under the
Government of the Romans and British KINGS: Written by a Person of Quality; an^
Published by Authority: price 4 s.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen at Their Chapel at St. James's,
on the Feast of the Holy Patriarch S. Bennet, By J. Cross D. D. of the H. Order
of St. Fra^^^^.


