The CRUEL MIDVVIFE.

Being a True Account of a most Sad and Lamentable DISCOVERY that has been
lately made in the Village of POPLAR in the Parish of STEPNEY.

At the House of one Madame Compton alias Norman a Midwife, wherein has been
discovered many Children that have been Murdered. Particularly Two that were
lately found in a Hand-Basket on a Shelf in the Sellar, whose Skins, Eyes, and
part of their Flesh were eaten by Vermin: The Skelliton of Six others that were
found buried in the Sellar; with the design of digging for others in the
Garden. With ^he manner of the Discovery.

ALSO An Account of the Seizing or Apprehending, Behavior, and Commitment to
NEWGATE, of Madam Compton alias Norman, the Midwife, on the Account of
Murdering these Infants.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for R. Wier at the White Horse in Fleet Street, 1693.

The Cruel Midwife of Poplar, etc.
EVery thing is carried on by a natural Instinct, to the Preservation of it
self in its own Being: And by the same Law of Nature even the most brutish
amongst the Bruit themselves, may be observed to retain a special Kind of
Indulgence and Tenderness toward the young The Monsters of the Sea draw out
their Breasts, and give Suck to their Young ones. The barbarous Cruelties of
some Midwives, Nurses, and even Parents to young Children, may assure us, That
there are greater Monstersupon the Land than are to be sound in the Bottom of
the Deep; and if some of these may extenuate their Inhumanities, by I know not
what Virtuous Pretenses, yet the Barbarities of the rest must be wholly
imputable to their savage Nature, and the bl^diness of their Disposition.

The Gentlewoman, who is the chief Subject or Occasion of the following
Narrative is by Name Crompton, or least generally known among the
Neighborhood by no other Name than Madam Crompton; she came to live a^
Poplar, which is near Stepney, about Two Years since, taking a large House,
where none but Persons of considerable Rank had li-ved before, bringing with
her at first only a Maid Servant, going for a Midwife of great note to Persons
of Quality; here she had not continued long, before she was observed to have
several Children of diverse Ages; but all the time of her living in this Place
has been very private, not in the least associating herself with any of the
Neighborhood, or coming to Church, etc. but her Maid Servant would often be in
Discourse with some of the adjacent Neighbors Maids, being always very
inquisitive with them, but she would never communicate any thing of her
Mistresses Domestic Affairs. The Midwife herself was scarce ever seen in the
Neighborhood, not so much as to stand at the Door, but steping into the Coach
early in the morning, and coming home in a Coach in the Night, and seldom or
never were any Visitants seen to come thither, but only some Gentlemen and
others often in the Evening or Night, except it were some of the Parish for the
Kings Taxes, the Ministers, Poor or other Duties, which generally, if she hapen
to be at home she readily paid them at the Door, or sent the Maid to them with
the money and many complesant Words; she was observed to be often from home for
several days together, yet so much was her maid servant her Confederate and
Creature, that the Affairs of the House was kept so private and obscure from
the Neighbors, that they could not tell how many Children she had in the
House, or how often changed, or otherwise disposed of: Mrs. Crompton is between
Fifty and Threescore Years of Age, and her maid has often declared upon several
Occasions, That her mistress has been a Midwife above Thirty Years; and it is
generally said that she she has followed this barbarous Infant murmurdering
Trade so long, the truth of which is best known to the Omnipresent God, the
searcher of Hearts, who can bring the most hiden Things of Darkness to light,
and from whom no Secret is hid, who for Reasons best known to his Providence,
permits some Persons Sins to go before to Judgment, that is to be punished in
this Life, and others to come after, that is, reserved to the Tribunal of the
great Day.

Mrs. Crompton going out of Town the beginning of the last Week, on Friday,
pretty early in the Morning, the Maidservant (no doubt by the Order and
Appointment of the Mistress) left the House likewise, leaving at home a
Boyabout Seven Years of Age, and a Girlabout Six Years Old, with a little
Infant in the Cradle, leaving with them for Food only a piece of Cheese and
Water, not any Beer or Bread, but bid the Boy, in case the young Child cried,
to give it some Water, and she would return in a little time; all which the Boy
has since related: The Children continuing in the House alone most part of the
Day, and no Maid returning, grew very impatient, and particularly for want of
Sustenance, etc. and the Boy bringing of it into an outward Room next the
Street, a Neighbor's Son passing by, and hearing the Child cry, called to the
Boy to know what was the matter; to whom he declared, after some ti^e, the
Reasons: That they were left all d^^ alone in the House, without Victuals, and
that the young Child was almost starved; after which, Neighbors being called,
the Constable and Masters of the Parish were sent for, some of whom coming and
entering the House, examined the two Chilgren, who declared as before mentioned;
and farther, besides the Infant in the Cradle, the Boy declared there were two
more that lay Dead in a Hand-basket upon a Shelf in the Cellar; another lay
Buried ^n the Garden, and a Fourth in the Cellar: Upon present search, they
found the Two Children in the Hand-basket as the Boy had said, they being most
lamentable Objects of Humane Misery, looking at first sight, were liker the
Carcasses of Catts or Dogs than Humane Creatures, all their skin being off, as
likewise their Eyes and part of their Flesh eat with Vermin, stinking in a
lamentable manner.

On Monday being 21st. Instant, the Coroners Inquest were Impanell'd, and
coming to the House where the Dead Bodies lay in the Basket, after viewing of
them, they ordered some Laborers (according to the Words of the Boy) to Dig in
several soft places of the Cellar where they perceived the ground had been
broken, where, after some time, they Dug up six several Skeletons of Children
of several Ages; upon which Night coming on, the Coroner Adjourned the Jurytill
the next Day, resolving to have the ground in the Garden likewise to be broken
up before they brought in their Verdict, many of the Spectators took several of
the Bones and carried them away, some of which are now to be seen at the
Ben-Johnson's Head, near St. Brides Church by Fleetstreet.

Who were the Parents of these Children, or upon what account this Midwife had
the keeping of them, is not certainly known, though it is generally conjectured,
and that not without a great deal of Reason, that these were those commonly
called By-blows, or Bastards, which she undertook, for a certain Sum of Money
agreed on, to ease the Parents of, by keeping them as long as they lived. It Is
hoped our Grandsire Time, that brings all things to light, will unvail the
Darkness of this hidden Mystery of Iniquity, and expose the Truth as the Sun at
Noonday; In the mean time great care is taken and search made in order to
discover the Midwife or her Maid.

Postscript.
TVesday, August 22. This Day the Coroner's Inquest met again, but were
adjourned till Monday, on the Account that they had done digging in the Garden,
and other ports for Children, and for other Reasons. This Day likewise about
One in the Afternoon, our Madam Compton, alias Norman, was Apprehended near
Covent Garden, and with the Assistance of the Constables and Beadles, being led
between two Men, attended with a numerous Crowd of People; she was carried to
the Petty Sessions of Bloomsbury, where she was Examined before their Majesty's
Justices of the Peace there fitting; who likewise took several Affidavits, by
which she is vehemently suspected (if not positively charged) to have Murdered
several Children that were put to her to Nurse; upon which she was from thence
Committed to Newgate, by the Warrant or Mittimus signed by the Worshipful
Justices of the Peace then on the Bench.

When our Doughty Midwife was first seized, all the way she went to the
Justices, and when she came before their Worships, she was observed to carry
her self with a great deal of Confidence, not seeming in the least concerned,
or much denying the Fact. It has been observed that several Gentlemen and
others have been seen to enquire at some of the Adjacent Alehouses concerning
some particular Children.

FINIS.

