Commonwealth blazon or coat of arms OLIVARIVS DEI GRA: REIPVB: ANGLIAE,
SCOTIAE, ET HIBERNIAE, andc PROTECTOR

PAX QVAERITUR BELLO.


By the Protector* A DECLARATION OF HIS HIGHNESS FOR A DAY OF PUBLIC FASTING
AND HUMILIATION.
AS it is the Duty, so it has been the constant practice of the People of God
in all ages, not only to take special notice of the Providential dispensations
of God toward them, whether they concerned them as a Nation, or as particular
persons, but also to meet the Lord in the way, both of his Judgments, and of
his Mercies, in a solemn manner, suitable to such Dispensations, to which the
Lord has been pleased to give such visible testimonies of his gracious
acceptance, as has been and still is a great encouragement to his people to
make their addresses to him under the like providence. And as no Nation under
heaven has been exercised with more various and wonderful Providence then
these Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland, so none have had more eminent
experiences of the goodness of the Lord in the speedy and merciful returns he
has made to the prayers of his people; And therefore of all others, it becomes
them to let no Providence of God go unobserved or unregarded, especially such
as seem to carry upon them Characters of the displeasure of that God, from whom
alone We have professed to all the world, We have received all Our mercies
past, and that We depend on him alone for greater things, which are yet in his
peoples expectation. Upon these grounds, His Highness the Lord Protector and
the Council, sadly reflecting on the late dispensation of Divine Providence, in
removing from Us His Highness the late Lord Protector, whom the Lord has used
as a choice Instrument for carrying on his Work, and under him to be both a Sun
and a Shield unto those that fear the Lord abroad and at home (which they
cannot but be deeply sensible of as a sore stroke of his mighty hand) as also
in the general visitation of Sickness and great Mortality, which is now upon
many parts of this Nation, hold it their duty to invite the people of these
Nations to humble themselves greatly under the mighty hand of God, in the sense
of the many great and crying sins of this Nation, which have deserved his sore
displeasure, and to accept the punishment of their sins. And likewise to seek
the Lord for a blessing upon His Highness and his Government and Counsels for
the good of these Nations, that thereby the breach which he has made upon Us
may be healed, and the present tokens of his displeasure removed, and that he
will be pleased yet to continue his gracious presence among Us, and delight in
Us as his people, that his own Work may by his assistance be carried on, and
peace and truth may be established in the midst of Us. For which purpose His
Highness the Lord Protector, with the advice of his Privy Council, has thought
fit to set apart Wednesday the Thirteenth day of October One thousand six
hundred fifty and eight, to be observed as a day of Solemn Fasting and
Humiliation in all places within England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick
upon Tweed, earnestly exhorting all the people of God in this Nation to cry
mightily unto the Lord, and to wrestle with him by prayer and supplication for
the ends aforesaid. And that the Ministers of the several Churches and
Congregations, do diligently and conscientiously attend their duties on that
day, as is suitable unto so solemn a work, and that they give notice hereof on
the Lords day next before the said Thirteenth day of October in their Public
Meeting Place, and read this Declaration on the said day. And His Highness does
hereby prohibit all Fairs, Markets, and all bodily labor in the works of men's
callings, which may interrupt or hinder the Religious observation of the day
aforesaid.

Given at White Hall this Twenty fourth day of September, in the year of our
Lord God, One thousand six hundred fifty and eight.
LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the
Lord Protector, 1658.


