PAX QVAERITVR BELLO

OLIVARIVS DEI GRA REIPVB ANGLIAE SCOTIAE ET HIBERNIAE, andc PROTECTOR

blazon or coat of arms
A DECLARATION of His Highness FOR A DAY OF SOLEMN FASTING and HUMILIATION.
THe Successes of all the Consultations and Actions of the Sons of Men have
their Dependence on the Pleasure of that God, who is Wonderful in Counsel, and
Mighty in Working: And therefore, as in all other Affairs, so especially in
those which are of greatest concernment, it is our Duty to seek the Lord, with
whom alone is Wisdom and Strength, that we may testify our Hope to be in him,
and our Dependence on him alone. It is the Privilege of those who are in
Covenant with the Lord, that they have a God nigh unto them in all that they
call upon him for. The People of God in this Nation (if they had observed them,
or have not forgotten them) may produce so large a Catalogue of Mercies given
in answer to Prayers, as no Nation under the Heavens can parallel: in not a few
of which the Lord has as it were exemplified that Promise, Before they call I
will answer, and while they are yet speaking I will hear; and in others, given
a proof of his Faithfulness in what he had said, Ask of me concerning my Sons,
and concerning the Works of my Hands command ye me: All of them so many real
Demonstrations, that he has not said unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in
vain: So that above all the People in the World, those who fear the Lord in
these Nations have cause to say of him, Because he has heard my voice,
therefore will I call upon him so long as I live: And as if the Lord would try
us whether we will do so or not, he is pleased to administer variety of
occasions to prove the Faith of his People. This present season exhibits matter
of deep Humiliation, and earnest Supplication. Who can look back on the
Providence wherewith the Lord has exercised us the Year passed, but has
cause to say, My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments? And if we do but with an eye of common Prudence, take a Prospect of
those great Actions which are like to be the Product of the ensuing Year, and
weigh the Consequences of them, may we not say, Lord, we know not what to do,
but our eyes are unto thee? His Highness the Lord Protector seriously
considering these things, and having by the Advice of His Privy Council called
a Parliament to meet in January next, and being not a little sensible how great
an influence the Deliberations and Determinations of that His great Council may
have, not only upon the Civil Peace and outward Prosperity of these Three
Nations, yea of all the Protestants abroad, but also in reference to the
Spiritual Liberties which the Lord has in an especial manner reserved as a
Blessing to be given in to this Generation, and likewise to the concernments of
the Gospel through the World: Therefore His Highness, by Advice of His Privy
Council, holds it a seasonable and necessary Duty as in His own Person, so to
call upon, and invite others who are concerned herein, in a Solemn manner to
humble themselves before the Lord, and earnestly to seek his Favor and Blessing
on the Counsels and Affairs of these Nations, and especially on that Great
Council, that he who is the Counselor and Prince of Peace, will sit among
them, guide their Spirits, and lead them to such Counsels of Peace and Good for
these Nations, and the Interest of the Lord Jesus in them, that the Generations
to come may rise up and call them Blessed, and the Nations round about us may
be filled with Admiration at the Lords gracious dealings with us, and we may
have further cause to say, The Lord is in the midst of us, therefore we shall
be established. For which purpose His Highness does appoint, That in all Places
within England and Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, Wednesday the Nine
and twentieth day of December instant, and in Scotland and Ireland, Wednesday
the Fifth of January next, be observed as a day of Solemn Fasting and
Humiliation in all Churches, Chapels and Congregations within the same;
earnestly exhorting all those whose hearts the Lord has touched with a due
sense of these things, to be instant with the Lord in this behalf, in such a
Serious and Solemn manner, as the nature of so Spiritual and Extraordinary a
Duty does require, and that every one in their Places will study how they may
second their Prayers with suitable endeavors, tending to Unity and Peace: And
His Highness does Will and Require all Ministers and Pastors of Congregations,
to Read this Declaration in their Meetings for Public Worship on the Lords
Day next before the said Day of Public Fasting, to the end the same may be
the better taken notice of: And the holding of all Markets and Fairs are hereby
Prohibited on that day.

Given at WHITE HALL this Sixteenth day of DECEMBER One thousand six hundred
fifty and eight.
LONDON: Printed by HENRY HILLS and JOHN FIELD, Printers to His Highness the
LORD PROTECTOR, 1658.

And are to be sold at the Sign of the Seven Stars in FLEETSTREET over against
DUNSTANS Church.


