AN Epistle to Friends, FOR Union and Edification Of the Church of God in
Christ Jesus.
By his Servant, John Crook.
1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye all speak one thing, and that there be no dissentions among you; but
that ye be knit together in one mind and in one judgment.
Dear Friends and Brethren, etc.
I Salute you all in that first Love wherewith God loved us, and we so dearly
loved one another. In my old Age I cannot forget those times and seasons of
comfortable Refreshments we have enjoyed together in the holy Spirit of our
heavenly Father: Praised be his blessed Name for ever.

That which is in my Heart to you in this Epistle, is to remind you of that
free love of God, that visited us in our low Estate, when we were cast out (as
it were) into the open Field, void of all Shelter, as in a weary Land, quite
tired and weary of every thing: Then was made known to us the hiding place from
the Storms, etc. which we found to be as a Rock in that weary, wayless
Wilderness State and Condition.

My Dear Friends, you that know and can witness what I write, what remains but
that we love (Him) that first loved (Us) and one another in him? The former
will appear by our keeping his Commandments, and the latter by our diligent and
tender watchfulness one over another, for our preservation in the same love
unto the end.

Remembering that all miscarriages both toward God and toward one another,
arise and spring commonly from the decay of Love; this procured that dreadful
threatening to Ephesus of having her Golden Candelstick removed, because she had
left her first Love, etc.

I doubt not but there are those yet left among us, that can remember that
esteem and good Persuasion that many People had of the Truth, and of those that
professed it at the beginning, because we loved one another; and therefore many
concluded we were the Disciples of Christ, and it may be observed that because
Peter knew Man's Heart is not more ready to deceive him in any thing than
concerning true and unfeigned Love, he prefers not his own knowledge of his
Heart, but appeals to Christ's knowledge of it, viz, Lord thou know I love
thee.

And because true love to the Brethren is such an excellent Grace and Virtue,
the Primitive Christians counted it a sign of their Regeneration, saying, we
know we are passed from Death to Life because we love the Brethren; But seeing
there is an hypocritical fawning, that looks like Love, the Apostle sharply
reproves that in saying, Let your Love be without Dissimulation.

Therefore as God's free love in Christ Jesus was the cause of our gathering to
be a People at the Beginning, who were not a People, but gathered us (as it
were) out of all sorts of Professions of Religion, to be a People to his
Praise, and did, according to his promise, Jer. 3.15, 16. Raise up Pastors
according to his own Heart, that fed us with Divine Wisdom and Understanding,
which was in some measure the fulfilling of that Prophecy. So that we pursued
after the substance, which is Christ Jesus; and left the Shadows, Ceremonies
and Figures, as ending in him the Substance; of which Figures the Ark of the
Covenant under the old Law was chief, as Jeremiah Prophetically speaking of the
Gospel times, saying, In those dars, says the Lord, they shall say no more the
Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, neither shall it come upon the Heart (as the
Margent has it) neither shall they go after it, etc.

Now, Dear Friends, seeing we began in the Substance which was the appearance
of Christ Jesus in Spirit and Power: Let all watch and be careful that they
turn not aside, lest by hearkening to the Fleshly Wisdom and Carnal Reasonings
any of you fall back again into the Naturals, where the Shadows pass for
Substances, and so become bewildered again, and at a greater loss than you were
in before; for then it may be said, It had been better for you that you had
never known the way of Truth, viz. [better] not only because it will be harder
to return again than before your first Convincement; but also the Fiery Furnace
through which such must pass will be hotter, because the state the Backslider
is fallen into is aggravated by his being once Enlightened, which renders that
condition [near] unto impossibility of returning, according to Heb. 6.5, 6.

This I speak as a warning to all concerned, that they which stand (or think
they stand) may take heed lest they fall, for blessed is the Man that fears
always; because he that casts away true fear will restrain Prayer, and the
restraining Prayer will discover the Irreligious and Careless; and the
Hypocrite does not truly discern Prayer, though he makes long Prayers.

Therefore Dear Friends, as you would persevere unto the end in your Spiritual
Union with God, and Communion one with another, and as you would have such as
should be saved added to the Church, and that the number of them may be
increased through the World, until the Kingdoms thereof become the Kingdoms of
the Lord and his Christ's, which must be accomplished, and the Mystery of God
finished, Rev. 10.7. compared with 11.15.

I say, as you desire the accomplishment of all these things in their season,
what manner of People ought you to be in all Godliness of Conversation? Which
brancheth out it self into all particulars of Religion, and the duties thereof,
as Children to Parents, Subjects to their Governors, Wives to Husbands,
Servants to Masters, and the Younger to the Elder, etc. as the Apostle writes
to Titus; which Exhortation would be to no purpose did not the Grace of God
appear to them all; therefore he says, [For] the Grace of God appears to all,
etc. whereby the Apostle exalts the Sovereignty of Grace for the performance of
all these Duties, saying in a certain place, The Unity of the Spirit is kept in
the bond of Peace, for Peace must be kept in all the States and Conditions God
has placed People in; Peace and Love being the Bond that will preserve in the
Unity both with God and one with another.

The Children of God are bound together (as it were) in the bundle of Life, and
as they continue [so bound] the Gates of Hell can never prevail against them:
but if any separate from that bundle of Life, and Unity in the Spirit they are
soon broke. Therefore I exhort all to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond
of Peace, and then will you abide in the new Covenant that is ordered in all
things, and sure, as the last Words of David testify, in the 2 Samuel 23.5.

For although the great Covenant is between the Father and his Son Christ Jesus,
yet that Covenant is derived from the Father to all his Children in Christ
Jesus; so that every Particular (according to their measure) can say with holy
David, Thou have made with [Me] an everlasting Covenant, etc. as they abide in
the Unity of the Spirit and Bond of Peace.

But if this Unity of the Spirit be departed from by disorderly walking, and
running greedily after this present World, hasting to be Rich, etc. Such
oftentimes miscarry, not only to the loss of their own Estates, and ruin of
their slamilies; but also to the wrong of their Neighbors, and above all to
the dishonor of their holy Profession, and causing the way of Truth to be evil
spoken of, etc.

Let not such deceive themselves by thinking such miscarriages may be salved
over, or covered with an outward and formal Profession of the Truth; for God is
not so tied to any Profession, that they should be at liberty to walk after the
Lusts of the Flesh, and to please themselves; but if we break Covenant with
him, he is not bound to keep Covenant with us; but the breach is always first
on Man's part as the Prophet Zachary speaks, Zac. 10, 11. which was signified
by the two Staffes, Beauty and Bands, saying, And I took my staff, even Beauty,
and cut it asunder, that I might break the Covenant that I had made with all
People, and it was broken in that day, and the Poor of the Flock that waited
upon God knew that it was the Word of the Lord.

And when the Unity of the Spirit is departed from, and the Bond of Peace
broken, the other Staff Bands (which signified their outward Form or
Discipline) could not keep them together; but God soon cut that asunder also,
that he might break the Brotherhood between Judah and Israel, for the
Brotherhood between Judah and Israel of old did not stand in the outward form
of the same Profession only, as appears Isa. 66.3. where it is said, He that
kills an Ox is as if he slew a Man. He that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut
off a Dogs Neck; Even when these things were outwardly required: but they were
departed from the holy Spirit of God, therefore it follows; But to this Man
will I look, says the Lord, even to him that is Poor, and of a Contrite
Spirit, and trembles at my Word.

Dear Friends, Let us be careful to keep to the Laws of the House upon the top
of the Mount, which is [Holiness round about] Ezekiel. 43.12. If Holiness be round
about, then God [is] there, according to his Promise, and Christ is in the
midst, be the number never so small, yet it may be called the House upon the
top of the Mount, because THE LORD IS THERE; then there is no room for
Formality or carnal Liberties, nor any thing else that tends not to Holiness
and Purity.

But whatever advances and promotes Holiness round about, even in all our
Ways, Words and Actions, that the Doctrine according to Godlyness may be
maintained, even that Godliness that is in Christ Jesus, although we suffer
Persecution for it.

The Name of this House, THE LORD IS THERE, will end all other Names, as it is
foretold, that the time shall come that the Lord shall be (One) and his Name
(One) in all the Earth.

His Name is his Power, and Presence of his Spirit and Glory, and as we give up
wholly to his dispose and ordering of us, then it will be with us inwardly in
all our Meetings, as it was outwardly at the Dedication of the Temple, which
God took so kindly at the hands of Solomon, that he would not dwell in it
himself (though it was so much famed in the World) but gave it up to the Lord,
that God so filled the House with his Glory, that the Priests could not enter
in, as it is written in 2 Chro. 7. and not only so, but God provided such
plenty of Sacrifices, that there was scarce room to receive them.

And as we give up to the Divine Power of God (as Peter calls it) that will
make us Partakers of all things that pertain to Life and Godliness, and so fill
our Meetings with greater Glory than at the beginning; when few Words
oftentimes did the Work of the Ministry to God's Praise and Glory, and to the
Comfort and Satisfaction of the Souls of his People.

These Pastors which God raised up at the beginning (according to his own
Heart) went out to God's Work as Abraham did out of his Country and Fathers
House, not knowing whither; so they not questioning God's Assistance, or
disposal of them in his Service, and like Israel when they left Egypt, and set
forth their three Days Journey, saying, We know not wherewith we shall serve
God until we come there.

So poor in Spirit were (they) in that day, and so closely kept (they) retired
unto the Light and Measure of the Spirit of Christ within, that they durst not
(out of an holy Fear) open their Mouths, till the Word of the Lord came,
(saying) as the Prophet Jeremy speaks, and when that stopped (saying) they had
done (speaking) until (it) came again.

This was one great cause wherefore the Truth at the beginning so mightily grew
and prospered, together with the holy Conversations (answerable thereunto) of
those that received the Truth in the love of it, into the good and honest
Heart, as it is written, etc.

These things I write unto you by way of remembrance to stir up your pure Minds
to follow these good Examples, that those of latter times may beware of lusting
to speak many Words, and of thinking that may do the business of the Ministry,
and of lusting to Preach or Pray, to gratify an itching Ear after speaking, or
sometimes to show their Gifts and Elocution for Applause. This is not spoken to
stop the Motion of God's Spirit in any, nor to despise Youth truly Sanctified
and Gifted, but that none may be exalted when they see People affected with
their Ministry. Pray observe Christ's Caution to those early Messengers, that
came and told him, that unclean Spirits were subject to them, etc. by advising
them not to Rejoice in that, but rather that their Names were writren in
Heaven, Luke 10.20. This may be a Caution to all those of lower Seize and
less Authority, who had need to take heed of Popularity, or striving for a Name
on Earth, but be sure their Names are Recorded in Heaven.

Timothy was a Young Preacher (but rarely Qualified) yet Paul in his Epistle to
him (amongst other Counsel that he gives him) he advises him to Exhort the
Younger Women, as Sisters, [with all Purity.] Timothy was a Young Man, and
probably attended with Temptations of Youth; therefore Paul advises him to
shun Youthful Lusts, and instructs him to be careful in his Exhortation to
Young Women, that he do it [with all Purity.] least any sinister or by-end
should creep in to defile, and so frustrate his Exhortation, etc. A good
Caution to all Young Men, that are but Young Preachers also.

Those Pastors after God's own Heart, at the Beginning, kept much to the Word
of Exhortation, to the Light of Christ in the Conscience, as a Seed that was
Sown for the Righteous to bring forth a plentiful Crop of Holiness to the Lord;
from whence also sprang pure Living Praises to the Almighty, for bequeathing
such a Legacy and Gift through Christ Jesus, unto such poor Orphans as we were
at the day, when as to Religion we could call no Man Father on Earth, nay, we
scarcely durst call God Father, in that state we were then in, at our first
Convincement. Yet I can say, with many more at that day, viz. In God the
Fatherless found Mercy, through Jesus Christ.

Let all be careful how any meddle by way of Prophecy of Times and Seasons, so
as to fix Destructions and Desolations to be on (or within) such a certain
time, etc. But keep to the form of sound Words and Gospel Doctrine (used in
holy Scripture) and Examples of Gospel Ministers, and not to be too positive
about Persons, Places and Things; which if imaginary, presumptuous or mistaken,
proves to the great dishonor of Truth, and stumbling of many, if not to the
Ministering an occasion of Atheism, to such as watch for opportunities
thereunto, and also to cause many not to regard true Prophets.

The first Preachers among us (as all true Preachers do) minded more the
Goodness and Sincerity of those that came among us, than they did the number of
the People: their Business and Message was to gather the poor lost Sheep of the
House of Israel, and to call Sinners not only to change their Opinions, but to
change their Hearts, Lives and Conversations, that such might be added to the
Church as should be saved; and in all things they showed themselves workmen,
that need not be ashamed; they were experienced in the Word and Doctrine, and
knew that a bare Convincement in the Judgment and Understanding was not
sufficient to make Disciples of Christ, and that unhewen Stones (as they came
out of the Quarry) were not fit to build God an House to dwell in; but would
rather prove a disgrace to the Workman that uses them, and a dishonor to the
whole Building, if made use of; for such unskilful Builders indeed may well be
ashamed of their Work, and give it over till they are better experienced.

Therefore such ought to be remembered as have spoken unto us the Word of God,
whose Faith follow, considering the end of their Conversation, Christ Jesus,
the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, as Heb. 13.7, 8, 9. and that you be
not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines; for it is a good thing,
that the heart be established with Grace, and not with Meats, as says the
Apostle.

Therefore Dear Friends and Brethren, let us all abide with God, in the Calling
whereunto he has called us; and none to strive for Mastery, nor to be many
Masters, and to set up as 'twere for themselves, but all to serve the full time
of Silence, in order to be Well-experienced in the Word and Doctrine; and when
you are thoroughly [of God taught] your selves, you will understand, and learn
of him how to instruct others.

But let all, in the first place, learn well the Doctrine of Self-denial,
submitting our selves to God in Christ Jesus. So will every one know their
Place and Service in the House (or Church) of the Living God; where none that
are really Members of it, but will submit to the Laws thereof; which are [All
Holiness round about] and God in the midst, judging out all Stubbornness
Self-willedness, and all that Wickedness of Jealousies, Evil Surmisings,
Whisperings and Backbitings, etc. which produce Discord and Divisions: And all
as little Children, and serving one another in Love, and the Younger receiving
the Counsel and Advice of the Elder, embracing it thankfully for God's Glory,
and their own Benefit and Comfort: So will all, from the highest to the lowest,
submit one to the other in true Love and godly Simplicity for Edification and
Preservation of the whole. And then forgiving and forgetting all former
distances; that in the Unity of the Spirit you may all knit together by the
Bond of Peace; and the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against you, but you
shall remain a People to God's Glory, and your own Comfort: And so you will
abide in the pure Religion, unspotted from the World; manifesting plainly, that
you have received a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, by all that Noise and
Clamor that is made against you, etc.

Which Kingdom, as it came not by outward Observation, so it stands not in Word
or Opinion, nor yet in Meat and Drink, but in Righteousness and Peace, and in
Joy in the Holy Ghost, and [he] that is in these things (says the Apostle,
Romans 14.17, 18.) serves Christ; (such a Man or Woman) is accepted of God, and
approved of Men; having this Evidence fixed to this pure Religion, viz. of
Father, Son and Spirit, and all good Men, as being that only pure and merciful
Religion before God and the Father, that the Apostle James has given (as it
were) a short Definition or Description of; James 1.27.

So that whoever Professes this pure Religion, and abides and continues in the
same, bringing forth in his whole Life and Conversation the pure and holy
Fruits thereof, need not be ashamed of it; for to such an one, it is not only
given to believe it, but also to suffer for the same, which has been, and is a
great Confirmation to many, by that sweet Power and Presence of God, that has
assisted them in all their Afflictions and Exercises, both from within and
without, and joyfully (in that needful time of great and sharp Trials) born up
their Spirits to their great Satisfaction and Comfort, and to the Eternal
Praise of God's most Holy and Blessed Name for ever, Amen.

Hertford, the 26th of the 3d Month, School. John Crook.

A Postscript.
Dear Friends,
LET not your outward Concerns prevent your Religious Meetings and Service on
the Week Days, lest the Earthly Spirit get up again, and bury you before your
time; but meet in the Faith that you shall meet with God, whether you hear
Words spoken outwardly or not; so by retiring into the inward and spiritual
Grace you will avoid the extremes of dead Formality and false Liberty, and
witness that [pure Silence] wherein was felt the Breast that inwardly
Nourished, and those Paps that gave us Suck, when we were Young.

When Christ ascended he commanded his Disciples to [wait] for Power from on
high, the Promise of the Holy Spirit, which (according to his Promise) fell
upon them when they were [met] together with one accord, and the Apostle in 2
These. 2.2. exhorts them by their gathering together in Christ, etc. Seeming to
use their Meeting together as an argument to keep down that Wicked One, and
them from [that] falling away he speaks of, etc.

Therefore, Dear Friends and Brethren, be diligent in your Meetings together in
God's Fear and Service, and that will procure his Blessing upon your diligence
in your particular Callings; therefore I beseech you stir up and exhort one
another thereunto, by the Elder giving good Examples to the Younger sort, who
are apt to content themselves with going to Meetings on the First Days only;
and then too many, instead of waiting and exercising Faith, to meet with the
teachings of the Spirit of God in their inward parts, only exercise their
outward Ears in hearing what may be spoken outwardly, which in tender Love and
good will to the Souls of all, I desire may be prevented for the future,

Farewell. John Crook.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House, in
White-Hart-Court in Grace Church Street, and at the Bible in
Leaden-hall-street, near the Market, School.


