R Commonwealth blazon or coat of arms PAX QVAERITUR BELLO.

P
By the Lord Protector. A PROCLAMATION Commanding all Papists, and all other
persons who have been of the late Kings party, or his Sons, to repair unto
their places of abode, and not to remove above five miles from the same.
FOr preventing the danger that may be occasioned by the confluence of Papists,
and oth^^ ill-affected persons at this time, to the Cities of London and
Westminster, and places a^jacent: His Highness the Lord Protector, by, and with
the Advice and Consent of H^^ Privy Council, has thought fit to Publish and
Declare; and does hereby Enjoin a^^ Require all and every Person and Persons,
born within this Commonwealth, being Papists, or Popish Recusants, and all and
every person and persons, who have at any ti^^ born Arms against this
Commonwealth, or adhered unto, or willingly assisted the Enemies thereof the
late War, not being now under Restraint, that they, and every of them do before
the Twelfth d^^ of May now next coming, (or if under Restraint, then within
three days next after his or their Enlar^^ment) repair unto his and their
place of dwelling, where he or they usually heretofore made their common abode;
and shall not at any time after, until the Tenth day of June next coming, pass,
or remo^^ above Five miles from thence. Or if such Papists, Popish Recusants,
or other persons aforesaid, ha^^ no certain place of dwelling or abode within
this Commonwealth; That then all and every such Papists, Popish Recusants, and
other persons aforesaid, Do, by the respective times herein before L^mited,
repair to the places where he or they were born, or where the Father or Mother
of such perso^^ shall then be dwelling; and not at any time after, until the
said Tenth day of June* Pass, or Remo^^ above Five miles from thence, upon pain
of being Deemed and Proceeded against as disturbers of t^^ Public Peace, and
Enemies to the Commonwealth. And His Highness does hereby strictly Cha^^^ and
Command all Mayors, Justices of the Peace, Constables, and all other Officers,
Civil and Mili^^ry, to certify unto His Highness Privy Council, the Names of
all and every such Papist, Popish ^^cusant, or other persons aforesaid, as
shall be found at any time, after the Twelfth day of May afo^^said, until the
said Tenth day of June next, above Five miles from his, or their places of
abode or h^bitation, or other the places herein before limited and appointed
for him and them to repair unto; the end they may be proceeded against as
aforesaid.

Given at Whitehall the three and twentieth day of April, in the year of our
Lord, 1659.
London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1659.

And are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet over against Dunstans
Church.


