Unrighteousness NO PLEA FOR TRUTH, Nor Ignorance a Lover of it.

Being an Answer to a book called A Plea for Truth, in love to Truth,
subscribed by James Pope, Wherein is contained his Answer to several Queries
(sent to him by Thomas White) which are tried and found unsatisfactory, and
James Popes Ten Queries to the people (called) Quakers fully answered.

Also the Doctrine and Practice of the People (called Baptists) examined and
weighed (in the true balance) and found too light,

With a full discussion of their Principles, and particularly their Ordinances
of breaking bread and water baptism, etc. With some Queries to all the People
called Baptists (wheresoever they are to be found) for them to answer in Truth
and Righteousness, and in Gods fear.

By a true Lover of all their souls and eternal welfare. JOHN CROOK.

Try all things, and hold fast that which is good.

For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thy self to the
search of their fathers Job 8.8.

He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand; he shall hold it fast,
but it shall not endure, Job 8.15.

Printed for Tho. Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

THE PREFACE.
THe Lord of Hosts is arisen and arising in his power to shake the earth, and
not only the Earth but Heaven also, that that which cannot be shaken may
remain; and this shaking is for the removing of those things which are shaken,
as of things that are made; And for Alaruming of the World, and awakening all
professions and Professors, that so every man may betake himself to his God,
and he that answers by fire, and consumes the chafe and stubble, let him be
God, and all bow before him, that so his Name may be exalted above every name,
and that to him every knee may bow, both of things in Heaven and things in
Earth, for to him must all bow and bend; and the Prophet which he has raised
up must all hear or be cut off from among the people; and this Prophet is like
unto Moses, and must go before Israel to lead the holy Seed out of Egypt, and
to divide the Sea for Israel to pass, and to stand in the gap to intercede,
that so the Lords wrath may be appeased; but they that refuse him that speaks
cannot escape; Therefore Reader whosoever thou art, take heed that thou neglect
not this the day of thy visitation, nor that great salvation which is proffered
to thee in the light of Christ, for if thou harden thy heart against it, thou
cannot prosper, (neither can thou ever hear his voice, nor see his shape, but
in the light) for he will not always strive with thee, neither will he accept
an offering at thy hand, while thou rebels against his light that shines in thy
heart, to give thee the knowledge of God in Christ; for Gods soul is weary of
all vain oblations that are offered up in the wills of men, and of their
humility that is feigned, and of al their Assemblies though they multiply them,
while obedience and hearkening to his voice (in the conscience) is not
regarded. Therefore turn ye, turn ye to the true light, that with it you may
see your selves, and from that sight receive the sentence of death upon your
selves, that you may not trust in your selves, but in the living God, that so
every one of you may know by experience that by grace you are saved, not of
your selves, but by the free gift, and this free gift may lead and guide you in
all your Worship, that so self may have no share in it, but every one of you
may be justified before the Lord both in your sayings and doings, that you may
be able to endure sound Doctrine, which searches the heart and tryes the reins,
and keeps low, waiting for the fulfilling of the promise viz. (That all the
people of the Lord shall be taught of the Lord) and may not heap up teachers to
your selves to please the itching ear. And what thou meetest with in this
discourse that may seem sharp or piercing, take it as the smiting of a friend,
not given to hurt the life, but to wound that nature and birth which must not
be heir with the freeborn, but must be cast out, or else to the Inheritance of
the Saints in light thou can not come, nor into the holy City thou can not
enter (which has been trodden under foot) though thou may dwell in the outward
courts, for that must be given to the Gentiles. Therefore have, have, have and
come out (least being partaker of the sin, thou be partaker of the plague also)
and meet the Lord while he is nigh, and call upon him while he may be found,
least the door be shut, and there be no entrance for thee.

JAMES POPE,
HAving seen a Paper with thy name subscribed to it, in answer to a Paper of
Thomas Whites, directed to the People called Baptists) which thou calls A Plea
for Truth in love to Truth, which Title agrees not with thy Book, if thou
intendest the writing following thy Title Page, and so on to the end of the
Book.

For in the third line of thy Book, I find a saying which is none of Truths
Plea, which is the cause and inducement that moved thee to write thy following
discourse, in these words, It has moved me to write this following answer,
because none else (that thou know of) has done it: What thou meanest ( by
it has moved thee) I do not understand, because thou have given two Reasons of
thy writing of thy Book; one is because thou say thou art one of those
people to whom Tho. White directed his Paper, and thy second Reason seems to be
because thou had two of those Papers given to thee, and then says, It has
moved thee to write this following Answer, etc. This savors more of the voice
of a stranger then to be Truths Plea; If by it thou intendest the Spirit of
God, why did thou not name it? Or do thou question its Authority, as not
being sufficient of it self without some other motive? or do thou not intend
that at all, as not believing it necessary to such a work, or as not being thy
rule to walk by? or wast thou (when thou began to write thy Book) as one
surprised with fear, speaking that which thou understood not thy self, and so
let it pass, as hoping it might meet with the same acceptance from the Reader,
being clothed with this beautiful Title of A Plea for truth in love to Truth,
and then begins thy Book thus; Forasmuch as I am one of those people to whom
Thomas White has directed his Paper, and having two of those Papers given to
me, it has moved me to write this following Answer, because none else (that I
know of) has done it.

James Pope, I may justly suspect to find more of thy Pleas to be none of
Truths, neither come they from Truth, nor tend they to the Honor of Truth,
only thou makes use of the Name Truth as a Superscription or image upon thy
counterfeit Coin to make it pass for current, but being used to such Coin (from
such hands) makes me the more jealous; and had thou not used the word Truth so
much I might not have been so strict in my examination, but in the true
Balance are thy words weighed, and they are found too light, and condemned as
nothing sound, and so no Plea for Truth, nor spoken in Love to Truth, but to
hide some beloved Image which thou cal's Truth, and would have others to take
it so to be, but though they may be Jacobs words, yet they are Esaus hands, and
the blessing he must not have; and so thou have not named thy Book right.

Then thou say, I appeal to all unbyased men and women in the World, etc.

James Pope, Thy appeal is too large for a business of no more concernment, it
may be determined by a less company, and that in Righteousness too, and yet
judgment may be given against thee, both for thy rash appeal and hasty charge
against Thomas White in saying, shooting this his first Fiery Dart; if it has
wounded, it is because the Armor of Light was not put on, for it was not shot
at a Friend but at an Enemy, neither was it a Fiery Dart shot toward the Life,
but to stick fast in the Liver of the Man of Sin, that that which is of God may
go free, and the exalted and the mighty be thrown from his Seat. And whereas
thou say, either he knows those of the Baptists, or he knows them not that
stumble at and contend against Christ. Thomas White does not charge all the
Baptists with stumbling at and contending against that in which alone all
worship, prayers, sacrifices are accepted in the sight of God, etc. neither
does he call them contenders against Christ (in those words) but if thou had
been endued with patience thoroughly, thou might have read this word (therefore)
or reason of his so speaking to the Baptists, which is that except their
worship, prayers, etc. do come from a measure of him (in you) who is the light
of the World, etc. you are but warming your selves at your own sparks; but of
those words thou take no notice, either as not knowing a measure of him who
is the Light of the world to be in thee, or else do not believe that there is
a measure of God in man first to be known before God himself in his fulness come
to be known; and there is the drawings of the Father first to be known before
Christ be come unto, and there is the forming of Christ in man before Christ be
born and brought forth, 1 John 6.44. Gal. 4.19. But thou overlooking of the
measure of Christ in thee, in thy reading of his Book, speaks thee guilty of
overlooking the measure of Light given to thee to profit withal, and so would
be dealing by wholesale, before thou know Christ formed in thee, and
something that is pure in thy own heart to guide thee, given thee freely of God
to lead thee into Truth, which is more then into words that are true. And so
thy saying that the People Thomas White writes unto do know all sacrifices are
only accepted in Christ, seems to be too hasty a confession, and to be too
much like the People of Israel of old spoken of, Deuteronomy. 5.28, 29. I have heard
the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken unto thee, they
have well said all that they have spoken. O that there were such an heart in
them; and like the foolish virgins whose lamps were gone out, and yet kept
their confidence Lord, Lord open to us; and like to Nicodemus confession who
readily confessed to Christ, but knew not the Kingdom in him like a grain of
Mustard Seed, no more then the Pharisees. And therefore James Pope, search and
try thy self whether thou have any other proof of all Sacrifices being accepted
in Christ, then that 1 Peter and that of Ephesians 1. if not, what proof have
thou more then all Englishmen have, and yet all Englishmen do not know Christ
in them, nor that all is accepted in Christ, though they have read it so, as
well as thou, but are offering up both strange flesh and strange fire. And
therefore be not angry, nor call it a reviling slander, because Thomas White
said many Baptists are professing, preaching, praying, etc. and yet stumbling
at and contending against that in which all worship is accepted in the sight of
God, for this is and may be true, and therefore no such Fiery Dart as thou
would represent it to be, nor no reviling slander, nor is he to be reproved
for speaking evil of things he knows not; and therefore thy thoughts that he
ought to be deeply humbled before the Lord for this, are as vain and unsound as
thy mistake was, in what moved thee to write thy Book; for may not Thomas White
know many Baptists that have stumbled at and contended against the light of
Christ which every man that comes into the World is lighted with? are not many
such known at this day in England? nay, do not thou and others know many who
are called Baptists that dispute against the light and grace of God given to
all men, as being sufficient to lead to salvation, and deny that which checks
and reproves for sin in men and women, to be the saving light of Christ? now do
not such who thus say, and thus believe, stumble at, and contend against that
in which alone all worship is accepted in Gods sight? and besides is T. White
any more an offender for not naming those particular Baptists that do so
stumble and dispute, then Paul was blamable for not naming those amongst the
Corinthians that he charged with eating disorderly, or those that he charges
with being unequally yoked, or then those he charges with being sick and weak,
for the causes mentioned in his Epistle, and yet names not the persons? no more
does it follow that either Thomas White does not know such as he charges, or
else he was bound to name them, or otherwise he must be taxed for being no
friend to the souls of all the Baptists, or for shooting of fiery darts against
them, or for being a reviling slanderer, and ought deeply to be humbled for the
same; but James Pope, thou do not divide aright thy Exhortations, but art an
unskilful Preacher, for this deep humiliation belongs to thy self both for thy
ignorance and for thy hypocrisy, in covering over thy unadvised sayings with
the painted garment of a plea for truth, when truth does not own thy words; for
let but the wise in heart judge and they will see, that thy hard, ignorant, and
rash charges are as strong against Paul (upon the reasons alleged) as against
Thomas White; but they will fall upon thy own pate; and upon a serious search
of thy heart in Gods fear and light, my sayings may be of closer and nearer
concernment to thy self and many of thy brethren then thou art at present
sensible of, but if repentance prevent not (in time) thou may feel the
weight.

In thy 2. page, thou say, That thou do wish that Thomas White and his
friends may also carefully walk by the rule T.W. prescribes to thee and thy
friends; then thou say, he will be so far from speaking against his holy
appointments, that he will love and keep them; may thou not be judged out of
thy own mouth? Did Thomas White shoot a fiery dart? and do thou not shoot a
poisoned arrow? and do not thou charge him with speaking against Gods holy
appointments, and as if he neither loved them, nor kept them, nor delighted in
those that did? How many falsities and untruths are here in two lines? was it
no better then a reviling slander in Thomas White, and did thou judge it so,
and therefore says that thou think that he ought to be deeply humbled
before the Lord for the same, because he said, while many of you are
professing, praying and yet stumbling at, and contending against that in which
alone all worship etc. is accepted in the sight of God? Is his offense so great
because he did not name them, though he knew them? and is thy offense
mitigated, because thou names Thomas White, but chargest him falsely with that
which thou can not prove against him, and yet calls thy sayings, a plea for
truth etc? as if thy Title to thy Book were to privilege thy calumnies, and
Authority sufficient to pass thy reproaches without a review or farther
examination; but thy beautiful Title is but like the Pharisees beautifying the
outside of the cup and platter while the inside was foul, and like Pilate, who
wrote a good Title over Christ calling him King of the Jews, but delivered him
up to be crucified as a blasphemer; So thy fair Title does but aggravate thy
offense, in that thou slanders the innocent, and calls it a plea for truth, in
love to truth, as if light and darkness could unite together, and truth and
falsehood marry each other, which neither can be, neither shall they go
unpunished who go about to reconcile them.

In the 3. page of thy Book, thou ask Thomas White in those words, why do
thou upbraid us? do we say that the Scriptures direct not to, or speak not of a
light within? we both know and say that the Scripture says 2 Cor. 4.6. that
God has shined in the hearts of his Saints, to give the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Christ. James Pope, when thou say, do we
say, and we both know and say, etc. Do thou only intend thy self, and some
one or two more, or do thou intend all the Baptists generally? seeing that
thy self may not be ignorant how many Baptists have both in Print and disputes
publicly disowned the light within that checks and reproves for sin to be
sufficient to lead to salvation, which thou seems to acknowledge in words to be
true, and chargest Thomas White for upbraiding of you, in that he says, are
not many of you strangers to the light, whilst you are questioning whether the
Scriptures declare of, or direct to a light within etc. which thing has often
been questioned by many Baptists, and such as are none of the least in esteem
among you, and if thou will declare against them that have so questioned and
disputed, and deny fellowship with them, for not being sound in the faith, I
may help thee to a Catalogue of their names, the public dispute at Dunstable
may bring some of them to thy remembrance; But are you not better informed then
you were some years since, and somewhat rectified in your judgments? if so,
let the praise be given to God, and your former errors and mistakes be printed
and published for others to take heed by, especially seeing many who are called
Baptists in England are yet in the dark and questioning what thou, on the
behalf of thy brethren, seems to confess to, and let your unity make it appear
that you do not only confess to the light within (that checks and reproves
for sin, to be that alone which gives the knowledge of God in the face of
Christ, and that a man cannot have the knowledge of God in Christ, until the
light give it to him) but also that you walk in the light, and have fellowship
one with another in the light, and that in it you witness the blood of Jesus
Christ to cleanse you from all sin; that so none of you may stumble at the
Doctrine of perfection: but if you say, you have fellowship with God, and are
in the fellowship of the Gospel, and walk in darkness, and stumble at figures
and shadows, you lie, and do not the truth, for in him is no darkness at all.

And whereas thou say, Thomas White deals uncharitably with you in putting
you in the number of those that are lost, in whom the God of this world has
blinded their eyes, etc. It is no uncharitableness to speak the truth; and to
say that those who are stumbling at that (which is given them to lead out of
darkness) are such as the God of this world has blinded their minds; and that
such are in a lost estate, and the Gospel of their salvation they do not know,
for it is hid from them, and he that judges such so to be, is not uncharitable,
but his judgment is just, and the uncharitableness does light upon thy own
head.

And whereas, thou say in these words, thou must give me leave to query how
thou dare abuse us, etc. James, thy tongue is too much thy own in speaking
leesing, for leave I do not give thee to query of that which is not, for that
is breath spent in vain, for it is no abuse to query how they can profess they
know God, who deny the light of his Son within, but leaves out these following
words, viz. in which the Father is revealed, and by which that that may be
known of God is made manifest in man, is this a plea for truth, in love to
truth, to take half a sentence, or so much as may serve to make a cavil, and
leave out that which is the main and explanatory part of the whole? or is it
rather in imitation of him who made use of Scripture to tempt Christ withal,
but left out what might make against his design? may he not justly be charged
as a transgressor that shall say there is no God, though he quote the Scripture
for it, which says, there is no God, but leaves out the foregoing words which
makes the saying true, which is that the fool has said in his heart there is
no God? does thy crime differ in any thing from his that should so say more
then this that he leave out the foregoing words, and thou leaves out Thomas
Whites following words? and to say that such a one is a deceitful worker, and
for it must come to judgment, is but to speak truth plainly, and therefore
take Thomas Whites words at length as they are in his Book, and may it not
justly be queried, how can those Baptists profess they know God, whilst they
are denying the light of his Son within, in which the Father is revealed, and
by which that which may be known of God is made manifest in man? seeing such
has appeared in opposition to this light, both by public Printing and
disputing, and if thou James Pope do not own them to be of you, declare it
publicly, that so they may come to repentance, and you be clear of their blood.

And whereas, thou say, the Lord in mercy has made you to own him to be
your life and light, who also is leading you in the way to that light which is
unapproachable, etc. I cannot but take notice of thy confusion, who speaks like
one that has got a thing by rote, but understandest not what thou say; for
is Christ your very light and life who is leading of you in the way to that
light which is unapproachable, and is not that same Christ that is the light
and life, also the way, and the light which is unapproachable, or is there one
Christ that is the very life and light, and leader in the way and approachable,
and another Christ that is the way, and that light which is unapproachable; if
thou knew what thou said, thou would know that the very life and light is
unapproachable; but do thou not in those words manifest thy ignorance of Gods
Christ the way to the Father, and light of the world, and life of men, and by
thy invention have found out one Christ to be thy very light and life, and is
leading of thee in the way to another Christ which is unapproachable; so that
to one Christ thou art already come, who is thy light and life, and he is
leading of thee in the way to that light which is unapproachable; by this thou
may see where thou art, for in the world are Gods many, and Lords many, but
to us there is but one God and one Lord Jesus, and we know that an Idol is
nothing, howbeit there is not in all men this knowledge.

And whereas thou speaks of holy appointments and Christ's Ordinances, and who
ever denies them, they are they which deny the light, etc. Thou should speak
plainly what those appointments are that thou intendest, because you Baptists
differ so much among your selves about them; one says Christ has appointed
hands to be laid on, and another says Christ has appointed the washing of the
Disciples feet, and another says anointing with oil is an Ordinance, and
another says good cheer or love feasts before the supper is an Ordinance, and
some say sprinkling is enough, others say they must be dipped over head and
ears; and some say the bread must be cut, others that it must be broken, some
say it must be taken and broken by him that eats it, others say it must be
broken before hand and given them by an officer of the Church; and some say
singing is an Ordinance, and others say no, and many other things which
Baptists call Ordinances and appointments, but which are thine, or those that
thou calls Christ's appointments and Institutions thou have not yet declared thy
self; seeing all these are called Christ's appointments and ordinances by those
who plead for them; but I should counsel thee, first to be reconciled to thy
brethren, and agree with them which be Christ's appointments, and which be men's
inventions, or men's misunderstanding of Christ's words; and then I may declare
to thee which are to continue, and which are at an end, the substance being
come; until then take heed thou deal not with his Ordinances as thou have dealt
with his Name, in calling that a plea for truth, in love to truth, which indeed
is but a cover for deceit. And you that are called Baptists above some others
make it manifest your fellowship is not in the light, because you have not
fellowship one with another, and therefore though you confess to the light, yet
I may say thou walks not in the light, while thou imagines two Christ's, one to
be the very life and light, and the other to be a light unapproachable.

And whereas thou grants that it was the end of the Apostles Ministry, to turn
people from darkness to light; and grants that many at this day tramples under
foot the Son of God, etc. and I doubt not but all in his book (that thou have
not answered) thou grants; and touching the Doctrine of Election and
Reprobation, thou say, that the people which Tho. White writes to, do differ
in their understandings of it, and therefore shall pass it by, etc. Truly James
thou grants so much, and passest by such things, that now I do not wonder thou
understood not what it was that moved thee to write thy book (except to see thy
name in Print) Art thou ashamed of thy Doctrine of Election and Reprobation?
how will thou avoid the censure of Christ? saying, Whosoever denies me before
men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 10.33. And
if we deny him, he also will deny us, 2 Timothy 2.12. And if you that are Baptists
do differ in such a fundamental thing as Election and Reprobation, how can ye
be in the Faith or fellowship of the Gospel, seeing it is the Election that
obtains, and the Reprobation that enters not? And if you differ in your
understandings about this, how can you understand any thing aright, seeing no
Faith but the Faith of Gods Elect is sound and good, nor no Salvation can be
witnessed, until Calling and Election be not only known, but made sure? and
yet the Baptists differ in your understandings about it; And therefore must ye
needs be at a loss, and in an uncertain state, as to your eternal welfare and
happiness, and always liable to be deceived, for it is only the Elect that
are impossible to be deceived; and therefore no marvel why you are so divided
and deceived, seeing you differ in your understandings about Election. Have,
have, have unto the light of Christ that shines in your dark hearts, that that
may give you the understanding of Election and Reprobation; for now it is
evident that while thou and others are differing about Election, and know it
not, your Religion is in vain; and Christ the light you do not know, and
therefore no marvel thou speaks of one Christ that is thy light and life, and
another light that is unapproachable.

In thy fourth page thou seems to be displeased with Thomas White for
cautioning of thee to take heed of deceit, etc. Is it not time to caution thee
and others to take heed of deceit, seeing you differ in your understanding
about Election, and none are out of a possibility of being deceived but the
Elect, and you and others differing in your understandings about it, is it not
time to cry to you Baptists above others, take beed of being deceived? Yea,
take heed you are not deceived in your Ordinan^es, in your Church fellowship,
yea, and in your Christ too, seeing one Christ is your very light and life, and
another light that is unapproachable is he leading you in the way to. And be
not angry, because Thomas White exhorts you to look to your building, least it
be pulled down to your loss, neither call it judging of the hearts of Gods
people any more, seeing thou have made thy heart, and what is in it so
manifest. And for those Invectives which thou say are so frequent in our
papers, thou should have named some of them, and who were their Authors,
otherwise now can thou expect an answer? but does not fear surprise the
hypocrite, and are not the hypocrites in Sion afraid, and cry out do not judge
least you be judged, not knowing to whom that was spoken? Luke 6.37. to whom he
spoke a parable and said, Can the blind lead the blind? shall they not both
fall into the ditch? The blind are forbidden to judge, but not the spiritual
man, who judges all things, nor he whose eyes are opened to see good and evil;
and he that judges any thing in another, that he has not first judged in
himself, is a transgressor; but he that judges that in another which has been
first judged in himself, is no man's enemy, though in the time of man's love to
his lust he may count him his enemy, because he tells him the truth; but when
he comes to be awakened, he will count him his brother, because he would not
suffer sin to lie upon him, nor the Sun to go down in his wrath.

And thou say, That which you call Church Fellowship, you do not miscal it,
for it is true Church Fellowship according to the Order of our blessed Lord
Jesus, which he himself has instituted, and his holy Apostles and Primitive
Saints practiced, in which fellowship (though contemned by you) do we walk
sweetly together, having his presence with us, and his blessing upon us, etc.
And many other words thou uses and applies to thy self and brethren, which
are the words of others, and the conditions of others, and thou appliest them
to thy self and thy brethren; thou should first have proved thy self and
brethren born of the same spirit that they were, and led into those things (in
which they walked) by the same spirit that they were, and not in the imitation
without the same command that they had, and leading which they were well
acquainted withal as many as were the sons of God, for they spoke as they were
moved by the Spirit, and in it did they worship, and by it were they guided to
know when to go and when to stand still, and by it they knew well their own
spirits, and when self spoke at any time, and in it had they fellowship
together, and by the same Rule did they walk according to their several
seize; but were not of many Sects, neither did they cry up their own
inventions for Christ's Commands, neither did thy differ about what were his
appointments, some crying one thing, and some another, like Babylons builders,
insomuch that their languages are confounded, and they cannot understand one
another, what was the Primitive Order, and what are now those appointments
believers are to be found Practitioners of; But one cries this, and another
that, but all in error from the Spirit of the Lord, who knows not the movings
of his Spirit in them, nor knows not that Christ the Leader, and Christ the
Way, and Christ that dwells in the light unapproachable, and is the light of
the world, all is but one Christ; neither knows Election nor Reprobation, but
differs in their understandings about them; all such are out of the
Appointments and Commands of Christ, and as yet knows not the Way of his
worship, as it was performed in the days of the Apostles; therefore say not
Christ's Institutions are contemned, because men's Traditions and carnal
Imitations are not followed, all which must tumble down, when Babylon the great
the Mother of Harlots falls; and when that comes to pass, it will be no wonder
to those that behold her downfall, that are come out of her, to see many
pleasant Pictures spoiled, and lofty Cities laid low, and Master builders (that
have rejected the light) bewailing the fall of their Towers, which they thought
had been so high, and built upon such a foundation as could not be shaken, and
of such materials as they thought had been living stones, and formed in all
things like the Primitive Churches; but their attire will be found to be the
attire of the Harlot, and not of the true Spouse, neither her comeliness that
which Christ has put upon her, but a paint like Jezabel, and a Harlot, though
welfavoured; and though her garments be purple and scarlet-colored, yet not
washed with the blood of the Lamb, and therefore follows him not wheresoever he
goes. And whereas thou say, you walk sweetly together; How can that be,
seeing you differ in so many things, and main things too, as Election and
Reprobation? For how can two walk together, except they be agreed? and yet thou
confesses you walk sweetly together, and also confesses you are not agreed in
Election, etc. Therefore may I not say there is no light in thee, because thou
walks not according to this Rule, which says, Can two walk together, except
they be agreed? Amos 3.3.

Thousaist, Thomas White is deceived in that he cautions you of being deceived
your selves, while you cry out others are deluded; you who are joined in that
which you call fellowship, by the outward form (of washing, etc.) Is not the
mistake on thy own part? Are you not so joined? If thou can plead not guilty,
who else can, seeing thou seems to justify all that are called Baptists? For
Tho. Whites paper is directed in general to those people called Baptists, and
what is both spoken in general, and to some in particular, thou applies to thy
self and brethren as either being guilty of all, or else taking thy self to be
united to all that are dipped in water; and so by the tendency of thy
discourse, thou pleads for all the people called Baptists (though they be such
as differ from thee in the understanding of the great business of Election and
Reprobation) as if thou were especially concerned in that name; though there be
many others who are not so called, and yet do not differ in such weighty
matters from thee and thy brethren, as many of those people who are called
Baptists do, all which being put together spells little less, then that you are
joined in your fellowship by your outward form of washing; because thou pleads
for, and takes thy self to be especially concerned in all things charged
against the washed, or baptists, which imports no less then that you are joined
in your fellowship by outward washing, otherwise why do thou not deny some of
those people called Baptists, seeing by your own confession you differ in your
understanding, and that understanding which differs from truth is not good, and
so none of Gods gift, and such, what they know they know naturally like bruit
beasts, and how can thou have fellowship with them, except it be because you
are both outwardly washed, and so are joined together in fellowship by that
outward form, in other things having no fellowship. And so James Pope, the wise
in heart may see that thou, and others are the deceived and deluded, whilst
thou would cast it upon Thomas White; and the Reader may see who is the liar,
and his burden he must bear.

Toward the beginning of the fifth page of thy Book thou say, you practice
washing, because the Lord has appointed you so to do, and are not like many in
our day, or like Naaman the Assyrian, that thinks it a business too low for
them, though it was not too low for Christ and his Disciples, but it was too
low for the Pharisees then, who rejected the Counsel of God against themselves,
and were not baptized of him, Luke 7.30.

James Pope thou might have done well to have produced thy commission, that
so thy practice with it might have been compared, that so whether thou exceeds
or falls short, might have been understood by the Reader, until that be done,
thy saying the Lord has appointed you so to do, is no more then he that takes
away my goods wrongfully, and without my consent, and yet says, he does it by
Authority, but can produce none, saving his lust and strong desire after my
property to make himself rich, having nothing of his own to live upon. And for
some being like Naaman the Assyrian, etc. If thou knew that there was a
Prophet in Israel, thou would know who they are that are like Naaman the
Assyrian, that call the light of Christ (with which every one that comes into
the world is lighted, and checks and reproves for sin) natural, and the checks
of a natural conscience, and is not sufficient to lead to salvation, as was
affirmed at the dispute at Dunstable, by the Baptists some time since, and of
later times have been often so said by those called Baptists; are not these
most like Naaman, that despise the true Prophets washing, and is it not yet
more evident that these are the despised, and therefore the leprosy remains,
though they say they see; and are not these wrath like Naaman, and go their way
from the light, like him, expecting some sudden irresistible power to fall from
heaven upon them, and to make them willing; but will not come to the light in
them to wait in it for power to overcome, and do not they wait for such a
thing, but cannot believe that the Kingdom of Heaven is in the Pharisees, nor
that the light which reproves the drunkard and liar for their evil, is a
spiritual light, and sufficient to lead them to salvation; but say as Naaman
did, behold I thought he would have come out to me and stand and call on the
Name of the Lord his God, and strike his hand over the place, and recover the
leper, etc. Are not you Baptists like Naaman in this also in your own thoughts,
limiting the holy one of Israel, and setting bounds to his worship? as if God
could not be worshipped a right, if men and women did not go down into the
water; and because the Lord is appearing in a way to disappoint the wisdom of
the wise, and to frustrate the thoughts of the prudent, who think as Naaman
did, that they know how God will bring to pass the great things promised, and
accomplish the blessings upon his people looked for; but they are mistaken as
Naaman was, and stumbling at the contemptibleness of the true Prophets counsel,
as he did, and the Pharisees did, when they reject the light and would not
believe in it, that they might be the children of it, and such were those thou
speaks of, in Luke 7.30. who frustrated the Counsel of God within themselves
(as it is in the Margent of the Bible) not being baptized of him, those in the
verse before being baptized with the Baptism of John, and so he that has an
ear may hear, and an eye may see who they are that are like Naaman the
Assyrian, and like the Pharisees who frust rate the counsel of God within
themselves not being baptized of him; but wilt not thou be enraged like Naaman,
if my counsel please not thee, as the Prophets did not like Naaman, if I should
say that whilst thou compares others to be like Naaman, art thy self with many
of thy brethren (that differ in their understandings from thee about Election
and reprobation, and yet you walk sweetly together in your fellowship, as thou
say) like him spoken of in Job 8.15. viz. He shall lean upon his house but
it shall not stand, he shall hold it fast but it shall not endure.

In the fifth page, thou returns an answer to Th. Whites exhortation, viz. try
your selves by the witness of God in your consciences, whether you are come to
the Church in God, which is the ground and pillar of Truth; and says that as
the Churches in Judea were in Christ, who was and is God, so are we bound to
judge of the Churches in England; but thou not daring to leave it so, brings in
a parenthesis, which was well thought of to save thy head, viz. (walking in the
same order and professing the same faith) and then comes in to be in Christ,
for before the parenthesis they were not in Christ, and it is as plain by
adding of the parenthesis they are out of Christ; so that without it, thou
durst not stand to vindicate them, and by thy adding of it, thou have at once
un-churched them all, and so are Christ's words made good, he that will save his
life shall lose it, for where are those Churches, among the people called
Baptists (of whom I speak) that walk in the order of those Paul writ unto in
his Epistle; nay are not your Churches so far from being like those, that if
Paul were alive, he would rather express himself by weeping over you for your
disorder (as he did over some amongst the Philippians, whose steps you rather
follow) then those that he rejoiced to behold their order? Phil. 3.18. of whom
he had often told them and now says he) tell you even weeping, that they are
the enemies to the Cross of Christ, and their end is destruction, who mind
earthly things, and are not those thou calls Churches in England minding
earthly things, and some making too much provisions for their bellies, and
others glorying in their shame, as flattering Titles and foolish apparel and
such like? and would thou have us to judge every such member to be of the
Church in God? nay in him is light, and no darkness at all, and he who judges
such Churches, and such members to be rather Synagogues of Satan, then Churches
of Saints, judges righteous judgment, though James Pope call it by another
name; for he is subject to mistake as his Book plentifully makes it manifest,
especially hear where he would have those members called living stones, or a
Church in God, who differ in their understandings about Election and
reprobation, and what and how many Ordinances Christ has appointed to be used
in his Church, which first James Pope and his brethren are to agree in, and
conclude upon, before those who are led by the same spirit that Paul was can
rejoice in your order; but rather mourns in secret for your disorder, and cries
to the Lord to open the eyes of your understandings, and to give you the Spirit
of wisdom and Revelation for the acknowledgement of him, that ye may know what
is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance
in the Saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who
believe, according to the working of the might of his power, which he wrought
in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, etc.

Thou say, that Baptism by fire was promised and performed in the second of
the Acts and some other places; but experimentally neither the Quakers, nor any
other that thou know of, does know it, if they do, let them make it manifest
by their speaking in strange tongues, miracles, etc. for so all could do that
the Lord Baptized with the Holy Ghost and fire.

Thomas, Does not the Saints know things now exper mentally, as well as they
did in former times? herein thou have showed thy nakedness, and of what kind
thy knowledge is now (which from me thou would not have born) if I should
have called thy knowledge natural or traditional, as it must needs be, if it be
not experimental, and so is knowledge falsely so called, for I desire to know
nothing but what I know experimentally in the worship and service of God; for
all other knowledge does but puff up; and to it I desire to be a fool that I
may know things not by thinking, but certainly; and the tongues by which those
speak now who are Baptized with the Holy Ghost and fire, are as strange to this
generation as those were strange to that generation then; and may thou not as
well say, there is none that thou knows of that are now Baptized with the holy
Ghost, as to say there is none that thou knows Baptized with fire, and may
thou not as truly say, that there is none that thou knows of now Baptized with
the Holy Ghost, because none now speaks with those strange tongues, nor does
those Miracles thou speaks of; for they went together then, and they are not
parted now, except by those who knows neither experimentally; and if thou knew
any Baptism aright, or him that is mightier then John, thou might know
Baptizing with the Holy Ghost and fire; or if thou know him whose fan is in his
hand; but art thou not in truth as ignorant of his fan as of his fire, and
because of thy ignorance of both, the chaff remains unburnt up, and the chaff
ungathered into the garner; and therefore I tell thee plainly (James Pope) thou
and thy brethren must yet know a terrible day of threshing before the Word of
the Lord you know that is as a hammer and fire, until then your words are but
as chaff to the wheat, Jer. 23.28, 29 and Mat. 3.10, 11, 12. Be not angry if in
love to thee I ask thee a Question; viz. Are not many of the Baptists now that
are Baptized with water, as ignorant of the Holy Ghosts Baptism as those
Disciples of John in John 1 35, 36, 37. who followed Christ and left John were?
who at the 41. verse. says, We have found the Messiah, which they had not while
they were with John; but in this you Baptists are short of John, for he was not
angry when his Disciples left him and went to Christ: see that you imitate him
in this also as well as his outward washing.

And for thy answer to what is the flaming sword, thou manifests thy ignorance
of it (as of the Baptism with fire) in saying, If thou meanest the work of
grace, etc. He meant as he spoke, and if indeed thou knew it, thou would
have returned another answer, and not when a question is asked about a
particular, then to answer if thou mean the work of grace in you; and here thou
make good thy former words, viz. That thy knowledge is not experimental no
more of the flaming sword, then of Baptism by fire; and if thou art mistaken in
this, then does not thy ignorance appear of what follows by thy own confession,
and it is no uncharitableness so to conclude, viz. That you have not felt the
quickening power of the Lord raising up a Seed, and bringing forth a birth in
you which is not of the world; but contrary to the world, which is leading out
of the vanities thereof, and causes them to bear the cross.

Then thou say, The Baptists are for signs and wonders, and gazing stocks in
the earth; and thou say, Some of us have been reproached for the Name of
Christ, etc though we have at this day much rest from the rage of our enemies.
What confusion is here, first to say the Baptists are for signs and wonders,
etc. and then to say (with the same breath as it were) some of us have been
reproached, etc* and though we have at this day rest, etc. How can these things
hang together? Is not the rest that you now have in the flesh, and in that same
nature that the world is in? And is not the seed spoken of before, unraised up,
but rather in Babylon then in Canaan? And was it not better with you then when
you were as gazing stocks to the world, then now when you are become their
companions in their folly, and vanity, and customs and fashions which thou
speaks of in thy next lines, etc? And thy ingenious confession of the reforming
work that is yet behind (I own) but remember it is he that confesses and
forsakes that finds mercy, and take heed of covering your evil customs with
good names, as thou in thy following words pleads for, least thou spoil thy
former confession and cavil against what thou seemedst even now to wind up into
a penitent confession; and so thou thy self and thy brethren be the very men
that thou speak of in the former page, that are like Naaman the Assyrian,
that not only thinks the customs and fashions of the world (which the people
called Quakers stand witnesses against on truths behalf) too low for you to
stoop unto, but also in that you are like Naaman the Assyrian in this
particular, who after he was washed confessed to the true God, in the 2 Kings
5.15, 17. and 18. ver. and said he would not sacrifice to other Gods but to the
Lord, and yet (like thee) in the next words begins to plead thy case, or rather
really to dispense with the light of Christ in his Conscience, saying, In this
thing the Lord pardon thy servant, that when my Master goes into the house of
Rimmon to worship there, and he leans on my hand, and I bow my self in the
house of Rimmon: when I bow down my self in the house of Rimmon, the Lord
pardon thy servant in this thing. Read your selves you that are called
Baptists, and behold your faces as in a glass; how many of such spots,
Naaman-like, have you in your faces? is there no house of Rimmon now, that you
need to beg pardon for bowing in it, if not for repairing of it, and not only
so, but for maitaining those Priests that worship in this Rimmons house? And
here surely you had need of pardon, and in this you exceed Naaman, for he only
bowed in Rimmons house, but you pay Tithes or maintenance to Rimmons Priests,
or some not much unlike to them, and some of you do hear them, and call them
good men; and therefore leave off any more naming of Naaman the Assyrian,
except to manifest your own transgressions; for had you Baptists in England
been faithful to God, according to your confessions and judgments, had Tithes
been this day standing in England, and had there been a hireling Ministry in
England, as it is at this day? had you Baptists and separated people been
faithful to God; but then would you have been still gazingstocks to many, as
some of you have bin in years past, while you kept your first love, and abode
in your tenderness and integrity. But ah! dear people consider your loss, what
an exchange have you made, that loose your acquaintance with God to gain peace
with the world; and is it not plain, in that many of you (through the subtle
distinctions found out by some of your Teachers) can now do those things
without remorse which sometimes you durst not do? And how do you like Naaman
the Assyrian dispense with some of Christ's Commands, and cry up others for
commands, which he has not commanded? Is not tithe, mint and cummin paid, while
the great and weightier matters are left undone? (do not say I charge you
falsely) is not respect of persons forbidden? And is not all swearing
forbidden? Do you not in these and other things, not only respect persons, and
make God so to be, but respect his Commands also, pleading for some and
neglectieg others? Is not this like Naaman, after many good words and fair
confessions? Do you not know that faithfulness in these things would still keep
you at the same distance from the world, not only to have been, but so to
continue as signs and wonders? but was it not better than with you then it is
now? Therefore return to your first love, and cry in truth and righteousness)
mightily to the Lord (not like Naaman) to pardon you not only in these things,
but for all your unfaithfulness to God, that in the light that lets you see
your evils, you may wait to be washed from them by the blood of Jesus Christ;
and then you need not plead for any heathenish customs to manifest your duty
by, but in faithfulness to God yield obedience to Parents, Masters,
Magistrates, etc. which is sufficiently manifest by yielding obedience to all
Just Commands, and is honor enough to all these (and other) relations, that
they have the honor that comes from God only given to them, with which they
ought to be contented, and not to seek honor one of another, nor to be angry
because their persons are not respected, nor flattering titles given to them.

Then thou comes to answer Thomas Whites Queries. 1. What Command or Commission
have ye or any men to Baptize with water from Christ declared in any Scripture,
which Command did not as well extend to Paul who was an Apostle, as to any of
you?

To this thou say, Paul had the same Command or Commission to Baptize with
water as any man now has, or any man ever had; for the Command to Baptize in
water was given to Christ's Disciples, and was not tied to the Office of the
Apostleship, but as more Disciples were made successively, so were they
successively to be taught to observe what ever Christ had commanded them, viz.
the preceding Disciples; and so though Paul as an Apostle was not sent to
Baptize, yet as a Disciple he had good warrant so to do; yet seeing some in the
Church of Corinth were ready to Idolize his Ministry, and the work of Baptism
might as well be done by other Disciples that were not Apostles, he thanks God
he Baptized no more of them, to prevent, no doubt, any saying he had Baptized
them into his own Name. This is thy answer, and thou sums up thy answer in
these words; Thus you see Paul's Commission to Baptize with water, as good as
any man's now, and so his Commission and ours also are both good, which is a
full answer to the Query. But such a one as darkens Council by words without
knowledge; for it is not doubted but Paul's Commission was as good as yours; but
it is questioned whether yours be so good as his, seeing Paul's Command being
good to him, makes not yours good to you, no more then his Faith being right
makes yours right. But in this thy answer, thou grants that you have no Command
to Baptize with water, etc. But the same belonged to Paul as well as you: and
to save the consequence which must needs follow, viz. that you do that which
you are not sent to do, saying, you have no Command but what Paul had: and he
says, he was not sent to Baptize, and no more are any of you by thy own
confession, and therefore it is high time to leave it off. But thou not being
willing to part with it so, like Micah, art ready to say, What have I more, and
what is this you say unto me, what aileth thee? Judge. 18.23, 24. And therefore
say thou, that the Command was given to Christ's Disciples, and was not tied
to the Office of Apostleship; What a slubberly answer is this? Was not those to
whom the Command was given Apostles? are they not called Apostles in Mat. 10?
And when he had called unto him his twelve Disciples, he gave them power, etc.
and at the next verse. Now the names of the twelve Apostles are these, etc. and
at Luke 6.13. And when it was day, he called unto him his Disciples, and of
them he chose twelve, whom also he named Apostles; So that these were also
Apostles as well as Disciples to whom the Command was given: Disciples when he
called them, and out of them chose twelve; and when he had taught them what to
do, then they are called Apostles: Disciples when they came to Christ, Apostles
when they went from Christ, and were empowered what to do: and Christ calling
them Disciples in Mat. 28. does no more take away the Apostleship, then Christ
calling them Apostles in Mat. 10. and Luke 6. takes away their Discipleship:
and therefore to say Paul was not sent to Baptize as an Apostle, is to say,
Paul was not sent to preach as an Apostle, except Paul had one Commission to
preach, and another to Baptize, seeing that Commission hinted at in Matthew
requires both: besides, is not this to devide Paul, or rather Christ in Paul,
that he did some things ministerially as an Apostle, and other things as a
Disciple, as if he were sometimes an Apostle and no Disciple, and sometimes a
Disciple and no Apostle: or that Paul should dissemble with the Corinthians, to
write to them as an Apostle, and to thank God that he had Baptized no more but
those few he names, and gives this reason for it, because he was not sent to
Baptize, but to preach the Gospel: when as by thy own confession he was sent as
he was a Disciple to Baptize as well as others, and knew it (as well as James
Pope) if it had been so; and had not Paul by removing one block out of the way,
viz. (preventing a jealousy, least he should be thought to Baptize in his own
name) laid a greater stumbling block in the way, viz. to slight the Ordinance
of Baptism, and all those that should Baptize with water, though as Disciples,
Paul not explaining his meaning (to be) as James Pope says it was, viz. that
he meant as an Apostle he was not sent, but as a Disciple he might and did: and
might not Paul as well have left off preaching to prevent the jealousy of
preaching in his own name as well as Baptizing, seeing one was commanded in the
Commission as well as the other, and was or might have been idolized as well as
Baptizing: but in truth, Paul had no more Command to Baptize with water then to
Circumcise, yet he did both upon occasion to remove stumbling blocks, and to
strengthen the weak, and all for the furtherance of the Gospel. And Christ's
calling them Disciples in one place, after he had once chosen them, hinders
them not from being Apostles, no more then his calling them Apostles in another
place, hinders them from being Disciples; for sometimes he called them by the
name of Disciples, and sometimes by the name of Apostles, as Luke 22.14. And
when the hour was come, he sat down and the twelve Apostles with him: and this
was before he sent them forth in Mat. 28. but is not this a new invention,
saying that Paul as a Disciple was sent, but not as an Apostle: seeing the old
cover is found out to be too narrow, viz. that Paul was not sent so much to
Baptize as to preach: and therefore where it is said, not sent, is meant (say
some) not so much; as labor not for the bread that perishes, etc. that is
(say some) not so much for bread that perishes: but you not being able to prove
that Paul was sent at all to baptize with water; but it may be easily proved,
that to labor at all is not only lawful but commanded: but that Paul was sent
at all to Baptize with water, yet remains to be proved: and to say that he did
Baptize with water, and therefore was sent, proves no more that he was sent to
Baptize with water, then because he did Circumcise, proves he was sent to
Circumcise: but in thy saying it belonged not to Paul's Office, and therefore he
might leave it; in this thou have truly concluded, that a man may be sent of
God, as Paul was, and yet not Baptize with water, as not belonging to his
Office, and for this ingenious confession of thine, I may as truly confess to
thee also, that there are many that do Baptize with water, who are not sent by
God so to do; and of this thy Brethren may take notice, how thou thy self have
answered the Objection which is so often made by them, and seems to lie so much
in their way, viz. if we that are called Quakers were led by the same spirit
that the Primitive Saints were led by, surely then we would do the same things
that they did, as to practice water Baptism, etc. Which Objection thou have
answered to the satisfaction of the Objectors; in that thou have found out a
man sent of God, and led by his Spirit, and yet might lawfully let water
Baptism alone to others, as not belonging to his Office.

2. The next Query propounded, is, whether the outward washing with water
(which is but the shadow) and John's Baptism, or the inward washing or cleansing
by the Spirit, which is the Baptism of Christ; Which of these (I say) is that
one Baptism that Paul wrote of? Or why writes he but of one there, if both
might be continued?

To this Query thou answerest like one altogether ignorant of the Spirits
Baptism, like those Baptists in Acts 19.2. only with this difference, thou
have read there is a Holy Ghost and a Baptism so called, of which they had not
heard, but thou have read, and like them have been (it may be) Baptized with
John's Baptism, who indeed Baptized with water; but he of whom John bore
witness, Baptized with a better Baptism, who was to increase, but John and his
water Baptism was to decrease, for John was sent to prepare his way.

In thy answer to the Query, thou say, There are three Conclusions; First,
that it is but a shadow. Secondly, that it is John's Baptism. Thirdly, that the
washing and cleansing by the Spirit is Christ's Baptism.

To the first thou say thou shall let it pass; to the second thou propounds a
question, and then follows with a second question, whether John were a Minister
of the Law or Gospel; and then thou further Queries, Whether there were any
other difference between John's and Christ's, then that one taught and prepared
for Christ to come, and the other taught to believe in him that was already
come, etc. What shuffling is here to avoid a plain question, viz. in short
which is no more then for thee to answer, what that one Baptism is which Paul
speaks of, whether it be water or the Spirits Baptism? And if both were to
continue, why writes he but of one? And to answer this plain Question, thou
asks Questions and propounds further Queries, as if the way to resolve one
Question, were to propound two others; or as if to answer one Query, were
further to Query: but it is commonly the answer of him or them that have no
further nor better answer to return. But thou further answers in the third
place and say, Whereas it is implied that the inward washing and cleansing by
the Spirit is Christ's Baptism, I do not know that any Scripture calls it
Christ's Baptism, or Baptism at all, etc. Thou might have left out this
thirdly, except it had been on purpose to manifest thy ignorance of the
Scripture and Spirits Baptism: thou needs not have said, I do not know that the
inward washing and cleansing by the Spirit is Christ's Baptism; For what
difference is there between inward washing by the Spirit, and inward Baptizing
by the Spirit, is it not all one, only one is translated into English, and the
other is left in Greek untranflated? And so whilst thou say, thou do not
know that any Scripture calls it Christ's washing or baptism, confesses and
calls it inward washing thy self, so that by thy own confession there is no
more difference between the inward washing and cleansing by the Spirit, and
Christ's baptism, then there is between baptizing in Greek, and washing in
English, which is all one; and the word baptism might as well have been
translated washing in all places of the Scripture, as in one place, had it not
made for the upholding of the Trade of the Translators, and for the continuing
of much idolatry and ignorance in the world; and whereas thou say it is not
called Christ's Baptism, what Baptism was that the Apostles speak of, 1 Cor.
12.13. For by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews
or Gentiles; and what Baptism was that which Paul speaks of, Romans 6.3, 4. by
which they were baptized into Christ and into his death, and were buried with
Christ by Baptism, and by it planted into the likeness of his death, whereby
they knew that the old man was crucified with him, that the body of sin might
be destroyed, that henceforth they might not serve sin; for he that was thus
dead and buried with Christ, was free from sin; which your water does not do;
nay do not you who are washed with water plead against freedom from sin, and
say it is not attainable in this world? and therefore it is strongly to be
suspected that as your Baptism is wrong so is your faith also, seeing the
Scripture says as many as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ,
and put off the old man with his deeds, by being planted into the likeness of
his death, and by being buried with him by Baptism, and in the 1 Cor. 6.11.
where the Apostle says they were washed, and sanctified, and justified by the
spirit, etc. what difference is there by being washed or cleansed by the
spirit, and by being baptized by the spirit, seeing washing and Baptizing is
all one, and if thou were come to the full assurance of faith, and knew what
it was to have thy heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, then thou would
know what that pure water was with which the Saints had their bodies washed, Heb.
10.22. But thou concludest that Christ's Baptism is not now in being, because
those tongues and miracles thou speaks of are not in being that thou know of,
and so justifies thy self that the one baptism is meant water baptism, and
Christ's baptism or the Baptism of the spirit was some extraordinary thing, and
was to confer upon them a larger measure of gifts, fitting then to spread the
Gospel, etc. and therefore one principal gift bestowed by that Baptism was the
gift of tongues, (to this I spoke before about fire Baptism) as in Acts the
second, and says other places both before in the sixth page and now, but names
none; by which I conclude thou have no place to prove the Holy Ghosts Baptism
thou speaks of, but that of Acts 2. and what ground thou have to call that
(fire) Christ's Baptism, or the Baptism promised that Christ should come withal,
I know not, since there is not one word in that second of the Acts at the
beginning (that speaks of Baptism) where it is said, there came a sound from
Heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they
were sitting, And there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as of fire, and
it sat upon each of them; and they were all filled with the Ghost, and began
to speak with other tongues as the spirit gave them utterance. Where is this
called the Baptism of Christ, or the Baptism of the Holy Ghost? the word
Baptism is no more named here neither in Greek nor English; and yet this thou
would have by all means to be the only Baptism of the Holy Ghost promised,
and some other places, where both the word Baptism in Greek and the word
washing in English is spoken off, must not be the Baptism of the spirit, that
was promised and was to continue, when outward water was to cease; but why
should thou speak of miracles and tongues so much, seeing tongues were for a
sign, not for them which believed but for them which believed not, and thou
accounts thy self a believer, 1 Cor. 14.22.

But James Pope, why do thou seem to grant inward washing and cleansing by
the spirit to be a washing or Baptism of the spirit, seeing thou have spent so
much time to prove inward washing and cleansing to be none of the spirits
baptism, and yet sums up the query thy self in these words, whether the Baptism
of water, or the inward washing and cleansing by the spirit, be the one Baptism
which Paul writs of, or why writs he but of one, if both must be continued; to
which thou grants both must be continued, and yet says it is water Baptism he
writs of.

So that thou seems to grant what thou would deny, and to deny what thou
would grant; but thou art in a strait, and truth is too hard for thee; for if
thou grant the spirits Baptism to continue, then thy water Baptism must down,
because there is but one, and therefore of the two thou had rather the
spirits Baptism should cease then thine, and yet if thou should deny inward
baptizing or cleansing to be out of use, then thou were no Christian; and
therefore thou have sowed as good a covering together as fig leaves will make
to hide thy nakedness withal, and to save thy water Baptism, and thinks to do
it by calling inward baptizing with the Holy Ghost, inward cleansing and
washing by the spirit; and so sets up two words to contend each with other,
whilst thou thereby think to amaze the Reader, that thou may escape with thy
water to be the one Baptism that is to continue, and yet in thy first answer
says, both must continue, inward Baptism because no entrance into the Kingdom
without it, and water must continue, because it is Christ's Ordinance fitted to
the New Testament, as Circumcision was to the Old; In thy next Book (James)
prove it an Ordinance commanded by Christ to be practiced after his Ascension,
in plain words, and not by an invented consequence, least you are found guilty
of that for which you condemned the Priests of England, viz. for proving their
Baptism by a consequence; and will not this be much to your shame, to have your
Commision to prove by a consequence, and not by plain and positive Scripture,
for a Commissioner by consequence only is no Commissioner. But (James) me
thinks thou comes too near the Priests of England in bringing Circumcision and
Baptism together, do thou not lay thy self open to some disadvantage in this?
was one Ordinance a type of another, or one figure a type of another figure?
what confusion is here? is not this Priests baptism? was not the Circumcision
of the flesh a type of the Circumcision of the heart? and was not water Baptism
a figure of the inward washing by the Lavor of regeneration, and is called a
figure, 1 Pet. 3.21. of that that saves, not the washing away the filth of the
flesh, which was the outward baptism, but the inward washing, and answer of a
good conscience by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, which is known by all who
have their hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience by the flesh of Jesus
Christ. How is Baptism fitted any more to the new witness then any other thing
commanded or practiced by the Saints? if thou knew the new witness which he
that believes has in himself, thou would know there is no more outward water
in it then outward fire; but thou speaks words by tradition and understandest
not what thou say, was Circumcision any otherwise fitted to the old witness
or Testament then as a figure of the true cutting off from the body of sin by
the Circumcision of Christ? and is Baptism any otherwise fitted to the new
Testament then as a figure also? and when the substance is come, they both end
in him who is the substance. And for thy saying, Christ's Disciples were to
teach succeeding Disciples what ever he had commanded them, etc. but water is
not mentioned to be commanded them by Christ, and therefore not to teach water,
having it not in charge. Again thou say, he promised his presence with them
to the end of the world, if his presence with them, then is he not a commander
to them, and are they not to receive the word at is mouth? seeing God speaks by
him in these last days, and he is the same yesterday to day and for ever; or
was and did Christ only speak with and to his twelve disciples, and they to
deliver over by tradition what he told them? or were the Saints without Christ's
presence for diverse hundred years after his departure o^t of the world, before
the New Testament was gathered together, and bound in one Book, seeing the
Epistles were scattered up and down in diverse parts of the world some many
hundred miles distant one Epistle from another? and how long after, and by
whose command were they gathered together? or is Christ's presence with his
people, and yet he speaks not to them imediately? or is Christ less powerful
then he was? or is his love abated? or did he speak once for all? and will he
never speak more imediately? or else what does Christ's presence signify now if
not to speak to them, lead them, and save them? otherwise what is man the
better for such a presence as he knows not nor is not sensible of? or has
Christ ceased to be a King, seeing where the presence of a King is there is
power? or is a man only to believe he has Christ's presence with him, while
other Lords have Dominion over him? or has Christ left his people to pick out
his worship as well as he can here and there a little, out of all the Epistles
and other Books by their own judgments and understandings? Is not this to make
the New Testament inferior to the Old; where Isreal's Laws were together in
Tables, and in some particular places and books, as Deuteronomy Levit. etc? If you be
the succeeding Disciples, and are to observe all things that those were to
observe and had in command? why are you not going into all Nations to Preach
the Gospel in every creature, but stay at home in your country? or have you not
Christ's presence with you, and so dare not venture too far? but what singular
thing do you do, whereby it may appear you have Christ's presence with you, and
are indeed the succeeding Disciples thou speaks of? or is it not rather
manifest, you are none of his Disciples, seeing he never taught nor practiced
such customs and conformities to the world, as are practiced among many called
baptists; besides this legible mark, they do not love one another, but bite and
devour one another about those things they call Christ's Ordinances and
appointments, and if this be true which Christ said, viz. by this shall all men
know you are my Disciples, if you love one another; then whose Disciples are
those who hate one another, how is Christ's presence with them, while these
things abide among them?

Then thou gives thy reason why thou say, that of water is the one Baptism
Paul writes of, viz. because the other is not called Baptism, but it is called
washing by the spirit, 1 Cor. 6.11. and diverse other places as before is
proved; so it is either the thing or the word thou denies, if the thing, it is
sufficiently proved to be called washing which is all one with baptizing, as
Luke 11.38. And when the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he had not first
baptized before dinner, or washed as some Translators read it. If the word
baptism be that which thou denies, where is the word Baptism attributed to
fire, or where is it said they were baptized with fire? and yet thou urges the
second of Acts to prove Baptism with fire, when there is not the word baptism
there, only, like as of fire. But then thou say, if it were called Baptism,
yet were it a Metaphorical, and not a proper Baptism, etc. James, thou may
remember in thy six page thou say, to the Law and to the testimony, if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them; out
of thy own mouth may thou be judged, where is there one such a word in the
Law or testimony, as Metaphorical? if it be not there to be found, may it not
be said (without offense) thou speaks not according to the Law and testimony,
therefore there is no light in thee, for thou say plainly it is not a proper
baptism, surely (James) thou know it not, and therefore miscals it, for if
ever thou had witnessed it, or knew what it were to be baptized into Christ,
and to put on Christ, thou would not so speak of it, to call it, not a proper
Baptism; What did John who baptized with water, baptize with a proper baptism,
and Christ of whom he bore witness, baptize with an improper baptism, or a
baptism not proper? was ever such gross absurdities affirmed, as that the
messenger and servant should baptize with the proper Baptism, and the Master
himself with a Baptism not proper? Is the servant become above his master? or
is the Masters work only Metaphorical and not proper? what is not the washing
away of sins a proper washing? and is not the lavor of regeneration a proper
washing or baptising and is not that with which those Apostles and others who
were baptized or washed by the spirit, a proper washing or baptizing? and those
that had their bodies washed with pure water, was not that a proper washing? Is
not this to darken counsel again by words without knowledge, and by men's
traditions and inventions to make void Christ's commands? is not the washing of
the spirit, the true and proper washing, or is the figure in thy esteem become
proper and substantial, and the substance and truth become Metaphorical and not
proper? and is the washing away the filth of the flesh preferred before the
answer of a good conscience, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ? and so that
by thee is called not proper, which is most proper, and that Metaphorically
which is true, substantial and real, for whatsoever is spiritually so, is more
so then that which is naturally so, and that which is most real and true is
most proper: but herein thou apparently manifests thy ignorance of the true and
proper Baptism, like those who had John's washing, but knew not whether there
were any Holy Ghost or not. Acts 19. may thou not as well say, that Christ's
blood and Christ's flesh, which except a man eat and drink, he has no life in
him, is Metaphorical and not proper? though Christ says his blood is drink
indeed, and his flesh is meat indeed, and nourishes up to eternal life, and is
most proper food for the children; but is not this as improper in thy
judgment, though Christ says it is meat indeed (mark indeed) not as thou
say of his Baptism but properly, substantially and indeed? but is not this
as hard a saying now to many who say they are Disciples, as it was of old, and
because of these hard sayings, have not many Disciples gone back, and walked no
more with him, Joh. 6.60. and 66.

Again thou say, the Baptism intended by Paul, Ephesians. 4.5. is distinguished
in the same place from faith, by which God purifieth the heart, Acts 15.9. and
Mark 19.16. (and there is no such chapter nor verse) which is the inward
washing and cleansing by the spirit.

Here thou grants again what thou seems to dispute against; which is say
thou the inward washing and cleansing by the spirit, so that all that thou
contends against is the word baptizing, or Baptism, where as thou calls it
washing by the spirit; but denies it to be baptizing by the spirit, so
confesses it in English, but denies it in Greek, but thou say it is
distinguished from faith which washes, and therefore not the spirits baptizing,
or washing, and yet calls it thy self the inward washing by the spirit; so thou
art but as one that fights with thy own shadow. But is not thy confusion
manifest to all whose eyes are open? and is not this thy reason that thou gives
(why that baptism is not meant the spirits baptism) because distinguished from
faith which washes, etc. is not this reason as strong against the spirit, and
against the hope, and against the one Lord and one God, as against the Baptism?
are not all these distinguished by name, though all one in nature and kind? or
is the Lord not God, because distinguished by name? and is not the spirit, God,
because distinguished there by name? and is the hope not Christ, because
distinguished? what nonsense and confusion is here? is the one baptism, or one
washing, that is so nearly coupled to the one spirit, one Lord and one God, and
one hope and one faith, not the true or proper Baptism or washing of the
spirit, because distinguished from such which washes and purifies? is not by
the same reason the one hope which purifies not the true and spiritual hope,
because it is distinguished from faith which purifies? and by the same reason
the one spirit is not the true spirit, because distinguished from faith and
hope which purifies and washes, as 1 Cor. 6 11. washed by the spirit; but in
this Argument also (as well as others) is not thy folly made manifest to all
men (that reads with understanding) are all these things different in nature
because distinguished by name? what ignorance is this? does not thy own
Argument make against thy self, and thy water Baptism, viz. because faith, and
hope, and the spirit, and Lord, and God, and Baptism are only distinguished by
name, and not divided in nature or kind, therefore it must needs be intended
the Baptism of the spirit? all these names being spiritual, and only
distinguished, but not divided in nature and kind, is to speak of a spiritual
and inward hope, and a spiritual and inward faith, and a spiritual and inward
Lord and God above all and through all and in you all; and then should thrust
in, in the midst of this inward and spiritual unity, an outward visible water,
which only washes away the filth of the flesh outwardly, is not this to set up
and to prefer your water, and couple it with and make it equal to the one Lord,
the one faith, the one God and one spirit? and to make the want of outward
water and washing to be a breach of the union with the one Lord, and one God,
and one faith, and so he that is not outwardly washed with outward water is out
of the unity with the one spirit, one Lord, and the one God; for if any of
these particulars be wanting, the union is not complete but broken, and
therefore he that has not the true hope in him, is not in the unity of the
spirit, and he that has not the true and one faith, has not unity with God
nor Christ, and so he that has not the one Baptism, has not the one Lord, nor
the one God; for none of these may be spared without the breach of the union in
the whole, for he that has one of these, has all these, for they are in unity
together, and unites all as with a bond of Peace, where they are enjoyed. So
that, thou James Pope have at once (by thy saying this one Baptism is outward
water and washing) condemned all the children of the Lord that are not so
baptized with outward water, as being out of the unity of the spirit, and out
of the unity with the one Lord and one God, and so no salvation for them; is
not this to set up another Savior, or to bring in an outward corruptible
creature, and set it upon the throne by the Creator? and so make outward
washing with water to be the key to let into the Kingdom of God, and unity of
the spirit, and without it no union with God or Christ or the spirit, and so no
salvation; therefore said I not truly, thou wast not willing to part with thy
water so; but like Micah, Judges the 18.24. might well cry out, you have taken
away my gods, and what have I more? and why do you ask me what aileth me? so
now it is no wonder you cry out so much for your water, seeing you join it so
close to the one faith, one Lord, and the one God, that if it be wanting unity
with God is not known, and so this is agreeable to what some have Printed, that
without water Baptism no salvation; and is not this to make another door then
Christ, and another way then Christ? and how much short of this thou have
endeavored to make outward water to be (may be easily seen by the upright in
heart) who says, not only it must continue because fitted to the New
Testament, as Circumcision was to the Old; and so in like manner as the
Teachers of Circumcision thrust in that upon the bewitched Galatians, and said
except they were Circumcised they could not be saved: do not all you, whose
judgment this is, do the same concerning your water, when you say, It is
fitted to the New Testament, as Circumcision was to the Old? And do not you
make Proselites by your outward water, as they did by Circumcision? But as if
this were not enough, thou say, Outward water is that one Baptism spoken of
by Paul, joined with the one Faith, one Lord, and the one God; as if that
outward water either lets into the union with Christ, or the want of it makes
void the union; and yet you say in words, that union with Christ must precede,
and fit the subject, before a right can be to water: and yet what it should be
that should make you cry up water so much I know not (seeing you have no
positive Command by Christ in plain words for it) except through the cunning
craftiness of the old serpent, who gives leave to cry up, and to rest upon any
thing that is outward, on purpose to busy the mind upon, and to blind the eye
from looking at or upon any thing revealed within, that only can give the
knowledge of God in Christ, and manifests to the Souls its union with, and
compleatness in Christ Jesus both as to the true Circumcision and Baptism, Col.
2.11, 12.

The next Question thou say, Thou understands not, which was, whether such do
truly discern the Lords body, eat his flesh and drink his blood, who do imagine
of the flesh, blood and bones of Christ as the Jews did.

And yet as if thou were concerned in the Query (though thou understand it not,
as thou say) will return some kind of answer to it (which is not the part of
a wise man) to give an answer to that which he positively says, he understands
not, as thou do: but thy answer makes it manifest, that thou art not sensible
of that fond imagination, which runs in the minds of filthy creatures, who
defile the flesh; for thou say, If it be meant of the believing Jews, who did
believe that Christ rose from the dead with his flesh and bones as himself
testifies, such may truly discern the Lords hody, eat his flesh and drink his
blood, etc. Does not this answer savor of a Jew outward? Or art thou mistaken,
as thou wast in thy former quotation? when as there is neither Chap. nor verse.
to be found; so in this also seeing thou names only flesh and bones, and the
Query was flesh, and blood, and bones, as a real man has; or do thou imagine
of Christ that he had or has flesh and bones only, and no blood like a real
man? If so, speak plainly in thy next Book, that I may know thy Opinion in this
particular, and name thy proof; or if it be the Errata of the Printer, let thy
next be rectified, that thou had forgotten to put down the blood, and so I
may pass it by for the present.

To the next Question, which is, whether that flesh which is meat indeed, and
that blood which is drink indeed, be not spiritual and that which quickneth and
nourishes up to eternal life all those that feed thereon?

To this thou confesses, but cannot know it but in the light, no more then the
Jews did, who said, how can this man give us his flesh to eat? And it is as
hard a saying now, as it was then, though easilier confessed now, because it is
written and may be read.

To the last Query, which is, What is that flesh that profits nothing? And
what is that flesh after which Christ was once known, yet henceforth know we
him so no more?

To which thou returns this answer, Christ in John 6.63. shows that it is the
Spirit that quickneth, and therefore without that all is without profit,
whatever is done in the flesh without the Spirit; and so if you take it of
being employed in Ordinances with the flesh, or outward man only, it profits
nothing. This is thy answer to the first part of the Query, viz. What is that
flesh which profits nothing? Can any wise man take this for an answer to the
Question, or is it not a declining the Question, and answering to another
Question of thy own framing? As if thou had been asked, whether that worship
that is performed in the flesh or outward man only without the Spirit of God
profits or not? If this had been the Question, then thou had returned an
answer somewhat pertinent; but the Question that thou was to answer to, was,
What is that flesh that profits nothing? Considering what the foregoing
Question was (and thy answer to it) viz. that there is a flesh that is
spiritual, and does nourish to eternal life all those that feed thereon: then
comes this Question in the next words (as depending upon the foregoing
Question) and what then is that flesh that profits nothing, seeing there is
flesh that nourishes up to eternal life? But thou in stead of giving an answer,
what flesh it is that profits nothing, tells a story of what ever is born in
the flesh or outward man, without the Spirit, profits not, etc. A Child that
reads his Primer, might have said so much by rote out of the Catechism; and yet
thou quotes John 6.63. as if thy answer were intended to that place of
Scripture, as if thou did believe the Question was grounded upon that place,
which answer of thine does manifest, as if Christ were speaking in this place
of worshipping in the flesh without the Spirit, and instructing his Disciples
that the worshipping in the flesh without the Spirit profits nothing; which
thing (though true in it self) yet not true in this place, as being the thing
Christ was at this time teaching his Disciples, for he was here rather
rectifying, and informing of them aright, seeing they seemed to be prejudiced
at Christ's foregoing words about eating his flesh and drinking his blood, and
saying at the 57. ver. he that eats me, even he shall live by me, and at the
58. ver. This is that bread which came down from Heaven: not as your fathers
did eat Manna, and are dead: he that eats of this bread shall live for ever;
and at the 60. ver. Many therefore of his Disciples, when they heard this,
said, This is an hard saying, Who can hear it? When Jesus knew in himself that
his Disciples murmured at it, he said unto them, Does this offend you? What and
if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? It is the Spirit
that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you,
they are Spirit, and they are life. So that it is manifest Christ's drift and
scope in this place is to satisfy his Disciples that murmured about his
telling them of of eating his flesh and drinking his blood; and to take them
off from looking at his outward fleshly presence, as if his outward flesh, or
outward words, were that which they were to feed upon, or always to expect to
hear: but there was another flesh to be known, and other work to be read in the
inward man by the Spirit, for that quickneth, and those words are Spirit and
life; but the flesh profits nothing: so by this may the enlightened
understanding see and read plainly the scope and drift of Christ's Words, and
not to be spoken in that sense which thou and others in your vain minds
conceive; but have a deeper understanding, which the children of light are
acquainted withal: so that the Query yet remains unanswered (by thee) viz. what
then is the flesh that profits nothing.

And for thy answer to the second part of the Query, viz. and what is that
flesh after which Christ was once known, yet henceforth know we him so no more:
to which thou answerest, To know any man or Christ after the flesh, it was to
know according to the natural line of Abram, and so according to the first
Covenant; but now know we him no more, that is not by a natural descent; but he
that is in Christ is a new Creature, and all the old things of the first
Covenant are passed away, and all things are become new: and thou quotes
Philip. 3.3, 4, 5. and says, We will help to clear the sense of this place,
viz. what is that flesh after which Christ was once known; yet henceforth know
we him so no more. By this answer to the Query, thou have but manifested thy
ignorance of Christ after the Spirit; for does the knowledge of Christ after
the Spirit teach to deny the natural descent of Christ after the flesh, seeing
it is reckoned up as one of the Israelites Privileges, viz. of whom as
concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all God blessed for ever, Amen,
Romans 9.4, 5. Or is Christ changed from what he was? Or is he the same yesterday
and to day and for ever? And does the Apostle Paul teach to forget the
Genealogy of Christ from Abram? Or has he forgotten his love to his brethren
and kinsmen according to the flesh, which he says, Romans 9.3. he could wish
himself separated from Christ for them? Or does he instrust children after they
are come to the knowledge of Christ no more to know their Parents after the
flesh or natural descent, or any other man after any natural line? Surely to
say so, had been crime enough against the people called Quakers; then might
thou have had some ground to cry out of their disrespect to Superiors, and of
the neglect of children in not obeying their Parents, and subjects in not
giving honor to Magistrates, and of servants in not obeying of their Masters
after the flesh, which in thy Book thou seems to blame the Quakers for their
remisness therein, and do thou do the same thing? Or do thou go about to
interpret Paul's words to such a sense? Whereas he himself was so far from
denying his natural descent or lineage, or outward Privilege, that upon
occasion he reckons it up again and again, and stands upon it, and is not
condemned for it: and does he write to the Corinthians to know no man after the
natural line or descent? No not Christ himself: What does Paul make void
Matthews and Lukes reckoning up of the natural line or descent of Christ from
Abraham? Are we no more to know Christ so? What do the Christians with it in
their Bibles then, if Christ be no more to be known so? But let us see if the
Apostle Paul have one word tending that way, in "that place thou quotes, 2 Cor.
5.16. For he is speaking how the love of Christ constrained them at the 14.
ver. and the cause of it, because says he we thus judge, that if one died for
all, then were all dead: and that he died for all, that they which live should
not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose
again. Wherefore from henceforth know we no man according to the flesh (for so
it is, and some translations read it so) yea, though we have known Christ
according to the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more. Therefore if
any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are past away, behold,
all things are become new. And all things are of God, who has reconciled us to
himself by Jesus Christ, etc. James Pope, what ground is here for thy conceived
imagination? therefore wait upon the Lord in the light of his Son, that thou
may be made alive by God, by being his workmanship in Christ Jesus; and then
thou will know how the word henceforth in the 15. ver. answers to the word
henceforth in the 16. ver. and then thou will see how such inventions and
interpretations of thy own brain are some of those old things, which then thou will behold passing away, as thou becomes a new Creation, and all things will
be of God; and in that day thou will know the first Covenant, and its vanishing
by the new and everlasting Covenant, which is Gods free gift; but known to none
who are alive without the Law, and have their first husband living; such must
know a bitter cup, and a day of death, before ever they can be married to
Christ. Take this in love to thy Soul (James Pope) for this is the Word of the
Lord to thee, and is of nearer concernment to thee, then as yet thou art aware
of. And for that of Philip. 3.3, 4, 5. it proves nothing of thy conceit and
invention, but rather may serve to condemn thee, who art comparing outward
circumcision and outward washing together, as being fitted to the New
Testament, as outward circumcision was to the Old: but we are the Circumcision
which worship God in the Spirit, and have no confidence in the flesh, neither
Faith in any outward washing with outward water: but our Faith stands in Christ
alone, in whom we are complete, both as to the true Circumcision, and to the
one Baptism, and to the one bread in which we have Communion together in the
body; and as many as are joined to the Lord are one Spirit, and are of one
heart and one Soul, and do not deny any of the Gospel Ordinances, or plead for
the abrogating of them, as thou say the Query seems to suppose: but this we
plead against, will worship and all likenesses, and dead imitations in the
worship of God; for by the Gospel of our Salvation are we made alive, and do
not rush into Gods service, without fear and the leadings of his Spirit; having
in times past felt by experience, and smarted for having a form of godliness,
but not sensible of the power; and a name to live, and accounted as
worshippers, but were in the death, as many more are at this day who say they
are alive, and say they see but are blind; and who required these things at
your hands will be their answer when they think to enter by them or for them:
and it is not enough that I have read or heard others did them, but I must know
whether they are required at my hands, and whether I am appointed by my Lord
and Master to do them, seeing he has several appointments for his servants,
and none are exempted from learning of him what to do every day, and knowing
his voice and following his Counsel, who is faithful to him that made him a
high Priest, and is worthy of more honor then Moses, inasmuch as he who
builded the House, has more honor then the House; for every House is builded
by some, but he that builds all things is God; and Moses verily was faithful in
all his House as a servant, for Testimony of those things which were to be
spoken after, but Christ as a Son over his own house, whose house are we if we
hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the Hope firm to the end:
wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, to day if ye will hear his voice harden not
your hearts, etc. So by this thou may understand what House it is that Christ
is a faithful high Priest over, and gives Laws and appointments to, as Moses
did to the outward people of the Jews, and Christ does to the inward Jews, who
is a Prophet like unto Moses, and is now to be heard, for by him God speaks,
and whoever hears not him shall be cut off from among the people; and such a
one who hears not his voice immediately, is but a Jew outward, though in the
practice of all those outward washings and other outward things done by the
Saints, and recorded in the Scripture, whose praise is of men, and as yet
Christ is not come to him the second time without sin to Salvation, and
therefore knows him not to be the end of all things, and to put an end to sin,
and to finish transgression, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, in whom
we are complete, who is the head of all principalities and powers.

Now follows an Answer to thy Queries.
1. Q. WHether it is not a high degree of pride and arrogance, for any to go
about to exalt their own wisdom above the wisdom of Christ?

Answ. Yea, and so do all those who are wise above what is written, and pry
into things which they have not seen, and so become puffed up in their fleshly
minds, boasting of other men's lines, hastening to be rich, but will not wait
upon the Lord to receive the true riches from him, which are his gifts, nor the
true wisdom from him, which is not taught by the precepts and customs of men,
but comes down from above, and is first pure and peaceable, and easy to be
entreated.

2. Q. Whether they do not so, that account those Ordinances which he has
appointed too low and carnal for them to submit unto, not minding that this
foolishness of God is wiser then men? 1 Cor. 1.15.

Answ. All those who despise or account the Ordinances (which Christ has
appointed them to submit unto and walk in the practice of) too low and carnal,
do set up and exalt their own wisdoms above the Wisdom of God: and of this sort
are they who neglect the means which God has appointed unto eternal life,
which is to wait upon and stand still in the light and grace of God which
appears to manifest Gods Mind and Will unto every man and woman, that so they
may know it and do it in obedience to his requiring of it at their hands; that
so they may not fall under that righteous censure of the Lord, saying to some,
Who has required these things at your hands? though performed (in times past)
by the servants of the Lord, and by him required at their hands: and yet others
may be condemned for doing the same things, the Lord forbidding all likenesses
to be made, whether of things in Heaven or things in Earth, etc. And for thy
quotation of 1 Cor. ^.15. I know not what thou intends by it, except to
manifest how thy mind is troubled for Baptizing in thy own name; for in that
place Paul thanks God that he had Baptized but a few, least any should have
thought so of him, intimating that those who Baptize many, or lay so much
stress upon it, expose themselves to be guilty of this charge: but it may be an
Errata of the Printer, and so I shall pass it by.

3. Q. Whether those who deny the continuance of water Baptism which Christ
Commanded, and his servants faithfully practiced after his Resurrection, in
memorial thereof, are willing the doctrine of the Resurrection of the body of
Christ as the first fruits of the Resurrection of the bodies of the Saints
should be perpetuated?

Answ. Those who deny the continuance of water Baptism, or any other thing,
which Christ has Commanded them to observe and continue, are transgressors;
and those are no less, who continue it in their own wills and imitation only,
the Lord not requiring it at their hands, he being a Spirit, and will be
worshipped in Spirit, and by the Spirit, and not because Jerusalem was the
place of worship, therefore still to continue: no more are men still to go down
into outward water, because some were commanded so to do, except they know the
Lord requires it at their hands, by the moving and stirring of the Spirit of
God in their own hearts and breasts, which thing they do and should have done,
had they never read or heard of any such thing done by any before them: and he
that thus goes into the water, or does any other thing, worships God aright,
and finds not out his worship himself; but he himself is first sought out of
God to worship God in the Spirit, for God is a Spirit, and such God only seeks
to worship him, though many others otherwise seeks to worship God; but he will
not accept an offering at their hand, which causes many to be filled with wrath
against those at whose hands the Lord does accept an offering, because they do
it in the Spirit of Faith, and such do not deny the one offering that perfects
for ever them that are sanctified, nor the memorial of the Resurrection of the
body of Christ, nor the Resurrection of the bodies of the Saints; but do
equally condemn the folly both of those who say there is no Resurrection of the
dead, and who yet are to seek what the Resurrection of the body is, and who say
how are the dead raised up, and with what body do they come: to them both I say
as the Apostle said, Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except
it die; and he that has not part in the first Resurrection, for all his shows,
memorials and figures, shall not escape the second death; but he that knows he
has part in the first Resurrection, over him the second death shall have no
power; and he is willing that the doctrine of the Resurrection of the body of
Christ, as the first fruits of the Resurrection of the bodies of the Saints
should be perpetuated, though some say now of such, as once was said of Paul,
Acts 17. that he was a setter forth of strange gods, because he Preached unto
them Jesus and the Resurrection, and this query does not altogether excuse the
Author from that spirit; but James, here is three things for thee to prove by
plain Scripture and not by thy consequences, least thou be guilty of that which
you of your way have charged upon the Priests. 1. To prove Christ commanded
water baptism since his Resurrection. 2. To prove that his servants practiced
it by virtue of that command after his Resurrection. 3. That he commanded
outward washing to be practiced after his Resurrection in memorial of his
Resurrection, and that the practitioners did it so accordingly; all which thou
seems to affirm in thy query, and to take it for granted, and then a more
particular answer to them all thou may receive according to the Scripture of
Truth.

Q. 4. Whether those that deny the Ordinance of breaking bread, as it was
instituted by Christ, and practiced by his Primitive Saints, are willing the
memorial of Christ's death and bloodshed should remain among his Saints until
his next coming?

Answ. Those who deny any Ordinance or institution of Christ to those of whom
he required it, and to that end for which he appointed it, as the cause of his
requiring it at their hands, are transgressors, and are not willing that the
end or cause of his commanding it should be fulfilled or accomplished, nor do
not wait or look for his appearing the second time without sin unto salvation,
but believe they are saved though they commit sin, and believe that freedom
from all sin they can never attain while living in this visible world, and such
are not only unwilling that the memorial of Christ's death and bloodshed
should remain among his Saints, but are both ignorant and unbelieving, that the
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses all that know it and believe in it from all
unrighteousness, and presents them perfect unto God without spot or wrinkle or
any such thing, and such only (as thus believe) celebrate the memorial of
Christ's death and bloodshed, as are dead with Christ, and such are free from
sin, and such though they neither eat bread nor drink wine, but feed upon
locust and wild honey, or are content with a dinner of green herbs, such I say
do truly show forth the Lords death in their conformity to it, and his blood
shed in that their hearts are sprinkled from an evil conscience to serve the
living God in truth and righteousness.

Q. 5. Whether those that say that Scripture, 1 Cor. 11.26. is meant of Christ's
coming in Spirit, do not in effect say that the Ordinance of breaking of bread
was appointed for unbelievers to eat and drink damnation, till Christ come to
them in Spirit?

Answ. Was it not in the same night in which he was betrayed, that he took
bread? and is not Christ a spirit, and his coming in spirit? or does he come
out of the spirit, or is there a coming of Christ, and not in the spirit? is
Christ and the spirit divided, or can he come and he not in the spirit, and the
spirit in him? and where Christ is present, is not the spirit there also, and
he in it, and it in him, and yet but one? And does it at all follow in sound
judgment or good understanding, that they who say the 1 Cor. 11.26. is meant
of Christ's coming in spirit, must needs or in effect say that the Ordinance of
breaking bread was appointed for unbelievers to eat and drink damnation till
Christ come to them in spirit, any more then it follows that the Disciples had
no power at all, because they were commanded to wait at Jerusalem for the
promise of the Father, and that they should receive power after the Holy Ghost
was come upon them, Acts 1.4.8. ver. or any more then it may be said of Christ
that his words employed, or that he in effect said that his Disciples had not
his spirit at all in them (and so were none of his) when he said to them (in
these words) how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy spirit to
them that ask him? Luke 11.13. and yet all that time God was their Father, and
they could not ask aright without the spirit, and yet Christ says, how much
more shall your heavenly Father give the holy spirit to them that ask him? so
do they (who say that the coming of Christ in 1 Cor. 11.26. is his coming in
spirit) in effect say any more or otherwise, that those had not the spirit at
all, or were unbelievers, to whom Christ said, take, eat, this is my body which
is broken for you, etc. because they were to wait for a further and fuller
manifestation of him in them; and he went away in that fleshly appearance, that
he might come again unto them, and abide with them for ever, and this Christ
prayed for and performed accordingly, John 17.23. I in them, and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in one, etc. so that to say (till he come) is
meant of Christ's coming in spirit, does no more deny or in effect say that the
breaking of bread was appointed for unbelievers to eat and drink damnation,
etc. then Christ in saying (the Father would give his holy Spirit to them that
ask him) in effect said that God would give his holy Spirit to them that asked
or prayed without the Spirit, or then Christ in effect said, that they who
waited in their wills, and in the form without the power, should receive power
after the Holy Ghost was come upon them, or then in effect Christ should say,
they had not the holy Spirit at all as yet, because it was to come upon them,
and so (till he come) though meant of his coming in Spirit, yet does not
follow, but those to whom Christ spoke had a measure of his Spirit already come
to them, and was in them, and so commanded them not to eat and drink damnation;
but by eating of that bread, and drinking of that cup, they were to show the
Lords death till he come, and then when he was come, who was showed by that
eating and drinking, the show needed no longer, the thing showed being come and
witnessed, the bread indeed and drink indeed was known, and Eternal life
inherited.

Q. 6. Whether it is not granted by those that seem to deny it, that the
forecited place directs the Church at Corinth to the use of an Ordinance,
seeing some might eat this bread and drink this cup, which is also called flesh
and blood, unworthily, but those that eat truly that flesh that is meat indeed,
and drink that blood which is drink indeed, are nourished up to Eternal life,
so that while some do eat and drink in that Ordinance unworthily, and so eat
and drink damnation, others by faith feed upon the benefits of Christ's death
and bloodshed, and so are nourished up to Eternal life?

Answ. Is there any thing in the forecited place, that directs to the use of
(that which thou calls) an Ordinance, surely in this, thy zeal out-runs thy
understanding, seeing those be the words of the forecited place, viz. for as
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, show ye the Lords death till he
come (for so it is on the Margent) show ye; what is here of direction in these
words, as to the use of an Ordinance, as thou say (let the wise in heart
judge) but does not the Apostles words, as much, if not more signify to the
Corinthians, that they might forbear their eating and drinking in that wise as
they did eat and drink, and their unworthiness was, in not discerning of the
Lords body, and for that cause was many sick and weak, etc. and for that
disorder which was amongst many the Apostle reproves them, as for their
greediness and drunkenness, and the like; and exhorts them to eat at home in
their own houses, but he never calls it an Ordinance to be ministered once a
Month, or once a week, and that always, by some men or man appointed by the
rest in their wills and ways, some to buy wine and bread, and others to break
it, and deliver to the rest; but Christ did not do so, for in the same night in
which he was betrayed he took bread, and when he had given thanks he brake it,
and said, take, eat, this is my body, this do in remembrance of me; after the
same manner also he took the cup, when he had Supped, and did he bid you do so,
or do you do so after Supper? or can you give thanks as he did? or do you know
what he said when he gave thanks? or do you imitate him in saying his very
words in one thing, viz. (this is my body) and do you speak your own words in
other things, as when you give thanks? or do you take a piece of bread and a
cup of wine, and say nothing at all, but eat and drink? and if you do it not in
the same manner, which he did it in, is it then his Ordinance, or your
invention, seeing Gods Ordinances must be kept as they were delivered, and
observed as he commanded them, otherwise they are none of his; and if not his,
then but a likeness, and if a likeness, then that which God has forbidden, and
so is Idolatry, and he an Idolator that so worships, and in that state cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God. And whereas thou say, some might eat this
bread and drink this cup, which is also called flesh and blood, unworthily.

Take heed (James) of calling a lie, a plea for truth, in love to truth,
remember the Title of thy book, where is that bread and that cup, which a man
may eat unworthily, called flesh and blood, as thou positively affirms in thy
query it is; surely thou discerns not Christ's body, for if thou did, thou
would learn to speak truth; are not these the words of the Apostle (that thou
intendst) viz. wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup of
the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord: but
where is it called flesh and blood? surely this is a gross error of thine, not
only to call the outward bread, and the outward cup (which an unworthy and
wicked man may eat and drink) flesh and blood, and if flesh and blood, whose
flesh and blood? is it not Christ's flesh, and Christ's blood? and can an
unworthy man and woman eat and drink that? surely no, if Christ's words be true,
and I must believe him before thee (James) and he says, John 6.54. whosoever
eats my flesh and drinks my blood has Eternal life, how say thou then
in thy query, some might eat this bread, and drink this cup, which (thou
say) is also called flesh and blood, unworthily? but where is the bread and
the cup (which some may eat and drink unworthily) called flesh and blood? take
heed of slandering the Scripture. And then thou drawest up thy query into a
short conclusion in these words, viz. so that while some do eat and drink in
that Ordinance unworthily, and so eat and drink damnation, other by faith feed
upon the benefits of Christ's death and bloodshed, and so are nourished up to
Eternal life, and herein thou have made a good confession, that while some in
that which thou calls an Ordinance eat and drink damnation, others who live by
faith and feed upon the benefits of Christ's death and bloodshed (and are not
that which thou calls an Ordinance) and yet are nourished up to Eternal life,
and so of what thou have spoken this is the sum, that some in that Ordinance
eat and drink damnation, and others out of it, feed upon the living bread that
comes down from heaven, and have Eternal life abiding in them.

Q. 7. Whether those that deny Church fellowship, do not forsake their own
mercies, seeing Gods children have found by sweet experience that it is of
singular use for their building upon their most holy faith, it being the place
of Christ's promised presence, where he has commanded the blessing and life for
evermore.

Answ. Those that deny that Church that is in God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, These. 1. and that fellowship that is in the light, as he is in the
light, 1 John ^ denies the true Church Fellowship, and forsakes their own
mercies, and that light in which alone all the Saints ever had all their sweet
experiences given them of Gods love, and tender mercy to them, and in that who
ever walked, and continued in it, built up one another in their most holy
faith, that being the place of Christ's promised presence; for there he dwells
for ever, and out of his light none can meet with him, or know him; and out of
that is the false Church and Church Fellowship, and Christian outward, and
baptism outward, that only washes away the filth of the flesh, but knows not
the answer of a good conscience by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, for from
the true light was and is the false Church and fellowship, for they went out
from us, says the Apostle, who had his fellowship in the light.

Q. 8. Whether they may not most truly be said to live above Ordinances, that
faithfully wait upon, and live to Christ in the use of them?

Answ. They that wait upon and live to Christ in the use of Ordinances, cannot
be said to live above them; for that which God has appointed and Ordained, as
the way to Eternal life and happiness, none may live above it; for the the way
and the life are one, and he that is in the way, is in the truth, and in the
life also; and none can be in the truth and (most truly) live above the way
ordained of God to life; neither can any live above the way, and yet be in the
truth; and therefore thy query is an unlearned question, and manifests thy
ignorance of the mysteries of Christ.

Q. 9. Whether if those who despised Moses Law died without mercy under two or
three witnesses, ought not those then, that (either in word, practice or
writing) despise Christ's Law, to be deeply humbled and truly repent of so
grievous a sin, especially if they have taught others so do?

Answ. I hope that is not the English of thy query, viz. that thou would have
them more sorely punished that deny your water washing, then those were that
despised Moses Law. Those who despise Christ's Law ought to be deeply humbled,
and repent of it, and turn from it, or they cannot be saved; and such are all
those who despise the true light, with which every man that comes into the
world is lighted, and call it natural: for Christ is a Lawgiver, and gives
Laws to his children, as Moses did to the Jews, and his Laws and Ordinances are
only known, and read in the true light, and he which opposes or gain-says
either in himself or others the manifestation of the Spirit, which is given to
every man to profit withal, is an unprofitable servant unto God, though he be
found in all the outward practices of the true Church, for God is a Spirit, and
they which worship him aright, must worship in the Spirit, and in the truth,
for such God did seek to worship him in the days of the Apostles, and such God
is seeking again, and all others shall be discovered, and cast out as dung upon
the face of the earth, and such despisers shall behold and wonder, and by their
mocking at the true light, which lights every man that comes into the world;
shall their bonds become strong, and their punishment become sorer then those
who despised Moses Law, if they speedily repent not.

10 Q. Whether it will be a good Plea at the dreadful day of Christ, to say,
Lord we would not have despised thy Laws, if thou had made them to our minds,
and we had thought they had been spiritual enough?

Answ. It will be no good Plea at the dreadful day of Christ, neither is it
now, to say, Lord we would not have despised thy Laws, if thou had made them
to our minds, and we had thought they had been spiritual enough: and of this
sort are all those, who put the day of the Lord afar off, and are of the night,
and know not the day of the Lord as yet to be dawned, nor the day star to be
risen in their hearts, but though they draw near with their lips, their hearts
are far from God, and their minds are estranged from him by wicked works,
though in words they confess him, yet they are but in their thoughts, and think
they stand sure; but their foundation is rottenness and built upon the sands,
like all those who say and do not, and hear his words but obey them not, and
cry, the Temple of the Lord, and Churchfellowship, and Ordinances, but hate to
be Reformed, and to have their conversation ordered aright; and so cannot see
Gods Salvation, while they account that too low and carnal, or legal and
natural, which checks and reproves for sin in the Conscience, and accuses for
evil, and excuses when they do well, and reject it and slight it as not
spiritual enough; and such are they thy Query speaks of; had they known that
the light in their Consciences had been spiritual, and that which came from
Christ the light of the world, and given them to lead out of darkness, and that
with which they must come to see themselves lost and undone (if ever they be
saved) and in the sight and sense of their miserable estate, to wait for a
Savior, and in that light to see him revealed, to save when none can help or
deliver: I say this is the man and the woman, that in truth thy Query speaks
of, that shall say, Lord we would not have despised thy Laws, if thou had
made them to our minds, or if they had been spiritual enough: but the light in
the Conscience we liked not, because it always bore a witness for God, against
all our evil ways; and now we marvel not that every one that does evil hates
it, because it reproves them all; but outward Observances and bodily Exercises
we like well, and in these Observations we look for the Kingdom of Heaven to
come: but to give up to be guided by the light in our Consciences and shines in
our hearts for that to give us the knowledge of God in the face of Christ, we
like not; but accounted it not sufficient to lead to Christ, and that which
prejudiced us the more against the light which shines in our hearts (and has
long showed us our evil words before we spoke them, and our thoughts when they
first did arise in us, before we consented to them, to follow them) was because
we accounted it common to all men, and that which every man had, and that
though it showed some sins against the Law, yet not all sins against the
Gospel, as unbelief, and therefore slighted it as legal and natural; and when
it troubled us or reproved us, when we had been worshipping of thee, O Lord,
(as we thought) in breaking bread and drinking wine, and preaching and praying,
and the like, which we verily believed had been thy ordinances and
appointments: and when we were troubled in our spirits and minds after such
exercises as these, we looked upon it as the temptation of the Devil, and did
not know it to be Gods witness in our Consciences, or his Spirit striving with
us, to bring us to silence, that so we might know the dumb to speak, and the
Spirit of the Lord to move, and stir and guide in us, and we in all things to
be led by it, and so in all we did feel Gods acceptance by the Testimony of his
Spirit in us, even the Spirit it self bearing witness with our spirits, that
we were Gods Children, and the Spirit of truth to lead us into all truth, that
so by it we might witness freedom from the inward troubles of our minds and
spirits, and the accusings of Gods witness in our Consciences; and so be made
free and perfect as pertaining to the Conscience, by the blood of Christ, which
is only known and felt in his light, as the Scripture says, 1 John 1.7. If we
walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another,
and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. But we looked
on that of God in our Consciences to be too low, and of the relics of the old
Adam, or something of the Law; but we looked upon our selves, as not being
under the Law but under grace, and so judged our selves in Christ; and when we
were at any time troubled in our Consciences, we presently called some Promise
or other to mind in the Scripture, or thought of some comfortable Text, and so
slighted the light in our Consciences, as not to be heeded or regarded, as to
receive and witness Justification from all sin and trouble in and by it; but
looked upon our selves as Elected in Christ before the world, and that we had
known a time when he called us by his Grace (in the use of Ordinances) and
spoke peace to us afterward by his Spirit in the Scripture, applying some
Promise to us, and having learned and known these things, we believe we can
never fall totally; for once in Christ and ever in Christ, and the Elect cannot
be deceived, and we believe our selves Elected and Justified by Christ without
us, before we had committed one sin in our own persons: for Justification is
but one entire act, and is perfect; but our Sanctification is gradual and
imperfect, and Salvation is not works, least any man should boast, but of grace
freely; and so we never mind much what is in us, we know there is enough in
Christ: and for our sins they cannot separate us from the love of God in Christ
Jesus; and our holiness or righteousness (though we be never so strict)
commends us not to God; for if we be Elected, our sins shall not destroy or
damn us, and if we be reprobated by God, our righteousness or strictness in
holiness cannot help us or save us: and so all our comfort is in a Christ
without us, and in what he has done for us already; but for any thing in us
that is spiritual, or for Christ to be in us formed there, and to dwell and
inhabit there, and we to feel him and know his voice, and to be silent until he
speak in us, and to be justified by his Spirit in us, and for him to work all
our works in us and for us, and we to be justified by him who works in us, and
not for our works, is that which we looked upon as legal and dangerous, to be
led, and guided, and justified, and sanctified by Christ in us, the Hope of all
our Glory, this we thought not spiritual enough, nor our carnal minds liked not
to have all within; but rather to have sin within and Christ without, and lusts
within but righteousness without, and Hell within but Heaven without, and
vanity and filthiness present, but happiness and blessedness to come hereafter:
but the light which shined in our hearts, and lets us see the thoughts and
intents thereof we believed not in, for that to give us the knowledge of the
light of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; but looked to get
knowledge faster then that would give us it, and surer then the knowledge that
came that way, by our running to the Scriptures and other good books, by
reading of them, and by setting ourselves to observe what we read there,
looking upon the Scriptures to be the foundation of Faith and the rule of Life,
and what we get out there we account true knowledge, and by reading of that we
can be rich quickly, and wise to dispute, and to answer gainsayers, and our
building is according to that, and built upon that foundation; but for the
light that shines in our hearts, to wait upon God in that, to be taught by him,
and to hear his voice, and to see his shape, is a tedious, painful, flow and
uncertain way of getting knowledge, and that which has no delight in it, but
is a narrow way and a strait gate to walk in and enter by, and takes up the
whole minds of those that are guided by it and walk in it, that they can mind
nothing else, and makes them such fools, that all wise men scoff at them, to
see how they walk up and down as if they cared for nothing, and were grown
strangers to the world, and had no fellowship with it, but kept out of all its
customs, and ways, and fashions, as if they were redeemed out of it (while
they walk up and down in it) but this way we like not, but rather a zeal for
outward Ordinances and outward Observances, and to be somewhat strict in them
we like pretty well; so that we may be kept in our wisdoms and understandings
which are natural, and not have them confounded nor brought to nothing; but
still remain in that nature in which we can live at ease in the flesh, and have
fellowship with the world, and conform to their customs, and be made partakers
of their honors, and flattering titles, and have our thoughts at liberty, and
our tongues our own; and this Religion we like well: but for to have all within
like those foolish bewitched people (called Quakers) we like not, and for their
ways, had we thought them to have been spiritual enough, and conformable
enough to the Scriptures of truth, we would not have despised them: but we
account them fools for being so strict, and our selves wise for taking our ease
and pleasure while we may have it, and yet go to Heaven when we dye, before
them; and for to enjoy any great matter in our hearts in this life, we look not
for it, if we can but keep our Consciences quiet it is enough for us; when the
Messiah comes which is called Christ, he will tell us all things, and we look
for his personal coming, and then it shall be glorious times, then we shall
known all things. And so by what I have said, thou may know an answer to thy
Query, and also to that which thou say may seem a digression, but craves to
be favored in it: only to thy last words of Exhortation (in which thou
exhorts, all to hearken to the voice of Christ in the Gospel in this day of
Grace, etc. I have this to say, Christ's voice is not heard but in the light,
nor the Gospel is not known but in the light, though Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John's writings may be read and remembered by him or them that are in darkness,
and yet the Gospel hid; and here they may be lost, because their minds are
blinded in them by the god of this world, who has the glory of this world to
give unto men, that so he might keep the eye of their minds shut, least with it
they should see the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ the Image of God,
and it should shine into them, and they be converted, and then the Gospel which
once was hid becomes the Gospel of their Salvation, and Christ Gods Image such
comes to know and bear in the world, and such Preach not themselves, but Christ
Jesus the Lord, and themselves servants for Jesus sake: for God who commanded
light to shine out of darkness, has shined into their hearts, to give them the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.4, 5, 6.
And such know how they come by their knowledge, for the light gave it them, and
they are not vain talkers, nor boasts not in other men's lines, but keep to
their own measure of Grace, and boasts not about it, but knows it and keeps in
it; for there only is safety, and condemnation is avoided, and justification
is enjoyed, and such are ever with the Lord, and from him cannot be separated,
because in his Son (that is Truth) and in that understanding which is Gods
gift, in which alone Peace, Justification and Reconciliation with God through
him is witnessed and life Eternal inherited for evermore, which all that are
out of the light) (with which they are lighted, though never so much puffed up
with knowledge) are ignorant of, and strangers to the life and immortality that
is brought to light by the Gospel, in which Gospel they hear Christ's voice, and
knows it from the voice of a stranger, both within them and without them, and
through the anointing within them they know all things, and need no man to
teach them, but as the same anointing teaches them, which is truth and no
lie; and such cannot be seduced, because of the anointing which they have
received, whereby they savor and try the spirits whether they be of God or no,
for every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in their flesh,
is not of God.

Here follows some Queries for James Pope, or some others to answer in Gods
fear, and with plainness of speech, that so all that reads may be edified by
his or their answer, and Scripture proofs produced to witness the same.
1. WHat is the first Principle of the pure Religion, is it something within
man, or something without man?

2. What is the Foundation of Faith and Rule of Life to all that are or shall
be saved, is it something within or something without, something created, or
something not made but Eternal?

3. Whether do Abrams Children now follow his steps in making that the Rule of
their Life, and Foundation of their Faith, which was the Rule and Foundation of
his Life, and whether that Gospel which is the Gospel of their Salvation now,
was not the Gospel of his Salvation, and preached to him then in his day?

4. Whether that be not a fundamental Principle in Christ's Religion which a man
must know and take up daily, or he cannot be one of Christ's Disciples, and
whether the Cross of Christ be not such a fundamental, if it be, what is it,
and where is it, that every one that desires to learn of Christ may know it and
take it up daily?

5. Whether to stand still is not a fundamental in Christ's Religion, seeing
every ones strength is in it, and Salvation cannot be seen but by it, nor
safety witnessed but through it; if it be such a fundamental, what is it, and
how may the ignorant be instructed in the knowledge of it? describe it plainly.

6. Whether that is not a fundamental in the true Religion, which if a man know
not and be not partaker of, he has no life in him; but if he do know and be
partaker of, he has life Eternal: and whether the flesh and blood of Christ be
not such a fundamental, seeing Christ faith, Except you eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you; and again, Whosoever
eats my flesh and drinks my blood has Eternal Life?

7. Whether the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, be in these days, if it
be, what is it now, and where does it grow, and whether it be still forbidden
to be fed upon or eaten of, and when does a man eat of it; and what is that
death which a man dies, when he eats of it?

8. What is the Tree of Life, which they who keep the Commandments of God have
right to eat of, and what is that Paradise of God where it grows, and what is
it to eat of it?

9. Whether he that does not discern the Lords body daily in his ordinary
eating and drinking, does not eat and drink damnation, seeing not discerning
the body is the cause of condemnation, or whether is the Lords body discerned
by some once or twice a year, and other some once a month, and others (it may
be) once a week, and some never, if so be that breaking of outward bread, and
drinking of outward wine in such a way (as some call a Sacrament, and others
the Ordinance of breaking bread) be that alone wherein the Lords body is
diseerned and fed upon?

10 Whether washing of the body with outward water be necessary to salvation,
or that a man which is not so washed, cannot be saved (if he cannot) whether
you do not make two doors to enter into life (if he may) then whether he that
enters in by Christ the door, is not complete in his entrance (and in Christ
his life) as well in being truly baptized, as Circumcised, seeing the Apostle
says the Saints were complete in Christ, in whom they were Circumcised with
the Circumcision made without hands, and buried with him in Baptism wherein
they were risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, Col. 2.10,
11, 12.

11. Whether he that baptizes now (with outward water) must not manifest his
Commission thereunto, either by the same Authority that they did, or by
something of equal power thereunto, seeing he that baptized with water was
greater then all the Prophets, and was sent by God to do it, but saw the end
for which it was appointed, for he that sent him to baptize with water, said
unto him, upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and remaining on him,
the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost; and I saw and bear record
that this is the Son of God, Joh. ^.33.34.

12. Whether Baptism with water was not in its full force, before Mat. 28 if
yea (and water Baptism was still to be continued) why might not Christ's
Disciples have followed John's example, without any new command to them, as well
as you follow their example (as you say) without another, or new command to
you, seeing it is written, John was a man sent from God to Baptize with water,
etc. or may it not be concluded (from the same reason) that the Baptism of the
Spirit was and is intended, seeing water is not at all expressed in Mat 28 nor
Mark 16. but rather the contrary, for it is such a washing as is necessary to
salvation.

13. Whether the false Church or Apostasy consists so much in the cessation or
declension from outward observances (sometime practiced by the servants of God)
or rather in their keeping up, or imitating of those outward practices in their
own wills, out of the same life and power by which they were once required and
performed, by those of whom they were required, seeing it is a charge both
against the Jewish Church (in that they drew near with their lips, and
multiplied oblations, and were not charged for neglect of outward, but for
resisting of the Holy Ghost, as their fathers had done) and in the Apostle
days, was it the want of the form, or men having a form (and denying the
power) that made the times perilous?

14. Whether that coming of Christ spoken of in 1 Cor. 1.7. which some of the
Corinthians were waiting for (which coming of Christ the Apostle says, should
confirm them to the end (or were the Corinthians never confirmed) and that
coming spoken of in 1 Cor. 4.5. (which coming is said to manifest the counsels
of the heart, etc.) was not the coming spoken of in the 1 Cor. 11.26. until
which they were to do so and so, seeing the former coming was a coming not yet
obtained, but they were waiting for it, etc. and whether some amongst the
Corinthians did not witness the coming of the Lord as aforesaid?

15. Whether the servants of the Lord now, may not be forbidden (by the holy
Ghost) to do some things now (once done by the Saints) as Paul and Silas were
forbidden to Preach the Gospel in Asia, Acts 16.6. (though by Christ's general
Commission, they were to Preach the Gospel to all Nations) and be justified by
the Lord in their so doing (as Paul and Silas was) while others run on in
imitation, and are condemned by the Spirit in themselves, the Lord not
requiring them at their hands?

THE END.

