Commonwealth blazon or coat of arms OLIVARIVS DEI GRA: REIP: ANGLIAE, SCOTIAE,
ET HIBERNIAE, andc PROTECTOR

PAX QVAERITUR BELLO.


By the Protector. A PROCLAMATION Of His Highness, Prohibiting Horse-Races in
England and Wales for Eight Months.
ALthough it has pleased Almighty God of his infinite mercy and goodness, to
discover and disappoint from time to time the manifold, wicked, and secret
Plots and Devices against the peace and welfare of these Nations, contrived by
the restless and implacable Enemies of this Commonwealth, yet they still make
it their business and take hold of all opportunities to insinuate their
Principles into the minds of those that are of sober and peaceable
dispositions; and that chiefly by the advantage of public Meetings, and the
concourse of People at Horse-Races and other such like Meetings, that they may
the better carry on their pernicious ends to involve these Nations in new
Troubles. His Highness therefore, with the advice of His Privy Council, has
thought fit to declare His Will and pleasure to be, And does expressly charge
and Command, That from and after the Eighth day of this instant April, One
thousand six hundred Fifty and eight, during the space of eight Months from
thence next ensuing, there shall be no Horse-Races, nor any Meetings or
Assembling together for that purpose of any persons whatsoever, on any pretense
or color in any place or places whatsoever, within this His Highness Realm of
England or Dominion of Wales. And if any person or persons of what estate,
degree, quality or condition soever, shall at any time during the said space of
8. Months, presume or take upon him or them to appoint any Horse-Race or
Horse-Races, or assemble or meet together in any place or places by any color
or pretense whatsoever, Then and in such case they are and shall be, and shall
be taken and proceeded against as breakers of the public Peace, and
contemners of His Highness just Commands herein. And His Highness Justices of
the Peace, Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and (other His
Highness Officers and Ministers of Justice, calling to their aid and assistance
(if need require) any Officers or Soldiers of His Highness Army quartered or
lying near such place or places) are hereby straightly charged and Commanded,
That immediately upon notice given unto them, or any of them, of any such
Horse-Race, or Horse-Races, or appointment thereof, they do not omit but repair
to those places, and seize or cause to be seized all and every such Horses as
shall be brought or sent to the said place or places; And likewise to apprehend
and cause to be apprehended and keep, or cause to be kept in safe custody, the
bodies of all and every such person and persons, who shall so assemble and meet
together, on any such pretenses, or other pretense whatsoever, and bring or
cause them to be brought before the Lords of His Highness Privy Council, to be
examined and further proceeded against for their contempts according to the
severity of Law and Justice.

Given at His Highness Palace of Westminster the 8th day of April, in the year
of Our Lord, 1658.
London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1658.


