SEVERAL LETTERS AND PASSAGES Between HIS EXCELLENCY, The Lord General CROMWELL
AND THE Governor of Edinburgh Castle, AND The MINISTERS there, Since His
Excellencies Entrance into EDINBURGH.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed by John Field for Francis Tyton, at the Three Daggers near the
Inner Temple Gate, September 25. 1650.

For the Honorable, The Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh.
SIR,
I Received Command from my Lord General, to desire you to let the Ministers of
Edinburgh, now in the Castle with you, know, That they have free liberty
granted them, if they please to take the pains, to preach in their several
Churches; and that my Lord has given special Command both to Officers and
Soldiers, That they shall not in the least be molested.

Sir, I am your most humble Servant, EDW. WHALLEY.
Edinburgh the 9 of September. 1650.
From the Governor of Edinburgh Castle to Colonel Whalley; with my Lord
Generals ANSWER.
SIR,
I Have communicated the desire of your Letter to such of the Ministers of
Edinburgh as are with me; 3 who have desired me to return this for Answer, That
though they are ready to be spent in their Masters service, and to refuse no
suffering, so they may fulfill their Ministry with joy: Yet perceiving the
persecution to be personal, by the practice of your party upon the Ministers of
Christ in England and Ireland, and in the Kingdom of Scotland since your unjust
Invasion thereof; And finding nothing expressed in yours, whereupon to build any
security for their persons while they are there, and for their return hither,
they are resolved to reserve themselves for better times, and to wait upon Him
who has hidden his face for a while from the Sons of Jacob. This is all I have
say; but that I am, Sir,

Your most humble Servant, W. DUNDAS.
9 Septem. 1650.
For the Honorable, The Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh.
SIR,
THe kindeness offered to the Ministers with you, was done with ingenuity,
thinking it might have met with the like: but I am satisfied to tell those with
you, That if their Masters service (as they call it) were chiefly in their eye,
Imagination of Suffering would not have caused such a return; much less the
practice by our Party (as they are pleased to say) upon the Ministers of Christ
in England, have been an Argument of personal persecution: The Ministers of
England are supported, and have liberty to preach the Gospel, though not to
Rail, nor under pretense thereof to overtop the Civil Power, or debase it as
they please: No man has been troubled in England or Ireland for preaching the
Gospel; nor has any Minister been molested in Scotland since the coming of the
Army hither. The speaking Truth becomes the Ministers of Christ: when Ministers
pretend to a glorious Reformation, and say the foundation thereof in getting to
themselves worldly Power, and can make worldly mixtures to accomplish the same,
such as their late Agreement with their King, and hopes by him to carry on
their Design, may know, That the Sion promised and hoped for, will not be built
with such untempered mortar. As for the unjust Invasion they mention, time was
when an Army of Scotland came into England, not called by the Supreme
Authority: we have said in our Papers with what hearts, and upon what account
we came, and the Lord has heard us, though you would not, upon as Solemn an
Appeal as any experience can parallel. And although they seem to comfort
themselves with being the Sons of Jacob, from whom (they say) God has hid his
face for a time; yet its no wonder, when the Lord has lifed up his hand so
eminently against a Family, as he has done so often against this, and men will
not see his hand, if the Lord hide his face from such, putting them to shame
both for it, and their hatred at his people, as it is this day. When they
purely trust to the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, which is
powerful to bring down strong holds, and every imagination that exalts it self,
which alone is able to square and fit the stones for the New Jerusalem; Then,
and not before, and by that means, and no other, shall Jerusalem (which is to
be the praise of the whole Earth) the City of the Lord be built, the Sion of
the Holy One of Israel. I have nothing to say to you, but that I am, Sir,

Your humble Servant, O. CROMWELL.
September. 9. 1650.
A Letter from the Governor of Edinburgh Castle, for the Right Honorable the
Lord Cromwell, Commander in Chief of the English Army.
My Lord,
YOurs I have communicate to these with me whom it concerned, who desire me to
return this Answer, That their ingenuity in prosecuting the ends of the
Covenant according to their vocation and place, and adhering to their first
Principles, is well known; and one of their greatest regrets is, that they have
not met with the like: when Ministers of the Gospel have been imprisoned,
deprived of their Benefices, sequestrate, forced to flee from their dwellings,
and bitterly threatened for their faithful declaring the will of GOD against the
godless and wicked proceedings of men, That it cannot be accounted an imaginary
fear of suffering in such as are resolved to follow the like freedom and
faithfulness in discharge of their Masters Message; that it savors not of
ingenuity to promise liberty of preaching the Gospel, and to limit the
Preachers thereof, that they must not speak against the ^^ns and enormities of
Civil Powers, since their Commission carries them to speak the Word of the
Lord unto, and to reprove the fins of persons of all ranks, from the highest to
the lowest: That to impose the name of Railing upon such faithful Freedom, was
the old practice of Malignants against the Ministers of the Gospel, who laid
open to people the wickedness of their ways, that they should not be ensnared
thereby: That their consciences bear them record, and all their hearers do
know, that they meddle not with Civil Affairs further then to hold forth the
rule of the Word, by which the straightness and crookedness of men's actions are
made evident. But they are sorry that they have just cause to regret, that men
of mere Civil place and employment, should usurp the calling and employment of
the Ministry, to the scandal of the Reformed Kirks, and particularly in
Scotland, contrary to the Government and Discipline therein established, to the
maintenance whereof you are bound by the Solemn League and Covenant. Thus far
they have thought fit to vindicate their return to the offer in Colonel
Whalleys latter offer: The other part of yours which concerns the Public as
well as them, they conceive that all has been answered sufficiently in the
public Papers of the State and Kirk: only to that of the success upon your
solemn Appeal, they say again what was said to it before, That they have not so
learned Christ, as to hang the equity of their Cause upon events, but desire to
have their hearts established in the love of the Truth in all the tribulations
that befall them. I only do add that I am

My Lord, Your most humble Servant, W: DUNDAS.
Septembr. 9. 1650.
For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle.
SIR,
BEcause I am at some reasonable good leisure, I cannot let such a gross
mistake and inconsequential reasonings pass without some notice taken of them.
And first, their ingenuity in relation to the Covenant, for which they commend
themselves, does no more justify their want of ingenuity in answer to Colonel
Whalleys Christian offer, concerning which my Letter charged them with
guiltiness, deficiency, then their bearing witness to themselves of their
adhering to their first Principles and ingenuity in prosecuting the ends of the
Covenant, justifies them so to have done, merely because they say so. They must
give more leave henceforwards, for Christ will have it so, will they nill they,
and they must have patience to have the truth of their doctrines and sayings
tried by the sure touchstone of the word of God; and if there be a liberty and
duty of trial, there is a liberty of judgment also, for them that may and
ought to try; which if so, they must give others leave to say and think, that
they can Appeal to equal Judges, who have been the truest fulfillers of the
most real and equitable ends of the Covenant: But if these Gentlemen which do
assume to themselves to be the infallible Expositors of the Covenant, as they
do too much to their Auditories of the Scriptures, counting a different fence
and judgment from theirs, breach of Covenant and Heresy, no marvel they judge
of others so authoritatively and severely; but we have not so learned Christ.
We look at Ministers as helpers of, not Lords over the faith of Gods people. I
appeal to their consciences, whether any trying their Doctrines and dissenting,
shall not incur the censure of Sectary; and what is this but to deny Christians
their Liberty, and assume the infallible Chair? What does he, whom we would not
be likened unto, do more then this? In the second place it is affirmed, That
the Ministers of the Gospel have been imprisoned, deprived of their Benefices,
Sequestered, forced to fly from their dwellings, and bitterly threatened for
their faithful declaring the will of God, etc. And that they have been limited
that they might not speak against the sins and enormities of the evil Powers:
That to impose the name of railing upon such faithful freedom, was the old
practice of the Malignants against the Preachers of the Gospel, etc.

If the civil Authority of that part of it, which continued faithful to their
Trust, true to the ends of the Covenant, did in answer to their consciences
turn out a Tyrant in a way which the Christians in after times will mention
with honor, and all Tyrants in the world look at with fear, and many thousands
of Saints in England rejoice to think of it, and have received from the hand of
God, a liberty from the fear of like usurpations, and have cast off him, who
trod in his Fathers steps, doing mischief as far as he was able, whom you have
received like fire into your bosoms, of which God will, I trust, in time make
you sensible; if Ministers railing at the civil Power, calling them Murderers
and the like, for doing this, have been dealt with as you mention; will this be
found a personal persecution? Or is sin so, because they say so? They that
acted this great business, having given a reason of their faith in this action,
and some here are ready further to do it against all gainsayers. But it will be
found that these reprovers do not only make themselves the Judges and
Determiners of sin, that so they may reprove but they also took liberty to stir
up the people to Blood and Arms, and would have brought a War upon England, as
has been upon Scotland, had not God prevented it: and if such severity as has
been expressed toward them, be worthy the name of personal persecution, let all
uninterested men judge, whether the calling of this practice railing, be to be
paralleld with the Malignants imputation upon the Ministers, for speaking
against the Popish Innovations in the Prelates times, and the Tyrannical and
wicked practice then on foot, let your own consciences mind you. The Roman
Emperors in Christ's and his Apostles times were usurpers and intruders upon the
Jewish State, yet what footstep have ye either of our blessed Saviors so much
as willingness to the dividing of an Inheritance, or their meddling in that
kind; This was not practiced by the Church since our Saviors time till
Antichrist, assuming the infallible Chair, and all that he called the Church to
be under him, practiced this authoritatively over civil Governors.

The way to fulfill your Ministry with joy, to preach the Gospel, which I wish
some who take pleasure in reproofs at adventure, do not forget too much to do.

Thirdly, you say you have just cause to regret, that men of civil employments
should usurp the calling and employment of the Ministry, to the scandal of the
Reformed Kirks, etc.

Are you troubled that Christ is preached? Is preaching so inclusive in your
function? Does it scandalize the Reformed Kirks, and Scotland in particular? Is
it against the Covenant? Away with the Covenant, if this be so, I thought the
Covenant and these could have been willing that any should speak good of the
name of Christ; if nor, it is no Covenant of Gods approving, nor the Kirks you
mention, in so much the Spouse of Christ. Where do you find in the Scripture a
ground to warrant such an assertion, That preaching is included in your
function? though an approbation from men has order in it, and may do well, yet
he that has not a better warrant then that has none at all. I hope he that
ascended up on high, may give his gifts to whom he please, and if those gifts
be the Seal of mission, be not envious though Eldad and Medad. prophecy: you
know who bids us covet earnestly the best gifts, but chiefly that we may
prophecy, which the Apostle explains there to be a speaking to instruction,
and edification, and comfort, which the instructed, edified, and comforted, can
best tell the Enargy and effect of; if such evidence be, I say again, take heed
you envy not for your own sakes, lest you be guilty of a greater fault, then
Moses reproved in Joshua, for envying for his sake; indeed you err through the
mistake of the Scriptures: approbation is an act of convenience in respect of
order, not of necessity to give faculty to preach the Gospel. Your pretended
fear lest error should step in, is like the man that would keep all the wine
out of the county, lest men should be drunk. It will be found an unjust and
unwise jealousy, to deny a man the liberty he has by nature, upon a
supposition he may abuse it, when he does abuse it, judge. If a man speak
foolishly, ye suffer him gladly because ye are wise, if erroniously, the truth
more appears by your conviction; stop such a man's mouth with sound words that
cannot be gainsaid, if blasphemously, or to the disturbance of the public
peace, let the civil Magistrate punish him; if truly, rejoice in the truth; and
if you will call our speakings together since we came into Scotland, to provoke
one another to love and to good works, to faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and
repentance from dead works, to charity and love toward you, to pray and mourn
for you, and for the bit e returns to, and incredulity of our professions of
love to you; of the truth of which we have made our solemn and humble Appeals
to the Lord our God, which he has heard and born witness to; if these things
be scandalous to the Kirk and against the Covenant, because done by men of
civil callings, we rejoice in them, notwithstanding what you say.

For a conclusion in answer to the witness of God upon our Solemn Appeal: You
say, you have not so learned Christ to hang the equity of your cause upon
events. We could wish blindeness has not been upon your eyes to all those
mavelous dispensations which God has wrought lately in England; But did not
you solemnly Appeal and Pray? did not we do so too? and ought not you and we to
think with fear and trembling of the hand of the great God in this mighty and
strange appearance of his? but can slightly call it an Event; Were not both
yours and our expectations renewed from time to time, whilst we waited on God
to see which way he would manifest himself upon our Appeals? And shall we after
all these our Prayers, Fastings, Tears, Expectations, and solemn Appeals, call
these bare Events? The Lord pity you, surely we fear, because it has been a
merciful and gracious deliverance to us: I beseech you in the bowels of Christ,
search after the mind of the Lord in it toward you, and we shall help you by
our prayers, that you may find it out; (for yet, if we know our hearts at all)
our bowels do in Christ Jesus earn after the godly in Scotland: We know there
are stumbling blocks which hinder you; The personal prejudices you have taken
up against us and our ways, wherein we cannot but think some occasion has been
given, and for which we mourn; the apprehension you have, That we have hindered
the glorious Reformation you think you were upon: I am persuaded these and such
like bind you up from an understanding and yielding to the mind of God, in
this great day of his power and visitation; and, if I be rightly informed, the
late Blow you received is attributed to profane Councels and Conduct, and
mixtures in your Army, and such like; the natural man will not find out the
cause; look up to the Lord, that he may tell it you: which that he would do,
shall be the fervent prayers of

Your loving Friend and Servant, O.CROMWELL.
Edinburgh, Sept. 12. 1650.
For the Governor of Edinburgh Castle.
THese Queries are sent, not to reproach you, but in the love of Christ laying
them before you; We being persuaded in the Lord, That there is a Truth in them,
which we earnestly desire may not be laid aside unsought after, by any
prejudice either against the things themselves, or the unworthiness or weakness
of the person that offers them. If you turn at the Lords reproofs, he will pour
out his Spirit upon you, and you shall understand his Words, and they will
guide you to a blessed Reformation indeed, even to one according to the Word,
and such as the people of God wait for; wherein you will find us and all
Saints ready to rejoice, and serve you to the utmost in our places and Callings.

QUAERES.
I. Whether the Lords Controversy be not both against the Ministers in
Scotland and England, for wresting, straining and improving the Covenant
against the godly and Saints in England, of the same Faith with them in every
Fundamental, even to a bitter persecution, and so making that which in the main
intention was Spiritual, to serve politics and carnal ends, even in that part
especially which was Spiritual, and did look to the glory of God, and the
comfort of his people.

II. Whether the Lords Controversy may not be for your and the Ministers in
England sullenness at, and darkning, and not beholding the glory of Gods
wonderful Dispensations in this Series of his Providence in England, Ireland
and Scotland, both now and formerly, through envy at Instruments, and because
the things did not work, forth your platform, and the great God did not come
down to your minds and thoughts.

III. Whether you carrying on a Reformation, so much by you spoken of, have not
probably been subject to some mistakes in your own judgments about some parts
of the same, laying so much stress thereupon, as has been a temptation to you,
even to break the law of Love toward your Brethren, and those Christ has
regenerated, even to the reviling and persecuting of them, and to stir up
wicked men to do the same, for your Forms sake, or but some parts of it.

IV. Whether if your Reformation be so perfect and so Spiritual, be indeed the
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, it will need such carnal policies, such fleshly
mixtures, such unsincere actings, as to pretend to cry down all Malignants, and
yet receive and set up the Head of them, and so act for the Kingdom of Christ
in his Name, and upon advantage thereof, and to publish so false a Paper, so
full of specious pretenses to piety, as the fruit and effect of his repentance,
to deceive the minds of all the godly in England, Ireland and Scotland; you in
your own consciences knowing with what regret he did it, and with what
importunities and threats he was brought to do it, and how much to this very
day he is against it, and whether this be not a high provocation of the Lord,
in so grossly dissembling with him and His people?

For the Right Honorable, The Commander in Chief of the English Army.
My Lord,
YOur Papers I have communicate to these with me whom they concerned, who have
desired me to return this Answer; The Contents of these Papers do concern the
public Differences betwixt you and these of the three Kingdoms, who have
faithfully adhered to the Solemn League and Covenant, and are awed by the Oath
of God from accession to the guiltines of clear and evident breaches of
Covenant, and have been so often and fully answered in the public Papers of
this Kirk and Kingdom; In the Resolutions of the Assembly of Divines in
England, and in the published Writings of the soundest Divines there, yea and
of all the Reformed Kirks, That they conceive it needless (though a matter of
no great difficulty) to give a particular Answer; especially since the late
General Assembly have authorized their Commissioners to take into consideration
matters of public concernment to this Kirk, unto whom (if you please) you may
hereafter direct Papers of that kind: In the mean time they rest fully
persuaded in their minds, That the event of a Battle (though ordered indeed by
a just and wise Providence) is no infallible proof of the Equity or Iniquity of
a Cause, seeing there is one Event to the Righteous and to the Wicked, to him
that swears and to him that fears an Oath, as it is clear in the cause of
Israel against Benjamin about the men of Gibeah. I am,

My Lord, Your most humble Servant, W. DUNDAS.
September. 12. 1650.
FINIS.

