THE SVMME OF THE Charge Given in by Lieutenant General CRVMWEL, Against the
Earl of MANCHESTER.
THAT he the Earl of MANCHESTER, has always been indisposed, and backward to
engagements. And against the ending of the War by the sword; And for such a
peace to which a Victory would be a disadvantage; and this declared by
principles expressed to that purpose: And a continued series of cariages
answerable. And since the taking of York, (as if the Parliament had now
advantage full enough) He has declined what ever tended to futther advantage
upon the Enemy; neglected and Studiously shifted off all opportunityes to that
purpose, as if he thought the King to low, and the Parliament to high,
especially at Dennington Castle. He has drawn the Army too, and detained them
in such a posture, as to give the Enemy fresh advantages; and this before his
conjunction with other Armies, by his own absolute will, against, or without*
his Council, against many Commands from the Committee of both Kingdom; and
with contempt, and vilifying of the Commands. And since the conjunction,
sometimes against Counsels of war, and sometimes persuading, and deluding the
Council, to neglect one opprotunity, with another, and that again with a
third, and at last when no other pretense would serve; by persuading that it
was not fit to fight at all.

After this expect a larger, and yet nothing but truth, and what is
sufficiently proved, at a select Committee, of the House of Commons, whereof
Mr. Lysle had the Chair, with charge, with the prooffes thereupon; was
reported to the House, and there debated, and a home Vote thereupon passed;
above a year ago, before the House was recruted with new Members; Whereupon a
potent Northern Knight, one of Manchesters special friends etc. Made a very
earnest motion that Lieu. Genesis Crumwell might with his horse be sent immediately
to relieve Taunton, as you may read in the 35. page of Englands BIRTHRIGHT; by
means of which the Charge has lain dormant ever since, although it may be
spoken upon very good grounds, that it is a charge of as high a nature as ever
was given into that House, and therefore it is hoped that either Lieu.
General, or some of the honest new Members, will discharge a good conscience,
by pressing the reviving of it, that so Treachery may receive, its due desert,
and the Kingdom have Justice upon its Enemies.

FINIS.

