To the KING and both Houses of Parliament, (Who have made Laws and Decrees,
and caused them to be put in Execution, to restrain and prohibit People from
having the Liberty of their Consciences in the Exercise of the Worship of GOD)
This is sent as A WARNING from the LORD.
FRIENDS,
WHat do you mean by these Practices? or what do you expect to bring to pass by
these your Undertakings and Proceedings? Do you think thereby to root out the
Holy Seed and Royal Offspring of God, which he has raised and brought forth
in these North parts of the World, to rule and reign (according to his Promise
made by the Mouths of his Prophets in Ages past) to which Nations must bow and
bend, and become subject; I tell you plainly and truly, that if this be your
Expectation (which your proceedings give me cause to believe it is) you will
certainly fail therein; And God will assuredly frustrate these your
Expectations, and by this very way and means that you take to suppress and root
out the People of God from having a being amongst you, even thereby you will
provoke the Lord to root you out, if you persist therein: Wherefore beware,
lest that which you think (and expect) to bring upon the People of God, be by
the Hand of God brought upon your selves. For (be it known unto you) the Lord
God Almighty ^s with his People of a truth, whom you have turned your Sword and
Power against; and what is done unto them, he certainly takes as done unto
himself; and in as much ^s you go about to suppress his People, or to limit
them in the exercise of their Consciences toward God, you therein are found
fighters against God, and thereby you go about to stop and hinder the work of
God; which will be as hard for you to do, as it was for Saul to kick against
the pricks of the Witness of God in his own Conscience: Wherefore consider
these things, and remember that many Warnings and tender Visitations of Love
the Lord has sent unto you in times past (which you have little regarded
hitherto, but go on exercising Cruelty toward the People of God) And now at
this time also I am moved (and it is upon my heart) by the Spirit of the Lord,
to lay these things before you, and do tell you in plainness what the Lord will
do and bring to pass in despite of all that you can do who seek to oppose him:
For, notwithstanding the many Laws and Decrees which you have made or shall
make, yet the Work of the Lord which he has certainly begun, that shall go on
and increase, and the Truth must flourish and prosper, and spread forth its
self, and the Kingdoms of the World must become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of
his Christ, according to his Promise; and they that will not bow unto his
Throne and Government, who is KING of Kings, (whose right it is to rule in the
Consciences of people, and to bear the Government there, and to exercise them
in matters of Worship toward God) but will seek to stop and limit him and his
Government there, even such must and shall be broken by him, and bruised under
by his eternal Power; the Lord has said and spoken it, and it must come to
pass.

Wherefore Friends, be you once more warned that you meddle no more with the
Consciences of People, so as to go about to limit them in matters relating to
the Service of God (for it is not the place of a Civil Magistrate to meddle or
have to do with those things) but leave them free in those things to do as they
are persuaded in their own Consciences by the Light of the Spirit of the Lord;
for you cannot give an account unto God for them if they do amiss, but they
must all (and so must you also) give an account unto God, every one for
himself: And this is just and equal that (in things of this nature) every one
should be left to the exercise of the Spirit of ^he Lord in his own heart;
because that Spiritual Worship consists in obedience ^o the Spirit of God,
and you your selves would not be willing to be prohibited from, ^r denied of
this Liberty; but (I dare say) you would look upon it to be a very great
Oppression unto you, to be restrained (by any Civil Power or Government) from
that, which by the Spirit and Power of God you were persuaded in your
Consciences you ought to do; and you could not but judge that those (who should
go about to lay or impose such a Restriction upon you) did do unto you as they
themselves would not be done by; and so ye might well conclude that it were
unrighteousness in them so to do: wherefore if you seriously consider whether
this Unrighteousness and Oppression be not found in you, I know you cannot but
lay your hands upon your mouths and confess, Guilty.

So let my Counsel be (at this time) received by you, and take my Advice (as
^om one that has received the Counsel of the Lord, and (in measure) knows the
mind of the Lord by the revelation of his Spirit as touching this matter) that
is this: Shake your selves out of these cruel practices of persecuting about
Religion and Worship, and lay aside these cruel Impositions, which are and have
been laid upon the People of God, by reason whereof many (who are dear unto the
Lord) have suffered very greatly; some the loss of their Liberties, and some
the loss of their Lives, occasioned through being thrust together in noisome
Holes and Prisons, and others are obnoxious to Exilement from their Wives and
Children, and from their Native Country and dearest Relations, and no evil at
all justly charged against any of these, for which these cruel Sufferings are
inflicted upon them; it is only for worshipping God in Spirit that these
Sufferings are sustained by them, that is the greatest Charge that has been by
you at all proved against them; and for these things sake the Lord's
Controversy is certainly great with you, and will you continue in these things
through which you have provoked the Lord to anger? His Wrath will not be
appeased toward you, neither can your Government be established in safety, nor
you cannot establish your selves in safety and security, for fear will surprise
you (while you go on in these practices) because of the guilt that is upon your
Consciences; and although we cannot, neither do we desire to make outward
opposition against you by Plottings and Insurrections, etc. (Out of which
things God Almighty has redeemed us, and has brought us into his Covenant of
Peace, and unto his Mountain of Holiness, where nothing hurts nor destroys)
yet we know that the Lord is with us, and on our side, and takes our part, will
plead our Cause and fight for us, and he is stronger than you all; and his
Power is above yours, and our trust and confidence is in him alone, and not in
the arm of flesh: and its in vain for you to strive against him, or to oppose
or resist him; for he will in the end be too hard for you, and will break you
to pieces as a Potters vessel of clay, except you repent.

And now Friends, there is but one only way by which you may or can possibly
escape and prevent the dreadful Judgments of the Lord, or by which his Anger
may be appeased which is kindled against you, and that is this; To humble your
selves before the Lord, and to repent of the Evil of your Doings, and to loose
the Bands of Iniquity, and to undo the heavy Burdens, and let the Oppressed go
free, and turn the Sword against the Evildoers, and suppress Vice and
Profaneness, and do not tolerate Licentiousness and those wicked Practices (as
Rioting, Drunkenness, Stage Plays, and the like) which day by day even greatly
abounds in your Streets, while the Servants of the Lord lie in noisome Holes
and Prisons; And give Liberty of Conscience unto the People of God to worship
him (which is the main thing that I contend with you for) that the Servants of
the Lord may have free Liberty to labor for the reducing of People from those
aforementioned, and all other Vices, which tend to the destruction of Youth,
and to the destroying both of soul and body: And this is the way for you (if
there be any) to purchase the good will and favor of God, and to be
established in safety and security in your Government; and if any (who are
self-seekers and time-servers) shall (for self ends) counsel you otherwise,
such (you shall know in the day of the Lord) are evil Counselors, and ought
not to be received by you, but denied.

And Friends, one thing more I would present to your Consideration, which has
been often laid before you in times past, and as often forgotten by you, that is
this; What has been the ground and original cause of all the late Overturnings
which have been in this Nation? if it be rightly weighed and considered, will
it not appear that Cruelty and Oppression of men's Consciences in matters
relating to the Service of God, was the main original Cause thereof? I confess
I cannot but marvel that you should be so blinded (with your present
prosperity) that you cannot see and consider these things, and labor to avoid
that which was the cause of their overthrow and ruin that are gone before you,
but to run on so headlong and inconsiderate, as though you were hastening with
desire to bring the Wrath of God upon you: For mark Friends, when did any
escape the hand of God in any Age or Generation, or where were any established
in safety that took in hand this work of Oppression, and persecuting the Seed
of God and his People? Consider from Pharaoh (that great Oppressor) unto this
day, and you will find that in all ages, this work of Persecuting and
oppressing the People of God, was the very Cause of the overthrow and ruin of
the Persecutors; as for instance, the great Persecution and Cruelty that was
exercised by the then Powers of the Nation in Queen Mary's days; what was the
issue thereof? Was it not the very overthrow and rooting out of that
Persecuting Power, Religion, and Faith? etc. And does not their name (who
exercised that Cruelty) remain as an ill savor unto all sober People (truly
fearing God) unto this day? And could they by all their Tyranny then exercised,
root out or extinguish that Faith and Religion, that they then struck at? Nay,
they could not, though it was but (as I may say) the beginning of Reformation
and coming out of the Apostasy; but its true indeed, they Killed, Destroyed,
and Murdered many, but blessed be the Lord that did not shake the rest so, as
to make them fall, but rather establish them. And certainly Friends, although
you should be permitted (as they were) to destroy many of us by your Laws and
Decrees made, or to be made, yet you cannot thereby destroy the Faith of
others, neither can you possibly accomplish your desire, nor root out the holy
Seed which is now sprung and risen, and must replenish Nations, and cause the
Desolate places to be inhabited, though indeed you may thereby root out and
destroy yourselves; which is sad to consider.

So Friends, much more might be said unto you, and many sound Reasons and
Arguments might be produced to convince you, how unsafe it is for you to
persevere in this work of Persecution and Cruelty, but I know you will (many of
you, if not most of you) kick against it, and harden your hearts, and will not
believe; wherefore I have chosen rather to be as brief as I may, only to
discharge my Conscience to you in the sight of the Lord, that I may be clear of
your blood, and so shall conclude even with a few words, telling you, that this
work which you have begun, and put your hand unto, will be too hard for you;
for when did ever any yet rise up against the Lord and prosper? Or do you think
to prevail against the Ancient of Days, although your Predecessors could not?
O nay, it cannot be. But then you will say, that it is not the Work of God that
you oppose, but Heresy and Sedition, etc. I answer; So said your Predecessors,
the Persecutors in all Generations, when they slew the Prophets, and crucified
the Son of God, and persecuted the Apostles; they charged them with Blasphemy
and Sedition, and Turners of the World upside down, and said, the Earth was not
able to bear them, etc. Yet that would not be a sufficient excuse for them in
the day when God took Vengeance, neither will it be a sufficient excuse for you
in the day when you must (all without respect of persons) give an account unto
God for all your deeds done in the body: Wherefore beware lest that come upon
you, which was spoken by the Prophet of old, saying, Behold ye Despisers, and
wonder, and perish, for I work a Work in your days, a Work which you can in no
wise believe, though a man declare it unto you.

Written at Kingstone upon Thames the 5th of the 9th Month, 1664. I am a Friend
to the whole Creation of God, and have the mind of the Spirit of the Lord, who
wills not the Death or Destruction of any, but rather that all should return
and live. J. C.


