THE HISTORY OF THE KINGDOM OF Scotland.

Containing an Account of the Original of that Nation, and of the most
Remarkable Transactions and Revolutions during the Reigns of Seventy Two Kings
and Queens, to the Seventh Year of King William III.

Comprehending variety of State Intreagues, strange Accidents, Prodigies, and
other memorable Occurrences.

With a List of the present Nobility of that Kingdom.

By R. B

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultry. near Cheapside
1696.

SPEREINS PERGO

Ex libris Michaelis Tomkinson.

Franche Hall WORCESTERSHIRE.



Dysou Perrius

Charles Willtam

perenue: suh: sole: nibil



portrait of King James the 6th King James the sixth of Scotland And First of
England



TO THE READER.
TWO Consideratious induced me to draw up this brief Collection; First I have
not observed any thing already extant of this Nature in so small a Volume,
notwithstanding the Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents have been as
remarkable in this Kingdom as it may be in any other in Europe; so that they
must needs be surprising to most Readers, who can hardly Imagine that such
strange actions should be Performed in our Neighbor Nations and we have little
Notice or Account thereof in any of our Modern Histories. The Second
Consideration was, that having already published a Book of the same value of
the Kings of England, and two or three other little Tracts of the most
considerable Occurrences and Rarities in that Countray, I could not but think
it pleasant, to give some particular account of what has happened in former
Ages in the Kingdom of Scotland, wherein I aim at plainness and brevity, yet
have omitted nothing material, to far as it was possible to reduce so many
notable Passages into so small a compass, which I doubt not but you will
acknowledge upon peruseing thereof.

THE HISTORY OF THE Kingdom of SCOTLAND.
THe Scots (as well as other Nations) esteeming it glorious to derive
themselves from far-fetcht Antiquity, affirm, their Original Descent to be from
the Greeks, and Egyptians; and their ancient Historians relate that a noble
Greek called Gathelus (the son of Cecrops who built the City of Athens, others
say, the sen of Argus the 4th King of the Argives) commiting diverse outrages in
Macedonia and Achaia, was often severely reprehended by his Father; but the
young man impatient of reproof, and continuing his irregularities, was
banished. In his Exile, consorting with several stout youths of the same humor,
they went all into Egypt, and were entertained by Pharaoh Orus then King of
that Country, employing them under Moses the Captain General against the
Ethiopians who had invaded Egypt as far as Memphis; Gathelus marched under
Moses, who (as Josephus reports) was chosen Commander in chief by the voice
of an Oracle, and the Ethiopians received a great overthrow, with the loss of
Saba their principal City in the Isle of Merot. In this enconnter as well as
many others, Gathelus gave such proof of his conduct and courage, that he
became much in favor with Pharaoh; but Moses was rather envied then honored
for his valor, the King fearing that the Israelites increasing so extremely,
might one day challenge the government of he Kingdom; whereupon Moses went into
the land of Midian; But to Gathelus and his followers the City of Thebes was
given, which had been formerly the Israelites and to add to his honor Pharaoh
gave him his daughter in marriage, whose name you must know was Scota, of whose
Posterity it seems came the Scoti, or the Nation of Scots, and the land where
they inhabited was called Scotia or Scotland.

Gathelus thus advanced, lived all the days of his Father-in-law-in great
splendour, but after the third Geperation another Pharaoh called Cheucres
succeeded, who oppressed the Israelites in Egypt more then his Predecessors,
till Moses by divine appointment returning from Midian declared God's will that
he should let go the people, which Pharaoh refusing was horribly plagued, and
more severe Judgments threatmed; Gathelus believing the Oracle, resolved to
forsake this miserable Country, and providing a great number of Ships, he with
Wife and Children, and a multitude of Greeks and Egyptians sailed out of the
River Nilus in the year of the World 2453. having dwelt in Egypt 39. years;
after many dangers at Sea, they first touched upon the Coasts of Barbary from
whence being beaten back by the Inhabitants they imbarqued again, and landed in
a part of Spain called Lusitania, and called the place where they went ashore
Port Gathale, of this Gathelus, and afterward by corruption Portugal, as at
this day; when the Spaniards understood their Arrival, they came against them
with strong Forces, but after a bloody Fight were routed by Gathelus, which
much encouraged him and his followers; soon after it was agreed that they
should continue there, and Gathlus built a City called Mundus and after
Bacchara; but the Spaniards perceiving these strangers mightily increase,
designed to have forced them away, yet doubting their strength, they proposed
to Gathelus to temove to the North side of Spain, now called Galicia, as being
thinly peopled; which he willingly accepted and sacrificing publicly to his
Gods for his good success, departed thither with all his People, and making a
League with the Natives, built a City called Brigantia, now Gomposteila; Being
thus settled, Gathelus was called King, and ordrined good Laws, and because he
would have all his followers under one Government he commanded they should be
called Scotsmen, from his wife Scota.

In process of time growing very populous; the Spaniards resolved to root them
out, but after a sharp Fight, the Scots remained Conquerors, upon which a peace
followed, and it was agreed they should live after their own Laws, and not be
disturbed; Gathelus thus established, (says our Historia^) sat upon his
Marble Stone in Brigantia, administering justice to his people; this stone was
like a chair, and attended with such a fatal destiny that the Scots say
wherever it should be found their Nation should Reign, and therefore it was
removed from Spain to Ireland, and then to Scotland, all their Kings being
Crowned therein. When Gathelus observed that the Country was too little for
them, resolving to maintain the League inviolate with Spain, and understanding
there was an Island North of Spain meanly inhabited, he sent his two sons
Hyberus and Himericus with a great Navy, and a strong Army, who landed at
Dundal in that Country, and called it Hybernia from the eldest son's name now
Ireland; being arrived they found the Inhabitants to be few, and simple, living
only on Milk, Herbs, and other Fruits growing naturally; hereupon they treated
them gently, and easily persuaded them to submit and join in friendship.

Hyberus having taught them tillage and husbandry, returned into Spain, and
succeeded his Father Gathelus, subduing more of that Country, the succession
continuing in his Posterity a long while after. Himericus was left by his
brother to govern Ireland; ruling both the Scots and Irish, but in time great
differences arose, and much blood was shed, till at length by assistance from
Spain the Irish were subdued, and the Scots settled there, who crowned one
Brechus of the Blood royal King, being the first that Reigned over Scotchmen in
Ireland; to him Succeeded others, and at length one Rothsay, who observing
Ireland to be too narrow he transported a great number into the Isles formerly
called Hebrides, now the Western Isles, and gave his name to that which he
first possessed; from the Isles they went over all that Country, which they then
named Scotland, continuing many years in great Glory under good Laws and
Governors.

At length the Picts a people of Germany, (others say of Scythia) so called
from painting themselves, or from their colored Garments, landed in Scotland,
and got strong footing therein, building diverse Fort; and Castles, and forcing
the Scots to let them have women for procreation; upon which a League was made
the land being divided betwixt them and it was agreed, that if at any time the
Succession in the Kingdom of the Picts were doubtful, then one born of a
Scottish woman should be admitted to the Throne: this Alliance was disliked by
the Britains, who fearing they might be too strong endeavored to foment
differences, persuading the Picts to join with them, as being more Civilized
and a better Country, enforcing it with an old prophecy, That the Scots should
one day Traitorously destroy the whole race of the Picts out of their Country;
whereby they so prevailed that the Picts joined with the Britains against the
Scots, but upon the point of Battle the Pictish women came into the army with
their Children, with Cries and Lamentations persuading them not to defile
themselves with unnatural murder, since they were resolved to die with their
Children, rather then their husbands, Fathers, Brethren, and Kindred should
thus destroy each other.

The Nobles and Commanders considering the reasonableness of their complaints
made an agreement with Fergus K. of Scots, and turned their joint Forces on the
Britains, slaughtering Coilus the British King, with his whole Army, and
entering into a League Offensive and defensive, they miserably tormented the
poor Britains for many years till they were vanquished by the Conquering
Saxons.

After the death of Fergus several Pictish and Scottish Kings Reigned in that
Country, and among them Ederus, in whose fourth year Julius Caesar invaded
Britain; upon which Cassibilane then King sent for aid to the Scots and Picts,
and was promised it from both; but Caesar having vanquished the Britains, sent
to the Scots to submit, who answered, that they were resolved rather to lose
their lives then liberties, as if their were occasion he should experience.
Ewyn the son of Ederus succeeded, who gave up himself to debauchery and made
diverse immodest and filthy laws to encourage his Subjects therein as, That they
might marry as many Wives as they could maintain, four, six, or ten, as they
pleased; That poor men's Wives ought to be common to the Lords of Manors, who
likewise had the privilege to have the Maidenhead of every Bride on the
Wedding night; which last act was so pleasing to the lustful Nobility that it
continued many years, though the former were soon abolished.

Ewin spending all his time among Harlots, and abusing his Nobles, by
imprisoning some, and murdering others, the more freely to enjoy their Wives
and Daughters, they thereupon raised an Army, sencountred, him in the Field,
and took him Prisoner, his friends and partakers not offering to strike one
stroke in his defense; they then committed him to perpetual imprisonment, but
the same night he was strangled in his Chamber, and Meterlanus the Brother of
Ederus succeeded, in whose Reign our Savior was born; After, this Claudius the
Roman Emperor came into Britain and failing to the Isles of Orkny took that
King Prisoner, whereupon Caratake K. of Scots; and the King of the Picts joined
with the Britains for their common Defense, and a Battle was fought wherein
neither prevailed; yet afterward the Romans obtained a great Victory, and the
people of Gallaway submitted to them; and the greatest part of the Kingdom.

Corbred succeeded Caratake, and after him Dardan for his stature surnamed the
Great, of whom the Nobility had Conceived a good opinion for his Worthy Acts in
his Predecessors days, and chose him in the minority of Corbreds three sons,
but having attained the Crown he grew outrageous in Lust, Covetousness and
Cruelty, and likewise designed to out of the three young Princes whereupon they
brought him out before the multitude, and openly beheaded him; Corbreds Eldest
son Galde Reigned next, in whose time the Famous Voadicia was slain by the
Romans, and all her Britains almost cut off, after which Agricola the Roman
General invaded Scotland, and beat the Picts and Scots; yet at length the
Romans submitted themselves as vanquished, and accepted the conditions of Peace
prescribed by their Enemies, leaving all the Garrisons and Forts they had in
the Country.

After thirty 5 years Reign Lugtak succeeded Galde his Father, he was abhorred
of all men for his detestable cruelty and Lust, ravishing not only his Aunt,
Niece, and Sister, but his own Daughter; so that after two years intending to
put to death those who in an assembly at Dunstasage blamed his misgovernment,
he was there murdered among the people, with abundance of his partakers. Nogal
the Nephew of Galde succeeded, who was at first well beloved of his Subjects,
and obtained many notable Victories against the Romans, who again invaded the
Country; upon which he grew so proud, that he fell into the same sensualities
as his Predecessors; and understanding there was a Conspiracy against him, he
fled into a Wood at Midnight with only two servants, of which the Conspirators
having notice the next morning they pursued him with great fury, and seizing
him, cut off his head, which they set upon a pole and carried about in derision.

Conarus his son ascended the Throne, who was thought to have been in the
Treason against his Father, and coming to the Crown by wicked means, it could
not be expected he should rule well, for he soon discovered his debauched
humor, wherein he used such excess that it brought him into great necessity,
whereupon calling an Assembly of his Lords, he demanded a Subsidy, alleging,
that the rents of the Crown were not sufficient to mantain his Royal Dignity,
and therefore required Contribution from his Subjects; the nobles were startled
at his demand, resolving to deny him, and next morning when they were again set
in the Council Chamber, one of them spoke to this purpose; That since he had
no Wars wherewith to spend his Treasure it might seem strange why he should
demand a Tax to maxtain his household, but that it might not indeed be much
wondered at, since he preferred only mean Persons who studied all ways to oppress
his Subjects, and enrich themselves; but (says he) this shall be amended ere
long, and they shall be advanced yet higher, even to a fair pair of Gallows,
and end their lives with shame, as many others have done before them who have
thus ruined the people; neither is it sit that a Person who so little
understands his Office, should be King over us, who ought rather to be cofined
to a Chamber, and some worthy Person by common consent chosen to govern the
Kingdom. The King at this insolent speech started up, and loudly called them
Traitors, adding, that if they durst meddle with his Person they should dearly
repent it. Yet the Conspirators seized and committed him prisoner, executing
several of his Officers and Ministers, and choosing Argadus, one of their
number, Govenour of the Realm, during the life of Conarus.

Ethodius Nephew to King Mogal succeeded, who together with the Picts made
sharp war upon the Britains, ravaging Westmorland and Kendal with Fire and
Sword; he delightd in Hunting and Music, and was especially taken with one
Musician, born in the Western Isles, by whom, after he had reigned thirty four
years, he was murdered one night in his Chamber, the Murderer alleging he
did this wicked Act in revenge for some of his Friends and Kinsmen, whom the
King had caused to be executed in Argile; that he had designed it long before,
and was now ready to receive whatsoever torment they would adjudge him to, for
sure I am (says he) that how terrible soever my execution be I shall feel no
pain, but rej you even to the very midst of my (...) since I have so notubly
and fully revenged the death of my Friends; he was ordered to be dra^n in
pieces with horses, and Satrahel the brother of Ethodius succeeded, though be
left a son behind him whom Satrahel would have put to death, with many of his
wealthy subjects, thereby to enjoy their Estates, but before he had reigned
four years he was strangled by his own servants, to whom Donald his brother was
Successor, who was beloved of his Subjects, and died peaceably after twenty one
years reign.

Ethodius the second son of Ethodius reigned after him who was so very foolish
and weak, that the Government was committed to diverse Noblemen, yet was he
extreme covetous, and was slain by his guards in his sixteenth year; then his
son Athirco was advanced to the Crown, who slighting his Nobility, and
ravishing two Daughters of Natholicus a Nobleman of Argile, he with the rest
conspired against him, who suspecting those about him fled privately to the Sea
side, and went into a boat designing to pass into the Isles, but being driven
back by contrary winds chose rather to hill himself then fall into the hands of
his Enemies; after whose death Natholicus was proclaimed King, and the line of
Athirco laid aside, though he had three Sons, and a Brother called Dorus who
escaped into Pictland in beggars habit; to settle himself, he was very kind to
the Lords and people, endeavoring to appease all quarrels and discontents, but
Dorus after a while sending Letters by a Pictish woman to some Scottish Lords
of himself and his Nephews, she was surprised by Natholicus, and being put in a
sack was thrown into the Sea, which act being declared abroad, they and their
Associates procured the people to rebel, of which Natholicus being informed, he
privtely retired into Marra, land, and sent a trusty servant to a Witch at
Colmkill to know the fortune of this War, who answered, That the King should in
a little time be murdered, not by his open Enemies but by the hands of his
familiar Friends in whom he put much trust; the Messenger earnestly inquired by
whose hands, even by thine (says she) as it will plainly appear in a few days;
the Gentleman called her old Witch, saying that he hoped to see her burnt
before he should commit so villainous a de^^ and made haste to tell the King;
but as he went, he began to consider, that if he should declare the truth, the
King might be suspicious of him, and put him to death; if he kept it secret
some other might reveal it, and he be in danger, so to make all sure, coming to
the King, he led him into a private room, and all others being withdrawn, he
suddenly struck the King to the heart with his Dagger, His death being known,
the Nobles resolved to send for the sons of Athirco and employed this person to
fetch them; who being come, Finloch the eldest was Crowned, who reigned very
Justly, for ten years, but then going to suppress the Rebellion of Donald of
the Isles, he was Treacherously murdered by two villains employed by him, to
whom succeeded his younger brother Donald, who was resolved to be revenged of
the Traitor, but he suddenly setting upon the King, flew him, and above three
thousand more, and having got so great a victory he took upon him to be King,
by the name of Donald of the Isles, but being conscious of his Usurpation, he
never went abroad without a Guard, yet was killed one night by Cratchilut the
son of King Findock who succeeded him, after whom reigned Fingomarc his
brothers son, then Romacus, and Angusianus who was slain in battle by the
Picts; after him Fethelmacus his Cosen, who was killed by two Pictish Traitors
as he lay sleeping; who being taken were torn asunder with wild Horses.
Eugenius his son came next to the Crown, who was killed in a fight with the
Romans in Conjunction with the Picts and Britains, who resolved to root out
the Scottish Nation and made a Law that they should resign all their Lands to
the Britains and Picts, and forsa^e the Country; and accordingly the Scots
were banished their Native Land, many going into Ireland, and other Countries;
and to preserve peace between the Picts and Britains, the Romans built a great
Wall from the East Sea to the West, with a strict order, That if any Pict
should pass that wall into Britain without leave, he should certainly die.
Hitherto we have followed the Scottish Historians, though it is questioned
whether there were such a succession of Kings; what follows is allowed to be of
more Certainty and Authority, and therefore we shall be more particular in the
Reigns of the succeeding Kings. I. It is generally believed that in the year of
our Lord 424. the Scots coming in great numbers out of Ireland settled in
Scotland under Fergus their King, who was Crowned in the Marble Chair at
Argile, and the Picts having broken their League with the Romans, they joined
with the Scots against them, between whom a great Battle was fought, so that
the River Carron was filled with dead bodies, and the water looked like blood;
but while the victory remained doubtful there fell so violent a storm of Haill
and Rain, that they could not see each other, but were forced to part; and
having lost so many on each side, the Romans under Victorinus their General
marched back into Britain, and the Scots and Picts broke up their Camp; after
which they again Assemble to hinder the Britains from building the wall,
killing the Laborers and Soldiers, and entering the British borders, ferched
thence great spoils, but the Romans resolving to defend their Consederates,
fought a terrible battle under Maximin, wherein the Pictish King, and Fergus
King of Scotland were both slain; this overthrow dismayed the Scots, fearing
they should be now utterly expelled their Country, for the Romans pursued their
victory with great destruction, and Maximin was councelled to root out both
Nations but being satisfied with his success, he retired to York, where hearing
of the disturbances at Rome, he resolved to usurp the Crown of Britain, and in
order thereto Married one of the Daughters of Dionethus a Prince of Wales.

II. Mean time the Scottish Lords made Eugenius the 2d of that name son of
Fergus King, and Maximin, was content to make peace with him, having designed
no less than the Government of the whole Roman Empire; and taking all the
British Youths with him sailed into France, causing himself to be proclaimed
Emperor, leaving behind Dionethus his Father and only one Roman Legion who
continued not long ere they were sent for by Etius Lieutenant to the Emperor
Valentinian, whom they instantly obeyed, though they had Sworn Allegiance just
before to Maximin; the Britains thus deprived of defense the Scots and Picts
fall upon them with Fire and Sword, retaking all places in their own Country
which had been Garrisoned by the Romans, and entering Cumberland destroyed most
part of Yorkshire in this distress the Britains sending to Valentanian he
ordered Gallio to assist them, who pursued their Enemies, and repaired the
Wall, which was Eight Foot broad, and Twelve high, with Towers in diverse place,
giving directions to the Britains how to defend themselves, and then returned
into France; Gallio was no sooner gone, but the Picts resolved again to invade
the Britains and Persuaded Eugenius to join with them, and so entering Britain
they soon overthrew the Wall, and in multitudes entered, beating down the
Britains without resistance, who again apply themselves to the Roman
Lieutenant in Gallia, but were answered That they must make the best defense
they could, for he had no Forces to spa^e, so that their Enemies miserably
overran their Country as far as the River Humber, in this woeful distress they
sent to Etius the Roman Lieutenant in Gallia, who answered that their Calamitys
did much disturb him, but the present invasions upon the Empire by several
Nations did at present hinder him from sending them any relief, advising them
to make the best resistance they could, and when the Empire was settled they
should be fully revenged of all their injuters: the same time the Britains
having sent Ambassadors to the Scots to Treat of Peace, they returned answer,
That unless the Britains wholly submit themselves, and become their Subjects
they would make no Peace; which the Britains took in such indignation that
they must cred up all their Forces possible, and met the Scots in the Field,
but were beaten with the loss of Fifteen Thousand, and Four Thousand Scots and
Picts; after which they were forced to sue again for peace, which was granted
upon these hard Conditions, That the Britains should upon no account receive
any aid from Rome, nor suffer any Enemy of the Scots or Picts to pass through
their Country; that they should enter into no League with any City or Nation
without their consent, and should be ready to assist the Scots upon all
occasions; that all Britain as far as Hull or Humber. should be resigned
wholly to the Scots; that as a Trophey of Conquest they should pay the Scots
sixty Thousand Pounds and lastly, that they should deliver an hundred Hostages
for performing these Conditions; which Articles being severe, were kept only
till the Britains had opportunity to break them, which was soon after; for
Eugenius having reigned 30 years, and much enlarged the Scottish Dominions,
died.

III. Dongard succeeded, in 470. who followed his brothers example in
preserving Justice and Peace among his Subjects; in whose reign the Britains
weary of their servitude, by the persuasion of Conarus, resolved to free
themselves, and sent into Armorica, now Brittany in France, for aid, which
Androntus King thereof soon agreed to, sending his son Constantine with
considerable Forces, who landing at Totnes in Devonshire, be was received with
great Joy, and proclaimed King of Britain, who assured them he would to the
utmost of his power endeavor to regain their freedoms; which so encouraged
them that they quickly assembled all able to bear Arms, and marched against the
Picts and Scots, and a bloody battle was fought, sixteen thousand Britains
being killed, and thirteen Thousand Scots with Dongard, who was slain by
Constantine, Fighting Valiant ly in the midst of his Troops; upon which the
English marched southward and the Ecots with their dead King, home.

IV. Constantine another brother of Eugenius, was Crowned King after him, a Pr.
altogether unlike his worthy predecessors, giving himself up to lust and
wantonness, deflowring Virgins and ravishing Wives, a great favourer of
Backbiters and Slanderers, and never pleased but in the Company of Buffoons and
Jesters; and though of the same name with the British King, yet of different
qualities, one studying to promote the good of his People, the other minding
nothing but Lasciviousness and sensuality; He granted peace to the Britains
without asking, releasing the tribute and secretly delivering up diverse Castles
upon the River Humber into their hands; these things enraged the Nobility and
People against him, so that they resolved to make an Insurrection, but by the
persuasion of Dongal a discreet Nobleman of Gallaway, they were persuaded to
suffer patienly his disorderly Government; the Picts observing the ill conduct
of the Scotch King, were afraid that if the K. of Britain should endeavor to
revenge the injuries received from them, they were not able to resist him
singly and were like to have small assistance from the Scots, sent three
Pictith Villains into Britain who treacherously flew tha^ King; but being
taken they were Cast into a mighty fire, and Burut to Asher, neither did
Constantine of Scotland long survive, for haing ravished the Daughter of a
Nobleman of the Isles, he was by him murdered in 481.

V. After him Dougal or Congal his Nephew, Son of his Brother Dongal was
proclaimed King, who endeavored to reform a^uses, In his time Constantinus the
Eldest Son of Condartixt was taken out of an Abbey, wherein he was a Monk, and
advanced to the Kingdom of Britain, but being unfit to govern, the ordering of
all was committed to Vortigern, who renewing the League with the Picts and
Scots, choosing a Guard to the Kings Person out of them, but soon after he
procured Constantinus to be murdered by some of them, and then put them all to
Death, as well the innocent as guilty, at which the Scotey and Pictish Kings
were so enraged that they made several inroads upon the British borders, upon
which Votigern raised a great Army who were commanded by Gitellus Prince of
Wales took 500 of these Borderers, and hanged them up; the Scots and Picts
marched toward them with strong Forces, where a battle was fought, wherein
there were slain of the Britains (says the Scotch Historian) twenty Thousand,
and of the Scots four Thousand. This loss discouraged the Britains, so that
Vortigern designed to have left the Kingdom.

But upon Consultation with some British Lords, it was concluded to send for
succor from Germany, and Hengist and Horsus two Saxon Princes came over with
Ten Thousand Soldiers, and were received joyfully by Vortigern and the
Britains; and were no sooner refreshed (...) they fell upon the Scots before
they knew of their arrival, whereupon a multitude of them were slain; diverse
other Victories they obtained for the Britains, and great numbers of Saxons
daily arriving, the Britains suspected they designed upon their Liberties
which happened accordingly; for after a while Hengist having notice that
Aurclius Ambrosius, and Vter Pendragen the sons of Constantine, designed to
bring abundance of Britains and French from Brittany to claim the Crown as
lawfully descended from their Father, he with the assistance of Vortigern got
possession of York, and caused diverse of the Nobles and Gentry to be slain,
under pretense they would have betrayed several Forts and Castles to the Scots,
which he get into his own hands; the Brittins to prevent these growing
mischiefs, deposed Vortigern, placing his son Vortimer in his stead, and sent
Ambassadors to the Scots and Picts, requiring their assistance against the
cruel oppressions of the Saxons who endeavored to usurp the Government and
utterly ^o extinguish the Faith of Christ among them; earnest^^ desiring their
aid against these their common Ene^ies, who were called into the Realm, by the
private ^ntrivance of Vortigern to suppress not only the Scots and Picts, but
the Britains themselves, whom by his Tyranny he was coscious he had given
cause to defend themselves against him.

Dongal King of Scots having heard their Message, replied, That he was sorry to
understand into what danger the miserable Christians of Britain were fallen,
and if he had no other motive to join with them against the Saxons, yet the
delivering that Island from such a Paganish Generation was to him a sufficient
cause, who not only used the heathenish Ceremonies of their false Religion by
sacrificing to their hellish Gods, even in the presence, and tto he dishonor,
and offense of Christians, but likewise sought to root out the Faith of our
Blessed Savior Christ in all places where they had power, he therefore
promised his uttermost assistance for driving them out of Britain; the same
answer the Ambassadors received of the King of Picts, and accordingly sending
an Army into Northumberland, they obtained a great Victory against the Saxons
commanded by Occa the son of Hengist, and Vortimer at the same time vanquished
them in Kent, so that they all soon fled out of the Country back into Saxony.

King Vortimer was po^soned by the Treachery of his Stepmother Roxana, and
Vertigern again, Reinthroned, upon taking a Solemn Oath never to assist the
Saxons, nor receive any Foreign Nation into the Kingdom; he administered
Justice to his Subjects, and was exceedingly beloved, and renewed the League
with the Scots and Picts; yet Hengist again returned, and by force or policy
possessed himself of most part of the Land, so that the greatest number of the
Britains were forced to retire into Wales with King Vorrigern, where they
remained till Aurelius Ambrosius and Vter arrived from Brittany in France, who
besieging him in a Castle at length burnt it, with the King and his Queen
Roxana as they say, Merlin the soothsayer had prophesied who was supposed to
have been begotten by an evil Spirit called an Incubus, that in the shape of
men, was thought to accompany with Women.

In this place Hector Boethius relates some strange illusions of Spirits, which
happened, and may be worth, rela^ng. A Scoteish Ship departing out of the Frith
about ^^dsummer toward Flanders, there arose so extraordina^y a Tempest as
astonished the Mariners as being unusu^ that time of the year; the Storm still
increasing, so that all despaired of safety; a Woman in the hold of ^he Ship
called to the Seamen, beseeching them to throw ^er into the Sea, whereby they
should be all secured ^om danger, adding that she had been a long time
con^ersant with an unclean Spirit, which haunted her in ^he shape of a man, and
was at that instant using his filthy ^leasure with her after the manner of men;
there hap^ened to be a Priest in the Ship, who going down and ^^nding her a
wretched desperate Person, and woefully ^menting her miserable condition, he
gave her such ^holesom counsels that she at length seemed thoroughly ^enitent
for her wickedness, upon which there issued out ^f the Ship a black stinking
Cloud, that with a terrible ^^ise smoke, and flame fell into the Sea; after
which ^he Tempest ceased, and the Ship arrived in safety to ^er Haven.

The same Author adds that a young man near Aberdeen ^ing a very handsome
Person, made complaint to the Bishop of the Diocese, that a Spirit haunted him
in the ^hape of a Woman, exteam beautiful who would in the ^ight come into his
Chamber, and use pleasant intice^ents to allure him to enjoy her and that he
could not (...) freed from her by any means; the Bishop advised ^^m to remove
to some other Country, and apply himself to fasting and Prayer; which he
perorming was de^ered from any further Disquiet or Temptation.

(...) adds this third relation that in the Country of March, young Gentlwoman
of excellent beauty, Daughter of Nobleman, having refused diverse wealthy
Matches, she (...) length proved with Child; and being severely charged ^he^
parents to discover the Father, she confessed, that young man kept her company
every night, and some^^es in the day, but whence he came, or how he went away
she knew not; her Parents giving no credit to her words, kept strict watch to
find who had dishonored their Family; about three days after, one of her maids
giving notice that the Fornicator was at that instant with her, they enter the
Chamber with Torches, and shutting the Doors, find their Daughter in the arms
of a foul deformed Monster terrible to behold; among others a Priest was there
of an honest conversation, who when all others were affrighted boldly
approached, and began to recite the beginning of St. John's Gospel, and coming
to these words, Verbum caro factum est, the Word was made Flesh, the evil
Spirit fled with a dreadful, roaring noise taking the roof of the Chamber with
him, and burning the Hangings and covering of the bed, yet was the Gentlewoman
preserved, who within three or four days was delivered of a horrid and mishaped
Birth, which the Women, to prevent shame to the House, seized and burnt to
ashes. Thus much out of Hector Boethius who has writ these and other credible
Relations, as he affirms, to prove that all which has been told concerning
these illusions of Devils and Demons is not false or feigned.

Aurelius Ambrosius having dispatched Vortigern, resolved to try his fortune
against Hengist and the Saxons, and to restore the Christian Religion,
concluding a firm League with the Scots and Picts who joining their Forces
obtained a great Victory against them, Hengist himself being slain by Aurelius,
who afterward Married the Daughter of the Pictish King. The Britains thus
delivered from the Tyranny of the Saxons enjoyed Peace some years and
discovering some Saxon Priests who pretended to be Christians, yet Sacrificed
to their Idol Gods, they were burnt according to a Law then in being.

VI. Coranus succeeded his brother Dongal a Just Prince, being himself present
in Courts of Justice to hear Causes or Hunting in some Forest near where his
Judges sat, in his Reign Occa and Pascentius the sons of Hengist hearing of
their Fathers Death came again into Britain with a strong Army, at which time
Aurelius preparing to resist them with the assistance of the Scots, died of a
Consumption, and his brother Vter succeeded, who falling in Love with the Wife
of Gothlois Duke of Cornwall, he for^ced her to his pleasure and to enjoy her
more freely pursued her husband to destroy him, and at length taking him in a
Castle whither he was fled, caused him to be executed under Pretense that he
had forsaken his Captain in a fight with the Saxons; of this Lady, Vter be^got
Arthur the famous Warrior, whom because he had ^no legitimate Son, he ordained
should succeed him in the Kingdom, whereat Loath the Pictish King right Heir
after Vter to Britain, was so displeased, that he joined with the Saxons
against him and a Battle was fought, wherein the Britains obtained a glorious
Victory by the help of St. Germain the Holy Bishop of Auxerre as the Scottish
Writers relate after this manner.

About Easter both Armies came into the Field, the Saxons and Picts on one
side, and the Britains on the other; many of whom were grown Idolaters by
conversing with the Saxons, which St. Germain understanding, preached so
effectually to them in the Camp, that they were again reduced to Christianity,
and received the Sacrament from him in Company of the other faithful
Christians; when both sides were ready to engage, St. Germain with all his
Priests and Clergy marched in the Frout before the British Army, giving
Command that when he and his should cry Hallclujah, the whole Host should
answer them with one voice, and carrying the Kings Standard before him, upon
the approach of the Enemy, he with the Priests cried thrice with a loud voice
Hallelujah; which being loudly repeated by the whole Army at once, made such a
tremendous Echo in the adjoining hollow Caves and Mountains, that the Saxons
amazed at this redoubled noise, and suspecting an other great Body lay in
ambush on the Hills, on each side of them, yea doubting that the very Mountains
and Hills, yea Heaven it self would fall on their heads, were struck with so
dreadful a Consternation, that the^ fled with great haste and terror, abundance
were drowned in the adjacent River, and the rest dispersed ove^ the Country,
throwing away their weapons to expedi^ their escape. Thus by this Christian
Policy (says ^ Author) this Holy man procured a bloudlses Conque^ to Vter and
his Britains; who thereupon grew proud, debauched, and careless of their
future defense; which abuses of Divine goodness were much lamented by the good
men of those days, denouncing the Wrath of Heaven against them, if they did not
reform, which in ^ short time came to pass, for Occa again made head, an^ gave
them a notable overthrow, wherein above Fifte^ Thousand Britains were slain,
though the Saxons lost the^ King Occa; however they chose another Occa, Nephe^ to
the former, King, who turned all his Forces upon L^ K. of the Picts, since
contrary to his Oath he had assiste^ the Britains in the last Battle, and
falling upon a Company of Scots and Picts, cut them off with a Cruel Slaughter,
of which news being brought to Conranus and Lo^^ they marched toward their
Enemies, but being read to give Battle, were so struck with fear of encounteri^
such an Army of fierce people, that the Kings perceivin^ it ordered one to make
an Oration for their Encouragement, which put such life into the trembling
Scots an^ Picts that they declared themselves ready to die at the feet of their
Captains, and to follow their Kings whithe^ soever they would lead them;
marching toward th^^ Enemies, whom they found ready to receive them, an^ that
with such rage and violence, that after a huge sla^ghter on each side, the
Scots and Picts were utterly rou^ed; The Scotch King with the remainder of his
Arm^ hasted to Galloway, and the Pictish to his own Countre^. At which time
Vter King of Britain dying, Loath King (...) Picts sent to demand the Crown, as
having married the Sister and Heir of Aurelius and Vter but the Brittai^
disdaining his Message, proclaimed Arthur the Basta^ Son of Vter King, and
routed the Saxons in several Ba^^tles, under his valiant conduct.

Conranus growing old, his Officers oppressed the People, who being
discontented and the Nobility joining with them, they conspired against him and
his Favorites, especially one Toncet, of mean Birth, who being made Chief
Justice or Chancellor, exercised much cruelty, taking the forfeitures of the
Penal Statutes, to fill the Kings Coffers without regard to Justice or Right;
he caused several Rich Merchants to be accused of Treason upon slight
Informations, for which they were condemned and executed without legal proof,
only to seize their Estates; which so enraged their Friends that they came into
the Judgment Hall, and first reproached him with words; and then openly
murdered him upon the seat of Justice, flying into the Mountains for safety;
and to prevent punishment for one Villainy, contrived to commit a greater, by
killing the King as the original of these mischiefs; Donald Governor of Athol
in great trust about the King understanding their design assured them of his
utmost assistance, and these Outlaws coming secretly to the Kings lodgings,
were by him conveyed into his Bedchamber, Donald going away as soon as they
entered. Conranus perceiving he was betrayed, and that his Enemies were ready to
murder him, got out of his Bed, and on his knees besought them to have pity on
his Age, and not d^efile their hands in the blood of their Natural Lord and
King, since if they had been any way injured it was without his knowledge, but
they doubting he should make his escape, deaf to his Entreaties murdered him,
Instantly betaking themselves to flaght.

VII. Eugenius his Nephew the second Son of his Brother Dongal being placed in
the marble chair at Argile, was persuaded to avenge the blood of his Uncle for
terror to others; Yet he not not only forgave the crime, but took Donald, and
the other Murderers into his service, and made them privy Counselors, which
occasioned suspicions that he himself was privy to it, so that the Widow of
Conranus with her two Sons Aidan and Reginan doubting their safety fled into
Ireland; However Eugenius to get favor with the People, would often sit in
Judgment and if he thought any wronged ordered the cause to be heard over
again; If a poor man wanted money to manage his cause, he would lend it him out
of the Common Treasury, he ordained that no widow should be obliged to go
above a mile from her own house, upon any matter of Controversy, Robbers and
Thieves to be severely punished; and lastly he took special care ^^maintain the
League with the Picts and Britains.

King Arthur had concluded a Peace with the Picts, bu^ the Britains desiring
that since he had no Children, he would name his Successor in his life time, he
chose Corstantine Son of Cador Duke of Cornwall, causing him to be proclaimed
Heir apparent, to the great rejoicing of hi^ Subjects; but Mordred son and Heir
to Loath King of Pic^ counting himself the true Heir, sent to the Brittai^
charging them with breach of Faith and Oaths, who Answer, That Arthur their
King had done nothing contrary to (...) Oath, since the League held no longer
than his Fathers Life o^ according to the duty of a Prince, who tendered the
happiness ^ his Subjects in providing one of their own Nation to Reign aft^
him, lest after his decease, the Realm should fall into the han^ of strangers,
which might occasion much Misery and Calamity If therefore the Picts loved
their own safety it would be best ^ them to keep within their own Dominions,
lest by attempting against others they should have cause to repent it.

Mordred and his people, being nettled with this answe^ resolve upon speedy
revenge, and persuaded Eugen^ to join with him, and both Armies being in sight,
(...) Bishops of the three Nations endeavored to procure Peace, which the
Britains would not hearken to, so the a bloody battle was fought near the
Humber, where twenty thousand Scots and Picts, and King Mordred, we slain with
thirty thousand Britains and King Arthur, the rest escaping by slight; the
next day the Camp of the Britains being ri^^ed, they found Queen Guyamor Arth^
Wife, with divert other Ladies and Gentlewomen, wh^^ were all made Captives;
this dreadful Fight so weak^ned the three Nations, that for many years they
were not able to recover it, before which diverse Prodigies appeared, Grass and
Herbs were found spotted with Blood; a Calf was brought forth with two heads,
an Ewe yeaned a Lamb both male and female, the Sun at noon seemed red like
Bloo^d, the Sky at the same time apperaing full of Bright Stars, for two days
together; in Wales a Battle was fought between a multitude of Crows and Magpies
on one party, and Ravens on the other, with great Slaughter on both sides.
After the death of Arthur Constantine was declared King, and to prevent any
other from claiming the Crown the Britains took the Children of Mordred who
were brought up by Gaivolaine a British Nobleman their Grandfather in
Britain, and cruelly murdered them, running into their Mothers Lap, beseeching
her to save their Lives, by whose death the whole Family of Mordred was utterly
extinguished. The Saxons hearing of the weak condition of the Britains, and
that their valiant King Arthur was slain, landed great Forces, and soon routed
the Britains, driving them and their King Constantine into Wales, and
recovering all the Land formerly held by Hengist which from his name was called
England; some write that Constantine having Reignd some years in Wales, his
Wife and Children died, whereupon growing weary of the World he forsook his
Kingdom and went privately into Ireland, where applying himself to the relief
of the Poor, he was discovered by a Monk, who persuaded him to be one of his
Order; that being afterward sent by the Bishop of the Diocese in to Scotland to
instruct the people in the Christian Faith, he there Suffered Martyrdom, and
was after Canonized a Saint, many Churches in Scotland being dedicated to his
memory

VIII. Congal his brother succeeded Eugenius, a Prince extreme Devout,
especially in worshipping the Cross, which was carried before him, and at his
getting off and on his Horse, he with all his Attendants, would kneel down and
reverently kiss it; this Cross was of Silver with a Crucisix thereon, and these
words Engraven, Christian^rum Gloria, the Glory of Christians; he commanded the
Cross to be set upon the tops of Steeples, Towers, and Gates, and forbid to be
graven or painted on the ground lest it should be trod upon; he likewise had
the Clergy in extreme honor, and they in requital Proclaimed him a Saint, so
that St. Colme an Irish Monk of great Sanctity came over to see him, and to
instruct the people in the Christian Faith, bringing Aidan the son of Conranus
along with him.

IX. Kynatel his Brother succeeded him to whom St. Colme went with Aidan, who
was appointed by Congal to receive the Government of the Kingdom, if he had
lived; they were both received with great kindness by Kynatel, contrary to
expectation, who embracing Aidan, bid him be of good Comfort, for he should
shortly attain to his Grandfathers Dominions, and have Issue to succeed him to
the great happiness of the Scottish Nation; what Spirit of prophecy he spoke by
is uncertain, but it is most certain that upon his deathbed he declared, his
intent was to have delivered up the Crown to Aidan, as his Right, though he had
not time to accomplish it, for he died of a Fever twenty days after hi^
Coronation, appointing Aidan to succeed him.

X. Aidan being Crowned by St. Colme or Columb, endeavored to preserve Peace,
as well among his own people as his Neighbors, till it happened that diverse
Lord Hunting together, a quarrel arose and many were slain the most guilty,
being sought for and arrested by the King, refused to surrender themselves,
beating and abusing the Officers, and then fled to Brudeus King o^ Picts, of
whom Aidan according to custom demande^ them; Brudens pitying the condition of
the young Gentlemen, alleged several excuses till at length Aida^ was so
enraged, that he commanded a party of his people to fetch a great booty of men
and Cattle out of the Pictish Dominions, wherewith they being provoked acted the
same in Galloway; at length it came to pitched Field near Donkeld Castle in
Monteith, where was great slaughter on both sides, though in the end the Scots
got the Victory, yet losing Arthurnus the son of Aidan, they did not much
rejoice therein. St. Colm hearing of this breach, came to Aidan reproving him
for the same, and at length procured an Agreement between them.

At this time the Saxons having driven the Britains into Wales, divided
England into seven Kingdoms, whereof Northumberland was one, Governed by King
Etheldred, who endeavored to raise War between the Picts and Scots, that being
both weakened he might Conquer both; wherein he prevailed so far, that at length
the Picts proclaimed War against the Scots, who on the other side renewed their
League with the Britains, and joining their Forces obtained a great Victory
over the Saxons and Picts; but Aidan would not let them pursue for fear of
Treachery, and recalling them by sound of Trumpet they assembled about the
Standard, Dancing, Singing, and Playing on Pipes and Instruments with all
manner of Joy; but in the midst of their Triumphs another party of Picts and
Saxons appeared in Battle array, wherewith they were so confounded that Aidan
with all his Rhetoric could hardly prevail with them to fall on again, the
Saxons came forward with great fury, and soon routed the Britains, which the
Scots observing, fled likewise, losing many of their Nobility, and King Aidans
third son, who staying to save his Father out of the throng, was himself slain;
several other Battles were fought with equal success, till at length Aidan
obtained a considerable Victory, and soon after died in Peace.

About this time, says my Author, there dwelt among the Picts one Valdrid a
Scotchman, who converted them to the Faith; after his death three Parishes
contended about the burying his body, with such heat as they were ready to
fight, but by advice it was ordered, that they should continue in Prayers all
that night, and the next morning stand to the Bishops determination, next day
there were found three Coffins with three Bodies decently covered with Cloth,
so much alike that none could distinguish them asunder; then by the command of
the Bishop, and with great Joy of the people the Bodies were carried to the
three several Churches and there Solemnly buried, where they remain to this
day, says my Author, in great veneration with the common people.

XI. After Aidan, Kenneth the Son of Congal was proclaimed and Crowned, but
four Months after, dying of the Rheum and Catarrh, he delivered the Kingdom
unto Eugenius Son to King Aidan, with the consent of the Nobility, since it was
known he had a right thereunto after Kenneths Decease.

XII. Eugenius the third succeeded accordingly, of which it is said St. Colme
Prophesied before his Fathers death, for when the Sons of Aidan were brought
before him, and the King demanded which should Reign after him, he Passed over
the rest whom he foresaw should die in the Wars, and declared that Eugenius
should succeed him. About this time St. Colme died, wasted through Age, some
say among his Brethren in Colmkill, others in Ireland at a Town called Dune,
and that his Tomb is now there in great Honor, upon which this Epitaph is In
graven.

Hi tres in Duno tumulo tumulantur in uno,
Brigida, Patricius, atque Columba Pius.
Thus translated by Ballantine;

Saint Colme, Saint Patrick and Brigitta pure;
These three in Dune lie in one Sepulture.
Eugenius forgot not the Virtuous instructions of St. Colme in his Youth, so
that he rather studied quietly to preserve what he had than to enlarge his
Dominions, he was extremely beloved being impartial in the execution of
Justice, sparing none in regard of Nobility or Friendship, but was rather more
strict against the disorders of Gentlemen than others, yet none more ready to
advance those to honor who behaved themselves worthily. In his tenth year the
Saxons Vanquished Cadwallo K. of Wales, and chased him into Scotland, from
whence he Sailed to Brittany, where receiving assistance, he returned back, and
slaying many Thousands of this Saxon Enemies was restored to his Kingdom; about
this time Eltheldred K. of Northumberland was slain by the East Angles, and
left seven Sons behind him, who for fear of falling into the Enemies hands,
fled to Eugenius; likewise Ebba his only Daughter being taken Prisoner made
her escape miraculously in a Boat in the River Humber, getting thereinto alone,
and sailed into the Main Ocean, as is related, and at length arrived safely at
the point of Land in the Mouth of the Forth in Scotland, which after her name
is called St. Ebbs-head to this day, where being received by the Bishop, she
was made Abbess.

Eugenius kindly entertained the Sons of Etheldred, though their Father had
been a cruel Enemy to the Scots, who after they had continued a while in
Scotland, by the Devour Exhortations of the Bishops and Monks forsook Idolatry
and embraced Christiany. Eugenius died leaving three Sons behind him, Ferquard,
Fiacre. and Donald, who were all by their Fathers appointment educated in
Virtue by Conon Bishop of the Isle of Man, Ferquad and Donald did not much
regard his Instructions as Judging them not to agree with their Birth and
Degree, but Fiacre heard him gladly resolving to forsake the World, and retire
to a Contemplative Life.

XIII. Ferquard succeeded, and was quiet from any disturbance from abroad,
though not from Domestic troubles, by the frequent Quarrels among his
Subjects, who in all parts of the Realm murdered and robbed each other, so that
there was no security either of Life or Estate, occasioned by a false Maxim the
King had entertained, that whilst they thus ruined one another, he was out of
fear of their Rebellion against him, so he never endeavored to reconcile them;
but at length by this means he was disregarded and slighted by all, so that
without his knowledge they chose Arbitrators to compose their differences, and
grew still more insolent toward him, for being sensible he was not displeased
at their divisions, if he did not soment them, they accused him that among
other crimes he was guilty of the Pelagian Heresy, which was much abhorred by
the people; whereupon the Nobility summoned him by an Herald to appear before a
Council of the States by them appointed, to be informed whether it were true;
the King refusing to obey their summons, they besieged him in the Castle
whither he was retired for safety, which being surrendered they committed him
close Prisoner.

They then consult whether to depose or restore him again, and at last
concluded to send an Honorable Embassage to Fiacre his Brother into France,
whither he had re^^red himself into solitary place for his Devotion; and to
desire him to return and take upon him the Government Fiacre, as it is
reported, having notice of their coming, made fervent Prayers to God, to
confirm him in his contemplative Life, and that he might not be tempted out
into the troubles and vexations of the World; and it happened according to his
wish, for (says my Author) when the Ambassador came to the Hermitage where he
was, he appeared to them so loachsome and dissigured with the Leaprosy and
filthy sores, that upon his earnest refusal to forsake his Life of an Anchorite
for the greatest Preferment in the World, they were soon satisfied to return
with that answer, since they thought him unfit to Govern because of his
Infirmity; and returning to Scotland with this account, the Nobility chose four
of the most ancient among them, for Wardens of the Kingdom, to manage all as
they thought fit; in the mean time Ferquard continuing in Prison and being
tormented with diverse pains and diseases, to be freed from his miseries, slew
himself.

XIV. After this wretched end of Ferquard the Lords assembled at Argile, and
Donald the third Son of Eugenius was invested King, who according to the
example of his Father, restored the Kingdom to its former State, whereby he
became beloved and admired; at this Cadwallo K. of Britain, and Penda King of
those English who inhabited the Country formerly called Mercia, falling upon
Edwin K. of Northumberland, who had usurpt the Crown, deprived him of his Life
and Kingdom, and pursuing their Victory invaded Pictland, whose people in vain
sued to Donald for aid, because Brudeus their King had so often broken Faith
with them, yet upon the death of Edwin, Donald procured Elfred Son of Etheldred
to be restored to part of his Fathers Kingdom of Northumberland, and of the
other part Cadwallo made one Osrike King, who Marrying one of his Daughters to
Elfred he persuaded his Son in Law to restore the Pagan, and suppress the
Christian Religion in all his Dominions; but this Apostasy was soon revenged
upon them for the Britains Saxons and Piets entered Northumberland, and
incountring Osrike and Elfred in battle, utterly routed their Forcer, and took
them Prisoners, who being both put into a common Prison, to prevent more severe
torture which they daily expected, they desperately slew each other. Oswald his
Brother succeeded Elfred who was a very Zealous Christian, and an earnest Enemy
to his Predecessor, yet at last he was slain by Penda K. of Mercia whose death
Donald much lamented, being a Prince he loved extremely, and did not long
survive him, for in the Fifteenth year of his Reign, fishing in the water
called Locktay, the boat sunk under him, and he was drowned; after several days
his body being found was buried among his Ancestors at Colmkill in 647.

XV. Ferquard the second his Nephew succeeded, of a quick and lively Spirit,
but rather inclined to evil than good, especially after he came to the Crown,
it being said that from a liberal modest Prince, he was suddenly changed into
an insatiable and cruel Monster; for before he was so Charitable that if any
Gentleman wanted money to redeem their Lands, or give it for portions with their
Daughters, if he had wherewithal they might be sure of his assistance, yea he
seemed rather willing to want himself than to see others in necessity; but now
he turned covetous, a scoffer at Religion, a tormentor of his people, and
insatiable in all Naughtiness; that which he had formerly given to the Nobility
he now shamefully demanded restitution of, pretending he did but lend it, and
if any delayed repayment, caused their Estates to be confiscated, and committed
them to Prison, and upon very small Allegations many were put to cruel deaths;
the famous Bishops Colman and Fynnan perceiving these extravagances, sharply
reproved him, and at last finding he did not regard their admonitions they
Excommunicated him; which he so little minded, that while others were at Church
he went in the Forests to Hunt, with several of his Favorites; he was
likewise a great Glutton, and Drunkard, sitting drinking till morning and then
Vomiting up the debauches of the former night; which was accompanied with such
filthy Lasciviousness, that he Ravished his own Daughters, and because his
Queen endeavored to dissuade him from such abomination, he slew her with his
own hands.

Continuing in this course of Life for some years, diverse of his Nobles
conspired against him, but Bishop Colman persuaded them by no means to attempt
any thing, assuring them, as it seems, by Divine inspiration that Ferquard
utterly detesting his own Wickedness should in a short time be punished by the
Almighty according to his deserts; which soon after proved true, for as the
King was in Chase of a Wolf, the Beast-being enraged by the Hounds, flew back
and wounded him dangerously in his side, whereupon either through the anguish
or Venom theirof, he fell into a filthy disease, for a Venomous humor with a
soft consuming heat did eat and wast his Limbs, and filthy corruption issued
out of his feet, legs and privy parts, with so horrid a stink that none could
come near him, which bred lice in such an abundant manner as he could by no
means be freed from them. Thus he continued two years, acknowledging this to be
a Just Punishment for his Sins of which he seemed heartily to repent, and was
released from his Excommunication by Colman, and then Receiving the Sacrament
and putting hair and sackcloth upon his bare skin according to the Devotion of
that Age, he desired to be carried into the next Fields, where he Penitently
gave up the Ghost, the Eighteenth year of his Reign, in 664.

XVI. Maldwin the Son of Donald, next Ascended the Throne, he mantained peace
with the Picts, Saxons and Britains, and administrated the Laws justly to his
people; in his Reign there happened a quarrel between the Herdsmen of Argile
and Lennox, which at first was inconsiderable, but those of the Western Isles,
and the People of Galloway, strengthening either party, they grew formidable;
the King having Intelligence hereof, marched toward them, and soon dispersed
them, forgiving the common people and executing the leaders, whereby he gained
much Beputation among his Subjects in those parts. About this time a grievous
Pestilence Reigned throughout the World, so that in three years time wherein it
raged, above half mankind died, yet were the Scots free from it then, and many
years after, till Riot, Gluttony, and all other sins, provoked Heaven to send
it among them: Colman being then in Northumberland, and finding the English
died so fast, desired leave of the King to retire to the Western Isles in
Scotland for his security, where he built a Monastry, and lived the remainder
of his days. He was no sooner gone, but the people of that Country joining with
the Picts made several Inroads into Scotland, which injuries Maldwin (...)
back with Interest, whereby they were so enraged that they prepared to make an
absolute war against the Scots: but in the mean time Maldwin was strangled in
his bed in the night bp his own Queen, upon Jealousy of his keeping company
with other Women; the next day she was apprehended, together with those
Confederate with her, and were all burnt together.

XVII. Eugenius the fourth Nephew to Maldwin, being the Son of his Brother
Dongard was his Successor, who sent Ambassadors to Egfred King of
Northumberland to Treat of Peace, He pretended to be willing thereto though he
intended nothing less, and consented to a Truce only of eleven Months, in which
time he made preparations for War, which Eugenius having notice of, provided
for defense; but to give no just occasion, he strictly commanded all his
Subjects not to attempt any thing toward the breach of the Truce; Egfred having
all things in readiness sent a party of Soldiers to plunder upon the borders
of Scotland, who brought thence a great number of Cattle, and slew diverse of
the Borderers who endeavored to rescue hem; upon this Eugenius sent Ambassadors
to demand atisfaction, who after long attendance could hardly procure audience,
and then boldly delivering their message, received for answer a plain
Declaration of War, with a complaint from Egfred, That since the Truce the
Scots had several times fetched bootys out of the Confines of his Dominions,
and had deserved to suffer more damage than they had yet received; that he
resolved not to maintain Friendship with those, who knew not how to keep their
hands from Robbing and Stealing from their Neighbors, he therefore bid them
tell their King, that within eight days after he should expect Wars both from
him, and all his Allies and Confederates.

Eugenius having received this answer, desired of God, that since Egfred sought
to violate the Peace, Divine Vengeance might fall upon his head, who was the
alone occasion of the breach thereof; and mustering his Forces, he Marched into
Galloway whither a great Army of English were already come, and had Besieged a
strong Castle, but were forced to raise the siege to meet Eugenius, where a
Furious battle was fought, and at length Egfred being wounded in the face with
^n Arrow fell down dead, whereat the English were so ^icouraged that they fled,
and endeavoring to pass the River near the Camp, abundance were destroyed, the
Scots reckon twenty Thousand Saxons and English were slain with their King, and
but four Thousand Scots; by this overthrow the Saxons and English ^n
Northumberland were very much weakened, of which Brudeus King of Picts taking
advantage, invaded them, ^illing, burning and plundering all before him, and
^ad wholly subdued that Country, had it not been (says my Author) for the
Prayers of St Cuthbert, which preserved the people from desolation; but ^here
was another strong reason, namely their own divisions, for after having for
some time ravaged the Country, they quarreled about dividing the Spoil, and
that with such rage as they made a huge slaughter of each other; soon after
Eugenius died.

XVIII. Eugenius the Fifth, the Son of Ferquard, succeeded who by the
persuasion of Bishop Adnan, with whom he was educated, and St Cuthbert, entered
into a League with the people of Northumberland, but would not be persuaded to
conclude peace with the Picts, agreeing only to a truce, which when he found
they so often broke to the great damage of his Subjects, he proclaimed War, and
sent a Herald to bid them defiance, yet by the Intercession of those Bishops
the War continued without the loss of much blood during all the Reign of
Eugenius, which was only ten years, he dying in 698. in which year the Scotch
Chronicles relate diverse wonderful accidents; as that in the River Humber there
appeared a great Army of men, and Navy of Ships ready for Battle; In the Church
of Camelon, a noise was heard like the clattering of Armor; Milk was turned
into Blood in diverse places of Pictland, and Cheese converted into a Mass or
Cake of Blood corn as it was gathered appeared Bloody, In the furthe parts of
Scotland it rained Blood; which prodigies cause great fear and dread in the
minds of the People.

XIX. Amberkeleth the Nephew, or Son of Eugenius was next declared King, who
after his advancement t^ Honors, soon changed his manners; for whereas h^
before seemed the only refuge of the Poor and Indi^gent, he now became the
Patron of all Vices, delighting in nothing but Luxury and Debauchery, whereby
the Government became weak, and Garnard then K of the Picts, to revenge the
injuries received from the Scot^ entered the Scottish Borders, making woeful
Slaughter of the inhabitants; Amberkeleth having been often reproached by the
Nobility, for suffering these horri^ abuses against his Subjects, mustered up
his men^ though not without much dread to appear in the head of them, whom he
was conscious he had so unreasonably neglected, so that they little understood
military Discipline, however he marched on, and pitched his Tents by the water
of Tey, and after Suppe^ having occasion to go forth for natural necessity,
accompanied with only two of the Grooms of his Chamber, he was suddenly shot
through the head with an Arrow, whereof he immediately died; but by whom, or
from whence it came was never known.

XX. The Peers of the land did not much lamen^ the death of so monstrous a
Person, yet lest the Army should suffer any damage, they immediately proclaimed
Eugenius the Sixth, his Brother, King, who taking view of (...) Forces and
perceiving them not able to engage with the Enemy, found means to conclude a
peace, and pontana the Danghter of Garnard was married to Eugenius for
confirmation thereof this poor innocent Lady being great with Child, was the
year following murdered one night in the Kings Bed, instead of Eugenius
himself, by two brethren of the Country of Athol, in revenge of their Fathers
death; Eugenius being suspected of this Murder, and e^^^ spoken of by his
Subjects, was at length forced to answe^ an Attainder to the great danger of
his Life and Honor, several of the Nobility being appointed as Judges to hear
the cause, so greatly was Spontana beloved by all the Scottish Nation; But was
at last found guiltless, for at the very time when Judgment should have passed
against the King, the murdering (...) were taken and he acquitted, to the
great joy of all (...) Royal Subjects; The Murderers were condemned, and
hanged naked upon Gibbets by the heels, with two cruel Mastiff Dogs hung by the
heels likewise on each side, to torment and devour them. Eugenius thus cleared
from suspicion, resolved to revenge himself on his accusers, but was dissuaded
there from by Bishop Adnan. He then applied himself to the advancement of
Religion, and Just Government, commanding the Histories of his Ancestors to be
written, and preserved in the Abbey of Jonan after called Colmkill; he augmented
the Revenues of the Clergy, and concluded a League with the Saxons and Picts,
which continued during his Life, which ended at Abernethy in 717. being greatly
lamented of the Lords, and Commons, because of his Princely Qualities.

XXI. Mordack his Nephew Son of Ambirkeleth succeeded, who was of a gentle and
liberal nature; he established peace with the Pictish, British, and English
Kings; in these days, says the Famous Saint Bede, four several Nations lived in
Peace and Quietness within the bounds of Albion, though differing in manners,
Language, Laws, and Ordinance, Saxons whom he called Englishment, Britains,
Scots, and Picts; Mordack repaired several Churches and Religious Houses,
ruined in the time of the Wars, and not re-edified by his Predecessors, and
after Eighteen Years Reign died, in 734.

XXII. Ethsin Son of Eugenius the Seventh succeeded who was naturally inclined
to Justice; he continued the peace with his Neighbors and cleared the Realm of
the common disturbers thereof, so that he procured both fear and love from his
Subjects, but in his Old Age he appointed Four Peers to have the Government of
the Kingdom, who did not manage themselves with that uprightness which Ethsin
used, conniving at the faults of their Friends and Favorites, and permitting
the Nobility to live in their former licentious course, whereby many mischiefs
were acted against the Subjects, for Donald of the Western Isles a goodly
Personage but inclined to all Vice, maintained a great number of Robbers, who
destroyed the Estates of the Inhabitants of Galloway, neither did the Kings
Lieutenant Mordack endeavor to repress these violences, being either akin, or
partaker with them, and the more the people complained the worse they were
used, for Ethsin being sick in his latter days, could not take order in the
Government; He died in 764.

XXIII. Eugenius the Seventh Son of Mordack succeeded, who pursued Donald of
the Isles, and at last took and executed him with the chief of his Accomplices;
he likewise caused Mordack for upholding Donald, to be put to death, and his
goods bestowed upon the Commons of Galloway in recompense of their losses
occasioned by his falsehood; the other three Governors were fined on the same
account: which exact Justice procured him great love among his Subjects; He
continued the League with the Picts, Britains, and English. And now reigning
in Peace he fell into all manner of Lasciviousness, deflowering Virgins, and
Ravishing the Wifes of Nobles and Commons, and those who could promote his
libidinous humor were his only Privado's; to this was added insatiate
Covetousness, and barbarous Cruelty, destroying several of his wealthy
Subjects, to enjoy their Estates; the Nobility enraged at his Actions, killed
him one day upon the Judgment Seat, just as he was about to have condemned a
Rich man though Innocent, and apprehending several of his Abettors, caused them
to be hanged, to the great rejoicing of the wronged People. Such was the end of
Eugenius after he had scarce Reigned Three Years in 767.

XXIV. Fergus the Second Son of Ethsin was next advanced to the Throne, who
seemed ambitious to exceed his predecessors in Vice and Enormity, not regarding
the Government of the Realm, but devoting himself to Gluttony and Lust,
maintaining a number of Impudent strumpets, that his Queen was disregarded, who
being a Woman of great Virtue and Modesty, used persuasions to reclaim him; but
finding she labored in vain, since his depraved mind hurried him daily into
worse crimes, she grew desperate, and secretly strangled him in his bed,
choosing rather to be without a Husband than to have one who suffered his
Impudent Paramours to affront her on all occasions.

The day after, the Kings body being found, was clothed in Funeral Robes, and
brought into the place of Judgment, strict search being made for the Authors of
so heinous an Act, for though few lamented his death, yet some of his Friends
were very solicitous to discover the Murderers, upon which diverse were
apprehended, and put upon the rack, yet none would make any Confession or
discovery, the Queen was not suspected, being accounted a meek temperate Woman;
but when she heard how many Innocent persons were tormented without desert, she
lamented their miserable condition, and coming in have into the Judgment Hall,
she got upon a high Place, and made a free confession of the fact as done out
of Jealousy, and then with a Dagger stuck her self to the Heart, falling dead
in the place; the body of Fergus was buried at Colmkill, but the Queens in
unholy Ground, as a Self-murtherer.

XXV. Solvathius the Son of Eugenius the Eighth succeeded, who seemed a Prince
born to accomplish great Enterprises, had not Fortune hindered, for he was so
tormented with the Gout, by lying abroad in the cold in Hunting, which
continued with him during Life, that he was not capable of those worthy
Archievements which he designed; this encouraged Mackdonald Governor of the
Isle of Tyne to take Possession of all the Towns and Castles in the Western
Isles, causing himself to be proclaimed King, yea he transported an Army of
dissolute Fellows into the main Land, who made great Havoc, but the Governors
of Athol and Argile Encountered and put them to flight, chasing them into a
straight in Lorn, the entrance whereof is very narrow but large within,
encompast with craggy Mountains, and a deep River at the bottom, so that there
was no way to get out, but by the passage wherein they entered, which Macdonald
designed to do, but finding it strongly Guarded by the Kings Forces he was much
Surprised, and calling his Commanders together, after three days they offered
to yield at mercy; this being denied they desperately rushed through the midst
of their Enemies in hopes to have forced their way, but had the hard ^hap to be
every man cut off, by the command of the Governors, for a terror to other
Rebels; after this another Insurrection was raised by the son of Donald lately
executed, but was soon suppressed: at this time the English, Saxons and Welsh,
were so employed by their several Kings and Governors, who strove for the
Sovereignty, that they had no leisure to attempt any thing against Scotland;
neither were the Picts free, one party of them destroying another, so that the
Scots were not troubled with Foreign Enemies; and Solvathius having Reigned
Twenty Years died in 788.

XXVI. Achaius the Son of Ethsin next ascended the Throne, a man Renowned for
his Justice, who by his former Conversation among the Gentry perfectly
understood their secret Feuds, and Animositys, which he foresaw would be of
dangerous consequence, and calling them together, he with wisdom and dexterity
perfectly reconciled them. Having thus settled the Realm, it happened that
several Irish arriving in Cantire, were slain by the Inhabitants of the Western
Isles; this loss the Irish were resolved to revenge, but Achaius sent an
Ambassador disowning the act, as committed by a company of Outlaws, without
Order; which yet could nothing prevail upon the haughty Spirits of the Irish
Nobility, (for at that time they had no King over them) who returned answer,
That they were resolved to receive satisfaction for the dishonor they had
received, before they would make the least overtures for Peace, and getting a
number of Ships and men together, they were all east away in a Tempest, which
so qualified the rest, that they gladly hearkened to an Agreement, confessing
the Just Judgment of God upon them for attempting War against those that had
not deserved it; Achaius replied, the Irish Nation were so stubborn, that they
would never hear reason unless they were thoroughly Scourged, and that the
Righteous Creator had dealt with them according to their deserts; however
setting aside all past injuries, to show himself a follower of Christ, who so
often recommended Peace to us, he was content to grant them that peace which
they now sued for; and accordingly it was concluded between both Nations.

At this time the League with France was first entered into, which continued
many Ages; Carolus Sir named Magnus, the great, finding that the English da^^
molested the Seas, to the great, damage of Trade upon the Coasts of France and
Flanders, by landing and plundering the Inhabitants; he resolved to conclude a^
Alliance with the Scots and Picts, wherein this principal Article should be
inserted that as often as the English invaded the French, they should fall upon
them at home, and on the contrary, if the English War upon the Scots and Pict^^
the French would invade the West of England to dive^ them. Charles sent several
Honorable Persons Ambassadors to Achaius, who represented the conver ency
(...) this League, to both Nations, since the English would be thereby
restrained from such injurious Enterprize^ against their Christian Neighbors,
for if such insolences continued, they might occasion the diverting those
Forces designed against the Saracens, to suppress the English, and endanger
those parts of Christendom which lie exposed to the mercy of those Barbarous
Infidels.

This Message was heard with great attention, and the Ambassadors kindly
treated; but since the Nobility were of different opinions, the King called an
extraordinary Assembly, and ordering several of his Lord to go a Hunting with
the Ambassadors, that they might not be present, consulted with the rest
concerning the weighty affair, and understanding that his Subject were
generally inclined to the League, he dismissed the Assembly till the next day,
and treated the Ambass^dors with a costly Banquet, after which it was agreed at
a conference with the Nobility and Lords of the Council, that for the Solemn
ratifying this League with King Charles, there should go with the Ambassadors
the Lord William Brother to the King, with four other Learned and Honorable
personages, and to carry Four Thousand men to fight against the Infidels, as
King Charles should order; the next day Achaius declaring to ^e Ambassadors
what was concluded on, they gave hearty ^hanks to him and his Counselors for
their respect to their Master; they went from thence to Hungus King of Picts
with the same Message, who took time to deliberate thereon; the Ambassadors
then returned back accompanied with the Lord William, the four others and the
Four Thousand Men, and were received kindly by King Charles, and the League
being confirmed, was proclaimed throughout France, to continue between the two
Nations and their Posterities for ever.

The Chief Articles whereof were This Amity and Confederation between the
French and Scots to be firm and ^erpetual, That the Wars or injuries of English
be common to ^oth; the French being assaulted by the English the Scots shall
send them aid to be paid, and armed by the French; ^he French on the contrary
to aid the Scots at their own ^roper cost; If any person of either Nation shall
assist the English with Arms, Counsel or Provisions, he shall be reputed a
Traitor to both Princes; Neither Nation to conclude a Peace ^r Truce without
consent of the other; and for a memorial to this matter Achaius added to his
Arms, being a red Lion in a Field of Gold, a double trace seamed with a Flower
de luce, to signify, that the Lion should be hence^orth defended by the
French, and that the Scottesh Kings should Fight Valiantly in defense of their
Country, Liberty, Religion and Innocence, which the Heralds say is represented
by the Flower de Luce; the Lord William remained with K. Charles, performing
many considerable Enter^rizes to the advantage of the French in Florence and
elsewhere.

About this time Athelstan Son of Ethelward K. of the West Saxons, getting the
Sovereignty of Kent, East Sax^ny, Mercia, and Northumberland, and being
ambitious ^o enlarge hi^ Dominions, entered into Pictland about Berwick, as
belonging to Northumberland, and putting all to Fire and Sword in Deira, he was
recalled to suppress an insurrection in Mercia; Hungus the Pictish King
resolved to revenge this injury, and applied himself to Achaius for assistance,
who sent him Ten Thousand Men, wherewith he invaded the borders of
Northumberland carrying from thence great booty, of which Athelstane having
notice, came suddenly upon them and a Herald Proclaimed that all the Picts
should be immediately put to the Sword, which cruel command much amazed the
Picts, yet they fortified the Camp in the best manner they could, and issued
out with such Courage that they routed the English Army, killing Athelstane and
most of his men, five hundred only making their escape. The Historian says,
this Victory appeared to the Picts by Miracle, for the night before the Battle
there h^ppened to Hungus in his sleep, the Apostle St. Andrew, assuring him of
Victory, and for a certain token thereof he told him, there should appear such
a Cross as he formerly suffered upon, in the Sky over the Pictish Host; when
Hungus awaked looking up to the Sky he saw this Cross, and showed it to his
Soldiers, declaring what was revealed to him in his sleep, wherewith they were
so encouraged, as not to doubt of success, which happened accordingly; from
whence it came to pass that in time of War their Posterity carried this Cross
in their Banners, and in gratitude to this Apostle Hungus built a Church and
dedicated it to St. Andrew giving thereto many Rich Ornaments, the Images of
Christ and the Twelve Apostles of beaten Gold, and a Case of Gold with the
Relics of St, Andrew, granting the Clergy Revenues, which yet they did not
long enjoy being deprived of them by Feredeth his successor, and bestowed on
the Soldiers. After this great loss of the English the Scots and Picts lived
in peace during the lives of both their Kings.

XXVII. Congal the third his Uncles son by Dong^ the Brother of King Ethsin was
his successor, betwixt whom and Hungus King of Picts there was great love and
amity, both studying to maintain the Ancient Al^ance between their People,
which procured much ^uietness to both Kingdoms; at length Hungus wasted with a
Consumption delivered up his Kingdom to his on Dorstolorgus, and then departed
this Life; neither did ^ongal long survive him dying likewise of sickness in
the ^ifth Year of his Reign, 826.

XXVIII. Dongal the second son of Solvathius succeed^d, a man of singular
Wisdom and conduct, but being evere in punishing the disorders of the Nobility
and ^entry, they conspired against him, and caused Alpine ^he son of Achaius to
lay claim to the Crown, who per^eiving he must either please them, or be
murdered, he ^onsented to go into Argile with them to be Crowned ^n the Marble
Chair; but Alpine being sensible of the ^ear calamities this Action would bring
upon his County, made his escape, and came to Dongal who Joyfully re^eived him,
promising that if the States of the Realm should think it necessary, he would
gladly resign the Government to him, as being desirous of nothing more than ^he
advancement of the House of Achaius; Alpine gave the King thanks, calling God
to witness, that he regar^ed nothing less than the Kingdom, and as for his
mar^hing into Argile on the head of an Army, it was no ^ault of his, since the
Conspirators threatened to kill him if he did not comply; three days after they
sent ^o excuse themselves charging all the fault on Alpine; ^he King little
regarded their words, but marches so ^uddenly that he surprised most of them,
before they ^eard of his coming, who were presently Executed, which so
retrified the rest, that they continued quiet (...) great while.

At this time Eganus the second son of Hungus King of Pict murdered his Eldest
Brother Dorstolorgus, to ^^tain the Kingdom, to and settle himself freely
bestowed his Fathers Treasure among his Lords and other great Men, taking to
Wife Brenna Daughter to the King of Mercian his Brothers Widow, to appease the
Mercian King for the death of his son in Law; yet he lived miserably being
continually in fear of all Men, doubting they would revenge his Brothers death,
and never went without a Guard of his Friends whom he had obliged with Money and
Presents; but notwithstanding all his precaution, his Wife in revenge of her
former Husbands death, strangled him in his bed when he was drunk, not having
Reigned full two years.

These two sons of Hungus being thus made away without issue, the posterity of
Hungus were utterly extinct, whereupon Alpine Nephew to Hungus by his his
Sister Fergusiana, by the advice of King Dongal^ laid claim to the Pictish
Crown, and sent Messenger to the Lords of Pictland, to demand the Kingdom due
to him by lawful Inheritance, seemed ordained by Almighty God, that for want
of a Lawful Successor the Scots and Picts might be united into one, for
Preventing these Wars, and Bloodshed, which had endangered the ruin of both
Nations. The Pictish Nobility having notice of the coming of these Ambassador^
chose one Feredeth King, a man of great Authority among them, thereby to
exclude the Title o^ Alpine.

Soon after the Ambassadors came to Camelon the chief City of the Picts, where
Feredeth and his Noble were assembled, and began to declare Alpines right t^
the Government, but the people would not suffe^ them to proceed, making so
great an Uproar, that (...) appease it, Feredeth commanding siilence,
acquainte^ them, that the Picts neither could nor would admit a^^ stranger to
Rule over them, because there was an Ancie^^ Law much reverenced among them,
that in case of necess^^ they might transpose the Succession of the Crown from
o^ Family to another; and by the same Law it was ordai^^ and decreed that if
any Person were once elected and crea^^ King, he should continue so all his
natural Life, and though Alpine were the Nephew of Hungus, yet being born a
stranger, and that the People by their full Authority had translated the Regal
Administration to another House, one whereof was already Proclaimed and
invested King, there was no reason Alpine should now lay any further claim to
the Kingdom.

The Ambassadors returning, Dongal sent others, requiring Feredeth to do
reason, or to expect open Wars in three Months; as these Ambassadors were going
toward Camelon, diverse Sergeants met them, commanding them in the name of
Feredeth their King to depart out of his Dominions within Four Days upon pain
of death, with which being terrified they went no further, yet according to
their Commission, denounced War against the Picts, in the name of Dongal and
Alpine: Upon this great preparation; were made on each side for War, one to
settle Alpine in his right, and the other to prevent any Stranger Prince from
reigning over them. But while all things were providing. Dongal happened to be
drowned in the River Spey, the boat being cast away.

XXIX. Alpine then received the Crown with the general joy of the people, who
endeavoring to pursue his Title to the Pictish Kingdom, entered thereinto with
a well appointed Army, and was met by Feredeth, a great Battle was fought,
wherein King Feredeth was slain and abundance of his people, Alpine likewise
loosing above a Third part of his Army. The Scots fearing such another costly
Victory might endanger the ruin of their Country, resolved to manage it only
with a few, who should make incursions upon the Picts, which they did so
effectually that the Country was left desolate of Inhabitants; neither could
Brudus (the Son of Feredeth, whom they had chosen King) prevent it; for being
slothful and negligent in his Government, he became a derision among his
people, who slew him before he had Reigned a full year. Kenneth the second Son
of Feredeth succeeded with no better fortune, for assembling an Army and coming
to Angus he no sooner saw his Enemies but he threw off his Armor and fled,
leaving his People in the Field, and for have was slain by a Plowman, who knew
him not, only observnig he fled from his Company judged him to deserve no other
favor; the Soldiers finding themselves destitute of a Commander retired in
good order without any further attempt.

After this unfortunate end of Kenneth, the Picts chose Brudus, of a Warlike
Spirit, who coming into Angus, seized and hanged several Scotch Robbers. He
sent to Alpine to renew the former League between both Nations, but was
rejected, and no Peace or Truce to be expected without delivering up the
Kingdom, whereupon Brudus sent money to Edwyn King of Northumberland, desiring
his aid; the Money was received and assistance promised, but never sent, Edwyn
pretending he had domestic Rebellions to quell, and likewise had been
requested by Lewis the French King by no means to endamage the Scots, his
Confederates* but if he would defer the War till next year he would send him
succors. Brudus perceiving himself deluded by the English, summoned all his
Subjects able to bear Arms, to assemble in Caledony within Eight Days with all
necessary provisions, there to understand his pleasure. His Commands were
obeyed and a mighty Army appeared wherewith he marched toward the Enemy. The
night before the Battle, Brudus ordered all the Horses that belonged to the
Carriages to be put among the Lacquies, and Women, part of whom were in Armor,
and part in white Linen with long Poles in their hands like Javelins, an^
hundred Horsemen being placed among them, these he laid in a Wood hard by the
Field of Battle, next morning the Fight began with great fury; wherein a^ first
the Scots were disordered, but by the presence of Alpine again reinforced, and
began to get ground o^ the Enemy, at which time this counterfeit Troop came out
of the Wood, and showed themselves upon the back of them, appearing a much
greater number then they were wherewith the Scots were so terrified that they
threw away their Arms, and fled so that few were slain in the Battle but many
in the chase. Alpine himself was taken and having his hands bound behind him
was led to the next Town and there beheaded, his head set upon a pole on the
highest Tower in Camelon, having Reigned only Four years.

XXX. The Scots who escaped from this overthrow retired into Argile, and chose
Kenneth the Second, the Son of Alpine, King. The Picts having obtained so
considerable a Victory assembled at Camelon by their Kings Command, where
causing a Procession of Thanks to be made for their good success, they took a
Solemn Oath upon the four Evangelists, That thenceforward they would never
cease to make War against the Scots till they had utterly destroyed and rooted
out the whole race from the face of the Earth, and that if any man durst
mention or propose any League or Peace to be made with them, he should lose his
head. Several grave Personages in the Assembly were scandalized at this
extravagant presumption of the People, alleging that in prosperity men ought
to use modesty; wherewith the Younger Men were so offended that they thrust
them out of the Church where they were met; the Scots having notice hereof were
not in the Least discouraged, but rather anima^ed at such unreasonable
insolence. Next Summer the Picts mustering their Forces marched toward the
Scots; but upon a small occasion they fell at Variance, and fought with much
eagerness one against each other, neither could their King appease them, till
night parted the Fray; and finding no way ^o compose the quarrel the next
morning he dismissed his Forces and went home in great discontent, with the grief
whereof it was thought he soon died. After whose decease they chose one Drusken
for their King who endeavored to compose these Civil discords.

Several Scots being much concerned that the head of their King should remain
in that reproachful manner amongst their Enemies, and understanding the Pictish
Language, they came to Camelon like Merchants and took an opportunity to get
the head off the Walk, which they brought safely to Kenneth, who highly
rewarded them, and Honorably buried his Father^ Corpse together, in a Leaden
Coffin in Colmkill. The King then designed to revenge his Fathers death upon
the Picts, but upon proposing it to his Lord found them extreme backward, as
remembering the late misfortune, whereupon Kenneth breaking up the Assembly
invited them all to Supper that evening where they were highly treated till
very late in the night, so that as soon as they were in bed they fel^ fast
asleep; now the King had ordered several me^ to be clothed in shining fish
Scales, with a stick of rotten wood in one hand and a great Hunting Horn i^ the
other, that they speaking through the Horn the^ Voices might seem terrible and
unusual. Being the accomodated, about midnight they enter, one into each of the
Lords Apartments, who were sound a^ sleep, and by their noise half wakened
them, wh^ were much astonished at the sight, Doubting whether it were a Dream
or Vision; upon this they hea^^ them speak with strange Voices, far greater
than tho^ of men, these words, That they were Messengers co^^ from Almighty God
to the Nobility of Scotland, and to Command them to obey their King, for his
request was just; the the picush Kingdom was due to him by Rightful Inherita^
and ought to be recovered from the People, who for their gr^^ sins, should
suddenly come to utter destruction, for such (...) the determination of the
Divine Majesty, which neither W^^dom nor Policy was able to prevent.

When these pretended Messengers had thus spok^ they hid their Stars, and
Shining Garments und^^ their other cloths, and seemed to vanish away. Ne^
morning these Lords being met in the Council Chamber, declared to each other
what they had seen, and heard, which finding to be the very same to every one,
they concluded, it was some Celestial Oracle and Divine admonition, and went
and discovered it, to the King, who told them he had seen the like Vision, but
that they ought to conceal it, left they should displease the Allmighty; but
when through his favorable assistance the War was brought to an happy end,
they might then publish it. This advice was approved of, and the Nobles made
all manner of provisions, so that a great Army was mustered, wherewith they
unexpectedly invaded Pictland: King Drusken ^net them, assisted by some English
who in the beginning of the fight left them, so that the Scots obtained a
considerable Victory; Drusken escaping by the swiftness of his Horse: the Picts
hereupon sue for peace, which Kenneth would not hearken to upon any other
condition, than surrendering the Kingdom into his hands as his Right.

Upon which the War went on with great Destruction of the Picts in all places,
who received another terrible overthrow, wherein their King was killed and most
of their Nobility. It is said that the Scots encountered with the Picts in this
fight seven several times, in seven several places, wherein the Victory still
remained to the Scots; Kenneth was hereupon advised to dismiss his Army, but
resolving to make an end of the War all at once, which was now in so ^air a
way, he called the People together and spoke ^hus to them.

It is the duty of a Wise Captain, when he has the Victory in his hands, and
the War not finished, to use his success to the advantage of himself and ^hi
Country, and not to divert from pursuing his Enemies once Vanquished, till he
has made them his Friends, or utterly destroyed them; for if any shall imagine
it the best course to suffer them to retrain quiet when they are brought low,
till they recover fresh force and strength, I think he may thereby procure more
danger then he is aware of. And to apply this to the present case, the Pictish
Kingdom we know is now much infeebled, their Forces rented, their Power
weakened, so that it is in our hands utterly to exterminate and destroy the
whole Nation, which were an Action to be abhorred and detested, if it were
possible for us by any honorable means to invite them into Friendship with us;
but the Picts are of such stubborn and revengefull Natures, that so long as
there remains one alive, they will retain in their hearts the utmost Sentiments
of Vengeance against the Scots for the losses and mischiefs received by them,
so that I think it impossible the Pictish Nation should ever have the least
kindness for us for the future; therefore since we can never make them Friends,
it will certainly be our interest and security, utterly to extinguish the whole
race, by putting to the Sword not only the Men and Women, but their very Youth
and Infants, lest they, being descended from their loins, should in time to
come arm themselves to avenge the death of their Parents, and thereby greatly
hazard the utter ruin of our Country and Kingdom.

Although this cruel determination seemed severe yet to please the King, and
for the future safety o^ Scotland, it was allowed and confirmed by all the
People, upon which such barbarity was used, that through all the Pictish
Kingdom, no creature of humane shap^ was left alive, but such as saved
themselves within th^^ walls of Camelon and other strong places, and about Two
Thousand who fled into England; the rest were murdered without respect to Age,
Sex or Quality; and new names given to all places, that no remembranc^ of the
Picts might remain; soon after the City of Camelon was besieged, wherein were
most of the Noble men's Wives and Children, the Siege continuing (...) long that
they were forced to eat upon Cats, Do^^ and the most abhorred things in nature,
yet so obstinate were they that if any did but mention surrendering, he was
presently slain; At length it was taken by assault, and miserable slaughter was
made among the Religious as well as others; a great number of Ladies and
Gentlewomen got into the presence of King Kenneth, and lamentably besought him
to save their lives from his bloody Soldiers, but such was the Rage of the
Scots that they ran upon them, and slew them all without mercy or compassion,
yea so dreadful was the carnage, that there was not one left alive of the
Pictish Nation, neither Man, Woman, nor Child, to bewail the miserable
destruction of their kindred or Country; then were the Walls of Camelon levelled
with the ground, the Houses and Churches burnt, so that there remained nothing
of this famous City but deplorable ashes and Ruins. At the same time the Castle
of Maidens, now called Edenborough, was kept with a mighty Garrison of Picts,
who hearing of the woeful fate of Camelon, left the Castle, and escaped into
Northumberland. Thus ended the Kingdom of the Picts after they had Reigned
therein 1173 Years, in the year of Christ, 839. From the first coming of Fergus
into Scotland 1166 Years, and from the Creation of the World, according to the
Scottish Writers, 4806.

This year two dreadful Comets appeared; fiery Armies were seen in the Air,
running with burning spears, one vanquishing the other, and both immediately
vanquishing. At Camelon as the Bishop was officiating, holding his Croizier
Staff in his hand, it fell on Fire of its self, neither could by any means be
quenched till it was burnt to ashes: About Noon the Sky being fair, and clear,
such a clattering of Arms, and neighing of Horses was heard both in Scotland
and Pictland, as if two Armies had been engaged in Battle; These Prodigies were
diversely interpreted, though they seemed to all to presage the dreadful
calamities that followed.

Kenneth having thus destroyed the Pictish Kingdom, caused the Marble Chair to
be removed out of Argile to Scone; where the succeeding Kings were Crowned;
Those Picts that fled into Northumberland endeavored to persuade the English
to attempt the recovery of their Country, but not prevailing by reason of the
Intestine divisions amongst themselves, some of them went to Norway and
Denmark, and others laying afide the thoughts of War settled in lawful
employments, the Scots living in quiet during the life of Kenneth, who was of
great Renown for having enlarged his dominions, which now extended from
Northumberland South to the Isles of Orkney North, and for many good Laws which
he instituted for the benefit of his People, whom he Governed. He died.

XXXI. Donald the second, his brother, Reigned after (...) of much different
qualities, though he conceased his V^ious Inclinations, for fear of offending
his Brother; in two years time he subverted all good O^der in the R^a^m, giving
himself up to Riot, and De^^^c^erry, advancing only the Vicious, and
discoantenancing the Virtuous; the Nobility admonish^d the King of these
mis^^iefs, but found him deaf to their Petitions, so that for fear of offending
they in s^d silence saw Oppr^ssion and Violence Reign through the Kingdom. At
this time the residue of the Picts in England renewed their Applications for
recovering their Coun^ry, promising Subjection; which induced Osbert and Ella
Kings of Northumberland to undertake it, since they heard of the weakness of
the Scotch Government, and concluding a League with the Britains who Inhabited
Cumberland, they joined their Forces, and marched toward the River Tweed, from
whence they sent an Herald to King Donald requiring him to surrender all the
Country which the Scots had taken from the picts, or else he must expect the
English and Britains to be no less severe Enemies to them, than they whose
cause they had undertaken to defend.

Donald was at first startled at the news, but being encouraged by his Friends,
he marched into the Field; but the youth of the Army were so corrupted with
Vicious Customs, that the Provisions which should have served for the Soldiers
was spent upon Whores, Bawds, and Gamesters wherewith the Camp was replenished;
when their Enemies understood these disorders, occasioned for want of discreat
Commanders, they came by break of day, and finding them unprovided made a
terrible slaughter, above Twenty Thousand Scots being slain, King Donald was
taken aslsep, having overdrank himself the night before, and many of the
Nobility with him. When the News of this unfortunat Battle came to Scotland the
People were so astonished, that they m^de no defense, so that the English
pursuing their Victory took in a great part of the Country, at length the Scots
sued for Peace, which was condescended to by the English, but upon such hard
terms that the people generally resolved not to accept of; but Culene a
Nobleman and Governor of Angus, used such Arguments as quieted them, and King
Donald with his nobles were sent home according to that agreement, and the
Countries conquered by the English and Britains divided between them, the Town
of Sterling being the common March to them and the Scots only the Castle was
held by Osbert, who set up a Mint there to Coin Money, which the Scotch by
mistake called Sterling from this place; He likewise made a Stone Bridge over
the River Forth in the midst he set up a Cross, whereon these Verses were
engraven.

Anglos a Scotis separat Crux illa remotis.
Arma hinc stant Bruti, stant Scoti hac sub ruce tuti.
In Scotch thus.

I am free March as Passengers may ken,
To Scots, to Britains, and to Englishmen.
The Picts, who assisted the English, expected to be restored to their
possessions, but when Osbert settled his own Subjects therein, they began to
suspect lest they of Friends should become Enemies, and to secure their
interests, should root out the whole Generation of the Picts whereupon most of
them sailed into Norway and Denmark, and those that remained were slain by the
English, so that there was not one to be found alive in all their Dominions.

Donald was received again with much Joy by his people in hopes that these
afflictions would have reformed his manners. But in short time he returned to
his Old Vices bauishing those honorable Persons from his presence, who
endeavored the advancement of the Kingdom, and the ease of the Subjects. The
Nobility perceiving the danger of the Common wealth by his ill management,
committed him to Prison, where a few days after in desperation he slew himself
in the Sixth year of his unfortunare Reign, in 862. In his time in Lothian a
Child of six weeks old bid his Mother fly out of the Country, for the Enemy
would suddenly take it from the Scots. The Beasts in the Field roared in a
strange manner, and then fell down dead, Fishes in the Shape of men were found
on the Scottish shore. In Galloway a multitude of Snakes and Adders fell out of
the Sky, and putrefying sent forth such a noisome stench, as caused mortal
diseases in man and Beast.

XXXII. Constantine the Second, the Son of Kenneth succeeded, who was very
desirous to have recovered those lands which the English had conquered, but his
Lords informing him of the weak condition of his Realm by the former
misfortunes, he desisted for the present, and fell upon reforming abuses at
home, whereby the Scots grew sober, temperate and valiant, and Constantine was
much beloved by his People, whom he maintained in peace and plenty, till one
Evan of the Western Isles endeavored to raise a Rebellion, who with several
rude persons being abridged of their former liberty in opressing their
Inferiors, grew discontented; but endeavoring to engage the people of
Murrayland and Ross and other places, they discovered it to the King, who
surprised them unawares, causing Evan to be hanged upon a high Gallows, and
committed the rest to Prison.

This being over, a worse mischief followed, for the King of Denmark pretending
Right to the Lands of the Picts, the residue of that Nation who fled having
resigned their Title and Interest to him, he resolved to make War with the
Scots and English, for recovering them; and landed a vast Army in Fife und^^
his Two brethren Hungar and Hubba, before the Scots had any notice, who fell to
Robbing and Murdering the people, especially Priests, burning Churches and
Chapels, being themselves Pagans. The Scots and English fled before them, not
being able to resist their fury, till at length Constantine raised a mighty
Army, and obtained a Victory against them; but being numerous, they rallied
again, and gave the Scots a terrible overthrow, ten Thousand of them falling
that day, and Constantine being taken Prisoner, was carried into a Cave by the
Sea side, and murdered, which place was called the Black, and afterward the
Devils Den, in memory thereof; he reigned 13 years, and died in 875.

XXXIII. Ethus the Brother of Constantine was presently Crowned King, to
prevent the utter destruction of the Scottish Kingdom, which was much
endangered: This year in the mouth of the Forth a multitude of Fishes like Men
appeared, with half their bodies above Water, their Skins black, going in great
numbers like Herrings. The Rivers and Ponds were froze^ from November to April,
and upon the Thaw was a great Flood over all the Plains, and part of the
Mountains, and when the Waters abated, a vast quantity of Frogs was left in the
Mud, that putrifyed the Air, from whence mortal Diseases proceeded* A Blazing
Star was seen night and day following the Moo^^

The Danes having vanquished the Scots, passed into Northumberland, ruining all
before them; and being aided by diverse, English, they slew Osbert and Ella,
Kings of that Country, in Battle, Massacring the People, especially Churchmen,
and Martyred St. Edmund King of the East Angles: yet the English Kings War'd
against them many years, with various success; most of the people along the
Coasts of the German Ocean being either slain or miserably iaslaved; but
Alfred, who succeeded his Brother Etheldred, obtained several Victories,
slaying their two Captains, Hungar and Hubba.

Ethus King of Scots was so swift of foot, that he would outrun Hearts and
Greyhounds; but his mind was incapable of Government; for whereas he might have
recovered Fife and Lothian, whilst the Contest lasted between the Danes and
English, he neglected it, delighting more in licentiou^^ess than Warlike
Enercises, For which the Nobility resolved to depose him; and seeking him out,
hunting in the Forest of Caledonia, they seized him, and his Abettors,
committing them close Prisoners, and proceeded to the investing a new King; and
Ethus through anguish of mind died within three days, in the second year of his
Reign, 875.

XXXIV. Gregory, the Son of Dongald the Second was next advanced to the Crown;
he fi^^^t caused a Convocation to be called, who ordained many things for
advancing the Christian Religion. He then recovered the Conquered Co^^tries
from the Dan^s, his Enemies flying before him, and proceeded against the
Britains, who possessed a great part of Scotland, but they ^oubting their own
streng^^, offer to surrender all those Lands which belonged to the Scots.
Gregory considering that if the Scots, Britains and English, joined in League,
they need fear neither the Invasions of the Danes, nor any other basbar^us
People; consented thereto, whereby the Confines o^ Scotland were enlarged to
their ancient and utmost bounds This Alliance disheartened the Danes, who
expecting present de ruction, used diverse practices to break it, and at last
effected it; for the English under King Alfred, having such success against the
Danes, that the Britains were no more afraid of them, repented of the League
they had made, and under Constantine their King entered Anandale to recover
those Countries; but King Gregory vanquished their Army, Constantine being
slain among them. This overthrow endangered the utter ruin of the Britains, by
the Scots on one side and the Danes on the other, the English refusing to
assist them, because they had broke the late Treaty; so that they were forced
to send Ambassadors to Gregory, excusing themselves and charging Constantine,
who contrary to the inclinations of his Subjects, undertook that dishonorable
and unfortunate Enterprise: K. Gregory reproached them for their faithlesness,
declaring he would conclude no Peace nor Truce unles they resigned Westmorland
and Northumberland into his hands, and to have 60. Noblemens eldest Sons as
hostages for his security; which conditions the Britains were obliged to
condescend to since they knew not how to avoid it, and surrendered all that was
required, settling themselves in North Wales betwixt Conway and the River D^e,
where they erected a King^o^, and maintained Wars against the English several
Years. K. Gregory having thus enlarged his Kingdom, Assembled his Nob^es at
Carlisle, and resolved to parsue his good Fortune, to the City of York, whilst
the English were employed against the Danes in Kent, at which time Alfred sent
Ambassadors to congratulate his success, and to renew the League against their
Common Enemies, which upon mature deliberation was assented to, with new
Articles for mutual defense.

Matters thus settled with the English, when Gregory thought of enjoyine ^eace,
the Irish made an Invasion it to Galloway, because the Inhabitants had
plundered two Ships belonging to Dublin; Gregory marched toward them, but
having got a vast booty they Imbarqued again, and sailed home. Gregory with his
Navy followed them, Landing a great Army in Ireland, and was met by another of
the Irish, incamping themselves strongly upon the Bank of the River Bane, under
a great craggy mountain called Fute, intending to delay fighting till the Scots
should be Famished for want of Provisions, and then to destroy them at
Pleasure; of this K. Gregory was aware, and in the night sent two Thousand men
through the Woods to the Ridg of the mountain, and upon a sign given, Gregory
assaulting their Camp, the Soldiers above tumbled mighty Stones and Rocks on
the Irish, that above a Thousand were slain, and the rest put to Flight; after
this another Battle was Fought, wherein the Scots were again Victorious, which
caused the Irish to desire peace, which was managed by Cormach Bishop of
Dublin, who coming to meet him, the King alighted off his Horse, and falling on
his Knees Devoutly Kissed the Crucifin; the Articles were soon agreed, and
great rejoicing was made upon the Amity between both Nations. Gregory then
returned home, and had no disturbance during the rest of his Life, which he
ended in a good old Age, being never Married, but living Chaste all his days,
and for his Glorious Archievements, deserving to be reckoned among the mest
renowned Princes of Scotland; he died in 895. In his time lived the Famous
Johannes Scotus or John Scot, a Sco^^^an Born, who was brought up at Athens,
Learning there the Greek Tongue, from whence he was sent for to the Emperor
Lewis of France, and was employed by him as Ambassador to Alfred King of
England, with whom he continued, teaching his Children in the Abbey of
Malmsbury, wherehe ^^ad a great number of Scholars; yet when he severely
reproved them for their vicious practices, he was mut^ered with their Daggers,
whilst reading to them, and is registered among the Martyrs.

XXXV. Donald the third, the Son of Constantine the second, succeeded Gregory,
who finding all things quiet endeavored to continue the same, causing Justice
to be duly administered, so that no injury (especially toward the poor) was left
unpunished, ordaining that such as by Swearing Blasphemed the name of God, or
in Cursing called upon the Devil, or wished the Devil to take any Christian,
should be bored through the Tongue with an hot Iron. In his Reign Gormand a
Dane Landed in Nothumberland, Pitching his Camp near the Shore, without doing
any damage to the Country, so that it was uncertain whether he intended a
Conquest there, or to make War upon the English; upon which Donald hastened
toward the place, but in the way had notice that they were passed over Humber,
and marched farther into England, whereupon in pursuance of the Treaty lately
made, Donald sent five Thousand men to Alfreds assistance, who fought with
Gormand at Alington, where after a bloody Battle the Victory remained to the
English, yet with so great loss that they were not able to pursue their
Enemies, but were forced to conclude a Peace with them, upon condition that the
Danes should Inhabit in England, so they would be Baptized into the Christian
Religion, and Pledges being given for security on both sides, Gormand received
Baptism, and changed his name to Athelstane, during whose Life Peace continued
betwixt the two Nations.

At this time several Thieves coming out of Ross in the night, went into
Murrayland, from whence they fercht much Booty; at first those of Murrayland
resisted them as they were able, but calling their neighbors to assist them,
they skirmished in such a manner, that above Two Thousand were slain of both
Parties. Donald offended at this notorious breach of the Peace, raising strong
Forces, marched toward them, where he seized, condemned and executed the
Ringleaders and thence went into Northumberland to be in readiness if the
Danes and English should attempt any thing against his Subjects in those parts,
which he then suspected; he died in 905.

XXXVI Constantine the Third, the Son of Ethus, called Swififoot, was next
advanced to the Royal Dignity, whose nature was more inclined to Peace than
War; K. Edward who succeeded Alfred in England, being sensible thereof, sent an
Herald at Arms, commanding him to restore Northumberland, Cumberland, and
Westmorland, which King Gregory had taken from the English by reason of their
domestic troubles, or otherwise to expect War at his hands within forty days
after this summons. Constantine returned answer, That if King Edward were
resolved to make War for those Lands which he enjoyed by just Right and Title,
he and his People would be ready to defend themselves, beseeching God Almighty
to revenge the bloodshed upon those who had raised the Quarrel. Hereupon some
slight Skirmishes happened between them for about a year, when the power of the
Danes increasing, Edward by the persuasions of his Lords, Proposed Terms of
Peace, which were willingly accepted by Constantine, and the League was
confirmed.

The War soon after was renewed betwixt the English and Danes and a peace again
confirmed by a Marriage between Siri^k King of Northumberland, and B^atrice
King Edwards Daughter, at length Sirick was poisoned by his Wife; and because
Anlaff and Godfrey the Sons of Sirick put B^atrice to death for the murder,
Edward made War against them, and vanquished them, though with the loss of his
own Life. The Danes being certified of King Edwards Death, made new
preparations for War, and Anloff persuaded Constantine to join with him against
the English, who sent them an Army commanded by Malcolm Son of King Donald the
Third of Twenty thousand men, wherewith they concluded to destroy the English
Nation; Malcolm ^eing at the same time proclaimed Heir Apparent of Scotland;
and had Cumberland assigned him for maintaining his Grandeur, and it was then
ordained, That the Successor to the Crown should ever after enjoy that Title
and Province. Malcolm joining his Forces with Anlaff and Godfrey, they marched
into the English Borders murdering the innocent Inhabitants, and burning their
Houses without pity, boasting they did this to provoke them to come into the
Field, and revenge the blood of their Friends and Kindred, confidently
presuming that they were unable to withstand the united Force of the Scots and
Danes; but Athelstane, the natural Son of K. Edward, succeeding his Father, to
revenge these ^orrid insolences, raised an Army and encountered them at a place
called Bromingfield in 947. Where the English at first pretending to fly, their
Enemies broke all their ranks to Pursue them, but the English railying, beat
them down in great numbers, and obtained a great Victory, Twenty Thousand Scots
and Danes being ssain, with Wilfert K. of the Guentes, Hanwall K. of the
Britains, and Seven Dukes who came to their assistance; Athelstane following
his blow, recovered the three Countries which his Father demanded, Malcolm was
wounded in the Battle, yet made his escape, and was carried home in an
Hor^-litter, declaring to Consian^ine the whole proceedings in the Battle, who
perceiving his Kingdom much weakened for want of Nobility, on whom the late
Slaughter fell very heavily, they thinking it more Honorable to die in the
^ield than cowardly to fly, whereby most of them were cut off; and the rest
being young and unexperienced, neither able by force nor Counsel to defend the
Realm, to free himself from danger and trouble, he resigned the Kingdom, and
became a Canon in the Abbey of St. Andrews, where he died.

In his Twenty Seventh Year a Monster was Born of both Sexes with a head like a
Swine, feet like a Goose, and legs like a man, full of bristles and of a horrid
shape; another was born in Northumberland of the male Sex, one Belly and two
Thighs, and two legs from the Belly downward, but divided upward into two
entire Bodies, and appeared to have two contrary humors, for when one eat the
other would fast, so that they always quarrelled, beating and tearing each
other with their Nails, at length one dying, the other not able to endure the
filthy stench of the dead Body, died likewise. A Fountain of Blood issued out
of the side of a Mountain in Galloway, for seven days together, so that all the
Rivers in that Country, had their Water mixed with Blood, which running into the
Sea, caused it to seem bloody some Miles from the shore; all which were thought
to presignifie that fatal overthrow at Bromingfield.

XXXVIII. Malcolm the Son of Donald the Third succeeded Constantine, who
finding the Kingdom weakened by the latengreat Losses, to secure the Borders of
his Kingdom, resolved to maintain Peace with the English; and designing to send
Ambassadors, to that purpose, he had notice that K. Athelstane had given
Northumberland to Anlaff the Dane, and had entered in a League to assist him
against the Scots, with which news Malcolm was much surprised, being sensible
of the want of valiant Commanders; however, calling a Counsel, while they
continued in great perplexity, intelligence came that a Dissension happening in
the Camp, the English and Danes had fought a bloody Battle, wherein the English
were Victors, who pursued the Danes, till night prevented them; Anlaff with his
broken Troops fled into Westmorland, and getting what Ships he could, sailed to
the Isle of Man; which having plundered passed from thence to Ireland.

Athelstane having lost many of his Soldiers continued in Northumberland
without marching into Scotland, great rejoicing being made in that Country for
so happy a deliverauce by such a strange accident, at length he sent
Ambassadors to Malcolm to treat of Peace; which was gladly accepted by the
Scots, and the former League confirmed, with only this Article added, That
Northumberland being now chiefly inhabited by Danes, should remain in
possession of the English, and Westmorland and Cumberland to the Scots;
provided that he who should succeed to the Crown of Scotland should do homage
to the King of England as his Vassal for the same, ever after. Peace thus
concluded Indulph the Son of Constantine the third was proclaimed Prince of
Cumberland and Heir Apparent; Malcolm continued some years quiet, striving to
advance the good of his People, but making a progress through his Kingdom, and
causing Justice to be severely executed against offenders, he was murdered in
the night by a few Conspirators, who being discovered, weretorn in pieces with
wild Horses, and their Quarters set upon the Gates of several Cities.

XXXVIII. Indulph Prince of Cumberland succeeded, His first five years passed
over without any considerable action, but then Anlaff the Dane sent to join in
amity with him against the English, in revenge of the overthrow at
Bromingfield, alleging that a fit opportunity was now offered, since after the
Death of Athelstane the English had created Edmond to be their King, a man of a
dull wit, and unfit for Government, neither ought the League between Malcolm
and Athelstane ^e any impediment to him, because it expired with their Lives,
Indulph replied, that this League was con^luded with much deliberation, and by
consent of all the states ^f the Realm, and ratified with their Solemn Oaths
for the ^rue performance thereof, so that they could not violate it without
incurring the just Indignation of Heaven against him and ^is People. Anlaff
looking on Indulph as a flothful and ^egligent Person, since he valued the
breach of ^n Oath, when it was for his advantage, sent for more Forces from
Norway, who landing in Northumberland, Elgarine the English Governor,
declaring himself to be ^escended of Danish Blood, Treacherously yielded up all
the Towns, Castles and Forces, in that Country to Anlaff, engaging to aid him
to the utmost against King Edmond, who having notice thereof, raised an Army,
and sending for aid from Scotland in pursuance of the late Treaty, Indulph
ordered him Ten Thousand Scots, who together rell upon the Danes, and routed
them at the first onset, making a great s^^ghter in the pursuit; Elgarine was
taken alive according to Edmonds desire; and for his Treson was drawn in pieces
with wild Horses.

Soon after the Kings of Norway and Denmark came with a mighty Navy upon the
Coasts of Scotland to revenge the ^^aths of their Countrymen, designing to
land at the Forth, but bein^eaten off, they made a descent in Bucqain; Indulph
marched toward them and after an obstinate Fight, forced them to fly, a
multitude being sl^^^; the King with certain choice Troops pursuing the ^hase
very hard, happened to fall in among a number of Danes, who fled from the Field
at the beginning of the Fight, by one of whom he was shot through the head with
a Dart, and died, though not before he was revenged of his Enemies, every man
of them being s^ain upon the place.

XXXIX. D^sse the Son of Malcolm was next Invested in the Kingdom. In the
beginning of whose Reign Cullen the Son of Indulph was proclaimed Prince of
Cumberland; he first went over into the Western Isles, and purged the Country
of those Malefactors who Robbed and oppressed the People, causing a great
number of of them to be Executed, the rest flying for security into Ireland, or
else forced to follow some Trade, which severity discontented the Nobility,
many of them being of great Families, whom it was unbecoming to work for their
Livelyhoods; Saying, the King was only a Friend to the Commons and Clergy, but
neglected his Nobles, and was therefore unworthy to Govern them these
discourses were Familiar with them throughout the Kingdom.

In the mean time the King fell sick of a Languishing Disease which the
Physicians could in no wise understand, for though they saw no reason, yet his
Body consumed away; he looked well and lusty, eat and drank very well, but
could get no rest, falling into great Sweats which could no way be prevented;
yet though ^he had little hopes of recovery, he administered the Laws Justly to
his People, but when it was known what danger he was in, several discontented
Persons raised a Rebellion in Murrayland, killing diverse of the Kings Officers,
and committing cruel outrages, though the Physicians would not admit him to
have knowledge thereof; it happened at this time there was some discourse among
the People though none knew the Author, that the Kings Sickness was not
natural, but caused by Sorcery and Magic Practiced by a Company of Witches
living at a Town called Fores in Murrayland, which being brought to the Kings
Ear, he sent several knowing men; who, not discovering their design, were
received in the dark into the Castle of Fores by the Governor na^^ed Donwald,
who kept it for the King against the Rebels, to whom declaring heir intent,
they desired (...) assistance; now the thing had been whispered in the Castle
before, for one of the Soldiers, keeping a young Wench for his Concubine who
was Daughter to one of the Witches, she had told him all the Proceedings of her
Mother, and the rest of the Witches, and that the design was to make away the
King.

Having discovered this to Donwald, the Wench confirmed it, and disclosed the
house where the mischief was done, which they breaking into at midnight, found
one of the Witches Roasting an Image of Wax ^t the fire upon a Wooden Spit,
resembling the Kings Person, and another Witch sat by basting of it with a
^ertain Liquor, and mumbling some words of Enchantment; being seized and
Examined, they confessed their design was to destroy the King, for as that Image
wast^d, so did the Kings Body break forth into sweat and wasted away, that the
words of Incantation were to hinder him from sleeping, and when the Wax was
quite melted then should the King dye; that they were taught it by Evil
Spirits, and hired to act this Villainy by the Lords of Murrayland; hereupon the
Image wa^ broke and the Witches burnt to death as they Justly deserved. It was
said, that the very instant when this was acted at the Castle of Fores the King
was absolutely freed from his distemper, sleeping that night without Sweating,
and the next day, was perfectly, restored to his Health and Strength, as if he
had never been sick.

Upon his Recovery he raised Forces, and routed the Rebels in Murrayland,
apprehending diverse, whom he caused to be hanged up on high Gibbets, among whom
were diverse Young Gentlemen of good Quality and a kin to Donwald the Governor
of Fores Castle, whose pardon he used means to obtain of the King, but
receiving a positive denial, he conceved such desperate malice against him that
nothing but his death could appease: For the King being still in that Country,
he used commonly to lodge in the Castle, because of the confidence he had in
Donwald; who could never forge^ the reproach of his Family to have his Kinsmen
hung up for a Spectacle to the People, the thoughts whereof so disturbed him,
that his Wife observing it would never cease till she understood the reason
thereof, which when he had declared, she being no less incensed against the
King than he, urged and persuaded him thereto, contriving how it might be done;
which he agreeing to, watched his opportunity; it happened that the night
before the King intended to depart the Castle, he was very late in his Oratory
at Prayrs, and at last coming out, he called those who had been most
serviceable in suppressing the late Rebels before him, and giving them hearty
thanks, bestowed diverse rich gifts among them, and particularly to Donwald whom
he accounted one of his most Faithful Servants. Then going to bed his
Chamberlains left him, and went to Banquet with Donwald and his Wife, who had
prepared several delicate dishes ^r them, where they eat and drank so heartily
that ^ey fell into a dead sleep.

Donwald though his heart misgave him, and he ab^orr'd the Fact, yet by the
Instigation of his Wife ^alled four of his Servants, prepared for the villainy,
and ^rdered them now to perform it, who entering the Chamber cut his throat as
he lay sleeping, without any ^oise, and immediately carried the Body out of a
Posern Gate into the Fields, and throwing it on a Horse ^here ready, conveyed
it two Miles further, where ^hey stayed and got some Laborers to help them
turn ^he course of a little River, and digging a deep hole in ^he Channel,
buried the Body therein, filling it up with great Stones, very hard and close;
and then tur^ing the Water into its right course, none could per^eive there had
been any digging; the Laborers had ^no sooner sinished their work, but they
murdered them, and fled to the Isses of Orkney.

Donwald, while the Murder was acting, got amongst the Guard, where he
continued all night. In the morning when an outcry was made, that the King was
slain, his Body conveyed away, and the Bed all stained with Blood, he ran
thither with the Guard, as though he had been ignorant of the matter, and
rushing into the Chamber, finding Cakes of Blood on the Bed, and the Floor, he
killed the Chamberlains as guilty of this heinous Crime, and then ran about
like a madman as if to discover the Murderers; and finding the Postern Door
open, charged the dead Chamberlains with the deed, they having the Keys of the
Gates in their custody, and that it could not be done without their privy; yea
so over diligent was he in his Inquisition, that the Lords began to suspect him
guilty though they durst not discover it, being within his Power; six months
after this horrid Murder, the Sun did not shine by day nor the Moon by night
in any part of the Realm, the Sky being continually covered with black, thick
Clouds, Thunderings, Lightning (...) Tempest, so that the People were in fear
of utter destruction: This was the miserable end of King Duffe in 973.

XL Cullen the Son of Indulph, Prince of Cumberlan^ was then Crowned King, and
demanding of the Bishop the cause of such intemperate weather, they unanimously
answered, that no doubt it was because of the ju^ anger of the Almighty for the
murder of King Duff^ and unless the murderers were sought out and punished,
worse Judgments might be expected; Cullen appointed public Processions and
Fasts for the discovery and made a Solemn Vow never to cease till he had fully
avenged his Blood upon the Traytorous Inhabitants o^ Murrayland; the People
getting to Arms, resolved to follow their Prince, who presently marched toward
the Country; the People trembling at his approach, but especially Donwald his
Conscience accusing him, and fearing to be put to the Torture, he fled from his
Family with a few to accompany him, and getting to the River Spey, went into a
Ship, designing to fly into Norway.

Cullen having advice hereof passed over Spey water, and taking the Castle of
Fores slew all within it, and hen ransackt and burnt it: Donwalds Wife and two
Daughters were taken alive, and the Mother being put on the Rack consest the
whole matter, and that her Husband did it chiefly by her provocation; who they
were that performed it, by his order, and where they buried him. Whilst this
was doing, news ^a^^e that Donwald was by Shipwreck cast ashore within four
Mile of the Castle, who being seized was brought to the King presently diverse
Lords of Ross brought in Donwalds four Servants who Executed the murder; thus
all the Offenders being taken and brought to the same place where the murder
was contrived and committed they were Arraigned Co^^emned and Executed in the
manner following; they were first Scourged by the hangman, and Imbowelled,
their Entrails being burnt before the^ eyes, and their quarters sent into
severral parts of the Kingdom; this dreadful end had Donwald and his Wife,
before they saw Sun or Moon after the wickedness committed, those that seized
the murderers were highly rewarded, and freed for ever from all Taxes or going
to the Wars.

Then was the Body of King Duffe taken up and conveyed to Colmkill, accompanied
by Cullen, and all his Lords with a multitude of others; some write that tho
the Corpse had been buried six months, yet was it nothing altered but sound and
whole as if alive, and that as soon as it was brought above ground the air
cleared up, the Sun shining brighter than ever could be remembered, and many
flowers sprung up in the Fields, contrary to the season of the year; in that
place a Church was after built called Killflies or the Church of Flowers, to
this day. This year several Horses in Lothian of singular beauty and swiftness
eat their own flesh, and would taste no other Food; In Angus a Child was born
without Eyes, Nose, hands or Feet; a Sparrow-Hawk was strangled by an Owl,
which were all judged Moustrous presages of future ill.

Cullen began his Reign with the Execution of justice which gave hope of his
future Government, but he fell into all kind of Lasciviousness, which
encouraged the youthful Nobility and Gentry to commit many extravagancies, and
to abuse Priests, Merchants, and others, of which they could have no redress,
for several of the Peers being grieved thereat, made bold humbly to admonish
him of his duty, and of the danger of the Realm by such disorders; Cullen
answered; I am very sensible that young men cannot be easily persuaded to act
like those that have hoarry heads, till time and old Age causes them to be
sober; neither do I think it convenient to use such rigor toward them, as some
of my Predecessors have'd on having lea^^ned by the Example of Indulph, Duffe a
others, wh^ a danger I may incur by such severity Government, I being resolved
to rule so that I may be rather beloved than feared, which I judge to be the
only means to retain my Subjects in due and faithful obedience.

Though this answer was unsatisfactory, yet none durst presume to reply; so
that excesses abounded, the King only inclining to flatterers, and those that
could devise provocations to lust; wherein he was so extreme, that he spared
neither Widow, Wife nor Maid, Religious, nor others; yea so shameless therein,
that when tired with lewdness he took pleasure to behold others perform it in
his presence, to stir up his impotent and decayed Lust, th^^ he continued three
years, negiecting of the Laws, whereby Thieves and Robbers, increased and
committed horrid Insolences. At length he fell into ^anguishing decay of
nature caused by his debaucheries; ^hereby his flesh rotted away, and he
appeared like a dead Carcass, that his own Servants abhorred him; whereupon the
Nobility summoned a Parliament at Scone, designing to depose him; Cullen not
knowing their intent, was going thither, but in the midst of his Journey at
Aleffen Castle, he was murdered by one Cadhard Lord of the place, whose
Daughter he had ravished, amongst diverse others.

XLI. Kenneth the third, the Son of Malcolm was next Proclaimed King, who had
enough to do to educe the People from that wild and Savage life, they had
fallen into by the negligence of his Predecessor; he maintained Amity with
strangers, and obliged his Subjects to follow some lawful employment; and
resolving to punish some notorious Offenders, he appointed a Sessions at
Laneik, causing the Principal of them to be summoned thither; but at their
coming, perceiving they should be convicted of several Notorious Crimes, they
withdrew into the western Isles for security; the King finding that by the
disloyalty of those Criminal Lords and Gentry he could not duly administer
Justice, dissembled his indignation, dismissing the Assembly, and marched into
Galloway; the next year contriving how to bring these misdoers to Judgment, he
appointed all the Nobility to Assemble at Scone, as it to consult about some
weitghy affairs; the night before they were to meet, he caused some of his
Faithful Servants to lie privately hid in the Council Chamber completely armed,
with order to their Captain not to stir till all the Lords were come the next
day, and then to do according to command. In the morning the Lords were no
sooner met, and placed according to their degree near the King, but the Armed
Men encompassed them, at which being affrighted, the King perceiving their
Surptize, told them, that he had no design against their Persons, but that he
heard they were incouragers and Abetters of those who unjustly robbed and
injured the People, which at length would occasion the utter ruin of the
Country, advising them to be careful for the future of apprehending and
bringing such Villains to justice; which would ^emove the suspicion he might
have, of them for their former miscarriages.

The Lords began to excuse themselves, and falling at his feet humbly begged
pardon, for their past faults, assuring him of their diligence in seizing the
Robbers; and the Council breaking up, they were kept in the Kings House, where
by their Interest with their Friends and kindred, they caused above five
hundred of these Malefactors to be seized, who were all hanged upon Gibbets,
there to remain for a Terror to others. After which the King licensed the Lords
to depart to their own Houses, and the Kingdom continued in peace, till the
Danes with great Forces, landed at a Town called Montres in Angus, which they
ransacked, and burnt, neither Man, Woman, Child, nor, any other Creature being
left alive by these Barbarians; Kenneth raised a potent Army to meet them; and
being come near each other, the King earnestly persuaded his Soldiers to show
their valor, promising to release them from all tributes due to him for five
years, offering ten pound, or the value thereof in Land, to every man that
shall bring him the head of a Dane, exhorting them to fight courageously, and
to remember there was no hope of mercy, for they must Fight it out at the
Swords point, and not expect any safety in Flight, since their cruel En emies
would find them out wherever they were, if they should chance to be overthrown.

The Scots couragously fell on their Enemies, and the Fight was very bloody,
the Scots being much bindred by attempting to cut off the heads of their
adversaries, so that two of their wings were forced to give way, the main
Battle firmly keeping their ground, though in much danger, being thus left
naked, so that the Dares must have been Victors had not providence sent present
relief; there happened at the same time to be a husbandman in the next Field
with his two Sons, busy ^t work, named Hay, of a strong robust body, but a
^oble and Valiant Mind; this Man beholding the King and Nobility fighting so
desperately, caught a Plough^eam in his hand, and exhorting his Sons to do the
like ^hey hastened to the Battle, resolving rather to dye like ^en than fall
into the hands of unmerciful Enemies. There was a lane near the place in which
the flying (...) Scots were beat down in heaps, here Hay, and his Sons ^laced
themselves, beating down all before them, and ^ying them, so that the Scots
fled and pursued I ^anes (...) ^o their Camp; the King perceiving his men (...)
and his Enemies disheartened, called earnestly (...) them, to perform their
parts, and since their (...) ^aries hearts began to fail, to pursue them (...)
assuredly they would obtain a most Glorious Victory which words giving them
fresh Vigor, they fought stoutly that the Danes were forced to leave the Fie^
the Scots cutting off a multitude in the Chase.

This Victory was much ascribed to the courage the Nobility, but especially to
the admirable Valor Hay and his Sons, and a great part of the Spoil in the
Danish Camp was given to him; the King having va^ quisht his Enemies, as he was
to enter into Bertha ^fered costly Garments to Hay and his Sons, that be^^
richly clothed they might be the more Honored (...) the People, but Hay
refused to change his Clothes, a^^ marched into the City with his Plough-beam
upon (...) Shoulder, being received with little less honor the the King
himself, all running to behold him who (...) Valiantly restored the Battle,
when it was almost pa^^ recovery; a while after at a Council held at Scone
(...) was ordained, that Hay and his Posterity should be re^koned among the
Nobility and Peers of the Realm and Gifts and Lands were bestowed upon them
suitab^^ to their Estates; it is said that by the advice of his So^ who
understood the fruitfulness of the Soil, Hay requ^red so much Land in those
parts where the River T^^ runs by the Town of Arrol over against Fife, as a
Facon should fly over at one flight, which request being freely granted by the
King, Inshire was appointed so the Falcon to be cast off, who never lighted
till she can to a great stone near Ross, not far from Dundee, where by all the
Country between Inshire and that Stone, b^ing six mile in length and four in
breadth, fell to H^ and his Sons, the stone being called Falcons stone, an^ the
same land continues in the possession of the Hays t^ this very day, and the
Plow-beam was added to his A^^ustead of a Battle Ax.

These things happened in the first year of King Ke^th; afterward a Quarrel
arising upon a small occasionused great trouble, Cruthlint one of the Chief
Lords (...) (...) a Lady called Fewelld who was Daught^ ^o Grunet Governor of
Angus, coming to visit his Grand^ather at his Castle of Delbogin, a fray
happened among ^he attendants, wherein two of Cruthlints Servants were ^lain
who complaining thereof to his Grandfather, he answered him reproachfully, as
if he had occasioned ^he dissurbance; Crunets Servants observing their Masters
carriage, fell upon Cruthlint himself, and beat him so severely that he escaped
with great danger of his life. In his return he came to his Mother Fewella at
her Castle at Fethercarn, who so incensed him, that having got together a
number of People, he went privately toward the Castle, and was admitted by the
Guard, who with his followers immediately killed his Grandfather Crunet, and
all within the Castle, ransacking and razing it to the ground; the next day he
forraged all the Country, returning home with great booty, which others
revenged so that much mischief was done; Kennith hereby discovering the nature
of the Scots, who must be Governed with a strict hand, getting Forces together,
pursued and at last took Cruthlint, and his accomplices; he and the principal
of them were executed, the Commons being pardoned as acting by the example of
the great Ones, for which impartial Justice he was applauded by the people.

At this time Kenneth desirous to advance his Children caused Malcolm the son
of K. Duffe, his nearest Kinsman, to be made away, (who in the beginning of his
Reign was created Prince of Cumberland, and so Heir apparent to the Crown)
though Kenneth dissembled his knowledge thereof, and buried him with Honor and
seeming sorrow; about the same time Ambassadors came from England, desiring
that since Malcolm was deat, the King and States would appoint another in his
stead who might do homage for the County of Cumberland, according to the late
League; Kenneth called a Council to whom he made a long Oration, persuading
them to alter the Ancient Custom of Electing their Princes because of the
dangers and inconveniences, and to ma^^ an Act for the Crown to descend by
Succession, acco^ding to the usage of other Nations, to which the Pe^^ of the
Realm being before prepared, and made se^^^le of the Kings resolution, seemed
willingly to agre^ Constantine the Son of K. Cullen and Grime the Nephe^ of
(...) Duffe first assenting thereto, though by the form^ (...) were likely to
have succeeded, but since would not be prevented they thought it safest to see^
(...) to comply: in pursuance hereof an Act w^^ made, That the Heir male of the
deceased King, when there Son or Nephew, of what Age soever, yea though he were
in his Mothers womb at the time of his Father Death, should succeed, and during
his minority, one o^ the principal. Noblemen should Govern his Persons the
Realm till he came to fourteen years of Age; the Nephew by the Son to be
preferred before the N^phew by the Daughter, and the Brothers Son before the
Sisters; Lastly Malcolm the son of Kenneth was created Prince of Cumberland,
and Heir Apparent to the Kingdom.

Kenneth by this Law seemed confident that he had asl^red the Crown to his
Posterity, whereby all men thought him now in a happy state, except himself,
for it is recorded, that soon after, as he was in Bed one Night, he heard a
frightful voice utter words to this purpose; Think not O Kenneth, that the
wicked murder of Malcolm Duffe contrived by thee, is kept secret from the
knowledge of the Eternal God, Thou art he who did conspire the Death of that
Innocent Prince, treacherously perpetrating that against thy Neighbor, which
thou would have cruelly revenghged upon any other design against thy self, it
shall there fore come to pass, that both thou and thy issue, by the just
vengeance of Almighty God, shall suffer deserved punishment, to the utter ruin
of thy Family, For even at this present there are secret contrivances in hand
to dispatch thee and thy issue out of the way that others may enjoy that
Kingdom which thou did endeavor ^o secure to thy Posterity. The King
extremely as^onished at these words passed that night without sleep and next
morning went to Bishop Marcan, a man of great holiness of Life, to whom he
confessed all the circumstances of this heinous offense, desiring counsel how to
appease the Wrath of Heaven against him; who observing his great penitence,
comforted him by telling him, that as God was provoked by sin and wickedness,
so he was pacified by repentance and a meadment, whereupon the King submitted
to all the Bishops injunctions and pennances, declaring himself a true penitent
according to the Devotion of that Age.

Not long after Kenneth having been at a Town called Ferdune, to visit the
Relick; of Bishop Palladius, wena little out of his way to Lodge at the Castle
of Fethercarn, where he was entertained by Fewella the Lady thereof, whose Son
Cruthlint he had put to Death; she was askin to Malcolm Duffe, who was
murdered, and to Constantine and Grime who were defrauded of their right by
Kenneths New Law; For all these injuries this Lady had long conceived a mortal
hatred against the King, (though she did not yet certainly know how Malcolm
came by his Death,) and understanding he delighted in curious buildings, to
execute her purpose, she caused a Tower to be made next her own Lodging in the
Castle, which was covered with Copper finely engraven with Flowers and Images,
and hung with Cloth of Arras very richly; behind the hangings diverse Cross Bows
were fixed, with sharp Arrows in them ready bent to discharge; in the midst of
the room, was placed an admirable brazen Image exactly resembling the Person of
Kenneth, holding in his hand a curious Golden Apple Gloriously beset with
precious Stones, contrived with such extraordinary Art, that as soon as any one
should take hold, or remove it never so little, the Crossbows would immediately
discharge all their arrows at him with great violence.

Fewella having provided this Bloody present for the King, she after dinner
desired him to go into th^^ inner room; being entered, he was surprised with the
sumptuousness of the Furniture, at last veiwing the Image, he demanded what it
signified, Fewella replied, The Image represented his Highness own Person; and
the Golden Apple so richly set with Smaragds, Jicinths, Sapphires, Topazes,
Rubies, Turkisses and other precious Stones; She had provided as a gift for
him, humbly beseeching him, to accept thereof though not worthy to be presented
to a Person of his High Honor and Dignity; she then withdrew on one side to
avoid the danger; the King continued admiring the beauty of the Apple, and
attempting to take it with his hand more particularly to observe it, the Cross
bows discharged the Arrows, so directly upon him, that he fell down stark dead
upon the ground. Fewella seeing him fall, got out at a back door, and flying
into the adjoining Woods where she had ordered Horses to wait for her, escaped
out of danger before the Kings Death was discovered; His Servants waited long
for his return in the outward Room, but he not coming, they first rapt softly,
and then more loud; but no body appearing they suspected the worst, and broke
open the Doors, where they found the King dead on the Floor; upon which an
outcry being raised Fewella was scarched for in all places, as the Author of
this horrid deed, but could never be heard of; some judged that Constantine
conveyed her into Ireland, for the desire he had to succeed, because when the
Kings Death was known, he procured the assistance of all his Friends for
attaining the Crown, according to the Ancient Ordinance of the Realm, which he
said could not be abrogated by the private Authority of Kenneth or any other.
This miserable end had Kenneth in the year 1003.

XLII. Constantine the fourth, the Son of King Cullen was next Crowned King, in
which year, were found a, multitude of fishes upon the Coasts of Bucquan left
by the Sea, which putrefying, caused great sickness. The Moon appeared like
Blood terrible to behold; in England and France it rained stones. Malcolm son
of Kenneth, hearing that Constantine had usurped the Crown contrary to the late
Statute, gathered all the Forces he could, being about ten Thousand, and
marched toward Constantine; but finding himself too weak he dismissed his army
and went into England, eaving Kenneth his Bastard-Brother to Watch
Constantine's motions; between whom a Bloody Battle was fought, at which time a
furious tempest of wind drove so violently into the faces of Constauine's men
that unable to make resistance they were vanquished, yet had neither side any
cause to rejoice, for Constantine and Kenneth happening to Encounter, and
fighting singly killed each other.

XLIII. Grime the Nephew of K. Duffe hearing of this Slaughter, mustered up the
refrdue of Constantines Army, and caused himself to be Crowned King, as his
Lawful Successor, using friendship toward his Predecessors Friends, and giving
Gifts and and Lands to those of Malcolms party; but others who would not be
won, he Proclaimed Traitors and seized their Estates. Malcolm having notice of
Grimes Coronation, raised an Army and marched toward him, but by the
Intercession of some Bishops an agreement was made, whereby Grime was to enjoy
the Crown during life, and Malcolm to succeed and to continue Prince of
Cumberland with the Lands thereto belonging, till that time; whereby for eight
years, peace continued in the (...); but Grime from a liberal Prince
degenerated into a cruel oppressor, for having put to death diverse Lords, to
obtain their Lands, he exacted so severely upon his subjects that they were
brought into great misery; the Nobility swelling with indignation, appointed
some to want on him, and represent their Greivances; Grime having heard their
complaints; under pretense of kindness invited them to a Banquet, desighing to
have (...), of which they having notice they fled to Bertha to the rest of the
Nobility, who finding no hope of redre^ raised an Army against him; of which
Malcolm Prin^^ of Cumberland having Intelligence, came out of England (where he
was assisting K. Etheldred against the Danes, with an Army of Scots; the Lords
beseeched him to ta^pity on their miserable Country, in danger of ruin (...)
the disorders of Grime, who assenting thereto marche^ toward him; a fierce
fight ensued, wherein Grimes party were routed and himself slain; it is
reported tha^ Grime was taken alive, fighting courageously, and being much
wounded in the head, his eyes were put out of which he died a few days after
in great misery, the ninth year of his Reign, 1010.

XLIV. Malcolm having obtained the Victory, called an Assembly at Scone for
electing a new King, who consenting to Crown him, he refused it, unless they
would by their Oaths confirm Kenneths Law about the Succession, to which they
agreeing he was Crowned by the name of Malcolm the Second; in his Reign a
mighty Army landed in England and chased K. Ethelred into Northumberland who
receiving aid from the Scots sought with him, but was overthrown, with great
loss, so that despairing of success he fled into Nurmandy; Swain having thus
conquered England, resolved to ^oot out all the English Nation, which the Lords
of England having notice of, falling on their knees at his Feet, humbly
besought him to have compassion of their miserable codition, and though they
had formerly been a puissant Nation by Sea and Land, yet they would now be
contented if he would only grant them their Lives, and to continue under
whatever servitude he would prescribe, dosiring neither Castles, Towns, nor
Possessions but only to live with their Wives and Children in their Native
Country, at the pleasure of the Conqueror; Swain though of a Cruel nature, yet
was somewhat mollified, and allowed them their lives upon these terms, but
withal disarmed and made them absolute slayes to his Soldiers, yea forced
every English man to maintain a Dane in his house for a Spy upon his words and
actions, to prevent Conspiracies, who was called in Honor Lord Dane, and after
in contempt Lurdain.

Having so easily subdued England, the Ambition of the Danes spurred them on to
invade Scotland in great numbers, between whom and King Malcolm diverse bloody
Battles were fought; in one of which Malcolms headpiece was beaten so fast on
his head that he was carried out of the Field for dead, at length the Scots
were so weakened that they were glad to conclude a peace, Malcolm then called a
Parliament at Scone, wherein he divided the Realm into Barronies bestowing them
upon those who had best deserved in the Wars, or whose Fathers or Friends had
been slain, reserving little to the Crown but Commons and Forests, with the
Mountain whereon the Marble Coronation Chair stood, and a few other Lands. The
Nobility to maintain his Royal dignity granted him and his Successors for ever
the Wardship of their Heirs, if they should die before their Children were
Twenty one Years old; that he should enjoy the Rents and Profits of their
Estates till they were of that Age, and then they were to pay the King one
Years Rent before hand; and if they married before Twenty one, it should be
with the Kings consent, or else they were to compound with him for the same;
these and many other good Laws were made, which Malcolm caused to be written in
a Book called Regiam Majestatem, by which the People might know how the Realm
was Governed.

Thus did the King abound in diverse noble Virtues for some time, so that he
might have been reckoned one of the best Princes in Scotland, had not these
excellent qualities been slained with the hateful Vice of Covetousness, which
caused him to repine at his liberality toward the Barrons, and contrive many
fained accusations against the richest, putting some to death, and banishing
others to enjoy their Lands; the Nobility seeing none of their lives were safe,
conspired to ta^e away his, of which having notice he fled to Glammis but being
betrayed by some of his Servants who admitted the Conspirators into his
Lodging, he was there sla^ in revenge of the death of their Friends. The
Murderers fled, but missing their way, the ground being covered with Snow,
they came to the lake of Forfaie which was frozen over, and attempting to pass
it, the Ice broke, and they were all drowned, yet three Bedies were after
found, and being quartered were se^ up in several Towns. Thus died King
Malcolm, in 1035. At this time on Christmas Day was a great Earthquake in the
Town of Sterling, and the ground opening, a mighty stream of water issued out,
that carried away a Wood adjoining to the River Forth. In the Summer the Sea
came higher into the Land then ere before, without any apparent cause; on
Midsummer Day was so whement a Frost that the Corn and Fruits were blasted,
from whence a great dearth followed.

XLV. Duncan the Nephew of Malcoim by his Daughter Beatrice succeeded, who was
married to Crinen, Thane or Lord of the Isles, whose Son Duncan was; Malcolm
had another Daughter called Doda married to Synel Lord of Glammis, by whom she
had Mackbeth, a valiant Gentleman but cruel, whereas Duncan was too mild; the
beginning of his Reign was peacable, but when I is remisness in punishing
Offenders was observed, it caused many commotions, one of which thus began;
Banquo Thane or Earl of Loquebar (from whom proceeded the Royal Family of the
Stewards) going thither to gather the Kings tributes, and punishing some
oftenders severely, the People assaulted him so that he hardly escaped with his
Life, robbing him of his money and goods, and wounding him very dangerously; of
which complaint being made to the King, the offenders were sent for by a
Sergeant at Arms, but to add to their viliany, they first abused, and then
barbarously murdered the Officers; after which despairing of pardon, they
persuaded one Mackdonald, to be their Captain, and raised an open Rebellion,
reproaching the King, and calling him faint-hearted milk sop, fitter to govern
idle, lazy Monks in a Cloister, than such valiant men as the Scots; the King
sent some Forces against them, but they being much Superior in number cut them
all off, and beheaded Malcolm their Commander. This overthrow Startled the
King, who calling a Council, Mackbeth severely reprehending the Kings softness
and neglect in punishing offenders, declared, that if a full Commission were
given to himself and Bancquo, they would engage quickly to vanquish the Rebels,
which they accordingly persormed, most of them flying from their Captain, who
yet being obliged to Fight was quickly routed, and flying to a Castle wherein
his Wife and Children were, desired terms for surrendering it; which being
denied, to prevent a more cruel death, he first slew Wife and Children and then
himself; upon which the Gates being set open, Mackbeth entered and beheld this
dreadful Spectacle, yet he caused Macdonald's head to be cut off and sent to
the King to Bertha, and the Body to be hanged on an high Gibbet.

Soon after Swain K. of Denmark landed a great Army in Fife, killing and
ravaging all before him, whom Duncan meeting with a powerful Army, was utterly
discomfited by the Danes, the King flying to the Castle of Bertha; yet Swain
Commanded after the Fight that no man should be hurt or wronged, hoping to
conquer the Kingdom without more bloodshed, and then besieged the King in the
Castle, who sent private notice to Banquo and Macheth to stay with their Forces
at such a place till further order. In the mean time Duncan pretended to treat
with Swain about surrendering, and fill the Articles were agreed, he freely
offered to send fresh provisions of Victuals to the Enemies Camp, and mixing
the juice of a certain Berry in the oread and drink, they sent a great quantity
thereof to the Denish Soldiers, who rejoicing thereat, eat and drunk very he
arily, till at length the operation of the berries caused them to fall into a
dead sleep, that it was almost impossible to wake them; Duncan then sent for
Banquo and Mackbeth, who coming speedily to the place, made woeful slaughter
among them, some never waking, and those that did were so Giddy they could make
no defense, so that of the whole Army only Swain and ten more escaped, and got
to their Ships; the greatest part of the Mariners hearing of such plenty came
to the Camp, and were slain also, so that Swain could only man one ship
wherewith ^he sailed back to Denmark cursing his unhappy Fate. After which a
peace was concluded between the Scots and Danes.

About this time a strange adventure happenned; Mackbeth and Banquo, traveling
toward Fores were met in a Wood by three women in strange Apparel, resembling
People of another World, who coming up to them, the first saluting him said,
all Hail, Mackbeth Thane or Earl of Glammis (which Title he soon succeeded to
by the Death of his Father Synel) the Second said, Hail Mackbeth, Thane of
Cawder; The Third, all Hail Mackbeth who shall be King of Scotland; This is
very ^^kind, said Banquo, to give all to my fellow, and nothing (...) me; Yes,
says the first, thou shall be more happy, for he indeed shall Reign, but with
an unfortunate end, and without any issue, and though thou shall never be King,
yet out of thy Fumily shall proceed those who will be Sovereigns of Scotland
for many Ages. This was accounted a vain illusion, so that Banquo would
jestingly call Macheth King of Scotland; and the other him, The Father of many
Kings; soon after the Thane of Cawder being condemned and executed, his Title
and Estate was by the Kings liberality given to Mackbeth, at which Bonquo'
laughing said, Thou have obtained two of the things promised by the Witches (or
Weird Sisters, as the Scots call them stherenow remains only the third to be
performed; Macheth revolving these words in his mind from that instant
contrived to attain the Crown; at this time Duncan having two Sons by his Wife
Daughter to Syward, Earl of Northumberland, he created Malcolm the Eldest
Prince of Cumberland, and Heir Apparent, at which Mackbeth was much disturbed,
resolving to force his way to the Grown, since Duncan endeavored, as he said,
to defraud him of all Title and claim thereto for the future, being much
encouraged by the former prophecy, but especially by his Wife, who had an
insatiable ambition to become a Queen; and communicating his purpose to his
trusty Friends, whereof Banquo was chief, in confidence of their assistance, he
murdered the King at Innerness in the sixth year of his Reign, 1041.

XLVI. Macheth being by his accomplices Proclaimed King, Malcolm called Conmer
and Donald called Bane, the two Sons of Duncan fled for fear of the Usurper,
the first to England, and the other to Ireland, where they both found kind
Entertainment. Mackbeth endeavored to oblige his Nobles with rich Gifts, and
executed Justice upon Thieves, against whom he used this Policy, he induced
several of his good Subject, by great rewards, to challenge those who had most
oppressed them to fight themat a set time, for a proo^o^ the truth of their
Accusations, who coming wereseized, and hanged up according to their deserts;
he caused the Lords of Cathnes, Southerland, Stranavern, Ross, and others, to
be slain for their Seditious Attempts, and enacted good Laws, so that had he
had right to the Crown, and continued his Inregrity, he might have been
accounted a Gallant Prince.

But he soon discovered his Sanguine Nature and the words of the three Sifters
were never out of his mind, who promised the Kingdom to the Posterity of
Banquo, which he resolved to prevent, and to that end invited him and his Son
Fleance to Supper, having appointed several Murderers to kill them as they
returned home, and accordingly Banquo was slain, but his Son by the darkness of
the night escaped, and fled into Wales, upon which Mackbeth would fain have had
it believed that Fleance himself flew his Father, and made his escape; Fleance
grew much in favor with the Prince of that Country, and after with his
Daughter, that at length he got her with Child, of whom was bo^^ Walter, who in
few years discovered a great Spirit and Courage; for one of his Companions
upbraiding him with his birth he slew him, and escaped into Scotland, where by
his prudent carriage and Valiant Explous, he attained to be Lord High Steward
of Scotland, from whose issue proceeded Robert Steward Crowned King of Scolland
in 1370.

Mackbeth after this grew terrible, the people judging their lives continually
in danger, and he as much suspected them, so that upon some pretended de sign
(...) other he cut off all he thought endangered him, wherein at length he
seemed to take delight, being thereby freed from his Enemies, and enriched by
their estates, wherewith he kept a Guard to secure his Person, and ^uilt a
strong Castle upon the top of Dunsinnan Hill, so ^igh as to over look all the
Countries round about, which being chargeable, he Commanded the Lords of every
^hire to come and assist therein; at length it came to ^he turn of Macduff
Thane of Fife, who fearing the King would seize him as he did others, sent his
workmen and Provisions, but did not appear himself, which much offended
Macheth, who said, I perceive this man will never ^hey my Command till he be
rid with a bridle, and that I will ^ake care to provide for him; neither could
be ever en^ure him afterward, fearing he might one day do him (...) mischief,
and had put him to death, but that a Witch whom he much credited assured him he
should ^ever be slain by a man born of a Woman, nor be Vanquished till Bernans
Wood (which was some Miles off) should come to Dunsinnan Castle, which gave him
such confidence, that he now acted without dread of any ^anger, since he
thought it impossible he should ^ere^her slain or overcome.

Macduff finding his condition very uncertain, resol^ed to go into England to
Malcolm Gonmer, and persuade ^im to come and set up his claim to the Crown of
Scot^and; Mackbeth who maintained a Spy, in every Noble^ans House, had notice
of his purpose, and presently ^arched with some Forces to the Castle where
Mack^luff resided, thinking to have found him there; the Gates were opened to
him, they within suspecting no ^ifchief; but not meeting Macduff, he in a rage
caused ^is Wife and Children, with all in the Castle, to be murdered, and then
seized his goods and Estate, Pro^laiming him Traitor; Mackduff escaped into
England, where hearing of the miserable destruction of his house, ^e applied
himself to Malcolm, representing the woeful State of the Kingdom by the Tyrany
of Mackbeth, for which he was mortally hated of the People.

Malcolm was so moved at his discourse that he setch a deep sigh, which Macduff
perceiving, labored to i^gage him to undertake the freedom of his Counrre^
having so Just a Title, and the carnest Prayers and w^^ es of his Subjects to
ass^t him; though Malcolm (...) much disturbed at the Calamities of his
Country me^ yet not cettain whether Macduff were sincere in his Protestations,
or were not sent by Makbeth to betray him he resolved to try him further, and
replied, I assure you I am truly sorry for the miseries of my Country but
though I were never so much inclined to relie^^ them, yet by reason of several
incurable vices the Reign in me, I am not a proper Person to perform the same;
for first I am so extreme libidinous, and give so much to sensual pleasure,
which is the Foundation of all mischiefs, that if I were made King, I should
debauch all your Virgins, Wives and Matrons, (...) that my Intemperance would
be worse than the Blo^dy Tyranny of Mackbeth.

Macduff answered; this is certainly a great vice, so many valiant princes have
lost both Life and Kingdom thereby, yet there are Women enough in Scotland,
(...) if you will be advised; and make your self King, (...) will so order the
matter that you shall enjoy your ple^ sure to the full, and yet so secretly
that none shall kno^^ it. Malcolm added, I am likewise the most Cover^^ Person
upon Earth, so that I shall go nigh to destr^ most of the Nobles of Scotland by
false pretenses (...) accusations, that I may enjoy their Estates, and (...)
show what mischief may happen by my insatia^ Avarice I will tell you a story;
their was a Foz (...) having a sore place on his head, it was covered (...)
with a swarm of Flys who continually sucked his Blood and when one who came by
offered to drive the^ away, he would not admit it, for (said he) if the^ Flies
who are now full, and do not suck so enge^^ should be driven away, I shall have
others lean (...) hung rey presently settle in their places, who wo^^ suck out
the rest of my blood and be far more dangerous than these. Therefore I say,
suffer me to remain where I am, lest when I am advanced to the Government my
wretched Coverousness should be so grievous, that your present condition would
seem easy in comparison of the outrages I should daily commit.

This, says Mackduff, is a worse fault than the former, for Coverousness is the
root of all evil, and for which many Princes have been brought to ruin, yet do
but follow my Counsel, and get the Crown, and thou will find Gold and Silver
enough in Sco^land to satisfy thy most greedy desires. Ay, but says Malcolm, I
am so extremely inclined to diffi^ulation, lying, and all kind of deceit, that
I baturally rejoice in nothing so much as to betray and deceive those that put
trust or confidence in me; now since nothing is more necessary in a Prince than
Faithfulness, Truth, and Justice, you find I am hereby absolutely incapable to
Govern any People or Country, and therefore since you have found Remedies for
my other notorious vices pray provide a Cloak for this as well as the rest;
Nay, replies Mackduff, this is worst of all and here I leave you, and can only
lament and say Oh unhappy Scotchmen, who are plagued with so many great
Calamsties, one upon another; ye have one cursed Tyrant who now Reigns over you
without any Right or Title, oppressing you with his Bloody cruelties; and this
prince who has Right to the Crown is inrected with Treachery, inconstancy, and
other English Vices, that he is no way worthy to enjoy it, for by his own
confession he is not only avaricious and lustful, but so false a Traitor
withal, that no belief is to be given to one word he speaks; what therefore
shall I say? farewell Scotland, farewell my Native Country, farewell for ever,
for I shall account my self a banished man hereafter, without the least Joy and
Consolation; at which words, the Trears trickled down his Cheeks amain. Being
ready to depart Malcolm plucked him back, (...) said, be of good comfort
Macduff, for I am guilty (...) none of these Vices, but have said all this only
to (...) thee, since Mackbeth has used all manner of Stratagems to get me into
his hands, but the more flow (...) have seemed in condescending to thy request,
she more diligence will I now use in accomplishing the same. Hereupon strictly
embracing each other, they entre^ into an entire Friendship, and fell to
consult the best methods to effect their business. Mackduff by Lette^ secretly
conveyed to the Scotch Nobility engaged them in Malcolms Interests, who being
assisted by Edward the Confessor with Ten Thousand men under old Sywa^^ E. of
Northumberland marched into Scotland, and the people flocking in to him,
Mackbeth durst not venture a ba (...) but fled into Fife, resolving to fortify
himself in (...) Castle of Dunsinnan, some persuaded him to fly to the (...) to
gain time, but he had such confidence in the prophecy that he feared nothing.
Malcolm followed him so haslily that the night before the Battle he came to
Berna^ Wood; the next morning he ordered every man (...) march with a great
bough of a tree in hand, that they might come near their Enemies without being
disce^ned.

Mackbeth seeing them approach in this manner, admired at the meaning, but then
he recollected that the prophecy, That Bernan wood should come to Dunsinna^
Castle, was now fulfilled. However he marshalled his me^ exhorting them to
Fight valiantly; but Malcolms Soldiers throwing down their branches, and
Mac^eth perceiving their number presently fled, whom Mad^ pursued till he came
to Lunfannin, when Mackbeth petceiving him just behind, leapt from his Horse
saying Thou Traitor, what do thou thus follow me in vain, since (...) am not
or dained to be killed by any one that is born of a we man? come on therefore
and receive the just reward of t^^ pains, and therewith he lift up his Sword to
have (...) him; which Macduff avoiding answered, Nay then to^ ^talperiod is at
hand, and thy insatiate crueley shall have an and, even as thy Wizards have
assured thee, for I am the ^an that was never born of my Mother, but ripped out
of her ^omb; and therewith he stepped to Mackbith and flew ^im in the place; then
cutting off his head, he brought (...) upon a pole to Malcolm. This end had
Macheth after ^e had reigned seventeen years, 1058.

XLVII. Malcolm Conmer thus recovering the Kingdom, was Crowned at Scone, by
the name of Maclcolm the 3d. and then called a Parliament at Fores, where he
rewar^ded those who had assisted him against Mackbeth, with Lands and Honors,
creating many Earls and Barons according to the English mode; Mackduff was
created Earl of Fife with three privileges. 1. That the Earls of Fife should
ever after put the Crown on the Kings head at the Coronation. 2. That they
should be placed in the Front of the Battle. 3. That they should have power to
determine all causes within their own Jurisdiction, Treason excepted; some add,
it was granted, if any of that Family should chance to kill a man, unless it
were maliciously, he should be free, paying twenty four Marks. While the King
was settling the Realm one Lugtake caled the Fool, Cosen to Mackbeth, with many
of his Adherents was to Scone, and there Crowned but brought Markduff soon
dispersed them, Lugtake himself being slain. After this Malcolm having notice
that a Gentleman designed to kill him, he took occasion to go a hunting, and
being in the Forest he called, this Gentleman apart into the thickest part of
the Wood, where the King reproaching him for his traitorous purpose ensidering
the many kindnesses he had received, and there with leaping from his Horse,
drew his Sword, commanding the other to do the same, and told him that having
now convenient time and place, he might try his valor by open force, and not
use cowardly treacherry; the Conspirator at this being confounded fell down
trembling at the Kings Feet, humbly begging pardon for his heinous intent;
which the King frankly granted. This year 1066 William Duke of Normandy invaded
England, and in one Battle conquered it, killing Harold the Usurper and Sixty
Seven Thousand; English with him; pretending a Title to the Crown from the
Grant of Edward the Confessor; this K. Edward in his Life time sent for his
Nephew Edward, Son of his Brother Edmond Ironside, out of Hungary, whither he
had Traveled, and there married Agatha, the Daughter of the Emperor Henry,
Sister to the Queen of Hungaria, by whom he had a Son called Edgar and two
Daughters; it is said Edward designed Edgar to sueceed him, and would have
resigned to him during his Life which the other utterly refused, and Edward
dying, when Edgar saw William had subdued the Realm, despairing of recovering
his right he went into Scotland with his Mother Agatha and Sister Margaret, and
were Nobly received by Malcolm, who soon after married. Margaret; William the
Conqueror fearing the effect of this Alliance confined, all the well-wishers to
Edgar, which Malcolm denying, War was proclaimed; and Williams Forces were
defeated several times by the Scots; which at length produced a Peace, and a
Cross was set up called the Recress or Kings Cross which divided both Kingdoms.
Afterward a Rebellion was raised in Galloway, and Malcolm sent Walter the son
of Fleance thither, who gave them a total overthrow. and crushed another
insurrection in the Western Isles, for which great services he was Created High
Steward of Scotland, whose posterity have retained that surname to this day.

After the death of Will. the Conqueror his Son Rufus repining that the Scots
should enjoy so much of the Ancient Dominions of England invaded Northumberland
and took the Castle of Anwick, putting all within to the Sword. King Malcolm
soon came, and besieged it with a potent Army, and the English being roady to
surrender, a Knight came out of the Gates unarmed, but only a Spear, whereon he
carried the Keys of the Castle, riding toward the Scottish Camp who being
brought (...) the King, bowing as if to deliver them, he ran the ^^^ng through
the Eye into his Brain, with his Sword, ^ho immediately fell down and died, and
by the swift^ess of his Horse escaped out of danger; it is related that (...)
Rufus named this Knight Pierce Eyes, giving him an^state in Northumberland,
from whence the Family of ^ircies Earls of that Country are descended. This
^^^ar such dreadful Thunder happened that many men ^^d beasts were slain, and
Houses overthrown. In Lothian, ^ife and Angus Trees and Corn were burnt by Fire
^ndled no man knew how K. Malcolm left several Chil^en, but Edgar was the true
Heir.

XLVIII. Donald Bane, who fled to Ireland, hearing ^s Brother Malcolm was dead,
returned into Scotland, with the assistance of the King of Norwas, upon
con^tion to have the Possession of the Western Isles) and ^as received by the
people as King, being Crowned at ^cone by several of the Nobility, who soon
after seem^ng to repent their rashness, Donald was heard say, That ^f they did
not comply fully with him be would befully revenged ^n them, which being told
them, turned afterward to ^^s great disadvantage; for William Rufus sending
Dun^an, Malcolms Bastard Son out of England with an Army ^o claim the Crown,
when Donald went to encounter ^im, most of his men forsook him, and joined with
Duncan; so that he was forced to fly to the Western ^sles; and Duncan was
Crowned King, but soon after murdered by the procurement of Donald, who was
^hereupon restored to the Government; but the Scots being incensed that the
Isles were given to the Danes, who had garisoned them, sent to desire Edgar to
come unto Scotland, who before he would venture, dispatched Messengers to
Donald, requiring him to relinquish the Crown, for which he should enjoy the
Country of Lohian; Donald hereat enraged slew the Messengers: Edgar aided by
the King of England presently ser forward for Scotland, and was met by Doanld
with a puisant Army, who were vanquished by Edgar, and Donald taken. Some write
that when the Armies were ready to join, Donalds Soldiers bebolding the Banner
of St. Cuthbert flying against them, deserted him, so that he was again forced
to fly to the Isles, where being seized, he was brought to Edgar, and
imprisoned, and soon after died.

XLIX. Edgar after this Victory went to Edenburg, and was Crowned King. In his
Reign was the great Expedition of the Christian princes against the Saracens to
the Holy Land for the recovery of Jerusalem; Edgar Reigned nine years, and died
in 1103.

L. Alexander the Fierce, his Brother, succeeded, so called from his rigor in
prosecuting Thieves and Robbers; in the beginning of his Reign, being very
devout, the People of Murrayland and Ross, guessing he would not be severe
against Offenders, presumptiously robbed and slew their Innocent Neighbors,
without respect to Age or Sex; this news roused K. Alexander out of Devotion,
to take vengeange on them, which he did by executing a great number; the rest
being restrained, conspired his Death, diverse of them, by corrupting the Kings
Chamberlain, being admitted one night through an House of Office into his
Lodgings; but he suspecting their design, started out of his Bed, and catching
his Sword first slew his Chamberlain, and then six of the Traitors, the rest
flying for fear of discovery; yet some of them were after taken, and confessed
they were encouraged by the Nobility whom they named; the King marched against
them, and routed them, many being taken and executed. Alexander having Reigned
seventeen years, died in 1120.

LI. David his Brother succeeded as Lawful Heir to the Crown, who administered
Justice, especially to the poor, and restrained those excesses which had
debaucht the Nation; it is recorded that King David going one day to hunt a
Deer in a Forest near Edinburgh, which was then full of Woods and Trees, of a
sudden the Dogs had lost the scent, and the noise had ^oused all the Wild
Beasts in the Forest, all the Kings ^ttendants being dispersed, when he coming
alone to ^he foot of a Hill there appeared the fairest Heart that ever was seen,
who running in a full carreer toward the King, startled his Horse so that he
run clear away with him the Heart following with suchviolence that he threw both
than and Horse to the ground, and as the King held but his hands to defend
himself from the Horns of the Heart, a Cross fell miraculously into his hands,
at the sight whereof the Heart vanished, being never seen more, neither did any
know whether this Cross were made of Mertal, Stone or Wood; which story seems
contrived to promote Superstition, and the Priests made use of ^t to persuade
him to build an Abbey called Holyrocae House, because the thing happened on
Holyrood day, wherein this Cross remained till King David Bruce, who lost it to
the English at Durham Field; many Wise Men have blamed the profuse Liberality
of this devout Prince to the Church, whereby the Revenues of the Crown were
much diminished, which occasioned the destruction of several Princes, who not
having wherewith to maintain their Royal Dignities, procured the fall of diverse
great Families to possess their Estates; sometimes they were forced to lay
heavy Taxes on the People to the impoverishing the Realm; otherwhile they have
been constrained to invade England, as desperate men, regardless of their
Lives; likewise to stamp bad money to the damage of their Subjects; all which
mischiefs were occasioned by King David's unreasonable enriching the Church;
therefore when K. James 1. saw David's Tomb at Dumfermling, he sighing said,
that he was a sore and woeful Saint to the Crown.

At this time Queen Maud his Wife died, by whom he enjoyed part of
Northumberland, Cumberland and Huntington, whose death so afflicted him that he
never married again; he had by her one Son named Henry, who married Earl
Warrens Daughter, on whom he begot Three Sons, Malcolm, William and David, and
Three Daughters, Albama, Margaret and Maud; King Henry the first' of England
having no Sons caused all the English Nobility to swear they would receive his
Daughter Man the Empress for their Sovereign, King David doing the same, and
when K. Stephen had usurped the Crown, and sent to require David to perform his
Homage for these Three Counties, David replied, that he had all ready given his
Faith to Q. Maud, and would not break it for the threats of an Usurper. Stephen
hereupon invades Northumberland with Fire and Sword, which the Scots resenting
entered England with an Army, routed Stephens Forcer, taking the Earl of
Gloucester and other Lords Prisoners to redeem whom Stephen was obliged to
renounce his Right to those Countries, of which soon repenting, he again made
an inroad into Scotland, but was fully repaid by the Scots and forced to
conclude a Peace, (...) while after Quen Maud came into England claiming the
Crown, which caused great contentions. Mean while Prince Henry, David's only
Son, died, being exceeding ly lamented by his Father, and all his Subjects, and
Malcolm the Eldest Son of prince Henry, was proclaimed Prince of Scotland;
David falling into a mortal disease desired to be carried into the Church to
receive the Sacrament, which having done, he recommended hi^ Nephew to the
Nobility, and kissed them all, earnestly requiring them to seek the Peace of
their Country, and the advancement of the public weal, and then died in 1150.

LII. Malcolm the Fourth his Nephew of thirted years old succeeded; a prince
who credited his education under his Grandfather, being of a modest and
virtuous temper, of which some Seditious Spirits taking advantage, endeavored
to dispossess him of the Kingdom, especially one Somerlide, but he was suppressed
wi^^ the Slaughter of two Thousand of his followers; Ho^^ the second of England
sent a Herald to him to co^^ to ceme to London and do homage for the Counties
(...) Northumberland, Cumberland, and Huntington, as his Grand^ather David had
done, upon penalty of forfeiting the ^ame; King Malcolm went and performed it,
upon ^ondition (say the Scotch Writers) that it should no wise ^rejudice the
Liberties of the Scotch Kingdom. King Hen^y having Wars at this time with Lewis
the sixth of France went thither, compelling Malcolm to go with him, there^y if
possible to break the Ancient Alliance with Scotland, but having lost many of
his men by sickness, he returned into England, and licensed King Malcolm to go
home; who calling a parliament at Scone, the Lords reprehended him for bearing
Arms against the French their An^ient Allies and Confederates; Malcolm excused
it modestly alleging, That he unwarily put himself in to Henry's hand, and
what he acted was by constraint, which ^he French King could not take ill when
he understood ^he truth of the matter.

King Henry hearing of this dissension strove to inflame ^t, and calling a
Parliament at York, sent for Malcolm ^hither, where he was charged for
discovering the secrets of the English Army to the French, for which he said he
ought to forfeit the three Counties and though Mal^olm refelled all their
Allegations by substantial reasons, ^et by King Henrys enforcing them, the
Affembly gave Sentence against him; and to make him odious to his Nobility he
caused it to be reported that Malcolm had freely renounced all his Title and
Interest to those Coun^ies; so that upon his return to Scotland, without
knowing any of these slanders, he was beseiged in the Castle of Bertha by
several of his Lords, but when they understood how he had been abused they
raised the Siege. Malcolm hereat incensed, proclaimed War against Henry, (...)
after much damage on each side an Agreement was made on the former terms, only
Nothumberland was resigned to King Henry and his Heirs for ever.

Several Insurrections were made about this time by ^he Scotch Nobility, but
all happily quelled' to the confusion of their Authors, and the Realm settled in
peace, the King wholly applying himself to administer Justi^^ and the Nobility
being informed that he had made Vow of Chastity undertook to advise him to
renoun^^ his purpose, but their Arguments could prevail nothing Malcolm
alleging that from his tender years he h^^ vowed his Virginity to Jesus
Christ, who he did to doubt would so provide that the Realm should not^
destitute of Worthy Heirs, when it should please (...) Divine Majesty to take
him to his Mercy; and so spe^^ ding the rest of his days in Devotion, and
Erecti^^ Monasteries, he died in 1163. a Blazing Star with terrible streams
appearing for fourteen days together before his death.

LIII. William his Brother, called for his Singul^^ Justice the Lion, was next
advanced to the Thro^^ After his Coronation he sent to Henry of England to
restore Northumberland, as part of his Inheritance; H^^ required him to come to
London and do homage (...) Cumberland and Huntington, where he should receive
satisfaction; which being done Henry declared the Northumberland was annexed to
the Crown, and he co^^ make no restitution thereof without the consent of the
States, which he would propose the next Parliament and then going into Normandy
with an Army he took William along with him and other Scotch Lords; which
William agreed to, in hope to have Northumberland quietly delivered, but after
a while seeing little probability he obtained leave to return home; to root out
those Robbers and Oppressors who had abused his Subjects which having done he
sent again to Henry, wh^ perceiving he must either satisfy him or expect open
Wars, by the advice of his Nobles he restored as much of Northumberland as his
Grandfather King Malcolm had possessed; but within few years he repented this
(...) and caused inroads to be made on the Borders of (...) land, they doing
the like upon England; at length hi^ William raised an Army, marched toward
Cu^^ber, and one Wing being led by Gilchrist Earl of Angus, who for ^s Valdur
had married the Kings Sister, and the other ^y Rouland the Kings Cousin.

The English having no Forces ready, offered a great ^^m to procure delay, but
William answered, that he had ^ot begun the War for desire of money, nor had
given ^he occasion, being always willing to live of his own; and if
Northumbesland his rightful Inheritance were rester'd, he would cease from all
further attemps; King Henry being in France, the English endeavoring to
pro^ract time, send several Messages with Golden promises ^ill at length they
suddenly satrounded the Scots Camp, one night, who were so surprised therewith,
and likewise by another party, who lay in ambush, that they were forced to fly,
William himself being taking prisoner, and conveyed over to Normandy to King
Henry, who ordered David Earl of Huntington to govern the Realm of Scotland
till his Brother William was released, who sent several Bishops and Noblemen
into Normandy, to ransom his Brother. At length it was concluded, that King
William should swear Fealty to the K. of England, and do homage for the Kingdom
of Scotland, as to his Sovereign Lord, and to the Lord Henry his Son; that all
the Prelates of Scotland and their Succenors should acknowledge Subjection to
the Church of England, and do Fealty to whom the King should appoint; the Earls
and Barons to do homage also to King Henry, and his Son. The King of Scots to
pay One Hundred Thousand Pound Sterling for his Redemption, one half in hand,
and Cumberland, Huntington and Northumberland, to be delivered to K. Henry, for
securing the rest. Lastly for the trut performance of these Covenants, and that
the Scots should raise no War against the English for the future, four of the
strongest Castles were delivered into the hands of the English, namely,
Berwick, Edinburgh, Roxborough, and Sterling.

King William being restored to his Realm, one Gilbert of Galloway raised a
rebellion, pretending to the Crown, and making great slaughter, and because his
Brother reproved him of his Cruelty, he put out his eyes, and (...) off his
hands; against whom E. Gilchrist was sent with a potent Army, who put them to
flight, Gilbert himself scaping into Ireland; this year on Midsumers day ^e^^
so great a Storm of Hail, that it killed many Sheep and small Cattle, and
People were beaten down with the violence thereof. In September, the Sun at
noon wa^ darkened for two hours, without any Eclipse, Clouds o^ other natural
cause. In Yorkshire was such terrible thunder, and strange Lightning, that many
Abbeys at Churches were burnt. At this time K. William sent (...) present his
Obedience to the Pope, who rejoicing thereat, returning a Rose of Gold filled
with balm, adde^ many new Privileges to the Church of Scotland. Soo^ after
Earl Gilchrist turned his Wife out of Doors, upon suspicion of Adultery, and
afterward strangled her a^^ Village near Dundee; at which the King was so
enraged she being his Sister, that he seized on all his Estate, a^^ proclaimed
him Traitor, destroying his Castle to the ground.

K. Williams Queen dying, he married the Daughter of the Lord Beaumont, who was
Son to a Daughter (...) William the Conqueror; by this marriage the Peace with
England was confirmed, and an Atricle added, tha^ neither Prince should harbor
any Fugitive or Rebe^ who were Subjects to the other; whereby Gilchrist wh^
fled into England, was forced to go back to Scotland (...) mean Apparel, living
with his two Sons in the Woc^ in great misery, unknown to any by reason of his
poo^ clothes. Two great Thieves at this time got into the Western Isles, where
having raised assistants, they got a great many Ships together, with which they
passed to the Main Land, robbing and spoiling, and then flying (...) their
ships; the King resolving to suppress these Insolences, sent out a Navy, who
burnt all their Vessels, an^ landing in the Isles, encompassed them on every
side, taking and executing most of them upon the Wheel, according to the Civil
Law; Returning thence the (...) ^^hanced to espy Gilchrist with his two Sons
digging of surfs, and wondering to see two such Gentile Young Men (...) meanly
employed, Gilchrist with his Bald Head ^ame and fell at his feet saying; If
there be any Commiser^tion in thee most Noble Prince, toward such who by their
Offense (...) brought into Extremity and have suffered condign punishment for
their crimes, I beseech thee for the Love of Christ, who ^id not spare to shed
his own most precious Bl^nd, for the Redemption of sinners, to have mercy upon
me, and these my Poor and Maser able Sons, who have suffered much sorrow and
want with me, though they have not deserved it by committing any fault.

The King inquiring who he was, and how be came unto this wretched state, the
tears trickled so fall down (...) Cheeks that he could not speak, at length
recovering himself, he added, I am Gilchrist (most excellent Prince) ^he most
sorrowful creature, who alas have dipped my hands it ^he Blood of thy Family, and
was therefore deprived of all my Lands, and Banished with these m^ Sons out of
the realm, whereupon we continued in England, till Proclaimation being, made
against Outlaws, we were constrained to return ^ither, where I and my Son have
lived by roots all the Summer, and are forced to get our living it the Winter
with digging of ^lods; if thy indignation be now somewhat qualified,
commiserate our sorrowful Estate, forgive me my Offenses, whereby thou may
not only gain the honor and same of a merciful Prince, and be highly renowned
among all Natious, for that Heavenly Virtue, but may likewise expect the
mercy of God, showing thy self a follower of Jesus Christ the giver of all
Mercy, Grace, and Peace.

The King moved at these words, and remembering his former good service,
restored his Estate to him and his two Sons; Gilchrist continuing obedient, and
his Sons dying before him, he left all his Lands to the Abbey of Abirbrothoke
which the King had newly founded. In England K. Richard the first succeeded his
Father Henry, who resolving to go into the Holy Land, to prevent the Scots from
disturbing his Realm, surrendered the four Towns, and the three Counties
aforementioned, only the Garrisons to be commanded by the English, David E. of
Huntington the Kings Brother accompanying Richard, where they performed
Wonders, and at length returning, Richard dying, K. John succeeded, to whom
William performed his homage; but John requiring him to go over and assist him
against France, he refused it, whereupon John declared all the aforesaid Lands
to be forfeited to the Crown of England, and caused a great booty to be fetched
out of Scotland, which had occasioned open Wars, if the English Lords had not
obliged King John to make restitution, they being loath for to engage against
Scotland and France at once.

This Winter proved so frosty that no Plough could enter the ground till March;
Ale was Frozen in the House; and Cellars so that it was sold by weight, from
Twelve-tide till February, were terrible Earthquakes continually. King John now
raised another quarrel against the Scots, but at length Peace was established
on condition that Margaret and Isabel, Daughters to King William, should after
nine years be married to Henry and Richard the Sons of John, and if one died
the other should succeed to the Crown, for which William gave a confiderable
Dowery with his Daughters, and nine Scotch Noblemen were delivered to K. John
for true performance. K. William returning, came to Bertha, where such a flood
arose by the inundation of the two Rivers Tay and Almond, that the Walls were
beaten down, abundance of People drowned, with such lamentable Cries and
Shrieks as if the Town had been suddenly surprised; and so violent was it, that
though the King, his Queen, and part of his Family escaped, yet his Youngest
Son John, the Nurse, and above Thirty Women and Servants were overwhelmed
therein. The City being thus destroyed, the King built another which he called
Perth, now St. Johnstone; and died. 1213. The year before, dreadful Comets were
seen, one appearing before the rising Sun, the other at its setting. (...)
Northumberland a Cow Calved a Monster, and the ^ead and neck resembling a Calf,
the other parts ^ke a Colt; and likewise there was two Moons visible ^t once.

LIVE. Alexander the second his Son succeeded and called a Parliament at
Edinburgh, he Ordained many good Laws, at this time the English Barons being in
Arms against K. John, Lewis the French King's Son came over to assist them, of
which Alexander having notice marched with a great Army toward London, to join
with Lewis; at length things being settled in England Alexander went with Lewis
to France, where the Ancient League was renewed between both Nations, with this
addition, that neither Prince should entertain the Enemies of the other, nor
marry any stranger without acquainting the other therewith, which being
ratified, Lewis and Alexander returned to England, and K. John dying, Henry his
Son succeeded, who procured Pope Innocent in a general Council at Rome wherein
were 412 Bishops and 800 Abbots, to accuse both Lewis and Alexander, with all
that favored their cause, and soon after Cardinal Guallo came into England
upon that account; so that Lewis was forced to compound for his absolution with
a great sum of Money, and Alexander marched home, but was followed by K. Henry,
who finding himself too weak to engage, returned back, Alexander following him
into Northumberland and taking Carlisle; after which K. Henry being reinforced,
took Berwick, and likewise he ruined all that Country, but at length by the
Mediation of the Bishops, Peace was concluded, and likewise the places
restored, and Alexander freed from the Pope's Curse.

But Guallo not forgetting the main business, summoned all the Prelates of
Scotland to Anwick, to receive full absolution, which he was resolved they
should not have without a good round sum, which some paid, but others refused;
the Recusants Guallo summoned to Rome who going thither, made such heavy
complaint against him that at his return he was fined; next year a Legate came
from the Pope with Bulls to raise money against the Saracens, and having
gathered a considerable sum he spent it in Riot and Debauchery, pretending when
he came to Rome that he was Robbed by the way. In a short time another was sent
on the same errand, of which Alexander having notice, called a Council to
advise about it, in which one of the Bishops used such cogent arguments against
admitting him, that the Legate was not received into the Realm. Shortly after
one Ross raised a Rebellion, burning the Town of Innerness, put the E. of
Bucquain, took him and his two Sons, striking off their heads, and sent them to
the King. Then the People of Cathness seized upon their Bishop called Adam, for
cursing them for refusing to pay their Tithes, scourging him with Rods, and
then setting fire to his House, burnt him in his own Kitchen, for which the
King himself marched against them, and taking fo^^ hundred, caused them all to
be hanged, that there might be no succession, ^e ordered all their male
Children to be gelded, the place where it was done, being called Stone Hill to
this day; the Earl of Cathness because he did not assist the Bishop, nor
endeavor to punish the Offenders, was deprived of his Earldom a fine paid,
was again restored to them, yet soon after he himself was slain by one of his
servants, whom he had hardly used, and his House burnt over him to prevent
discovery, and Patrick Earl of Atholl had the same fate, being slain in his
Castle, and burnt. Next year K. Liwis of France desired aid of Alexander for
his Journey to the Holy Land, who sent him diverse choice Bands of Soldiers,
under three valiant Leaders, but the greatest part perished in the Land of
Egypt, either by Sword or sickness.

LV. Alexander the third his Son, succeeded, not above nine years old; when he
came to be Crowned, great ^^^n^ion are se among the Nobility, because by the
^bservation of the Stars it was an unfortunate day; others alleged that he
ought first to be made a Knight; at length the difference grew so high that to
quiet it the Earl of Fife on a sudden set the Crown on the King's head being in
a Marble Chair, disregaring all Super^^itious Omens; in his second year (says
the Monkish Historian) the Prelates and Barons caused the bones of Queen
Margaret the Kings Grandmother to be taken up, and put into a Silver Shrine,
which being carried toward her Tomb when the bearers came against the Sepulcher
of her Husband K. Malcolm, they were not able to proceed further, till an old
man advised them to take up his bones likewise, and then they carried them to
the place where they now remain, and were in great veneration with the People.
He adds, that at this time a Monk of M^bross, was admonished in a Dream that he
should find part of the true Cross whereupon Christ was Crucified, near Peplis
in Lothian, enclosed in a Case whereon was Engraven St. Nicholas; when the Case
was opened, the Cross was found within it, whereby many Miracles were wrought;
not far from thence was found a stone Chest, curiously wrought, wherein were
certain bones wrapped up in silk, but not known whose they were; The King built
an Abbey, where this relick was found, which no doubt was the intent of
inventing these Miracles.

Alexander renewed the Peace with the English, and married Margaret K. Henry's
Daughter at York; and being informed, that the Earls of Monteith, Atholl, and
Cumins, had committed many violences upon his Subjects in his minority, he
summoned them to appear before his Judges, and they refusing, were for the
contempt proclaimed Traitors, put too the ^or^; to revenge which they conspired
to seize the King, keeping him prisoner at Sterling; at length an agreement was
make; the next year was so great a Dearth by reason of rain in the harvest,
that the People were miserably vexed with Famine, upon which Acho King of
Denmark took occasion to invade the rest of the Western Isles, some o^ them
having been possessed by the Danes from King Edgars time, soon reducing them,
arrived with a great Army, taking the Castle of Air by siege, and forraging the
Country; at which young Alexander being surprised, as doubting his own power,
to prolong the time by treating of Peace, sent Ambassadors to the Camp of Acho,
who required such unreasonable conditions that perceiving nothing but a Battle
must decide the controversy he raised an Army of Forty Thousand Men, and
marching against Acho, the Danes were routed with the slaughter or Twenty four
Thousand, but not above Five Thousand Scots; Acho's Nephew was slain among
them, he himself with a few others escaping to the Castle of Air, where he had
the ill Tidings, that his Navy of 150 ships was destroyed by tempest, and not
above four saved; the Mariners who escaped on shore being likewise cut off by
the Country People, so that few got away. Acho astonished at two such
misforturnes at once, sailed with his small Company into the Isles of Orknay,
where he sent to Denmark for fresh Forces, but before they arrived he died
there, so that all those great preparations came to nothing. The same day that
Acho died Alexander Prince of Scotland was born. Magnus his Son succeeded Acho,
from whom the Scots won all the Islands that was possessed by the Danes for 167
Years past.

At this time Lewis of France made another expedition into the Holy Land,
Alexander sending a thousand Scots to his aid, commanded by the Earls of
Carrick, Athel, and others, most of them died in the Voyage, and the Earl of
Carrick among the rest, leaving only one Daughter, named Martha, Heiress to his
Estate, who was after Married without the Kings consent, to Robert Bruce Son
and H^ir to Robert B^^ce Lord of Anandale in Scotland, and of Cle^^land in
England whose Mother was Isabel second Daughter to David Earl of Huntington,
Brother to William King of Scotland; of this Marriage was Born Robert Bruce who
afterward for want of Heirs to King Alexander attained the Crown of Scotland.

Queen Margaret, Alexanders Wife, and Daughter to King Henry the Third died
about this time, by whom he had two Sons Alexander and David, and one Daughter
named Margaret, who about three Years after was Married to Aquin K. of Norway;
David died before her, and Prince Alexander soon after without issue, though
Married to the Daughter of the E. of Flanders; his Daughter Margaret Queen of
Norway deceased likewise the same Year, leaving only one Daughter behind her,
which struck the King with great grief, however by the advice of his Nobility
he Married another Wife, the Daughter of the Earl of Champaign in France; but
the same Year as he was riding full speed upon a fierce Horse at Kinghorn, the
Horse leapt over the Clift into the Sea, and broke his neck. The day before his
death the E. of March demanded of one Thomas Lermond (called Thomas the Rymer,
and accounted a notable Prophet) what weather would be to morrow, Thomas
answered, that to morrow before noon should happen such a dreadful Tempest that
the like was never seen before in Scotland. In the Morning the Sky was clear,
and noon drew near without sign or storm of Wind, the Earl of March sent for
Thomas, telling him he was mistaken, Thomas alleged it was not yet past noon.
At that present instant a great Pest Arrived at the Earl of Marche's Gare with
News of the Kings sudden Death. This is that fearful Wind said Thomas, which
shall bring Calamity and Trouble to the Realm.

In this Kings Reign, an infinite number of Worms destroyed the Fruits, and
Herb^; the Waters of Forth and Tay, overflowed many Towns and Villages; a
Blazing Star appeared, of so vast a magnitude that it wa^ seen at noon day;
Winds with Hail Stones overthrew many houses; and dreadful Fires burned down
Aberden, Perth, part of Lanerick, with many Towns and Villages in Lothian, and
a great Pestilence reigned in Scotland; it was remarkable that when Alexander
at his last Marriage was leading up a dance in the company of the Lords, and
Ladies, there appeared in the presence of them all, a Skeleton, of Skin and
bone, like the Picture of Death, terrible to behold, which caused such a
Consternation that it broke off their Mirth and Jollity.

Alexander leaving no issue behind him, great mischiefs and disorders happened,
at length it was concluded to Elect four Governors: but Edward the first of
England, perceiving he had now a fair opportunity to conquer Scotland, sent to
propose a match with the Daughter of Norway (say the Scotch Historians, who
write very partially against King Edward) which being agreed upon, two Noble
Scotch Knights were sent to Norway, to fetch the Bride, but she was dead before
they came, upon which great contention arose between Alexanders Kinsmen about
their right to the Crown; three especially pretended a Title thereto, John
Baliel the son of Margaret Eldest Daughter of David Earl of Huntington, Brother
to K. William; Robert Bruce, as descending from Isabel the youngest Daughter,
of Earl David; and John Lord Hastings, likewise descended from this youngest
Daughter, who was Married to his Father Henry Hastings; the Governors
consulted about the matter, but not concluding upon any resolved to leave the
decision of it to K. Edward, desiring him to come to Berwick on that account.

At his coming he appointed Twelve Scotch Lawyers, to join with so many
English, of the most learned in both Kingdoms, to consider maturely of all
their claims, and make report, and the major part judged the right to be in
Robert Bruce. The Scotch writers report that Edward proposed to Bruce, if he
would swear to hold the Crown of him as his Sovereign Lord, he would declare in
favor of him, otherwise not, but he affirming that he valued the Liberty of
his Country above his own private advantage, and would not be^tray its
Liberties into the hands of the English, which had hitherto been free. King
Edward made the same offer to John Baliol, who accepting those conditions, on
the day appointed he gave Judgment in behalf of John Baliol, upon which (say
the Scotch Historians) the Earl of Gloucester an English Lord of great prudence
spoke thus to him. Oh King, Remember what you have done this day, in refusing
to give a Righteous Sentence in this matter, you have now given an unjust
Sentence against a King, but then shall Just Judgment be pronounced on you.

LVI. John Baliol was soon after Crowned in great State at Scone, and the next
year came to Newcastle, where he did homage to King Edward for the Realm, of
Scotland against the consent of the Nobility, say the Scots, since by this
means he seemed to bring the Realm into servitude to the English, neither had
he much Felicity therein, for King Edward commanding him by Virtue of this
homage to assist him with all his power he could raise against France, King
John repenting his rashness, sent to Edward and renounced his homage as done
without the consent of the three Estates. K. Edward gave this short answer to
the Ambassadors, Since we perceive your King will not come to us, tell him we
intend shortly to visit him, and declared John to have forfeited his Crown and
Dignity, and concluding a Peace with France, he procured the Friendship of
Robert Bruce, who delivered him all the Castles that he held in Scotland, upon
promise, as it was thought, of making him King; on the other side, John renewed
the Ancient League with France, and a marriage was concluded between the Eldest
Daughter of Charles Earl of V^lsis, Brother to King Philip, and Edward Baliol
the Son of John, and Forty Thousand Crowns were to be paid to John as for her
Dowry. In the mean time K. Edward came into Scotland, like an Inundation,
carrying all before him, first taking Berwick by storm with so much blood shed,
that the Scotch Writars say it drove the Miles at low Water, above Seven
thousand people being slain in one day, with most of the Nobility and Gentry of
Lothian and Fife; then he routed the Forces of Baliol at Dumbar, occasioned,
say they, by treachery of Robert-Bruce, who persuaded all his Friends in the
Scotch Army, to flee upon the first onset, which so discouraged the rest, that
they threw down their Arms, and were slain without resistance; after this
victory Bruce applied himself to King Edward, to perform his promise of settling
him in the Throne, to whom it is said Edward answered, do thou think we have
nothing else to do, but to Conquer Kingdoms, and give them to thee? Upon which
Robert retired in discontent to his Lands in England; King Edward then took the
Castles of Edinburgh, and Sterling, in the last of which by the procurement of
John Cumin, John Baliol and his Son Edward were delivered into his hands; King
John laying aside his Royal Robes, presented himself before Edward, with only a
white wand in his hand, and resigned up the Kingdoms into his hands, renouncing
all his Right and Title thereto for ever; which was confirmed by a Charter,
under the hands of the Nobility, who all swore Allegiance to King Edward of
England, and delivered all the Forts and Castle^ into his hands, John and his
Son were carried Prisoners to London, but soon after the Father was released
and sent to Scotland, who preceiving he was hated by the people, retired to his
Ancient Inheritance in Normandy, where falling blind, he died in a good Old
Age, but leaving his Estate to his Son Edward, and who being released resided
with his Father before his Death.

After this King Edward pursued his Quarrel against France, leaving Hugh
Cressingham Governor of Scotland. The Lords of Scotland no sooner heard he was
passed the Seas but they made an Insurrection, choosing 12 ^oblemen to be
Governors, in their several Countr^^; about which time William Wallace, a
young man (...) large stature, and an inveterate enemy to the English,
assembling a great number of Scots, performed many valiant exploits, taking
diverse Towns and Castles, and invading Northumberland; of which Edward having
notice again entered Scotland, and at Falkirk obtained a considerable victory. A
while after the Scots discomfited a party of the English, with which news
Edward was so enraged, that gathering a mighty Army, he marched thither again,
the Scots flying before him, none daring to take Arms but Wallace and his
accomplices, who shelterd themselves in the Woods, so that the English marched
quite through Scotland, wholly subduing it without opposition, and to secure
them from rebelling for the future, and make one people of both Nations, he
abolished all the Law and Statutes of the Realm, barnt all Records and Books,
both Sacred and common, commanding the Scots to use the Liturgy of Sarum, and
removed the Marble Coronation Chair from Scone to London, all the Nobility
taking new Oaths of Allegiance to Edward, who returned to England with Triumph.

He was no sooner out of sight, but the Scots entered into new Practices, for
John Cumin, called the Red, and Robert Bruce, conferring together about the
deplorable state of their Country, it was concluded to endeavor the Freedom
thereof; and that Eruce should be King, and Cumin to Inherit Brucl's Estate; of
this Agreement Indentures were drawn with their hands and Seals thereto, after
which Bruce went into England to prevent suspicion in King Edward, for it was
thought he would have put him and his Brethren to death, if he could have got
them all into his power; after Bruce's departure Cumin suspecting the success
of their design, or at least that he should be of little account when Bruce had
once attained the Kingdom, he thereupon privately sent the counterpart of the
Conspiracy under Bruce's Hand and Seal to King Edward, who judging it to
proceed from envy, disregarded it, yet showed it to Bruce, inquiring whether it
were his hand; Bruce stoutly denied his knowledge thereof, desiring that he
might peruse it one night, thereby to discover the Forgery and Malice thereof,
which if he did not, he was willing to lose all his Estate in England, to which
the King consented; after he was gone the Earl of Gloucester sent to Bruce's
Lodgings twelve Single Pence, and two sharp Spurs, which Bruce took for a
Warning to be gone Instantly, and causing a Smith to Shoe three Horses
backward, that their Track should not be perceived in the Snow, which then lay
on the Ground, he went out of London about midnight with only two trusty
Servants, so that by Morning he was out of Edwards reach, who sent to overtake
him, and in seven days he came to Anandale, where meeting with his Brother, he
declared what danger he was in by the Treachery of Cumin; at that Instant they
met with one of Cumins Servants going to King Edward with Letters, signifying
that if Bruce were not presently put to Death great mischiefs would the^ happen.

But having Examined the Messenger and understood that his Master was at the
Priory at Dumfrieze, they flew him, and then Posting thither, Bruce found Cumi^
in the Quire of the Church, and charging him for such usage, hot words arose,
when Bruce drew his Sword, and struck Cumin into the belly, and flying out of
the Church met two of his Friends, who seeing him in disorder inquired the
reason; I believe, said he, that Cumin is slain; what, say they, have thou
attempted so great an Act, and left it doubtful? and going into the place where
Cumin lay wounded, they asked him whether he thought he had his deaths wound,
or hoped to recover with the helps of a good Surgeon, he told them he doubted
not but he might if he come in time; whereupon they gave him three or four
deadly wounds more, wherewith he presently gave up the Ghost; at this time
William Wallace was betrayed to King Edward, and being brought to London was
Hanged, and his Guarters set up in diverse Towns in Scotland. He was one of the
most Gallant Persons of that age, and ador^ed by the Scots, because he would
never acknowledge Subjection to the English; it is said, when he went to
School, his Master taught him these two Verses which he never forgot.

Dico tibi verum, Libertas optima rerum.
Nunquam servili sub nexu vivito, fili.
Remember Son that Liberty
Is a most happy thing.
Take heed that into slavery
Thy self thou never bring.
LVII. Kobert Bruce having thus slain Cumin procured a pardon from Rome that
none might scruple to aid him on that account, for obtaining the Crown; soon
after having got his Friends together, he caused himself to be Crowned King at
Scone, though at first he had few to assist him, for King Edward having notice
of his designs sent against him, who soon discomfited King Robert and his small
company, so that he was forced to secure himself in Woods and Desert places,
most of his Friends forsaking him, and his Queen was taken prisoner, and sent
to London; at length he had some assistance from the isles, wherewith he took
Carrick Castle and other places, which encouraged others to join with him; upon
which King Edward marched toward Scotland with strong Forces, designing utterly
to subdue the whole Country, but by the way fell sick and died. Edward the
Second called Caernarvan succeeded him, who persuing his Fathers Enterprise,
summoned all the Scotch Nobility to Dumfreize to Swear Allegiance, some of whom
appeared, and others refused, because they heard that he was drawn away by ill
Counsel, to the great grief of his people, which was like to occasion
disturbance in England. King Robert still increased. defeating several small
Parties of the English (...) length King Edward came into Scotland with an Army
of one hundred and fifty thousand foot, and almost as many horse (say the
Scotch Historians) besides Servants, Ostlers, Women, and Lackeys, many carrying
their whole families to settle there after the Conquest; King Edward brought a
Carmelite Friar called Robert Baston with him to describe the manner of it the
place of Battle was Bannocks Bourn, where King Robert with thirty Thousand Men
vanquished this mighty Army, killed ten Thousand, among whom was the Earl of
Gloucester and two hundred Knights, about four Thousand Scots being slain; the
Friar was taken, and commanded by King Robert to Write the Victory of the
Scots, who thereupon made certain Rude Verses beginning thus.

De Planctu cudo, metrum cum carmine nudo.
Risum retrudo, dum tali Themat ludo.
Thus Englished;

With barren Verse this Rhyme I make,
Bewailing whilst this Theme I take.
After this Robert called a Parliament, wherein the Crown was settled upon him
and his Heirs, if his Son David should dye without Heirs, that Robert Stewart
should succeed. Soon after King Edward made another expedition into Scotland,
but with ill success, and after that a third, but with as bad Fortune as the
former; at length Ambassadors were sent by Edward to conclude a Peace, by whom
it was agreed, that K. Edward should renounce all his Right and Title to the
Kingdom of Scotland, and declare it to be as free as in the Reign of King
Alexander the third, and for this renunciation and damages done to the English,
King Robert was to pay thirty thousand Marks Sterling; for confirming this
Peace David Bruce Prince of Scotland married Jane the Sister to King Edward;
after which King Robert departed this Life in 1329. A Prince who mounted the
Throne over the carcases of his nearest Kindred, encountering with the greatest
difficulties of a Country oppressed by Powerful Enemies, yet bravely strugled
with all disadvantages, and left behind him the Characer of a great Captain,
and a prudent Prince. Upon his Deathbed he advised his Nobility. 1. Not to
make an absolute Lord over the Isles, lest it might encourage Rebellion, which
would not be easy to quell by reason of difficulty of approach, they being
incompast by the Sea. 2. Never if possible to join in a set Battle against the
English, nor venture the Kingdom upon the chance of one Fight, but rather to
skirmish at advantage, that some reserve might remain. 3. Not to make any long
Peace or Truce with England, since Idleness caused sloth and Cowardice. He
desired his Heart might be carried to the Holy Land, whither he had designed to
have gone, which was undertaken by Sir James Dowglass, who had therefore the
Bloody Heart in his Arms; but he by the way assisting the Spaniards against the
Saracens in Arragon was cut off with all his company. This end had this Valiant
Knight, whom the Scots report to have got the Victory Fifty and Seven times
against the English, and Thirteen against the Turks.

LVIII. David Bruce seven years old, was next Proclaimed King, during whose
Minority Earl Thomas Randol was appointed Governor of the Realm. Who finding
the Country much impoverished, sent Ambassadors to King Edward the third who
concluded a Truce betwixt both Nations for three years, after which he studied
to maintain Justice and Equity, ordering every man to provide himself Arms, and
to extirpate Thieves and Robbers; he commanded Sadles, Bridles, and other
Furniture to be left abroad Night and Day, and if any were stole, the Sheriff
of the County was to produce the Thief, or else pay the value; which cleared
the Kingdom of all Vagabonds and Idle Persons. It happened that a Country
Clown, hid his own plough Irons, and pretended they were stolen, thereby to
recover the value from the Sheriff, but the cheat being discovered, he was
Hanged according to his deserts.

King Edward envying the flourishing state of Scotland, sent a Monk who
poisoned the Governor, in the mean invaded the Borders, but it seems he venom
was of such a nature as not to kill suddenly, so that though he were so sick,
as not able to ride nor go, yet he caused himself to be carried into the Field,
in an Horse litter, in the head of a considerable Army, which being unexpected,
Edward sent an Herald, pretending to treat him, but really to observe the
posture of the Scotch Camp. The Governor putting on his best Robes, and sitting
in a Chair, as if recovered from his distemper, ordered him to be brought in,
who requiring some unreasonable Conditions, he boldly answered, That in a short
time he did not doubt to make it appear; and then bestowing all the Rich Robes
he had on upon the Herald, sent him back again. King Edward by this, supposing
the Governor was in health, returned to England, ordering the Monk (say the
Scots) to be slain for deceiving him; in the mean time the Governor returning
homeward, died the of venom administered by the Monk. After whom the Earl of
March and Mar were chosen Governors, at which time Edward the Son of King John
Baliol, was persuaded to come from France by Lorison, Cumin Earl of Albol, and
other banished Scots, and claim the Crown of Scotland, and landing in England
King Edward assisted him with Six Thousand Men, upon Condition to hold the
Kingdom from him, as his Sovereign Lord; with these Forces he entered Scotland,
defeating and slaying Alexander Seaton, and his company who were sent against
him; encouraged with this success, they marched forward, but were met with by
two great Armies raised by the Governors; however Baliol resolved to encounter
them, though much inferior in number; the Scots disdaining their weakness, fell
to dancing, drinking and revelling without fear; which Baliol understanding,
assaulted their Camp at midnight, killing all till they came to the Earl of
Marr's Tent, whom they slew in his Bed fast asleep, making a woeful slaughter of
the rest, so that ^he dead Bodies lay on heaps. The English were so furious
that, had not Baliol ordered all his own party to wear a white cloth about
their arms, they would have destroyed one another; there were slain of the
Scots, above three thousand Lords and Gentlemen, and Sixteen Thousand others.

LIX. Edward Baliol after this great Victory finding the Nobility and Commons
coming in great numbers to his assistance, caused himself to be Crowned King in
1332. King David, then nine Years Old, was conveyed into France with his Queen
Jane Sister to K. Edward, and entertained by King Philip, with whom he
continued nine Years. After this some Noblemen who were for King David having
notice that King Edward resided in Saint Johnstons, they suddenly besieged the
Town, whereupon the people of Galloway under the Lord Maxwel invaded and
spoiled the Lands of those Lords who were at the Seige, which caused them to
raise it, and enter into Galloway with Fire and Sword; King Edward having
fortified Saint Johnstons, and leaving the Earl of Fife Governor, marched into
the Country with his Army, before whose return his Enemies took it,
Imprisoning the Earl of Mar, beheading Andrew Murray: and others increasing
their Forces, encountered with King Edward at Anandale, where after a Bloody
fight, Baliol was routed, himself flying upon a Horse without a Bridle. While
the Scots were thus ruining one another, King Edward thought it a fit
opportunity to Conquer both, and besieged Berwick by Sea and Land; for four
months many skirmishes happened, in one of which William the Governor was
taken Prisoner, at length the besieged were so necessitated for provisions,
that they promised to surrender if not releived in six days, and the Governor
delivered his Eldest Son Thomas as security for performing the same. Just then
a mighty Army of Scots marched into England under Archibald Dowglass the new
Governor, of which King Edward having notice, sent to the Governor to deliver
the Town or else his two Sons should be instantly hanged up before his Eyes;
causing a Gibbet to be erected, and his Sons to be brought thither, which Sir
Alexander beholding, was in extreme perplexity, natural affection inclining him
to save his Childrens Lives; yet his Faith and Loyalty to his Prince and
Country restrained these first thoughts; but at length Fatherly tenderness had
prevailed, had not his Lady and the Mother of his Children Fortified his
Resolution.

With such Arguments this Noble Lady persuaded her sorrowful Husband to act
nothing unworthily of himself out of commiseration to his Sons, who were
accordingly put to death; the Governor resolved to revenge their Blood, by
fighting with King Edward, and thereby relieve the Town; and marching toward
him, contrary to the advice of his Commanders; A great Battle was fought at
Halydown Hill, wherein the Scots were Vanquished, Fourteen Thousand slain. King
Edward then settled Edward Baliol in the Kingdom, and a Parliament being called
at Perth, he was confirmed King, most of the Nobility Swearing Allegiance to
him, and had most of the Fortified Towns and Castles delivered to him,
rewarding with Lands and Command those who assisted him in recovering the
Kingdom; he then used means to get Robert Stewart into his hands, being
sensible of his Right to the Crown, next to King David, but he being about
Fifteen years old was con^eyed to Dumbarton Castle, and joyfully received by
Malcolm.

Next year King Edward invaded Scotland by Sea and Land, but no Enemy daring to
appear, he returned ^aking Edward Baliol with him, and leaving David Cumin
Governor, who undertook to rule both in the name of King Edward and Baliol,
and seized all the Lands of Robert Stewart in Murray and Bucquain, who in
^evenge got his Friends together, and seized the Castle of Dunon, slaying all
the English therein, and increasing ^n Power, reduced a great part of the
Country to the obedience of King David; after which coming to Edinburgh the
Earl of Murray and Robert Stewart were chosen Governors; this resolution
recalled King Edward of England who marched thither, and took the Town of Saint
Johnstons, which he Fortified with Bulwarks and Walls, and then went home
again; soon after Robert Stewart besieged it, and after a long Siege had it
delivered into his hands; as likewise Edinburgh Castle, by this contrivance;
William Dowglass persuaded one Walter Towers to provide a Ship, and to Sail
into the Forth as a Merchant with Wine, and coming ashore ^he brought two Tun
of Wine with him, which he offered to sell to the Captain of the Castle, the
Price was soon agreed on, and the Wine to be brought into the Castle; next
morning early Towers comes with his Cart, and the Gates being opened as soon as
he entered ^in, he plucked out a pin, upon which the Cart and Tuns fell down in
the Passage, so that the Gates could not be shut again, Towers then giving
notice to Dowglass and his companions by the sound of a Horn, they presently
arrived, and killed the Porters, with all the rest in the Castle, thereby
becoming Masters thereof; other places were daily surrendered, so that in a
short time all Scotland was recovered, the English and all Baliol's partakers
with himself being compelled to go back to England, he made full resignation of
his right, to Kin^ Edward.

Next year King David, his Queen, with diverse Scot^ and French Lords arrived in
Scotland in great Triumph, and soon after the Scots made inroads in England,
carrying away rich booty, being incited thereto by the French King, to withdraw
King Edward from Callice which he then closely besieged. At length Dav^ with an
Army of Sixty Thousand Men marched into Northumberland and thence to Durham,
burning all before them, Churches and Chapels as well as other places. John
Southerland the Son of David youngest Sister, was then declared Heir Apparent
but he soon after dying, Robert Stewart was again received into favor, and his
title Recognized to the Crown. Then King David called a Council of his
Nobility, and acquainted them that he had promised to transfer the Crown of
Scotland to the King of England Son, and his Lawful Heirs, if his Lords would
agree to it but they unanimously answered, that as long as any o^ them was able
to handle a Sword, they would never consent, by which answer David thought
himself discharged, and soon after died at Edinburgh Castle, i^ 1370. In his 17
year many Birds and Beasts brough^ forth their young in the Winter, and not in
the spring (...) Rats and Mice were so numerous as not to be destroyed, and
great Inundations happened, which did much d^mage.

LX. Robert the Second Surnamed Stewart, was nex^ advanced and Crowned at
Scone, though opposed by the Earl of Dowglass, but for removing all differences
(...) Marriage was concluded between Eufame Eldest Daughter to King Robert, and
James Son to the Earl of Dowglass.

Robert before he was King, had two Sons by his Wife Eusame Daughter to the
Earl of Ross, named Walter and David, but before he married her he kept one
Elizabeth Mure instead of a Wife by whom he had likewise three Sons, John,
Robert, and Alexander, and seven Daughters; soon after his Queen Eufame dying,
he married Elizabeth Mure his old Mistress, that the Children he had by her
might be made Legitimate. And a Parliament being called he procured that his
Eldest Son John should succeed to the Crown, and his issue after him, and in
default to his Son Robert, and Alexander, and if they died without Heirs, then
his Sons Walter and David, whom he had by his Queen Eufame, to Reign
successively, to which Act all the Nobility were sworn.

About this time Diverse skirmishes happened between the Borderers of England,
and Scotland, with various success, and Berwick was taken, but presently
retaken from the Scots. In some of those the Earl of Dowglass and the Lord
Piercy had notable encounters, as at the Seige of Newcastle, where Five Hundred
English were slain, and a Thousand made prisoners; And soon after King Richard
the Second invaded Scotland with a great Army under the Duke of Lancaster, and
took Edinburgh, but saved it from burning and plundering, for a sum of money
paid by the Inhabitants, and returning home, the Scots then entered
Northumberland and got a rich booty.

In this expedition Will. Dowglass L. of Galloway gained much honor, whereupon
K. Robert gave him his daughter Giles, a Lady of admirable Beauty in Marriage;
this William was a very stout man, of a black swarthy complexion, and mighty
stature and strength; the Scots report that with only Eight Hundred he fought
against three thousand English, of whom he slew Three Hundred in the Field, and
took Five Hundred Prisoners. Another time the Scots got an advantage upon the
English by policy; In the night several Country follows having bags of Leather
like Bladders filled with small stones, ran up and down the English Camp, the
Bags making such a rattling noise affrighted the English Horses who breaking
their B^ldies fled away through the Fields; the English not daring to come out
of their Camp, doubting the sudden assault of their Enemies.

Charles the Sixth of France now sent to renew the ancient League with King
Robert, at which time John Lion, Lord Chancellor of Scotland, was slain by the
E. of Crawford because he was so much in favor with the King; After which a
Truce was concluded with England, and Robert, being 75 years old, died, 1390. A
Prince commended for Justice, but not much for valor, many great actions being
preformed by his Captains, few by himself, yet he had this happiness that
ruling in turbulent times, and over a martial people, he had no Domestic
Insurrections nor Rebellions.

LXI. John his Eldest Son succeeded, but because his name was thought
unfortunate in that Age by the infelicities of the Kings of France, and
England, he changed it into Robert, being the third of that name. The Truce
with England prevented any quarrel o^ that side, but furious dissentions
happened among his own Subjects, one of which was very Remarkable; Thomas
Dumbar Earl of Murray, and James Lindsay Earl of Crawford finding that two
Clans or Families of Irish Scots were irreconcilable, they proposed that
Thirty Persons of each side should decide the difference, which being agreed
to, they were to fight before the King near St. Johnstons, which they did with
such rage and fury that all were slain on one side except one person only, who
to save his life leapt into the River Tay, and by swimming over escaped, Eleven
of the other being likewise killed; when they first came into the Field there
was one wanting of the number, whereupon a Country fellow being loath such
notable sport should be spoiled, offered to supply the place for half a French
Crown, though unconcerned in the matter.

A Parliament being called, Robert made his Eldest Son David Duke of Rothsay,
and his Brother Robert, who was Earl of Fife, and Governor of the Realm ^uring
his Father's indisposition, he created Duke of Albany, they being the first who
had the Title of Dukes in this Kingdom. Next year the King contrated a Marriage
between the Duke of Rothsay, and ^he Earl of Marches Daughter, but Dowglass
envying ^im this honor, by the assistance of the Duke of Al^any caused a
revocation of this Marriage in Council; upon which the Earl of March desiring
satisfaction of ^he King, had a very slight answer; which so engaged ^im, that
he fled into England to Henry L. Piercy, called Hotspur, an utter Enemy to the
Dowglasses; soon after K. Henry 4 entered Scotland with an Army, without doing
any damage, giving rich gifts to the Abbeys and Monasteries, and only requiring
the Commanders of Forts and Castles, to Hang out his Banner and Arms as he
passed by; The year after Annabel Drummond, Queen of Scotland died, whereby the
Duke of Roth^ay who had been virtuously educated under her, being ^ow at
liberty fell into all manner of debauchery, ravishing Women and Virgins of all
Qualities; of which complaint being made to his Father, he ordered his Brother
Robert to take him into custody and endeavor to reclaim him; who being glad of
this Office, having long designed to Root out his Brothers Family, to make way
for his own ambition, he shut him up close in Falkland Castle, designing to
starve him to death which was yet a while delayed by a poor woman putting in
some Oat Cakes through a Chink, and after she was discovered and murdered,
another woman fed him with Milk from her own breast through a long reed, who
was also dispatched for her Charity, so that he was constrained to eat not only
all the filthy things he could find in the Castle, but his own fingers for
hunger, and so at length miserably died.

The Earl of March and Piercy making several inroads unto Scotland, the Earl of
Dowglass gathered all the Flower of the Nobility, and Gentry to encounter them,
but the English utterly discomfited them, killing and taking Prisoners most of
them, among whom was the Earl of Dowglass himself, Mo^^lo ^^^ward, Eldest son
to Duke Robert, and divert other Lords and Gentlemen: The Lord Piercy clated
with this Victory besieged Cock-calvis Castle, but soon after he was accused
for Conspiring against King Henry, and a Battle was sought at Shrewsbury
wherein the Earl Dowglass assisted Piercy yet Henry remained Victor, after the
loss of diverse Gallant Commanders; The Old Earl of Northumberland, Father to
Piercy, hearing of his Sons discomfiture fled into Scotland; At that (...) K.
Robert had an account of the murder of his Son by his Brother Duke Robert,
which he had hitherto concealed, and was much disquieted, charging Robert
therewith, who utterly denied it, and assured the King he would bring out those
who did it; accordingly he brought in some wicked profligate fellows, and hired
others of their gang to accuse them of the fact, who being tried before corrupt
Judges of Roberts providing, they condemned diverse of them as guilty of the
Death of the Duke of Rothsay, though they never saw him in their lives.

Yet did not this clear the Duke from being suspected of the Murder, yea the
King himself was much unsatisfied, yet durst not discover it, by reason of the
power and policy of his Brother, but rather doubted he would make away his
Second Son James, to prevent which, he sent him into France giving him also a
letter to the King of England as if he had foreseen what after happened, that
if he should fall into the hands of the English, he might procure favor from
that King; they were no sooner at sea, but were surprised by an English ship
who lay in wait for the Prince; others write he desired to be landed there,
because he was Sea-sick. Being brought to King Henry, he delivered his Father's
Letters.

These Letters being read, after deliberation it was concluded, that James
Prince of Scotland should be detained as a lawful Prisoner, since several
English Rebels were sheltred in Scotland; yet his Captivity proved his greatest
happiness, being educated in all Sciences and accomplishments becoming a Prince
and a Gentleman. The News struck his Father K. Robert with grief that he died
soon after, in the 16 year of his Reign, 1408.

After the Death of King Robert his Brother the Duke of Albany was confirmed in
his Office of Governor, and the Earl of March by the Solicitations of his
Friends restored to his Estate and Honor; about which time one Donald of the
isles, being denied in a claim to the Earldom of Ross, raised forces which did
much mischief, against whom Stewart Earl of Mar gathered a party, and a Battle
was sought, wherein Donald lost nine hundred, and the Earl six hundred men,
upon which Donald submitted. King Henry the Fifth, succeeded his Father in
England, Proclaimed war against France, and passing over, took young K. James
with him, whom he required to persuade all the Scots in service under the
French to return to their own Country, for which he promised to remit his
Ransom, and send him with Riches and Honor into Scotland; to whom James
replied, I very much wonder your Highness does not consider that I have no
authority at all over the Scots while I am under Captivity, and have not yet
received the Crown, but if I were at liberty and were Crowned according ^o
Custom, and had received the Oaths of Fealty and Obedience from my Subjects, I
might then prevail somewhat in this matter, and should act what was reasonable,
but in the mean time I beseech your Grace to excuse me, and not desire that of
me which I am not able to perform. The King satisfied with his Prudent Answer
urged him no more in that matter.

Robert Duke of Albany dying, after he had been Governor Fifteen Years, his
Son Mardo or Mordac^ Stewart, Earl of Fife and Monteith, succeeded as
Governor, wherein he continued Four Years, though unfit for that Office, being
insolent in Prosperity, and despairing in Adversity; and so indulgent over his
Sons Walter and Alexander, that they committed many horrible outrages; at
length Walter being angry that his Father denied him a Falcon, he plucked the
Bird from his Fist, and wrung off her neck; the Father moved at his
presumption, well, said he, since I cannot rule you, I will bring home one ere
long who shall govern us both. After which he used means for redeeming King
James, and his Ransom being set one hundred Thousands Marks, one half was paid
in hand, and the other discharged in consideration that James Married the Lady
Jane Daughter to the Duke of Somerset.

LXII. James the first of that name being restored to his Liberty, was attended
with many English Grandees into Scotland, and received with great rejoicing by
his Subjects. After his Coronation he made a Parliament, wherein the
Chancellor, Treasurer, and other Officers in the late Governors time, were
found to have alienated most of the Lands and Revenues of the Crown; upon which
a Tax was levied of Twelve Pence in the Pound upon all Lands, and four Pence
upon every Cow, Ox and Horse for Two Years; this was paid freely the first
year, but the next the Commons made such murmuring that he forgave the rest.
Complaints were made against Mordack late Governor, his Wife and Sons, with
other Peers, for high misdemeanors before the Kings Return, who were committed
to prison with the Earl of Dowglass, Angus, March and others; James Stewart the
Third Son of Mordack, in revenge of his Father's, Mother's and Brethren's
Imprisonment, burnt the Town of Dunbrittain, and fled to Ireland, where he
died; next Year Duke Mordack with Walter and Alexander Stewart his Sons were
Condemned in a Parliament at Sterling, and all three beheaded, whereby the
Earldoms of Fife, Monteith, and Lennox came into the Kings hands, and the rest
of the Imprisoned Lords were restored to Liberty and Favor; Donald of the
Isles at this time did much mischief, but being pursued, fled into Ireland,
where he was beheaded by one Odo, and his head sent to the King for a present;
three hundred of his Fellows were in Ten Days taken and Hanged.

King James then made a Progress through the Kingdom, to punish Offenders,
allowing no pardon of the Governor's granted for Murders, Felonies and other
Villainies not pardonable by the Law of God; so that in his first two years
three Thousand Persons were Executed for their former Crimes; notwithstanding
which one Agnus Duffe with a Crew of Thieves and Robbers, took away goods out
of Murray and Cathnes, to recover which one Agnus Murray pursued him with
strong Forces, who made such resistance that there remained only two persons
alive of both Parties, which consisted of many hundreds. Another Notorious
Robber called Macdonald Ross was taken, with Twelve of his Comorades, who had
shod a poor Widow with Horse shoes on the Soles of her feet, because she
threatened to discover them to the King, which as soon as recovered she did,
who ordered them to be shod as they had done by her; and when they had been
three days led about a Spectacle to the people, his Companions were hanged, and
he beheaded.

Next year the Queen was delivered of two Sons at a Birth, named Alexander and
James; the same year happened a dreadful Eclipse of the Sun, so that for half
an hour it was as dark as midnight, which was after called the Black Hour; soon
after the King besieged the Castle of Roxborough, but was forced to leave it
still in the hands of the English; the Lord Scroop was now sent from Henry the
sixth to persuade the Scots to relinquish their Ancient League with France, and
join with England, which they would by no means hearken to; at that time the
Earl of March was imprisoned, and disinherited, for his former Rebellion,
against King Robert, and Margaret Eldest Daughter of King James was married to
Charles the seventh of France, and the former alliance confirmed; the Lady was
sent over in great state, accompanied with five of her own Sisters and arrived
safely in France, though the English endeavored to seize her in her passage.
Henry Piercy, E. of Northumberland, about this time invaded Scotland with four
thousand men, and was encountered by Dowglass Earl of Angus, where after a great
slaughter the Scots remained victors, with the Death of fifteen hundred
English, and four hundred prisoners.

Hereupon King James raised a great Army, and again besieged Roxborough, which
when he had reduced to terms of surrendering the Queen arrived in great haste in
the Camp, assuring the King there was a dreadful Conspiracy against his Life;
whereupon he instantly raised the Seige to provide for his safety, but it was
past remedy, for Walter Stewart, Earl of Athol, was the principal Conspirator,
alleging that he was the true Heir to the Crown, being descended from Robert
the second by his 1. Wife, and procured Robert Stewart his Nephew, and Robert
Graham an Outlaw, to join with him, in the destruction of the King; who coming
one Evening with leave of the Porters to the Black Friars at Perth, where the
King then lay, one of his Servants coming out to fetch Wine, observing them,
cried, Treason; but they presently slew him, which caused so great a noise,
that a young lady named Catherine Dowglass, suspecting mischief, thrust her Arm
in the staple of the Door, of the Kings Chamber, which they soon crushed in
sunder, and entering slew those that resisted, and then murdered the King
himself, with many wounds, the Queen being hurt in attempting to save her Lord,
and Patrick Dumbar Brother to the Earl of March was slain in the valiant
defense of his Master. Thus was King James murdered, ^n 1436.

The Lords detesting this Bloody assassination, used such diligence in
apprehending the Traitors, that they were all seized and thus executed; the
Earl of Athol (who was chief, and likewise concerned in the murder of the Duke
of Rothsay, and persuaded the King to put Duke Mordack and his Sons to Death,
to make way to the Crown) was three days punished with exquisite tortures; on
the first he was stripped naked to his ^hirt, hoisted up by a Crane fastened in a
Cart, and suddenly let down again, whereby his Bones were disjointed, in which
posture he was carried through the streets; the second day he was mounted upon
a Pillar, and Crowned with a red hot Diadem, with this Motto; The King of all
Traitors; and thus did he enjoy the Crown before his Death, as a Wizard had
assured him; the third day he was laid naked on a Scaffold, his belly ripped up,
and his Bowels taken out and burnt before his Eyes; Lastly his head was cut
off, which with his Quarters were fixed in several Cities of the Kingdom; his
Nephew Robert Stewart was only hanged and quartered as acting by instigation of
his Uncle; but because Robert Graham had imbrued his hands in the Kings blood,
a Gallows being fixed in a Cart, he had his Right Hand n^^^ed to it, and as he
was dragged along the streets, his flesh was torn off with burning Pincers, his
Heart and Bowels burnt, his head and quarters sent to the Townsmen, to satisfy
the rage of the people. In this Kings Reign a Sow at Perth brought forth Pigs
with heads like Dogs; a Cow had a Calf with an head like a Colt: Before his
Death a Blazing Star was seen, and a Sword appeared gliding, up and down the
Sky, to the wonder and terror of the People.

LXII. James the Second, his Son of six years old, by the consent of three
Estates was Crowned King; during his Nonage Sir Alexander Levingston of
Calander was chosen Governor of the Realm, and Sir William Creighton Lord
Chancellor had the Government of Edinburgh and the Kings person; difference
arising between them soon after, occasioned much mischief, one thwarting the
Orders made by the other; the Queen and the Governor continued at Sterling,
the King and Chancellor were in Edinburgh Castle; disorders increasing, the
Queen to Regulate them, went with a few attendants to Edinburgh, and persuaded
the Governor to let her enter the Castle to see the King; three days after she
pretended to go to Church one morning early, and having prevailed with her Son
to put himself into a Trunk, she conveyed him upon a Sumpter Horse to Sterling,
where he was joyfully received by the Governor, who raised a strong party, and
besieged the Chancellor in the Castle, but by mediation an Agreement was made;
at that time James Stewart, Son to the Lord of Lorn, married the Queens Mother,
and the Earl of Dowglass died, leaving a Son named William but 14 Years old,
who by ill company grew very debauched and insolent, coming to Court attended
with Two Thousand Horse, many of them Common Thieves and Robbers.

This year the Governor took the whole administration of affairs into his
hands, which stomached the Chancellor, that going one morning with only Twenty
four men to Sterling Park, where the King was Hunting, and the Governor
absent, he persuaded him to go with him to Edinburgh; at which the Governor
being enraged, prepared for revenge, but by the procurement of the Bishops they
were perfectly reconciled, and the King was to remain with the Chancellor, upon
which they both consulted how to abate the dangerous ambition of the Young Earl
of Dowglass, and at length concluded to invite him into Edinburgh Castle, with
his Brother David; being come they were entertained with seeming kindness, but
in the midst of the Banquet, a Bulls head was brought in, and set before
Dowglass, which in those days was a certain sign of sudden Execution; the Early
daunted at this horrible sight, leapt from the Table to defend himself, but was
seized by the Guard, with his Brother David, and Malcolm Fleming, and all three
beheaded at the Castle Gate. William his Uncles Son succeeded in the Earldom,
at which time the King being Thirteen Years of Age resolved to Govern himself,
which Dowglass hearing, came to Sterling, and offered him his Service, and
Assistance, who received him kindly, Pardoning all his Misdemeanors, and taking
him into such favor that Dowglass in a short time procured the banishment of
the Governor, and Chancellor, with all their Friends, from Court, at which
they being incensed, raised Forces, and other Lords assisting each Party, a
battle was fought, wherein about six hundred on both sides were slain; and a
Parliament being called Sir Alex. Levingston, William Creighton, and diverse
others, were Condemned, some to lose their Estates, and Robert and Daniel
Levingston were beheaded.

Dowglass thus dispacht his Brethren raised open Rebellion, and being summoned
to appear, set up Papers on the the Church Doors with the Seal of the
Dowglasses, charging the King as a murderer, Bloodsucker, and a False, and
Perjured person; they then Rob and Spoil the Country, and fighting with the
Kings Forces, many were slain on both sides, but Dowglass Confederates
forsaking him, he fled into England, and again invaded Scotland, but was
discomfited, and again got back to England, several of his Companions, as the
Earl of Ormond and others, being beheaded; At this time the Wars between the
Houses of Lancaster and York happened in England, and King Henry 6 was forced
to fly into Scotland, but when Edward 4th. had se^tled the Crown upon his head,
remembering how ready K. James was to support his Adversaries, he ordered some
of the Borderers to make Inroads into Scotland, to prevent which K. James
marched into England, and besieged Roxborough Castle, and being well skilled in
shooting, as he was standing near the Piece of Ordnance, which he commanded to
be discharged, it, being overcharged, broke and killed the King, (and hurt the
Earl of Angus.)

The day before the Kings death a Blazing Star appeared. The year before a
Person who pretended to be an Hermaphrodit was buried alive for Personating a
Woman, and yet performing the part of a man in getting her Masters Daughter
with Child. About which time a certain Thief who lived privately in a Den, with
his Wife, and Children, were all burnt alive, they having made it their
practice many years to kill young people and eat them; one Girl only of a year
old was saved, and brought up at Dundee, who at Twelve years of Age was found
guilty of the same horrid Crime.

LXIV. James the third, of Seven Years of Age, succeeded his Father, and was
carried to Roxborough by the Queen his Mother, a Woman of an undaunted Spirit,
who instead of unprofitable lamentations, encouraged the Lords to prosecute the
Seige, which they did with such vigor, that the Castle was taken and razed to
the ground, and likewise the Castle of Wark; after which the King returning to
Edinburgh was Crowned, Seven Regents being elected to Govern him and the
Kingdom, till he came to Age, of which the Queen and Bishop Kennedy were chief,
but next year she died, having lived somewhat dissolutely after her Husbands
death with Adam Hepburn a married man, whereby her Fame was impaired; The King
being now Twenty years old, married the Lady Margaret Daughter to the King of
Denmark; and the Isles of Orkney, being Twenty eight, and of Shetland eighteen,
were agreed to remain in the possession of the Kings of Scotland till her
Portion, which was fifty Thousand Florins, should be paid. The Earl of Arran,
one of the Commissioners sent to Denmark to bring over the Queen, had some
Enemies at Court, who in his Absence provoked the King against him, that he
threatened to take off his head at his return, of which his Wife who was the
Kings Sister gave him notice while he was on shipboard. The Kings Younger
Brother was Condemned for Conspiring to bewitch his brother to death, for which
his Veins were cut, and he Bled to death.

King James sent two Heralds by the instigation of the French King to King
Edward of England, to dissuade him from assisting the Duke of Burgundy against
France, whom Edward would not admit to audience till he had dispatched a Fleet
into Scotland where they took several ships, and burnt the Town of Blackness,
for which affront King James prepared an Army to invade England, but was forbid
by the Popes Legate, that all Christian Princes might unite against the Turks,
upon which King James disbanded his Forces; the Duke of Albany coming out of
France into England, King Edward received him honorably, promising, as some
write, to make him King of Scotland, and thereupon with Thirty Thousand Men,
under the Duke of Gloucester, and a strong Navy, he designed to invade Scotland
by Sea and Land; the King of Scots hearing of their approach raised all the
strength possible, and marched to the Town of Louder, where being Bucquain,
encamped, the Earls of Angus, Huntley Lennox, the Lords Gray, Lisle and others,
then in his Army, entered his Lodgings, charging him with several misdemeanors
to the damage of the Kingdom, especially hearkening to the Iewd Counsels of
Persons of meanbirth and Quality, such as Thomas Cookrain, whom from a Mason he
advanced to the Earldom of Mar; also for Coining Copper Money, and other
mischiefs: That he would not hearken to the advice of his Nobility, but
neglecting his Lawful Wife and Queen, lived in Adultery with an impudent
Strumpet called Daysy: That he had unjustly put his Brother the Earl of Mar,
to death, and banished his Brother, the Duke of Albany, and therefore they
resolved the Realm should be no longer disturbed by such naughty Persons.

Hereupon they hanged Thomas Cockrain, William Rogers, and James Hominil a
Tailor, over the Bridge at Louder, saving John Ramsey a Youth of eighteen, at
the Kings earnest desire, and committing the King to Edinburgh Castle, they
concluded a Truce with the English, whereby the Duke of Albany was restored to
his Country, Estate, and Honor; and so the English returned home having taken
the Castle of Berwick in their march into Scotland. At length the Duke was
persuaded by the Queen to set his Brother at Liberty without consent of the
other Lords, which they hearing of, fled every one to his own Estate, after
which followed much slaughter in several places, by this difference between the
King and his Nobles: The Duke of Albany suspecting that poison was given him in
drink, in the Kings Chamber, fled again from Court to Dumbar Castle, and
raising Forces was vanquished by the King, and then imbarkt for France; Edward
the fourth dying, King Richard usurpt the Crown, who concluded a peace with
Scotland for three years.

But the discontents of the People daily increasing, by reason of
mal-administration, and the King again entertaining mean Fellows into his
Council, who abused both Nobility and Commons, the Earls of Angus, Argile, and
Lennox, the Lords Hale, Hume, Drummond, Gray, and others, resolved to preform
these disorders by Arms, and to take off the name of Rebellion they made James
Duke of Rothsay the Kings Son and Heir, Captain General, (though against his
will) protesting ^hey only designed the removing of an evil King, not the
destruction of Monarchy or their Country, but the welfare thereof; the King
raised an Army, but before he would use force, sent to his Son and the Lords to
propose an Agreement; he likewise sent to ^he French and English Kings, and to
the Pope, to in^erpose in the quarrel; but the Scotch Nobility and Commons were
so desperately enraged, that they sent him word, if he would resign his Crown
and Dignity they would treat with him, else not; the same answer was given to
the English and French Ambassadors, which ^o incensed the King, that he
resolved to meet and fight them who were now marching toward Sterling, with ^ll
their strength, neither could the King be persuaded to stay till the Earls of
Huntly, Arrol, Athol, Craw^ord, Rothes, Sutherland, Cathnes and Marshall, with
other Lords came in with their forces, confisting of Forty Thousand men, but
presently joined Battle with them at Banocksbourn, where after a great carnage,
^he King being vanquished fled into a mill, whither being followed and found, he
was slain, and left stark^aked, in the Twenty Ninth Year of his Reign. 1488.

LXV. James the Fourth was next advanced to the Throne, about sixteen years
old, who was very penitent for being in Arms against his Father, wearing an
Iron chain about his middle, all his life on that account, proving a very pious
and just Prince. After his Coronation ^he Earl of Lindsey, and the Lord Lisle,
though in the Field with him at the slaughter of his Father, yet not finding
things to their expectation, raised an Army, causing the late Kings Bloody
shirt to be carried before them as a Banner, and marching toward Sterling
against the young King, were overthrown at Tollymoss, and diverse of the
Principal slain. A Parliament being called a general Pardon was granted by the
King, to those that fought against his Father, and those that aided his Father,
were suspended from bearing any public office for three years; It was likewise
declared, that the Death of his Father happened by his own default, and that
King James the Fourth and his Adherents were innocent of all slaughter then
made, and clearly acquitted from all fault or crime upon that occasion, the
three Estates testifying the same with their hands and seals, with the Kings
great seal annexed for confirming the same, which was showed to the Pope, the
King of France, Spain, Denmark and other Confederates, with whom the Ancient
Leagues were renewed. His two Benchren, the Duke of Rothsay and the Earl of
Mar, the K^caused to be educated in all princely Qualities; The Pope sent him a
Rose and Scepter of Gold.

At this time Henry the Seventh reigned in England, and Charles the French King
sent an Embassy to Scotland, that there was (...) probability of a Breach
betwixt England and France, desiring the assistance of King James, if it should
happen, and informing him that he had with him Richard D. of York Second sonto
Edward the fourth, who had been preserved many years by the Duchess of
Burgundy, whom he would send into Scotland, desiring his aid to settle the
Crown of England upon him; soon after, this pretended Duke, whose true name was
Perkin Warbeck, arrived, and King James by reason of this French recommendation
entertained him nobly, and married him to the Earl of Huntleys Daughter, his
near Kinswoman; and raising Forces, invaded England, hoping the English would
flock in to their new King, but wasting Northumberland, and finding none
regarded this young pretender, he returned with a Rich Booty; at length by the
mediation of the King of Spain, a Truce was concluded for three years, and King
Henry insisted to have Perkin delivered up, but King James, though abused by
him, would not consent, only desired him to withdraw out of the Realm, which he
did into Flanders, ^ut making another accempt on England he was taken, with his
Wife, whom for her beauty King Henry ^^ought a fitter match for an Emperor than
a Soldier, and therefore used her honorably, she continuing with the Queen,
as long as that King lived.

Shortly after a marriage was concluded between K. ^ames, and the Lady Margaret
Daughter to King Henry, and Peace to continue during both their lives; the ^ext
year the Queen was delivered of a son named ^ames; and two years after King
Henry 7 died and his Son Henry the Eighth succeeded, who sent an honorable
Embassage to King James. About this time the English took two Scots Ships, at
which King James was much offended, and required Sacisfaction, but received
^ittle, only King Henry promised to send Commissionert, to the Borders, to
adjust all differences; the French King and the Duke of Gelderland perceiving
Henry was resolved to make war with France, they both sent Ambassadors to King
James for his assistance, who being desirous of Peace, sent to the King of
England, to persuade him to unity, and offered to compound any differences
between them, but received a slight answer. Soon after Commissioners met on the
Borders, but could not agree, upon which King James sent a long Letter to
Henry, and received as long an answer, whereby James perceived the English
designed rather War than Peace, and therefore sent an Herald to the Borders to
denounce open War, and raising his Forces, the Lord Hume first made an attempt
upon sow English, who had fercht a Booty out of Scotland, following them into
Northumberland; but an Ambuscade of English suddenly issuing out, out most of
them off.

Mean while the whole power of Scotland and K. James in the head of them,
marched over the River Tweed into England, against whom the Earl of Surrey,
Lieutenant of the North, raised a puissant Army; and a^ Flodden Field a Bloody
Battle was fought, wherein above thirteen Thousand Scots were slain, with King
James himself. And a multitude of Noblemen and Gentlemen, and not above two
Thousand English, so that they obtained a complete Victory; thus died King
James in the twenty fifth year of his Reign, and the 39 of his Age, 1512. A
Prince who for his Politic and just Government deserves to be numbered amongst
the most excellent of the Scotch Princes.

LXVI. James the fifth his Son, a Child of a Year and five Months Old, was by
his mother (with the consent of the remnant of the Nobility who escaped)
Crowned King, the Queen being chosen Regent during his minority, assisted by
James Beaton Archbishop of Glasgow, and the Earls of Huntley, Angus and Arran,
but variance happening some of them sent secretly to the Duke of Albany, the
Kings Uncle in France, to come over and Govern the Realm, as being next Heir to
the Crown if the Child should die without issue, and a Parliament being called,
he was confirmed Governor; soon after the Queen was matried to Archibald
Dowglass Earl of Angus, and a Truce concluded with England for three years; the
Duke of Albany arrived from France, and was received with Triumph, upon which
the Earl of Angus and his Brother were banished the Realm; King Henry was much
displeased at Albany's advancement, knowing that he would promote the French
Interest against his, and sent a Herald to Scotland, to require the Duke to
depart, alleging it was agreed by the French King at their last Interview,
that he should not come into Scotland, and further, that the King of England
was Uncle to the King of Scots; whom he was bound to protect and defend, and
that it was not reasonable, since the Duke was next Heir to the Crown, that he
should have the Government of him, lest he should be made away, as other young
P^nces have been; that it was unjust for the Earl of Angus to be banished,
whereby he could not enjoy his Wife, the Sister of the King of England. The
Herald had likewise in charge, that if the Duke refused to depart the Realm, he
should declare open War against him.

The Duke of Albany weary of the dissentions among the Nobility, took his
leave, and departed into France, upon which a Peace was concluded with England,
and King James some time after married Magdalen Daughter to the French King,
but she dying within a year, he married Mary of Lorrain Duchess of Longuevil;
about which time great divisions happened in the Kingdom in opinions of
Religion, which seemed to shake the state; hereupon the King calling a Council
of his Ancient Servants, some of whom began to peep through the Clouds of those
ignorant times, the King demanded their advice in the matter, and freedom being
allowed one spoke to this effect.

Sir, It is not the least Blessing of your Government that the meanest Subject
has liberty to declare his Judgment to his Sovereign, and if ever it were a
time to deliver sound Counsel, it is now; your Kingdom is divided with
diversity of Opinions; it were to be wished that one true Religion were embraced
by all your Subjects, since differences therein are a punishment from God, for
men's horrible vices and roaring sias, and which many times occasion Factions,
Wars and utter Destruction to nations; but matters being in such great disorder
in your Kingdom, and Sectaries daily increasing, without dissembling my
thoughts to your Majesty, the preservation of their people being the supreme
and principal Law, which God Almighty has enjoined to all Princes, I think it
more expedient to tolerate both Religions, than to suffer the Common peace of
your Subjects to be torn in pieces: if you condemn to Death those that adhere
to the new Doctrines, for mere matters of faith, it will invite numbers who
were ignorant thereof, not only to favor their cause, but to embrace their
opinions, pity and commiseration opening the Gates, which spreads Doctrins, and
increases their numbers; if you banish them, they are so many Enemies abroad,
ready to invade and trouble the peace of their Native Country; to take Arms
against them is as dangerous, Religion cannot be preached by Arms, the first
Christians detested it, since it may produce Hypocrites, not sincere
Christians; if it be an Heresy, it is in the soul, upon which fire and Iron
cannot work; they must be overcome by Spiritual Arms; Love the men, and pity
their Errors. Who can enforce a man to believe or not believe what he pleases?
To tuin and extirpat them is a weakening to the state, since no man is so mean
or miserable, but he is a Member of the Commonwealth; It is false, and
erroneous, that a Kingdom cannot subsist which tolerateth two Religions, since
a little time will contract Acquaintance and Familiarity, yea they will be
intermixed in one City, Family and marriage Bed; why may not two Religions, I
pray, be suffered in a State, till by some sweet and gentle means they may be
reduced? Since is the Church of Rome, which boasts to be Unity it self, there
are almost infinite Sects and kinds of Monks, differing in their Laws, Rules of
Government, Diet, Apparel, Opinions of perfection; the Roman Empire had not its
extension by similitude in Religion; the Murders and Massacres committed upon
pretense of Religion are far more execrable and impious, than diversity of
opinions with peace and quiet can be unjust, since those who flesh themselves,
like famished Lions, in the Blood of their Neighbors, do as much as in them
lies to sacrifice their Souls to Devils, by not giving them time to repent of
their Errors. That Maxim of the Churchmen, that it is more necessary to destroy
Heretics, than Insidels, is designed more for the enlarging of the Sovereignty
and Dominion of the Pope, than propagating the Christian Religion; Kingdoms,
and Soveraignties, should not be governed by the Laws and Interest of Priests
and Churchmen, but for the public weal, which often requires the tolerating some
Defects and Errors; It is the duty of all Christian Princes to endeavor that
their Subjects may observe all Gods Commandments, yet when some vice cannot be
extirpated without ruin of the state, humane Judgment thinks it better to
suffer it, as Fornication and the like. These men are of the same nature as we,
worship one God, believe the same holy Records, aim at Salvation, fear to
offend God as well as we, they only find some abuses in our Church, and require
a reformation, and shall we for this pursue them with Fire and Sword, and root
them out of the Earth? If they be out of the way let us bring them in; if they
be in darkness let us give them light, not kill, banish and burn those whom by
love and sweetness we might reduce and recall again. Let their opinions be heard
and examined before we condemn them, which being Holily and Righteously done,
we shall find it is not our Religion, but our private Interests and passion
which trouble us and the State.

Yet the King followed not this Counsel, but inclined to the Prelates, who
persuaded him, that if he suffered the People to question points in Religion,
they would soon presume to make laws for the Government, and restrain the
Sovereign Authority. In pursuatice here of all who differed from the Romish
Faith were proceeded against with the utmost severity, which yet did but
increase their number.

King Henry fearing the design of the Emperor and French in conjunction with
the Pope against him, in revenge for having renounced his Supremacy, (...), to
meet King James at York, and communicate with him about matters of public
advantage to both Kingdoms, which James promised to do, but by the persuasions
of the Cardinal and Bishops, who doubted his Uncle would prevail with him to
follow his Example in throwing off the Romish Yoke, he was dissuaded from it,
though the Lord of Grange made him so sensible of the danger of not performing
his promise, by creating an unnecessary War, that one time he thus accosted the
Prelates, Wherefore, said he, did my Predecessors give so many Lands and Rents
to the Kirk? Was it to maintain Hawks, Hounds and Whores for a number of Idle
Priests? The King of England burns the King of Denmark, beheads you, and I will
stab you with this Whinyard. However when his Passion was over, their Gold, and
Golden promises of continual supplies in case of War, prevailed upon him to put
an affront upon King Henry, and not to meet him, who took it so hainously that
he resolved to invade Scotland, publishing a declaration of the motives
thereunto, making great preparations by Sea and Land, and at Solloway Moss the
Scotch Nobility were so discontented that one Oliver Sinclare a Person of mean
birth, was preferred before them to be Lieutenant General, that resolving not to
fight under such a Commander, they suffered themselves to be overcome without
resistance or the loss of one man on either side.

The K. with the grief hereof, and of his two only Sons, who died in one day
the year before, fell into a deep melancholy; the Queen about this time was
delivered of a Daughter who only survived him, at the news whereof sighing a
farewell to the World, It will end as it began (says he) the Crown came by a
Woman, and with a Woman it will go, many miseries approach this poor Kingdom;
King Henry will either take it by Arms or marriage; and five days after he
yielded up the Ghost, 1542.

LXVII. Mary his only Daughter, a Child of seven days Old, succeeded her
Father, of which King Henry having notice, proposed to the Lords who were taken
at Solloway Moss, marriage was between his Son Ed^ ward, and their young Queen,
promising them their liberty without ransom, if they would promote the
business, which they all solemnly engaging to perfor^^ were freed and sent
home. Soon after a Parliament being called, Ambassadors were sent to Henry to
confirm the same, and a Peace was concluded for Ten years by his Authority; The
Earl of Arran was made Governor of the Realm, who seemed to embrace the
reformed Religion, causing one Friar William to preach against Images and other
Popish Ceremonies, the Bible was translated into the English Tongue; and
Beaton, Cardinal and Archbishop of St. Andrews, an Enemy to the Reformation,
was imprisoned.

The French King suspecting the ancient League with France might be weakened by
his Alliance with England, sent Matthew Earl of Lennox then in his service into
Scotland, to procure the Government of the Kingdom, as due to him by right,
though now unjustly usurpt by the Earl of Arran, directing Letters to diverse
Scots Lords of the French Faction, to assist him therein; having delivered his
message he found the Lords and Governor much inclined to King Henry's
Interest, who sent assistance to them against Lennox, but being upon the
Borders, the Cardinal so managed his Kinsman the E. of Arran, that he revolted
from the King of England, and joined with the Cardinal, the Queen Dowager, and
the French Faction, at which the Earl of Lennox was so offended; that he
renounced the French Kings service, and joined with King Henry, who sent him
assistance, wherewith he burnt Edinburgh, and took Leith, with other places,
discomfiting the Scots in diver^ skirmishes, with the aid of Sir Ralph Evers,
and other English Commanders.

At this time Cardinal Beaton caused Mr. George Wisenart to be burnt at St.
Andrews for Heresy, a man learned, an Excellent Preacher, and well beloved by
the People; soon after the Cardinal being in his Castle at St. Andrews, several
of his intimate acquaintance, as Norman Lord Lesly, L. Grange and sixteen
others entered the Castle, and slew him in his Bed, seized upon all the
Ammunition and Rich Furniture; and other Lords and Gentlemen joining with them,
were received into the Castle, which they defended against the Governor. It is
recorded, that the Cardinal leaning out of the Castle Window, some days before,
in great Triumph, to see Mr. Wisehart burnt, the Martyr looking up toward him,
uttered this Prophetical speech: He that in such state from that high place now
feeds his eyes with many torments, shall in few days be hanged out of the same
Window with as much shame and Ignominy as he now leans there with pride, Which
now happened, for, the Provost raising the Town, came to the Castle Gates,
crying, What have ye done with the Lord Cardinal, where is he? To whom they
answered from within, Return to your houses for he has received his reward,
and will trouble the World no more. But they cried, We will never depart till
we see him. Upon which he was hanged out of that very Window to satisfy the
People he was dead. Those within the Castle defended it 8 Months, but Forces
being sent from France, they were compelled to yield upon Terms, only their
lives saved, though most of them were by the French sent to the Galleys, and
after redeemed by their Friends for great Sums of Money.

About this time Francis the French King died, and Henry the Second succeeded.
Henry the Eighth of England likewise died, and left the Crown to his Son Edward
the Sixth, during whose Minority the Duke of Somerset was Protector of the
Kingdom, who sent to demand the confirating of the Marriage with Q. Mary, which
being denied by the influence of French Counsels, he sent an Army into Scotland
under the Earl of Warwick, who obtained a great Victory, a multitude of the
Scots being killed, and many Prisoners taken; upon which diverse strong Forts
and Castles were rendered to the English; after this more ^id was sent from
France, wherewith they had diverse successful skirmishes with the English; the
Young Q. was likewise sent to France, where she was Married to Francis the
Dauphin of France; Some time after a Parliament was called by the Queen
Dowager, who was made Regent of Scotland, wherein a motion was made that Common
Prayer should be read in the English Tongue, which was greatly opposed by the
Bishops, and much disturbance happened; the Queen Regent caused John Kno^ and
others to be summoned before her, who appearing were denounced Rebels; hereupon
Knox persuaded some of the Nobility and Burgesses to pull down Images and
Altars in several Churches, and to suppress diverse Priories; the Queens Forces
under the Duke of Castleherault, meeting and discoursing with the Reformers,
who were the Earls of Argile, Arran, Lord Hammilton, and others, joined with
them, and being assisted by Queen Elizabeth, several encounters happened, but
at length all matters were composed, and a peace concluded between England and
Scotland, about which time the Queen Regent died.

The Earl of Lennox was restored to his Honor and Estate, and Francis the
French King Husband to Q. Mary dying, she was now a Widow, when taking a
Journey through Fife, she was much pleased with Henry Lord Darnly Eldest Son to
the Earl of Lennox, a proper Young Gentleman, and quickly Married him though
the match was strongly opposed by the Earl of Murray and Queen Elizabeth; he
was then Proclaimed King at the Market Cross of Edinburgh; and the D. of
Castleherault, the Earls of Argile, Murray, and their accomplices were summoned
to appear before the Queen and Council in six days, which they refusing were
put to the Horn, and Forces raised to pursue them who fled into England and
entreated that Queen to interpose in their behalf, but a Parliament being
called they were outlawed; whereupon their Friends in Scotland got an Interest
in the King, persuading him that if he would restore the Banished Lords, and
follow their Counsel, they would make him absolute King of Scotland, and that
the Queen should have little Interest in the Government; to this he consented,
and going about eight a Clock one Evering into the Queens Privy Chamber,
attended by the Earl of Morton, the Lords Ruthen and Lindsey, they told the
Queen, they would no longer suffer her to Govern the Realm, and abuse them with
the Counsel of Strangers, as she had hitherto lone, and seizing up on David
Rizio an Italian, her Secretary, immediately Slew him, he crying out lamentably
Justitia, Justitia, the King himself being present, and his Dagger found
sticking in the Body; the Queen was shut up in her Chamber, and and a Guard set
upon her, the Earls of Huntley and Bothwel escaped by the back Window.

Next day the banished Lords came from N^wcastle to Edinburgh, and were
joyfully received by the King and his Party; but the Queen a while after having
private conference with him, persuaded him to forsake those Lords, and go with
her; and then joining with Huntley and Bothwel, Orders were issued for raising
Forces, whereupon those Lords fled again to England, but upon Queen Marys
request all concerned in the Murder were ordered to depart; at this time the
Queen wea delivered of a Son in Edinburgh Castle, and immediately notice
thereof sent to Queen ^lizabeth by Sir James Melvil, who waited upon her at
Greenwich; when she first heard the News by Secretary Cecil, which he whispered
in her ear as ^he was merrily dancing after supper, on a sudden all her Mirth
was laid aside, and retiring ^he burst out into these Expressions, the Queen of
the Scots is Mother of a fair Son, and I am nothing but a birren Stock; yet the
next day she seemed very joyful to the Messenger, and sent the Earl of Bedford,
to declare the Queen to be Godmother, the King of France and the Duke of Savoy
being Godfathers, and the Infant was Christened James, In June 1565. In January
following, the King came to Glasgow, where he fell. Sick, and removing thence
to Edinburgh, the Queen lodged at the Holy Rood House, but the King in a House
within the Town near the Field, where one night he was barbarously Murdered,
the House being blown up, and his Dead Body thrown in the Orchard.

Earl Bothwel was vehemently suspected as the Chief Actor, but it was so
carried that he was not only cleared by an Assize or Trial, but soon after
married the Queen, which caused great admiration; some of the Lords, enraged at
Bothwels promotion, fly to Arms and designed to have supprized the Queen and
him, but they got into the Castle of Dumbar, and raised Forces, who meeting
with those of the Nobility, much Bloodslied might have happened, had not the
French Ambassador interposed, and Bothwel flying, the Queen delivered her self
up to the discontented Lords who brought her to Edinburgh; Bothwel escaped into
Denmark, and died there; several of the Murderers were after taken and
Executed, who all accused Bothwel as the Chief Instrument in the Murder of the
King.

LXVIII. James the Sixth, not above two years Old, was then Crowned at
Sterling, by Commission from the Queen his Mother, who resigned the Government,
and the Earl of Murray was chosen Regent during his Minority with power to
associate seven others to his assistance, namely the Duke of Castleherault, and
the Earls of Lennox. Argile, Athol, Morton, Glencarn and Mar; and a Parliament
being called an Act was made for abolishing the Popes Authority in Scotland;
May 2. the Queen escaped out of Locklevyn, where she was kept by the Regent and
the Lords, and with the assistance of George Dowglass and others was conveyed
to Hammilton Castle, where she raised Forces; the Regent upon the News got his
Friends together, and within two miles of Glasgow a Battle was fought, wherein
the Queens Party was discomfited, fourteen of the name of Hamilton being slain;
three hundred taken prisoners, and among them several Lords; the Queen
perceiving from the place where she stood, the overthrow of her Forces,
withdrew into Galloway, and from thence by the Sea to Workington in England,
where she was stayed by Sir Ralph Sadler, and conveyed to Carlisle; after this
all the Castles and Garrisons of the Queens Friends were surrendered to the
Regent.

In 1569 the Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland raised a Rebellion against
Queen Elizabeth, and burned the Bible, but being suppressed by the diligence of
the Earl of Sussex, and other Gallant Captains, they fled into Scotland; soon
after the Regent riding through Lithgow was shot to death with an Harquebuz by
one James Hammilton; after this Murder, the Lords sent for the Earl of Lennox
out of England, who came to Edinburgh with several Lords and Gentlemen, and
reduced the Earl of Huntley and other Lords that opposed him, and was by the
Parliament made Regent of the Kingdom; The Queens Lords again raised Forces;
and fortified several places, but by the conduct of the Regent were defeated in
several skirmishes; but at length three hundred entering one morning early in
the Regents House at Sterling, wounded him with a Pistol, of which he died, and
the Lords chose the Earl of Mar Regent in his stead, who Thirteen Months after
died, and the Earl of Morton succeeded, at which time the Duke of Norfolk was
Beheaded upon Towerhill, for High Treason, and among other Articles, for
designing to Marry the Queen of Scots; Ten days after Commissioners were sent
to Queen Mary, charging her for usurping the Tittle and Arms of England, and
contriving to Marry the Duke of Norfolk, to which she answered in the Negative;
the Earl of Northnmberland had wandered in the Woods of Scotland since his last
Rebellion and was secured from being delivered up by Murray, but now Morton
sells him to the Governor of Berwick and he was soon after Beheaded at York,
The Realm was now divided between two Factions, The King and the Reformers, and
the Queen and her Lords who kept the Castle of Edinburgh, but by assistance
from England the Regent gained it; now several differences arose in matters of
Religion, some Lords approving o^ Reformed Episcopacy, and others were for the
Discipline of Geneva, which caused many hot contests, and the Regent being
opposed, the King about Twelve Years old was Crowned at Edinburgh, and a
Parliament being called several Acts were made concerning Religion.

The Earl of Morton late Regent is about this time accused for the Murder of
the late K. which he confessed before he died, excusing it, as being forced
thereto by the disturbances of that time; the Fatal Ax, called the Maiden,
which he had caused to be made by a pattern at Hallifax in Yorkshire, falling
down between two Posts, was now the Instrument of his own Execution. The Earls
of Mar and Gowry, the Lords, Lindsey, Boyd, with two Abbots, and others seized
the K at Ruthen, from whom he after freed himself, for being in Falkland, he
desired to Visit his Uncle the Earl of March at Saint Andrews, where taking a
View of the Castle, Colonel Stuart acquainted of the design, clapped to the
Gates, and shut out the company, and next day the Earls of Argile, Marshal,
Montross and Rothes, the Kings Friends came thither to him, and to prevent
further mischiefs the K Pardoned those Lords who had been his forms Keepers;
but Earl Gowry was Condemned and Executed; and the Earl of Arran was made Lord
Chancellor.

In 1586 Mary Queen of Scots was brought to a Trial at Fotheringay Castle in
Northamptonshire before Twenty four Commissioners, whose Authority she disowned
as being a free Princess, yet being charged that Babington, with her privity,
defigned the death of Q. Elizabeth, she was Condemned and Beheaded,
notwithstanding the mediation of several Foreign Princes, and the endeavors
of her Son K. James, who threatred severe revenge for such an unparallelled
Act. But domeslick quarrels and Queen Elizabeth's Caresses at length diverted
those thoughts. In 1558. The Spainish Armado came against England, upon which
the King was persuaded to take this opportunity against Q. Elizabeth, but he
told his Lords he would not accept the assistance of one mightier than himself
to fight his cause, left he should become Master of all. Which resolution much
pleased the Queen, as she signified to him by Sir 3. Sidney; the defeat of the
Spaiqish Fleet much Sisturbed the Catholics in Scotland; Bothwel and Hundey
take Arms, but afterward submit to mercy; The King then goes to Norway and
there Mar^ies Ann Prinness of Denmark, and returning she was Crowned with great
Triumph.

King James valued himself much upon his skill in the Politics, which he
usually called, King Croft, and that Maxim of the Emperor Tiberius was applied
to him either by himself or his Courtiers, Qui nescit d^iffimulare nesciat
regnare; He that cannot dissemble know, (...) how to Reign, Of which he gave
several pregna^ (...) stances, particularly about this time, For upon (...)
turn from Denmark, the next Sunday after, (...) Sermon was ended, the King made
a speech to the Presbyterian Noblemen, Gentlemen and Ministers present,
declaring; that he was come thither to thank God for his prosperous return; To
thank them for the good order they had kept in his absence, and to thank the
Ministers for their care in stirring up the people to fast and pray for his
safe return; And promised to amend his former negligence, and to execute
justice without deceit or favor, and to see the Kirks better provided with
Ministers, acknowledging, that many things had been formerly out of order,
partly by the iniquity of the times, and partly by reason of his you^^^ but now
he had seen more, and being married he would be more stayed and engaged to give
himself wholly up to the execution of his promises for the future: He required
the Ministers to purg themselves, and to be impartial in their own cause,
telling them, It was his duty to see them reformed as well as it was theirs to
urge him, and the Nobility to reform themselves; and in conclusion he praised
God, that he was born in such a time of the Light of the Gospel, and in such a
year as to be King of the sincerest Kirk in the World; The Kirk of Geneva, said
he, keep the Pasch and Yule, what rule have they for them? They have no
institution; As for our Neighbor Kirk in England their service is an evil said
Mass in English, they want nothing of the Mass but the Listings; I charge you
my good People, Ministers, Doctors, Elders, Nobles, Gentlemen and Barons to
stand to your purity, and exhort the People to do the same, and I forsooth, so
long as I brook my life and Crown, shall maintain the same against all deadly,
etc.

This Zealous speech was received with such great (...) ^use that nothing was
heard for a quarter of an (...) but praising God and praying for the King. Yet
(...) ^ard by his policy and endeavors, Episcopacy was brought into that
Kingdom, and 2 Archbishops with ^2 Bishops ordained for the Government of the
Church, which occasioned many dangerous disturbances, and differences between
the King and the Presbyters, who he thought owned many principles not so
favorable to Monarchy, of which there was an instance in the reign of his
Mother Queen Mary, with whom Mr. John Knox that eminent Presbyterian Minister
being in conference spalie thus to her; Madam, if Princes exceed their bounds
they may be resisted even by power, for there is no greater honor nor
obedience to be given to Princes than God has commanded to be given to Father
and Mother; If Children join together against their Father, stricken with a
Phrensy, and seeking to slay his own Children, and if they apprehend him, take
his Sword or other Weapons from him; if they bind his hands and keep him in
prison till his Fury be over, do they offer him any wrong? or will God be
offended with them for hindering their Father from committing horrible murder?
Even so Madam, if Princes will murder their good subjects, their blind zeal is
but a mad Frenzy, and to take the Sword from them, to bind their hands, and to
cast them into prison, till they be brought to a sober mind, is not
disobedience, but just obedience, because it agrees with the word of God; the
Queen stood still as one amazed for about a quarter of an hour, and changed her
countenance at this bold speech. When King James came to the Crown of England,
the Presbyterians defired the relaxation of some of the controverted ceremonies
in the Church; upon which he appointed a Conserence at Hampton Court between
some of them and the Bishops, where the K. discovered so much earnestness
against the Presbyterians, and such Zeal for not allowing any abatements or
alterations either in the Common Prayer, or Episcopal Discipline, that
Archbishop Whitgift isaid, he was verily persuaded that the King spoke by the
spirit of God; so that either the change of the air, or clearer information
occasioned a very extraordinary alteration of his sentiments in these matters.

The Earl of Bothwel now endeavors to seize the King and Court, but the design
miscarrying he flies, some of his company being hanged next morning, to appease
the People. After this the Earls of Huntley and Murray quarrelling, Earl Murray
was miserably slain; Bothwel then contrives new designs, and seizes the K. at
Holy Rood House, and forces him to sign his pardon, to restore him all formerly
possessed by him, and to abandon the Chancellor, L. Hume, Master of Glammis,
and others, whereupon he grew so insolent, that the King complains of him, and
some of his Lords joining with him, he got out of his hands, and Bothwel is
Proclaimed a Rebel.

In 1593 Prince Henry was born, who was solemnly baptized in great State, Lion
Herald at Arms Proclaiming his Title thus, Henry Frederick Knight. and Baron of
Rensrew. L. of the Isles, E. of Carrick, Duke of Rothsay, Prince and Steward of
Scotland. Bothwel again raises a Rebellion with the assistance of the Popish
Lords, but being discomfited, he flies into France, and thence to Naples, where
he died poor and miserable.

In 1600 Charles his Son and successor was born at Dumferling in Scotland, Nov.
19. and was so named in relation to the Duke of Lennox the King's Uncle. About
the same time a Conspiracy was reported to have been made by Earl Gowry, son of
him aforementioned, against the Kings life, but he was killed by the Guards;
March 26. 1603. King James had news that Queen Elizabeth was dead, and had
declared him successor, contrary to the opinion of many of the Scortish
Courtiers, who being wearied with the tediousness of their expectation, did
believe at last it would never be acknowledged by the Lords of England that the
Queen was dead so long as there was any old Woman alive in England to wear good
Clothes, and take the name of Q. upon her; this was seconded with the advice of
the Kings being Proclaimed her lawful successor, whereupon he prepared himself
for England, the late Queens Favorites being ready to receive him, and adore
the rising Sun; of whch toward her latter end they gave signal intimations, for
her Courtiers would sometimes in her presence glance at the King of the Scots
as her successor (though they knew it would put her into a passion to speak of
a successor) and she would tell them; Was this imputed to the Earl of Essex for
a crime, and is it less in you? Yea Secretary Cecil himself kept a
correspondence with King James, which he was once like to have been intrapt in;
for the Queen taking the air upon Black heath hear Greenwich, a Post from
Scotland came, whereupon she stayed her Coach to receive the Pacquer, but the
Secretary being in the Coach with her, fearful that his Intrigues would be
discovered, suddenly calls for a Knife and cuts the string, and smelling to the
letters, tells her, that they looked and smelt illfavouredly coming out of so
many filthy Budgets, and ought to be aired before her Majesty touched them;
Which the Queen who was a great enemy to ill sents, ordered to be done, and was
thereby prevented of smelling out the design. In his way to London the King was
treated and applauded in so extraordinary a manner by the English Nobility and
Gentry, that a Scotch Gentleman said publicly, These people will spoil a good
King. May 11 1603. he arrived at Whitchall in the thirty sixth year both of his
age and Reign in Scotland, the Queen and Prince Henry following a few weeks
after, and in July the King and Q. were Crowned at Westminster.

In March following a Parliament was summoned, to whom the King, in a long
speech, earnestly recommended the Union of Scotland with England, since in his
person who descended lineally from King Henry seventh, The Union of the two
Houses of Lancaster and York was reunited and confirmed, and declared the many
advantages that from thence would redound to both Kingdoms. But the English
stumbled at this Partition, thinking it an unequal division, and fearing the
Scots creeping into English Lordships and English Ladies beds, in both which
they already began to be active, and likewise finding that the Kings bounty
contracted it self into private Favorites, bestowing the affection he promised
whole people upon one man, as afterward on Somerset and Bueking ham, they
doubted that Scotland though the least, might, yet be the most predominant
part; However in persuance of this project, He is Proclaimed King of Great
Britain, England must no more be a name, the Scottish Coyns are made current,
and our ships must have St. Georges and St. Andrews Crosses quartered together
in their Fings; with all outward signs of Amity; But although those English
Gentlemen that had not tasted of the Kings bounty repined to see the Scots
advanced from their blue Bonnets to costly Bevers, as the Satirical Lampoons of
that Age sufficiently demonstrated, yet the King guided the Helm of State so
politiekly that these small Gusts were not felt; The Parliament, to satisfy the
Kings desires about the Union, made an Act to authorize certain Commissioners
to meet, Treat, and consult with others nominated by the Parliament of
Scotland, concerning such matters as they should think necessary for the honor
of the K. and common good of both Kingdoms; but the good intentions of this
Union took no effect.

1605 The horrible Powder Treason of the Papists against the King and
Parliament was happily discovered to the Confusion of the Conspirators. In 1610
King Henry the fourth, Surnamed the Great, of France (in the height of his
Glory, having prepared a mighty Army and a vast Mass of Treasure, the intent
whereof was kept very secret) received his deaths wound in his Caroch in one of
the streets of Paris by a poisoned Dagger from the bloody hand of Ravilliac who
was thought to be incited thereto by the Jesuits, that were not assured of that
Kings thorough conversion (as they called it) to the Roman Church.

In 1612 Prince Henry died, and there was a discourse that he was poisoned by a
Bunch of Grapes, or by the venomous scent of a pair of Gloves, but the
Physicians gave it under their hands that he dyed of a strong malignant Fever.
In 1617 the King after 14 years absence-went into Scotland; March 27 1625 King
James died at Theobates in the 59 year of Age, and the 22 of his Reign in
England, and was buried at Westminister.

LXIX. Charles his only Son and Heir succee led him, and in 1633. being the
Ninth year of his reign, made a Journey into Scotland, and was Solemnly Crowned
King at Edinburgh, though he would willingly have avoided the trouble of going
thither; for he writ to a Scottish Lord who was entrusted with that Crown to
bring it into England, that the Geremony might have been performed here, but
the Lord returned answer; That he durst not be so false to his trust, yet if
his Majesty would be pleased to accept thereof in ^cotland he should find those
his people ready to yield him the highest honor, but if he should long defer
that duty they might be perhaps inclined to make choice of another King.

The Scotch Parliament were now sitting, and that Nation discovered great
discontent at the passing of several Acts there; and the generality of the
People would not suffer the Bishop of Dumblain Dean of the Kings private
Chapel there, to read the Common Prayer, neither durst they receive the
Communion on their knees, nor wear a Surplice. In 1637 the King designing a
Uniformity of Church Government in both Kingdoms sent them a Book of Common
Prayer, or Liturgy, with an express command that they should read it in
Churches; of which the Scotch complained, as not being allowed in their Church
in a National Synod, that it was not the Same with that in England, but much
altered in many places for the worst, the variations approaching directly to
the Roman Missal, and that all the parts of Popery were there; The King
published a Declaration to excuse it, alleging, That it was not rendered them in
the same words with the English, lest they should misconstrue it as a budg of
dependancy of that Church upon this, and that the alterations were insensible,
etc. But this did not satisfy, so that when the Book was read by the Kings
Command in the great Kirk at Edinburgh, a great uproar happened, in which the
Bishop that read it hardly escaped, and the Nobility and ministers joining with
the Plebeians, a petition was sent for recalling the order, but the King was
immovable, and sent another peremptory order for reading it, commanding all
Petitioners to depart from Edinburgh, and that the Council should receive no
more Petitions; and whereas the Bishops were charged as the cause of this
iunovation, the King by Proclamation declared, that the Bishops were wrougfully
accused about the Prayer Book, that he himself was the Author of it, and all
done by his command; He condemned their proceedings as Tumultuous, and
denounced them Traitors who persist therein.

Against this Proclamation the Lords of the Commission protested, and entered
into a Solemn League and Covenant, which was subscribed by the Nobles,
Ministers, and all sorts of men; at which the King was iuraged and condemned
the Covenant, but at length was persuaded not to press the reading of the Book,
Nov. 1. a National Synod is called at Glasgow, out within seven days it was
dissolved by the Marquis of Hamilton as Commissioner; the Clergy protested
against this Dissolution, and continued to (...), and make what Laws and
Decrees they thought fit, and then dissolved themselves and published a
Declaration directed to all sincere and good Christians in England concerning
the innodency of their intentions. The King after a sharp Proclamation, which
he ordered to he read in all English Churches, raised an Army to subdue them by
force; the Covenanting Lords published a Remonstrance in answer to it, and in
pursuance there of seized all the considerable Forts and Castles, disarming all
persons they de^med disaffected to them, and chose Sr. Alexander Lesly an old
Soldier to be their General; but by the modiation of some moderate Peers a
Pacification was made^ June 18. 1639. and both Armies disbanded; but after the
Kings return to London, his heart was again estranged from the Scots and the
paper of the Pacification which they had published was ordered to be burnt by
the Common Hangman; The Scots complained of this, and that their Parliament was
dissolved when great business of stare was depending, which was an open breach
of their liberty; and against the Laws of the Kingdom, with other Greivances,
of which they sent an account to the King by some Lords, who upon their coming
to London were imprisoned in the Tower.

April 13. following a Parliament was called in England with whom the King was
urgent to raise money for a war with Scotland, but they de monstrating some
aversness to that War, were dissolved May 5. following; to the great regret of
the generality of the people, there having none been called for 11. years
before; The War with Scotland now proceeded vigorously, the Earl of Stafford
being General, and some skirmishes happened near Berwick; But diverse of the
English Nobility being unsatisfied with the present proceedings, Petitioned the
King to call another Parliament in England, to redress the Greivances of the
Kingdoms who wanting Money, was obliged to comply with their desires, and in
the mean time a Cessation of Arms was concluded for two Months, during which
the Scors were to be paid 850. a day, or otherwise to raise it in the Northern
Counties; The Parliament met at Westminster November 3. 1640. and discovered
much kindness to the Scots, whom they judged the instruments of their meeting,
and though the King had declated them Rebels, and desired they might be driven
out of the Kingdom; yet the Parliament continued the Cessation, and ordered,
That they should be recompensed for all their charges and losses that this
mischievous War had brought upon them; That the Scotch ships taken since the
War should be restored, and 4000. pound paid to newrig them; That the full sum
of three hundred thousand Pounds should be given them toward a supply of the
necessities of their brethren of Scotland; The Scors Commissioners at London
gave thanks to both houses not only for the money, but for the kind Title of
Brethren, and all Books Libels and Proclaimations against the Scots were voted
to be called in, and a Thanksgiving was appointed, for the happy Peace, and
both Armies were to be instantly disbanded.

These proceedings still more incensed the King against the Scots, and in
August 1641. he resolved to take a Journey into Scotland, though earnes^ly
dissuaded from it by the Parliament. Oct. 23. while the King was there, the
horrid Rebellion in Ireland broke forth, wherein above 200000. Protestants were
sacrificed to the malice and fury of the Papists.

In 1642. The King left London, and went to York, after whom the Parliament
sent a Declaration, wherein they charge him, That at his being in Scotland he
had countenanced the fish in their Rebellion, with several other severe
Reflections. To which the King ret^^n'd answer, and writ a Letter to the Privy
Council of Scotland to clear himself from the imputation of being Popishly
affected, or guilty of the bloodshed in Ireland, etc.

Hereupon the Scots interpbsed their mediation to compose the differences
between the King and his Parliament. Humbly desiring him to hearken to them as
his greatest, best, and most unparalle'd Council, etc, And like wife declared,
They will not meddle with any verbal or real engagement for the King against
them; for which the Parliament made them an affectionate acknowledgment. In
1643. the King set up his Standard at Notringham, and raised Forces against the
Parliament, who likewise gathered an Army to oppose him, and many Battles and
ski^mishes happened between them, wherein the King was so successful that by
the latter end of that year he had subdued all the West, Wales, and the North
of England to the borders of Scotland. In this desperate condition the
Parliament invited the Scots to come in to their assistance with an Army of
Twenty one Thousand Horse and foot, engaging to pay an hundred thousand pound
toward raising them; and the Solemn League and Covenant was ordered to be taken
by all persons whatsoever; In pu^ suance of this invitation the Scots entered
England in January following with an Army of 18000. Foot and 2000. Horse, under
the Earl of Leven their General, who took several Towns and Forts and much
weakened the Earl of Newcastles Army, and were very serviceable in that great
victory at Marston Moor July 3. 1644. wherein near 9000. of the Kings Army were
slain; And in October following the Town of Newcastle after a long seige was
surendred to them; as York had been sometime before; while the Scots were
assisting the Parliament the Marquis of Montross by the Kings Commission raised
an Army against the Covenanters in Scotland, who being joined by some Irish
Rebels sent from thence under the Earl of Antrim, made sudden excursions out of
the Highlands, and fell into the Neighboring Countries, wasting and burning
all before them, and then returned among the thick Woods and craggy mountains,
so that to restrain them an Army of 12000 men was sent against them by the
Parliament of Scotland, who declared Montross with some other Lords Traitors
and Enemies to their Country; Montross had various fortune, at one time he
killed and took prisoners 1500 of the Earl of Argiles men, and afterward
received a great defeat from General Huny and was forced to fly to his craggy
retreats; soon after he was again beaten by Huny near Dundee; yet in a short
time he showed himself again, and became very formidable to all Scotland; The
Scotch Army were now at the seige of Newarck, but the Horse were obliged to
march home to the relief of their Country, which by the frailty of human
affairs, was in the space of one month lost and received again; for it being
agreed between the King and Montross that the first should march Northward, and
the other South to join and make a considerable Army in those parts, the
Kendeavoured to do it with a good body of Horse but was prevented by the
Parliaments Forces; yet Montross mindful of his promise, broke out into the
South parts of Scotland with greater success then could have been expected,
having scarce 4000. Highlanders and Irish, and at a place near Kilsithe the
Scotch Army fell into one of his Ambuscades among the craggy rocks and strait
passages, and were cut off with a miserable slaughter above 5000. being slain,
and none escaped almost but whom the wearied Conquerors had not time to kill,
Montross sparing none saying, They had no need of prisoners; The Covenanters
had no Army for a Reserve, or Forces to stop the Victor, to whom almost all the
Towns presently yielded, and his numbers daily increased. So that all the chief
Nobility of that Party fled into England; but about a month after L^. General
Lesly arriving there with his Horse, October 13. 1645. he engaged Montrosses
Army at Selkrik and in an hours space gave him a total defeat, upon the same
day (as a German Writer observes) wherein the Queen of England at Paris was
singing Te Deum for Montrosses Victory at Kilsithe;

Neither had the Kings affairs better success in England, the Parliaments
Forces having by many field battles and gaining of Towns, vanquished his Army in
most Countries; some few Garrisons only defended themselves, and among them the
strongest was Newwarck, which was straightly beseiged by General Leven, Pointz
and Roffiter; but though the Plague raged in the Town, and they began to want
provision, yet they held out in hopes of advantage from the discontents in the
Scotch Army, who commplained of the neglect of Church Government, and the
Covenant, and for want of pay though they had received above two hundred
thousand pound in two years, besides great sums extorted from the Northern
Countries;

The King hearing of these dissenters, resolved if possible to serve himself of
them, and therefore privately went out of Oxford, and came to the Scotch Camp
at Southwell, May 5. 1646. The Scots seemed amazed at his coming, and gave
notice of it to the English Commissioners there present, they sent the news to
Parliament, who required them to detain the King at Southwell, but they
contrary to that order carried him away with them Northward to Newcastle; The
Scots excused their departure, Newark being yielded to the English by the Kings
order, and that no work was left for them, That as the King came to them of his
own accord unexpected, so he followed their Army, neither being entreated nor
forbidden by them.

Upon this the Parliament voted, That the person of the King should be disposed
of by both Houses of Parliament. Which caused great heats between the two
Nations, but at length the Scots agreed to deliver up Berwick, Carlisle and
Newcastle upon the receiving of four hundred thousand pound, and the King was
delivered into the hands of the English Commissioners, and brought by them with
great observance and honorable attendance to his Palace at Holmby in
Northhamptonshire, and the Scotch Army marched home again; But June 4. 1647. he
was taken away from thence out of the hands of the Parliament Commissioners, by
a Party of the English Army, and brought by his own desire to Newmarket, and
from thence to Hampton Court, and soon after the Parliament pass a vote, That
they would make no further Address to the King; Who had a while before privately
withdrawn himself to the Isle of Wight, and from thence had sent to the
Parliament, that he might be admitted to Treat personally at London; the
Commissioners of Scotland with great, vehemence pressing that it might be
granted.

The Kings Friends were so exasperated with these Votes that several
Insurrections were made at the same time in diverse parts of England, so that
the King this Summer 1648. though set aside and confined to the Isle of Wight
seemed more formidable than when he was followed by the strongest Armies; but
the greatest danger that threatened the Parliament was from the North, and
Scotland, for Duke Hammilton in July with a numerous Army of Scots entered
England, and by joining some English Forces became 25000, strong; but Cromwell
and Lambert though much inferior, being some ten thousand, August 20. engaged
them near Preston in Lancashire, and entirely routed them, killing 3000. and
taking 9000. Prisoners, pursuing them above 20 miles; Duke Hammilton was taken
with about 3000. Horse, and being brought to London was beheaded at
Westminster; this was the Success of D. Hamiltons invading England.

Cromwell following his Victory, entered into Scotland to help Argile, and
Leven, against the Forces of Monroe and Lanerick, whom he soon reduced, and was
honorably entertained at Edinburgh by order of the Committee of Estates, and
thanks were given him by Ministers, whom they Styled the preserver of Scotland
under God; after which all the Forces there were disbanded, except 1500 under
the Command of Leven, and the Estates and Kirk decreed, That for preservation
of Religion and brotherly amity with the English Nation, no man which had
joined with Hamilton in the late Invasion of England should be chosen into the
New Parliament, or the Assembly of the Kirk; Though the year before these very
Scots had declared the English Army to be a bundle of Sectarys or Rebels for
acting the very same thing in England which they now did in Scotland

After this a Treaty was propounded by the Parliament to the King at the Isle
of Wight, and the Kings Concessons were voted satisfactory; out the Army
interposed, requiring that the Courtiers, and Actors in the late bloody War
might be brought to speedy justice, without excepting either King or Lord, the
Parliament themselves having before decreed and declared against the King, as
well as the Kirk of Scotland, That he was guilty (besides other, horrid crimes)
of shedding the blood of many thousands of his best subjects, which would
provoke the Wrath of God if no satisfaction were made; and they might by
deceitful Treaties betray themselves and their Friends to an implacable enemy;
This was the sense of diverse petitions from several Regiments in the Army; And
to enforce their desires they marched to London, and seized about 40 Members of
the House of Commons and accused 90 more for inviting in the Scots whom they
required might be excluded; after which the remainder which were under an
hundred, being found complaisant to their wills continued to sit, and made an
Act for trying the King by an High Court of Justice, (though the House of Lords
absolutely dissented and the Scotch Parliament was against it,) by which they
Judged, condemned and executed the King Jan. 30. 1648. before his Palace Gate
at White^hall

LXX. The Parliament of Scotland having notice of this fatal stroke; Feb. 3.
following they proclaimed Charles his Son King at Edinburgh, and then sent
Commissioners to Treat with him at Breda, whither he was come from Jersey to
that purpose, where it was concluded, that the King should sign the solemn
League and Covenant, and pass an Act for all Persons to take it throughout the
Kingdom, that he should withdraw his Commissions from Montross and put away all
Papists from about him; with several other particulars; During which Treaty
Montross was seized in Scotland for opposing the Kirk Party, and condemned and
executed upon a Gibbet near 50 foot high, with all imaginable contempt, which
had like to have broke off the Treaty if the necessity of the Kings affairs
would have permitted it.

July 15. 1650. the K. arrived at Edinburgh and was again proclaimed there, but
his Coronation was deferred because Cromwell with the English Army, was upon the
Borders, whom the Scots under the Command of Mountgomery fell upon with great
advantage at Musselborough, but were wholly defeated by them at Dumbar; Jan. 1.
following, the King. was solemnly Crowned at St. Johnston, and resolved to be
Generalissimo of his Army, and fortified Sterling; but Cromwell perceiving he
could not draw the Scots to a Field battle, suddenly, transported over Fyfe
1600. foot and 4. Troops of Horse, who routed the Forces under Sr. John Brown,
taking him and several others Prisoners, and killing 2000 on the place; The
King seeing the English prevail so fast in Scotland resolved to quit it, and
marched for England, which he did July 30. 1651. which Cromwell observing sent
Lambert after him with a select Party of Horse; At length the King arrived at
Worcester and fortified it, but was soon befieged there by the numerous Forces
of the Parliament; who obliged him to quit the Town, and fally out with his
Forces upon Cromwells Army, by whom they were in a short time utterly defeated,
the King making his escape, and getting into France; About 3000 were slain, and
700 taken Prisoners.

After this the English took most of the strong Towns, Forts and Castles in the
Lowlands, but the Highlanders made invasions upon them yet were at length
totally defeated by General Monk and Colonel Morgan, who likewise dissolved
the Assembly of the Kirk, and subjected the Presbyterian Clergy; things
continued quiet in Scotland during the Protectorates of Oliver and Richard
Cromwell, but the Army under Lambert, laying the last aside in 1659. and
calling the remainder of the long Parliament to sit again, and afterward
turning them out, and settling a Council or Committee of safety consisting of
Military Officers; these continual fluctuations in the Government occasioned
general discontents throughout the 3. Kingdoms; and General Monk, who was then
commander of all the English Forces in Scotland, was invited by the
Presbiterians and others to march with his Army into England, which he did
accordingly, having received some money from the Scots, and the blessing of the
Kirk; He arrived in London, and re-established the long Parliament, with
secluded members, who dissolved themselves after having issued out writts for
another Parliament to meet April 25. 1660. which voted the Restoration of K.
Charles 2. and the Royal Family, and May 29. following the King made his solemn
entrance into London with the General joy of the people.

But though the Scots and English Presbiterians were principally instrumental
in the restoration of King Charles 2. yet this signal service was soon
forgotten; and severe Acts of Parliament were made in both Kingdoms against
them, which occasioned much disturbance in both Nations, especially in
Scotland, who having an invincible aversion to Prelacy could not endure the
thoughts of its being again imposed upon them, but made several insurections,
whereby many of them were cut off; so that by the influence of evil Counselors
(as his present Majesty when Prince of Orange in his declaration to the Kingdom
of Scotland then published) the lives, honors and Estates of the Scots were
desigued to have been ravished from them, and the whole reign of K. Charles 2.
was but a continued conspiracy against thereligious and civillibert^es of that
people.

LXXI. After the Death of King Charles 2. which happened Feb. 1684. James Duke
of York his Brother succeeded, in whose reign the people of Scotland had some
relaxation of their troubles; and liberty of conscience was granted them, but
in such arbitrary Ter^^s as showed the intentions thereof to be the utter
inslaving them, the King declaring, that he expected obedience without reserve,
that is, although his Commands were contrary to the most necessary and
sundamental Laws of that Kingdom; But upon his abdication of the Government in
1688. The Scotch Nobility and Gentry in London addressed themselves to his
Highness the Prince of Orange, desiring him to take upon him the Government of
that Kingdom, which his Highness accepted.

LXXII. The Estates being assembled at Edinburgh they sent Commissioners to
their Majesty's K. William, and Q. Mary with an Offer of that Crown, which they
accepted, and accordingly took the Cronation Oath at the Banqueting House at
Whitehall May 11. 1689. After which the Convention of Estates being turned into
a Parliament they made several Acts for redressing the Grievances of that
Nation, and having declared Prelacy to be a principal one, it was abolished,
and the Presbiterian Government settled in the Church; some attempts were made
by the Highlanders under Viscount Dundee and others, for restoring the late
King James, but by the happy conduct of his Majesty and his Forces, they were
all entirely suppressed, and at the meeting of the Parliament in 1693. they gave
fresh assurances to their Majesty's of their continued resolutions for
supporting their Government against all opposers, by raising men and money for
the defense thereof, and by declaring their Majesty's Right to the Crown to be
not only de Facto but de Jure, which they were resolved to assert with their
Lives and Estates against the enemies of what kind so ever. May 19. 1695. The
Parliament of Scotland met, and the Marquess of Twedal made a speech, setting
forth his Majesty's great care for the welfare of that Kingdom, and preserving
the rights, and liberties thereof, acquainting them with the necessity of
continuing the forces, etc. After this the Parliament ordered an address of
Condoleance to be drawn ^p, and presented to his Majesty in their names, upon
the ^eplorable death of her late Majesty; blessing God for the ^reservation of
his Majesty, and declaring their hopes, that God will preserve a Life on which
so much depends, and ^able his Majesty to finish what he has begun, that they
(...) the rest of Europe may in the issue owe to his Majesty ^ull peace and
security, as they do, under God, all their pre^ent happiness; renewing their
assurances which they have ^ften given of their fidelity and assection readily
^o assist his Majesty to the utmost of their power against all his enemies both
at home and abroad; To which ^is Majesty did singulary oblidge them by the
assurances ^e had given them to do whatsoever should be for the ^ecurity of the
Government and the satisfaction of his good ^ubiects. In pursuance hereof, they
proceeded to consi^er about securing the Kingdom, and agreed to 1440000. ^ounds
Scots, for maintaining a convenient number of ^and forces, and a Naval strength
requisite for Convoys ^or defense of the Coasts and Trade. An information of
^igh Treason was prefered against the E. of Braidalbin upon certain private
Articles agreed on between him and ^. G. Buchan, with other Highland Clans in
rebellion 1691. upon which he was committed to Edinburgh Castle. The Parliament
having passed several acts, and one particularlly for making some seasonable
abatements in Church matters they were Prorogued till further time, ^eaving the
Kingdom in profound peace and security.

I have been very brief in relating the passages in the reign of King Charles
1. and 2. and also of K. James; K. Will. and Q. Mary, having already published
several books ^f the same price with this, wherein a long account of all
^articulars is given, to which I refer the Reader; their ^ames being as follow.
1. The wars in England and Scot^and and Ireland during the reign of K. Charles
1. 2. The History of Oliver Cromwell. 3. The History of Charles 2. and James
2.4. The History of the House of Orange, and of K. Will. and Q. Mary to this
time.

A Description of the Kingdom of Scotland.
THis Ancient Kingdom is divided from England by the Rivers Tweed and Solway,
the Cheviot Hills reaching from one River to the other on the South; It has
the German Ocean on the East; on the North the Isles of Orkney, and the
Deucalidonian Sea; and the Kingdom of Ireland on the West; it is a fair and
spacious Country 480 Miles in length, but in breadth far less, no place being
60 miles from the Sea; The air is sharp and cold, it has Rivers, Woods,
mountains, and low grounds which produce such plenty of Fish, Foul, Cattle and
Corn, that it suplies the wants of other Countries.

The People are generally well shaped, strong of Body, high minded, and so
valiant in War that there are few Countries where they were not employed in
Military affairs. The Nobility and Gentry are great affecters of Learning, and
don't only frequent their own Universities but travel into foreign parts for
improvement. The whole Kingdom is divided into two parts the Lowlands and the
Highlands, wherein are 34 shires or Counties; the Regal City thereof is
Edinburgh seated in Lothian where is the Royal Palace; It consists principally
of one street about a Mile long, into which run many lanes, so that the whole
Compass may be about three miles; it is fortified by a Castle that Commands the
Town; the South part of Scotland is more populous and rich, as well as more
civilized in manners; The North or Highland inhabitants are more under
retaining the customs of the Wild Irish.

This Kingdom was once inhabited by two populous Nations, the Scots and Picts;
but the Highland men, the natural Scots indeed are supposed to descend from the
Scythians, who with the Getoe invading Ireland left their posterity behind
them, and at length the word Scyth degenerated in Scot, and Scythland into
Scotland; though some derive the name from Scota the Daughter of Pharaoh that
saved Moses in the river;

The Piets are thought to be the Britains who fled out of Britrain from the
Roman servitude, and settled themselves here, till after long Wars, the Scors
prevailing they utterly extermined not only the Kingdom but the name of Picts.
Scotland is far more Barren than England, the chief commodites are Liance
Clo^^, Frize, Fish, Hides, Lead Oar etc. The Principal Rivers are Forth,
Cluyde, and Tay all ^^vigable; The Lowlands are in disposition and Language
much like the English. The most memerable Antiquities of this Country are,

I. The ^orcification drawn from Abercorn to the Frith of Edinburgh, and thence
to Dumbarton and the West Sea, where Jolius Agricola set the limits of the
Roman Empire; at this place began the great and dark wood Caledonia famous for
the wild white Bulls that were bred therein, with manes thick and curled like
Lawons, so fierce and cruel by nature and so abhoring mankind that they would
not meddle with any thing that was handled or breathed on by them; These Woods
were of a great length and breadth containing many dark shades and dreadful
dens that the Inhabitants securing themselves in the Covert of them were the
last that yielded their necks to the Roman yoke.

II. Another memorable matter is the Soland Geese, which are most plentiful
about the Bass near Edinburgh, and are in such great numbers that they
sometimes seem to darken the Air. There have been great disputes among the
Learned about the generation of them, some asserting that they were bred of
moist rotten Wood, lying in the Water; Others that they come of an Egg and are
hatched like all other Geese; But many Scots men do assert, that they really
grow upon a Tree called the Bamale Tree, and falling into the Water they in a
shor^ time receive life, and swim as others.

III. Mr. Speed relates that in Merton Lake in thi^ Country, part of the
Waters are Frozen, and the rest not; In the Lake of Lennox 24 miles in com^
pass the Fish are generally without Finns, and ye^ there is great abundance of
them; It is said tha^ when there is no wind stirring, the Waters of the Lak^
are so tempestous that no mariner dare venture on it and that in the Lake of
Nessa is a floating Island fu^ of Grass, rushes and reeds, which removes from
on place to another with the Wind; That in Buqua^ upon the Banks of Ratra, is a
Well the drops of which trickling down are turned Pyramid wise into an
har^stone, and another Lake near Edinburgh on the top whereof there floateth
Bitumen.

IV. There belongs to this Kingdom the Western Isles, the Orkneys, and the
Isles of Shetland, being reckoned about three hundred in all; the la^^ some
Authors think to be Thule or the Fortunate Is^ands, where some ancient Poets
feigned the Elisi^^ Fields were situated, into which the Souls of goo^ men were
sent that continues ever green and from whence, one writer says, Julius Casar
the first Roman Emperor could hardly be persuaded to return, as being ravished
with the pleasantnes of the place; But the moral of this. Fiction is thought to
be, that the Hea^thens were of opinion, the virtuous Souls of the (...) were
carried beyond the utmost bound (...) the Earth (which they thought these
Islands to be seated in, a having nothing but the vast Ocean beyond it) into a
plac^ of Eternal pleasure and happiness; But sure these places are very far
from being always green, for on the contrary they are almost continually
covered with Ice and Snow.

V. Hector Boethius Writes that in this Country here is a deaf stone twelve
foot high and thirtee thre^ foot thick, of this rare quality, that a Musket
shot off on the one side, cannot be heard by a man standing on the other; near
Falkick remain the ruins and marks of a Town swallowed up by an Earthquake and
the void place is filled up with water; The Lake Lomond turns Wood into
stone; near a place called Dysert in Fise on the Seaside is a Heath where there
is great plenty of Brimstone in the earth; in the County of Argile, says Mr.
Camden, are at this day Rine and red Doer ranging wild upon the Hills; Between
the Coast of Cathnes and Orkney is a dreadful Frith or Gulf in the North end of
which by reason of the meeting of contrary Tides or Currents is a male-stream
or great Whirlpool, which whirleth continually about, and if any ship, boat or
bark come within the reach thereof, they must instantly throw over somewhat
into it, as a Barrel, a piece of Timber or the like, or else the Vessels will
inevitably be swallowed up; which the Cathnes and Orknay Mariners-know very
well, and observe it as a constant custom to redeem themselves that way from
danger; Toward the North of Scotland (says Mr. Speed) there be Mountains all
of Alabaster, and some all of Marble. At the mouth of the River Frith in the
main Sea is a very high rock out of whose top a spring of Water runs abundantly.

The Snow lies all the year upon the Hills of Ross; A long piece of Amber,
says Mr. Camden, as big as a Horse was found lately upon the Coast of Bucquan;
in which Country, they say, Rats are never seen, and if any be brought thither
they will never live; It is credibly reported, says Orteliu that there is a
stone found in Argile which if covered a while with straw or Flax it will set
it on fire.

A List of the Kings of Scotland, from the year after the Creation of the World
3641. to this time.
* Note, That the first to Kings undernamed, till Fergus 2, though recorded by
Scortish Historians in an orderly Succession, yet want sufficient authority;
therefore their actions are almost wholly omitted their names being only
subjoyned.

1 Gathelus. 2 Hiber. 3 Hemericus. 4 Brechus. 5 Fergus 1. 6 Feritharis. 7
Manius. 8 Dordavillo. 9 Nothatus. 10 Reuther. 11 Reutha. 12 Conarus. 13 Josina.
14 Finnacus. 15 Durstus. 16 Ewyn 1. 17 Ewyn 2. 18 Ederus. 19 Ewyn 3. 20
Metellane. 21 Caratake. 22 Corbred. 23 Dardan. 24 Galde. 25 Lugtake. 26 Conarus
2. 27 Ethodius. 28 Satrahel. 29 Donald 1. 30 Ethodius 2. 31 Athico. 32
Natholocus. 33 Findock. 34 Donald 2. 35 Donald 3. 36 Crathlint. 37 Fincormach.
38 Romacus. 39 Fethelmacus. 40 Eugenius 1. 41 FERGUS 2. 42 Eugenius 2. 43
Dongard. 44 Constantine. 45 Congal. 46 Conranus. 47 Engenius 3. 48 Congal 2. 49
Kynatel. 50 Aidan. 51 Kenneth. 52 Eugenius 4. 53 Ferquard. 54 Donald 4. 55
Ferquard 2. 56 Maldwin. 57 Eugenius 5. 58 Eugenius 6. 59 Amberkeleth. 60
Eugenius 7. 61 Mordack 62 Ethfin. 63 Eugenius 8. 64 Fergus 3. 65 Solvathius 66
Achalus 67 Congal 3. 68 Dongal. 69 Alpine. 70 Kenneth 2. 71 Donald 5. 72
Constantine 2. 73 Ethus. 74 Gregory. 75 Donald 6. 76 Constantine 3. 77 Malcolm
1. 78 Indulph 79 Duffe 80 Cullen. 81 Kenneth 3. 82 Constantine 4. 83 Grime. 84
Malcolm 2. 85 Duncan. 86 Mackbeth. 87 Malcolm 3. 88 Donald 7. 89 Edgar 90
Alexander 1. 91 David 92 Malcolm 4. 93 William 1. 94 Alexander 2. 95 Alexander
3. 96 John Baliol. 97 Rob. Bruce. 98 Edw. Baliol. 99 David Bruce. 100 Robert 2.
101 Robert 3. 102 James 1. 103 James 2. 104 James 3. 105 James 4. 106 James 5.
107 Q. Mary. 108 James 6. 109 Charles 1 110 Charles 2. 111 James 7. 112 Will.
and Mary. 113 William 2.
The Names of the Lord High Commissioners, who have represented the Kings of
Scotland since the union of the two Kingdoms.
1604 Earl of Montross. 1606 E. of Dumbar. 1609 E. of Marshal. 1612 E. of
Dumferling. 1621 Marq. of Hammilton. 1638 M. of Hammilton. 1639 E. of Traquair.
1644 Marq. Montross. 1660 E. of Middleton. 1663 D. of Rothes. 1669 D.
Lauderdail. 1681 D. of York. 1685 Queensbery. 1689 E. of Melvil. 1692 Duke
Hamilton. 1695 E. of Twedall.
Officers of State in Scotland.
L. High Commissioner. L. Admiral. L. High Chancellor, L. High Treasurer. L.
President Privy Council. L. Privy Seal. L. High Chambeclain. L. High Constable.
L. Great Marshal, L. Treasurer Deputy. L. Register. L. Advocate. L. Justice
Clerk.
A List of the Present Nobility in the Kingdom of Scotland
Dukes 3.
Hamilton D. Hamilton. Dowglass D. Queensbery. Gord on D. Gordon.
Marquesses 3.
Dowglass M. Dowglass. Graham M. Montross. Murray M. Athol.
Earls 63.
Campbel E. of Argile. Lindsay E. of Crawford. Hay E. of Arrol. Keith E.
Marshall. Southecl. E. Southerla. Erskeine E. Mar. Graham E. Monteith. Lesly E.
of Rothes. Dowglass E. of Morton. Erskeine E. of Buchan. Cunningham E.
Glencairn. Montgomery E. Eglington. Kennedy E. Cassills. Sinclar E. Cathness.
Stewart E. Murray. Maxwel E. Nidisdail. Seaton E. Winton. Levingston E.
Linlithgow. Hume E. Hume. Drummond E. of Perth. Seaton E. of Dunfermling.
Fleming E. Wigton. Lion E. of Strathmore. Ker. E. Roxborough. Hamilton E.
Abercorn. Erskeine E. of Kelly. Hamilton E. Hadington. Stewart E. Galloway.
Mac-Kenzy E. Seaforth. Carr E. Lothian. Hay E. Kinnoul. Campell E. Lowden.
Crichton E. Dumfreis. Alexander E. Sterling. Bruce E. Elgin. Carnegy E.
Southesk. Stewart E. Traquair. Car E. Ancram. Weims E. Weims. Ramsey E.
Dalhousie. Ogilbie E. Arlie. Ogilbie E. Finlator. Dalziel E. Carnwath.
Levingston E. Callandar. Lesly E. of Leven. Johnstown E. Anandale. Mauld E.
Panmeure. Hay E. of Twedall. Carnegy E. North-Esk. Bruce E. Kincarden. Lindsey
E. Balcarres. E. Forfar. Middleton E. Middleton. Gordon E. of Aboyn. Scot. E
Tarrus. Levingston E. Newbrugh. Boyd E. Kilmarnock. Cochran E. Dundonald.
Dowglass E. Dunbarton. Keith E. Kintor. Campbell E. Braid-Albin. Gordon E.
Aberdeen. E. Melvil.
Viscounts. 15.
Carey V. Falkland. Constable V. Dumbar. Murray V. Stormont. Gordon V. Kenmear.
Arbuthnet V. Arbuthner. Crichton V. Frendraught. Saeton V. Kingston. Macgil V.
Oxenford. Ingram V. Irwing. Levingston V. Kilsyth. Osborn V. Dumblane. Graham
V. Preston. Cheyney V. Newhaven. Graham V. Dundee. Dalrymple V. Stairs.
Lords 47.
L. Forbes. Frazer L. Salton. Gray L. Gray. Alex. L. Cathcart. Hen. L.
Saintclare. Dowglass L. Mordington. Francis L. Semple. John L. Elphingston.
Charles L. Oliphant. Frazer L. Lovat. John L. Borthwick. George L. Ross.
Sandilands L. Torphichen. Leslie L. Lindoris. Elphingston L. Balmerinoch, and
Cowper. Erskeine L. Cardrass. Stewart L. Blantire. James L. Crauston. Balfonr
L. Burgleih. Kerr L. Jedburgh. Drummond L. Madertie. L. Reth. Archibald L.
Napier. Henry L. Fairfax. Richardson L. Cramond. Walter L. Aston. Donald L.
Rae. James L. Forrester. Forber L. Pitsligo. Macklel. L. Kirkudbright. Charles
L. Frazer. Hammilton L. Bargeny. Ogilby L. Bamff. Murray L. Elibank. Galloway
L. Founkel. Falconer L. Hacerton. Hamilton L. Belhaven. John L. Carmichel.
Sutherland L. Duffes. Andrew L. Rollo. Robert L. Colvil. David L. Ruthen. John
L. Rutherford. John L. Bellenden. Lesly L. Newark. Weims L. Burnt-Island. David
L. Nairne. Hume L. Polward.
Scotland is divided into Twenty three shires or Counties, each of which send
Two Barons Commissioners to sit as their Representatives in Parliament, the
whole number being sixty six. There are likewise sixty five Royal Buroughs,
which send only one Burgess each, except Edinburgh which elects two; the whole
number of Burgesses and Barons being 132.

Before Prelacy was abolished by Act of Parliament there were in Scotland two
Arch-bishopricks.

Saint Andrews.
Glasgow.
Bishoprics 12.
Edinburgh. Galloway. Dunkell. Aberdeen. Murray. Ross. Brechen. Dumblain.
Cathness. The Isles. Argile. Orkney.
Universities 4.
St. Andrews, Aberdeen. Glasgow, Edinburgh.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poul trey
near Cheapside.
History.
1. ENgland's Monarchs: Or, A Relation of the most remarkable Transactions,
from Julius Caesar; adorned with Poems, and the Picture of every Monarch, from
K. Will. the Conqueror to this time. With a List of the Nobility, and the
number of the Lords and Commons' in both Houses of Parliament; and other useful
particulars. Price one shilling.

2. THe History of the House of Orange: Or a Relation of the Magnanimous
Achievements of his Majesty's Renowned Predecessors, and likewise of his own
Heroic Actions, till the Late Wonderful Revolution. Together with the History
of K. William and Q. Mary, Being an Account of the most remarkable passages to
this time. By R. B. Price one shilling.

3. THe History of the two late Kings, Charles II. and James II. and of the
most observable passages, during their Reigns; and the secret French and Popish
Intrigues in those Times. Pr. 1 s.

4. THe History of Oliver Cromwell, being an Impartial Account of all the
Bartels, Seiges, and Military Achievements, wherein he was engaged in England,
Scotland and Ireland; and likewise of his Civil Administrations, till his
Death. Relating: matter, of Fact, without Reflection or Observation. By R. B.
Pr. 1 s.

5. THe Wars in England, Sentland and Ireland, containing (...) Account of all
the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable Transactions, from the beginning of
the Reign of K. Charles the First, 1625. to 1660. The Trial of K. Charles Iawe
large, and his last Speech; with Pictures of several Accidents. Pr. 1. shilling.

6. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and present state of
London and Westminister, showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Hospitals, Schools, Inns of Courts, Charters,
and privileges thereof; with the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires,
Plagues, etc. for above 900 years past. Pr. 1 s.

7. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities and Wonders in England, Scotland, and
Ireland; or an account of many remarkable persons and places; and of the
Battles, Sieges, Earthquakes, Tempests, Thunders, Fires, Murders, and other
Occurences for many hundred years past: with the Natural and Artificial
Rarities in every County, and several Sculptures. Pr. 1 s.

8. THE History of the Kingdom of Scotland, Containing an Account of all the
Wars, Battles, and other remarkable Transactions, Revolutions and State
Intrigues in that Nation during the Reigns of 72. Kings and Queens to the sixth
year of King William III. Intermixed with variety of strange Accidents,
Prodigious Appearances, and other considerable Events. And a List of the
present Nobility of that Kingdom. Illustrated with Pictures. Pr. 1 s.

9. THE History of the Kingdom of Ireland, being an Account of all the Batles,
Seiges, and other memorable Passages during the late Wars there, till the
entire Reduction thereof by the victorious Arms of K. Will. III. To which is
prefixed, a relation of the Ancient Inhabitants, and the first Conquest of that
Nation by K. Henry II. The horrid Rebellion in 1641. and the Popish and
Arbitrary designs in the last Reigns, Pr. 1 s.

10. THE History of the Principality of Wales in three parts: Containing, 1. A
brief account of the ancient Kings and Princes of Britain and Wales, till the
final extinguishing of the Royal british Line. 2. Remarks upon the Lives of all
the Princes of Wales of the Royal Families of England, from K. Edward I. to
this time, particularly of Edmund the black Prince of Wales, who with 30000
English defeated an Army of 100000 French at Cressy; and at Poictiers with
10000 beat 80000, and took John the French King Prisoner. Also of Henry of
Monmouth (afterward K. Henry V.) who with 13000 routed 90000 French, whose Son
Henry VI. was Crowned K. of France at Paris. 3. Remarkable Observations on the
most memorable Persons and Places in Wales, and of diverse considerable Passages
for many hundred years past: With the birth and strange actions of Merlin the
famous Welsh Prophet. And the Natural and Artificial Rarities in every County
of that Principality. pr. 1 s.

11. THe Unfortunate Court Favorites of England; Exemplified in some Remarks
upon the Lives, Actions and Fatal Fall of diverse Great Men, who have been
Favorites to several English Kings and Queens. Namely, I. Pierce Gaveston
Favorite to K. Ed. 2. II, III. Hugh Spencer the Father and Son, both
Favorites to K. Ed. 2. IV. Rog. Mortimer Favorite to Q. Isabel, Mother to K.
Ed. 3. with their private Amors, etc. V. H. Stafford Favorite to Crook-backt
Richard, with that King's secret Intrigues for usurping the Crown, and
murdering his Nephews. Likewise the Character of Jane Shore by Sir Tho. More
who saw her. VI. Cardinal Woolsey; VII. Tho. L. Cromwell; both Favorites to K.
Henry 8. VIII. E. of Essex, Favorite to Q. Elizabeth. IX. D. of Bucks
Favorite to K. Charles I. and K. James I. X. E. of Strafford, Favorite to K.
Charles I. With all their Pictures. Price one shilling.

12. The English Empire in America, or a prospect of his Majesty's Dominions in
the West Indies, namely, New Foundland, New England, New York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Bermudas, Berbuda, Anguila,
Monserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevis of Nevis, St. Christophers,
Barbados and Jamaica: With an account of their Discovery, Situation and
Product: The Religion and Manners of the Indians, etc. To which is prefixed a
relation of the discovery of this New World and of the remarkable Voyages of
Scbastin Cabot, S. Frobisher, Martin Davis, C. Weymouth, C. Hall, C. Hudson,
Sir T. Cavendish, the E. of Cumberland, Sir W. Rawleigh and other English
Worthies, With Pictures of the strange Fruits, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects,
Serpents and Monsters found in those parts of the World. pr. 1 s.

13 A View of the English Acquisitions in Guinea and the East Indies: With an
Account of the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents,
Monsters, and other Observables in those Countries. A description of the Isle
of St. Helena, and the Bay of Souldania; intermixed with pleasant Relations. pr.
1 s.

14. THe English Hero: Or, Sir Francis Drak Revived. Being a full Account of
the dangerous voyages, admirable Adventures, notable Discoveries and
Magnanimous Achievements of that Valiant and Renowned Commander. As, I. His
Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the West Indies, where they saw a Pile of
Bars of Silver near 70 foot long, 10 foot broad, and 12 foot high. II. His
incompassing the whole World in 1577. which he performed in two years and ten
months, gaining a vast quantity of Gold and Silver. III. His Voyage into
America in 1585. and ^aking the Towns of St. Jago, St. Domingo, Carthagena and
St. Augustine. IV. His last Voyage into those Countries in 1595. with his Death
and Burial. Revised Corrected, enlarged, and beautified with Pictures. By R. B.
pr. 1 s.

15. TWo Journeys to Jerusalem, Containing first, An account of the Travels of
two English Pilgrims some years since, and what Accidents befell them in their
Journey of Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria, etc. II. The Travels of 14
Englishmen in 1669. With the Antiquities, Monuments and Memorable Places
mentioned in Scripture. To which are prefixed, Memorable Remarks on the Ancient
and modern State of the Jewish Nation, As 1. A Description of the Holy Land,
its Situation, Fertility, etc. 2. The several Captivities of the Jews: 3.
Probable Conjectures what is become of the Ten Tribes carried Captive by the
Assyrians, with Diverse pertinent Relations pursuant thereto. 4. The State of
the Jews since their extermination, with the present condition of Palestine. 5.
Of the Septuagint or seventy Jewish Interpreters of the Law of Moses. Together
with a Relation of the great Council of the Jews in Hungary, in 1650. to
examine the Scriptures concerning Christ. Written By S. B. an Eyewitness. The
wonderful delusion of the Jews by a false Christ at Smyrna 1666. The final
Extirpation of the Jews of Persia the same year, and the occasion thereof. The
Proceedings between the Jews, and Oliver Cromwell in 1655. The Epistle of
Agbarus with our Savior's Answer: Beautified with Pictures pr. 1 s.

16. EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men: With the strange Events,
and signal mutations and changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious places
and persons in all Ages; being an account of a multitude of stupendous
Revolutions, accidents, and observable matters in diverse States and Provinces
throughout the World; With Pictures. Pr. 1 s.

17. The History of the Nine worthies of the World: Three whereof were
Gentiles: 1. Hector Son of Priamus K. of Troy. 2. Alexander the great King of
Macedon. 3. Julius Caesar first Emp. of Rome, Three Jews. 4. Joshua C. General
of Israel. 5. David K. of Israel. 6. Judas Maccabeus a valiant Jewishcommander
against the Tyranny Antiochus. 3. Christians. 7. Arthur K. of Britain. 8.
Charles the Great K. of France, and Emp. of Germany. 9. Godfrey of Bullen K. of
Jerusalem. Being an account of their Lives, and Victories. With Poems and the
Picture of each Worthy By. R. B. Pr. 1 s.

18. Female Excellency, or the Ladies Glory, Illustrated in the Lives of nine
Famous Women, who have been renowned in several Ages of the World: As 1.
Deborah the Prophetess. 2. The valiant Judith. 3. Q. Esther. 4. The virtuous
Susannah. 5. The Chaste Lucretia. 6. Boadicia Q. of Britain, in the Reign of
Nero, containing an account of the Original Inhabitants of Britain. The
History of Danaus and of his fifty. Daughters, who murdered their Husbands in
one Night. Of the valor of Boadicia, under whose conduct the Britains slew 70
thousand Romans, with other remarkable particulars. 7. Mariamne Wife of K.
Herod 8. Clotilda Q. of France. 9. Audegona Prince of Spain. Adorned with Poems
and Pictures. Pr. 1 s.

19 Wonderful Prodigies of judgment and mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories; containing, 1. Dreadful judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and Perjured Villans. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
etc. 3. Remarkable predictions and presages of approaching Death, and how the
event has been answerable. 4. Fearful judgments upon bloody Tyrants, murderers,
etc. 5. Admirable Deliverances from imminent dangers and deplorable distresses
at Sea and Land, Lastly, Divine goodness to penitents, with the dying thoughts
of several famous Men, concerning a future state. Pr. 1 s.

20. Unparalleled Varieties, or the matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind;
displayed in near 400. notable Instances and Examples, discovering the
transcendent Effects, 1. Of Love, Friendship and Gratitude. 2. Of Magnanimity,
Courage and Fidelity. 3. Of Chastity, Temperance and Humility: And on the
contrary, the Tremendous consequence, 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude. 5.
Of Cowardice, Barbarity and Treachery. 6. Of Unchastity. Intemperance and
Ambition. Imbellished with Figures. Pr. 1 s.

21. THe Kingdom of darkness: Or, The History of Demons, Specter, Witches,
Apparitions, and other supernatural Delusions, and Malicious Impostures of the
Devil. Containing near 80 memorable Relations, Foreign and Domestic, ancient
and modern. Collected from Authors of undoubted Verity. With a Preface
obviating the Common Objections of the Sadducees and Atheists of the Age, who
deny the Being of Spirits, Witches, etc. With Pictures. Pr. 1 s.

22. SArprized miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts; containing, 1. The
miracles of Nature, or the wonderful signs, and prodigipus Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; with an account of the most Famous
Comets, and other Prodigies, from the birth of Christ to this time. 2. The
Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent Buildings, and other Curious
Inventions in all ages, as the seven wonders in the World, and many other
excellent Structures and Rarities throughout the Earth. Beautified with
Pictures. pr. 1 s.

23. THe General History of Earthquakes: Or An Account of the most Remarkable
Earthquakes, in diverse parts of the World, from the Creation to this time,
particularly those lately in Naples, Smyrna, Jamaica, England and Sicily; With
a Description of the famous Burning Mount Aetna, and several other late strange
Accidents. As I. A surprising Account of Angels Singing Psalms in the Air, over
the Ruins of a Protestant Church in France in the year 1686. With the words
they Sang in the hearing of many hundred. II. The Life of a Great Person of
near an Hundred years old, now an Hermit in a Forest in France, with the
Devotions, Clothing, Diet, etc. of him and his Companions, etc. III. The
wonderful Army of Grasshoppers near Breslaw in Silesia, September. 7. 1693. and in
other parts of Germany; which in their March took up sixteen Miles devouring
every Green thing. IV. Three Miraculous Cures wrought by Faith in Christ, in
1693. As 1. Of Mary Maillard the French Girl healed of an extreme Lameness. 2.
The Wife of Mr. Savage Cured of a Lame Hand. 3. A Shepherd near Hitchin in
Hartfordshire instantly healed of the King's Evil, under which he had
languished Twenty Years. pr. 1 s.

24. MEmorable Accidents and Unheard of Transactions, containing an account of
several strange Events: As the Deposing of Tyrants, Lamentable Shipwracks,
Dismal Misfortunes, Stratagems of War, Perilous Adventures, Happy Deliverances,
with other remarkable Occurrences, and select Historical passages, which have
happened in several Countries in this last Age. Printed at Brussels in 1691.
and Dedicated to K. William, etc. Published in English by R. B. pr. 1 s.

25. MArtyrs in Flames, or Popery in its true Colors; being a Relation of the
horrid Persecution of the Pope and Church of Rome, for many hundreds of years
past, in Piedmont, Bohemia, Germany, Polland, Lithuania, France, Italy, Spain,
Portugal, Scotland, Ireland and England; with an abstract of the cruelties
exercised upon the Protestants in France and Savoy in 1686, and 1687. and an
account of God's Judgments upon Popish Persecutors. pr. 1 s.

Miscellanies.
26. DElights for the Ingenious, in above Fifty Select Emblems, Divine and
Moral, curiously Engraven on Copper Plates, with 50 delightful Poems and Lots,
for the lively Illustration of each Emblem, whereby instruction may be
promoted, by pleasant Recreation; to which is prefixed, A Poem, entitled,
Majesty in Misery, or an Imploration of the K. of Kings, written by K. Charles
I. in Carisbrook Castle in the Isle of Wight, 1648. with a curious Emblem.
Collected by R. B. Price 2 s. 6 d.

27. EXcellent Contemplations, Divine and Moral, written by A. L. Capel, with
some account of his Life, his Letters to his Lady, and his last Speech. Also
the Speeches of D. Ham. and the Earl of Holland, who suffered with him: Price
one shilling.

28. VVInter Evenings Entertainment, in two parts, Containing, 1. Ten Pleasant
Relations of many Notable Accidents. 2. Fifty Ingenious Riddles, with their
Explanations, Observations and Morals upon each. Enlivened with above 60
Pictures, for illustrating every Story and Riddle; Excellently accommodated for
cheerful Society and Conversation. Pr. 1 s.

29. ESops Fables in Prose and Verse, the 2d Part Collected from Ancient and
Modern Authors, with Pictures and proper Morals to every Fable. Several
applicable to the present time. By R. B. pr. 1 s.

Divinity.
30 THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Devotions, consisting of Morning and
Evening Prayers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day in the Week, in order
to a more Solemn Preparation for the worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion,
representing the several steps and degrees of the sorrows and sufferings of our
blessed Savior, till he gave up the Ghost: As, 1. His Agony in the Garden. 2.
His being betrayed by Judas. 3. His being falsely accused, smitten, buffeted,
and spit upon before Caiaphas the High Priest. 4. His condemnation, scourging,
crowning with Thorns, and being delivered to be crucified by Pontius Pilate. 5.
His bearing the Cross. 6. His Crucifixion. 7. Our Savior's Institution of the
Blessed Sacrament. With brief Resoutions to these objections, alleged for the
omission of this Important duty. With eight curious Sculptures proper to the
several parts, with Graces. Imprimatur, Z. Isham, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a
Sacris. pr. 1 s.

31. A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, brief Directions to all Christians how to
attain Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts.
As, 1. Saving Faith discovered in three Heavenly Conferences between our
Blessed Savior, and, 1. A Publican. 2. A Pharisee. 3. A doubting Christian. 2.
The Threefold state of a Christain: 1. by Nature. 2. By Grace. 3. In Glory. 3.
The Scriptures concord, compiled out of the Words of Scripture, by way of
question and answer, wherein there is the sum of the way to Salvation, and
spiritual things compared with spiritual. 4. The Character of a true Christain.
5. A brief Directory for the great, necessary, and advantageous duty of self
examination, whereby a serious Christian may every day examine himself. 6. A
short Dialogue between a Learned Divine and a Beggar. 7. Beams of the Spirit,
or Cordial Meditations, enlivening, enlighting, and gladding the Soul. 8 The
Seraphick Souls Triumph in the Love of God; with short remembrances, and pious
thoughts. 9. History improved, or Christian Applications of remarkable passages
in History. 10. Holy Breathings in several Divine Poems, upon diverse Subjects
and Scriptures. pr. 1 s.

32. Youths Divine Pastime; Containing Forty Remarkable Scripture Histories,
turned into English Verse. With Forty Pictures proper to each story; very
delightful for the virtuous employing the vacant hours of young persons, and
preventing vicious divertisements. With Scripture Hymns upon diverse occasions.
Price 8 d.

33. The Young Man's Calling, or the whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
young Persons of both Sexes, as well Ancient as Modern, who have been famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations. With twelve curious Pictures,
Illustrating the several histories. Price 1 s. 6 d.

34. THe Vanity of the Life of Man represented in the Seven several Stages
thereof; With Pictures and Poems exposing the Follies of every Age. Price Eight
pence.

35. DIstressed Sion Relieved, or, the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of
Heaviness. A Poem. Wherein are discovered the Grand Causes of the Churches
trouble and misery under the late dismal Dispensations. With a complete History
of, and Lamentations for those Renowned Worthis that fell in England, by popish
rage and Cruelty, from the year 1680. Humbly dedicated to their Majesty's. By
B. Keach. pr. 1 s.

36. ANtichrist Stormed, or the Church of Rome proved to be Mystery Babylon the
Great Whore, Rev. 17. by many and undeniable Arguments, Answering all the
Objections of the Papists, and all others. Together with the Judgment of many
Ancient and Modern Divines, and most Eminent Writers concerning the rise and
final Ruin of the Beast and Baby^on, proving it will be in this present Age,
with an Account of many strange Predictions relating to these present Times. By
B. Keach. Price one shilling.

37. The Devout Souls Daily Exercise in Prayers, Contempations and Praises,
containing Devotions for Morning, Noon, and Night, for every day in the week;
with Prayers before and after the Holy Communion: And likewise for Persons of
all conditions, and upon all occasions: With Graces and Thanksgivings before
and after Meat. By R. P. D. D. Price pound Six Pence.

38 SAcramental Meditations upon diverse select places of Scripture, wherein
Believers are assisted in preparing their hearts, and exciting their affections
and graces, when they draw nigh to God, in that most awful and solemn Ordinance
of the Lord's Supper. By Jo. Flavel Minister of Christ in Devon. Price one
Shilling.

37. JACOB Wrestling with GOD, and prevailing; Or, a Treatise concerning the
Necessity and Efficacy of Faith in Prayer: Wherein diverse weighty Questions and
cases of Conscience about praying in Faith, are stated and resolved: For the
satisfying of scrupulous Consciences; Conviction of formal Hypocrites,
awakening of all Saints, both weak and strong, to this duty of prayer. pr. 1 s.

38. THe true light shining in Darkness, and dispelling the mists of Error
arising from the Darkness of Man's heart, etc. Promoted by the Prince of
Darkness against the truth of God, in the matter of out Justification: in Three
parts; showing, First, That by the deeds of the Law, or Man's own Righteousness
no Flesh can, or shall be Justified in the sight of God. Secondly, That the
righteousness of God is the only matter of our Justification. Thirdly, The Time
and season wherein God does justify his Elect. Both by Tho. Tailor, formerly
Minister to a Congregation in St. Edmund's Bury, now at Cambridge, price. 1 s.
two pence.

All Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey, near Cheapside.

FINIS.

