His Highness SPEECH TO THE PARLIAMENT IN THE PAINTED CHAMBER AT THEIR
DISSOLUTION, upon Monday the 22 d. of January 1654.

Published to prevent Mistakes and false Copies.

Reprinted at Dublin, by William Bladen, 1654.

HIS HIGHNESS Speech To the Parliament, in the Painted Chamber, at their
Dissolution, upon Monday January 22. 2654
Gentlemen
I Perceive, you are here as the House of Parilament, by your Speaker, whom I
see here; and by your faces, which are, in a great measure, known to me. When I
first met you in this Room, it was, to my apprehension, the hopefullest day
that ever mine eyes saw, as to considerations of this World: For I did look at
(as wrapped up in you, together with my self) the hopes and the happiness of
(though not of the greatest yet a very great, and) the best people in the
World; and truly and unfeignedly I thought so; as a People that have the
highest and the clearest profession among them, of the greatest glory (to wit)
Religion; as a People that have been like other Nations, sometimes up, and
sometimes down, in our honor in the world, but yet never so low, but we might
measure with other Nations; and a People that have had a stamp upon them from
God, God having (as it were) summed all Our former Glory and Honor, in things
that are Glory to Nations in an (...) we knew one another at home, and are well
known abroad.

And (if I be not very much mistaken) we were arrived (as I, and truly, as I
believe, many others did think) at a very safe Port, where we might sit down,
and contemplate the dispensations of God, and Our mercies, and might know Our
mercies not to have been like to those of the Ancients, who did make out their
Peace and Prosperity, as they thought, by their own endeavors; who could not
say, as We, That all Ours were let down to Us from God himself, whose
Appearances and Providence amongst Us are not be outmatched by any Story.

Truly this was Our condition and I know nothing else we had to do, save as
Israel was commanded, in that most excellent Psalm of David, Psalm. 78. v.4, 5,
6, 7. The things which we have heard and known, and our Fathers have told us,
we will not hide them from their Children, showing to the Generation to come
the praise of the Lord, and his strength, and his wonderful works which he has
done; for he established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel,
which he commended our Fathers that they should make them known to their
Children, that the Generation to come might known them, even the Children which
should be born, who should arise and declare them to their Children, that they
might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his
Commandments.

This I thought had been a Song and a Work worthy of England, whereunto you
might have happily invited them, had you had Hearts unto it.

You had this opportunity fairly delivered unto you; And if a History shall be
written of these times, and of transactions, it will be said (it will not be
denied) but that these things that I have spoken are true.

This Talent was put into your hands, and I shall recure to that which I said
at the first, I came with very great joy, and contentment, and comfort, the
first time I met you in this Place: But we and these Nations are, for the
present, under some disappointment. If I had purposed to have played the Orator,
which I did never affect, nor do, nor I hope shall, I doubt not but upon easy
suppositions, which I am persuaded every one among you will grant, we did meet
upon such hope as thse.

I met you a second time here, and I confess at that meeting I had much
abatement of my hopes, through not a total frustration. I confess that that
which dampt my hopes, so soon, was somewhat that did look (...) you that the
management of Affairs did savor of a not-owning too too much savor I say of a
notowning the Authority that called you hither; but God left us not without an
expedient that gave a second Possibility, shall I say, a possibility? it seemed
to Me a probability of recovering out of that Dissatisfied Condition We were
all then in, toward some mutuality of Satisfaction, and therefore by that
Recognition, suiting with the Indenture that returned you hither, to which
afterward also was added your own Declaration, conformable to and in
acceptance o, that Expedient, whereby you had (though with a little check)
another opportunity renewed unto you to have made this Nation as happy as it
could have been, if every thing had smoothly run on from hatsirct hour of your
meeting.

And indeed (you will give me liberty of my thoughts and hopes) I did think, as
I have formerly found in that way that I have been engaged as a Soldier, hat
some affronts put up in us, some disasters at the first, have made way for very
great and happy Successes.

And I did not at all despond, but the Stop put upon you, would in like manner
have made way for a blessing from God, that that Interruption being, as
thought, necessary to divert you from destructive and violent proceedings, to
give time for better Deliberati us; whereby, leaving the GOVERNMENT as you
found it, you might have proceeded to have made those good and wholesome Laws,
which the People expected from you, and might have answered the Grievances, and
settled those other things proper to you as a Parliament, and for which you
would have had thanks, from all that entrusted you.

What has happened since that time, I have not taken public notice of, as
declining to entrench upon Parliament Privileges: For sure I am, you will all
bear me witness, that from your entering into the House upon the Recognition, to
this very day, you have had no manner of Interruption or Hindrance of mine, in
proceeding to that blessed issue the heart of a good man could propose to
himself, to this very day.

You see you have me very much locked up as to what you transacted among your
selves from that time to this, but something I shall take liberty to speak of to
you, As I may not take notice what you have been doing, so I think I have a
very great liberty to tell you, that I do not know what you have been doing, I
do not know whether you have been alive or dead, I have not once Heard from you
in all this time, I have not, and that you all know: If that be a fault that I
have not, surely it has not been mine.

If I had any Melancholy thoughts, and have sat down by them, why might it not
have been very lawful to me to think that I was a (...) judged Vnconcerned in
all these businesses: I can assure you, I have not reckoned my self, nor did I
reckon my self unconcerned in you, and so long as any Just patience could
support my expectations, I would have waited to the untermost to have received
from you the issues of your Consultations and Resolutions; I have been careful
of your Safety, and the Safety of those that you represented, to whom I reckon
my self a Servant.

But what Messages have I disturbed you withal? What Injury or Indignity has
been done or offered, either to your Persons, or to any Privileges of
Parliament, since you sat? I looked at my self, as strictly obliged by my Oath
since your Recognizing the GOVERNMENT, in the Authority of which you were
called hither, and sat, to give you all possible security, and to keep you
from any un-Parliamentary Interruption.

Think you I could not say more upon this subject, if I listed to expaciate
thereupon; but because my actions plead for me: I shall say no more of this.

I say, I have been caring for you, your quiet sitting, caring for your
Privileges (as I said before) that they might not be Interrupted, have been
seeking of God, from the great God, a Blessing upon you, sand a Blessing upon
these Nations; I have been consulting, if possibly I might in any thing
promote, in my Place, the real good of this Parliament, of the hopefulness of
which I have said so much unto you.

And I did think it to be my business, rather to see the utmost issue, and what
God would produce by you, than unseasonably to intermeddle with you. But as I
said before, I have been caring for you, and for the peace and quiet of the
Nations, indeed I have, and that I shall a little presently manifest unto you.

And it leads me to let you know somewhat that I fear, I fear will be through
some interpretation a little too justly put upon you, whilst you have been
employed as you have been (and in all that time expressed in the GOVERNMENT, in
that GOVERNMENT, I say, in that GOVERNMENT) brought forth nothing that you your
selves say can be taken notice of without infringment of your Privileges.

I will tell you somewhat, that (if it be not news to you) I wish you had taken
very serious consideration of; if it be news, I wish I had acquainted you with
it sooner: And yet if any man will ask me why I did it not, the Reason is given
already, because I did make it my business to give you no interruption.

There be some Trees that will not grow under the shadow of other (...) a man
may say so by way of allusion to thrive under the shadow of other Trees: I will
tell you what have thriven, I will not say what you have cherished under your
shadow, that were too hard, Instead of the Peace and Settlement, instead of
Mercy and Truth being brought together, Righteousness and Peace kissing each
other, by reconciling the honest People of these Nation:, and settling the
woeful Distempers that are amongst us, (which had been glorious things, and
worthy of Christians to have proposed) Weeds and Nettles, Briars and Thorn;
have thriven under your shadow, dissettlement! and division, discontent and
dis-satisfaction, together with real dangers to the whole, has been more
multiplied within these five Months of your Sitting, than in some Years before.

Foundations have been also laid for the future renewing the Troubles of these
Nations, by all the Enemies of it abroad and at home; Let not these words seem
too sharp, for they are true, as any Mathematical Demonstrations are or can be;
I say, the Enemies of the Peace of these Nations abroad and at home, the
discontented humors throughout these Nations, which I think no man will grudg
to call by that name, or to make to allude to Briars and Thorns, they have
nourished themselves under your shadow.

And that I may be clearly understood, they have taken the opportunities from
your Sitting, from the hopes they had, which with easy conjecture they might
take up, and conclude, that there would be no Settlement, and therefore they
have framed their Designs, preparing for the execution of them accordingly.

Now whether (which appertains not to me to judge of on their behalf) they had
any occasion ministered for this; and from whence they had it, I list not to
make any scrutiny or search, but I will say this, I think they had them not
from me, I am sure they had not; from whence they had it is not my business now
to discourse, but that they had, is obvious to every man's sense.

What preparations they have made to execute in such a season as they thought
fit to take their opportunity from, that I know (not as men know things by
conjecture, but) by certain demonstrable knowledge, that they have been (for
some time past) furnishing themselves with Arms, nothing doubting, but that
they should have a Day for it; and verily believing, that whatsoever their
former disappointments were, they should have more done for them by and from
our own Divisions, than they were able to do for themselves. I do not, and I
desire to be understood so, that in all I have to say of this subject, you will
take it that I have no reservation in my mind to (...) of Guess and Suspicion,
with things of Fact, but the things I am telling are of Fact, things of evident
demonstration.

These Weeds, Briars and Thorns, they have been preparing, and have brought
their Designs to some maturity, by the advantages given to them, as aforesaid,
from your Sitting and Proceedings; but by the waking ey that watched over that
Cause that God will bless, they have been, and yet are disappointed. And having
mentioned that Cause, I say that slighted Cause, Let me speak a few words in
behalf thereof (though it may seem too long a digression) Whosoever despises
it, and will say it is Non Causa pro Causa, the all searching ey before
mentioned will find out that Man, and will judge him, as one that regards not
the Works of God, nor the operations of his hands, for which God has
threatened to cast men down and not build them up; that because he can dispute,
and tell us, He knew not where the Cause begun, nor where it is, but modelleth
it according to his own intellect, and submits not to to the appearances of God
in the World, therefore he lifts up his heel against God, and mocketh at all
his providence, laughing at the observations made up not without Reason, and
the Scriptures, but by the quickening and teaching Spirit, which gives life to
the other, calling such observations Enthusiasms. Such men, I say, no wonder if
they stumble and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken by the
things of which they are so maliciously and wilfully ignorant. The Scriptures
say, The Rod has a voice, and he will make himself known, and he will make
himself known by the Judgments which he executes; and do we not think he
will, and does, by the providence of mercy and kindness which he has for his
People, and for their just Liberties, whom he loves as the Apple of his Ey?
Does he not by them manifest himself? And is he not thereby also seen, giving
Kingdoms for them, giving Men for them, and People for their lives? As it is in
the 43. of Isaiah Is not this as fair a Lecture, and as clear speaking, as any
thing our dark reason left to the Letter of the Scriptures can collect from
them? By this voice has God spoken very loud on the behal of his People, by
judging their Enemies in the late War, and restoring them a liberty to worship
with the freedom of their Consciences, and freedom in their Estates and Persons
when they do so. And thus we have found the Cause of God by the Works of God,
which are the Testimony of God, upon which Rock, whosoever spilits shall suffer
shipwreck.

But it is Our Glory, and it is Mine, if I have any in the World, concerning
the Interest of those that have an Interest in a better World; It is My Glory
that, I know a Cause, which yet we have not lost, but do hope we shall take a
little pleasure rather to lose our Lives than lose. But you will excuse this
long digression.

I say unto you, whilst you have been in the midst of these Transactions, that
Party, that Cavalier Party, (I could wish some of them had thrust in here to
have heard what I say) the Cavalier Party have been designing and preparing to
put this Nation in blood again with a witness; but because I am confident there
are none of that Sort here, therefore I shall say the less to that; only this
I must tell you, they have been making great preparations of Arms, and, I do
believe, will be made evident to you that they have raked out many thousands of
Arms, even all that this City could afford, for diverse Months last past.

But it will be said, May we not arm Our selves for the Defense of our Houses?
will any body find fault for that? No, for that, the reason of their doing so
has been as explicit, and under as clear proof, as the fact of doing so, for
which I hope, by the Justice of the Land, some will, in the face of the Nation,
Answer it with their lives, and then the business will be pretty well out of
doubt.

Banks of Money have been framing for these, and other such like uses; Letters
have been issued, with Privy Seals, to as great Persons as most are in the
Nation, for the advance of Moneys, which have been discovered to Us by the
persons themselves; Commissions for Regiments of Horse and Foot and Command of
Castles, have been likewise given from Charles Stuart, since your Sitting; and
what the general insolences of that party have been, the honest people have
been sensible of, and can very well testify.

It has not been only thus; but as in a Quinzie or Plurisie, where the humor
fixes in one part, give it scope, it will gather to that place, to the
hazarding of the whole, and it is natural to do so, till it destroy nature, in
that Person on whomsoever this befalls,

So likewise will those diseases take accidental Causes of aggravation of their
distemper; and this was that which I did assert, that they have taken
Accidental Causes, for the growing and increasing of those Distempers, as much
as would have been in the natural body, if timely remedy were nor applied. And
indeed, things were come to that pass (in respect of which I shall give you a
particular account) that no mortal Physician, if the Great Physician had not
stepped in, could have cured the Distemper.

Shall I lay this upon your Account, or my own? I am sure I can lay it upon
Gods account (...) mortal and destructive; and what is all this? Truly I must
needs say, a company of men still, like Briars and Thorns, and worse, if worse
can be, of another sort than those before mentioned to you, have been, and yet
are, endeavoring to put Us into Blood and into Confusion, more desperate and
dangerous Confusion than England ever yet saw.

And I must say, as when Gideon commanded his Son to fall upon Zeba and
Zalmunna to slay them, they thought it more noble to die by the hand of a Man,
than of a Stripling; which shows there is some contentment in the hand by which
a man falls: So is it some satisfaction, if a Commonwealth must perish that it
perish by Men, and not by the hands of persons differing little from Beasts;
That if it must needs suffer, it should rather suffer from rich men, than from
poor men, who, as Solomon says, when they oppress, they l^^ve nothing behind
them, but are as a sweeping rain.

Now, such as these also are grown up under your shadow: But it will be asked,
what have they done? I hope, though they pretend Commonwealths interest, they
have had no encourageme^t from you, but that as before, rather taken it, than
that you have administered any Cause unto them for so doing, from Delays, from
hopes that this Parliament would not settle, from Pamphlets, mentioning strange
Votes and Resolves of yours, which I hope did abuse you. Thus you see, what
ever the Grounds were, these have been the Effects. And thus I have laid these
things before you, and you and others will be easily able to judge how far you
are concerned.

And what have these men done? They have also labored to pervert where they
could, and as they could, the honest meaning people of the Nation, they have
labored to engage, some in the Army; and I doubt, that not only they, but some
others also very well known to You, have helped in this work of debauching and
dividing the Army; they have, they have; I would be loath to say, who, where,
and how, much more loath to say, they were any of your own Number, but I can say
Endeavors have been to put the Army into a Distemper, and to Feed that which is
the worst humor in the Army, which though it was not a mastering humor, yet
these took their advantage from delay of the Settlement, and the Practices
before mentioned, and stopping the pay of the Army, to run Us, into
Free Quarter, and to bring us into the inconveniences most to be feared and
avoided.

What if I am able to make it appear in Fact, That some amongst you have run
into the City of London to persuade to Petitions and Ad (...) own Votes that
you have passed? whether these practices were in favor of your Liberties, or
tended to be get hopes of Peace and Settlement from you; and whether debauching
the Army in England, as is before expressed, and sterving it, and putting it
upon Free Quarter, and occasioning and necessitating the greatest part thereof
in Scotland to march into England, leaving the remainder thereof to have their
throats cut there, and kindling by the rest a Fire in our own bosoms, were for
the advantage of Affairs here, Let the World judge?

This I tell you also, that the correspondency held with the Interest of the
Cavaliers, by that Party of men called Levellers, and who calls themselves
Common-wealths-men; whose Declarations were framed to that purpose, and ready
to be published at the time of their Commonrising, whereof We are possessed,
and for which We have the Confession of themselves, now in custody; who confess
also they built their hopes upon the assurance they had of the Parliaments not
agreeing a Settlement: Whether these humors have not nourished themselves under
your Boughs, is the subject of my present discourse, and I think I say not
amiss if I affirm it to be so.

And I must say it again, That that which has been their advantage, thus to
raise disturbance, has been by the loss of those Golden opportunities, that
God has put into your hands for Settlement, Judge you whether these things
were thus or no, when you first sat down, I am sure things were not thus, there
was a very great Peace, and sedateness, throughout these Nations, and great
expectations of a happy Settlement, which I remembered to you at the beginning
of my Speech, and hoped that you would have entered upon your business as you
found it.

There was a GOVERNMENT in the possession of the People, I say a GOVERNMENT in
the posession of the People, for many Months, it has now been exercised near
fifteen Months; and if it were needful that I should tell you, how it came into
their Possession, and how willingly they received it, How all Law and Justice
were distributed from it, in every respect, as to life, liberty and estate; How
it was owned by God, as being the Dispensation of his Providence, after twelve
years War, and sealed and Witnessed unto by the People, I should but repeat
what I said in my last Speech made unto you in this Place, and therefore I
forbear.

When you were entered upon this GOVERNMENT, raveling into it (you know I took
no notice what you were doing) if you had gone upon that (...) visions for the
good of the People of these Nations, for the Settling of such matters in things
of Religion as would have upheld and given Countenance to a Godly Ministry,
and yet would have given a just liberty to Godly men of different Judgments,
men of the same Faith with them that you call the Orthodox Ministry in
England, as it is well known the Independents are, and many under the Form of
Ba^tism, who are sound in the Faith, only may perhaps be different in
Judgment in some lesser matters, yet as true Christians, both looking at
Salvation, only by faith in the blood of Christ, men profe^^^ng the fear of
God, having recourse to the Name of God, as to a strong Tower; I say you might
have had Opportunity to have settled Peace and Quietness amongst all professing
Godliness, and might have been instrumental, if not to have healed the
breaches, yet to have kept the Godly of all Judgments from running one upon
another, and by keeping them from being overrun by a Common Enemy, rendered
them and these Nations, both secure, happy, and well satisfied.

Are these things done? or any thing toward them? Is there not yet upon the
Spirits of men a strange itch? Nothing will satisfy them, unless they can put
their finger upon their Brethrens Consciences, to pinch them there. To do this
was no part of the Contest we had with the Common Adversary; for Religion was
not the thing at the first contested for; but God brought it to that issue at
last, and gave it unto Us by way of Redundancie, and at last it proved to be
that which was most dear to us; and wherein consisted this, more than in
^btain^ng that Liberty from the Tyranny of the Bishops, to all Species of
Protestants, to worship God according to their own Light and Consciences? for
want of which, many of our Brethren forsook their Native Countries, to seek
their Bread from Strangers, and to live in Howling Wildernesses; and for which
also, many that remained here, were imprisoned, and otherwise abused, and made
the scorn of the Nation.

Those that were sound in the Faith, how proper was it for them to labor for
Liberty, for a just Liberty, that men should not be trampled upon for their
Consciences? had not they labored but lately under the weight of Persecutions,
and was it fi^ for them to sit heavy upon others? is it ingenuous to ask
liberty, and not to give it? what greater Hypocrisy, than for those who were
oppressed by the Bishops, to become the greatest Oppressors themselves, so soon
as their yoke was removed? I could wish that they who call for liberty now
also, had not too much of that Spirit, if the power were in their hands.

(...) Contentious Railers, Evil Speakers, who seek by evil words to corrupt
good manners, persons of loose Conversaions, punishment from the Civil
Magistrate ought to meet with them, because if these pretend Conscience, yet
walking disorderly, and not according, but contrary to the Gospel, and even to
natural light, they are judged of all, and their Sins being open, makes them
subjects of the Magistrates Sword, who ought not to bear it in vain.

The Discipline of the Army was such, that a man would not be suffered to
remain there, of whom we could take notice he was guilty of such Practices as
these: And therefore how happy would England have been, and You, and I, if the
Lord had led you on to have settled upon such good accounts as these are, and
to have discountenanced such practices as the other, and left men in disputable
things free to their own Consciences, which was well provided for by the
GOVERNMENT, and Liberty left to provide against what was apparently evil.

Judge you, whether the contesting for things that were provided for by this
GOVERNMENT has been Profitable expense of time for the good of these Nations?
by means whereof, you may see you have wholely elapsed your time, and done just
nothing.

I will say this to you in behalf of the long Parliament, that had such an
Expedient as this GOVERNMENT been proposed to them, and that they could have
seen the Cause of God thus provided for, and had by debates been enlightened in
the grounds by which the Difficulties might have been cleared, and the reason
of the whole enforced, the circumstances of Time and Persons, with the Temper
and Disposition of the People, and Affairs both Abroad and at Home, when it was
undertaken, well weighed, (as well as they were thought to love their Seats) I
think in my conscience that they would have proceeded in another manner than
you have done, and not have exposed things to those Difficulties and Hazards
they now are at, nor given occasion to leave the People so dissettled as now
they are, who I dare say, in the soberest, and most judicious part of them, did
expect, not a Questioning, but a Doing things in persuance of the GOVERNMENT,
and if I be not misinformed, very many of you came up with this Satisfaction,
having had time enough to weigh and consider the same.

And when I say, such an Expedient as this GOVERNMENT is, wherein I dare assert
there is a just Liberty to the People of God, and the Just Rights of the People
in these Nations provided for, I can put the issue thereof upon the Clearest
Reason, whatsoever any go about to suggest to the Contrary.

But this not being the time and place of such an Averment, for satisfaction
sake herein, enough is said in a Book, entitled, A True State of the Case of
the Commonwealth, etc. published in Jan. 1653. (And for my self, I desire not
to keep it an hour longer than I may preserve England in its Just Rights, and
may Protect the People of God in such a just: Liberty of their Consciences, as
I have already mentioned) And therefore if this Parliament have judged things
to be otherwise than as I have stated them, it had been huge Friendliness
between persons that had such a Reciprocation, and in so great Concernments to
the public, for them to have convinced me in what particulars therein my error
lay, of which I never yet had a word from you. But if instead thereof, your
time has been spent in Setting up somewhat else upon another bottom than this
stands, that looks as if a laying grounds of a Quarrel had rather been
designed, than to give the People Settlement; if it be thus, its well your
Labors have not arrived to any maturity at all.

This Government called you hither, the Constitution whereof being so limited,
A single Person and a Parliament, and this was thought most agreeable to the
Genral sense of the Nation, having had experience enough by trial of other
Conclusions, judging this most likely to avoid the extremes of Monarchy on the
one hand, and Democracy on the other, and yet not to found Dominium in gratia.
And if so, then certainly to make it more than a Nation, it was requisite that
it should be as it is in the GOVERNMENT, which puts it upon a true and equal
Balance. It has been already submitted to the Judicious honest People of this
Nation, whether the Balance be not equal, and what their Judgment is, is
visible by Submission to it, by acting upon it, by restraining their Trustees
from meddling with it: and it neither asks nor needs any better ratification.
But when Trustees in Parliament shall by Experience find any evil in any parts
of the Government, refered by the Government it self to the Consideration of
the Protector and Parliament (of which time it self will be the best
Discoverer) how can it be reasonably imagined, that a Person or Persons coming
in by Election, and standing under such Obligations, and so limited, and so
necessitated by Oath to Govern, for the Peoples good, and to make their love,
under God, the best under-propping, and his best interest to him, how can it, I
say, be imagined, that the present or suceeding PROTECTORS will refuse to agree
to alter any such thing in the GOVERNMENT that may be found to be for the good
of the People, or to recede from any thing which he might be convinced (...)
the balance too much to the single Person? And although for the present, the
keeping up, and having in His Power the Militia seems the most hard, yet if it
should be yielded up at such a time as this, when there is as much need to keep
this CAUSE by it (which is most evident at this time impugned by all the
Enemies of it) as there was to get it, what would become of all? Or if it should
not be equally placed in him and the Parliament, but yielded up at any time, it
determins his power, either for doing the good he ought, or hindering
Parliaments from perpetuating themselves, or from imposing what Religions they
please on the Consciences of men, or what Government they please upon the
Nation, thereby subjecting us to Dissettlement, in every Parliament, and to the
desperate consequences thereof; and if the Nation shall happen to fall into a
blessed Peace, how easily and certainly, will their charge be taken off, and
their Forces be disbanded, and then where will the danger be to have the
Militia thus stated?

What if I should say, If there should be a disproportion or disequality as to
the power, it is on the other hand, and if this be so, wherein have you had
cause to quarrel? What Demonstrations have you held forth to settle Me to your
opinion? would you had made me so happy as to let me have known your Grounds. I
have made a free and ingenuous confession of my Faith to you, and I could have
wished it had been in your hearts to have agreed that some friendly and cordial
debates might have been toward mutual Conviction; was there none amongst you
to move such a thing? No fitness to listen to it? No desire of a right
understanding? If it be not folly in Me to listen to Towntalk, such things have
been proposed, and rejected, with stifness and severity, once and again; Was it
not likely to have been more advantageous to the good of this Nation? I will
say this to you for My self, and to that I have my Conscience as a thousand
Witnesses, and I have my comfort and contentment in it, and I have the Witness
of Diverse here, that I think truly scorn to Own me in a Lie, that I would not
have been averse to any alteration, of the good of which I might have been
convinced, although I could not have agreed to the taking it off the Foundation
on which it stands, etc. The acceptance and consent of the People.

I will not presage what you have been about, or doing in all this time, or do
I love to make Conjectures, but I must tell you this, That as I undertook this
Government in the simplicity of my heart, and as before God, and to do the part
of an honest man, and to be true to the Inerest which in my Conscience is dear
to many of you (though it is not always understood what God in his wisdom may
hide from Us, as to Peace and Settlement) So I can say, that no particular
Interest, either of my Self, Estate, Honor, or Family, are, or have been
prevalent with me to this Undertaking.

For if you had upon the old Government offered to me this one, this one thing,
I speak, as thus advised, and before God, as having been, to this day of this
opinion, and this has been my constant Judgment, well known to many that hear
me speak, if this one thing had been inserted, that one thing, that this
Government should have been, and placed in my Family Hereditary I would have
rejected it, and I could have done no other, according to my present Conscience
and Light; I will tell you my reason, though I cannot tell what God will do
with Me, nor You, nor the Nation, for throwing away precious opportunities
committed to US.

This has been my Principle, and I liked it when this Government came first to
be proposed to me, That it put Us off that Hereditary way, well looking, that
as God had declared what GOVERNMENT he had delivered over to the Jews, and
placed it upon such persons as had been instrumental for the Conduct and
Deliverance of his People; And considering that promise in Isaiah, That God
would give Rulers as at the first, and Judges as at the beginning, I did not
know, but that God might begin, and though at present with a most unworthy
Person, yet as to the future, it might be after this manner, and I thought this
might usher it in. I am speaking as to my Judgment against making it
Hereditary, to have men chosen for their Love to God, and to Truth, and
Justice, and not to have it Hereditary; for as it is in Ecclesiastes Who
knows whether he may beget a Fool or Wise, honest or not, what ever they be
must come in upon that account, because the Government is made a Patrimony.

And this I do perhaps declare with too much Earnestness, as being my own
Concernment, and know not what Place it may have in your Hearts, and of the
good people in the Nation, but however it be, I have comfort in this my truth
and plainness.

I have thus told you my thoughts, which truly I have declared to you in the
fear of God, as knowing he will not be mocked, and in the strength of God, as
knowing and rejoicing that I am kept in my speaking; especially when I do not
form or frame things without the compass of the Integrity, and Honesty, that my
own Conscience gives me not the Ly to what I say, and then in what I say I can
rejoice.

Now to speak a word or two to you, Of that I must profess in the name of the
same Lord, an I wish that there had been no cause that I should have thus
spoken to you, and though I have told you, that I came with Joy the first time,
with some regret the second, that now I speak with most regret of all.

I look upon you, as having among you many persons, that I could lay down my
life individually for, I could through the grace of God, desire to lay down my
life for you; So far am I from having an unkind or un-Christian heart toward
you, in your particular capacities.

I have that indeed as a work most incumbent upon Me, I consulted what might be
My Duty in such a Day as this, casting up all Considerations. I must confess,
as I told you, that I did think occasionally this Nation has suffered
extremely in the respects mentioned, as also in the Disappointments of their
Expectations of that Justice that was due to them by your sitting thus long;
and what have you brought forth?

I did not, nor cannot apprehend what it is, (I would be loath to call it a
Fate, that were too Paganish a Word) but there is something in it, that we have
not our Expectations.

I did think also for my self, that I am like to meet with Difficulties, and
that this Nation will not (as it is fit it should not) be deluded with pretexts
of Necessity in that great business of raising of money, and were it not that I
can make some Dilemmaes upon which to resolve some things of my Conscience,
Judgment, and Actions, I should sink at the very prospect of my Encounters;
some of them are general, some are more special, supposing this Cause, or this
Business must be carried on, either it is of God, or of Man, if it be of Man, I
would I had never touched it with a finger; if I had not had a hope fixed in Me
that this Cause, and this business is of God, I would many years ago have run
from it. If it be of God, he will bear it up. If it be of Man, it will tumble,
as every thing that has been of man, since the World began, has done. And
what are all our Histories, and other Traditions of actions in former times,
but God mani^esting himself that he has shaken and tumbled down, and trampled
upon every thing that he has not planted? And as this is, so the all-wise God
deal with it.

If this be of humane Structure, and invention, and it be an old Plotting and
Contrivance to bring things to this Issue, and that they are not the births of
Providence, then they will tumble. But if the Lord take pleasure in England,
and if he will do Us good, he is able to bear us up; Let the difficulties be
whatsoever they will, we shall in his Strength be able to encounter with them.
And I bless God I have been inured to Difficulties, and I never found God
failed when I trusted in him; I can laugh and sing in my heart when I speak of
these things to you, or elsewhere. And though some may think it an hard thing
without Parliamentary Authority to raise money upon this Nation; yet I have
another Argument to the good people of this Nation, if they would be safe, and
have no better Principle; whether they prefer the having of their Will, though
it be their Destruction, rather than comply with things of necessity; that will
excuse me, but I should wrong my native Country to suppose this.

For I look at the People of these Nations, as the blessing of the Lord, and
they are a People blessed by God. They have been so, and they will be so by
reason of that immortal seed, which has been, and is amongst them, those
regenerated ones in the Land, of several Judgments, who are all the Flock of
Christ, and Lambs of Christ, though perhaps under many unruly passions, and
troubles of Spirit, whereby they give disquiet to themselves and others; yet
they are not so to God, as to Us, he is a God of other patience, and he will
own the least of truth in the hearts of his People, and the people being the
blessing of God they will not be so angry, but they will prefer their safety to
their passions, and their real security to forms, when necessity calls for
supplies; had they not well been acquainted with this principle, they had never
seen this day of Gospel-Liberty.

But if any man shall object, It is an easy thing to talk of neccssities when
men create necessities; would not the Lord Protector make Himself great, and
his Family great? does not He make these necessities? and then he will come
upon the People with this Argument of necessity.

This were something hard indeed, but I have not yet known what it is to make
necessities, whatsoever the Judgments or thoughts of men are. And I say this,
not only to this Assembly, but to the World, that that man lives not, that
can come to me, and charge me that I have in these great Revolutions made
necessities; I challenge even all that fear God: And as God has said. My glory
I will not give unto another, Let men take heed, and be twice advised, how they
call his Revolutions, the things of God, and his working of things from one
Period to another, how I say, they call them necessities of men's creation, for
by so doing they do vilify and lessen the works of God, and rob him of his
Glory, which he has said, he will not give unto another, nor suffer to be
taken from him. We know what God did to Herod when he was applauded, and did
not acknowledge GOD; And GOD knows what he will do with men when they shall
call His Revolutions, humane Designs, and so detract from his Glory, when they
have not been forecast, but sudden Providence in things, whereby Carnal and
Worldly men are enraged, and under, and at which many I fear (some good) have
murmured and repined, because disappointed of their mistaken Fancies; but still
they have been the wise disposings of the Almighty, though Instruments have had
their passions and ^ra^lties; and I think it is an Honor to God to acknowledge
the necessities to have been of Gods imposing, when truly they have been so,
as indeed they have, when we take our sin in our actings to ourselves, and much
more safe, than judge things so contingent, as if there were not a God that
ruled the Earth.

We know the Lord has poured this Nation from Vessel to Vessel, till he poured
it into your Lap, when you came first together: I am confident, that it came so
into your hands, was not judged by you to be from Counterfeited, or feigned
necessity, but by Divine Providence and Dispensation. And this I speak with
more earnestness, because I speak for God, and not for men; I would have any
man to come and tell of the transactions that have been, and of those periods
of time, wherein God has made these Revolutions, and find where they can fix a
feigned necessity.

I could recite particulars, if either My strength would serve Me to speak, or
yours to hear; if that you would revolve the great hand of God in his great
Dispensations, you would find that there is scarce a man that fell off at any
period of time when God had any work to do, that can give God or his work, at
this day, a good word.

It was, say some, the cunning of the Lord Protector (I take it to my self) it
was the craft of such a man, and his plot that has brought it about. And as
they say in other Countries, There are five or six cunning men in England that
have skill, they do all these things: Oh what Blasphemy is this! because men
that are without God in the World, and Walk not with him, and know not what it
is to pray, or believe, and to receive return from God, and to be spoken unto
by the Spirit of God, who Speaks without a written Word sometimes, yet
according to it: God has spoken heretofore in diverse manners, let him speak as
he pleases. Has he not given us liberty? nay is it not our duty to go to the
Law and to the Testimonies, and there we shall find that there have been
impressions in extraordinary cases, as well without the written Word as with
it, and therefore there is no difference in the thing thus asserted, from
truths generally received, except we will exclude the Spirit, without whose
concurrence all other Teachings are ineffectual; He does speak to the Hearts
and Consciences of men, and leads them to his Law and Testimonies, and there
he speaks to them, and so gives them double teachings, according to that of
Job. God speaks once, yea twice; and that of David, God has spoken once, yea
twice have I heard this. Those men that live upon their Mumpsimus and
Sumpsimus, their Masses and Service-Books, their dead and carnal Worship, no
marvel if they be strangers to God, and the works of God, and to spiritual
dispensations. And because they say and believe thus, must we do so too? we in
this Land have been otherwise instructed, even by the Word, and Works, and
Spirit of God.

To say that men bring forth these things, when God does them, judge you if God
will bear this. I wish that every sober heart, though he has had temptations
upon him of deserting this CAUSE of God, yet may take heed how he provokes, and
falls into the hands of the living God by such Blasphemies as these, according
to the 10th of the Hebrews, If we sin wilfully after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin (it was spoken
to the Jews, that having professed Christ apostatized from him) what then?
nothing but a fearful falting into the hands of the Living God.

They that shall attribute to this or that person the contrivances and
production of those mighty things God has wrought in the midst of us, and that
they have not been the revolutions of Christ himself, upon whose Shoulders the
GOVERNMENT is laid, they speak against God, and they fall under his hand
without a Mediator, that is, if we deny the Spirit of Jesus Christ the glory of
all his works in the world, by which he Rules Kingdoms, and does administer,
and is the Rod of his strength, we provoke the Mediator; And he may say, I Will
leave you to God, I Will not intercede for yon, let him tear you to pieces, I Will
leave thee to fall into Gods hands, thou deniest me my Sovereignty and Power
committed to me, I Will not intercede nor mediate for thee, thou fallest into the
hands of the living God. Therefore whatsoever you may judge men for, and say,
This man is cunning, and politic, and subtle; take heed, again I say, how you
judge of his revolutions, as the products of men's inventions.

I may be thought to press too much upon this Theme, but pray God it may stick
upon your hearts and mine; the worldly minded man knows nothing of this, but is
a stranger to it, and because of this his Atheism and murmurings at
instruments, yea repining at God himself; and no wonder, considering the Lord
has done such things amongst us as have not been known in the world these 1000
years, and yet not withstanding is not owned by us.

There is another necessity which you have put upon us, and we have not sought;
I appeal to God, Angels, and Men, if I shall raise Money according to the
Article in the GOVERNMENT which had power to call you hither, and did, and
instead of seasonable providing for the Army, you have labored to overthrow
the GOVERNMENT, and the Army is now upon Free Quarter, and you would never so
much as let me hear a tittle from you concerning it, where is the fault? has it
not been as if you had had a purpose to put this extremity upon us and the
Nation? I hope this was not in your minds, I am not willing to judge so; but
this is the state unto which we are reduced: By the Designs of some in the Army
who are now in Custody, it was designed to get as many of them as could,
through discontent for want of money, the Army being in a Barren Country, near
Thirty weeks behind in pay, and upon other specious pretenses, to march for
England out of Scotland, and in discontent to seiz, their General there, a
faithful and honest man, that so another might head the Army, and all this
opportunity taken from your delays, whether will this be a thing of feigned
necessity? What could it signify but that the Army are in discontent already,
and we will make them live upon stones, we will make them cast off their Governors
and Discipline? What can be said to this? I list not to unsaddle my self, and
put the fault upon others backs; Whether it has been for the good of England
whilst men have been talking of this thing or the other, and pretending
liberty, and a many good words whether it has been as it should have been? I
am confident you cannot think it has, the Nation will not think so. And if the
worst should be made of things, I know not what the Cornish men, or the
Lincolnshire men may think, or other Counties, but I believe they will all
think they are not safe. A temporary suspension of caring for the greatest
Liberties and privileges (if it were so, which is denied) would not have been
of that damage, that the not providing against Free Quarter has run the Nation
upon. And if it be my liberty to walk abroad in the Fields, or to take a
Journey, yet it is not my wisdom to do so when my House is on fire.

I have troubled you with a long Speech, and I believe it may not have the same
resentment with all that it has with some: But because that is unknown to me,
I shall leave it to God, and conclude with that, that I think my self bound in
my Duty to God and the People of these Nations, to their safety and good in
every respect. I think it my duty to tell you, That it is not for the profit of
these Nations, nor for Common and Public good, for You to continue here any
longer, and therefore, I do Declare unto you, THAT I DO DISSOLVE THIS
PARLIAMENT.


