the KINGDOM of Darkness.


THE KINGDOM OF Darkness: OR The History of Demons, Specters, Witches,
Apparitions, Possessions, Disturbances, and other wonderful and supernatural
Delusions, Mischievous Feats, and Malicious Impostures of the Devil.

Containing near Fourscore memorable Relations, Foreign and Domestic, both
Ancient and Modern.

Collected from Authentic Records, Real Attestations, Credible Evidences, and
asserted by Authors of Undoubted Verity.

Together with a Preface obviating the common Objections and Allegations of the
Sadduces and Atheists of the Age, who deny the Being of Spirits, Witches, etc.

With Pictures of several memorable Accidents.

By R. B.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
1688.

THE PREFACE.
Obviating the Common Objections and Arguments against the Being of Spirits,
Witches, etc.
THE Atheists and Sadduces of this Age, like some of the Ancient Heathens, have
thought it a great piece of wit to deny the Being of Spirits, and that all
stories concerning them are either fabulous or to be ascribed to Natural
Causes, which fond opinion many Learned men have sufficiently confuted, and as
the examples of former ages and places, so the prodigious accidents that have
happened in our times in several parts of the World make it manifest beyond
contradiction, that there are Devils infesting the lower World, besides the
evidence of Script, which is fully convictive to all sober Christians; Though
yet it must be granted the power of God dot^ so limit and restrain their malice
that they c^^ hurt no man nor any other creature, much les^ any that worship
him in truth without permission from him who is God over all the Earth; An^ as
there are many dreadful instances to evinc^ the truth hereof, so Satan's
possessing the bodies (...) men, and acting wonderfully in them is a great
confirmation thereof; Though it must be grante^ that it is sometimes very hard
to distinguish between natural diseases, and Diabolical possessions, there
having been found a very near resemblance. And therefore some Authors have
mentioned certain signs, whereby this Infernal Possession is to be
distinguished from any other Malady; As the revealing secret things past or t^
come, which without some supernatural assistanc^ could not be discovered; To
speak with strang^ Languages, or discover Skill in Arts or Science never
learned by them; To carry burdens o^ perform other matters far beyond human
strength To utter words or be heard speaking and ye^ their lips and tongues not
to have any motion To have their bodies become inflexible, neithe^ to be bended
backward nor forward with the greatest force; The Belly to be suddenly puffed up
and to fall instantly flat again; These among other are thought to be Arguments
of a Person possesse^ with an evil Spirit though very worthy Divines suppose
upon Scripture grounds that men may be demoniacal when none of the
aforementioned particulars happen to them, and that those of whom we so of
tread in the New Testament were of this kind, and the Jews were of that opinion
as is evident by that expression of (...) 10.20. He has a Devil and is mad,
and in St. Matt. 17. We read of one that was Lunatic and did often fall into the
Fire, and often into the Water; Now that he was a person possessed is clear from
verse 18. where it is said, Jesus rebuked the Devil and he departed out of him.
And of the same person it is said St. Luke 9.39. A Spirit takes him and
teareth him; It has been commonly thought that in our Savionrs time more
persons were possessed with evil Spirits than ever before or since, which if it
had been true it is very probable some Jewish Historians would have recorded it
as a thing strange and extraordinary, but since no such observation was made we
have no reason to believe it.

But though some will acknowledge the being of Spirits, and that the bodies of
men and women are actually possessed by them, yet they will not believe there
are any such desperate creatures as Witches or persons really confederate with
the Devil, and several Authors have to fidently affirmed that never any did
maintain that familiarity with Evil Spirits which is usually discourst of; It
must be granted that many things have been judged to proceed from Witchercraft
when it has not been so; The Antipathies and Sympathies of nature, and the
Sympathetick powder made without any Magical Ceremonies have been suspected of
Witchcraft, and by natural ma^^^^ (...) the Secrets of Nature ignorant men may
be made to believe the assistance of a Supernatural Power; It is likewise as
true that a multitude of Lies and Fables are reported of these Familiarities
with Devils, and matters done by his help which are beyond the power of
creatures to accomplish; What Stories are related of Incubi and Succubae, and
of men begotten by Devils, not but that the Devil may so delude the fancy of
the Witch (of which we shall give instances) that she may really think she has
carnal and cursed commerce with them, nor is it impossible for him to assume a
deadbody, or to form a lifeless one out of the elements and therewith to
debauch his forlorn Votaries, though to imagine Spirits can really generate
bodies is irrational.

There have indeed been some men in the World reported to have been thus born,
as the inhabitants of the Isle of Cyprus, Arcturus and our British Merlin, also
Homer, Aeneas, Hercules and Alexander the great, but it is altogether
inconsistent with reason, since it is acknowledged by all he cannot bring forth
a perfect animal, much less man the most noble creature of the whole creation;
It is altogether as false and vain, which yet some grave Authors have related
that Witches can transform themselves or others into other sort of Creatures,
as Horses, Wolves, Cats, Mice and the like, it being beyond the power of all
the Devils in Hell to cause such a Transformation, who are no more able to
effect it than they can be the Authors of any true miracle, not but that in
this case likewise the Devil may so impose upon the imagination of Witches as
to make them believe they are transformed into Beasts, of which the following
relations will give some account, from whence some Persons of worth have been
inclined to question whether there were any Person ever really confederate with
Infernal Spirits or no. Though there are many evincing Arguments to prove the
truth thereof.

Especially those taken from the holy Scriptures where Witchcrafts are often
forbidden, and particular mention is made of many who used those cursed Arts
and familiaritis with the Devil as Jannes and Jambres, Baalam, Manasseh, Simon,
Elymas, etc. Nor are the reasons deduced from the history of the Witch of Endor
sufficiently confuted by these Advocates for Witches by pretending that the
Witches and familiar Spirits spoken of in holy writ were only Juglers; or those
who by Legerdemain could do strange seats of activity, since the divine Law
requires such should be cut off by the Sword of Justice, for if these Persons
had not confederated with the Devil they could not deserve such strict
severity; So that these witty men play mere Hocus Pocus tricks in explicating
that Story than the Witch her self did in raising deceased Samuel.

Besides we have had too often and manifest experience that there are such in
the World who hold a correspondence with Hell, and that some have been Teachers
and Instructers of others in those cursed Ceremonies for maintaining communion
with the Devil, several Books having been writ to that purpose wherein too many
of those horrid abominations are set down; Yea it is a certain truth that some
have discourst in several Languages, and reasoned notably about sciences which
they never learned; They have revealed secrets, discovered hidden Treasures,
and told whither stolen goods have been conveyed and by whom; They have caused
brate creatures, yea marble Statues to speak and give rational answers, (as the
Jews Teraphim often did,) and sure such things as these cannot be done by the
help of mere natural causes, and it must needs be that the practicers of them
are confederate with Satan.

There have likewise been many in the World, who have upon conviction confessed
themselves guilty of Familiarity with the Devil; of which we have a multitude
of instances in diverse Authors, and many in the following Relations, and it is
a very vain shift for those who are Patrons for Witches to sham off this
Argument by suggesting that these Confessions proceed from the deluded
imaginations of mad and melancholy People; Some of them being as free from
distemperature in their Brains as their Neighbors though it cannot be denied
but others have accused themselves of what they were never guilty, their
deluded fancies having caused them to imagine they have really done those
things that were never acted but in their own imaginations; But yet that
persons whose Judgment and Reason has been free from disturbance by any disease
should not only acknowledge their cursed confederacy with Satan, and mention the
particulers, yea give occular demonstration of the truth thereof by discovering
Marks, Teats, and other Signs made by the Devil upon their bodies and that when
examined apart several should agree in the same circumstances of their
Relations, and yet all this should be the mere effect of Melancholy or Phrensy,
cannot without violence to reason and common sense be imagined; And as there
are Witches so they are many times the Causes of those strange disturbances
which are in houses haunted by Evil Spirits of which you have here many
examples.

It has been objected, That reputed Witches are generally poor miserable
Creatures, and that if the Devil would do such wonderful things at their
command, it is a wonder they cannot command him to fetch them money; To this
may be replied; That certainly the Devil does delude these people with the
enjoyment of all sorts of pleasures which they desire, if not really yet in
imagination, which to them is the same thing; Now riches not being desirable
but only as they conduce to a pleasant life, if they can obtain this without
them, what occasion have they for Money; Further they being Persons of base
degenerate Spirits, who desire nothing so much as revenge, mischief and
satisfying their filthy lusts, and coming as near as possible themselves to the
nature of Devils, such a mean way of living may be more suitable to their
temper, or they may choose it to avoid suspicion, and to have the greater
freedom to practice their wicked Arts.

It is further said that the opinion of Witchcraft is irrational since we can
hardly imagine that the Devil being so full of malice and hatred against men
should suffer any to live when he can so easily destroy them at the command of
a Witch; To this I reply that the Devil cannot go beyond his Commission, and it
is in Gods power to stop his malice when and where he pleases, besides it is
very probable that the Laws of the Devils Kingdom do not allow them that
freedom, since hereby their interest would not be carried on which is the ruin
of men's Souls, not the destruction of their bodies, to which cunning and fly
temptations are more advantageous than open violence, for if men should be thus
sensible of his malicious practices they might find themselves too weak to
resist, and would therefore run to God for succor, for ^is most certain that
neither Devils nor Witches can hurt us without Gods permission.

And they that say, It is a wicked and impious Opinion to say that God permits
and suffers such things; It may then be said to be as impious to affirm that
God suffers us to be tempted to sin, yet we are certain he cannot do it without
Gods permission as appears by that expression of St. Paul, He will not suffer
you to be tempted above what you are able, etc. So if we acknowledge that God
is omnipotent we must confess that no wickedness could be done in the World
without his permission seeing it is in his power to prevent it, and there is no
impiety in affirming that though God of his great mercy may preserve any man
from falling into sin, yet he is not bound to do it, as we see by daily
experience, and if we grant he suffers men to sin why may not he permit
Witchcraft? If God suffers one man to murder another, why may not he permit
Witches to do the same thing.

There is another objection as malicious as frivolous, That if Witches can do
such wonderful feats no man can by the light of reason discover whether our
Saviors Miracles are true or not; But let such consider the vast difference
between those wonderful works done by the Holy Jesus and the Impostures of
Witches, and their different ends, and likewise his exemplary life and
conversation, and the wickedness of Impostors, and remember what our Savior
himself says; You shall know the Tree by its fruits; Can one gather grapes of
thorns or figs of thistles? And when they have seriously thought thereof, this
objection would be answered, For could any of these Pretenders and vile
Wretches infallibly cure all diseases by a word of their mouth, or a touch of
their hand? Could they raise the dead after being buried so long as to stink in
their graves? Could they feed five thousand with five loaves and two fishes?
Did the Earth tremble or the Sun grow dark at any of their deaths? were the
graves opened, or did any ever arise as he in three days and at last gloriously
ascend up to Heaven in sight of many witnesses?

Methinks the manner of our Saviors birth is enough to satisfy us herein, That
he was born of a Virgin; A glorioas Star appeared over the place, A company of
Heavenly Angels were sent to proclaim it, as tidings of joy to the whole World,
and that the wise Men who had seen the Star in the East came so far to worship
and bring him presents; Add to these, the sweetness of his disposition, the
sincerity of his Doctrine, the holiness of his life, his transcendent
knowledge, and Zeal for the glory of God and the salvation of men, and
certainly these are infallible Testimonies to prove he was no Deceiver; So that
if whatever has been ascribed to Witches as miraculous were true, or more than
has been believed of them, yet we have not the least reason to doubt of our
blessed Saviors Divinity, who himself has told us, That false Christ's shall
come with signs and wonders able to deceive if possible the very Elect, which
may convince, us that many wonderful actions may be done without a Divine
Commission which may seem to be acted by a Divine power, but doubtless his
Faith is weakly grounded, and he is in a very deplorable condition that from
thence concludes any thing against the Savior of Mankind, and the Son of God
blessed for ever.

Lastly as to Apparitions, That Spirits have sometimes really as well as
imaginarily appeared to Mortals in the World is amongst sober men beyond
controversy, and that such things were of old taken notice of we may rationally
conclude from St. Luke 24.37. where it is said, The Disciples were terrified
and affrighted, and supposed they had seen a Spirit; And it is observable that
such frightful Specters do most frequently show themselves in places where the
Gospel is not preached, and therefore the Demons did generally infest the
Gentiles and Heathens of old, as also the East and West Indies of latter times,
of which we have many instances related by credible Historians.

It would be both tedious and impertinent to answer all that witty men may
object against the truth of the most obvious Opinion, and therefore I shall say
no more in confutation of the common quarrels raised by such Persons upon this
subject, but only add, That having already published somewhat of this kind in a
Book called Wonderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy; And in another entitled
Extraordinary Adventures, Discoveries and Events, with some few in The History
of the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, the general acceptance they have found
has encouraged me to present the Reader with another Collection of Ancient and
Modern Historys concerning Spirits, Witches and Apparitions, etc. which I doubt
not will meet with as much favor as the former.

R. B.

THE HISTORY OF Demons, Specters, Witches, Apparitions, etc.
IN this Collection I have no respect to time when these matters were acted, so
as to put them into a Chronological Order, though I shall set down the years
wherein most of them were done; Neither will I divide the Histories that are
Domestic from those which happened in Foreign Nations; But only relate bare
matters of Fact as I find them recorded by credible Historians, without much
enlarging upon Reflections or Advertisements, having already premised what may
be thought worth answering in the preceding Preface, and will therefore proceed
with that brevity and perspicuity which it becomes an uninterested Person to
use, wherein I shall indifferently set down the Relations of Demons, Witches,
Spirits, Apparitions, and other remarkable Accidents, without distinguishing
them into particular Heads or Chapters.

I.
IN 1679. the house of William Morse at Newberry in New England was strangely
disquieted by a Demon; After these troubles began he was advised to write down
the particulars, of which he gave the following Account; December 3. in the
night he and his Wife heard a noise upon the roof of his house as if sticks and
stones had been thrown against it with great violence, upon which he rose but
could see nothing, and locking the doors fast returned to bed; About midnight
they heard an Hog making a great noise in the house, so that he arose again,
and found a great Hog in the room below, the door being shut, which he opening
it ran out; December. 8. in the morning five great stones and bricks were thrown
by an invisible hand in at the west end of the house, and while the man's wife
was making the bed, the Bedstead was lifted up from the floor, and the Bedstaff
flung out of the window, and a Cat thrown at her, a long Staff danced up and
down in the Chimney, a burnt brick and a piece of weatherboard were thrown in
at the window. The man at his going to bed put out his Lamp, but in the morning
sound the Saveall taken away, and yet after it was again unaccountably brought
to the same place. The same day the long Staff was hung up by a line and swung
to and fro, the man's wife laid it on the fire but could not hold it there
inasmuch as it forcibly flew out, yet after much ado with her husbands
assistance they made it burn. A shingle flew from the Window though no body
near it, many sticks coming in at the same place, one of which was so ragged
that it could enter the hole but a little way, whereupon the man pusht it out,
a great Rail likewise was thrust in at the window so as to break the Glass.

Another time an iron hook which hung on a nail violently flew up and down,
also a Chair flew about, and at last fell on the Table where Victuals stood
ready to eat, and was like to spoil all had they not nimbly saved some of the
Meat with the loss of the rest, and the overturning of the Table. The People
were sometimes barricado'd out of doors, when there was no body to do it; and a
Chest was removed from one place to another, no hand touching it. Three Keys
being tied together one was taken from the rest, and the other two slew about
making a great noise by striking against each other. But the greatest part of
the Devils feats were mischievous, though herein he was sometimes antic
enough; wherein the chief sufferers were the man, and his wife, and grandson,
the man especially had a share in these Diabolical Molestations. Sometimes they
could not eat their Suppers quietly, but had the ashes on the hearth before
their eyes thrown into their Victuals, and upon their heads and cloths, so that
they were forced up into their Chambers, but had no rest there, for one of the
man's shoes being left below, was filled with coals and ashes, and thrown up
after them; Their light was beaten out, and they being laid in their bed with
their little Boy between them, a great stone from the floor of the loft
weighing about three pound was thrown upon the man's stomach, and he turning it
down on the floor, it was again thrown upon him; A box and a board were
likewise thrown upon them all, and a bag of hops were taken out of their Chest,
wherewith they were beaten till some of the hops were scattered on the floor,
where the bag was then laid and left.

Another evening when they sat by the fire the ashes were so whirled at them
that they could neither eat their meat nor endure the house; A Peel struck the
man in the face, an apron hanging by the fire was flung into it, and singed
before they could snatch it off. The man being at Prayers with his Family a
broom gave him a blow on his head behind, and fell down before his face.
Another day when they were winnowing barley some hard dirt was thrown in,
hitting the man on the head, and both the man and wife on the back, and when
they had made themselves clean they tried to fill their half bushel, but the
foul corn was in spite of them often cast among the clean, and the man being
diverse times thus abused was forced to give over what he was about. Jan. 23. In
particular he had an Iron pin thrown at him twice, his Inkhorn was taken away
while he was writing, and when by all his search he could not find it, at last
he saw it drop out of the air down by the fire; A piece of leather was twice
thrown at him, and a shoe was laid upon his shoulder which he catching at, was
suddenly snatched from him; An handful of Ashes were thrown in his Face and
Cloths, and the Shoe was then clapped on his Head, upon which he clapped his hand
holding it so fast that somewhat unseen pulled him with it backward on the
floor.

Next night as they were going to bed a lost ladder was thrown against the door
and their light put out, and when the man was abed he was beaten with a heavy
pair of leather Breeches, plucked by the hair of his head and beard, pinched,
scratcht, and his bed-board taken from him; Yet more, next night when in bed
his bed-board rise out of its place though he used all his strength to keep it
in, one of his bodkins were brought out of the next room into his bed and did
prick him, the cloths wherewith he hoped to save his head from blows were
violently plucked from thence; A night or two after the man and his wife both
received a blow upon their heads, but it was so dark they could not see the
stone that gave it, the man had his cap plucked off his head while he sat by
the fire. The night following they went to bed with their cloths on because of
their late disturbances, and the man, wife, and boy presently felt themselves
pricked, and upon search found in the bed a bodkin, knitting-needle and two
sticks sharp at both ends. He likewise received a great blow on his thigh, and
on his face which fetched blood, and while he was writing a Candlestick was
twice thrown at him, and a great piece of Bark feircely smote him, and a pail
of water was poured out without hands. Jan. 28. Frozen clods of Cow dung were
diverse times thrown at the man out of the house in which they were; His wife
went to milk the Cow, and received a blow on her head, and sitting down to her
milking work had diverse times Cow dung thrown into her pail; The man tried to
save the milk by holding a Piggin sideways under the Cows belly, but yet the
dung would fly in and the milk was made only fit for Hogs; That night ashes
were thrown into the broth provided for supper so as they could not eat it;
Ashes were likewise often thrown into the man's eyes as he sat by the fire, and
an iron Hammer flying at him gave him a great blow on the back; The woman going
into the Cellar for beer a great iron peel flew and fell after her through the
Trap-door of the Cellar, and going thither again afterward upon the same
account, the door was shut down upon her, and the Table came of it self and lay
upon the door, which the man was forced to remove ere his wife could be
released; Next day while he was writing a dish went out of its place, leapt
into the pail and threw out water upon the man, his Paper and Table, so that he
could not proceed; his Cap jumpt off his head, and on again, and the pot-lid
leapt off from the pot into the kettle on the fire.

Feburary 2. While he and his Boy were eating cheese it was snatched from them
and after found under an Apron and a pair of Breeches on the Table; Also from
the fire rose little sticks and ashes which flying on the man and his boy made
them in a dirty pickle.

But as for the Boy now spoken of, much must be said concerning him as a
principal sufferer in these afflictions; For December 18. He sitting by his
Grandfather was hurried into great motions, and the man thereupon took him and
made him stand between his legs, but the Chair danced up and down, and had like
to have cast both man and boy into the fire, and the Child was after flung
about in such a manner as they feared his brains would have been beaten out; In
the evening he was again tossed as before, and the man endeavored to hold him,
but in vain. The Lad was soon put to bed, and they heard an huge noise, and
demanded what was the matter, he answered that his Bedstead leaped up and down;
The man and his wife went up and found all quiet, but had not been there long
when they saw the board by his bed trembling, and the bed-cloths flying off
him, which they immediately put on, and were as soon off again, so for
quietness they took him out of his bed.

Dec. 29. The Boy was violently thrown to and fro; they carried him to the
house of a Doctor in the Town and there he was free from disturbance, but
returning home at night his former trouble began, and the man taking him by the
hand they were both almost thrust into the fire. They put him to bed, where the
cloths were again plucked off him, the bed-board shook, and there were the same
dreadful noises as before; They took him up designing to sit by the fire, but
the doors clattered, and the chair was thrown at him; Therefore they carried
him to the Doctors house and that night all was well; Next morning he came home
quiet, but as they were doing somewhat he cried out he was pricked on the back,
they looked and found a three grained fork sticking strangely there; which being
carried to the Doctors, himself said it was his, and the Doctors Servant
affirmed the Fork was seen at home after the boy was gone; The Boys vexations
continuing, they left him at the Doctors, where he was free some time, and then
again complained he was pricked, upon search they found an Iron Spindle
sticking below his back, he complained he was pricked still, they look further
and found pins in a paper sticking to his Skin, he once more complained of his
back, and they discovered a long iron, a boul of a Spoon and a piece of a
pansheard, they lay down by him on the bed, with the light burning, but he was
twice thrown from them, and the second time quite out of the bed, in the
morning the bed was tossed about with such a creaking noise as was heard by the
Neighbors; In the afternoon several Knives were one after another brought and
put into his back, but pulled out by the Spectators; Only one knife which was
missing seemed to the standers by to come out of his mouth; He was bid to read,
whereupon his book was taken and thrown about several times, and at last hit
the boys grandmother on the head; Another time he was thrust out of his Chair
and rolled up and down with loud outcryes heard that all was one fire, yea he
was three times dangerously thrown into the fire and very hardly preserved by
his friends. The boy likewise for a long while together made a noise like a
Dog, and sometimes like a Hen with her Chickens, and could not speak rationally.

Particularly December. 26. He barkt like a Dog and clockt like a Hen, and after
long straining to speak said, There Is Powel I am pinched; His Tongue likewise
hung out of his mouth, and could by no means be forced in till his fit was
over, and then he said, It was forced out by Powel. He and the house also had
rest after this till Jan. 9. When the Child because of his intolerable ravings
lying between the man and his wife, was pulled out of the bed, and thrown with
amazing and dangerous force against the bedstead boards. In the day time he was
carried beyond all possibility of finding him; His Grandmother at last saw him
creeping on one side, and dragged him in, where he lay miserable lame, but
recovering his speech he said, He was carried above the Doctors house, and that
Powel carried him, and then had him into a barn throwing him against the
Cart-wheel there, and after thrusting him out at a hole. And accordingly they
found some of the threshold barley hanging on his cloths.

Another time falling into a swoon, they forced somewhat into his mouth for
refreshment, but it was turned out as fast as they put it in, ere long he came
to himself, and seemed willing to eat, but the meat would forcibly fly out of
his mouth, and when he was able to speak he said, Powel would not let him eat;
Having observed the Boy to be best at a Neighbors house, the man carried him
to his daughter three miles off; The Boy was very antic as he was going, but
at length made a grievous hallowing, and when he came thither, he threw a great
stone at the maid of the house, and fell to eating ashes. Being afterward at
home, they had rest a while, but Jan. 19. In the morning he swooned and coming
to himself roared terribly, and eat ashes, sticks, and rug yarn. Next morning
there was such a dreadful racket with the boy that the man and his wife took
him to bed to them, whereupon a bedstaf was thrown at them, and a Chamber Pot
with its contents poured upon them, and they were severely pinched; The man
being about to rise his cloths were diverse times plucked from him, himself
thrust out of the bed, and his Pillow thrown after him. The Lad likewise had
his cloths often plucked off him in these winter nights, and was woefully disturbed
with these malicious devilish tricks till it pleased God to restrain the wicked
Demon.

All this while the Devil did not use to appear in any visible Shape, only they
would think they had hold of the hand that scratched them, but it would give
them the slip, and once the man was discernably beaten by a fist, and an hand
got hold of his wrist which he saw, but could not catch, and the likeness of a
Blackmore Child appeared from under the Rug and Blanket where the man lay, and
it would rise up, fall down, nod and slip under the cloths when they
endeavored to clasp it, never speaking any thing. Neither were many words
spoken by Satan all this time, only once having put out their light they heard
a scraping on the boards, and then a piping and drumming on them, which was
followed with a voice finging Revenge, Revenge, Sweet is Revenge; Who being
much terrified thereat called earnestly upon God, the issue of which was, that
suddenly with a mournful note there were six times over uttered such
expressions. Alas! Alas! Me knock no more, me knock no more, and now all
ceased. William Morse does further affirm that a Seaman being a Mate of a Ship
coming often to visit him told him, That they wronged his wife who suspected
her to be guilty of Witchcraft, and that the Boy his Grandchild was the cause
of this trouble, and if he would let him have the Boy one day he would warrant
him his house should be no more troubled; To which he consented, and next
morning betimes the Mate came, and the Boy was with him till night, after which
his house he says was not for some time molested with Evil Spirits.

Thus far is the Relation of this Demon, but the true reason of this
disturbance is not yet certainly known, some as was said, suspected Morses Wife
to be guilty of Witchraft. One of the Neighbors took apples which were brought
out of the house and put them into the fire upon which their own houses were
much disturbed. Another Neighbor caused an horshoe to be nailed before the
doors, and as long as it remained so, they could not persuade the suspected
Person to go into the house, but when the horshoe was gone she presently
visited them; The vanity and superstition of these experiments deserves to be
exposed, since the Demons whom the blind Gentiles of old worshipped told their
Servants that such things as these would very much affect them, yea and that
certain Characters, Signs, and Charms would render their Power ineffectual, and
accordingly they would become subject when their own directions were obeyed. It
is sport to the Devils to see silly men thus deluded and made fools of by them
Others suspected that one Powel a Seaman who was thought to be a Conjurer set
the Devil on work thus to disquiet Morses family, or it may be some other thing
yet reserved in the secrets of providence might be the true Original of all
this trouble, Essay of Provid. p. 142.

II.
VEry observable is the Narration concerning Ann Bodenham a Witch who dwelt at
Fisherton Anger near Salisbury in Wiltshire as it is related by Edmond Bowyer
an eye and ear-witness of several Passages. This miserable woman did not
conceal her Skill in foretelling things to come, helping people to stolen goods,
and such other feats that the more remarkable sort of Witches and Wizards
pretend to. Among others one Ann Style Servant to Richard Goddard Esquire of
the close in New Sarum resorted to her, who was sent by Mr. Mason this Goddards
Son in law to learn of the Witch what the event of a Law suit would be which he
designed to commence against his Father. The maid gave her three Shillings, and
desired (...) ^^swer, who took her staff and therewith drew a (...) about the
house and then took a book carry^^^ over the circle with her hands, after that
she (...) green glass on the book, and placed within the (...) an earthen pot
of Coals wherein she threw (...) ^^^ething which caused a very noisome smell,
and told (...) maid she should not fear whatever happened for (...) they would
come, and so calling Beelzebub Tor^^^tor, Satan and Lucifer appear, there
suddenly arose ^^^ry high wind which made the house shake, and ^^^sently the
back door flying open there came five ^^^rits, as the maid supposed, in the
likeness of ragged (...)s, some bigger than others and ran about the (...) use
where she had drawn the Staff; and the Witch ^ew upon the ground crumbs of bread
which the (...) ^^^rit picked up, and leapt often over the pan of coals in the
midst of the Circle, and a Dog and Cat of the Witches danced with them. After
so^^ time the Witch looked again in her Book, (...) threw some great white
Seeds on the ground wh^^ the Spirits likewise picked up. In a short time (...)
wind was laid, and the Witch going forth at (...) back door the Spirits
vanished, after which she to^^ the Maid, That Mr. Mason should demand fifteen
(...) dred pound, and one hundred and fifty pound a yea^^ Mr. Goddard, and if
he denied it he should prose^^^ the Law against him, and go away from his
Father (...) then he should gain it; which Message the Maid bro^^^ back to Mr.
Mason.

The same Maid was sent again a while after (...) her Mistress upon suspicion
that her two Daughter in-Law designed to poison her (of which they wa^ unjustly
accused.) To inquire of the Witch in (...) part of the House the Poison was
which was to (...) given her Mistress, hereupon she took her stick (...)
before, and making therewith a Circle, the w^^ rose forthwith, then taking a
Broom she swept ow^ the Circle and made another, and looking in (...) Book and
Glass as formerly, and using some wo^^ softly to her self, she stood in the
Circle and (...) Beelzebub Tormentor, Lucifer and Satan appear. The came first a
Spirit like a little Boy as she thou^^ which then turned into another shape
like a Sna^^ and then into the form of a shagged Dog with gre^^ eyes which went
about in the Circle, in the mi^^ whereof she set an earthen pan of coals
wherein (...) threw something which burnt and stank, and th^^ the Spirit
vanished, after which the Witch took (...) Book and Glass again, and showed the
Maid in (...) Glass Mrs. Sarah Goddards Chamber, the color (...) the Curtains,
and the bed turned up the wro^^ way, and under that part of the bed where the
bo^^ ster lay she showed the Poison in a white Paper The Maid then returned
home and declared wh^^ she had seen; If any one will object that those w^^
really some poor ragged Boys who had complotted with Ann Bodenham to get money
upon pretense of conjuring, yet the loudness of the wind and forcible shaking
of the house with the Magical words and Ceremonies, but especially the
transformation of one of them into a Snake and shagged Dog with staring eyes
may make it appear to be a feat far above all humane art or wit whatsoever.

The same Ann Styles was sent to her a third time to procure some exemplary
punishment upon Mr. Goddards two Daughters, who were unjustly aspersed with
designing to poison their Mother-in-Law. The Witch receiving her errand made a
Circle as formerly, and set her pan of coals within it, and having used the
same Words and Ceremonies as before five Spirits like little ragged Boys
appeared whom the Witch commanded to go along with the Maid to a meadow at
Wilton, which she showed in a Glass, and there to gather Vervine and Dill;
Forthwith the ragged Boys ran before the Maid, and she followed them to the
said Meadow, they looked about for the Herbs, and removed the Snow in two or
three places before they could find it, and at last found some, and brought it
away, and returning again to the Witch, the Maid said she found her paring her
nails in the Circle; She then took the Herbs and dried some to powder, and the
leaves of the rest; threw bread to the Boys and they eat and danced as
formerly, and then the Witch reading in a Book they vanished. The Witch gave
the Maid the powder in one paper, and the leaves in another, and the paring of
her nails in a third, all which she was to give her Mistress; the powder was to
be put in the young Gentlewomans drink, or broth to rot their Guts in their
bellies, the leaves to rub about the brims of the pot to make their teeth fall
out of their heads, and the paring of her nails to make them drunk or mad. The
Maid having delivered all with these directions, her Mistress laughed and said,
That is a very brave thing indeed, but she had the discretion not to use any of
it.

After this the Maid being advised by Mr. Goddard^ Family to go to London, she
went first to the Witch and acquainted her therewith, who asked her, whether
she would go high or low, says the Wench, What do you mean by that, she
replied, If you will g^ High you shall be carried to London in the Air, and be
there in two hours, but if you go Low you shall be taken before you come to
Sutton Towns end, unless you have help; But before they parted the Witch
earnestly desired the Maid to live with her, and told her if she would do so
she would teach her to do as she did and that she should never be taken. Then
the Ma^^ asked her what she could do; you shall know presently, says the Witch,
and immediately there appeared the shape of a great black Cat lying along the
Chimney, which the Maid imagined was the Wit^^ her self, and was much
affrighted, whereupon the Witch appearing again in her own shape said, I (...)
you are afraid and willing to be gone, if you are, do (...) speak against your
Conscience; The Maid replied s^^ was willing to go and not live with her; The
Wit^^ said she must seal to her Body and Blood not to di^^ cover her, which she
assenting to, the Witch ma^^ a Circle and did as before, when there appear^ two
Spirits in the likeness of great Boys with loo^ shagged black hair, and stood
looking over he shoulder, the Witch pricked the forefinger of the Maid with a
pin, and squeezed out the blood which she put into a pen, and gave it the Maid
holding he hand to write in a great Book, one of the Spir^^ likewise laid his
claw or hand on the Maids, wh^ she had done, the Witch said Amen, and made the
Maid say so too, and the Spirits said Amen, Am^^ Then the Spirit bit a piece of
Silver and gave it the Witch, and she to the Maid, and also stuck two p^^ in
the Maids headcloths, and bid her keep them a^^ be gone.

The reason that Ann Styles designed to go to London was, that her Mistress
having fasly accused the two young Gentlewomen of design to poison her, they to
clear themselves went to all the Apothecarys shops in Salisbury to inquire who
had lately sold any Arsnich, and found that this very maid had been employed by
her Mistress to buy an ounce and an half, and to put it under Mrs. Sarahs bed
thereby to raise suspicion of some evil intent in them against her; Having made
this discovery her Mistress persuaded the maid to go shift for her self and
prevent the trouble and disgrace of being brought before a Justice, when she
was gone, some having notice she was run away, pursued and overtook her near
Sutton as the Witch foretold, and carrying her into an Inn she freely confessed
what has been related, and giving them the piece of money and the two pins,
she said she should be troubled for not keeping these things secret, the Devil
having forewarned her of it, and accordingly soon after being committed to
Sarum Jayl, she fell into desperate Fits and Agonies so that six men could not
hold her, and once she was caught up so high that her feet touched their
breasts; Another time being miserably tormented about midnight she cried out,
The Devil will carry me away, and was thereupon pulled from them that held her,
and thrown from the low bed where she lay to the top of an high bed, with her
cloths torn off her back and a piece of her skin torn away. The candle on the
table was thrown down and put out, at which time there being a little Boy
almost asleep he was waked and so affrighted at the noise that he had no power
to go out of the room with the rest, but stayed there and saw a spirit like a
great black man without a head scuffling with the Maid, who took and set her in
a chair, and told her; She must go with him, he was come for her soul which she
had given him; The Maid answered, Her soul was none of her own to give, and
though he had already got her blood, yet her soul he should never have, and
after tumbling and throwing her about awhile he disappeared. Now what the Boy
heard and saw could be no fancy but a real object, especially considering the
condition of Ann Bodenham the Witch at that time, who being apprehended upon
the Maids information and committed to the same Prison, in another Chamber was
seen at that instant with her cloths off in her chains running about like mad,
and being asked the reason replied; She could not keep her bed but was pulled
out by viclence, and pray, says she, what is the matter in the Maids Chamber?
Nothing said they but a child is not well; Do not you lie to me, said she, I
know what is the matter as well as your selves?

After this the Maid not having taken any rest several days nor nights, and
being under most grievous hurryings and tortures of body, the Witch was brought
into the room utterly unknown to her, but had no sooner set her foot within it
when the Maid gave a most hideous glance with her eyes and presently sh^^ them,
falling asleep in a moment wherein she continued three hours so fast as not to
be wakned by any art or violence whatsoever, as by stopping her breath, putting
things up her Nostrils, holding her upright, striking her, and the like. The
Witch also declare^ her unwillingness that she should be wakened crying out, O
pray by no means wake the Maid, for if you should, I shall be torn in pieces
and the Devil will fetch me away bodily; But as soon as the Witch was gone, the
Maid wakened of her self and was at ease, the Devil as she said, having gone
out of her stomach, but doing her no violence, only making her body tremble a
little, and then the Witch began to cry and roa^ out, The Devil will tear me in
pieces.

The Witch being brought to her Trial at the Assiz^^ the Maid was the chief
evidence against her, who witnessed against her with so much earnestness and
seriousness of mind and such free and confident appea^ to the Witch her self
that all present were convinced she swore nothing but the truth, and after the
Witch was condemned the Maid wept floods of tears, bewailing her own wickedness
and madness, and wish^ing the Witch might be repreived. The Witch boast^ed to
Mr. Tuckers Clark she had a purse hung about ^her neck in a green string
wherewith she could do many feats, and that if they would give her half a Dozen
of Ale she would make a Toad leap out of it. She confessed to Mr. Langley of
Salisbury that she lived with Doctor Lamb and learned the art of raising
Spirits from him, and that she could cure diseases by charms and spells and
discover stolen goods, and show any one the Theif in a glass, and he asking her
for the Red book half writ over with blood, being a List of the names of those
that had sealed to the Devil, she denied not the knowledge of the book, but said
it was with one in Hampshire; she also professed that she used many good
Prayers and said the Creed backward and forward, and prayed to the Planet
Jupiter for the cure of diseases. She also acknowledged she had a book of
Charms whereby she raised Spirits which was worth thousands of other books, and
that there was a particular charm in it for finding a hidden Treasure. She
affirmed she was sure there were Spirits to be raised and that there was no
hurt in them since they would keep people from harm. At the Jayl and before the
Judges she was searched and there was found on her shoulder a certain Mark or
Yeat about the bigness of a woman's nipple hollow and soft with a hole in the
top. The Powder aforementioned was likewise shown there, with the piece of
money that the Spirit bit, and the Witch gave to the Maid; The hole also in the
Maids finger was then shown out of which the blood was squeezed; It was
observed that when the Maid recovered out of her Fits the Spectators saw a
black shade come from her, whereupon she presently came to her self.

Notwithstanding these and many more plain and evident circumstances some
Persons had the confidence to affirm that Ann Bodenham was no Witch, because
she denied it to the last, though the Maid swore the whole truth as it was,
even to the hazard of her own life, which the Witch indeed denies for the
saving of hers, and it is no wonder that one who would bid a pox on the Hangman
when he asked her to forgive him at her death, should lie and impudently deny
any thing to save her own life. To conclude, there being so many circumstances
which do fully evince her to be a Witch, and that she had the power of raising
Spirits, and doing several other* Supernatural Actions it cannot but gain full
assent from any man whom prejudice and obstinacy has not utterly blinded that
what the Maid confessed concerning her self and the Witch is most certainly
true. She was executed at Salisbury in 1653. Edn. Bowyers Narrative.

III.
IN 1642. One Mother Jackson was Arraigned and Condemned at Newgate in London
for bewitching one Mary Glover a Merchants Daughter in Thamesstreet, whereupon
one Dr. Bancroft informed the then L. C. Justice that Mother Jackson was
wronged and that the Maid did counterfeit, who thereupon ordered Sir J. Crook
then Recorder of London to make trial of them at his Chamber in the Temple The
Maid being sent for came with her Mother and several Neighbors, and an hour
after the Witch was brought in disguise like a Country Market-woman with a
muffler about her face, an old hat, and a safeguard spattered with dirt, when
she entered the Chamber the Maid suddenly fell backward upon the floor, her eyes
sunk into her head, her tongue was drawn to her throat, and her mouth drawn up
to her ears, her body became stiff and senseless; Her lips being close shut an
audible voice came out of her Nostrils saying, Hang her, hang her; The Recorder
then called for a Candle, and a sheet of paper, which being lighted he held the
flame to her hand till it blistred, the blister broke and water came out which
dropped on the floor, the Maid lying senseless like a dead body, with the voice
still coming out of her Nostrils saying, hang her, hang her. Then the Recorder
called for a long pin which he held in the flame of the Candle till it was very
hot, and thrust the head of it into her Nostrils to try if that would make her
sneeze, wink, bend her brows, or stir her head, but nothing moved her lying
still as dead.

A Worthy Divine then present told the Recorder that he had often prayed with
the Maid, and when he concluded with the Lords Prayer as soon as he pronounced
that Petition but deliver us from evil, the Maid was tossed and shaken as a
Mastiff Dog worries a little one; Then the Recorder bid the Witch rehearse the
Lords Prayer which she did till she came to those words, but deliver us from
evil, which she skipt over, and would by no means be brought to say; Then they
bid her say the Creed which she did till she came to Jesus Christ our Lord; but
would by no means be brought to confess that Jesus Christ was our Lord; The
Minister told the Recorder that when the Maid was in these dead senseless Fits
if the Witch did but lay her hand upon her she was tossed and thrown toward her;
Who thereupon caused her to be taken up and laid upon a bed close covered
especially her head and face because she should neither hear nor see; Then he
made signs to the Women to stand round about the bed, and that the Witch should
stand among them, and that every one should softly lay their hand on her which
they did, and the Maid did not stir till the Witch laid her hand upon her, for
then all the cloths were thrown off, and the Maid tossed toward her; Whereupon
the Recorder looking upon the Witch said, Lord have mercy upon thee Woman and
sent her back to Newgate; As soon as she was gone the voice that came out of
the Maids nostrils ceased, and she came to her self, and went home to her
Mother.

About three weeks or a month after the Witch was condemned the Maid continued
every second day in most strange and dreadful Fits and Torments. Whereupon
several Ministers and other Christians met together to pray for her; when on a
sudden after a terrible conflict, which so much amazed some that they cried out
with a confused noise, Jesus help, Jesus save, the Maid started up out of a
wicker Chair wherein she sat, and by main strength lifted up one of the
Ministers with her who kneeled behind and held her in his Arms, and threw white
froth out of her throat and mouth round about the Chamber, and on a sudden fell
down into the Chair as one really dead, with her head hanging on one side, her
neck and arms limber though before as stiff as if frozen; presently after life
returned into her whole body, and her eyes and tongue came into their right
place; She then looked up with a cheerful countenance round the Chamber, and
with a loud voice spoke saying, O he is come, he is come; the Comforter is
come, the Comforter is come; I am delivered, I am delivered. Her Father hearing
these words wept for joy, and with a faultring voice said, O these were her
Grandfathers words who suffered in Queen Marys days. She then kneeled down, and
gave humble and hearty thanks and praise to God for he deliverance, which she
continued to do till her voice grew weak, and the Minister desired her to
forbear, and so they ended the day with Thanksgiving. After which she was
committed to the care of the Minister who writ this Relation, lest Satan should
again assault her. His name was Mr. Lewis Hughs then Minister of St. Helens
London, from whence this Narrative was taken, and who does not mention what
became of the Witch, nor that the Maid was any more afflicted in this kind.

IV.
AT Colchester in Essex there lived one Mr. Earl about 1630. A young man in
those days, to whom the Devil did frequently appear in the Shape of some of his
acquaintance, and would persuade him to three things. 1. That he should abstain
from Prayer. 2. That he should never frequent the Church nor hear Sermons. 3.
That he should never marry; But he would not hearken to these suggestions; The
night wherein he was married, soon after he and his Wife were in bed, the Devil
came into the chamber, and pulled two of his Teeth out of his head, which put
him to great pain, whereupon he cried out, and when his Friends came in they
found his mouth bloody, and used means to ease his pain; This Mr. Earl was
afterward for the space of ten years ever and anon assaulted by the Devil, who
under many appearances of his Friends did endeavor to seduce him, and
therefore he often applied himself to Mr. John Rogers then Minister of Dedham
and Mr. Liddal of Colchester for comfort and instruction but chiefly to Mr.
Liddal a very eminent Divine; It once happened that the Devil came to Mr. Earl
in Mr. Liddals Shape, and as his custom was Mr. Earl proposed to him several
cases of conscience, but found that Mr. Liddal did not discourse after his
ordinary rate, which made him doubt whether he was not imposed upon by a
deceitful Demon; Next day going to Mr. Liddals house, he inquired whether he
was with him the day before; Mr. Liddal told him that he was not; Then, said
Mr. Earl, it was my Enemy in your Shape, what a miserable man am I that know
not when I speak with my adversary or my Friend. Mr. Liddal replied; If you
would know when you speak with a Spirit or with a man remember our Saviors
advice, who when he appeared to his disciples after his resurrection, and they
thought he had been a Spirit, and were therefore troubled, he said to them;
Handle me and see, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have.
Luke 24.39. This counsel Mr. Earl followed, for not long after the Devil coming
to him in Mr. Liddals Shape, he went to take hold on his arms but could feel no
substance only a vanishing Shadow, it seems this Mr. Earl was once an Athiest
who did not believe there was either God or Devil, and would often walk in
solitary and dismal places wishing for the sight of a Spirit, and he was first
assaulted by the Devil in a Churchyard, and though God mercifully gave him
repentance yet he was miserably haunted with an evil Spirit all his days.
Clarks Examples, 1 vol. p. 510.

V.
A Remarkable Passage somewhat like this happened to a Turkish Chiaus or
Gentleman, who was baptized a Christian at London January 30. 1658. He being in
his Chamber about three afternoon, a Person in the likeness of Mr. Dury the
Minister with whom he did most ordinarily converse came and sat by him. This
seeming Mr. Dury told him; That he had waited with a great deal of patience as
to the matter of his Baptism, and that himself had endeavored by all means
possible to procure it to be performed with public countenance; And to that
effect had dealt with Richard and several of his Council, but that now he
perceived it was in vain to strive or wait longer, and therefore advised him
not to be much troubled at it but setting his mind at rest to leave these
thoughts and take up his resolution another way; When the Chiaus heard this
discourse being much perplexed in his Spirit he lifted up his hands and eyes to
heaven uttering words to this effect; O my Lord Jesus Christ what a miserable
thing is this that a true Christian cannot be owned by other Christians, and
that one who believes on thee cannot be baptized in thy name. When he had thus
spoken, looking down he saw no body, the appearance of Mr. Dury being vanished
which was at first an amazement to him, but recollecting himself he began to
rejoice as hoping that Satan would be disappointed of his Plot. About eight in
the evening the true Mr. Dury met with him, who acquainted him with what had
happened, and thereby fully confirmed him how he had been imposed upon by
Satan; And he was soon after baptized according to his desire. These Instances
demonstrate that the Devil may possibly appear in the Shape of good men, not
only when dead but while alive. Remark. Provid. p. 217.

VI.
ABout fifteen years since a woman at Edinburgh in Scotland was married to one
John Ritchy in that City, and lived five years with him, bearing him five
Children and then dyed; In a few days after her burial her husband went to
court another young woman in marriage; He had a Comrade whom he acquainted with
his intention, and appointed him to meet at such a house near the Court of
Guard that he might see his new Mistress. They met accordingly and the two
Lovers sat together on the bedside, and the Comerade sat opposite to them,
there being a Table between them and a Window at the front of the room which
gave them light; And while they two were dallying together, the other smilling
and looking about the room perceived plainly the body and face of the dead wife
in her burying cloths looking toward them in at the window; Whereat he rose up
affrighted saying to the other, John, What Is that? Whereupon all three stood up
looking, and saw perfectly the buried woman lifting up her hands as they
imagined to pull off the dead dress from her head but could not reach it; The
man threw his new Mistress out of his arms resolving presently to be gone, but
the other vowed he would not stir till he had got something to comfort his
heart, whereupon they procured a little brandy and then went away not without
fear and astonishment; After this the man fell sick, and his Companion coming
to him persuaded him to delay or wholly desist from his purpose of marrying;
But affection would not permit him to forbear, and though not fully recovered
from his frenzy he resolved to make another Address to his Mistress, but while
he is putting on his shoes his dead wife again appears in her ordinary habit,
and crossing the room in his sight says, John will you not come to me? and then
vanished; Upon this he again fell sick, and calling for his Friend told him of
this second apparition, who again entreated him to desist or delay his design
of marriage. His sickness increasing he died soon after, about which time he
spoke of a third visit his wife had given him, blaming him as if he had too
soon forgotten her, but gave no distinct account of it, and therefore his
Comrade could not be positive in it. He was buried within a month after his
wife. One of the Ministers of Edinburgh hearing some whispering of this
Apparition, sent privately for his Companion who gave him the preceding just
and true account, adding that he having seen the Vision first some told him he
would dye quickly but he lived long after, the same Minister having married him
to two wives since, and is probably alive at the writing hereof. Invis. World.
p.

VII.
THere is a Narrative of sundry Apparitions of Satan unto, and Assaults upon
the Person of Mary the wife of Antonio Hortado dwelling near the Salmon Falls
in New England taken from her own mouth Aug. 13. 1683. Who relates that in June
1682. the said Mary heard a voice at the door of her dwelling saying, What do
you here? About an hour after standing at the door she had a blow on her eye
that struck her head against the door post, and two or three days after a
stone, as she judged about a pound weight, was thrown along within the house
into the Chimney, and going to take it up it was gone, all the Family were in
the house and no hand appearing which might be instrumental in throwing the
stone. About two hours after a Drying Pan then hanging in the Chimney was heard
to ring so loud that not only those in the house heard it, but others also that
lived on the other side of the River above an hundred rods distant; Whereupon
she and her husband going in a Canoo over the River, they saw something like
the head of a man new shaved, and the tail of a white Cat about three foot
distance from each other swimming over before the Canoo, but no body appeared
to join head and tail together, and they returning over the River in less than
an hour the same Apparition followed them back again, and disappeared at their
Landing. A day or two after the woman was struck on the head as she judged with
a stone, which made it swell and very sore; She was then in the yard, and going
instantly into her house she was bitten black and blew on both arms, and one of
her breasts scratched, the impression of the Teeth being like those of a man
were seen by many, whereupon leaving their house to sojourn at a Neighbors on
the other side the River there appeared to the said Mary in that other house a
Woman in a green safeguard, a short blue cloak, and a white Cap making an offer
to strike her with a fireband but did not touch her; The day following the same
shape appeared again to her, but now clothed with a gray gown, white apron, and
white head-cloths, and seemed to laugh several times but no voice heard; Since
when this Mary has been freed from these Satanical molestations; But her
husband and she being returned in March after with their Family to dwell again
in their house, Antonio on his entrance into it hearing the noise of a man
walking in his Chamber, and seeing the Boards bend under him as he walked
though no man to be seen in the chamber, for they went on purpose to look, he
returned with his Family to dwell on the other side of the River, yet planting
his ground though he forsook his house; He has had five rods of good log
fence, or pales thrown down at once, and the appearance of the feet of Oven
plainly to be observed almost between every row of corn in the field, yet no
Cattle seen there, nor any damage done to his corn, nor so much as any of the
leaves of the corn cropped. It is reported that some who should have been wiser,
advised the poor woman to stick the house round with Bays as an effectual
preservative against the power of evil Spirits, this Counsel was followed, and
as long as the Bays continued green she was quiet, but when they began to
wither they were all by an unseen hand carried away, and the woman again
tormented. But certainly the making use of such remedies is in no wise lawful,
since men thereby seem to submit to the Devils directions who either operate or
cease to do mischief upon the use of such things. Essay Provid. p. 165.

VIII.
ANother Accident no less remarkable happened at Portsmouth in New England
about the same time; On June 11. 1682. being Lords day at night showers of
stones were thrown both against the sides and roof of the house of Mr. George
Walton; some of the people went abroad, and found the gate at some distance
from the House thrown off the hinges, and stones came thick about them,
sometimes falling down by them, sometimes touching them without hurt, though
they seemed to come with great force; stones flew about the room the doors
being shut, the glass windows were shattered in pieces by stones that seemed
not to come from without but within, the lead of the glass, casements, and
window bars being driven forcibly outward, and so standing bent; while a
Gentleman was walking in the room a great hammer came brushing along against
the Chamber-floor that was over his head, and fell down by him; A Candlestick
was beaten off the Table; They took up nine of the stones and marked them, and
laid them on the Table, some of which were as hot as if they came out of the
fire, but several of these marked stones were found flying about again, and thus
it continued about four hours that night; The Gentleman then went to bed, but a
stone came and threw open his Chamber door, which was only put to and not
locked, a brick was also sent on the same errand; The stone that came in the
Gentleman locked up in his Chamber, but it was fetched out, and carried with
great noise into the next room; The Spit was carried up the Chimney, and came
down with the point forward and stuck in a log on the fire, and being removed
by one of the Company to one side of the Chimney, was by an unseen hand thrown
out at the window. It thus continued daily though with some short intermission
and then returned again. The stones were usually thrown where the Master of the
house was, whether in the field or barn; A black Cat was once seen while the
stones flew, and was shot at, but she was too nimble for them; Some of the
Family affirm they once saw the appearance of an hand put forth at the Hall
Window throwing stones toward the Entry, though there was no body in the Hall
at that time, sometimes they should hear a dismal hollow whistling, otherwhile
the noise of the trotting of an horse, and snorting, but nothing seen. Mr.
Walton went up the great Bay in his Boat to a Farm he had there, and being
haling wood and timber to the Boat he was disturbed by the stones as before at
home; He carried a stirrup iron from the house down to the Boat and there left
it, but while he was going up to the house the iron came jingling after him
through the Woods and returned to the house, and then went back again, and at
last quite away being never more heard of; Their Anchor leapt overboard
several times as they were going home and stopped the Boat; A Cheese has been
taken out of the Press, and crumbled all over the floor. A piece of iron
wherewith they weighed up the Cheese-press stuck into the wall, and a kettle
was hung up thereon; several cocks of English hay mowed near the house were
taken and hung upon Trees, and some made into small wisps, and scattered all
about the Kitchen, with diverse other such tricks wherewith they were treated;
They were sometimes quiet for a week, and much hoped all was past, but then
their vexation returned as much or more than ever. The man was very much hurt
with some of the stones thrown at him, but the Summer after the disturbance
ceased. Remark. Provid. p. 161.

IX.
THE same year another strange Accident is related which happened to Nicholas
Desborough of Hartford in New England who was strangely molested with stones,
pieces of earth, cobs of Indian corn and other things falling upon and about
him, which sometimes came in through the door, sometimes through the window,
sometimes down the Chimney, and other times they seemed to fall from the floor
of the Chamber, which yet was very close, sometimes he met with them in his
shop, the yard, the barn, and in the field at work. In the house such things
happened frequently not only in the night but in the day time if the man
himself was at home, but never when his wife was at home alone. There was no
great violence in their motion, for though several Persons in the Family, and
others also were struck with the things thrown by an invisible hand, yet they
were not hurt thereby; Only the man himself had once his arm somewhat pained by
a blow given him, and at another time blood was drawn from his leg by a scratch
he received. This molestation began soon after a controversy arose between
Desborough and another Person about a Chest of cloths which the other affirmed
Desborough did unjustly retain, and thus it continued for some months, though
with several intermissions; A while after the man's barn was burnt and all his
corn in it, but by what means it came to pass is not known; Hereupon in a
little while, some to whom the matter was referred, ordered Desborough to
restore the cloths to the Person who complained of wrong, after which he was
not troubled as before; Some of the stones hurled were of considerable bigness,
one of them weighed four pounds, but generally they were small. One time a
piece of clay came down the Chimney falling on the Table which stood at some
distance from it; The people of the house threw it on the hearth where it lay a
considerable time. They went to supper, which whilst they were doing, the piece
of clay was lifted up by an invisible hand and fell upon the Table, taking it
up they found it hot, having lain so long before the fire as to be so. Essay
Provid. p. 159.

X.
IN October 1671. a Maid named Elizabeth Knap of Groton in New England was
taken after a very strange manner, sometimes weeping, sometimes laughing,
sometimes roaring hideously with violent motions and agitations of her body,
crying out Money, Money, etc. In November following her tongue for many hours
together was drawn like a semicircle up to the roof of her mouth, not to be
removed though some tried with their fingers to do it. Six men were scarce able
to hold her in some of her Fits but she would skip about the House yelling and
looking with a most frightful aspect; Dec. 7. Her Tongue was drawn out of her
mouth to an extraordinary length, and now a Demon or Spirit began manifestly
to speak in her. Many words were uttered without any motion of her lips which
was a clear demonstration that the voice was not her own. ^ometimes words were
spoken seeming to proceed out of her throat when her mouth was shat. Sometimes
with her mouth wide open without moving either lips or tongue. The things then
uttered were chiefly railings and revilings of Mr. Willard the worthy Minister
of that Town; Also the Demon belched forth horrid and nefandous blasphemies,
exalting himself above the most High. After this she was taken speechless for
some time. One thing more is worthy of Remark, concerning this miserable
creature; she cried out in some of her Fits that a woman, one of her
neighbors, appeared to her and was the cause of her affliction; The Person
thus accused was a very sober religious woman, who thereupon with the advice of
Friends visited the poor Wretch; and though she was in one of her Fits, having
her eyes shut when the innocent Person impeached by her came in, yet could she
(so powerful were Satan's operations upon her) declare who was there, and could
tell the touch of that woman from any one else; But this good woman thus
accused and abused by a malicious Devil prayed earnestly with and for the
possessed creature, after which she confessed that Satan had deluded her,
making her believe evil of her good neighbor without any cause. Nor did she
after that complain of any apparition or disturbance from such an one, yea she
said, That the Devil ba^ himself in the likeness and shape of diverse tormented
her, and then told her it was not he but they that did it; Ibidem. p. 140.

XI.
VEry remarkable was that Providence wherein Ann Cole of Hartford in
New England was concerned; She was accounted a very religious woman, and of a
good conversation, yet in 1662. Living then in her Fathers house who was
likewise esteemed a serious Christian, she was taken with very strange Fits,
wherein her tongue was improved by a Demon to utter things she knew nothing
of, sometimes the discourse would hold a considerable time; The general
tendency whereof was that such and such Persons who were named were consulting
how they might carry on mischievous designs against her and diverse others,
mentioning several ways they should take for that end, perticularly that they
should afflict her body, take away her good name and the like. The general
answer made among the Demons was She runs to the Rock. This continuing some
hours the Demons said, Let us confound her language that she may tell no more
tales; After this she uttered many things that were unintelligible, and then
the discourse passed into a Dutch tone (a Dutch family then living in the Town)
and therein an account was given of some afflictions that had befallen diverse,
among others of a woman that lived next door to the Dutch family, whose arms
had been strangely pincht in the night, declaring by whom and for what cause
that course had been taken with her; Mr. Stone the reverend Minister of
Hartford being there when this discourse happened, declared that he thought it
impossible for one not familiarly acquainted with the Dutch, which Ann Cole had
not in the least been, should so exactly imitate the Dutch tone in pronouncing
English; Several worthy persons as Mr. Whiting, Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Hains,
wrote the intelligible sayings expressed by Ann Cole whilst she was thus
amazingly handled. The event was that one of the Persons, whose name was
Greensmith, a lewd and ignorant woman, then in Prison on suspicion of
Witchcraft being mentioned in the discourse as active in the mischiefs done and
designed, was sent for by the Magistrate; Mr. Whiting and Mr. Hains reading to
her what had been written, the woman was much astonished, confessing those
things to be true, and that she and other Persons mentioned in this
preternatural discourse had familiarity with the Devil; Being asked whether she
had made an express Covenant with him, she replied, She had not, only that she
promised to go with him when he called, which accordingly she had several times
done, and that the Devil told her that at Christmas they would have a merry
meeting, and then the Covenant between them should be subscribed. Next day she
was more particularly examined concerning her guilt (...) the crime she was
accused of; She then acknowledged that though when Mr. Hains began to rea^^
what he had written, her rage was such that she could have torn him in pieces,
and was fully resolve^ to have denied her guilt, yet when he had read a^ while,
she said, she was as if her flesh had been pulled from her bones, and so could
not deny any l^^ger. She likewise declared that the Devil first appeared to her
in the form of a Deer or Fawn skippinga^ bout her, wherewith she was not much
affrighted and by degrees he became very familiar, and at length talked with
her. Moreover she said that the Devil had frequently carnal knowledge of her,
and that the Witches had meetings at a place not far off her house and that
some appeared in one shape and others i^ another, and one came flying among
them in the shape of a Crow; Upon this confession and other concurrent evidence
the woman was executed, so likewise was her husband, though he did not
acknowledge himself guilty. Other persons accused in the discourse made their
escape.

After the suspected Witches were either executed or fled Ann Cole was restored
to health and continued well many years, approving her self a very serious
Christian. There were some had a mind to try whether the stories of Witches not
being able to sink were true, and accordingly a man and woman mentioned in Ann
Coals Dutch toned discourse had their hands and feet tied, and so were cast
into the Water, and they both apparently swam like a Buoy or a piece of wood,
part under and part above the Water. A spectator imagining that any Person
bound in that posture would be so born up, offered himself for trial, but being
in the like manner gently laid on the Water; he immediately sunk right down;
This was no legal evidence against the suspected Persons, nor were they
proceeded against on any such account. However doubting that an halter would
choke them, though the water would not, they very fairly took their flight not
having been seen in that part of the World since; Whether this Experiment were
lawful or rather superstitious and Magical may be much doubted, Ibidem p. 135.

XII.
A Considerable Person in England about fifty years ago having an ambitious
desire to be thought a wise man, whilst he was tormented with this foolish
humor the Devil came to him with promise that he should quickly be in great
reputation for his wisdom in case he would make a Covenant with him, the
conditions of which were; That when any came to him for Counsel he should
endeavor to persuade them that there was neither God nor Devil, nor Heaven nor
Hell, and that such a term of years being expired he should have his Soul. The
Articles were consented to, and the man continued after this to be of a very
civil conversation, doing hurt to none but good to many, and by degrees began
to have a name to be a Person of extraordinary prudence and understanding, and
he was sought to far and near for counsel, his words being esteemed Oracles by
the Vulgar; And he did upon all occasions secretly insinuate Principles of
Atheism, not being suspected for a Wizard; But a few weeks before the time
agreed on with the Devil was expired inexpressible horror of conscience
surprised him, so that he revealed the secret Transactions which had passed
between him and the Devil; He would sometimes with hideous roarings tell those
that came to visit him; That now he knew there was a God and a Devil, an Heaven
and an Hell; and so continued till his death, a miserable spectacle of the
righteous and fearful judgment of God. Ibidem. p. 184.

XIII.
MArtin Wienrichius a Physician of Silesia in Germany in his Preface to Picus
Mirandula's Treatise of the delusions of Devils, relates two memorable, and
more credible Historys because the things happened in his own time some few
years before he wrote them and in his own Country, and he does avouch them
with all imaginable confidence to be most certainly true; The former is this; A
certain shoemaker in one of the Chief Towns of Silesia in the year 1591. Sept.
20. on a Friday betimes in the morning in the further parts of his house, where
there was adjoining a little Garden, cut his own throat with his shoemakers
knife. The Family to cover the foulness of the fact, and that no disgrace might
come upon his widow gave out that he died of an Apoplexy, and declined all
visits of Friends and Neighbors. In the mean time they got him washed, and
laid linnens so handsomely about him that even they that saw him afterward, as
the Parson and some others, had not the least suspicion that he died such a
death, and so he had a decent burial with a Funeral Sermon, and other
circumstances becoming one of his rank and reputation.

Six weeks had not past but so strong a rumor broke forth that he died not of
any disease, but laid violent hands upon himself, that the Magistracy of the
place could not but bring all who had seen the Corpse to a strict examination.
They endeavored at first to shuffle off the matter, with many fair Apologies
in behalf of the deceased to remove all suspicion of so heinous an act, but it
being pressed very home to their consciences, at last they confessed he died a
violent death, but desired their favor and clemency to his Widow and Children
who were in no fault, adding also; That it was uncertain but he might be slain
by some external accident, or if by himself yet in some irresistible fit of
frenzy or madness. Hereupon the Council deliberate what is to be done, which
the Widow hearing and fearing they might determine something harsh and to the
discredit of her husband and her self, being also animated by some busy bodies,
she makes a grievous complaint against those who raised these reports of her
husband, and resolved to prosecuce them at Law, earnestly alleging there was
no reason that upon mere rumors, and idle defamations of malicious People her
husbands body should be dug up, or dealt with as if he had been a Magician
or self-murtherer, which boldness and pertinacity of the woman though after the
confession of the Fact did in some measure work upon the Council and put them
to a stand.

But while these things were in agitation, to the astonishment of the
Inhabitants of the place there appears a Spectrum or Ghost in the exact Shape
and habit of the deceased, and that not only in the night but at midday: Those
that were asleep it terrified with horrible Visions, those that were waking it
would strike, pull, or press, lying heavy upon them like the Night-Hag, so that
there were perpetual complaints every morning of their last nights disturbance
through the whole Town; But the more freaks this Spectrum played, the more
diligent were the friends of the deceased to suppress the rumors of them or at
least to hinder the effects of those rumors, and therefore made their addresses
to the President, complaining how unjust a thing it was that so much credit
should be given to idle reports and blind suspicions, and therefore entreated
him that he would hinder the Council from digging up the Corpse of the deceased,
and from all ignominious usage of him, adding also, that they intended to
appeal to the Court of the Emperor of Germany that their wisdoms might rather
decide the controversy than that the cause should be here determined from the
light conjectures of malevolent men; While by this means the business was still
delayed there were such stirs and tumults all over the Town that they are
hardly to be described; For no sooner did the Sun hide his head but this
Spectrum would be sure to appear, so that every one was fain to look about, and
stood upon their guard which was a sore trouble to those whom the labor of the
day made more sensible of the want of rest (...) the night. For this terrible
Apparition would sometimes stand by their beds sides, sometimes cast it (...)
upon the midst of their beds. It would lie close (...) them; It would miserably
suffocate and choke th^^ and would so strike and pinch them that not (...) the
marks but plain impressions of fingers were ^^sible in the morning upon diverse
parts of their bodies. Nay such was the violence and impetuousne^^ of this
wicked Spirit, that when men forsook the^^ beds, and sat up in their Dining
Rooms with Candle lighted, and many in company together, the better to secure
themselves from fear and disturbance, ye^ he would then appear and have a bout
with some o^ them, notwithstanding all this provision against i^ In brief he
was so troublesome that the People were ready to forsake their Houses and seek
other dwellings, and the Magistrate so awakened at the perpetual complaints of
them that at last they resolved, with the Presidents consent, to dig up the
body.

He had lain in the ground near eight months th^^ is from Sept. 22. 1591. to
April 18. 1592. Yet when he was dug up in the presence of the Magistra^^ of
the Town, the body was found entire not at a^ putrified, nor no ill smell about
him, save the nastness of the grave-cloths, his joints were limber a^^ flexible
as in those that are alive, his Skin only flaccid, but a more fresh grown in
the room of it, the wound of his throat gaping but no corruption in it; There
was also observed a Magical mark in the great Toe of his right Foot, which was
an excresency of flesh, in the form of a Rose. His body was kept out of the
earth from April 18. to the 24. During which many both of that Town and others
came daily to view him. These unquiet stirs did not cease for all this, which
they after attempted to appease by burying the Corpse under the Gallows, but in
vain, for they continued still as much as ever if not more, he now not sparing
his own Family, insomuch that his Widow went at last her self to the
Magistrates telling them she should now be no longer against it if they thought
fit to fall upon some more strict course of proceedings touching her husband.
Therefore May 7. he was again dug up, and it was observable that he was
grown more sensibly fleshy since his last interment. In short they cut off the
head, arms and legs of the Corpse, and opening his back, took out his heart
which was as fresh and entire as a Calf new killed. These together with his
body they put on a pile of wood and burnt them to ashes, which carefully
sweeping together and putting into a Sack, that none might get them for wicked
uses, they poured them into the River after which the Spectrum was never seen
more.

The like happened to his Maid that dyed after him, who appeared within eight
days after her death to her fellow Servant and lay so heavy upon her as
occasioned a great swelling in her eyes; She so grievously handled a Child in
the Cradle, that if the Nurse had not come into his help, he had been quite
spoiled, but she calling upon the name of Jesus the Spirit vanished. The next
night she appeared in the Shape of an Hen which when one of the Maids of the
house took to be so indeed and followed her, the Hen grew into a (...) bigness,
and suddenly caught the Maid by the ^roat so that she could hardly eat or drink
a lon^ while after. She continued these disturbances whole month striking some
so smartly that the ^^ws were heard of those that stood by, pulling ^^ bed also
from under others, and appearing ^^^iffering Shapes sometimes of a Woman, of a
^og, of a Cat and of a Goat, but at last her body being dug up and burnt,
the apparition was never seen more. These things were done at Bresl^w in
Silesia where this Weinrichius then dwelt, which makes the Narration the more
considerable; The concealing the names of the Parties is thought to be in way
of civility to his deceased Townman, his Widow and their family.

XIV.
THE other Relation that Weinrichius gives he was not the first Penman of
(though I suppose the things were done in his time a while af^^ the former as a
passage in the Narrative seems to intimate) but he transcribed it from one that
not only dwelt in the place, but was himself often infested with the noisome
occursions of that troublesome Ghost which did so much mischief to the place
where he lived. Johannes Contius a Citizen of Pentsch in Silesia, near fixty
years of age and one of the Aldermen of the Town, very fair in his carriage and
unblameable to appearance in the whole course of his lise, having been sent for
to the Majors house. (as being a very understanding man, and dextrous in the
dispatch of business) to end some controversies concerning certain Waggoners
and a Merchant of Pannonia; Having ended these affairs is invited by the Major
to Supper; He gets leave first to go home to order some concerns, leaving this
sentence behind him.

Its good to be merry whilst we may
For mischiefs grow fast enough every day.
This Contius kept five lusty Geldings in his Stable one wereof he commanded to
be brought out, and his shoe (...) loose had him tied to the next post; His
Master w^^^ servant busied themselves to take up his leg to look (...) his
Hoof, the Horse being mad and mettlesom struck ^^em both down, but Conti^^
received the greatest sha^^ of the Blow, one that stood by helped them both up
a^^in; Contius was no sooner up and come to himself but (...) cried out; We is
me, how do I burn and am all on a fire! Which he often repeated; But the parts
he complained of most, the women being put out of the room, when they were
searched no appearance of any stroke or hurt was to be found upon them. In
short he fell downright sick, and grievously afflicted in mind, loudly
complaining that his Sins were such that they were utterly unpardonable, and
that the least part of them ^^re bigger than the sins of all the World beside,
but would have no Divine come to him, nor did particularly confess them to any.
Several reports indeed there were that once he sold one of his Sons, but when
and to whom it was uncertain, and that he had made a Contract with the Devil
and the like. But it was observed and known for certain that he had grown
beyond all expectation rich, and that four days before this mischance he being
witness to a Child said, That was the last he should ever be witness to.

The night he died his eldest Son watched with him. He gave up the Ghost about
the third hour in the night, at what time a black Cat opening the Casement with
her Nails (for it was shut) ran to his b^d, and did so violently scratch his
face and bolster as if she endeavored by force to remove him out of the place
where he lay. But the Cat was suddenly gone and presently after he breathed his
last. A fair story was made to the Minister of the Parish and the Magistracy of
the Town allowing it he was buried in the Church on the right side of the
Altar, his Friends paying well for it. No sooner was Contius dead but a great
Tempest arose, which raged most at his Funeral there being such impetuous
storms of Wind with snow that it made men's bodies quake and their teeth chatter
in their heads, but he was no sooner inserred when of a sudden all was calm. He
had not been dead above a day or two when several rumors were spread in the
Town of a Spirit in the shape of Contius that would have ravished a Woman; This
happened before he was buried. After his burial the same Spectre awakened one
that was sleeping in his Dining Room, saying, I can scarce withhold my self
from ^eating thee to death. The voice was like that of Contius. The Watchmen of
the Town also affirmed, that they heard great stirs every night in Contius his
house, like the fallings and throwings of things about, and that they saw the
gates stand wide open betimes in the mornings though they were never so
diligently shut over night; That his Horses were very unquiet in the Stable as
if they kicked, and bi^ one another; besides unusual barkings and how lings of
Dogs all over the Town. But these were but preludious suspicions of further
evidence, as may appear briefly by the following particulars.

A Maidservant of one of the Citizens of Pentsch (while these Tragedies and
stirs were so frequent in the Town) heard, together with some others lying in
their beds the noise and tramplings of one riding about the house, who at last
ran against the Walls with that violence that the whole house shook again as if
it would fall, and the Windows were all filled with flashings of Light. The
Master of the House being informed of it went out of doors in the morning to
see what the mattter was, and he beheld in the snow the impressions of strange
feet, neither like Cows, Horses, Hogs or any creature he knew. Another time
about eleven at night Contius appears to one of his Friends that was a witness
to a Child of his, speaks to him, and bids him be of good courage, for he came
only to impart to him a matter of great importance; I have left behind me, said
he, my youngest Son James to whom you are Godfather. Now there is at my eldest
Son Stevens a Citizen of Jegerdorf a certain chest wherein I have put four
hundred and fifteen Florins; This I tell you that your Godson may not be
defrauded of any of them, and it is your duty to look after it, and if you
neglect it woe be to you. Having said this the Spectre departed and went up
into the upper rooms of the House, where he walked so furiously that all ratled
again, and the roof swagged with his heavy stampings. This Contius his friend
told the Parson of the Parish a day or two after for a certain truth.

But there are several other notorious passages of this Contius; As his often
speaking to the Maid that lay with her Mistress his Widow, to give him place
for it was his right, and threatening if she would not give it him he would
writh her neck behind her; His Galloping up and down like a wanton Horse in the
Court of his House; His being diverse times seen to ride not only in the streets
but along the Valleys of the Field and on the Mountains with so strong a trot
that he made the very ground flash with fire under him; His bruising the body
of a Child of a certain Smiths, and making his very bones so soft that you
might wrap the Corpse on heaps like a glove; His miserable tugging all night
with a Jew that had taken up his Inn in the Town, and tossing him up and down
in the lodging where he lay; His dreadful accosting of a Waggoner an old
acquaintance of his while he was busy in the stable, vomiting out fire against
him to terrify him, and biting of him so cruelly by the foot that he made him
lame.

Yet his most severe usage was toward the Parson of the Parish who penned this
Narrative, and whom this Fury so squeezed and pressed while he was asleep that
awaking he found himself absolutely weak, and his strength quite gone, yet
could not imagine the reason; Put while he lay considering of the matter this
Spectre returns again to him, and holding him so fast all over that he could
not stir a finger, rouled him in the bed diverse times together. The same
happened to his wife another time whom Contius coming through the Casement in
the shape of a little Dwarf, and running to her bedside, so wrung and pulled
as if he would have torn her throat out had not her two daughters come in to
help her. He pressed the lips together of one of the Ministers Sons so that
they could scarce get them asunder; His House was so generally disturbed with
this unruly Ghost that the servants were fain to keep together anights in one
room, lying upon straw and watching the approaches of this troublesome Fiend;
But a Man of the house being more courageous than the rest would needs one
night go to bed and forsake the company, whereupon Contius finding her alone
presently assaults her, pulls away the bedding, and would have carried her away
with him, but she hardly escaping fled to the rest of the Family were she
espied him standing by the candle, and presenty after vanishing. Another time
he came into her Masters Chamber making a noise like a Hog that eats grains,
smacking and grunting very loud; They could not chase him away by speaking to
him, but ever as they lighted a Candle he vanished. Another time about evening
while this Divine was sitting with his Wife and Children about him, exercising
himself in Music according to his usual manner, a most grievous stink arose
suddenly which by degrees spread about the room; Hereupon he commends himself
and his Family to God by prayer; The smell nevertheless increased, and became
above all measure pestilently noisome, so that he was forced to go up into his
Chamber; He and his Wife had not been in bed above a quarter of an hour but
they find the same stink in the bedchamber of which while they were complaining
to each other out steps Contius his Ghost from the Wall, and creeping to his
bedside breaths upon him an exceeding cold breath of so intolerable stinking
and malignant a scent as is beyond all imagination and expression; Hereupon the
good Minister grew very ill and kept his bed, his face, belly and guts swelling
as if poisoned; Whence he was likewise troubled with a difficulty of breathing
and with a putrid inflammation of his eyes, so that he could not well use them
long after.

Many other Feats were performed by this Spectre which if related would exceed
what are already set down, As the trembling and sweating of Contius his Gelding
from which he was neither free night nor day; The burning blue of the Candles
at the approaches of Contius his Ghost; His drinking up the milk in the milk
bowls, flinging dung into them, and turning the milk into blood; His pulling up
posts deep set in the ground and so heavy that two lusty Porters could not deal
with them; His discoursing with several men he met concerning the affairs of
the Waggoners; His strangling of old men; His holding fast the Cradles of
Children, or taking them out of them; His frequent endeavoring to force Women;
His defiling the Water in the Font, and fouling the cloth of the Altar on that
side which hung toward his Grave with dirty bloody spots; His catching up Dogs
in the Streets and knocking out their Brains against the ground; His sucking
dry the Cows, and tying their tails like the tail of an Horse; His devouring of
Poultry, and his flinging of Goats bound into the Racks; His tying an Horse to
an empty Out Tub in the Stable to clatter up and down with it, and tying the
hinder foot of another to his own headstall; His looking out at the Window of a
low Tower, and then suddenly changing himself into the form of a long staff;
His chiding of a Woman for suffering her servant to wash dishes on a Thursday,
at what time he laid his hand upon her, and she said it felt colder than Ice;
His throwing clods at one of the Women that washed his Corpse with such violence
that the prints of the clods were seen on the wall; His attempting to ravish
another, who excusing her self said, My Contius thou see how old, wrinkled
and deformed I am, and how unfit for those kind of Sports, at which he set up a
loud laughter and vanished.

But not to insist on these, it was remarkable that his Gravestone was turned
on one side shelving, and there were several holes in the earth like Mouseholes
that went down to his very Coffin, which though filled up over night, yet would
certainly be laid open next morning. In short the calamity was such from the
constant disturbance of this Fury that none would lodge in the Town, whereby
Trading decayed and the Citizens were impoverished; So that at length they
concluded to dig up the body of Contius with several others buried before and
after him, but they were so putrified and rotten as not at all to be known by
their shape being like a rude Mass of earth, whereas it was quite otherwise
with Contius, whose skin was tender and red, his joints not at all stiff but
limber and moveable, and a staff being put into his hand he grasped it very
fast with his singers, his eyes would of themselves be one time open and
another shut; They opened a Vein in his leg, and the blood sprang out as fresh
as in the living; His nose was entire and full not sharp as usually in sick or
dead, and vet Contius his body had lain in the grave from Feb. 8. to July 20.
almost half a year. It was easily discernable where the fault lay; However
nothing was come rashly, but Judges being constituted, sentence was pronounced
upon Contius his Carcass, being encouraged thereto from success in the like
case some few years before in this very Province of Silesia, ( I suppose he
means at Breslaw where the Shoemakers body was burnt) whereby they adjudged it
to the fire. Whereupon Masons were ordered to make a hole in the wall near the
Altar to get his body through, which being pulled at with a rope was so
exceeding heavy that the rope broke, and they could scarce stir him; But when
they had pulled him through and got him upon a Cart which Contius his Horse
that struck him, a very lusty Gelding, was to draw, yet it put him so to, that
he was often ready to fall, and quite out of breath in striving to draw so
intolerable a load, who yet could run away with two men in the same Cart soon
after, their weight was so inconsiderable to his strength.

His body being brought to the fire proved as unwilling to be burnt as before
to be drawn, so that the Hangman was forced with hooks to pull him out, and cut
him into pieces to make him burn, which while it was doing the blood was found
so pure and spirituous that it spurted into his face as he cut him, but at last
with the expense of two hundred and sixteen great Billets all was turned into
ashes, which being carefully swept together, as in the foregoing relation, and
thrown into the River this turbulent Ghost never appeared more. This narrative
contains so many plain and evident Convictions that one can hardly imagine what
excuse or objection the Atheist can reasonably produce against it. Ibidem p.

XV.
IN 1644. at Borrowstoness in Scotland a certain Woman in the Town came about
eight a Clock in the morning to her neighbors house, and fell upon her in a
most furious manner, scratching her face, and plucking the hair off her head,
saying, Thou traiterous Thief thou thoughtest to have destroyed my Son this
morning but it was not in thy power; The Ship wherein this young man was a
Saylor suffered very much in a dreadful Tempest that morning off a place called
St. Abbs head in Scotland, and with the violence of the waves which came in
upon the Deck he was washed off into the Sea on one side of the Ship, and to
the admiration of all was thrown on the other side upon the Deck again without
harm. This mavelous accident being reported about eight a Clock at night by
the Mariners when they came ashore, and being compared with what one Woman
said to the other that morning, they were both apprehended, and after their
confessing the whole matte^ as to their being Witches, they were both burnt in
the sight of many hundred Spectators, whereof, says my Author, I was one.
Invis. World. p. 206.

XVI.
HE relates another notable Passage concerning the Wife of one Goodail a Cooper
in the Pari^h of Carrin in Scotland; This woman was about thirty three years
old as beautiful and comely a Person as any in that Country, and had been often
accused by many other Witches who were burnt, who related that among them all
she was the Person whom the Devil at their meetings did most court and embrace,
calling her always his Dear ^istress, and setting her constantly at his right
hand (...) the great discontent of the old Hags who appre^^ded themselves
slighted; She being taken and committed to Prison, there was present at that
time one James Flemming a Master of a Ship, a Person of great courage,
strength, and resolution, who being earnest with her to confess her crimes, she
insinuated into him; That she understood he was to be upon the watch that
night, and if she were not delivered out of Prison as she expected before one a
clock in the morning, she would then discover all she knew to him; At which he
being apprehensive of the consequence as he had reason, went to his uncle a
grave experienced Person who advised him to take all his Ships Company who were
fourteen able men for a guard to him, not forgetting to read the Scriptures and
pray to God. The night was still and calm as in a Summers Evening without the
least appearance of change, when upon a sudden at midnight, as James Flemming
was leading her to and again by the hand as his custom was, there rose a
terrible Tempest like an Hurricane, which blew the roof off the House to their
great consternation, and a voice was heard three times calling her by a strange
name to come away; At which she made three several leaps upward, rising
gradually into the Air till her feet were as high as his breast, but he still
held her fast by both the arms, earnestly recommending himself to God, though
with great astonishment, so that his hair stood an end on his head, and after
the third call he prevailed against the greatest Effort which he ever felt,
holding her still fast though she was pulled from him with mighty violence, and
at length threw her on the ground where she lay grovelling and foaming like one
with the falling sickness, and then fell into a profound sleep which continued
two or three hours, when she waked she cried out bitterly against the Devils
treachery and perfidiousness who had promised to carry her to Ireland before
four a clock in the morning, and to touch at Peisley by the way where she might
see her Sister; She afterward made a very full and free confession, and accused
several other women and some of good repute who upon apprehension confessed
likewise their guilt, and suffered the Law as well as she. The Author of this
Relation is a Person of great honesty and sincerity. Ibidem. p. 211.

XVII.
ABout the same time one Hellen Elliot a notorious Witch was burnt at Culross
in Scotland, she was carried in a Chair to Execution by four men by reason her
belly and legs were broken by a malicious trick the Devil played her; This Woman
was watched one night in the Steeple of Culros by two men John Shank a Butcher,
and one John Drummond, who being weary went to another room where there was a
Fire to take a Pipe of Tobacco; But to secure her they put her legs in the
stocks and locked them in as fast as possible; They were no sooner gone out of
the room, but the Devil came into the Prison and told her, That he was obliged
to deliver her from the shame she was like to suffer for his sake, and
accordingly took her out of the stocks, and taking her in his arms carried her
out of the Prison; At which she being terrified made this Exclamation by the
way, O God whither are you carrying me? At which words he let her fall a good
distance from the ground, whereby she broke her legs and her belly; I saw the
impression and dimple of her heels, says my Author, as well as many thousands
more, which continued six or seven years without any grass ever growing
thereon; at length a stone-arch was built in the place. From this Relation we
have an evident instance that the Devil can transport the Bodies of Men and
Women in the air, it is true he did not carry her off but not for want of skill
and power; Neither probably was he afraid to hear the name of God spoken, but
designing to destroy the Body and Soul of this poor Creature, he might pretend
so, thereby to excuse himself and not frighten his miserable Vassals from
relying upon his assistance. Ibidem. p. 212.

XVIII.
WIthin these few years there was one Thomas Coltheart an Agent about the
Sessions House living in Mary Kings Close in Edenburg in Scotland who designing
to remove from a lower to a higher part of the City, as on the Saturday his
Maid was carrying some light furniture to the other House, one in the Close
meeting her, asked if she was to dwell in that House, Yes said she, for I am
hired for half a year; He then told her, I assure you, you will have more
Company than your selves; And after twice or thrice going to and again to carry
goods, and receiving several informations of the same kind from others, she
resolved to tell her Mistress that she would not stay to be a Servant in that
House because she heard it was haunted by a Spirit or Ghost. The Mistress
informed her husband desiring him to forbear going thither lest she should be
frighted with the conceit and apprehension of it; But he out of the Natural
courage and fortitude of his mind smiled at the Relation, and resolved to stay,
lodging there that very night. The morrow being Sunday they went both to Church
in the forenoon, but in the afternoon he being indisposed laid himself down on
the bed to sleep; His wife took a Bible and sitting at the end of the Table
near the bed resolved to spend her time in reading, ordering her Maid Servant
to go to Church, who never returned back again to the House. As the Mistress
was reading to herself she chanced to cast her eye toward a little Chamber door
just over against her, where she spied the head and face of (...) old man with
a gray Head and Beard looking directly upon her at a little distance; At which
sight she endeavoring to awaken her husband had not time, falling down
instantly into a Swoon or Fainting ^it and lay in that manner till she heard
some of (...) Neighbors open their doors when they came (...) Church; And then
recovering her senses waken^ her husband and told him what had happened, who
alleged it was only a fancy or delusion of her se^ses, and bid her be of good
courage.

After supper being both by themselves the Woman's fear still continuing she
made a huge fire and went to bed; After a little time the Husband casting his
eye toward the Chimney espied the same Old Man's Head in the former place; He
told his wife, who was like to have fallen into the former passion; He rises,
lights a candle, sets it on the Table, and goes to bed again, encouraging
themselves in God, and earnestly recommending their safety to his protection
and providence; About an hour after they plainly perceived a young child with a
Coat upon it hanging near the Old Man's Head; At which sight the Man flew out of
his bed and his Wife after him, and taking her in his arms they kneeled down at
the beds-side, and with fervent Devotion humbly entreated the Almighty to
deliver them from this horror and disturbance; He lighted another candle the
first being burnt out, and called to some of his Neighbors, but hearing no
answer returned to their bed, where they both kneeled and prayed in excessive
fear and perturbation of mind so that they sweat again. Soon after a naked arm
appears in the room toward the roof from the elbow downward and the hand
stretched out as when one man is about to salute another; He then again leapt
out of his bed, and kneeling down begged help from heaven; The Arm now came
very near as it were to shake hands with ha^, whereupon he goes into his bed
again, and at the opening of the Curtain it offered him another salutation; The
Man and his Wife embracing each other through fear, and still eying the naked
arm they prayed more earnestly, but at length it offering to touch him he was
in such consternation and amazement, that he was like one distracted, yet
taking courage he boldly spoke to it after this manner; In the name of the
living God and of our Savior Jesus Christ tell me why thou troublest my House?
To my knowledge I never wronged any man by killing or cheating, but have lived
honestly in the World; If thou have received any wrong, and I can right thee I
shall do my utmost for thee, but trouble me no more; Notwithstanding this the
Arm and Hand came nearer than before, yet still after a courteous manner with
an offer of acquaintance. They fell to prayers again, both of them being even
drowned with sweat, and in the mean time they saw a little Dog come out of the
little room aforementioned, which after a while looking about both toward the
Bed and the naked arm laid it self down in a Chair, as it were with its nose
toward its tail asleep; This somewhat increased their Fever, but quickly after
a Cat comes leaping out from the same room, and in the midst of the Chamber
began to play some little tricks, then was the room full of small little
creatures dancing prettily, of so strange a shape that the man and his wife
could not describe them as having never seen the like.

It is not possible to conceive the tremendous dread and passion these two were
under, having all these Apparitions at once in their eye, which continued a
long time; Yet expecting no help but from the God of Heaven they again went to
Prayer in their Bed, the room being so full of these dreadful appearances that
there was no space to kneel; while they were praying their ears were terrified
with a deep lamentable and loud groan like that of a strong man dying, at which
all the Apparitions and Visions vanished at once, and as they imagined retired
into the little room whence they came and all was quiet.

After this they went into the room where the drink stood to refresh
themselves, and the husband said, God had enabled him that night to suffer what
would have frightened some men to death; The day approaching they made them
ready, and related all these strange passages to their neighbors, and then
began to consider why they had not the wit to open the door, and fly from the
house which had been easier than to light a candle, but they thought it was so
ordered that they might undergo this trial, and by this means the good man had
the courage to continue in the house till he died, (yet seldom wanted some of
these Companions with him,) concluding the worst was past as indeed it was. A
few weeks after he and his wife went one Sunday to Church to Carstorfin a
Village two miles from Edenburg. In the evening they supt there at an Inn, and
stepping out of door upon some natural occasion, he was instantly surprised
with a vehement savering and trembling all over his body. However going thence
with an intent to get home that night, he was accompanied with diverse Crows
flying about him and almost keeping pace with him (...) he came to Portsburg a
part of the Suburbs of the City; where they left him, and he went to his own
house, These Crows my dear, says he, do progno^icate that I must dye shortly;
He presently fell sick of an excessive pain in his head, and died a while after.

Just at this time a Gentleman at Tranent a Town about seven miles from
Edenburg (whose Solicitor this man was in managing his Law Affairs, keeping
his papers upon that account,) and had a singular kindness for this Thomas, who
was likewise very complaisant to his Master. This Gentleman being in bed one
morning with his wife, his Nurse lying in a Trundle-bed under them, the Nurse
was much affrighted with something like a Cloud moving up and down in the room,
whereupon she called her Master and Mistress, who waking saw the Cloud. He
thereupon skipt nimbly out of his bed and drew his Sword, and going to bed
again laid it by his side and recommended his Family to God; For a while it
continued in the same dark form, but soon after they all saw the perfect body
of a man walking about the room, at which the Gentleman behaved himself more
like a Christian than a Combatant. At last the Apparition looked him full in the
face, and stood by him with a pale and ghastly countenance; whereat the
Gentleman with much resolution said to the Spectre, What art thou? Art thou my
dear Friend Thomas Coltheart? Art thou dead my Friend? Tell me if thou have any
commission to me from Almighty God, tell it me and it shall be welcome? The
Ghost held up its hand three times, waving and shaking it toward him, and
immediately disappeared. This happened about the very hour, as was computed
wherein the Agent died.

The Sunday after his death, among others th^^ accompanied him to his grave
some of the City Ministers were there, and by chance a friend of the ^ceased
thanked one of them for his company and (...) It was pity that some of you did
not see him before he (...) The Minister asked if there were any thing
remar^able in his sickness; Who told him so much that the Minister made a visit
to the Widow, who welcome^ him with tears in her eyes; After she had composed
her self he prayed with her, and then she related to him all the foregoing
particulars, and when she came to tell him about the little Dog, she said that
in that very chair where he now sat the Dog lay sleeping; The Minister rising
up, Come, says he, since this is the Chair in the name of Almighty God I will
see his Chamber too, and so went to see the little room from which the
Apparitions came; In the mean time a Gentleman came in, and running to the
Minister embraced him strictly both shedding tears; He was the same Person to
whom the Ghost of the dead husband appeared at Tranent the very hour he expired
at Edenburg. He told them likewise that the same morning the Ghost appeared to
him he was resolved to attend a Nobleman of Scotland from Lithington to
Edenburg, but this Apparition discomposing his wife he was prevented; But told
the Widow that he came to see her with the first opportunity, and get an
account of his Papers being much concerned with what he saw at his house. These
relations coming to the knowledge of the aforesaid Nobleman he related them
before many of the Nobility. Invis. World. p.

XIX.
THE mention of those little Creatures that danced so prettily in the foregoing
Narrative, recalls to my mind what I find related by Sierra a famous Author
concerning Fairies, to this effect; That there lived in his time in Spain a
Noble and beautiful Virgin, who was very remarkable for her excellency their
Needle, insomuch that happy did that Courties think himself who could purchase
the smallest price though at an unvaluable price. It happened (...) day that
this admirable Needle-woman sat working ^ther Garden, when casting her eye
aside on some (...) Flower or Teee, she saw as she imagined a little Gentleman,
yet one that showed great Nobility by his clothing come riding toward her from
behind a ^ed of flowers; She was much surprised how any one should come into
the Garden but more at the Stature of the Person who though on Horseback
exceeded not a foot in height, and had reason to believe her eyes deceived her,
but the gallant spurring his horse up the Garden made it not long, though his
Horse was little, before he came to her; Then approaching the Lady with all due
observance, after some Complements, he acquaints her with the cause of his bold
arrival; That forasmuch as he was Prince of the Faines and did intend to
celebrate his marriage on such a day, he desired she would please to make some
Points for him and his Queen against the time appointed. The Lady consented to
his demand, and he took his leave, but whether business caused her to forget,
or the strangeness of the thing made her neglect the work, as judging her sight
was deceived, it so fell out that when the appointed time came the work was not
ready. The hour wherein she had promised the Fairy Prince some fruits of her
needle happened to be one day as she was at dinner with many Noble Persons,
having then quite forgot her promise when on a sudden casting her eye to the
door she saw a mighty Train of Fairies come in, so that sixing her eyes on them
(who were invisible to the rest of the Company) and remembering how she had
neglected her promise, she sat as one amazed, and astonished all her Friends.
But at last the Train mounting the Table, as they were prancing their Horses
round the brim of a large dish of White-broth an Officer that seemed too busy
in making way before them fell into the dish, which caused the Lady to bu^^
into a sudden fit of laughter, and thereby to recover her senses. When the
whole Fairy Company (...) come upon the Table, so that the brims of every did
seemed to be filled with little Horsemen she saw the Prince coming toward her,
and hearing she had not performed her promise, seemed to go away displeased.
The Lady presently fell into Melancholy, and being asked by her Friends the
cause of these alterations, and astonishments, related the whole matter to
them, but notwithstanding all their consolations she pined away and died soon
after. These Pharies are described to be little Mimick Elves of a very small
Stature, who busy themselves in imitating the operations of men; We read in
Georgius Agricola that great searcher of subterraneal Mines that they appear
frequently in those places whence precious mett^s are dug, and from their
manners are called Cobali or Imitators of men; They seem to laugh, to be
clothed like workmen, to dig the earth, and to act man things which they really
do not, sometimes mo^ing the workmen, but seldom hurting them. The Latins
called them Lares, and Larvae, which they said frequented Houses, delighting in
neatness, pinching the uncleanly and rewarding the cleanly. Pig. Gu. p. 302.

XX.
THat these passages may not seem altogether. ^bulous, I find the learned Dr.
Hen. Mo^^ writes, that it may be very proper to inquire into the nature of
those large dark Rings in the Grass which they call Fairy Circles, whether they
be the Rande^vouz of Witches, or the dancing places of those little Puppet
Spirits which they call Elves or Fairies, and prefixes a Relation before this
discourse very proper for our present purpose. I shall relate says he, a
memorable story out of Remigius which is this. One Nicolea Langbernhard while
she was going toward Assenunturia in Germany, along a hedge side, spied in the
next field about noon a company of men and women dancing in a Ring, and the
postures of their bodies being strange and unusual made her review them more
attentively, whereby she discerned some of them to have cloven feet like Oxen
or Goats (it should seem they were Spirits in the shape of lusty Satyrs) she
being astonished with fear cries out; Jesus help me and send me well home; She
had no sooner said so but they all vanished save only one Peter Grospetter whom
a little after she saw snatched up into the air and to let fall his staff, and
her self was also driven so forcibly by the wind that it made her almost lose
her breath, and was fain to keep her bed three days after; This Peter though at
first he would have sued Nicolea at Law for slandering him, yet afterward
freely confessed and discovered other of his Companions, as Barbelia the wife
of John Latomus, and Margetta the wife of Laurentius who confessed she danced
with those cloven footed creatures and Peter was among them; And for further
evidence of the business John Michael a Herdsman did confess that while they
thus danced he played upon his crooked staff, and struck on it with his fingers
as if it had been a pipe sitting upon an high bough of an Oak, and that so soon
as Nicolea called upon the name of Jesus he tumbled down headlong to the
ground, but was presently catched up again with a whirlwind and carried to
Weiller Meadows, where he had left his Herds a little before; Add to all this
that there was found in the place where they danced a round circle, with the
manifest marks of the treading of cloven feet, which was seen from the day
after Nicolea had discovered the business till the next Winter that the Plough
cut them out. These things happened in the year 1590. Antid. against Atheism.
p. 120.

XXI.
A Few years since one Margaret Kirkwood a Woman of good repute lived in the
Town of Hadington in Scotland, who before her death was much troubled in mind
but upon what account was not known; she seemed to intimate to her Frinds that
she was inclined to make away with her self, which caused them to watch and
attend upon her very carefully, but allowed her Liberty to retire her self to
her Devotions, wherein she was very frequent. Upon a Sunday in the forenoon,
when all were a^ Church, and she at home only with her then Servant Maid and
going into an upper room as she was wo^^ to her prayers, she there hanged her
self, the Maid not in the least suspecting any such thing. At this very time
Eliz. Mudy formerly her Servant Maid being then at Church was observed to
number upon her fingers fifty or fifty one, which number being ended she cries
out aloud in the presence of them all; Now the turn is done; she was presently
carried away as a distracted Person, and news coming to the Church that her old
Mistress had hanged her self, she was seized and committed to Prison, and
confessing her self guilty of Witchcraft was burnt for the same. Invis. World,
p. 200

XXII.
THE learned Budaeus reports the following story out of Philostratus in the
life of Apolonius. A young man of Lycia called Menippus about five and twenty
of a reasonable wit, fair stature, and comely countenance, was thought to be
much in favor with a beautiful stranger who appeared very rich and gallant,
though all was but a delusion; for this young Gentleman walking one day alone
toward Cenchriae this Woman or rather Evil Spirit comes to him in the habit of
a very fair Lady and taking him by the hand told him, That she had been long in
love with him, and that she was a Phenician dwelling in the Suburbs of Corinth,
and says she, If thou will come thither Menippus thou will be extremely pleased
to hear me sing, thou shall have the best Wine that was ever drank, and shall
enjoy thy hearts desire without fear of a Rival, I will pass my time with thee
and we will live in all manner of pleasure and delight; The young man allured
with these tempting promises, and being naturally inclined to Women (though
otherwise a strict Philosopher) went privately that evening to this Ladys
house, and was received by her with all manner of caresses and freedoms, he not
in the least mistrusting but she was really what she seemed to be, Apolonius
who was a very renowned Necromancer coming to Corinth, and casting a severe eye
upon Meni^pus, he said, Alas thou comely young man so much de^^red by Ladys,
take notice thou nourishest a Snake (...) bosom, and a Snake nourishes thee;
Menippus was amazed at these words, but Apolonius proceeding Menippus, said he,
this Woman is none of thi^ and do thou think she loves thee? Yes indeed, d^.
I says he, and that with very much affection too; upon this account, replies
Apolonius, I think thou will do (...) well to marry her since thou believe
she loves none (...) thee; but pray tell me when shall the Wedding be; Very
suddenly says Menippus; And perhaps to morrow In short the day is appointed
which Apolonius carefully remembered. So the Guests being all (...) and set at
the Table Apolonius enters in, and saluting the company, Where is the fair
Bride says he, There she is cries Menippus who blushing stood up; Pr^ says
Apolonius, Whose Vessels of Gold and Silve^ are these, and the rich furniture
of the room are they thine? No says Menippus, they are my Brides, for I have
nothing in the world that I can call my own, but only this, showing his
Philosophers gown, you will find (...) the end replies Apolonius that all these
goodly shows come from Tantalus garden, and that they are mere dreams and
illusions; At which the company were much disturbed, but he still affirmed that
there was no reality in any thing, and that the Bride was only an old Hag, or
Evil Spirit who delighted only in filthiness and laciviousness and then destroy
her Lovers; Whereat the Witch began to say, soft and fair friend be not so
Chollerick, I defy thee and all such doting Philosophers; In the mean time the
Golden Cups and Flagons began to melt away and vanish as Apolonius had declared
the Cook, Pages, and all the seeming Attendants disappeared, and the Hag her
self began to entreat Apolonius not to compel her to discover what she was; But
he grew the more earnest against her, and urged the matter so strongly to her
that at length she confessed she was a wicked Spirit and no Bride, and that her
design was to make Menippus fat and then destroy him, after which she vanished
out of sight, Camer. Hist. Medit. p. 263.

XXIII.
A Gentleman of Bavaria of a Noble Family was so greived for the death of his
Wife that abandoning all consolation he betook himself to a solitary life. At
length when this his sorrow continued without measure or end, his wife appeared
to him in the night, and told him that she had indeed once finished the course
of her natural life, but yet by his importunity she was again restored back,
and was commanded to use his society yet longer, but upon condition, that they
should again be married and that for the future he should abstain from all
railing and blasphemous words whereunto he was formerly accustomed, and for
which cause he had been deprived of her, and that she must again presently
depart this life, as soon as he should utter one word of this Nature; These
terms being agreed to by the husband she took care of his household as formerly,
but was all the while of a sad and pale countenance; But some years after her
husband coming home in drink, and giving his Maid some hard words in anger more
than became a sober man, his wife went from the bed to the Cupboard to fetch
some fruit for him and there left her clothes standing at the Chest where the
Apples were kept without any body in them, and was never seen more; This I have
heard affirmed faith my Author by many Persons of credit, but whether it may be
reckoned a good or evil Spirit I shall not determine. Hist. Spectus, p. 38.

XXIV.
NOT far from Torga in Italy a Nobleman walking in the Feilds to refresh
himself met one in the habit of a Gentleman but was really a Demon, who
complementing him told him he was out of employment and would very gladly serve
him; Who thinking him fit for his business receives him into his service, and
makes him Master of his Horse; This Nobleman was a very impious Person, and
lived chiefly by robbery and plundering Passengers, and had now got a Servant
very fit for his purpose. One time when he was going a Journey, he commended
one of his Horses to his special care in his absence, the Master being gone
this excellent Servant conveighs the Horse up into a very high Tower, a his
return the Horse hearing his Masters voice put his head out of the battlements
of the Tower neighing aloud, The Master much wonders and asks who it was that
carried up his Horse thither, the good servant answers, It was he that had so
carefully performed his Masters commands, and knew no place safor for him than
there, where he could neither run away nor be stolen; but yet pretended he could
not so easily fetch him down as he carried him up, so that they were
constrained to let down the Horse from the Tower with ropes; It happened
afterward that those whom this Nobleman had plundered pursued him in order to
bring him to justice for his crimes, when this servant cries out, Master make
your escape, and presently pulls something out of his budget whereby he stopped
the course of the Horses that followed him, and he thereby got away; At length
he was taken, and thrown into Prison, where he implores his Servants assistance
who appears and tells him that being fast bound in fetters he could not now
free him; The Master is very urgent and at last his Servant tells him he will
do his endeavor therein, but says he, if I set you at liberty it shall be upon
condition that you stir not your hands, nor make any signs of defense;
Whereupon the Evil Spirit brings him out of the Prison with his chains and
fetters on, and carries him a great height into the Air, who being amazed and
afraid cried out, O Eternal God whither am I going? Hereupon the Devil
immediately casts him down into a watery marshy place, and then hastening home to
his wife, bids her go and help out her husband who was stuck fast in the ^enns
bound in chains; After which he vanished away. Ibid. p. 43.

XXV.
IN the City of Athens there was a very handsome house which no body would take
nor dwell in, because it had the report of being haunted, and that in the night
there was a Spirit walked in it drawing a Chain, and making a noise seeming
sometimes afar off, and otherwhile very near. After which there would appear a
great old man, with his flesh worn away, having a long beard, his hair standing
an end and all tangled, fetters on his feet, and a chain at his hands which he
would always be shaking. Those that formerly dwelt at the house could never
rest quietly in the night, but grew heavy and pensive, and soon after fell sick
and died, for in the very day time though they saw not the Spirit yet were so
terrified with the thoughts of it that they imagined it always in their sight,
and the ringing of the chains still sounded in their ears, whereby their fear
continued without intermission; Upon which the house stood long empty though
bills were put on it, and all other means used to induce people to inhabit it.
At the same time Athenodorus the Philosopher came to Athens, who seeing this
house offered at so small a rent, thought there was something in it, and would
needs know the Mystery; when he was informed of the whole matter he was the
more desirous to buy it, and at night took possession of it, causing a bed to
be made for him in one of the Chambers toward the street, and providing pen,
ink, and paper, and a Lamp well lighted, he ordered his Servants to withdraw
into a back room of the house; This done he settled himself very seriously to
writing and study, that his mind being employed he might make the less account
of what he should hear; About midnight the Spirit begins to shake his fetters
and his chain, but Athenodorm without once moving his head sat still writing
though the noise increased very much, at length the Spirit comes on, and stands
at the Chamber door, and then the Philosopher lifting up his head he perceived
the Spectre to appear in the shape of an old man as is before related; The
Spirit made a sign to him with its finger as if it called him to come to it;
The Philosopher answered it with his hand intimating, it should stay a little,
and so fell to writing again, upon which the Ghost shaking its chain over his
head, Athenodorus looking up perceived that it made a sign to him as before,
whereupon he took the light and followed him. The Spirit went very pitifully as
if it carried its irons with great pain, and going before him out into the
street suddenly vanished away; Athenodorus took some grass and leaves and laid
them as a mark upon the place, and next morning went to the Council of the City
desiring them to dig and search in that place, which being done they found a
dead body all rotten whereof nothing remained but the bones that were chained;
The bones were taken up and buried, though they knew not whose body it was or
how it came there, and after that there was never any Spirit seen in the House
of Athenodorus. Camer. Hist. Med. p. 290.

XXVI.
IN the Annals of Bavaria we find two notable instances of the fury of these
wicked Demons. In the year 1533. at Schiltac a little City in the Duchy of
Wirtemburg in Germany, a malicious Spirit having for several days horribly
affrighted and tormented the Inhabitants with dreadful howlings and cries, and
especially the Innkeeper at the Golden Star and his Family, it was at length
discovered that a woman-servant in that house kept intelligence with the Devil;
and that he had carnal knowledge of her; Those who were of this opinion,
grounded upon very probable conjectures, ordered the servant to depart thence
into some other place. And some days after, that Inn together with the whole
City was miserably burnt to ashes by a Fury altogether Diabolical in the space
of two hours, so that the people of the neighboring Towns could not come
thither soon enough to give them any assistance, nor could any remedy be found
to quench the raging violence of the fire; It was especially observed that
several circles of fire flying from all parts took one house after another, so
that those who went to help quench their neighbors were forced to leave them
and run with all speed to their own, where all was on fire. This Satanical fire
was so extreme furious that they had much ado to prevent a Castle built with
Freestone, and standing a great way o^^ of the City from being consumed as the
rest were; it is not many years since (says my Author) that I heard the
particulars of this fearful visitation from the mouth of the Curate or Minister
of that place, who was very old, and showed him in writing an account of some
mavelous illusions of the Devil a while before this sad accident, and how
this subtle Spirit counterfeited the singing and tunes of many birds, and
wondering that the Curate had as it were a Crown of long hair on the top of his
head of diverse colors, he told him that the wicked Spirit had trimmed him so
by throwing a hoop at his head; He added, that one day the same Spirit asked
him and some other persons if they had ever heard a Raven croak, and that
thereupon he made such a croaking as amazed them all, and if that hellish
music had lasted long they thought it would have distracted them with fear.
The old man further affirmed, not without blushing, that this enemy of our
Salvation had often times discovered to him and others all the secret sins they
had committed so exactly and punctually that they were all forced to leave the
place and get away with much shame and confusion. Ibidem. p. 293.

XXVII.
THE second Relation is of a mischievous Demon at Caumont a Village near the
River of Rhine in Germany; who first began to throw stones at people and knock
at their doors, but could never be perceived; Soon after, this malicious raging
Devil appeared in the shape of a man, and began to answer such questions as
were demanded of him, and to discover things stolen, accusing, slandering, and
defaming whom he pleased, and raising great enmities and quarrels among the
people; He first burnt certain barns, and after set fire to all the Houses, but
used one of the Inhabitants more cruelly than all the rest, for he always
haunted him whithersoever he went, and having burnt his house to the ground, he
stirred up all the neighbors to fall upon this innocent man and murder him,
this forger of lies affirming that the Village was cursed and destined to
destruction for the wickedness of that person, who thereupon was driven away
and forced to live abroad in the Fields having no other covert but Heaven, for
no man would receive him into his house holding him to be an execrable and
damned wretch; Yet to satisfy the desire of his neighbors and countrymen, he
to make proof of his innocence took a red hot iron into his bare hands without
hurt, according to the custom of those times; notwithstanding which this raging
desperate Fury burnt all the Corn in the Fields thereabout and committed so
many horrible outrages that they complained to the Archbishop who sent some of
the Clergy to exorcise him, at first the Spirit increased his fury and threw
stones at them, hurting some, but at length he pretended to be gone out of the
Country, yet as soon as the Priests were departed he shows himself again as
before, saying he had laid hid all this while under one of their Garments.
After this making a great howling the Ghost departed out of these quarters, and
vanished into the Air. Ibidem. p. 293.

XXVIII.
A Certain German in our time traveled toward Italy in the company of a
Soldier much given to Conjuring, by whom he suffered himself to be so much
governed, that one time this Conjurer made him stand within a Circle, fortified
with so many Characters that this ignorant man believed himself safe enough
from the power of all the Devils in Hell; Hereupon the Wizard used so many
horrible imprecations, and conjurations, that a wicked Spirit being called and
invocated by his terrible charms at length appeared as it were much against his
will, like a man exceedingly affrighted, wearing a hat all torn, with a great
feather hanging on it, having about him a sheet tattered and torn all to rags
almost, looking like a dead Corpse that had been dried against the Fire or in
the Sun, and after eaten with worms, with a ghastly countenance, and his feet
not like those of a man; As he thus stood the Conjurer would compel him as it
were to tell him if the Golletta a place then Besieged by the Turks were taken
by them or not; The Spirit replied, he did not know for the present, but that
the day before the Besieged had defended themselves valiantly; He then
complained of the Conjurer who by his horrible Enchantments did too much force
and importune Spirits, and having spoke of some other severities used by him
desired time to think upon what was asked, and then vanished leaving such a
stink and terror that these curious Inquirers were almost dead with fear; And
the German would many times swear, that so often as the remembrance of this
horrible Spirit, together with his voice which was small, hoarse, and cut off
or choked as it were at every word, came into his memory he was ready to swoon
away with the horror of it; By this it appears that though wicked Spirits have
a mavelous quick motion, yet they are not always privy to things done in
places remote from where they appear if they are required to give an answer at
an instant; Though they have sometimes answered readily of matters acted in
another part of the World. Ibidem. p. 268.

XXIX.
I Have before premised that though it pass for current among the vulgar that
Witches or Wizards can transform themselves into Wolves, Cats, Mice or other
creatures, yet it seems very doubtful, since there is a special sort of
Melancholy which is called Lycanthropia, wherein people imagine themselves to
be turned into Wolves or other Beasts, and Hippocrates relates concerning the
daughters of King Praetus that they thought themselves Cows, and of a Spaniard
who did believe himself a Bear; And Sennertus reports, that a Noble Person, and
one worthy of credit gave him an account of a strange passage to this purpose
which himself was particularly acquainted with. That a certain Woman being in
Prison on suspicion of Witchcraft, pretending to be able to turn her self into
a Wolf, the Magistrate before whom she was brought promised her that she should
not be put to death in case she would then in his presence thus transform her
self, which she readily consented to, accordingly she anointed her Head, Neck,
and Armpits, immediately upon which she fell into a most profound sleep for
three hours, after which she suddenly rose up, declaring that she had bee^
turned into a Wolf, and had been at a place some miles distant, and there
killed first a Sheep and the^ a Cow, The Magistrates presently sent to the
plac^ and found that first a Sheep and then a Cow had there been killed. Essay
of Provid. 179.

XXX.
SUch kind of people are likewise said to be found in Prussia, one of which
Men-Wolves was taken not long ago, and brought to the Duke of Prussia by the
Country people upon suspicion that he had devoured some of their Cattle; He
had in his face several scratches and hurts which they said were given him by
the Dogs that took him for a Wolf. The Princes Commissioners examining him he
confessed that twice every year, namely about Christmas and Midsummer he was
changed from a man to a Wolf, and that he then grew wild finding himself as it
were constrained thereto, and conversed in Woods among the Wolves; That before
the Wolfs hair came out, and that he changed his Shape he felt an horrible
quivering and faintness all over his body; Every one credited what he said; But
when they resolved to find out the truth of it, and to that purpose had kept
him a long time close Prisoner in a Castle, the guard having always an eye upon
him to see when the Wolfs hair appeared, they could perceive nothing of it, but
that he always continued a man; This was the last act of this Comedy, and
Wierus and Baptista Porta who have diverse stories to the same purpose are of
op^^ion that the Devil himself does the mischief and that in the mean time
these poor deluded creatures who are cast into so profound a sleep by h^^, as
that by any noise or blows they cannot be awakened, have their Phansies imposed
upon by Dreams and delusions according to the pleasure of their Master Satan.
Cam^rarius p. 276.

XXXI.
A Few years since, a Woman dwelt at Seavington in Somersetshire, who had been
the wife of a Vicar belonging to the Quire of Winchester, and was very honestly
educated living in good reputation with her first husband, and during her
widowhood taught a School of Girls at Winchester which she continued till
married again to J.H. with whom she lived in all virtuous manner being then
about 57 years of age, and had a Son by her former husband, about seventeen.
There dwelt in that village over against her a Woman of ill fame among her
Neighbors for diverse bad practices. This Woman coming to the School-Mistriss
desired her to lend her a small piece of changing money, which the other
refused, who said she knew she had such a piece, and it had been better she had
lent it her, going away muttering. In the evening the School-Mistriss standing
at her door saw a Monstrous great Toad walking upon all four like a Cat, coming
from the other Woman's house directly to hers, upon which retiring into the
house she desired her husband to get some instrument to kill that terrible
Vermin; As he was coming toward the door he met with it in the entry, and
before he had power to strike, it rusht suddenly into another room, and was
never seen after; That very night the School-Mistriss, though before a very
healthy brisk Woman, was taken in a most violent tormenting manner, with cruel
prickings and pains, as if her inside had been all stuck with pins, needles, or
thorns, insomuch that with the great tortures of her body abundance of blood
issued with her urine which was observed the first night. These Fits seized on
her very frequently, sometimes twice or thrice in one day, otherwhile whole
days together, and it was rema^^t that just before the coming of the Fit there
would come into the room a vast large Cat, after that another, and so till they
amounted to seven or nine: These would crawl about and stick against the wall
making a dreadful yelling hideous noise, and continuing about a quarter of an
hour suddenly disappeared. When they were gone a very great light like a flash
of Lightning would strike in at the window, and hang about the walls in heaps
of light like fire, passing from one room to another for an hour or more at a
time, and sometimes continued all the night long, shining through the window
into the street and visible to the Neighbors, all the while this light
continued she was in extremity of misery, and would often cry out and name the
suspected Party; She continued in this miserable state about seventeen years,
it happening when she was about forty, and had reduced her straight well
proportioned body to crookedness and deformity. The Physicians were all of
Opinion that the inward parts of her body were wounded by some Diabolical
practice, and advised her to remove her habitation which she did, but to no
purpose, the evil instrument following her thither also, and of many young
broods of Chickens which she attempted to nurse up for many years she could not
raise one, but they would suddenly turn round twisting their necks several
times about until they dropped down dead. She kept two Cats of her own for which
she had a great fancy, but as soon as ever the other sort of Cats entered the
room they would fly like Lightning sometimes into the fire, sometimes into the
Oven, and up the Chimney or any way to avoid the room whilst they were there,
nor did they ever thrive but soon after starved and pined away; After her
removal, her Son came from Winchester a strong healthy youth about seventeen
who had not been there above three months when he was taken with dreadful
raving frantic fits so that five or six men could not hold him, he would
spring out of their hands, and leap up with his head against the cieling,
sometimes he would catch up a Knife or Razor, and therewith endeavor to cut
his own throat or do himself some other mischief roaring out in a most terrible
manner; That the Witch aforementioned was by him, and commanded him to do it or
else she would strangle him, or choke him with pins or the like. So that they
were forced to lay all dangerous instruments out of his reach, and yet though
he had none of them near him, when his fit came his hands and pockets would be
full of Knives, Sizzars, Razors, and the like, and after these fits he would
cast out of his mouth a great quantity of pins and needles, and was forced by
extreme weakness to keep his bed several days. One day as the young man was in
the height of his fits his mother saw the suspected Party scrambling against
the wall of the room, and immediately called out to her husband, John, John!
There Is the Witch, (naming the Party) run her through with your Sword. Upon
which he darted his Sword at the place she directed him though he saw nothing,
and his wife cried out, John you have cut the Witch, you have cut her hand, and
it was observed that the woman had a lame hand a considerable time after. This
afflicted woman would often repair to Church, but if the other were there she
had not power to enter, but stayed in the porch or at the window; The Son
continued in those amazing Fits about five years, and then ran away in one of
them having never been seen nor heard of since. The Mother continued in this
lamentable state about seventeen years, and then died of pain and grief, but
very sensible, having her reason and understanding to the last. She was of
Opinion that others besides that woman contributed to her misery; And though
many Physicians and Neighbors were Eye and Ear-witnesses of what is here
related, yet I do not understand that any Justice was applied to for
apprehending of the supposed Witch and bringing her to punishment, but that she
lived about five years after the afflicted. Pandem. p. 189.

XXXII.
PAulus Grillandus a Lawyer in Italy well experienced in the Facts of Witches
and Sorcerers relates; That there was a Countreyman not far from Rome in 1526.
who when he saw his wife rise naked in the night to anoint her self, and that
thereupon she was gone presently out of sight and could not be found in or
about the house, the next day he provided himself of a good cudgel wherewith to
compel her to tell him whither and upon what account she conveyed her self away
the last night, which she presently confessing, he pardoned her upon condition
that she would carry him to the same place, that he might see her Associats;
Next night she and her husband both anointed themselves, and then they were
each of them instantly mounted upon a Goat, and so brought immediately among an
Assembly of Witches; Now his wife had forewarned him that he should by no means
name God or Christ, except in scorn and derision; When they were arrived among
the crowd his wife bid him stand at a distance till she had saluted their
Prince, who was most magnificently clothed, and guarded with a great company of
men and women, all honoring and waiting on him as their Lord. After which they
danced in a ring backward it may be to prevent their knowing and accusing one
another, if they should happen to be detected; Which this Triscillianus
afterward did to Charles the Ninth King of France, relating; That there were
many who adored and worshipped a Goat in their meetings, and kissed his
Posteriors, and then they danced, and the Devils had carnal commerce with the
women, and with each other in the Shapes of men and women. After their dancing
the Tables were covered and furnished with meat; The woman then bid her Husband
sit down with the rest of the company and salute the Prince, which being done,
the man not relishing his cheer without Salt called for it, which being
brought, he cried out aloud, God be thanked we have Salt now, which was no
sooner uttered, but Men, Women, Meat and Tables presently vanished, and the man
was left alone in a cold desolate place utterly unknown to him; When it was day
he met with some Shepherds, who informed him that he was in the Earldom of
Beneventum a great many miles from Rome, to which he was forced to travel back
and beg food, and cloths in his return. When he came home he accused his wife,
who impeached others, and they all confessing their guilt were hanged for their
enormous wickedness. Hist. Specters. p. 130.

XXXIII.
THE same Author writes, that being invited by a Nobleman to the Castle of St.
Paul in the Dukedom of Spoleto; When he arrived the Nobleman gave him an
account of three Sage Matrons who were found to be Witches; One of whom
trusting in his promise that she might freely speak without danger, declared
that fifteen years since she was carried by an Old Woman to an assembly of
Witches, where the Devil being present obliged them by an Oath to renounce God
their Creator, their Faith and their Religion, and to be faithful to him, and
that with their hands laid upon a book of very strange Characters they were
sworn to perform some Solemn Services to him in the night, and that they must
go wheresoever he commanded them; The Devil on the other side promised them
mirth, pleasure, and felicity forever; She confessed further that at that time
she killed four men, and many Cattle, and procured much damage to the fruits of
the earth, and if it happened that at any time she came not to their meetings
except she could show very good cause to the contrary she was so tormented that
she could neither sleep nor eat; When she came thither she heard the voice of a
man who called the Devil little Lord, and sometimes Mr. Martinetus; As soon as
she had anointed her self with a certain unguent, she mounted a Goat that stood
ready at the door and held fast by his main and tail, whereby she was conveyed
to the great Wood at Beneventum where she found a great company of Witches and
Inchanters, when she had there vowed allegiance to the Devil, she danced, sat
at the Table, and last of all every Devil had filthy commerce with her or him
whom they had chosen for themselves, and when they had done every one returned
back upon their particular Goat or Devil with the same incredible swiftness
that they came there, and likewise that they did privately worship the Devil at
home in their own houses; This confession agreeing with those of two more, many
others were accused, who acknowledging their crime, they with their ointments
and powders were all burnt together. Ibid. p. 131.

XXXIV.
THough we have already declared that it seems hard to believe Inchanters or
Witches can transform themselves into other Shapes, yet Dr. Henry More, in
vindication of Bodinus endeavors to demonstrate that nothing material is urged
to the contrary, since they acknowledge they find themselves very weary, and
sometimes wounded which he says cannot be a more delusion of fancy; I shall not
positively assert nor deny any thing, but having met with a story to this
purpose shall here insert it. In a Town in Germany, one whose name says my
Author for modesty I conceal, had at his House o^ of his Tennants cutting Wood,
whom a Cat of a ve^ bigness set upon unawares, and when with blows he had
driven it away, another more fierce than the former joins to it, against whom
while he more sharply contends a third comes in, so that he was hard put to it,
and obliged to use his utmost strength and courage against three such cruel
overgrown Cats, neither could he subdue them nor free himself from their teeth
and claws without giving and receiving many hurts and wounds; Having at length
vanquished and driven them away, the man falls again to his work and presently
2 Officers seize him and carry him before a Judge, who being much moved with
fury and rage commands him to be instantly cast into a dark loathsome dungeon;
His Protestations, sighs and groans nothing availing to clear him, or manifest
his innocence; The Judges anger increased, who exclaimed against him as an
impudent fellow in so obstinately denying the committing that Villainy wherewith
he was charged. After three days the Judge being continually importuned to
execute Justice upon him, sends for him to be brought publicly into the Court
of Justice there to receive his Sentence in the presence of the other Judges;
When he appeared the enraged Judge could not look upon him with patience, who
poor man falling on his knees humbly begged he might speak for himself. The
Judge then laid it heavily to his charge that like a wicked bloody wretch, he
had desperately wounded three of the chief Matrons of the Town within a few
days past, and yet had the confidence to deny his knowledge of it; The poor
wretch hearing this terrible accusation replied, That he never hurt any woman
in his life. The Judge on the other side thundered out, That it was notoriously
known he had so abused these three Gentlewomen that they were forced to keep
their beds, their limbs and several parts of their bodies being so out of joint
and beaten ^^at they were not able to turn themselves; The fellow persists that
he never hurt nor ever saw any such Gentlewomen, but says he, I very well
remember that on the day wherein I was apprehended and cast into prison, I was
set upon by three huge fierce Cats, and used all the strength I had to defend
my self against them, and yet had much ado to drive them away; These words
amazed all that were present, and then he declared all the particulars in
order; The truth being thus discovered the Judges do their utmost to conceal
the business, and save the reputation of the Matrons Ibidem. p. 120.

XXXV.
ONE Isabel Heriot, was Servant to the Minister of Ormston in Scotland; She was
of a low Stature, small and slender of body, black of complexion and her head
awry; Was very confident and much given to scoffing; After several years
service the Minister disliking her qualities discharged her his house, and she
dwelt long in another Service; After which she returned to Ormston, and got
sometimes (...) Masters house though without his knowledge; (...) fell sick
about the beginning of Winter 1680. (...) at the time of her death her face
became extrea^^ black. Within three or four nights after she wa^^^ried one
Isabel Murray Widow of William Craig the Churchwarden saw her Ghost about
twelve a Cloc^ at night with burying cloths upon her, walking from the Chapel
toward the Ministers house, and halting by the way at a Stone before the door,
where she sat down, as she usually did when alive, leaning upon her elbow;
After this she observed her to go into the Ministers back yard toward the
stable; Some few nights after there was throwing of Stones over the Ministers
house, and some were flung against the Hall door and Windows; Which were found
in the yard next morning, when they fell it was with no great violence; The
Minister against whom the Devils chiefest malice was, coming in one night at
the back door, and shutting it after him had a great stone thrown after him
which struck the door very hard and left a mark and impression behind it. This
she, (or rather the Devil) did in imitation of a prank she played before she
died; For the Minister causing his other Servants to thrust her out of that
very door, she out of anger threw a great stone with much violence against it;
The aforementioned Isabel Murray going into the Ministers house one night was
hit very hard with a stone on her back; The manservant who looked to the
Horses, as he was going to bed in the Stable was griped by the heel to his
great amazement; He crying out aloud his Mistress and others came to him, and
found him in much consternation and affright; That night several clods and
stones were thrown but no person touched, only an old Horse-comb which had been
missing many years was thrown with much fury at the Lads beds head; The Horses
were found in the morning in great sweats, and much disorder, and while this
Youth was dressing the Garden he had several stones thrown at him, but was only
struck by one and that very favorably, and several noises were heard in the
House; One night a burning coal was thrown under one of the beds, and one of
the family had his Cap taken off in the night which was found next morning in
the Chimney full of Cinders and Ashes. If the Devil could have done more he
certainly would. This trouble continued eight or nine weeks during which
frequent Prayers were sent up to God, and one scofflingly saying, Now let the
Minister and his brethren with all their Prayers drive away the Devil if he
can, it is very remarkable that from this time they had no more disturbance in
the Family.

But Isabel Murray reports diverse other particulars of this Apparition, as that
when she saw it first the face was as black as soot, and that she once saw her
walking in the Garden, and taking up something from the ground, saying a stone,
a stone, and gathering a great number of small stones into her Cap, she threw
them down under a bush, which some think were the stones that were thrown in
the night; The woman took the courage to speak to her, and said, Hey, what do
thou do here Isabel Heriot, I charge thee by the Law thou lives on to tell me;
The Spectre replied, I am now come again because I wronged my Master while I
was his Servant, for it was I that stole his Shekel (this was a Jewish Shekel
of Gold that with some other things had been stolen from him several years
before) which I hid under the Hearth-stone in the Kitchen, and when I fled I
took it up, and offered to sell it to a French- woman who lodged in the
Canongate where I then served, who asked where I had it, I told her I found it
between Leith and Edinburgh; One night, says she, I was riding home late from
the Town, and by the way my Horse stumbling I said, the Devil raise thee,
whereupon the foul Thief appeared presently to me and threatened me, that if I
would not promise to destroy my Master the Minister he would throw me into a
deep hole there, which I suppose is still to be seen near a place called the
Fauside Brae, or if I could not get power over my Master I should endeavor to
destroy the Schoolmaster; It is very remarkable that one of the Ministers
Maids had given to the Schoolmasters Maid some Linen to wash, among which was
a cross-cloth of strong Linen which could not be found, till one morning the
Master awaking found it bound round his Nightcap, which caused admiration both
in himself and wife, and showed that the Devil nor the Witch had no further
power of him, though it is probable they designed to strangle him therewith in
the night.

Isabel Heriot or her Ghost confessed likewise that the Devil met her a second
time at Elsiston Mill within a quarter of a mile of Ormiston, and that as she
another time was coming home from Hadington Market with Corn the Devil again
appeared to her and bid her destroy Thomas Anderson who was riding with her,
and because she refused, the Demon threw the Corn off the Horse, and it is
well known that her Corn lay there all night, and she went early next morning
to fetch it home. And says she, I cheated my Master when I went to the Market
to buy Oats, by telling him it cost more than it did, and do not you remember
Isabel Murray, says she, that one night coming out of the Ministers house you
had a sore blow on the back with a stone, it was I that did it, yet not for
your own sake, but your husbands who once threw me down and abused me; After
this Conference the woman began to be afraid, and leaving the Spectre came
running home with all speed; This Isabel Heriot was never reputed a Witch nor
accused by any, but was very ignorant in Religion, and traveled often in the
night; But this Disturbance and Apparition after her death made it believed
that it was either her real body acted by the Devil, or else Satan taking upon
him her shape and form, and imitating her to the life which seems most
probable. Invisib. World. p. 144.

XXXVI.
ONE Alexander Hunter lived at Edinburgh in Scotland and was nicknamed by the
Devil Hatterick; He was first a Servant to a Gentleman in East Lothian, and was
much given to Charms, pretending to cure Men and Beasts by Words and Spells,
which sometimes succeeded, otherwhile not; One Summers day as he was looking
after his Cattle on the side of an Hill the Devil appeared to him in the shape
of a Physician, and said, Sauny you have long followed my trade and never
acknowledged me for your Master, you must now bargain with me and be my
Servant, and I will make you more perfect in your Calling. Whereupon the fellow
gave himself to the Devil, and received his mark, and the new name of
Hatterick; After this he grew very famous throughout the Country for his
Charms, and curing distempers, and turned a wandering Mountebank, getting Bread,
Meat and Money by his Tricks from the ignorant people; So that at length
whatever house he came to none durst refuse Hatterick an alms, though many gave
it more out of fear than love. One day he came to a Gentleman's gate who had
some Friends that dined with him just ready to take horse and ride away; A
young Gentleman brother to the Lady seeing him there switcht him about the ears
saying; You Conjuring Rogue what have you to do here? Whereupon the Fellow goes
away grumbling and was overheard to say, You shall buy this dear ere long. The
Young Gentleman having waited on his Friends a good part of their way returned
back again where he supt; After which taking his Horse to go home to his own
house, and crossing Tine-Water (...) through a shady place called the Allers,
and the Evening being somewhat dark he met with some such dreadful Apparitions
as brought him into a terrible consternation, and which he would never full
discover; When he came home the Servants observe^ a strange trouble and
disorder in his countenance and the next day he became distracted, and wa^
bound in his bed a considerable time; His sister the Lady Samuelston hearing of
it was heard say; Sure^ that knave Hattarick is the cause of this trouble, call
(...) him presently; He being come, Sarrah, says she, wh^ is that you have done
to my brother William? I told his says he, I should make him repent his
striking of me at the gate lately; She giving the Rogue good words and
promising him his poke-full of Bread and Beef persuaded the Fellow to cure him
again; He undertook the business, but says he; I must have one of his Shirts,
which being given him what tricks he played with it they knew not, but in a
little while the Gentleman recovered his health; When Hattarick came for his
reward he told the Lady, Your brother William shall quickly go out of this
Country, but shall never return again; She knowing the Fellows prophecies were
generally true, caused her brother to dispose of his Estate before he went;
After this Wizzard had abused the Country a long time he was at length
apprehended at Dunbar, and being brought to Edenburg and found guilty of many
notorious crimes was burnt in the Castle there. Ibidem. p. 122.

XXXVII.
ABout the time that the Earl of Traquair was his late Majesty's Commissioner
in Scotland, it happened that at Dalkeith where he resided one Spalding living
in that Town killed one Sadler his Neighbor; The Murderer fled and absented
himself above a year, yet sometimes came home in the night finding that none
sought after him; At length wearied with this way of living he resolved to cast
himself upon the Lord Commissioners mercy; Who coming one day toward Dalkieth
in his Coach Spalding came to the Coach-side and falling on his knees begged
mercy of him; The L. Commissioner inquired what the business was. His Servants
told him he was such a man that had killed his Neighbor a Townsman, who
thereupon commanded him to be conveyed to Prison where he lay above a year;
After which being brought to his Trial, he was found guilty and condemned to be
hanged; When he heard his Sentence he cried out; What must I dye like a Dog,
why was not I sentenced to lose my head? When he came to the Scaffold and
prayers were ended, he goes up the Ladder, and the rope being put about his
neck be cries out with a loud voice in the audience of all, Lord, says he, let
never this Soul of mine depart from this body till it come to be reconciled to
thee; And having said thus the Executioner threw him off the ladder; When he
had hung the ordinary time which was sufficent to take away any man's life, he
was cut down, and his body being put in a Coffin was carried to the Talbooth to
be stripped, when they opened the Coff^^ the man sits upright in it, his eyes
staring, foaming a^ the mouth, and roaring like a Bull striking at all near him
with his Fists; The Magistrates hearing of it ordered he should be strangled
once more; The Executioner falls to work, and putting the rope about his neck
strained it so hard that his neck was no bigger than his wrist; After which
continuing quiet a sufficient time he was put into his grave and covered close
up with earth, notwithstanding all which he made such a rumbling and tumbling
therein that the very earth was raised and they could hardly keep the mould
down; Not long after the house where he formerly lived at the East end of the
Town was haunted with a Ghost, which made it stand empty a^ long time. Thus,
(says my Author) I have from a^ very credible Person who is yet alive, and
being a Scholar at Dalkeith was both an eye and ear-witnes^ of these
particulars. Ibidem. p. 191.

XXXVIII.
ABout 1656. one William Barton who dwelt a^ Kirkliston near Queens Ferry in
Scotland was apprehended for Witchcraft; Which he confessed saying; If he had
twenty Sons he would earnestly advise them to avoid the sin of uncleanness; For
sa^ he, I never saw a handsome woman in my life but I luste^ after her, which
was the only cause that brought me to (...) the Devils Vassal; One day (says
he) going from (...) own house to Queens Ferry I overtook a young Gentlewo man
who was to appearance very comely and beautiful, (...) drew near to her, but
she shunned my company, and when (...) persisted she seemed very angry and coy;
Madam said I since we are both going one way pray please to accept of me for
your Convoy; At last after much entreaty she grew better conditioned, and we
came to that familiarity that she suffered me to embrace her, and do what I
pleased; (...) this time I parted very joyful.

Next night she appeared to him in the same place where having committed
wickedness again with her he then became sensible that it was not a woman but
the Devil; And hereupon he renounced his Baptism, and gave up himself to her
Service, she calling him her beloved and gave him the new name of John Baptist,
and received a Mark; She likewise beflowed fifteen pounds Scots upon him by the
name of Tochergood and so parted; He had not gone far when she called him back
again and gave him a piece of money called a Merkpeice, which she bid him spend
at the Ferry, but desired him to keep the fifteen pound entire, which he
declared was real sterling money; After this confession he begged liberty to
sleep a little which the Judges granted him; Having slept a short time he wak't
in a very great laughter, The Judges inquired the reason very strictly, who
replied; That the Devil had been with him, and had bub sharply rebuked, and
grievously threatened him for making any confession, and bid him deny all, for
he would secure him from any danger; After this his heart was absolutely
hardened so that to his dying hour he would never acknowledge any thing for the
Devil had assured him even from his very first engagement with him, That no man
should ever take away his life. Which promise he absolutely believed, and
depended on to the last. So that when he was told in the prison that the fire
was made, the stake set up, and the hangman coming to lead him forth to
execution, he answered, He did not care for all that, since he was sure be
should not dye that day; The Executioner had orders to bring him out instantly,
but he no sooner set his foot within the prison door, when he suddenly fell
down dead and never stirred more. In this straight they ordered the Hangmans
wife to strangle him which she willingly undertook upon a reward promised her;
When Barton heard that a woman was to execute him he cried out; Oh how has the
Devil deceived me, let none ever trust to his promises; And he was accordingly
executed by the woman whose name was Margret Hamilton, in the presence of many
hundred people at Kirkliston the place of his abode. There is one thing
remarkable in this Relation, that the Devil should bestow so much real good
money upon the Wizzard, he is seldom so liberal, but would certainly be more if
God would permit him to steal, or discover hid Treasures which no doubt he is
restrained from, lest thereby he should deceive more wretched Souls than he now
is able to do. Ibidem. p. 160.

XXXIX.
IN 1559. at a Village called Joachims Valley in Germany dwelt a Smith that had
a Daughter who excelled in modesty and virtue, being very constant and diligent
in all pious Exercises, and yet by Divine permission was set upon by Satan who
took and threw her very often upon the ground as if she had been vexed with the
falling sickness; This so afflicted her Father and Mother that they went to a
Wizzard or Conjurer for help but in vain, for the Devil boasted that by this
their folly his power over the Maid was more confirmed and increased; A while
after Satan began to speak in the Virgin with an human voice and often appeared
in the form of a Cuckoo, of a Crow, of Hornets, and other creatures, and
exactly imitated their voices; He uttered many strange and wonderful matters
through her, so that the report caused a multitude of people to come and visit
her, and diverse out of an honest zeal did provoke the Demon to speak and
undauntedly heard his answers; In the mean time the young woman did patiently
endure her afflictions, incessantly joining her prayers with those of the
Church made on her behalf, and as often as she called upon the name of Christ,
and humbly prayed to be freed from that evil one by whom she was oppressed, the
Devil raged the more furiously, her eyes swelling almost out of her head, her
tongue was twisted out of her mouth like a slender twig, and stretched almost
the length of a man's hand, her face was wound and turned about to her back, and
the Devil tormented her in a most deplorable manner without intermission. If
any inquired how she did, and in what condition, she answered, That to her
apprehension she seemed as though she were stuck at the bottom of a River ready
to be drowned, but that by the coming of some Ministers she deemed her self
snatched out of the Jaws of Death; All the Neighboring Preachers and Divines
came daily to her, who talking with the Virgin the Devil answered them, and
when the name of Christ was mentioned he always blasphemed: Being demanded how
he entered into her, He said, In a draught of Ale in the form of a Fly; She
continued under this visitation above two years, and one Helias Hirsch a very
pious Minister watching with her several nights striving earnestly in prayer
for her deliverance, the Fiend raged against him, and abused him with base and
opprobirous language, and when he was coming out of his own house the evil
Spirit foretold saying, Behold this Sacrilegious Helias is coming again to
afflict me. This Virtuous man by the power of Gods word did wonderfully oppose
him, and by frequently using the name of Jesus Christ drove the Devil to new
outrages, so that the noise of his madness was heard afar off; Sometimes
speaking to Helias he would say, Oh now dance with me and either go before or
follow as thou please; The good man replied, Let thy Dances lead thee to the
bottom of Hell, The Demon answered, Go thy ways thou shall now see dances;
Then he roared and bellowed, soon after entering into a Stove he appeared in the
shape of a Cat and a Dog, who with much agility danced about, and then
vanished, many such pranks be played. Some time after, this worthy man set upon
the Devil again demanding, by what means or power he had possessed the Virgin,
By the command of God, said he, from whom I am sent that I might torment the
body, but I cannot hurt her soul, and that I might give warning to men to
abstain from pride, usury, gluttony and other sins of that kind, and though it
be sore against my will to declare these things, yet being commanded by God I
am forced to do it; At the last day I know I shall have more Souls than God
himself will have; To which one of the Ministers then present replied; Thou
lie O thou wicked Sacrilegious wretch, for if Sinners will repent they shall
have Salvation, but the Eternal God at the day of Judgment will throw thee and
thy Companions into Hell fire; why did thou banish thy self out of Heaven
when God created thee a glorious Angel? My Seat was not fixed there sure says
the Demon, but thou may as well spare thy pains, for I am not ignorant how
careful thou wast for this Margaret (so he called the Virgin though her name
was Ann) and that at Whitsontide thou made public Prayers to God for her; I
have done so, replied the Minister, and I will not give over to do so still
till we have thrown thee down headlong into Hell by our Prayers; After this,
says the Divine, wast not thou also sent to afflict holy Job? What then, says
Satan, Oh that I had now the like power given me that I might scatter the
Pestilence; This conference continued about two hours; Among other things the
Minister said; Behold thou that wast the chief and most beautiful of the
Creatures, and the top of the Creation, how art thou fallen, that thou now
hidest thy self under the ugly shape of a Hog, Dog, or other unclean Beast! O
good Priest say not so, replied the Devil, for I am often transformed into an
Hare, and am a dainty dish for great men; A few days after this good Divine
brought the Maid into the Congregation among a great Assembly who prayed to God
for her, and praised him with Hymns and Psalms, and as often as Jesus Christ was
named, the Demon raged with a bellowing and hideous, noise, as though he would
ruin and destroy all; The Maid being carried home from the Church, the Devil
roared in her like the noise of a Warlike Trumpet saying, It would little
profit them to remove him from that place since eight more of his Companions
were there also; At length the Minister of Slackwaldensis with ten others met
together, and prayed fervently from morning till noon, reading also the
Scriptures and singing Psalms with much zeal and earnestness, and then went to
Dinner; After they had dined the Ministers returned and brought with them the
Governor of the Castle of Prague, and a great Company were present, who with
one accord joined in singing praises to, and calling upon Jesus Christ, and
with ardent affections and strong cries poured out their supplications to God,
at which time the Devil was cast out, and flew out of the Window like a swarm
of Flys; But before he went he desired the Maid that he might remain but in any
one part of her body, in the Nail of her Finger and at last to be only in one
Hair, but she absolutely denied him in all; Furthermore just upon his departing
he spoke after this manner; All ye contemners of the Word of God, Ministry and
Sacraments, all ye that are addicted to Usury and Gluttony are mine Body and
Soul, and he further warned and admonished the Minister aforementioned; That
she should earnestly exhort all the People that belonged to his Church to
repentance; For God desires our Salvation, and therefore the Devil was
compelled against his will to warn men to forsake their Sins. When Satan was
thus dispossessed the Maid was carried home to her Fathers house in her right
mind, and with great joy and consolation of Soul, earnestly recommending her
self to the Ministers of the Church to be constantly remembered in their Public
Prayers; Fincelius 3. Book Miracles.

XL.
AT Rotenburg in Germany, A Person very gallantly attired, who much boasted of
his great Nobility and Riches frequented the house of a very honest Gentleman,
having two Companions no less gorgeously clothed than himself; He brought a
Fiddler and a Piper to the Gentleman's house, ma^^ great Treats, danced very
jovially, and all under pretense of marrying the Gentleman's Daughter (...)
modest virtuous young Virgin; He affirmed he was born of Noble Parents, had a
vast Estate, with Castles, Farms, yea whole Towns, and many of them in Foreign
Countries, neither did he want any thing this world could afford but a Wife
qualified and educated to his liking, and that he found the young Lady
absolutely accomplished according to his desire; The importunity and confidence
of this stranger and his two Comerades began at length to be troublesome and
suspected by the Master of the House; Whereupon he invited the Minister of the
Town to meet them when they came next; And accordingly that night when they
were at Supper the Minister came and sitting down with them began to discourse
of some Divine matters out of the Holy Scriptures; The Gentlemen seemed very
uneasy at this kind of conversation, and desired him to divert to some other
subject, arguing, That witty Jests and merry Conceits were more proper to
Feasting, and did more elevate men's Spirits than such kind of talk as that, and
therefore entreated him not to be any more troublesome to them with discourse
of that nature: By this the Master of the House was confirmed that they were
Demons, and Diabolical Spirits, and therefore arming himself with courage
against all the attempts of the Devil, he said to his Guests, Be gone and
depart instantly Oye cursed Feinds you shall have nothing to do with me nor
mine, we are baptized and redeemed by the precious Blood of Christ, and will
defend our selves against all your damnable delusions; At these words this
Devilish Impostor with his two hellish Companions vanished out of sight,
leaving a most horrid noisome stink and the dead bodies of three ^^defactors who
had been lately hanged behind them. Manlius Collect.

XLI.
SOme brisk learned men in the Council of Basil walked for recreation into a
small Wood to debate in a friendly manner about the disputes of those times. As
they were going along they heard a pretty little Bird singing most sweetly like
a Nightingale, so that they were even ravished with the pleasant Music
wherewith she entertained them, but could not imagine by her Note what Bird it
should be; Entering the Wood further they espy the same Bird fitting on a Tree,
and singing most pleasantly without intermission, to which they were all very
attentive; At last one having more courage and resolution than the rest, speaks
thus to the Bird, I adjure thee in the name of Christ to tell us who thou art.
The Bird made answer; That she was one of the damned Souls, and was condemned
to that place till the last day, and then she must undergo everlasting torment;
When she had said thus she flew away from the Tree crying, O how immense and of
what long continuance is Eternity; Philip Melarcthon a famous Divine says, I
am of opinion that this was the Devil frequenting there; All that were present
at this adjuration fell very sick and within a little time after died. Ibidem.

XLII.
MArtin Luther in his Colloquia Mensalia relates this notable Passage; A
Studious young man of Saffordia in Germany was so extremely in love with a
young Virgin that he became almost distracted with the violence of his passion;
And being intimately acquainted with one who was skilful in Art of Magic, he
assured him that he would use such means by his Skill that the Maid with whom
he was so much in love should come to him, provided he would solemnly engage
not to embrace nor touch her, the young man promises he will be civil, when
instantly the young Lady being extreme handsome enters his bedchamber; And by
words and gestures discovered much love toward him, which he observing, was so
exceedingly surprised that unable to command his affections, he approaches and
embraces her with much tenderness; Whereupon the Virgin presently falls down
dead, which did dreadfully affright both him and the Magician, who by his
enchantments so prevailed at length, that the Devil entered her hody, and by his
acting in her the Maid returned home, where she was very busy in her former
employment, but always pale and silent, which much troubled her Parents, who
after three days got some Divines to come and discourse with her, who when for
some time they had seriously conversed with her, the Devil went out of her, and
she falling down appeared only a filthy stinking Carcass; Blood is the cause of
a good color, says Luther, and the Devil cannot create that, none but God our
Creator only; Lutheri Colloqu.

XLIII.
AMong other pernicious devices whereby the Devil discovers his malice to
mankind, several Authors relate that Witches by his assistance with their
wicked charms and enchantments can hinder Generation by procuring frigidity and
other inconveniences of which they give several instances, and among others
that which follows; A certain Earl of a Noble Family at Argentinum in Germany
having married a Lady of illustrious birth, found himself deprived of his
natural strength, of which he could by no means discover the reason; It
happened that after he had been married three years without having any Children
going to the City of Mentz to dispatch some business he fell into the company
of a certain woman who some years before his marriage had been his Mistress,
whom he entertained very civilly and began co discourse her of their old love
and familiarity, not in the least suspecting her guilty of his misfortune, or
that she was concerned in Witchcraft; He inquires of her health and what
condition she lived in, who perceiving the innocence and good nature of the
Earl asks him how he did and whether he were perfectly in health, who replied,
He was very well and that all things succeeded happily with him; At which she
for a while stood amazed and silent, which when the Earl perceived, he begun to
have some doubts within him, and by his courteous treatment invited her to
discourse further, whereupon she inquires what condition his wife was in. He
replied, She was in good health; And pray my Lord says she, how many Children
have you had by her? The Earl replied; Not above three, every year one; At this
she seemed more disturbed than before, and continued silent a great while; But
pray my Dear says the Earl, why do thou inquire so strictly of the condition
of me and mine, I do not doubt but thou rejoicest at my felicity; Yes, says
she, I am heartily glad of your good fortune, but cursed be that old Witch who
swore desperately that by her Charms she would render both you and your Lady
incapable of having Children, the certainty whereof a Well that stands in the
middle of your Court will discover in which an earthen pot filled with
enchantments is thrown, of which the old woman did affirm, that as long as it
lay there you should both be disabled as to generation, but I now find, and am
very glad of it that all she said were lies and falsehood. The Earl hearing this
business, wisely concealed it without taking any notice, but making have home
causes the Well to be emptied of water, when at the bottom he finds the earthen
pot, which being burnt he and his Lady recovered their former vigor, and
afterward had many Children. Hist. Spect. p. 117.

XLIV.
IN 1532. A Nobleman in Saxony out of a malicious and Tyrannical humor
commanded one of his Countrymen over whom he had authority that he should
carry home to his house a great Oak whole out of a Wood with his Horse and
Cart, and threa^ned him severely if he did not execute his commands; The Clown
knowing certainly that it was absolutely impossible to be performed entered the
wood, where he made great sighing and lamentation for the severity of his Lord,
while he was uttering his complaints there came to him the Devil in the shape
of a man, and inquired the cause of his grief, to whom the Rustic discovered
the whole affair. The Devil bid him be of good cheer, and return home, for he
would bring the Oak to his Masters house without delay; The Countreyman was
scarce got home, but that the Devil had thrown the huge Oak loaded with thick
boughs just before the door of the Noblemans house, so that it quite stopped up
the entrance, and the wood presently became so hard, that it could neither be
cut with iron, nor by any art whatsoever be removed from the place, so that the
Nobleman was forced to break down a Wall on the other side the House and make a
New Gate, to his great cost and trouble; Fincelius Miracles. lib. 2.

XLV.
IN 1659. At Brightling in Sussex there was an amazing providence containing
many Notable Passages; A fire was strangely kindled, Nov. 7. in the Evening in
the Milk-house of a Man's house who dwest there, and Nov. 9. dust was thrown
upon the man and his wife as they were in bed, and great noises and strokes
were heard the same morning, and diverse things thrown about the fire again
began in the Milk-house which was put out by the Woman her self; It then
kindled in the Eves of the house in the Thatch which was extinguished by a
Neighbor. That evening the man had a pot of beer in his hand, and a stone fell
into the pot, upon which he set it down on the Table, when some men who came to
fit up with him that night were speaking how convenient it would be to have a
Tub filled with water to stand ready if they should have occasion to use it,
and as they were going out of door to prepare it, the fire began again in the
Milk-house, and in an instant the whole house was on fire but most of the goods
were carried out and preserved; It was an unusual fire appearing very white,
and not burning their hands when they pulled the things out of it. Next day the
house-hold-stuff was carried to another house where there was a Family, these
distressed people being to live in one end of it, and the Owners in the other,
but before the man and his wife went to bed there was dust again thrown upon
them, wherewith they were so affrighted that the man having a Friend with him
took a Lanthorn and Candle, and came to me, (says the Relator Mr. Bennet then
Minister of the Town) who was in bed and asleep, but when I was awakened I
heard him say; The hand of God still pursues me, and so he entreated me to go
down with him, accordingly I and my brother went to the house where we found
them greatly troubled by reason of the things that were thrown about, and some
were flung presently after we came in; Hereupon we went to prayers, and as I
was kneeling down dust was thrown upon me, but afterward all was quiet during
prayers. I then began to read the ninety first Psalm, the man standing by and
holding the Candle, but presently somewhat beat out the light; Whereupon the
man said, That some body else must hold it; Then a Knife was thrown at me,
which fell behind me, my brother said he saw it come; A chopping Knife was
thrown at the man's wife, whereupon he said, Things are flung at others for my
sake; At length he fell upon his knees and confessed; That he had been an
Hypocrite and a Pilfering Fellow, and that he had robbed his Master; etc. And
he was willing to separate the things which he had wrongfully taken from the
rest, which he did accordingly, laying forth several things which he said were
none of his, naming the Persons from whom he had taken them; And as a great
Chest was carrying forth, Trenchers, Platters and other things were thrown
about in such a dreadful manner, that one present not counted very religious
cried out, Pray come and let us go to Prayers, which they did accordingly,
spending the night therein and in reading the Scriptures and singing Psalms;
And though diverse things were thrown, as a dish several times with which I had
once a smart blow on the cheek, and the man of the house had his boots thrown
at him and a chopping knife twice, Crabbs out of a Tub in the midst of the
Room, a Firebrand, an Hammer flung twice and a Bible, yet still during the time
of Prayers all was quiet. In the morning as I was again going to Prayers I was
hit with a dish, and then my brother and I returning home, we went aside by the
way to speak with a Friend, but before we got home we heard that the house was
on fire, hereupon they sent for me again, and in the mean time carried out
their goods, plucked off the Thatch, and quenched the fire, yet as I heard it
kindled again and again till all the man's goods were brought out, and when
these people (whose house was burnt down to the ground) together with all their
Goods were removed into the Field all was quiet in this second house; Yet some
things were thrown in the Field, and in the afternoon when another Minister and
I went to them some assured us that several things had been thrown. This was
Nov. 11. The night following some noise was heard among the household stuff as
was testified to me; Thus were these poor Creatures distressed, their house was
burned down, that other to which they were removed several times fired, so that
neither they nor their goods might stay any longer there, nor durst any other
receive them, but they with their house-hold-stuff were forced to lie in the
open field for diverse days and nights together, being made a sad spectacle to
all forts of people who came far and near to see and hear this wonderful
buisiness. Hereupon I sent to same Neighboring Ministers to join with me in
^^ting, prayer and preaching Nov. 15. where the distressed Persons attended
diligently, and a great Congregation was assembled, and Divine Providence
seemed to be much magnified, thus to discover the Hypocrisy and Theft of the
man by these invisible Agents, and yet withal mercifully delivering them; for
after this day they were fully freed, and never after troubled in that manner.
Clarks Examples. p. 593.

XLVII.
IT has been a received opinion among all that do but know the name of
Laplanders that they are people addicted to Magic, and they are described both
by ancient and Modern Writers to have arrived to so great skill in enchantments
that among several strange effects of their Art they could stop Ships when
under Sail, which demonstrates them to be the Successors of the Biarmi, who
could either by their looks, words, or some other artifice so ensnare and
bewitch men as to deprive them of the use of Limbs, and reason, and often
endanger their lives; But though in these latter times they do not so
frequently practice this, and dare not profess it so publicly as before, being
severely prohibited by the King of Sweden whose Subjects they are, yet there
are still many who give themselves wholly to this study, as thinking thereby to
be defended from the injuries and malicious designs of others, and therefore
they have Teachers and Professors of this Science; and Parents in their last
Will bequeath to their Children as the greatest part of their Estate those
Spirits and Devils that have been any ways serviceable to them in their life
time. Gunilda a Virgin (says Sturlesonius) was sent by her Father Odzor Huide
who dwelt in Halogaland to Motle King of Finlapland in Norway to be instructed
in this Art and many arrive to great perfection in these cursed studies. Each
house has peculiar Spirits and of different natures, some being not to be
prevailed upon but by much entreaty, whereas others offer themselves even to
little Children whom they find sit for their turn, so that diverse of the
Inhabitants are almost naturally Magicians even from their Infancy, in which
tender age if the Devil takes a liking to any person as a fit instrument for
his designs, he presently seizes on him by some disease, in which he haunts him
with several Apparitions, from whence according to the capacity of his years
and understanding he learns what belongs to his Art, and becomes so knowing
that without the use of the enchanted Drum (of which we shall relate something)
they can see things at the greatest distance, and are so possessed by the Devil
that they see them even against their will, of which take the following
example. A certain Laplander who is yet alive, upon my complaint against him
for his Drum, brought it to me and confessed with tears, that though he should
part with it, and not make another he should have the same Visions he had
formerly, and he instanc't in my self, giving me a true and particular account
of what had happened to me in my Journey to Lapland. And he further complained
that he knew not how to make use of his eyes since things altogether distant
were presented to them.

This Drum is made out of a hollow piece of wood, and must either be of Pine,
Firr, or Birchtree which grows in such a particular place and turns directly
according to the Suns course, whom they worship with all imaginable devotion
under the Image of Thor; the piece of wood they make it of must be of the root
cleft in sunder, and made hollow on one side, upon which they stretch a skin,
so that it is like a Kettle-drum, on which they paint several red Pictures, and
draw in the middle diverse lines quite cross, upon which they place those Gods
to whom they pay the greatest adoration, as Thor the chief God with his
Attendants which are drawn on the top of the line, after this they draw another
line parallel to the former on which stands the Image of Christ with some of
his Apostles, and above these, Birds, Stars, and the Moon, below the Sun they
paint Bears, Wolves, Rain-dears, Otters, Foxes, Serpents and the like; Upon the
Drum they have a Hand or Index like that of a Clock, and then with an hammer
made of a Rain-dears horn they beat the Drum softly at first, and then louder
till they move the hand over the pictures and find out what they desire, and
hereby they believe they can effect very strange things especially as to their
hunting, their religious affairs, or lastly inquiring of things in Foreign
Countries or at a far distance, both he that beats the Drum and the rest are
all upon their knees; Those who desire to understand the condition of their
Friends, or concerns abroad though at five hundred or a thousand miles distance
go to some Laplander or Finlander skillful in this art, and present him with a
linen garment or piece of Silver as a reward for satisfying their demands; Of
which we read this instance upon record at Bergen a famous Market Town in
Norway where the effects of the German Merchants are registered. In this place
one John Delling then Factor to a German inquired of a certain Finlapper of
Norway about his Master then in Germany, the Finlapper readily consenting to
tell him, like a drunken man presently made a great bawling, then reeling and
dancing about several times in a Circle fell at last upon the ground lying
there some time as if he were dead, then starting upon a sudden, he related to
him all things concerning his Master, which were afterward found to agree to
what he reported; There are many more instances of this kind, the most
considerable is one concerning a Laplander now living who gave Torneus an
account of the Journey he first made to Lapland though he had never seen him
before that time, which though it were true, Torneus dissembled to him lest he
might glory too much in his devilish practices, and rely upon them as the only
means whereby he might attain to truth.

As to the method of making discoveries it is very different; Olaus Magnus
describes it thus; The drummer goes into some private room accompanied by one
single person, besides his wife, and by beating the drum moves the Index about,
muttering at the same time several charms, and then presently he falls into an
ecstasy, and lies for a short time as if dead; Mean while his companion takes
great care that no Gnat Fly, or other living creature touch him; For his Son
his carried by some evil Genius into a Foreign Country from whence it is
brought back with a Knife, Ring, or some other token of his knowledge of what
is done in those parts; Afterward rising up he relates all the circumstances
belonging to the business that was inquired after, and that they may appear
certainly to be true he shows what he brought from thence; Some think them not
really but in appearance dead during this trance, others are apt to believe
that the Soul departs from the Body, and after its travel abroad returns home
again; But without doubt it is impossible either for Man or Devil to restore
the Soul to the Body it has once left, so that it is more probable the Devil
only stifles the faculties of the Soul for a time, and hinders their
Operations. After the Drummer falls down they lay his Drum near his head, and
leave not off singing all the time he lies sweating in this agony, which they
do, not only to put him in mind when he awakes of the business he was to know,
but also to recover him out of his trance, which he would never do, as they
imagine if they either ceased singing or any one stirred him with their hand or
foot, perhaps and this is the reason they suffer no Fly nor other living
creature to touch him, and upon this account only watch him so diligently, and
not out of any fear they have lest the Devil should take away his body, as some
affirm; It is uncertain how long they lie in this manner, but it is commonly
according as the place where they make their discovery is nearer or farther
off, but the time never exceeds twenty fours hours let the place be at never so
great a distance. After which he awakes, and as we have said shows some tokens
to confirm their belief of what he relates to them. Several Inhabitants of
Kiema in Lapland were apprehended in 1671. with Drums for this purpose, of so
large a size that they could not be removed from thence but were burnt in the
place. Among these Laplanders there was one of fourscore years of age that
confessed he was bred up in this Art from his Childhood, who in 1670. upon some
quarrel about a pair of Mittens caused a Countreyman of Kiema to be drowned in
a Cataract, for which he was condemned to dye, and in order to that was to be
carried in chains to the next Town in Bothnia, but in the Journey he contrived
so by his Art that on a sudden, though he seemed well and lusty, he died on the
Sledge, which he had often foretold he would sooner do than fall into the
Hangmans hands. Hist. Lapland. p. 58.

XLVII.
THese Laplanders have likewise Magical Darts of Lead about a finger in length
by which they execute their revenge upon their enemies, and according to the
greatness of the injury received they wound them with cankrous swellings either
in the arms or legs, which by the extremity of its pain kills them in three
days time. They shoot these darts to what distance they please, and that so
right too that they seldom miss their aim; They have likewise another. Devilish
instrument of vengeance called a Ga^ much like a Fly, but really thought to be
some little Devil, of which the Finlanders in Norway who exceed others in this
art, keep great numbers in a leathern bag, and dispatch daily some of them
abroad. Of whom this Story is related that happened not long since; An
Inhabitant of Helieland who is still alive going toward the mountains of Norway
to hunt Bears, came to a Cave under the side of an Hill, where he found an
Image rudely shapen, which was the Idol of some Finlanders, near this stood a
Ganesk or Magical Bag or Satchel, he opened it, and found therein several
bluish Flies crawling about which they call Gans or Spirits, and are daily
sent out by the Finlanders to execute their devilish designs; And it is related
that the Finlanders cannot live peaceably except they let out of their satchel
every day one of these Flies or Devils; But if the Began can find no man to
destroy after they have sent him out, which they seldom do upon no account at
all, then he roves about at a venture, and kills the first thing he meets with;
Sometimes they command it to go into the mountains to cleave Rocks asunder:
However these Conjurers will for very trivial causes send out their Began to ruin
men; This they use likewise as well against one another as strangers, nay
sometimes against those whom they know are their equals in the art.

Of this kind there happened a notable passage betwixt two Finlanders, one of
them called Asbioren Gankonge from his great knowledge in the art, the other
upon some small difference concerning their Skill or some such triflle would
have destroyed Asbioren but was still prevented by his too powerful art, till
at last finding an opportunity as Asbioren lay sleeping under a rock, he
immediately dispatched away a Began that cleft the rock in sunder and tumbled it
upon him. This happened in the time of Peter Claud not long before he writ his
History; Some of their Conjurers are contented only with the power to expel
them, and free men from the mischief that they do them, as also to Beasts. This
is remarkable among them that they can hurt no man with their Began except they
first know his Parents name.

Now all that the Finlanders and Finlappers of Norway effect by their Began, the
Laplanders do by a thing that they call Tire; This Tire is a round ball about
the bigness of a walnut or small apple made of the finest hair of a beast, or
else of moss, very smooth, and so light that it seems hollow, its color is a
mixture of yellow, green and ash, but so that the yellow may appear most, I had
one of them given me (says my Author) by a Gentleman. This Tire they say is
quickened and moved by a particular art, it is sold by the Laplanders, and he
who buys it may hurt whom he pleases therewith; They persuade themselves and
others that by the Tire they can send either Serpents, Toads, Mice, or what
they please into the body of any man to make his torment the greater; It goes
like a whirlwind, and as swift as an arrow and destroys the first man or beast
that it lights on, of which there are daily too many Instances in that Country
which abounds with these miserable Vassals of the Devil. Ibidem. p. 60.

XLVIII.
ANother thing wherein the Laplanders have for many ages been accounted famous
or rather infamous is their selling of Winds to Sailors, to which they have
proper instruments as well as in the rest of their wretched Sciences; They tie
three magical knots in a cord, when they unty the first knot there blows a
favorable gale of Wind, when the second a brisker, when the third the Sea and
wind grow mighty stormy and tempestuous, so that they will neither be able to
direct their Ship, avoid the rocks, or so much as stand upon the Decks or
handle their tackle; Now those that are skilled in this art have command
chiefly over the winds that blew at their birth, so that this wind principally
obeys one man, that another, as if they obtained this power when they first
received their breath; And from hence they are able to stop the course of
Ships, and according to the different affections they have for Merchants can
make the Sea either calmer or more tempestuous. Ibidem. p. 58.

XLIX.
BEfore we leave these Northern Countries it may not be improper to give an
account of some Specters and Illusions of Satan in the seventeen Islands of
Feroe, Subject to the King of Denmark, and all inhabited, as they are published
in the Danish Tongue by Lucas Jacobson M. A. and Provost of the Churches there,
which I shall give you in his own words translated into English. Satan has
endeavored to delude the People of these Islands and to cause them to renounce
the True Religion by several methods, and persuades them to hold their old
Traditions and evil customs, which they do secretly and diligently observe, so
that it is a wonder the Devil does not oftener appear and disquiet them more
than he does; Of which yet we have several notable Instices which I shall
briefly relate. In 1668 Au^^^. The daughter of Olluff Hanson of Velberstat
(...) mist on the way as she was returning from ^^ch having the same day
received the Sacrament ^f me, whereupon in the evening as well as two days
after, they sought for her diligently but could not and her, at last her father
complained to me, and (...) next Sunday August 9. in the Congregation of
^^lbach which I then visited, I earnestly admonished ^^em to fall down with me
before God for the de^verance of that poor Creature; The Almighty ^eard our
prayers and intercessions, for the next day (...) three a Clock afternoon she
was found by some ^^ilkmaids in Suderdal the next Hamlet to Velberstat ^^ing
between two stones at the upper end of the close, having her cloth wrapped about
her head, she would speak to no body that went by, neither durst the Milk-maids
spoke to her, but discovered it to the man of the house who went and spoke to
her, desiring her to rise, which she did, then first speaking to him; And the
man asking her how she came thither, she showed him beyond them a pretty high
Cliff from whence, she said, she glided or slid down, though the man affirms it
was impossible for any one to come down thence without hurt; besides her linen
and cloths were as clean and her shoes as new as the day she was missed, though
there had been during some days and nights great Storms and rainy Weather,
neither according to her own confession did she eat any thing during these nine
days, and yet being come home was well disposed to eat and digest whatsoever
meat they gave her. I have endeavored by all means to make her confess the
whole business to me, but in vain, for she said always she lost her self in the
mountain, which cannot be, the ground lying high, and being but a League broad,
from the top whereof one may see the Sea on both sides, and easily find the
right way, so that a Beast much less ^ reasonable creature could not lose it
self except (...) were on purpose, and it would be great labor to climb up
that high Mountain; but I have found by many other examples that most of these
people who are thus seduced in theit bodies are so likewise in their minds, so
that they will by no means dis^^ver the business, and there are others who do
not well know themselves how it was; Besides I much doubt how this party could
live nine days without meat, since all Physicians agree that the body will be
extremely weakened in that time, and though some Historys relate that Duke
Woldemur, and Duke Erick who were thrown into the Tower of New Kiobing by their
brother Byrge King of Swede^ that they might dye of hunger, Woldemur lived
eleven days without meat or drink, and his brother but three days; Yet this
seems only to be guest at (...) the common people, and has no certainty since
the Chronicle says that the Tower was strongly shut up with Locks and Bars, and
the Keys thereof thrown into the River so that none could tell exactly when
they expired; If one brother as is related lived so long he must have sustained
himself with the body of his dead brother; Whence it follows that this Maid
could not naturally be kept alive without Meat nine days, but that it was some
supernatural power which supported her, and returned her so healthy back again.
Hist. Isles Feroe. p. 257.

L.
THE latter end of that very year, says the same Author, a man of Suderoe was
likewise carried away, as the Parish Minister there Mr. Jacob Christianson writ
me word, and afterward assured me by word of mouth, he was absent several days
but by the prayers of the Minister and Congregation he returned soon after, yet
was dumb for a fortnight, till at length by the renewed supplications of the
People he recovered his speech; At first he uttered several bl^sphemies against
God and the Holy Scriptures, but it was not long ere by the grace of God he
recovered his right sense and understanding, relating; That whilst he was away
he perceived nothing ^^ither knew where he was, but when he was to return he
saw a great many spirits of a very strange shape, who pushed and thrust him
away from them, and then he came back without hindrance. Doubtless the Devil by
the command of God upon the prayers of the Congregation durst not keep him any
longer. Ibidem. p. 362.

LI.
IN 1669. Satan (says this Author) did here torment two Chrildren of a man of
Saxan in Stremoe who was the Minister of North Church Corporation, where of Mr.
Gregory Hanson writ also to me; His ^^me is Mr. Christopher Absolonson; His son
was first troubled by the Evil Spirit but by the assistance of God the Boy
overcame him, so that the Devil ^ed when ever he saw him, and the Boy could
likewise discern when ever he came, but as soon as he began to pray or sing the
Spirit vanished; He also troubled his Sister from the beginning of August to
Christmas, the Maids name is Mary, when the Spirit (...) to her she grew sick,
and has been almost con^^^ally ill and weak of understanding ever since he
begun to trouble her; But that I might have in^urmation thereof I sent for the
Boy from whose ^^outh I received the following Relation. He told (...) be saw
him first about St. Olaus day in the evening standing before the house in the
shape of a great man with gray cloths; The next time he saw him was on
Christmas Eve when he came into the house and took out his sister; Wherefore
the Boy pursued (...) and found him near the River standing near the said who
lay on the ground near the Water, but at the Boys coming he went away; The Boy
carried (...) home to the house she being sick and weak; The Spirit followed
him softly to the house, and when the Boy came out again he stood before it.
Ne^^ day in the evening he came again into the room, and the Boy saw him
leaning against a post, but they being awake, and at prayers he did not stay
long; When he went out the Boy followed him out of doors, whereupon he asked
him, why he followed him. The Boy demanded of him; What he had to do them.
Whereunto he answered, That he should get what (...) came for, No, says the
Boy, you shall never get it (...) all; Whereupon he went away as another man,
yet came again several times that night, but they were watching over the Girl,
and employed continually in Prayers and Singing of Psalms, so that he did them
no harm, only he put out the light, and the Boy grew somewhat sick, the Girl
not being able to speak as long as he was there; Dec. 27. the Boy being absent
the Spirit came in, the Girl sat at the Table playing at Cards, with her other
Brothers and Sisters, when on a sudden the Spirit struck her on (...) side as
she sat with such violence that she spit Blo^^^ after it; The Minister of the
Parish coming afterward to the house sent her over to Got in the Isle of
Osteroe from which time they have perceived nothing of any Spirit or
disturbance. Ibidem. p. 163^.

LII.
THE same Author gives this following Relation ^. It happened about fifty years
ago that them lived a Tenant called Simon Simonson in the ancient. Bishops
House of Kirkeloe, whereunto belongs a little Island under Sandoe, called Hode,
whereon Oxe^ feed Winter and Summer; There was found on this. Island an Ox
which did not belong to the Farmer, nor to any man of the Country, therefore
the Bailiff challenged the propriety of it in the Kings name, and commanded the
Farmer to bring him the said. Ox, which he prepared to do, he with all his
Servants taking a great deal of pains before they could overcome him and lay
him bound in the boat; Which at length they did and departed from the I^^and in
very calm weather, yet was he and all his people carried away by the Ox, or
rather the Devil (...) that shape and never more heard of; The Boat wherein
they were came back empty safe and whole wi^h all the oars to land, so that
there was no sign at (...) they could perish in any other manner; Further(...)
the Countreyman had taken with him into the (...) three of his own Oxen, which
were found swim^^ing in the Sea near the Boat and taken up a(...); This
happened as is well known to all understanding old people in the year 1617.
Ibidem. p. 351.

LIII.
THE following account is likewise given by this Author; Whilst Mr. Taalle was
Minister in (...) it happened that one of his Parishioners was ^^ned away; He
was a young man who was just (...) to be married all things being prepared for
that ^^pose, and the Minister arrived the Saturday be(...) at the Parish, when
the Bridegroom was sud^^ly missing, they sent people to look after him, (...)
he could no where be found; The Minister defind his Friends to be satisfied,
for he was certain he (...) come again, which he did at last, and related, That
the Spirit which led him away appeared in the (...) of a very beautiful woman,
richly clothed who (...) him to forsake her whom he designed to ^^rry, and to
consider how ugly his Mistress was in ^^parison of her, and what fine apparel
she had; (...) declared likewise that he saw the men who sought (...) him, and
that they went very near him but (...) not see him, and that he heard them
calling in and yet had not power to answer them, but that (...) she could by no
arguments persuade him to ^^sent to her desire he was again set at liberty and
^^arped home. Ibidem p. 35.

LIVE.
ANother Relation this Author gives. Mr. Era^mus Ganting Minister of Waagoe
(whose Son Mr. John Erasmusson was my Predecessor in Thorshever his daughter
named Christine being young, went one summers day in the absence of her Father
to play in the Fields with her other young Brothers and Sisters; As they were
playing there came to them a (...) running in the grass, fluttering with her
wings, and the Children running after the Duck, this Girl ran before them, and
coming behind an house after the Duck, they saw neither of them any more,
neither knew what was become of the Child, whereupon the Father being come home
and hearing it was very much troubled, seeking after her with great care, but
could hear of her no where; At last he sought the assistance of Heaven by
prayers and invocations, and going again into the Field made a more strict
sear^h though to no purpose; Eight days after she was (...) he found her unhurt
and warm, lying asleep wrap^ with her headcloth about her head, upon a rock
above an hundred fathoms high just at the brint (...) it; He took her home with
him, but when she (...) to her self she could give no accoont of the mat^^
saying only, That a great man carried her away wh^^ she thought had been her
Father; When she came t^ years she was of a weak understanding, yet was married
in the Country and had many Children; She died a few years since, her mother
and three (...) being yet living. Idem. Ibid.

LV.
OUR Daenish Historian Saxo Grammaticus (said the same Author) is much blamed
by Foreign Writers for having amongst other things inserted in his History
some accidents that seem incongruous to reason especially how King Hading was
led away under the Earth by a Spirit in the figure o^ a woman, and yet came
back again; It may likewise chance that the Ingenious Reader will blame me as
relating Fables, but I know certainly what I write did happen though we cannot
comprehend it by reason, of which as I have already given some Instances I
shall now add a few more of the same kind. In 1665. it happened that a Farmers
daughter in Kalsoe (...) marriageable Maid went in the evening from her (...)
and was lost, so that she was never found since; Neither was there any
likelihood she should be ^^owned, the Sea being far from the House, and she
never having discovered any Melancholy thoughts which should induce her to
destroy her self. Likewise not many years since one Jonas Soideman in Ser^^ag
in this Country was kept by Spirits in a Mountain for the space of seven
years, and at last came back but lived afterward in great fear and
perturbation of mind lest they should again take him away, so that he was
forced to be watched in the night upon that account, and at length out of dread
there(...) he removed from thence to Bergen in Norway; ^^d about thirty years
since it happened that a woman of Westmans Haven in Stremoe was carried away,
who yet by the earnest prayers of the Congregation was found again the eight
day after she was lost, but (...) and yet warm lying in the midst of an
high^ay. Ibidem. p. 257.

LVI.
THE last Relation this Author gives is as follows; Satan has sometimes
endeavored by special ^^ons and Learning to seduce the Inhabitants of these
Islands from the true word of God; For it happened in 1667, that Jacob Oluffson
being then at (...) in Osterne in the twenty fourth year of his age, January 7.
fell sick and kept his bed a fortnight, and Jrenery 20. The fourteenth day of
his disease being (...), at night as he lay asleep there came one into (...)
with shining garments, whereat he wak't and ^^^ceived him in that Shape in the
bed by him, the (...) appearing full of Splendour; He gave the young ^an a
serious salutation asking him where his pain was, whereunto the young man
answered nothing, afterward he stroked him with his hand along the breast and
round about, whereby this young man was presently healed; He then enjoined him
to say a Prayer thrice every day, pronouncing the Prayer three times to him,
whereby the young man learnt it instantly, it was that at the end of Mr. John
T^^masons Psalter, and has been continually used in the houses in the same
Town where that young man lived, and no doubt this Spirit found it there, or
was present when it was read and could therefore repeat it, it being no new
thing for him to speak the word of God, for he made use of David's Psalms
against Gods own Son, St. Matthew. 4.6. Afterward he told the young man that he
should say this Prayer the first time he came to Church, first on the threshold
of the Church door with his face turned from the Church; commanding him to bid
the people say this Prayer also, and admonish them to amend their lives, and
leave off their cursing and swearing, and desist from all other sins, whereby
God would appease his anger.

Having said thus to the Lad, as he was going he added, Rise be thou whole and
sin no more, and so departed from him through the roof hole of the house Five
days after he appeared the second time before it was clear day as the Lad was
sitting in his bed, and sung the twenty third Psalm, My Shepherd is the living
Lord; The young man had a strong inclination to go abroad though he saw
nothing, and putting on his cloths he went out of the house, where he saw in
the South-west the Heavens open, and one coming down from thence, who at length
came and stood by him in the yard with a Priests habit on which reached down to
his feet, the habit being red and white with a red cross on the back, and told
him, He should not at all doubt but he came from G^^, and therewith left him
hastily ascending to the place from whence he came. Next Sunday night Jan. 27.
^e appeared to him the third time as he lay awake in the same form as at first,
and asked him if he had declared what he had commanded; The young man answered,
yes; He replied, Not so earnestly as it ^^ght to have been done, inquiring
withal whether he ^ad not seen some Signs in the Heavens? The Lad answered,
That he had seen no Signs, but other people ^ad seen two Suns in the Heavens,
(Samuel Powelson, Eclender Anderson, Sineve, Jonas Daughter and others of
Eldivig witnessed in Court they had seen these Suns,) He then said, They did
look indeed like Suns though they were not, but a Sign that they should begin
to keep Holiday or Sunday from the time they saw the true Sun arise which was
on Saturday half an hour past twelve in the afternoon, and that the Sermon
which was ^^eached on Sunday should be preached on Saturday in the afternoon,
and that when they rowed out to Church they should sing, My Shepherd is the
living Lord; And (...) the Lad was going to wake his Father-in-Law who then lay
in the bed with him he departed as before through the hole of the Chimney; Next
night Jan. 28. he appeared to him the fourth time, being awake as before; The
young man asked him who he was? He answered, That he was St. John (...) lay in
the bosom of Jesus at the Lords Supper, and (...) no more but vanished away as
formerly; He (...) to him the fifth time in the night presently after Mr.
Hellison the Minister was gone to visit his Congregation, and asked the Lad if
he had declared to the Minister what he had commanded him? The young man
replied, yes; adding, That the Mi^^^ter thought it very strange that he should
appear to him who was so great a sinner; Whereto the pretended St. John
answered, That the Lord had given many (...), and gives yet many that are not
so plain and ^^^fest as to be understood of all.

The news of these Apparitions became public all over the Country, and many
ignorant people put (...) faith therein, whereupon I sent for this young man,
and examined him, earnestly admonishing him that he should renounce all such
delusio^^; but he still persisted in affirming that all was rea^ which he had
related; So that his fame was spread all over the Islands, and in all
Congregations the Vulgar gave great credit to his Visions, especially Servants
for the sake of this New Holyday, which many diligently observed, but yet could
not refra^^ from swearing and cursing, to which they were as much exhorted as
to the other, and added many more Visions and Stories than were true, and used
diverse Arguments to justify the truth of them, whereby many simple Persons
were seduced from the truth of the Holy Scriptures and the commands of Christ,
and rise up against their Teachers, as it happened to me among the rest, I
therefore sent to every Pastor in the Country a true Copy of the young man's
confession, adding my censure of the falsity of them thereto, that they might
read the^ in the Pulpit, and admonish their Hearers to (...) in believing the
Infallible Word of God and (...) seek another way of worshipping him than what
is contained therein; At length it happened that this Spiritual Person, this
Enlightened Soul who had su^^ wonderful Revelations fell the next year by the
inducement of that unclean Spirit into the sin of Fornication; This struck a
great damp into his adm^rers, who then began to believe that it was only a
white Devil that had communicated these things to this young Prophet; Therefore
I referred the great scandal and disturbance he had given to the Congregations
to the Reverend Dr. J. Swaning Archbishop of Zealand in writing, from whom I
rece^ed Orders by the Kings Command that I should publicly reprove and
admonish the said Jacob Oluffson out of the word of God, and likewise upon his
declaring himself sincerely penitent, should absolve him for the same, and
represent to the people their great error; Which was done accordingly (...) St.
John Baptists day 1668. whereby God be ^^ased this design of the evil Spirit
was defeated, and all this emotion suppressed so that nothing of it ^^th been
since observed. Ibidem. p. 385.

LVII.
JOHN of Hemback in Germany, was carried by his (...) Mother who was a Witch to
one of those Night ^eetings where Witches Assemble and Meet the De^^* and
because he had learned to play on the Pipe, he was commanded by her to strike
up, and to get into 2 Tree that they might the better hear the Mu^^^; Which he
doing and looking upon the Dancers ^ow odd and rediculous they were in their
motion and gestures, being struck with admiration at the Novelty of the matter,
suddenly burst out into these words, Good God what a Mad Company have we ^ere!
Which was no sooner uttered but down (...) John, pipe and all, and hurt his
shoulder with the tumbling cast, who when he called to the Company to help him
found himself alone for they were all vanished. John of Hemback told what had
happened, but the people knew not what to make of it till some of that wicked
Crew who danced to his pipe were apprehended upon other suspicions, as
Cathar^^^, Praevotia, Kelvers, Orilla, and others who made good every thing
that John had related, though they knew nothing of what he had told before,
adding also more particularly that the place where he piped to them was
Maybuck. Several other Relations like these Bodin sets down which these
sensible effects of being so far distant from home, and being found naked in
the Fields, and the like, do evince to be no freaks of melancholy but certain
Truths, Ibidem.

LVIII.
IN 1649. a common report being spread of an eminent Wizzard or Conjurer named
Robert or Hob Grieve haunting about the Town of Lauder in Scotland and
deceiving many simple people, he was at length discovered, apprehended and
committed Prisoner in this Town, and after many shifts and denials he was at
length brought to a serious acknowledgment of his guilt, and confessed that he
had been the Devils Officer in that Country above eighteen years for warning
all the Witches and Wizzards thereabout to come to their Assemblys when and
where Satan should appoint them; He also acknowledged that his wife (who about
twenty years before was burnt at Lauder) was the occasion of drawing him into
this cursed confederacy, for they being poor and having little to live on, he
grew discontented with his condition and complained very much of his hard
fortune, which his wife observing desired him not to be troubled, telling him
that if he would follow her counsel she would bring him acquainted with a
Gentleman who should teach him a way how to become rich; To which motion he
readily agreed, and at her desire went down with her to a Wood a Gallowater
near the Stow, when they were come to this place and had tarried a considerable
time, and saw no body, he began to be tired, and told his wife he would be
gone, but she entreated him to stay a while longer assuring him the Gentleman
would not fail her; At length there appeared a great black Mastiff Dog which
ran toward the man, and put him into such a consternation and astonishment that
he knew not where he was; But his wife endeavored to comfort him, still
confidently affirming that the Gentleman would come presently and perform what
he had promised; And accordingly in a short space the Devil presented himself
in the shape of a black man, and fitting his discourse to the man's temptation,
made many promises to him that if he would become his Servant, he would teach
him several ways how to be rich, and to be respected by all the Country; Unto
which proposal of the Devil he confessed he consented not so much in hope of
any future riches as for fear lest he should be instantly destroyed by him, for
he began very much to suspect it was the Devil, who then gave him this charge,
That he should be his Officer to warn all his Hellish Vassals to their
meetings, as was said, wherein he continued till he was apprehended; He was
very ingenious in his Confession whereof this was a strong evidence, That there
was neither Man nor Woman accused by him, but when they were apprehended all
confessed themselves guilty, confirming what he had declared aga^^st them, and
acknowledging the truth thereof to their very deaths.

One instance is remarkable, that after he had discovered diverse, and as many
were taken and imprisoned as the Jayl would convenient hold and the Keepers
could attend, he disclosed another Woman in the Town of Lauder whose name the
Magistrates resolved to conceal till the Prison should be emptied of some of
those who were already apprehended and had confessed; And accordingly all
persons that knew it were enjoined to be secret in the matter; But that very
night the Devil came to her and told her that Hob Grieve had charged her to be
a Witch, but assured her that if she would rise and go and challenge him for
it, and never come away till he and she were brought face to face, that then he
would again deny it; Whereupon she arose and coming to the Prison Window fell a
railing against Hob Grieve calling him Wizzard and Slave to the Devil, with all
other vile names she could utter; And when the Watch and the Magistrates
desired her to go home she sat down upon the Tolbooth stairs and said, she
would never go to her house till she and that Slave of the Devil were
confronted; Whereupon the Bailiff went to the Minister desiring him to come and
persuade her to go home since none accused her; Who accordingly came and
endeavored to prevail with her, but she obstinately refused to go till she
could see that Rascal who had accused her an honest Woman for a Witch; The
Bailiff was at length constrained to comply; Whereupon taking several witnesses
with him she was carried into the room where Hob Grieve was; When she came into
his sight she fell on her knees and began to rail at him, accusing him for a
wicked Liar in nominating her; Thou common Theif, says she, how dare thou for
thy Soul say that ^ver before this time thou saw me or I saw thee, or ever
was in thy company either alone or with others; All which ill language he heard
very patiently till he was desired by the Bailiff to speak; Whereupon he asked
her how she came to know that he had charged her to be a Witch; For, says he,
surely none but the Devil thy Old Master and mine could tell thee so much; She
replied, The Devil and thou perish together for he is not my Master though he
be thine, I defy the Devil and all his works; Whereupon says he; What needs all
this noise, do not thou know that for these many years I have come to thy
house, and warned thee to Meetings, and thou and I have gone thither together;
And then he nominated several places, and told the actions done by her and
others there, to all which, said he, I am an eyewitness; By this discourse she
was so confounded that immediately in the presence of the Bailiff, the
Minister, the Schoolmaster and diverse others she cried out; " O now, says she,
I perceive the Devil is a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning, for this very
night be came to me, and bid me come and abuse thee and never to return till I
had confronted thee, assuring me that thou would deny all and say, Thou false
Tongue thou have lied; Having said thus she with many tears confessed that all
was true which Grieve had said praying the Minister that he would beseech God
to have mercy on her Soul, that she might be delivered out of the hands of the
Devil; She continued in this confession to the day of her death.

Another Evidence of the ingenuity of Hob Grieve was that when five or six Men
and Women whom he had discovered were taken and had confessed their Witchcraft,
he earnestly desired that himself and all the rest might be carried to Church
on the Lords day to hear the Word of God; Which being granted and they
accordingly brought thither with a Guard they all fate down together before the
Pulpit. The Minister preached upon the words of the Father concerning his
Lunatic Child in St. Mark 9.22. And often times it has cast him into the fire,
and into the water to destr^^ him, and the Preacher briefly noted; That
whatever the Devil might pretend to those ever wh^^ he had got any power yet
his cheif^^^d and ^^^^gn always was to destroy the poor Creature both Soul and
^ody. This truth being seriously applied by the Minister to Hob Grieve, and the
rest of the p^^^tent Wizzards and Witches, they were so affected therewith that
they all cried out with a dreadful and lamentable noise, Alas this is a most
certa^^ truth, Oh what will become of us poor wretches! Oh pray for us; But Hob
Grieve especially witnessed to that truth by a general declaration in the face
of the whole congregation, That he had experience of the certainty thereof.
For, said he, there is no trusting in the Devils promises, for once in
Musselburg water when I had a heavy load at my back he thought to have drowned
me there, and since I came into prison he cast me into the fire to destroy me,
as is well known to the Preacher and Magistrates of the place with many others.
And concluded with an exhortation to all to beware of Satan for whatever he
says or does his only purpose is to ruin you, and that you will find to be the
effect of all his temptations, as we by doleful experience know too well this
day.

Another evidence of the Devils malice in studying to destroy poor creatures
was manifest in that very place the same year 1649. A certain woman of the Town
of Lauder was accused for Witchcraft (not by Hob Grieve but some other) she for
a long time absolutely denied all; Whereupon the Magistrates of the place were
very loath to proceed against her, but condemned all the rest who confessed
their crime to dye ordering them to be burnt the Monday after; This woman
hearing of it, and that she alone was to ^^main in prison without hopes of
liberty, she was persuaded by the Devil to make such a confession of her own
accord as she supposed might take away her life, and thereupon sent for the
Minister to whom she declared freely that she was guilty of witchcraft,
confessing many particular crimes committed by her, and in the close she
earnestly desired the M^gistrates and Ministers then present that she might ^e
burnt with the rest on Monday; Her confession was; That she had covenanted with
the Devil and was become his Servant, about twenty years before, when she was
but a young Lass, and that he kissed her and gave her a name, but since he had
never owned her, and that she knew no more of the works of the Devil but that
as she should answer it before God what she had declared was true; Several
intelligent Persons began to suspect the truth of this confession believing
that from the pride of her heart she had in a desperate way made this
confession on purpose that she might lose her life, especially because she so
earnestly desired to dye with the rest on Monday; Therefore several Ministers
and others took much pains on Saturday, Sunday and Monday morning to persuade
her to recede from that confession which was judged to be only a temptation of
the Devil to destroy both Body and Soul; They charged it home upon her
conscience that there was just ground of jealousy that her confession was not
true, adjuring her in the name of God to declare the truth, and not to bring
her blood upon her own head; Notwithstanding all this she still stiffly adhered
to what she had said, and always cried out to be burnt with the rest; Whereupon
on Monday Morning being called before the Judges and there confessing what she
had formerly affirmed she was found guilty, and sentenced to dye with the rest
the same day; Being carried to the place of Execution she was silent during the
first, second and third Prayer, and then perceiving that nothing remained but
to rise and go to the Stake, she rose up and cried out with a loud voice; All
you that see me this day, know ye that I am to dye as a Witch by my own
confession and I free all men especially the Ministers and Magistrates from the
guilt of my blood, I take it wholly upon my self, my blood be upon my own head;
And as I must make answer to the God of Heaven presently I declare I am as free
from Witchcraft as any child, but being accused by a malicious woman and
imprisoned under the name of a Witch, disowned by my husband, and friends, and
seeing no ground of hope of my coming out of prison, nor ever being in credit
again, through the temptation of the Devil I made that confession on purpose to
destroy my own life being weary of it, and choosing rather to dye than to live;
And so she suffered death with Hob Grieve and the rest who (...) their guilt to
the last; This her lamentable speech as it did then astonish all the Spectators
^aw of whom could refrain from tears, so it may be (...) demonstration to all,
of Satan's subtilty, whole de^^n is always to destroy Souls, by tempting many to
presumption and others to despair; The truth of this Relation is certainly
attested by a worthy di^ine now living who was an eye and ear-witness of the
whole matter. Invis. World. p. 45.

LIX.
IN August the same year 1649. One Elizabeth Grabam was apprehended upon some
threatening words she had spoke in her drunkenness to John Runkins wife at
Kilwinning in Scotland, upon which the poor woman ten days after fell sick and
died; Elizabeth or Bessie Graham was hereupon ^^pected of Witchcraft and
imprisoned thirteen weeks during which (says the Relator who was a Minister of
the place) I repaired to her but found her very impenitent; In all her
discourse she was so subtle that I could not get any advantage by her words, so
that I sometimes thought she was an innocent woman, and was much grieved for
her hard usage, if it could have been helped, and secretly wished she had never
been meddled with; Yea I could have been glad she might make her escape, so I
were ignorant of it, for I much feared all we could prove against her would not
be sufficient evidence to bring her to a Trial; Or if she were tried I doubted
the Jury would not condemn her unless I advised them thereto, since we knew
nothing but that she had a bad report, and I was very loath to be so far
concerned, and if I had not, and she should have got her liberty, I should have
then been blamed for not advising them to condemn her; At this instant one
Alexander Bogs who was counted very Skilful in discovering Teats and Marks of
the Devil, being sent for to her, came and found the Mark upon her back bone
wherein he thrust a great brass pin of which she was not sensible neither did
any blood follow when it was drawn out; I judged this but a small evidence in
respect of what I afterward found, yet this somewhat inclined the Judges to
send her Process to Edinburgh where with some difficulty a Commission was
granted to try her; But then my fears augmented, for the chiefest man in the
Parish refused to appear against her professing he thought all that was proved
against her were only idle stories, and some of the Judges were also of that
opinion, however I my self could not but think her guilty, after which there
was further evidence thereof; For Nov. 28. in the evening I went to exhort her
to a confession, Alexander Symson the Church Officer and my own servant being
present, but when I had used many arguments in vain we left her; Coming to the
stair head I resolved to hearken a little what she would say by her self, in a
very short space she began to discourse as if some body had been with her; Her
voice was so low I could not understand what she said, only one Sentence
whereby I perceived she was relating that I had accused her and she had denied;
Soon after I heard another voice whispering as it were to her which I presently
apprehended to be Satan, this discourse continued some time, she speaking and
the other voice answering in a long sentence which none of us could understand,
yea sometimes he began to speak before she had ended so that we could hear two
voices at once; At this Alexander Symson was so affrighted that he cried out,
though I exhorted him with a loud voice not to fear, and so we came all down
stairs I being much satisfied that the business became still more clear.

There are several other remarkable passages concerning Elizabeth Graham before
her death which make it evident that she was guilty of Witchcraft though she
died obstinate and impenitent; Nov. 13. She seemed inclined to a confession,
and promised William Wats to tell me to morrow all that was in her heart, when
I came to her Wats only being present, she said she heartily repented her
mis-spending so much time, but especially her malice toward me which she
affirmed the Devil tempted her to; All which time she spoke with a very low
voice so that we could scarce hear her though we desired her to speak out, and
asked her the reason of it, she replied; That when she endeavored to speak any
thing that was for her Souls good she was scarce able to utter it, but if she
desired to scold and rail as she used to do the Devil gave her strength to
speak as loud as ever she did; A while after I seriously demanded whether she
was guilty of Witchcraft or not? At which words she stared with her eyes round
about the room, and I verily believe she saw the Devil, for immediately after
she began to rail at me though just before she had confessed that her malice
toward me was one chief cause of her grief, and still as she proceeded in
railing her voice became stronger and louder till at last she spoke as loud as
ever before. The Monday after I again visited her, and then she was very bitter
and malicious in her language to me, I questioned her what ground of confidence
she had that it would be well with her Soul; She replied, She had no grounds
yet, for she had been a very wicked woman and had not yet repented, but she yet
hoped she should get repentance, and get Heaven, and a change wrought in her,
and though she was to live but a short while, yet she was sure of it, and that
I should soon see it; I thought she had spoke this in her rage, but in the
afternoon some came and told me that she was fallen to prayers and in many good
words expressed her own vileness and the hopes of Gods mercy, in which strain she
continued till night, when I coming to see her found her as before aggravating
her guilt, and declaring her hopes of Salvation, and her desire to dye, and
using such pithy Scripture expressions so often and so pertinent that I began
much to wonder, considering I had ever found her altogether ignorant in matters
of Religion both before her imprisonment and after, and therefore much doubted
whether it were not a delusion considering she had so confidently foretold it
in the morning, whereupon seriously considering the matter I again questioned
her very strictly whether she were a Witch or not; She freely confessed all
that had been deposed against her which did not certainly evidence her to be
one, but the rest of the particulars she denied as also the crime of Witchcraft
it self, however she said she knew she should dye and desired not to live, and
she thought we would be be clear from her blood before God, for though she were
innocent yet there were so many things sworn against her that we could hardly
believe otherwise of her than we did; She was soon after executed and died
without any acknowledgment of her guilt. Ibidem. p. 120.

LX.
THE following Relation was published in a Sermon preached by an eminent
Minister in Scotland. That Feb. 8. 1578. a company of Drunkards whose names
were Adam Gibbons, George Keeple, John Keysel, Peter Horsedroft, John Warner,
Simon Heamkers, Jacob Hermons, and Hermon Frow, these eight Persons in contempt
of Religion agreed to go to the Tavern on the Lords day to be merry, and coming
to the house of one Anthony Hodge an honest civil man they called for burnt
Wine, Sack, Claret, and what not; The good man refused to give them any
advising them to go to Church and hear the word of God, but they all save Adam
Gibbons refused, saying, They loathed and hated it; Whereupon the Master of the
house departed, who being gone to Church they began to curse and swear wishing
he might break his neck before he came back, and wishing the Devil might break
their own necks if they went from thence till they had some Wine; Whereupon the
Devil in the likeness of a young man appeared to them bringing in his hand a
Flagon of Wine, and drinking to them said, Come good Fellows be merry, you
shall have Wine enough, you seem to be lusty Lads, and I hope you will pay me
well; They replied, they would either pay him or engage their necks for it, yea
rather than fail their Bodies and Souls also. Thus these wicked wretches
continued drinking and roaring so long till they could hardly see one another;
At last the Devil their Landlord told them they must now pay for all, at which
their hearts grew cold, but the Devil bid them be of good cheer for now they
must drink Fire and Brimstone with him in the Pit of Hell for ever; After which
he broke all their necks, and there left them, and thus these Drunkards ended
their miserable days; Which dreadful instance may inform us that God can make
the Devil his Executioner when he pleases to show his vengeance upon notorious
sinners. Ibidem. p. 158.

LXI.
ABout the same time several Witches were discovered in Scotland, and among the
rest a notorious woman called Agnes Symson, of the proceedings against whom,
and diverse others the Records remain in that Kingdom for future ages; She
pretended to skill in Physic, and that she could take the pains of the sick
party upon her self for a time, and then transfer them to a third person; She
used long Scriptural Prayers and Rhymes containing the chief points of
Christianity, so that she seemed not only a white Witch but a devout woman; But
yet she was no better than a Witch and confessed that she answered those
questions which were demanded of her by the assistance of the Devil, and when
she required him to tell her any thing he appeared to her in the shape of a
Dog, and when she would dismiss him she used these words; I charge thee to
depart by the law thou live on, as she did after, inquiring about the Lady
Edmistons sickness; The manner how she raised him was by these words, Elva come
and speak to me, who then instantly appeared like a Dog; She once sailed with
her Gossips and Fellow-Witches in a Boat toward a Ship, where the Devil caused
her and the rest to drink Wine and Beer freely, the Mariners neither seeing
her, nor she them; and when they were departed this malicious Spirit raised a
wind whereby the Ship was cast away; She and her wicked Accomplices Baptized a
Cat and used other cursed Ceremonies to hinder a Noble Person from coming into
Scotland; And raised a Spirit to conjure a Picture of wax for destroying Mr.
John Moscrope.

After her apprehension she confessed more particularly to a Person of Great
Nobility, That the Devil in the likeness of a man met her in the Fields near
her own house at Keith, and commanded her to be at North Berwich Church the
next night; To which place she came on Horseback with her Godson John Cooper at
eleven at night; They danced along the Churchyard Geille Duncan playing on a
Jews harp, and John Feign being mufled led the dance, there were in all above an
hundred Wizzards and Witches that met at this time, six whereof were men and
all the rest women; The women first kneeled and did obeisance to their Master
the Devil and then the men, who afterward turned nine times about, and the
women six times. John Feign blew open the Church doors, and then blew in the
lights which were like great black Candles sticking round about the Pulpit; The
Devil then mounted into the Pulpit appearing like a tall black man, and calling
over the names of his dismal Tribe, every one answered, here; He (...) demanded
if they had kept their promise and had been good Servants and what mischief
they had lone since they met last; After this at his command they opened three
Graves, two within and one without the Church, and then cut off the Fingers,
Toes, and Noses of the dead Corpse which he parted amongst them, and Agnes
Symson got a Winding sheet and two joints for her share; The Devil ordered them
to keep the joints till they were dry and then beat them to powder to be used
for malicious purposes; He then again enjoined them to obey his Orders, and to
do all the evil and Villainy they could; Before they were discharged they were
all obliged to kiss his Posteriors; He was clothed with a black Gown and Coat,
and part of the Assembly stood and others sat; John Feign was always at the
Devils left Elbow, and one Graymail kept the door. This John Feign confessed
that when the Devil appeared to him it was not in Black but White, yet proposed
as Hellish a Covenant to him as the blackest could have done; By whose
assistance he afterward swum in the Sea like a Cork, and raised a wind with a
design to have drowned several Royal Persons by throwing a Cat into the Sea
which the Devil delivered to him and his cursed Confederates, and taught them
to cry Holla when they first cast it in; And afterward raised a mist upon the
same account, by Satan's casting a thing like a football or a wisp of Straw into
the Sea which made a thick Fog arise so that the Ship wherein the Persons
aforesaid were was in danger of being cast upon the Rocks; These and many other
wicked practices being proved both by witnesses and their own confessions
against Agnes Symson, John Feign, and several more of this black Society, they
were arraigned, convicted, and executed for the same according to their
deserts. Ibidem. p. 24.

LXII.
SOme Authors who have writ about Witchcraft do acknowledge that Witches use
diverse Ceremonies for raising of Winds and Tempests, which accordingly follow
these Ceremonies, but that they had come to pass nevertheless without them, but
whether there be any casual connection between these Ceremonies and the ensuing
Tempests I will not curiously decide, only I do assert they are supernatural,
and proceed from the power of the Devil who has his Kingdom in the Air) and
which he likewise inables his Vassals to perform upon occasion, many Examples
whereof are upon Record. One is of a Witch who to satisfy the curiosity of
those that had power to punish her was set free that she might give proof of
what skill she had to raise Tempests. She therefore being let go, presently
betakes her self to a ^^ace thick set with Trees, scrapes a hole with her
(...), fills it up with Urine, and stirs it about so ^^^ng that at last a thick
dark cloud charged with ^bunder and Lightning arises and comes just over their
heads, to the terror and affrightment of the pectators. But she bid them be of
good courage (...) she could command the cloud to discharge upon what place
they would appoint her, which she made ^^od in the presence of all the
Beholders. Phil. Call. p. 92.

LXIII.
ANother accident of the same kind happened in a part of Swevia where a
Countreyman walking over his ground to see his corn in a dry season, his little
daughter being with him, he wished that it might rain a good shower; The Girl
hearing her Father say so, out of her childish simplicity told him, she could
easily procure that for him, the Father wondering at the Child's words asked her
how she could do such a feat, O says she, I learnt this wick of my Mother, and
added, That she could not only cause it to rain but hail, and could raise a
great Tempest and that her Mother was taught by a Master who came to her
privately, and that whatever she desired of him was presently performed, but
that her Mother had strictly charged her to tell no body; The Father much
terrified at this discourse asked her if she had ever seen this Master; The
Girl replied she had seen many come in and go out, whom her Mother said were
their Masters and loving Landlords. Her Father again demanded if she could just
then raise a shower or storm, she replied, I, if she had but a little water; He
therefore brought her to the River where calling upon this Master she instantly
caused it to rain upon her Fathers fields only and not on his Neighbors as he
had commanded her, the man then bid her make it hail only in such a field as he
showed her which she presently effected, who being fully convinced hereby that
his wife was a Witch he brought her before a Magistrate, by whom being examined
and fully convicted of her crime she was burnt for the same, and the daughter
being brought, up in a pious and religious course of life was thereby delivered
from the power and Wiles of the Devil Hist. Specters. p. 123.

LXIII.
BEsides winds sold to Merchants by Laplanders already mentioned; I shall
relate a true Story (says my Author) which I heard from an eyewitness
concerning these Supernatural Winds; At Cambridge in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth there were two Witches to be executed the Mother and Daughter; The
Mother when she was called upon to repent and forsake the Devil said, There was
no reason for that, for he had been faithful to her these threescore years, and
she would be so to him as long as she lived, and thus she died obstinate and
impenitent; But she hanging thus upon the Gallows her daughter being of a
contrary mind, renounced the Devil, was very earnest in prayer, and appeared
extreme penitent, which by the effect, the people conceived the Devil took very
heinously, for there came such a sudden blast of Wind, whereas all was calm
before, that it drove the body of the Mother so violently against the Ladder as
it had like to have overturned it, and shook the gallows with such force that
they were fain to hold the posts for fear all should have been thrown to the
ground. Phil. Collect. p. 90.

LIXV.
I Shall give one Relation from the same learned Author concerning Charms,
which since he judged worth mentioning may not be altogether impertinent; A
Friend of mine told me this Story, says he, concerning Charms; That himself had
an Horse which if he had stood sound would have been of good value. His
Servants carried him to several Farriers but none of them had the Skill to cure
him; At last unknown to their Master they led him to a Farrier who had it seems
more tricks than ordinary and dealt in Charms, Spells, and such like Ceremonies,
by virtue of which he made the Horse sound. The owner of him after he had
observed how well his Horse was, asked his Servants how they got him cured,
from whom understanding the whole matter, and likewise observing that there was
an S^branded on his buttock, which he imagined stood for Satan, chid his
Servants very severely as having done that which was unwarrantable and impious.
Upon this profession of his dislike of the cure, the Horse forthwith fell as
ill as ever insomuch that for his unserviceableness he was fain to be turned up
loose in the pasture. But a kinsman of the Gentleman's coming to his house and
chancing to see the Horse in the grounds took the advantage of a low price for
so fair a Gelding and bought him; The Horse had no sooner changed his Master,
but he presently changed his plight of body, and became as sound as ever.
Ibidem. p. 89.

LXV.
IN 1616 Mr. Alexander Roberts then Minister of Lynn in Norfolk published a
Narrative of the Witchcrafts of Mary Smith, which I shall contract as briefly
as may be; She was Wife to Henry Smith Glover, a woman of a malicious and
envious temper against (...) Neighbors, who gaining more by buying and sel^ng
Cheese than her self, she often times cursed them, and resolved to practice some
mischief against them, ^he Devil who is ready to assist such wicked wretches
(...) their evil designs, appeared to her amidst these liscontents in the shape
of a black man, and in a low hissing voice encouraged her to proceed in
revenging her self upon all whom she hated, and that he would help her to do
it, if she would renounce God and Jesus Christ and enter into Covenant with
him, which she readily consented to, and performed (...) express terms; After
this he presented himself to he^ diverse times, one while like a mist, another
tim^ like a Ball of Fire spangled with black, and last of (...) when she was in
prison and condemned he once appeared like a black man, and then again in the
same form only seeming to have a pair of horns on his head; Having made this
League with Satan he bega^^ to act mischief for her against any she maligned,
The first who tasted of her malice was John Orkton (...) Seaman of a strong
constitution of body, who returning out of Holland happened to strike a Son
(...) this Mary Smiths for some misdemeanor, she hearing him cry out came into
the street Cursing and Swearing most dreadfully against Orkton, wishi^^
earnestly and bitterly that his fingers might rot o^^ He thereupon was taken
suddenly ill in his stomach, and could digest no meat, nor scarce receive any
other nourishment, in this weak condition he continued nine months and then his
grief removed o^^ of his Stomach into his hands and feet, and at leng^^ his
Fingers, and Toes rotted and corrupted so tembly that they were forced to be
cut off; Notwithstanding this calamity he continued to frequent the Sea so long
as he was able, in diverse Merchants Ships having no other way to live, but
could never make a prosperous Voyage like others, either profitable to the
owners or himself; Whereupon he was so discouraged that he left the Trade and
staid at home, where his former malady increasing he went to Yarmouth to seek
assistance from an able Surgeon there, who applied many things for healing his
hands and feet, which in the evening seemed much better, but next morning grew
worse than before, so that perceiving all his labor to be in vain he gave
over, and left the poor creature in a miserable state; The wicked woman
rejoiced at it, and told the Neighbors long before they heard of it, That
Orkton lay a rot^ing, Which words were afterward a notable evidence against her.

The second Person distressed by this Witch was E^^abeth Hanc^^k then a Widow
who going along ^^e stroot, Henry Smith as she passed by his door took ^er by
the hand and told her smilingly, That his Duck (meaning his Wife the Witch)
said she, had s^oln her Hen, which words she passed over as only spoken in
^est, and denied she knew any thing of it; While they were talking the woman
her self came and charged ^er directly with the Hen, wishing that the bones
thereof might stick in her throat when she should ^at it; Which words likewise
she little minded at first, but upon consideration was much grieved to be
^ckoned a Thief, and therefore a while after spying ^e Hen whereof she was
accused sitting on the hatch ^f Smiths door she went to her and being moved a^
the indignity of the slander, told her in some passi^n, That it was very
dishonest in her to blemish the repu^^ion of her Neighbor, with false
aspersions; Smiths Wife enraged hereat cursed her and wished the pox to ^^ght
on her, calling her proud Jenny, and Flurt, and ^aking her hand, bid her go
home, for she should ^epent of what she had said. That very night Mrs. Hancock
was taken with a terrible pain at the heart and felt a sudden weakness in all
parts of her body, yet her appetite no way hindered, in this condition she
continued three weeks but would sometimes go to her door, whom this Mary Smith
seeing, fell a cursing of her and said, What can you yet come to the door? and
at three weeks end being very weak, she came out as usually to take the air,
but this malicious woman ^eeing her began to curse her as before, whereupon
going into her house she fell into such a tormenting ^it, and pinching at the
heart that she swooned away and was hardly recovered in half an hour, being so
grievously tortured all over as if the very flesh had been rent from the bones,
so that she tore her (...) off her head and was like one raving Mad. The same
night the bed whereon she lay was so tossed and lif^ed up and down for an hour
together in the fight of many spectators that she was therewith extr^^^ly
terrified, and did often think in her sleep that she saw Mary Smith before her;
This Fit continued ^^^teen hours during which Edward Drake her Father hearing
of her miserable state came to see her, and out of Fatherly compassion took her
Water and carried it to a Conjurer (which was no way justifiable) who first
told Drake the cause of his coming which was to seek help for his daughter, and
then added, she was so far spent that if he had staid but one day longer the
Woman who had wronged her would have spent her heart, and she had been
irrecoverable, and thereupon showed him her face in a Glass, and gave him a full
account of the occasion of their first falling out about an Hen, which Drake
never heard of before; He then gave his advice how to ease h^^, which was to
make a Cake of Flower mixed with h^^ own Water, and then Bake it on the Hearth,
after this one part was to be applied to the region of the heart, and the other
to the back directly opposite, giving him also a box of ointment like treacle
which was to be spread on the Cake and a powder to be cast on the same, and
certain words written in paper to be laid on likewise with the other; Adding
that if his daughter did not mend within six hours after these applications
there was no hope of her, and desired secrecy in the whole matter since the
Woman who had done the mischief would quickly know how it was done; Being thus
furnished he came back and alighting to go into his daughters house which was
the very next to Mary Smiths who stood leaning at her door, he knew her to be
the same person he had seen in the Glass, who cursed him as he passed by;
Saying, He had been with a Wizzard, and next day told diverse of her Neighbors,
That ^^ake had been to ask Counsel, and made a Witch Cake (...) she would learn
how they came by that Knowledge; Yet by using these things according to
direction Mis. ^^^cock found ease, and was freed from her pains (...) weeks;
After which she was married to Mr. James (...), when a great Cat which this
Witch kept freq^^nted their house, and doing some mischief her husband was so
moved that he thrust her quite through with his sword, notwithstanding which
she ran away, and he after her with a great pike-staff wherewith he struck her
upon the head with all his force yet could not kill her, for she afterward
leapt a yard high in the chamber and crept down stairs, which he perceiving bid
his Boy about fourteen years old drag her to the dunghill but he was not able,
they therefore put her into a Sack where she still moved and stirred, whereupon
they took her out gain and threw her under a pair of stairs intending next
morning to get more help and carry her away, but she could not then be found
though all the doors were locked that night, neither was she ever seen again;
not long after, this Witch came out with a ^oom threatening to knock down Mis.
Scot therewith, and daubing her cloths, which her husband seeing was so
disturbed at this abuse to his wife that (...) threatened if she had any such
Fits again he would certainly hang her; At this she clapped her hands and said,
He had killed her Cat, and within three days after his wife was again afflicted
with the same grief at her heart for two days and a night upon which her
husband threatened this wretched Woman that if his Wife did not mend, he would
accuse her to a Magistrate and cause the rigor of the Law to be executed on
her, yet she found little ease, nor was in perfect health nor soundness of body
to the day of her death.

A third subject whereon she excercised her malice was Cicely Bailey then
servant to Robert Coulton who sweeping the door of her Masters house Mary Smith
began to quarrel with her about it calling her fa^taild-sow but that her
fatness should be shortly abated and pulled down; Next night being Sunday (...)
Cat came and lay upon her breast while she was ab^d wherewith she was so
grievously tormented and oppressed that she could scarce breath, and at the
same instant she perfectly saw Mary Smith in the Chamber who she believed set
the Cat upon her, and immediately after she fell sick, languished and grew
exceeding lean, and so continued half a year till she wen^ to another service,
and then began to recover her former health, for the Witch had foretold, That
so long as she dwelt near her she should never be well but grow worse and
worse, Thus upon every trifle the Devil stirs up his wicked bondslaves to
revenge and mischief, thereby to gratify them for adoring him as this Witch
did, who worshipped him in a very submissive manner upon her knees with many
strange gestures, uttering several broken and imperfect speeches, as Cicely
Bailey did both hear and see, there being only a slight partition between her
house and Cicelys Masters, through a hole whereof she observed and listened
attentively to the rites she performed and the words she uttered, and might
have seen and heard more but that she was so affrighted with what she had
already discovered that she hastened down in great fear and amazement.

The Fourth Person who was indamaged by this Hag was one Edward Newton, who
dealing in Holland Cheese as well as her self she thought he got more prosit
than she, and therefore when ever he bought a bargain of Cheese he was
grievously afflicted, and at length either she or a Spirit in her likeness
appeared as he lay in bed and whisked a wet cloth of a very loathsome smell
about his face; After which he saw one clothed in russet with a little bushy
beard who told him he was sent to look upon a sore leg he had, and to cure it,
who rising to show it him perceived he had cloven feet, and therefore refused
him, who then suddenly vanished out of his sight; These were no vain fancies nor
conceits, but real and certain appearances; After this Smith sent her Imps, a
Toad and Crabs crawling about the room, one of his Servants took the Toad and
put it into the fire where it lay groaning a quarter of an hour ere it was
consumed, during which the Witch endured very tormenting pains, and cried out
in a very dreadful manner; Edward Newton then fell sick which quickly brought
him into a frenzy or distraction yet with some intermissions so that for a
quarter of a year together he would be in his senses and then fall again into
raving fits being deprived of all sense; The joints and parts of his body were
benumed, and he had so many other pains and griefs as disabled him from
following his employments, and being advised to send for the Witch and scratch
her when she came he had no power to use his nails they turning back like
feathers and so continued in a very weak condition.

The last I shall mention is Mr. Thomas Young of London Fishmonger, who coming
to her husband to demand a debt, his wife gave him several curses and
execrations, and three or four days after, Mr. Young going thence to Yarmouth
fell sick there being tortured with exceeding pain and torment, which the most
able Physicians in Norfolk could find no remedy for, so that he continued in
this lamentable state thirteen months and was constrained to go on crutches,
not being able to feed himself, neither did he find any amendment till this
wretched woman was committed to prison being accused for other villainies of the
like nature, at which time as near as he can remember he found some remission
of his former griefs, yet did not perfectly recover his strength, his left hand
becoming lame and useless; Before this happened, a great Spaniel Dog ran over
his bed in his lodging the door being fast shut, and upon strict inquiry no
such Dog was known to have been in the house nor in the whole Town.

After she was committed to Prison several Ministers and others went to see
her, to whom she confessed the contract she had made with the Devil and the
mischiefs she had done the four Persons aforementioned, begging mercy of God as
for all her other sins so especially for that of Witchcraft, renouncing the
Devil, and seeming really penitent for all her former practices; Upon this she
was arraigned and condemned to dye, and in the morning before her execution, as
she was going out of her chamber to confer with some Divines by whose prayers
and instructions she might be recovered out of the Devils hands, he appeared to
her like a black man with horns on his head as is before related, earnestly
persuading her to confess nothing but continue constant to the promise she had
made him, and rely upon him, and then he would certainly save her, though this
is one of his ordinary delusions, who having brought this this poor creature
into his snare, left her to dye a shameful death. When she came to the place of
execution she made an open confession of her sins and profession of her faith,
in the face of the whole multitude, declaring likewise the hopes she had to
obtain a better life hereafter; Being asked if she would have a Psalm sung, she
replied, Most willingly, and desired them to sing The lamentation of a sinner,
which begins thus, Lord turn not away thy face from me, etc. After which she
ended her life, and notwithstanding her wicked life we may have charitable
hopes that she was truly penitent at the last, and rests in peace. Treatise
of Witchcraft.

LXVII.
THE next year after in 1618. Happened a very sad Tragedy in the Family of the
Right honorable the Earl of Rutland whose Children were he ^itched and one
murdered by the devilish malice of Joan Flower and her two dau^^ters Margaret
and Philip who dwelt near Belvoir Castle in Rutlandshire, the Residence of that
noble Earl, and where they were not only relieved but entertained as
Char-women; After which Margaret was admitted to live in the Castle as a
Servant maid, till at length the Countess had information of some misdemeanors
they were guilty of, having notice that the Mother was a very malicious woman
and much given to swearing, cursing and Atheistical imprecations, and that of
late days her countenance was strangely altered, her eyes fiery and hollow, her
speech fierce and envious, and her whole demeanor strange and rediculous,
being much alone and having diverse other Symptoms of a notorious Witch, and her
neighbors reported she had familiar Spirits, and terrified them all with her
curses, and threats of revenge upon the least displeasure was done her; She
likewise heard that her daughter Margaret often carried such great quantities
of provision from the Castle to her Mother as was unfit for a Servant to
purloyn, and at such unseasonable hours that it was believed they could never
maintain their extraordinary riot and expense without robbing their Lady, to
maintain several debauched Fellows who frequented her mothers house for the
love of her youngest daughter Philip, who was likewise leudly transported with
the love of one Thomas Symson, insomuch as he was heard to say she had
bewitched him for he had no power to leave her, though he found himself much
altered both in body and mind since he kept her company.

Such discourses passed concerning them several years before they were
apprehended or convicted, of which the Earl and Countess took little notice by
reason of their cunning observance and modest carriage toward them; At length
my Lord had some suspicion of the Mother, and estranged himself from that
familiarity and discourse he used to have with her, for one Peak having wronged
her she complained to the Earl whom she found unwilling to encourage clamors
and malicious informations, and the Countess discovering some incivilities in
her daughters life, and her neglect of business discharged her for lying any
more in the Castle, yet gave her forty Shillings, a Bolster, and a Bed,
commanding her to go home. Upon this the Mother being upbraided by her
Neighbors, and told that her daughter was turned out of doors, she cursed all
that were the cause of it, and studied to revenge her self upon that Honorable
Family; The Devil perceiving the malicious temper of this wretch, and that she
and her daughters were fit instruments to enlarge his Kingdom, offered them his
service, and that in such a manner as should no way terrify them, nor could
they be suspected to be concerned appearing in the shape of a Dog, Cat, or Rat,
telling them that if they would make a contract with him, they should have
their will upon their enemies and do them what damage they pleased. The
thoughts of doing mischief to their ill-willers easily induced them all to
agree to his damnable proposals, and they consent to be his Body and Soul,
confirming their agreement with abominable kisses, and an odious Sacrifice of
Blood, with certain Charms and Conjurations wherewith the Devil deceived them;
After this these three women became Devils incarnate and grew proud in the
power they had got to do mischief by several Spells and Incantations, whereby
they first killed what Cattle they pleased; Which so encouraged them that they
now threaten the Earl and his Family, who soon after fell sick with his
Countess, and were subject to strange and extraordinary Convulsions, which they
judging only to proceed from the hand of God, had not the least jealousy of
any evil practice against them.

At last as malice increased in them so the Farls Family felt the smart of
their revenge, for Henry Lord Ross his eldest Son fell sick of a very unusual
disease and soon after died; His second Son the Lord Francis was likewise
miserably tortured by their wicked contrivances; And his Daughter the Lady
Katherine was often in great danger of her life by their barbarous dealings, with
strange Fits, etc. the Honorable Parents bore all these afflictions with
Christian magnanimity, little suspecting they proceeded from Witchcraft, till
it pleased God to discover the villainous practices of these women whom the
Devil now left to fall into the hands of Justice for murdering the innocent,
and to remain notorious examples of Gods judgment to future ages; They were
apprehended about Christmas in 1618. and after examination before diverse
Justices of Peace who wondered at their audacious wickedness, were all three
ordered to be carried to Lincoln Jayl; Joan Flower the Mother it is said called
for Bread and Butter by the way, and wished it might never go through her if
she were guilty of that which was charged upon her, and so mumbling it in her
mouth she never spoke a word more, but fell down and died with horrible torture
both of Soul and Body before she got to the Jayl; The two Daughters were
examined before Sir William Pelham and Mr. Butler Justices of Peace, Feb. 4.
1618. where Philip the youngest made the following confession.

That her Mother and Sister were very malicious against the Earl of Rutland,
his Countess and their Children, because Margaret was turned out of the Ladies
service, whereupon her Sister by her Mothers order brought from the Castle the
right hand Glove of the Lord Henry Ross, who presently rubbed it on the back of
her Spirit called Rutterkin, and then put it into boiling water, after which
she pricked it very often and then buried it in the yard, wishing the Lord Ross
might never thrive, and so her Sister Margaret continued with her Mother, and
she often saw her Imp Rutterkin leap on her shoulder and suck her neck, she
confessed also that she often heard her mother curse the Earl and his Lady, and
would thereupon boil blood and feathers together, using many Devilish speeches
and strange gestures, she likewise acknowledged that she her self had a Spirit
sucking her left breast in the form of a white Rat, which it had done for three
or four years past, and and that when it came first to her she gave her Soul to
it, who promised to do her good, and to force Tho. Symson to love her if she
would suffer it to suck her which she agreed to, and that it had sucked her two
nights before.

Margaret her Sister being examined agreed in the confession that Philip had
made of their malice to the Earl, and about the young Lords Glove, adding that
after she had pricked it Henry Lord Ross fell sick within a week, lying in great
torment, and shortly after died, which her Mother hearing of said, It was well.
She further said, that finding a Glove about two years since of Francis Lord
Ross the second Son on a Dunghill, she gave it her Mother who put it into hot
water, and after took it out and rubbed it on Rutterkin her Cat, and bid him go
upwards and afterward buried it in the yard and said, a mischief light on him
but he will mend again; She confessed also that her Mother and she, and her
Sister contrived so to bewitch the Earl and his Countess that they might have
no more Children, for turning her out of the Castle at which her Mother was so
enraged that she swore dreadfully to be revenged; Her malice increasing because
she thought the Earl did not take her part against one Peak who had abused her,
whereupon they took Wool out of the bed the Lady had given her, and a pair of
Gloves of the Earls, and put them into warm water mingled with blood stirring
it together, and then taking them out, rubbed them on Rutterkin her Imp,
saying, The Lord and the Lady should have more Children but it would be long
first. She likewise confessed that she brought her Mother a piece of the Lady
Katherines Handkercher and her Mother put it in water, and rubbed it on her
Spirit bidding him fly and go, whereupon he whined and cried mew, at which she
said, That Rutterkin had no power over the Lady Katherine to hurs her. She also
acknowledged that she had two Familiar Spirits sucking on her, one white, and
the other black and spotted, the white sucked under her breast, and the black in
the lower parts of her body; When she first entertained them she promised them
her Soul, and they covenanted to do all the mischief she commanded them; Lastly
she confessed that Jan. 30. four Devils appeared to her in Lincoln Jayl about
twelve a Clock at night, one standing at her bedside with a black head like an
Ape and spoke to her, but the words she could not understand, at which she was
very angry because he spoke not plainer that she might know his meaning, the
other three were Rutterkin, little Robin, and Spirit, and that she never feared
she should lose her life, nor suspected their treachery till that time.

About the same time Joan Willimot of Goadby a Witch was examined by Sir Henry
Hastings and Dr. Fleming Justices in Leicestershire about the murder of Henry
Lord Ross, who declared, that Joan Flower told her the Earl of Rutland had
dealt badly by her, and had put away her Daughter, and though she could not
have her will of my Lord himself, yet she had sped my Lords Son, and had
stricken him to the heart. She further confessed that to her own knowledge my
Lords Son was struck with a white Spirit, and that she can cure those who send
to her; and that some reward her for her pains, and or others she takes
nothing; Acknowledging that she had a Spirit which she called Pretty given her
by William Berry of Langholm in Rutlandshire to whom she was a servant three
years, and that when her Master gave it her he bid her open her mouth and he
would blow a Fairy into her which should do her good, and accordingly he blowed
into her mouth and soon after there came a Spirit out of her mouth which stood
on the ground in the form of a woman who asked her to give her Soul to her,
which she then promised by the instigation of her Master; She said she never
hurt any body, but helped diverse who were bewitched, and that her Spirit came to
her weekly, giving her an account who were thus afflicted, and that the night
before it came like a woman, mumbling somewhat she could not understand. And
being asked whether she were not in a dream, she affirmed she was awake as much
as at that instant. Another time her Spirit told her there was a bad woman at
Deeping who had given her Soul to the Devil, and that her Spirit did then
appear in a more hideous form than it had formerly done, and much urged her to
give it something though but a piece of her Girdle, saying it had taken great
pains for her, but she refused to give it any thing: She said further that John
Pachet whose child was bewitched to death might have had it alive if he would
have sought help in time, and that Pachets Wife had an evil thing within her
which would make an end of her, which she knew by her Girdle, and accordingly
she died soon after; And that Gamaliel Greet of Waltham in Leicestershire a
Shepherd had a Spirit like a Mouse which went into his Body at the time he
contracted to give his Soul to the Devil, after which if he looked maliciously
upon any thing it received hurt thereby, and that he had a mark on his left arm
which was cut away, of which her own Spirit informed her before he left her;
Upon a second Examination she confessed that Joan Flower and her Daughter
Margaret met together about a week before their apprehension in Black-borrow
Hill, and went thence to Joan Flowers house where she saw two Spirits one like
a Rat, and the other like an Owl, and one of them sucked her right ear as she
thought, and Joan told her that her Spirits had promised she should neither be
hanged nor burnt, and then took up some earth and spit upon it, working it with
her Fingers, and put it into her purse saying, Though she could not hurt the
Lord himself, yet she had sped his Son who is dead.

Another Witch called Ellen Green of Stathorn in Leicestershire was examined
about that time by the same Justices who confessed that Joan Willimot
abovenamed came to her about six years since, and persuaded her to forsake God
and betake her self to the Devil to which she consented, who then called two
Spirits one like a young Cat which she named Puss, and the other in the shape
of a Mole which she called Hiff, Hiff, who instantly came, and Willimot going
away left them with her, after which they leapt on her shoulder, the Kitling
sucking her neck under her right ear, and the Mole under her left in the same
place; After which she sent the Kitling to a Baker in the Town who had called
her Witch and struck her, bidding it go and bewitch him to death, and the Mole
she sent to Ann Daws of the same Town upon the same errand because she had
called her Witch, Whore, and Jade, and within a Fortnight after they both died.
After which she sent them to destroy two Husbandmen named Willison and Williman
who died both in ten days; These four she murdered while she dwelt at Waltham;
When she removed to Stathorn where she now dwelt, upon a difference between her
and one Pachets Wife a Yeoman there, Joan Willimot called her to go and touch
Pachets Wife and Child which she did, touching the Woman in bed, and the Child
in the Midwives arms, and then sent her Spirits to bewitch them to death, the
woman languished a month before she died, but the Child lived only till next
day after she had touched it; Adding that Joan Willimot had a Spirit sucking on
her like a little white Dog which she saw, and that she gave her Soul to the
Devil to have these Spirits at command for any mischievous purpose, and
suffered them to suck her constantly about the Change and Full Moon.

One Ann Baker a Witch was likewise apprehendand examined about the same time
who confessed before Sr. George Manors and Dr. Fleming Justices of Peace that
she had a Spirit like a white Dog which she called a good Spirit, and that one
Peak and one Dennis his wife of Belvoir told her that the young L. Henry was
dead, and that his Glove was buried in the ground, which as it wasted and
rotted in like manner did the Lords Liver rot and waste likewise.

Margaret and Philip Flower were arraigned at the Assizes at Lincoln before Sr.
Henry Hobart and Sr. Edward Bromley Judges, where upon their confessing
themselves actors in the destruction of Henry Lord Ross, with other damnable
practices they were condemned and executed at Lincoln March 11. and the rest
questionless suffered according to their deserts. Discovery Witchcraft.

LXVIII.
IN 1645. there was a notable discovery of several Witches in Essex, and among
others one Elizabeth Clark was accused of this horrid crime, and informations
taken against her before Sr. Harb^ttle Grimston and Sr. Thomas Bows Justices
of Peace for that County; John Rivet of Mannintree deposed that about Christmas
his wife was taken sick and lame with such violent fits that he verily believed
her distemper was more than natural, who thereupon went to one Hovey at Hadly in
Suffolk who was reckoned a Cunning Woman; She told him that his Wife was cursed
or bewitched by two Women who were her near Neighbors, and that he believed she
was bewitched by Elizabeth Clark alias Bedingfield who lived near their house,
and that her mother and some of her kindred had formerly suffered as Witches,
and Murderers.

At the same time Matthew Hopkins of Mannintree declared upon Oath, That this
suspected Witch being ordered by the Justices to be watched several nights for
discovering her wicked practices, he coming into the room where she was with
one Mr. Stern intending not to stay, Elizabeth Clark said if they would tarry
a little and do her no hurt, she would call one of her white Imps and play with
it in her lap, but they told her they would not allow it; After which she in
discourse confessed she had carnal converse with the Devil six or seven years,
who came to her bed three or four times a week in the shape of a proper
Gentleman with a laced band, and would say, Bessie I must lie with you, which
she never refused; About a quarter of an hour after this discourse there
appeared an Imp somewhat like a white Dog with red spots and short legs, which
soon vanished; She said his name was Jamara; Then another appeared like a
Greyhound with long legs which she called Vinegar Tom; She told them the next
would be a black Imp, and should come for Mr. Stern, which came accordingly
and instantly was invisible; The last that appeared was like a Pole-cat but the
head bigger; She likewise confessed that she had five Imps of her own, and two of
the Old-Beldam Ann Wests, and that their Imps sucked upon each other, and that
Satan would never let her rest till she consented to kill the Cattle of Mr.
Edwards of Mannintree and the Horse of one Robert Tailor; Matthew Hopkins
likewise affirmed that going from the house of this Mr. Edwards to his own
about ten that night with his Greyhound, the Dog suddenly gave a leap and ran
as if he had been in a full course after an Hare, and he hastening to see what
it was, spied a white thing like a young Cat and the Greyhound standing aloof
off, and that soon after the Imp or Kitling danced about the Dog and bit off a
piece of flesh from his shoulder which made him come crying to his Master; He
also declared that coming that night into his own yard he spied a black thing
in shape like a Cat but thrice as big sitting on a straw-berry bed and looking
steadfastly on him, but going to it, it leaped toward him as he thought and ran
quite through the yard and the Greyhound after it to the great Gate which it
threw wide open and then vanished; The Dog returned shaking and trembling
exceedingly.

Mr. John Stern confirms the aforesaid Information, adding, That after five
Imps had appeared Elizabeth Clark said she had one more called Sack and Sugar
who had been hard at work but would not be long ere he came and then he should
tear Mr. Stern; And soon after she told him, that it was well he was so quick
otherwise her Imp had soon skipped upon his face, and perhaps had got into his
Throat and then there would have been a nest of Toads in his belly; She said
likewise that she had one Imp for which she would fight up to the knees in
blood before she would lose it.

Francis Mills, Grace Norman, Mary Philips and Mary Parsley who all watched with
Elizabeth Clark declared upon Oath, That about twelve a clock that night she
smackt with her mouth and beckoned with her hand, and instantly there appeared
a white thing about the bigness of a Cat; They also saw five Imps more, whom
she called by the names aforementioned, and told them, that the old Beldam Ann
West did by Witchcraft kill Robert Oaks wife of Lawford, and a Clothiers Child
of Dedham in Essex, both which died about a week before; She added that old
West had the Wife of William Cole of Mannintree in handling, and she died
accordingly soon after of a pining and languishing disease.

George Turner informed upon Oath, that going to see Elizabeth Clark after she
was apprehended, and asking her whether she had any hand in the drowning of one
Thomas Turner his brother, who was cast away at Sea about two years and an half
before, she answered, That the old Beldam West raised that wind which sunk his
Hoy, and that she had no hand in it.

Edward Parsley of Mannintree declared that watching with Elizabeth Clark the
night before, he asked if he should continue in the room with her, who defired
he might if he would fight for her with the Devils for they would come that
night, and one Imp which she called Hoult would come first, and next that which
she called Jamara appeared in the shape of a white Dog with red Spots; and
presently after came Vinegar Tom, and then an Imp she called Sack and Sugar;
She told Edward Parsley that the Devil had taken possession of her six or seven
years, and that he often knocked at her door in the night, and she rise and let
him in, and that he came to bed to her three or four times a week, and had the
carnal knowledge of her as a man.

Elizabeth Clark her self being examined confessed, That about six months before
she met with Ann West Widow in a Field near her house where she was picking up
sticks; West seemed much to pity her for her lameness (having but one Leg) and
her poverty, telling her there were ways and means for her to live much better
than she did; And said she would send her a thing like a little Kitling which
should fetch her home some victuals, and would do her no hurt; And about three
nights after there came a white thing to her, and the night after a gray one,
who spoke and told her, they would not harm her, but help her to a husband who
should maintain her ever after, and that afterward they came into her bed every
other night, and sucked the lower parts of her body; Upon these Informations and
Confessions Elizabeth Clark was Arraigned, Convicted, and Executed at
Chelmsford, March 27. 1645. Inform. Witches p. 6.

LXXV.
ANN Leach of Misley in Essex was likewise apprehended for the same horrid
Crime of Witchcraft at that time, against whom Richard Edwards of Mannintree
deposed; That one Sunday afternoon driving his Cows home by her house a black
Cow of his which he judged to be very well fell down, and died two days after;
and the next day passing by her house again a white Cow fell down and died in
the very same place, and being both opened there could be no disease discovered
which might occasion their death; He likewise declared that some months before
he had a Child nursed by one Goody Wiles who dwelt near Elizabeth Clark and
Elizabeth Gooding another Witch, which Child was taken with strange Fits,
extending the limbs and rolling the eyes, and in two days died, and he verily
believes Ann Leach and Elizabeth Gooding were the death of his Child; and so it
appeared by Ann Leaches own Confession, which follows.

Ann Leach being examined said, That she had a gray Imp sent her and that she
with Elizabeth Clark and Gooding sent their Imps about a year before to kill a
black and white Cow of Mr. Edwards which was done accordingly, there were three
Imps sent, a black, a gray and a white; She likewise confessed that thirty years
before she sent a gray Imp to kill two Horses of Mr. Braggs of Misley, out of
malice to his Wife who told her she was suspected to be a naughty woman; And
that she and Gooding sent each of them an Imp to murder Mr. Edwards Child, hers
being white and the others black, and that she had her white Imp and two others
of Robert Peirces Wife of Stoak in Suffolk he being her brother, and that these
Imps went from one to the other doing mischief wherever they went, and that if
she did not employ them she was never well, but when she sent them to act her
revenge she was very healthy, and that they usually sucked these Teats which
were discovered on her body and often spoke to her in an hollow voice which she
plainly understood assuring her she should never feel hell torments, she
confessed further that upon a small quarrel with Elizabeth the daughter of
Robert Kirk of Mannintree about a Quoif which the Maid refused to give her she
sent her Imp to destroy her, who accordingly lay languishing a whole year and
then died; And that she sent her gray Imp to kill the daughter of the Widow
Rawlins of Misley because she was put out of her farm, and Mrs. Rawlins put in;
She also confessed that she knew of Elizabeth Goodings sending an Imp to vex and
torment John Tailors Wife of Mannintree, and would have discovered it but the
Devil would not suffer her, and lastly that about eight weeks before Elizabeth
Gooding, Ann West and her self met at the house of Eliz. Clark where there was
a book read wherein there was no goodness; She was likewise tried and executed
at Chelmsford the same year 1645. Ibidem. p. 8.

LXX.
HEllen the Wife of Thomas Clark, and daughter to Ann Leach was also accused
for Witchcraft at the same time; Richard Glascocks Wife of Mannintree deposed,
That there happening some difference between Edward Parsleys Wife and this
Hellen, she heard Hellen say as she passed by their door, that Mary their
eldest daughter should rue for it, whereupon the Maid instantly fell sick and
died six weeks after; Edward Parsley her Father confirmed the same, and said he
did verily believe Hellen Clark was the cause of her death, who being her self
examined confessed, That about six weeks before the Devil appeared to her in in
her house in the likeness of a white Dog, and that she called this Imp or
Familiar Spirit Elimanzer, and that she often fed it, and that the Spirit spoke
to her very audible and bid her deny Jesus Christ, which she did then assent
to, but denied that she killed the young Maid. She was executed at Mannintree
April 15. 1645. Ibidem. p. 10.

LXXI.
ANN West and Rebecca her daughter were likewise of this black Society against
whom Prudence the Wife of Thomas Heart of Lawford in Essex deposed upon Oath,
that about eight weeks before going one Sunday to the Parish Church about half
a mile from her house, being about twenty weeks gone with Child, and to her
thinking very well and healthy, upon a sudden she was taken with great pains
and miscarried before she came home; And about two months after, one night when
she was in bed something fell down upon her right side but being dark she could
not discover its shape, and that she was presently taken lame on that side with
extraordinary pains and burning, and was certainly persuaded that Ann and
Rebecca West were the cause of her pains, having expressed much malice toward
het and counted her their greatest enemy.

Mr. John Edes a Minister deposed, That Rebec^^ West confessed to him that
about seven years before she began to have familiarity with the Devil (by the
instigation of her mother Ann West) and that he appeared in several shapes; As
once like a proper young man who desired to have familiarity with her,
promising that he would then do what she desired and avenge her on her enemies,
requiring her also to deny God and put her faith and trust in him, which being
agreed to, she ordered him to avenge her on one Thomas Heart of Lawford by
killing his Son, who was soon after taken sick and died, whereupon Rebecca told
the Minister she thought the Devil could do like God in destroying whom he
pleased, after which she gave him entertainment and he lay with her as a man;
She likewise confessed to him that when she lived at Rivenhall in Essex her
Mother came and told her, The barley corn was picked up, meaning that the Son
of one George Francis a chief Inhabitant of that Town was dead, and his father
very much fuspected he was bewitched to death, and her mother hearing of it
said; Be it unto him according to his Faith.

Mr. Matthew Hopkins deposed upon Oath that going to the Prison where Rebecca
West and five others were, he asked her how she first came to be a Witch, who
told him that her mother and she going one evening after Sunset toward
Mannintree her Mother sharged her to keep secret whatever she saw, which she
promising to do, they went both to the house of Elizabeth Clark, where they
found her together with Ann Leach, Elizabeth Gooding and Hellen Clark, and that
instantly the Devil appeared in the shape of a Dog, then came two Kitlins, and
after them two Dogs more, who all seemed to reverence Elizabeth Clark, skipping
into her lap and kissing her, and then kissed all in the room except her self;
Whereupon one of the Witches asked her Mother if her daughter were acquainted
with the business, who assuring them of her secrecy Ann Leach pulled out a Book
and swore her not to reveal any thing she saw or heard, and if she did she
should endure more torments than there could be in Hell; Whereupon she again
engaged to be silent; They told her she must never confess any thing though the
rope were about her neck and she ready to be hanged; To which after she had
given her absolute engagement the Devil leapt up into her lap and kissed her,
promising to perform whatever she would desire. About half a year after the
Devil appeared as she was going to bed and said he would marry her, which she
could not refuse, whereupon he kissed her but was as cold as clay, and then
took her by the hand leading her about the room and promised to be her loving
husband till death and to avenge her of all her Enemies; She likewise obliging
her self to be his obedient Wife till death and to deny God and Christ Jesus;
She confessed that after this she sent him to kill the Son of Thomas Heart, who
died within a fortnight, and thereupon she took the Devil for her God, and
thought he could do as God.

Rebecca West being likewise examined before the Justices at Mannintree
confessed that all was true concerning their meeting at Elizabeth Clarks where
they spent some time in praying to their familiar Spirits, and then every one
made their desires known to them; Elizabeth Clark requested her Spirit that Mr.
Edwards might be met withal at a Bridge near her house and that his Horse might
be frighted and he thrown down and never rise again; Mr. Edwards deposed that
at the same place his Horse started and greatly endangered him, and he heard
something about the house cry, Ah, Ah, much like a Polcat and that with great
difficulty he saved himself from being thrown off his Horse; Elizabeth Gooding
desired her Imp to kill Robert Tailors Horse for suspecting her to be a Witch,
which was done accordingly; Hellen Clark required her to kill some Hoggs of a
Neighbors; Ann Leach that a Cow might be lamed, and Ann West her Mother
desired her Spirit to free her from all her enemies and to have no trouble; And
she her self desired that Thomas Hearts Wife might be taken lame of her right
side, after which they departed appointing the next meeting at Elizabeth
Goodings House. For these and several other notorious crimes Ann West was
sentenced and executed at Mannintree; Elizabeth Gooding at Chelmsford; And the
Bill found against Rebecca West by the Grand Jury, but was acquitted by the
Jury of life and death. Ibid. p. 14.

LXXII.
ROse Hallybread was another of this black Regiment against whom Robert Turner
of St. Osyth in Essex deposed, That about eight days before his Servant was
taken sick shaking, shrieking and crying out of Rose Hallybread that she had
bewitched him and that he sometimes crowed like a Cock, sometimes barked like a
Dog, and sometimes groaned violently beyond the ordinary course of nature, and
though but a youth strugled with so much strength that four or five lusty men
were not able to hold him down in his bed, and sometimes he would sing several
strange songs and tunes, his mouth not being opened nor his lips so much as
stirring all the time of his singing.

She being examined confessed; That about sixteen years before, one Goody Hagtree
brought an Imp to her house which she entertained, and fed it with Oatmeal and
suckled it on her body a year and an half, and then lost it; She confessed
likewise that about half a year before one Joyce Boanes brought to her another
Imp in the likeness of a small gray bird which she received, and carried to the
house of one Thomas Toakly of St. Osyths and put it under his door, after which
Toaklys Son languished and died, calling and crying out upon her that she was
the cause of his death. She also declared that about eight days before Susan
Cock, Margaret Landish, and Joyce Boanes brought to her house three Imps which
Joyce taking her Imp too carried them all four to Robert Turners to torment his
Servant because he refused to give them some chips his Master being a
Carpenter, and that he forthwith fell sick and often barkt like a Dog, and she
believed those four Imps were the cause of his death; Rose Hallybread was for
this wickedness condemned to be hanged, but died in Chelmsford Jayd May 9.
1645. Ibidem. p. 16.

LXXIII.
Joyce Boanes being examined about the same business confessed, That about
thirteen years before she had two Imps which came into her bed in the likeness
of Mice and sucked on her body, and that she afterward employed them to go and
kill ten or twelve Lambs belonging to one Richard Welsh of St. Osyths which was
done accordingly; And then to the house of one Thomas Clinch where they killed
a Calf, a Sheep and a Lamb; And that she carried the four Imps aforementioned
to kill Robert Turners Servant, and that her Imp called Rug made him bark like
a Dog, Rose Hallybreads forced him to sing several times in the greatest
extremity of his pains, Susan Gocks compelled him to crow like a Cock, and the
Imp of Margaret Landish caused him to groan in an extraordinary manner; Upon
this confession and other evidence Joyce Boanes was condemned and executed at
Chelmsford May 11. 1645. Ibidem. p. 20.

LXXIV.
Susan Cock upon Examination confessed That Margery Stoakes her mother lying upon
her death bed, and she coming to see her, her mother privately desired her to
entertain two Imps, which she said would do her good; And that the same night
her mother died the two Imps came to her accordingly, and sucked on her body,
one of them being like a Mouse which she called Susan, and the other yellow
about the bigness of a Cat which she named Bessie, and that she employed Bessie
with three Imps more belonging to the three Witches abovementioned to kill ten
or twelve sheep of John Spalls, against whom she had much malice because being
with Child and desiring some Curds of his Wife she denied either to give or
sell her any; She also confessed that what was said about Robert Turners servant
was true, and further that she and Margaret Landish sent their Imps to one
Thomas Mannocks of St. Osyth, which killed six or seven of his Hogs in revenge
for his refusing to relieve her, and saying she was a young Woman and able to
work for her living; She and Marguret Landish were both condemned and executed
at Chelmsford, May 12. 1645. with several others; Yea so great a number of
these Vassals of Satan were discovered about this time that there were Thirty
tried at once before Judge Coniers at Chelmsford, July 25. 1645. whereof
fourteen were hanged, and an hundred more detained in several Prisons in
Suffolk and Essex Ibidem. p. 22.

LXXV.
NEither were other Countys free from this Hellish contagion many being
discovered in Huntingtonshire of whom I shall only give you the confessions of
two of the Chief. Elizabeth Weed of great Catworth in that County Widow, being
examined before Robert Bernard and Nicholas Pedley Esquires Justices of the
Peace March 31. 1646. said, That about 21 years before, as she was one night
going to bed there appeared to her 3 Spirits one like a young man, and the
other 2 in the shape of Puppies, one white and the other black; He that was in
the form of a youth spoke to her and demanded, Whether she would deny God and
Christ, which she agreed to; The Devil then offered her to do what mischief she
should require of him provided she would covenant he should have her Soul after
21 years, which she granted; She confessed further, That about a week after at
ten a clock at night he came to her with a paper, asking whether she were
willing to seal the Covenant, she said she was, then he told her it must be
done with her blood, and so pricked her under the left arm till it bled with
which he scribled, and immediately a great lump of flesh rise on her arm in the
same place which increased ever since. After which he came to bed and had
carnal knowledge of her then and many times afterward; The other two Spirits
came into the bed likewise and sucked upon other parts of her body where she had
Teats, and that the name of one was Lilly, and the other Priscill; One of which
was to hurt Man, Woman, or Child, and the other to destroy what Cattle she
desired, and the young man was to lie with her as he did often; And says that
Lilly according to the Covenant did kill the Child of Mr. Henry Bedell of
Catworth, as she required him to do when she was angry, though she does not now
remember for what, and that about two or three days before she sent him to kill
Mr. Bedell himself, who returned and said, he had no power, and that another
time she sent the same Spirit to hurt Edward Musgrave of Catworth who likewise
returned saying, he was not able; And that she sent her Spirit Priscill to kill
two Horses and two Cows of Mr. Musgraves and Thomas Thorps in that Town which
was done accordingly; And being asked when the one and twenty years would be
out, she said, To the best of her remembrance about Low Sunday next; Being
further demanded why she did so constantly resort to Church and to hear the
Sermons of Mr. Pool the Minister, she said, She was well pleased with his
preaching and had a desire to be rid of that unhappy burden which was upon
her. Witches of Huntington. p. 2.

LXXVI.
THE other was one John Winnick of Molesworth in Huntingtonshire, who being
examined April 11. 1646. before the aforesaid Justices Confessed, that about
twenty nine years before he being then a Bachelor lived with one Bateman an
Innkeeper at the George in Thropston, who was likewise a Farmer, at which time
he losing a purse with seven shillings in it, much suspected one of the Family;
But the Friday after being in the Barn making up Hay about noon he fell a
swearing, cursing, and raging, wishing that some Wise Body or Wizzard would
help him to his Purse and Money again, when there presently appeared to him a
Spirit black and shaggy, with paws like a Bear, but no bigger than a Rabbit;
The Spirit asked him what he ailed to be so sorrowful, who answered that he had
lost a Purse and Money and knew not how to come by it again; The Spirit
replied; If you will forsake God and Christ and fall down and worship me for
your God I will help you to your Purse and Money again; To which he consented
and thereupon fell down on his knees and held up his hands. Then the Spirit
told him that to morrow about the same time he should find his Purse upon the
floor where he was making up the Hay, and that he would come himself too; John
Winnick promised the Spirit to meet him there and receive it, and would then
again worship him; And accordingly at the time perfixt he went to the place,
and found his purse on the floor, which having opened he found the seven
shillings therein; As he was looking into it the Devil again appeared to him
and said, There is your Purse and Money in it, and then Winnick fell down on
his knees and said, My Lord and God I thank you; The Spirit at this time
brought with him two other Spirits one like a white Cat and the other like a
gray Rabbit, both for shape, bigness and color, and while he was upon his
knees, the Bear Spirit spoke to him saying, You must worship these two Spirits
as you worship me, and take them also for your Gods. Whereupon he directed his
Body toward them, and called them his Lords and Gods. Then the Bear Spirit told
him, That when he died he must have his Soul, whereunto he yielded; He likewise
told him that they must suck his Body, to which he consented, but they did not
suck at that time; The Bear Spirit promised him he should never want Victuals;
The Cat Spirit that it would hurt Cattle when he would desire it; And that like
a Rabbit that it would hurt whoever he commanded it; The Bear Spirit further
told him that it must have some of his blood wherewith to seal the Covenant,
whereunto he consented and then it leapt upon his shoulder, and pricked him on
the head from whence it took blood, after which all three vanished away; Next
day about noon these Spirits came to him while he was in the Field and told him
they were come to suck of his Body which they did accordingly in the places
where, upon his being apprehended, the marks were found, and from that time
they came constantly once in twenty four hours, sometimes by day but most
commonly by night. And being demanded what mischief he caused any of his
Spirits to do, he answered never any only he sent his Bear Spirit to Mr. Says
Servant of Molseworth to provoke her to steal Victuals for him out of her
Masters house which she did, and he received the same. The Confessions of these
two Persons being so clear, and their cursed confederacy with Satan hereby
fully discovered, they were punished according to their demerits. Ibidem. p. 4.

LXXVII.
Cornelius Agrippa the great Magician going one day out of Town from Lorain in
Flanders where he dwelt left the Keys of his study with his Wife strictly
charging her to let no body go in till his return, but it happened that the
same day, a friend and companion of his came to the house, and having long had
a desire and curiosity to see some of this Negromancers books, he with much
importunity got the Keys of his Closet and then entering the room and viewing
the Books he perceived among the rest a Manuscript of Agrippas own writing
which seemed a Compendium of the mystery of the Black Art, in which while he
greedily reads, he in a short time raises an ill favored Devil, who entering
the Study asked him, what he would have that he conjured him so to appear; The
man being unexperienced and affrighted at this dreadful Apparition knew not
what answer to make, but remained silent, whereupon the Devil instantly choked
him and left him dead on the ground. Not long after Agrippa returns home and
finds the Devil dancing and rejoicing on the top of the house, at which being
astonished he goes into his Study and finds the dead Body; Whereupon he
commands the Demon to enter into it and carry it to the place where the
Students used to meet, which being done and the Spirit then quitting the body
it fell down dead, and the Person was thought to have died of some sudden
disease and was accordingly buried without any observation of his misfortune,
only some marks of strangulation were perceived about his throat; But not long
after the whole matter was discovered, and Agrippa was forced to fly into
Germany for his security. Pil. Gu. p. 298.

LXXVIII.
A Country Peasant in France in his wooden shoes, leather doublet, and
high-crowned hat, with his Scythe on his shoulder, and his Bag and Bottle by
his side, going one day to a piece of ground two or three miles from his
habitation to Mowing, was overtaken by a man on Horseback (as he thought) in
the shape of a Countreyman, who falling into discourse with him about their
Journey, and finding they were both going the same way, he at length offered
him the use of his Horse if he was willing to ride behind him; The honest Mower
glad to ease his legs seated himself behind him much at ease, and thinking now
to proceed in his Journey, he is carried up into the Air with such swiftness
that his astonishment gave him no time to speak, and fear made him and fast by
the Rider; Thus they passed over many Countries and Towns till at last they
came just over a great Marketplace in a City belonging to the Great Turk,
where seeing a multitude of people in strange habits, he cried out, Good God
what people are these, and whither am I going; At that word the wicked Dae mon
let him fall down in the midst of them, but by reason of the Tents and Cloths
that were set up by the Market people to shelter them from the scorching heat
of the Sun the vehemence of his fall was abated, and at length he came to his
Senses; By this time a vast number of Turks were gathered in a Ring at a great
distance about him, some supposing he was a God dropped from Heaven, others that
Old Time was come down with his Scythe on his shoulder. In short all were
extremely amazed as well at his strange and unusual clothing as at his
wonderful coming thither; And their astonishment was yet more increased when
they heard him speak in a strange Language which none of them understood, who
thinking they did not hear him, approaches toward them and they fly as fast
away from him; By this time the news of this rare accident came to the Grand
Seignior, and Interpreters were sent to take a full account of the matter, to
whom the poor man gave an exact relation of all particulars; After which by the
French Ambassadors means he was sent back again to his own Country. Ibidem, p.
286.

LXXIX.
I Shall conclude these Relations with one History more of the appearance and
assistance of a Good Spirit among all the Evil Ones we have mentioned, which a
Learned English Divine has thought worth translating out of Bodinus a famous
Author in his Book of Witches, etc. The main reason why the Society of Good
Spirits is so seldom found in History is as I conceive because so few men are
heartily and sincerely good, and the following Narrative is the more
considerable, because he who writ it had it from the man's own mouth whom it
concerns, and is as follows.

The Person was as it seems an holy pious man, and an acquaintance of Bodinus,
who freely told him that he had a certain Spirit which did continually
accompany him, and which he was first sensible of about the thirty seventh year
of his age, but he conceived that this Spirit had been with him all his life
time, as he gathered from certain monitory Dreams and Visions whereby he was
forewarned as well to avoid several dangers, as many vices and sins; That this
Spirit discovered himself to him after he had for a whole year together prayed
earnestly to God to send a Good Angel to him to be the Guide and Governor of
his life and actions, adding also, That before and after Prayer he used to
spend two or three hours in meditation and reading the Scriptures, diligently
inquiring and considering with himself what Religion among those many that are
controverted in the world might be best, beseeching God that he would please to
direct him to it, and that he did not allow of their way who at all adventures
pray to God to confirm them in that opinion they have already embraced be it
right or wrong.

While he was thus busy with himself in matters of Religion he lighted on a
passage in Philo Judaeus in his Book De Sacrificus where he writes, That a good
and holy man can offer no greater nor more acceptable Sacrifice to God than the
oblation of himself; And therefore following his counsel he offered his Soul
unto God; After this amongst many other Divine Dreams and Visions he once in
his sleep seemed to hear the voice of God saying to him, I will save thy Soul,
I am he that before appeared unto thee; Afterward the Spirit would knock at
his door every morning about three or four a Clock, though he rising and
opening the door could see no body, but the Spirit persisted in this course,
and unless he did rise would thus rouse him up; This trouble and boisterousness
made him begin to conceit that it was some Evil Spirit which thus haunted him,
and therefore he daily prayed earnestly to God that he would be pleased to send
a Good Angel to him, and often also sung Psalms, having most of them by heart;
Therefore the Spirit afterward knocked more gently at the door, and one day
discovered himself to him waking, which was the first time that he was assured
by his senses that it was he, for he often touched and stirred a Glass that
stood in his Chamber, which did not a little amaze him; Two days after when he
entertained a certain friend of his who was Secretary to the King, this friend
was much astonished to hear the Spirit thumping on the bench hard by him, but he
bid him be of good courage, there was no hurt toward him, and the better to
assure him of it told him the truth of the whole matter.

From that time, says Bodinus, he did affirm that this Spirit was always with
him, and by some sensible sign did ever advertize him of things; as by striking
his right Ear if he did any thing amiss, if otherwise his left; If any body
came to deceive or circumvent him, then his right Ear was struck, but his left
Ear if a good man and to good ends came to visit him; If he was about to eat or
drink any thing that would hurt him, or intended or purposed with himself to do
any thing that would prove ill, he was then forbid by a sign, and if he delayed
to follow his business, ^he was quickened by a sign given him; When he began to
praise God in Psalms and to declare his wonderful Acts, he was presently raised
and strengthened with a Spiritual and Supernatural power; He daily begged of God
that he would teach him his Will, his Law, and his Truth, and set one day in
the week apart for reading the Scripture, Meditation, and singing of Psalms,
and did not stir out of his house that day; Yet in his ordinary conversation he
was sufficiently merry and of a cheerful mind, and cited that saying for it; I
saw the faces of the Sai^^ joyful and merry; But in his conversing with others
if he talked vainly or indiscreetly, or had for some days together neglected
his Devotions, he was forthwith admonished thereof in a Dream; He was likewise
admonisht to rise early in the morning, and about four a Clock a voice would
come to him while he was asleep, saying, Who gets up first to prayer?

He told Bodinus also that he was often admonished to give Alms, and that he
observed the more charitable he was, the more prosperous he was; And that one
time when his enemies sought to take away his life, and knew he was to go by
water, that his Father in a Dream brought him two Horses, one white, and the
other bay, and that thereupon he bid his Servant hire him two Horses, and
though he told him nothing of the colors, yet he brought him a white one and a
bay; In all difficulties, Journeyings, and what other enterprises foever he was
engaged in, he constantly used to ask counsel of God, and that one night when
he had begged his blessing, while he slept he saw a Vision wherein his Father
seemed to bless him; Another time when he was in very great danger, and was
newly gone to bed, he said that the Spirit would not let him alone till he had
raised him again, therefore he watched and prayed all that night; The day after
he escaped the hands of his Persecutors in a wonderful manner, which being
done, in his next sleep he beard a voice saying, now sing, He that sits in the
Tabernacle of the most High need never be afraid, etc.

A great many other passages this Party told B^dinus, so many indeed that he
thought it an endless labor to recite them all, what he has set down were as
follows; Bodinus asked him why he would not speak to the Spirit for obtaining
the more plain and familiar converse with it; He answered that he once
attempted it, but the Spirit instantly struck the door with that vehemence as
if he had knocked upon it with an Hammer, whereby he gathered his dislike of the
matter; But though the Spirit would not talk with him, yet he could make use of
his Judgment in the reading of books and moderating his Studies; For if he took
an ill Book into his hands and fell a reading, the Spirit would strike it that
he might lay it down, and would also diverse times, be the Books what they
would, hinder him from reading and writing over much, that his mind might rest
and silently meditate with it self; He added also, that very often while he was
awake a small subtle inarticulate found would come into his Ears. Bodinus
further inquiring whether he ever saw the shape and form of the Spirit, he told
him, That while he was awake he never saw any thing but a certain light very
bright and clear, and of a round compass and figure, but that once being in
great peril of his life, and having heartily prayed to God that he would be
pleased to provide for his safety, about break of day between his slumbrings
and wakings he espied on his bed where he lay^ A young Boy clad in a white
Garment tinctured somewhat with a touch of Purple, and a countenance admirably
lovely and beautiful to behold. This he confidently affirmed to Bodinus for a
certain Truth. Bodinus Mag. p.

Conclusion.
THis last Narrative is so extraordinary remarkable that it may well seem
plainly beyond the power of Human Wit or the Laws of Modesty to determine any
thing therein, though it cannot but amuse a man's mind to think what these
Officious Spirits should be that so willingly sometimes offer themselves to
associate and assist mankind, whether they be Angels that are incapable of
assuming humane shapes, and therefore are seldom visible, or whether they are
the Souls of the deceased who have more affinity with Mortality and humane
frailty than the other and so are more sensible of our necessities and
infirmities having once felt them themselves, which is a reason alleged by the
Apostle to the Hebrews for the Incarnation of our Blessed Savior, who says,
For verily be took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed
of Abraham, wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like his
Brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest; For in that he
himself has suffered, being tempted he is able to succor those that are
tempted; For we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, Heb.
2.16, 17. and 4.15. For separate Souls being in a condition not unlike the
Angels themselves, it is easy to conceive that they may very well undergo the
like Offices.

It may likewise be worth inquiring whether every man have his Guardian Angel
or Genius, or no; That Witches have many (such as they are) their own
confessions preceding do abundantly testify; Some Philosophers were of opinion
that every man had two Genii, a good one and a bad; Which Mahomet has taken
into his Religion, affirming, that they sit on men's shoulders with Table-books
in their hands, and that one writes down all the good and the other all the
evil that a man does; But these expressions seem rather Figurative than natural
and it appears more reasonable that a man changing the frame of his mind and
his course of life changes his Genius withal, or rather that unless a man be
very sincere and single hearted he is left^ to common Providence; As also if he
be not desperately wicked or deplorably miserable scarce any particular Evil
Spirit interposes or offers himself a perpetual assistant in his affairs and
fortunes. But extreme Poverty, irksom Old Age, want of Friends, the contempt,
injury, and hard-heartedness of ill Neighbors working upon a Soul low sunk
into the body and wholly void of the Divine Life, does sometimes kindle so
sharp, so eager, and so piercing a desire of satisfaction and revenge that the
shrieks of men when they are a murdering, the howling of a Wolf in the Fields
in the night, or the squeeking and roaring of tortured Beasts do not so
certainly bring those of their own kind to their aid, as this powerful Magic
of a pensive and complaining Soul in the bitterness of its affliction, attracts
the help of those evil over-officious Spirits, of which there are several
pregnant instances in the foregoing Relations; So that it is probable that they
are often the forwardest to hang Witches who first made them so by their cruelty
and uncharitableness, and it may be have no more goodness nor true piety than
these they so willingly prosecute, but are as wicked as they, though with
better luck or more discretion, offending no further than the Law will permit
them, and therefore they securely let the poor man or woman starve for want of
relief, though with a great deal of clamor of Justice they will revenge the
death of their Hog or Cow.

We may further inquire, why Spirits so seldom nowadays appear, especially
those that are good; Whether it be not the wickedness of the present age, as we
have said, or the general prejudice men have against all Spirits that appear,
which they straightway declare to be Devils; Or whether it arise from the
frailty of humane Nature that is not usually able to bear the appearance of a
Spirit no more than other Animals are, for into what Agonies Horses and Dogs
are cast upon their approach we have already heard, and is in every ones mouth,
and may be a good circumstance to distinguish a real Apparition from our own
fancies and imaginations which these Creatures are not capable of; Or lastly,
whether it be the condition of Spirits themselves, who it may be without some
violence done to their own natures cannot become visible, it happily being as
troublesome to them to continue visible for some time as it is for men that
dive to hold their breath in the water; yet it does not follow from hence that
there are no such Appearances though some it may be will not believe it because
they themselves never saw any, for that can be no evidence that they are not
extant in nature, since every man has a reasonable Soul in himself which is an
immortal living Spirit, and yet none ever saw it forsaking its Habitation and
leaving the Body, for as long as we are in this mortal Body we can naturally
see nothing but what is corporeal, nay our eyes are so weak that we cannot
discern many real substances without the help of an Instrument invented for
that purpose.

To confirm this truth of Apparitions if we will but admit the free confessions
of Witches concerning their Imps, which we find they so frequently see and
converse withal, know them by their names, and do obeisance to them, the point
would be quite put out of all doubt, and their proofs would be so many that no
vollume would be hardly able to contain them; But these our Adversaries say are
all metancholly old Women who dote and bring themselves into danger by their
own Fancies and Conceits; But that they do not dote I am better assured of
(says my Author a very learned Person) than of their not doting that say they
do, for to satisfy my own Curiosity I have examined several of them, and they
have discourst as cunningly as any of their quality and education^; But by what
I have read and observed I discern they serve a very perfidious Master who
plays wreaks many times on purpose to betray and destroy them; I demand
concerning these Witches who confess their contract and frequent converse with
the Devil, some with him in one shape, others in another, whether mere
melancholy and imagination can put Powders, Ointments, and such like things
into their hands; Can impress Marks and Teats upon their Bodies so deep as to
take away all sense in that place; Can put Silver and Gold into their hands
which afterward proves but either Counters, Leaves, Shells, or some such like
useless matter; These real effects cannot be mere melancholy, for if a man
receive any thing into his hand be it what it will there was some body that
gave it him, and therefore the Witch receiving some real thing from this or
that other shape which appeared unto her, it is an evident sign it was an
external thing that she saw, and not a figure only of her melancholy
imagination. There are innumerable examples of this kind besides those I have
set down, which are undeniable to all men of sense, so that we need not farther
insist upon them; And from the whole (says my Author) I am not ashamed to
profess that I am as well assured in my own Judgment of the Existence of
Spirits, and the Appearance and Communication of Evil Ones too, and with
Witches, as that I have met with men in Westminster Hall, or seen Beasts in
Smithfield.

FINIS.
There are Newly Published one and Twenty other very useful, pleasant and
necessary Books, all sold by Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near
Cheapside.
I. FEmale Excellency or the Ladies Glory, Illustrated in the Worthy Lives and
Memorable Actions of Nine Famous Women, who have been renowned either for
Virtue or Valor in several Ages of the World, As, I. Deborah the Prophetess.
II. The Valiant Judith. III. Queen Esther. IV. The Virtuous Susanna V. The
Chaste Lucretia. VI. Voadicia Queen of Britain in the Reign of Nero Emperor of
Rome, Containing an Account of the Original Inhabitants of Britain. The
History of Danaus and his Fifty Daughters who murdered their Husbands in one
night; Of the Arrival of Brute. Of the Two Giants Corineus and Gogmagog; Of
King Lear and his Three Daughters; Of Belin and Brennus who took the City of
Rome; Of the manner of Julius Caesar's invading Britain, and of the Valor of
Voadicia under whose conduct the Britains slew seventy thousand Romans, with
many other remarkable particulars. VII. Marianne Wife to King Herod. VIII.
Clotilda Queen of France. IX. Andegona Princess of Spain. The whole adorned
with Poems and Pictures to each History. By R. B. Price One Shilling.

II. A View of the English Acquisitions in Guinea and the East Indies. With an
Account of the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents,
Monsters, and other Observables in those Countries. And among others, the Life
and Death of Mahomet the Grand Impostor, with the Principal Doctrines of the
Turkish Religion as they are displayed in the Alcoran. Two Letters, one written
by the Great Mogol, and the other by the King of Sumatra in the East Indies, to
our King James the First, of an unusual and extravagant style; The cruel
Executions in those Parts; With the manner of the Women's burning themselves
with their dead husbands. Together with a Description of the Isle of St.
Helena; And the Bay of Souldania where the English usually refresh in their
Voyages to the Indies. Intermixed with pleasant Relations, and Enlivened with
Picture. Price one Shilling.

III. THE English Empire in America, or a Prospect of his Majesty's Dominions
in the West Indies, namely, New Foundland, New England, New York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Bermuda's, Barbuda, Anguilla,
Montserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevis or Nevis, St. Christophers,
Barbados, and Jamaica; With an Account of their Discovery, Situation and
Product; The Religion and Manners of the Indians, and other excellencies of
these Countries; To which is prefixed a Relation of the first Discovery of this
New-World, and of the Remarkable Voyages, and Adventures of Sebastian Cabot,
Sir Martin Frobisher, Captain Davies, Captain Weymouth, Captain Hall, Captain
Hudson, Sir Thomas Cavendish, the Earl of Cumberland, Sir Walter Rawleigh, and
other English Worthies to diverse places therein. Illustrated with Maps and
Pictures of the strange Fruits, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects, Serpents, and
Monsters found in these Parts of the World. Pr. 1. s.

V. ENglands Monarchs, Or, A Compendious Relation of the most Remarkable
Transactions, and Observable Passages Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military,
which have happened, during the Reigns of the Kings and Queens of England, from
the Invasion of the Romans, under Julius Caesar, to this present; Adorned with
Poems, and the Pictures of every Monarch from King William the Conqueror, to
our most gracious Sovereign King James the Second, with his present Majesty's
Life, Heroic Actions, and other Occurrences to this time: The names of his now
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council; The Great Officers of the Crown: A
List of the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Bishops, Barons and Deans; The
Knights of the most Noble Order of the Garter at Windsor, and the Principal
Officers, Civil and Military in England. The number of the Lords and Commons,
who have Votes in both Houses of Parliament; and many other very useful
particulars. Price One Shilling.

V. THE History of the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, containing, 1. An
Account of the most Remarkable Transactions and Revolutions in Scotland for
above Twelve hundred years past, during the Reigns of Sixty eight Kings, from
the year of our Lord 424. to the Happy Union of both Kingdoms under King James
the Sixth of Scotland and first of England, of Blessed Memory, in 1602; and
among other particulars, the lamentable Murder of King Duffe, with the strange
Discovery and Punishment thereof: The wonderful History of Mackbeth and the
Witches, with the many Notable Occurrences in his Reign. 2. The History of
Ireland from the Conquest thereof unto King Henry the Second to this time; With
a Relation of the Miraculous Persons and Places in that Country; A full
Account of St. Patrick's Purgatory, and diverse other memorable Matters.
Intermixed with Variety of Excellent Speeches, Strange Accidents, Prodigious
Appearances, and other very considerable things both pleasant and profitable:
With a List of the Nobility and Great Officers of State in both Kingdoms.
Illustrated with near Thirty Pictures and other extraordinary Observables.
Price One Shilling.

VI. DElights for the Ingenious, In above Fifty Select and choice Emblems
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, Curiously Engraven upon Copper Plates;
with Fifty delightful Poems and Lots, for the more Lively Illustration of each
Emblem; Whereby Instruction and Good Counsel may be promoted and furthered by
an honest and pleasant Recreation. To which is prefixed, An Incomparable Poem
Entitled, Majesty in Misery, or an Imploration to the King of Kings written by
his late Majesty, King Charles the First, with his own Hand, during his
Captivity in Carisbrook Castle, in the Isle of Wight, 1648. with a curious
Emblem. Collected by R. B. Price half a Crown.

VII. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts, containing, I. The
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful Signs, and Prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; With an Account of the most famous
Comets, and other Prodigies, from the Birth of Christ to this time. II. The
Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent Buildings, and other curious
Inventions in all Ages; as, the Seven Wonders of the World, and many other
excellent Structures and Rarities throughout the Earth, beautitified with
Sculptures. Price One Shilling.

VIII. TWo Journeys to Jerusalem, Containing first, A strange and true Account
of the Travels of two English Pilgrims some years since and what Admirable
Accidents befell them in their Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria,
etc. With the wonderful manner of hatching many Thousand Chickens at once in
Ovens. Secondly, The Travels of Fourteen Englishmen in 1669. from Scanderoon to
Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah, Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the River of Jordan, the
Lake of Sodom and Gomorrah, and back again to Aleppo. With the rare
Antiquities, Monuments, and memorable places and things mentioned in the Holy
Scripture; and an exact Description of the Old and New Jerusalem; to which is
added, a Relation of the great Council of the Jews assembled in the Plains of
A^ayday in Hungary, 1650. to examine the Scriptures concerning Christ. By S. B.
an English man there present: With the notorious Delusion of the Jews, by a
counterfeit Messiah, or false Christ, at Smyrna in 1666. and the event thereof.
Lastly, The fatal and final Extirpation and Destruction of the Jews throughout
the Kingdom of Persia, whereby many thousands of all Qualities and Ages were
cut off in 1666. and the remarkable occasion thereof. The Epistle of K. Agbarus
to our Savior, with our Savior's Answer; Beautified with Pictures. Price One
Shilling.

IX. THE Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland containing an Impartial Account
(...) all the Battles, Sieges, and other remarkable Transactions, Revolutions
and Accidents which have happened from the beginning of the Reign of King
Charles the First, 1625. to His Majestys happy Restoration; The illegal Trial
of King Charles I. (...) large, with his last Speech at his Suffering. And the
most considerable matters till 1660. With Pictures of several Accidents. Price
One Shilling.

X. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present State of
London and Westminster, showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Court, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
occurrences, for above nine hundred years past, in and about these Cities; to
the Year 1681. Illustrated with Pictures, with the Arms of the 65 Companies of
London and the time of their Incorporating. Price One Shilling.

XI. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities and Wonders in England Scotland, and
Ireland, or an Account of many remarkable persons and places, and likewise of
the Battles, Sieges, Prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders and other considerable Occurrences and Accidents for
many hundred years past. Together with the natural and artificial Rarities in
every County in England, with several curious Sculptures. Price One Shilling.

XII. WOnderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories, containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and perjured Villains. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
etc. 3. Remarkable predictions and presages of approaching death, and how the
event has been answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers,
etc. 5. Admirable Deliverances from Immi^en^ Dangers, and Deplorable Distresses
at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine Goodness to Penitents, with the Dying shoughts
of several famous Men, concerning a ^^re state after this Life. Imbellished
with diverse Pictures. Price One Shilling.

XIII. THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Devotions, consisting of Morning and
Evening Prayers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day in the Week, in order
to a more Solemn Preparation for the worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion:
Representing the several steps and degrees of the Sorrow and Sufferings of our
Blessed Savior, till he gave up the Ghost; As, 1. His Agony in the Garden. 2.
His being Betrayed by Judas. 3. His being falsely Accused, Smitten Buffetted and
Spit upon before Caiphas the High Priest. 4. His Condemnation, Scourging,
Crowning with Thorns, and being delivered to be Crucified by Pontius Pilate. 5.
His ^^aring his Cross to Golgotha. 6. His Crucifixion and bitter Passion.
Lastly, Our Saviors Institution of the Blessed Sacrament. Together with brief
Resolutions to all those Scruples and Objections usually alleged for the
omission of this important Duty. With Eight curious Sculptures, proper to the
several parts. To which is added, The Devout Christians Daily Sacrifice or
Morning and Evening Prayers for every day upon Ordinary Occasions; with Graces.
Price One Shilling.

XIV. THE Young Man's Calling, or the whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassio^ate Address to all young persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
Young Persons of both Sexes, as well ancient as modern, who have been famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations; namely, on the Lives of Isaac and
Joseph in their Youth. On the Martyrdom of seven Sons and their Mother; of
Romanus a young Nobleman, and of diverse holy Virgins and Martyrs. On the Lives
of King Edward 6. Q. Jane, Q. Elizabeth in her Youth, Prince Henry Eldest Son
to King James, and the young Lord Harrington, etc. With Twelve curious Pictures
illustrating the several Histories. Price Eighteen Pence.

XV. THE English Hero: or, Sir Francis Drake Revived. Being a full Account of
the Dangerous Voyages, Admirable Adventures, Notable Discoveries, and
Magnanimous Achievements of that Valiant and Renowned Commander. As, I. His
Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the West Indies, where they saw a Pile of
Bars of Silver near seventy foot long, ten foot broad, and 12 foot high. II.
His incompassing the whole World in 1577. which he performed in Two years and
Ten months, gaining a vast quantity of Gold and Silver. III. His Voyage into
America in 1585. and taking the Towns of St. Jago St. Domingo, Carthagena, and
St. Augustine. IV. His last Voyage into those Countries in 1595. with the
manner of his Death and Burial. Recommended as an Excellent Example to all
Heroic and Active Spirits in these days to endeavor to benefit their Prince
and Country, and Immortalize their Names by the like worthy Undertakings.
Revised, Corrected, very much enlarged, reduced into Chapters with Contents,
and beautified with Pictures. By R. B. Licensed according to Order. Price One
Shilling.

XVI. THE History of the Nine Worthies of the World; Three whereof were
Gentiles; 1. Hector Son of Priamus King of Troy. 2. Alexander the Great King of
Macedon and Conqueror of the World. 3. Julius Caesar first Emperor of Rome.
Three Jews. 4. Joshua Captain General and Leader of Israel into Canaan. 5.
David King of Israel. 6. Judas Maccabeus a Valiant Jewish Commander against the
Tyranny of Antiochus. Three Christians. 7. Arthur King of Britain, who
courageously defended his Country against the Saxons. 8. Charles the Great
King of France and Emperor of Germany. 9. Godfrey of Bullen King of Jerusalem.
Being an account of their Glorious Lives, Worthy Actions, renowned Victories
and Deaths. Illustrated with Poems and the Picture of each Worthy. By R. B.
Price One Shilling.

XVII. A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, Brief Directions to all Christians how to
attain Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts, As
I. Saving Faith discovered in Three Heavenly Conferences between our Blessed
Savior and 1. A Publican. 2. A Pharisee. 3. A Doubting Christian. II. The
Threefold state of a Christian. 1. By Nature. 2. By Grace. 3. In Glory. III.
The Scriptures Concord, compiled out of the words of Scripture, by way of
Question and Answer, wherein there is the sum of the way to Salvation, and
Spiritual things compared with Spiritual. IV. The Character of a True
Christian. A brief Directory for the Great, Necessary and Advantageous Duty of
Self Examination, whereby a serious Christian may every day Examine himself.
VI. A short Dialogue between a Learned Divine and a Beggar. VII. Beams of the
Spirit, or Cordial Meditations, Enlivening, Enlightening, and Gladding the Soul.
VIII. The Seraphick Souls Triumph in the Love of God. With short remembrances
and Pious thoughts. IX. History Improved or Christian Applications and
Improvements of some remarkable passages in History. X. Holy Breathings in
several Divine Poems upon diverse Subjects and Scriptures. Price One Shilling.

XVIII. YOuths Divine Pastime; Containing Forty Remarkable Scripture Histories,
turned into common English Verse. With Forty curious Pictures proper to each
Story; very delightful for the virtuous employing the vacant hours of Young
Persons, and preventing vain and vicious Divertisements. Together with several
Scripture Hymns upon diverse occasions. Price Eight Pence.

XIX. UNparrallel'd Varieties, Or the Matchless Actions and Passions of
Mankind; Displayed in near four hundred notable instances and examples;
Discovering the transcendent effects; 1. Of Love, Friendship, and Gratitude. 2.
Of Magnanimity, Courage, and Fidelity. 3. Of Chastity, Temperance and Humility;
And on the contrary, the Tremendous Consequences, 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and
Ingratitude, 5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity and Treachery, 6. Of Unchastity,
Intemperance and Ambition. Imbellished with Proper Figures. Price One Shilling.

XX. EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men; with the strange Events,
and signal Mutations and Changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious Places
and Persons in all Ages; Being an account of a Multitude of Stupendous
Revolutions, Accidents, and Observable matters in States, and diverse Provinces
throughout the whole world, The Cruelties usued by the Turks upon the
Christians at Argiers, their manner of selling Slaves, etc. The dreadful Mutiny
in the City of Naples in 1647. and how Massanello a Fisher-boy ruled there for
10 days, with greater Power than any King or Emperor. An account of several
Nations destroyed, or driven from their Habitations by Gnats, Moles, Pismires,
Sparrows, Locusts, Hares, Conies, Fleas, Frogs, Mice, Grasshoppers, Serpents,
Worms, and other inconsiderable Creatures; The Tragical Deaths of John and
Cornelius de Wit, at the Hague in Holland. Remarks on the Life and Death of Sir
W. Rawleigh, with his last Speech and Behavior on the Scaffold; with Pictures.
Price One Shilling,

XXI. WInter Evenings Entertainments in Two Parts; Containing, 1. Ten Pleasant
Relations of many Rare and Notable Accidents and Occurrences; with brief
Remarks upon every one. 2. Fifty Ingenious Riddles, with their Explanations,
and useful Observations; and Morals upon each. Enlivened with above Threescore
Pictures, for Illustrating every Story and Riddle. Excellently Accommodated to
the Fancies of Old or Young, and useful to cheerful Society and Conversation.
Price One Shilling.

FINIS.

