SAMSON a Type of CHRIST: IN A SERMON PREACHED At Mr. Pomfret's Meeting House
in Gravellane near Hounds-ditch, London: At the Morning-Lecture, on July 22.
1691. FROM Judge. xiv. 5. Then went Samson down, and his Father and his Mother,
to Timnath; and came to the Vineyards of Timnath; and Behold, a young Lion
roared against him.

WHEREIN IS SHOWED, I. In Six particulars, How clearly Samson does Type forth
Jesus Christ, viz. (1.) In his Conception and Birth. (2.) In his Education and
Manner of Life. (3.) In his Work and Office. (4.) In his Manner of Warfare.
(5.) In his Marriage. (6.) And lastly, In his Death. And, II. With respect unto
Samsons Marriage, (treated of in the Text) like as Samson went down to Timnath
a City of the Philistines to take a Wife: So Jesus Christ came down from Heaven
into this sinful World, to Redeem and Espouse his Church to himself. III. As
Samson loved and married an Uncircumcised Woman, and one that belonged to the
House of his Enemies the Philistines: So Jesus Christ Loved his Church when she
was Uncircumcised in Heart, polluted in her Blood, and when residing in the
House of his Enemies, the Fallen Nature, he took her to himself. IV. As Samson
did overcome the Young Lion which opposed him: So Jesus Christ does overcome
and destroy that roaring Lion, the Devil, that opposes him.


Published at the Request of the Congregation, for Public Good. By D. C. an
unworthy Servant of Christ.

LONDON, Printed for William Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-street, 1691.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
IT has been, and is, to all the truly Godly, in this present Age, an occasion
of great Trouble and Sorrow of Heart, to see the World so exceedingly declining
the Ways of God, and reducing it self into such an height of Conformity to the
Will and Ways of the Devil, in this Generation; even superabounding with all
manner of Sin, and abominable Wickedness, and that in such measures (to speak
no further) as former Ages have been absolute strangers to: And indeed, to see
this in France, Spain and Italy, where it is to be feared they very much
content themselves with the very Name of Christians, being with respect to
Faith and Worship, even drowned in Idolatry and Superstition, is a great pity,
but not so much to be admired: But now to see this Notorious wickedness, and
these unheard of sins, So much in Credit and Practice in England, I say in
England, a Nation so much admired and cried up for Learning, Piety and Gospel
Light; truly this is not only much to be pitied, but also very much to be
admired. And again, were but this Sin and Wickedness Thus in Credit and Practce
among the Carnal and Irreligious ones, Who either profess nothing at all, or
else content themselves with mere formal Worship, in the mean while Denying the
Life and Power of true Godliness; then it would not seem half so strange
neither: But now, that this Sin and Wickedness is as much, if not in some
respects more, in Credit with, and in Practice amongst, them, that of late
years have born the Rod of Persecution for Conscience Sake: Who have not only
Dissented from what they perceived in others to be too superstitious, but have
separated from the Ways of the Vulgar, and have joined themselves to the Lord,
and to one another, in the strictest Sincerity and Zeal. Now I say, that this
Sin and Wickellness should so easily get amongst, and be so readily entertained
by these, yea by These; O this is not only an occasion of pity, but of Great
Admiration and Astonishment to and amongst all truly fearing God at this day.
But if any say, What sin is there amongst such? I answer, What sin is there
amongst such? Nay, thou may rather say, What sin is there not amongst such?
Yet I do not mean sins manifestly Gross and notoriously wicked; such as is
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Swearing, and apparently loose Living: No, but I mean
this Abominable Spirit of Pride, which certainly was scarce ever before at the
height to which it is now arrived, both Externally and Internally, both in City
and Country: For though it may be within, when it does not manifestly appear
outwardly; yet when it is so highly apparent without, there is black work
within for certain. And also this excessive Covetousness, yea and that with
respect unto Gospel-matters; of which (I fear I may too truly speak it) the
Ministers are too highly (not to say most highly) Guilty: For Souls and
Congregaetions are by many slighted and over-looked, where there is not that
Honor, Advantage, Entertainment and Esteem which this Ambitious Age calls for.
And hence it comes to pass that the city is ready to surfeit with Superfluity,
while the Country is almost starved for want of Supply, etc. And it is well if
too many, who have formerly condemned others, for that, for which they were
indeed highly worthy of blame, do not now themselves in this time of Liberty
fall into the same snares with them: Besides, there is a spirit of Envy and
Evil-will, with the which the Minds of most Professors at this Day are too
highly influenced; which generally arises from a desire, which now reigns in
the Hearts of most to be Great and Lordly among, if not over their
Fellow-brethren; the sad Effects whereof many Congregations are too highly
sensible at this day: But when Samson comes down to Timnath, viz. When Christ
comes down in more Light, Life and Power by the Gospel, and amongst his People,
to the overcoming and flaying of this Lion, the Devil, the grand Author of all
these Troubles Then will the Trumpet of the Gospel sound a Retreat, in order to
the bringing back of backsliding Sion to her first Husband: Concerning which
(Reader) thou have a short Account given thee in this ensuing Discourse; which,
though it be unpolisht, wanting those learned Phraises and Terms of Art so much
in use at this day, yet the Simpleness and Plainness thereof, may be
Advantageous to such as are of mean Capacities; and such as are otherwise, are
desired to look over the same.

And further know, that when it was preached, it was not at all designed for
the Press: No, nothing less was in the Authors thoughts: But it being publicly
requested before the Congregation went away, for that the People then present
seemed to be very much Affected therewith; the Author was thereby engaged,
together with some other reasons of the like Import, to give way to the same,
not much regarding what in a way of Derision may be charged upon him for the
same.

And now, Reader, that thou may be Benefited, and the Lord alone Exalted, is
both the Design of this, and Desire of him, who remains a hearty Well-wisher
to all the whole Israel of God,

From my Chamber (for the present) in Lawrence-lane, near Cheap Side, London,
July 28. 1691. David Crossey.

SAMSON a Type of CHRIST.
JUDGES xiv. 5. Then went Samson down, and his Father, and his Mother, to
Timnath, and came to the Vinyard of Timnath; and behold a young Lion roared
against him.


BELOVED, It is worth the serious Observation of all sincere Christians, to
take notice, How God in days of old (especially in the middle Age of the World)
did lead his Church and People, by Types and Figures, to the Knowledge of Jesus
Christ, as by him appointed to be the only Savior of all that believe in his
Name throughout all Ages.

SO that few Kings in, or Judges over Israel, for many hundred years together,
but did in one thing or another, less or more, Typically represent Jesus
Christ, in his Person, Works, or Offices; as many both then, and also since,
have to their comfort and benefit observed.

AMONG whom Samson, of whom our Text treats, shines in this respect, as a
Star of the first magnitude; and does in many things as clearly (if not more
clearly) Type forth Christ, than any of them all; and that in many particulars.
But I shall only mention six. 1. In his Birth. 2. In his Education. 3. In his
Office and Government. 4. In his manner of Warfare. 5. In his Marriage. 6. In
his Death.

1st. IN his Birth, 1. In that it was foretold by Angels, Judge. 13.3.
Answerable to the Birth of Christ, Luke 1.31. 2. In that it was in a time of
Isreal's so great Bondage and Captivity, Judge. 13.1. So the Birth of Christ was
in like manner when the Scepter was departed from Judah, and all the World came
up to be taxed by Augustus Caesar, Luke 2.1, 2. 3. In that it was in a time of
Isreal's so great Darkness, Blindness and wickedness, chapter 13.1. So the Birth of
Christ, of whom it is said, When he comes, shall he find faith on earth? Luke
18.8. See also Joh. 1.10.

2dly. IN his Education, in that he was a Nazarite unto God from the Womb,
devoted to the Lord from his Birth; and that not at his Parents Discretion, as
Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.11. but of the Lord's own Choice, Judge. 13.5.

3dly. IN his Office and Government, he was, 1. To be a Deliverer to Israel,
Judge. 13.5. 2. A Judge over Israel, Judge. 16.31. to save and defend them from
the Philistines, who then so grievously oppressed and distressed them:
accordingly as Christ was appointed and exalted of God to be a Prince and a
Savior in and over his Church, the Government whereof was and is upon his
shoulders, Isa. 9.6. Act. 5.31. And him it is that is in the midst of her, and
therefore she shall not be moved, Psalm. 46.5. His tabernacle is in the midst of
her, and he will surely plead her cause. For whosoever touches her, touches
the apple of his eye, Zech. 2.8.

4thly. IN his manner of Warfare; and indeed this is worth the noting, and most
observeable, in that when Samson went to War with, or to Battle against his
Adversaries; as he often did, he never gathered together Armies of Men, nor
called in Assistance from the People, as did others of the Judges and Kings of
Israel. Nay, what Judge, Prince, King, or Monarch, did we ever read or hear of,
that did not so, excepting him alone? But as for him (the Spirit of the Lord
first coming upon him) he always went forth in his own Person against them,
generally without any Weapons but what Providence brought to his hands: And yet
we do not read that ever he went forth but he prevailed; he never Engaged, but
he always Conquered, and came off Victorious, (except in the Matter of Dalilah,
wherein he resembles not Christ, but a Christian,) in all things else he was
ever successful, putting whole Armies to flight, and overthrowing the power of
the Philistines in such a manner as gave way to Isreal's Restoration, both with
respect to their Rights and Liberties. So that hence note, 1. That he finding
Israel in so great Slavery and Bondage to the uncircumcised Philistines, did
first restore, set free, and redeem them, both with respect to their Liberties
and Laws, in Persons and Estates, making them again a free Nation. And then, 2.
He did Judge, Defend and Preserve them in the Liberties and Rights unto which
he had restored them. And all this he did in his own Person, without having any
Assistance or Counsel from his Brethren: No, all he got from them, was by them
to be delivered Bound into the Philistines hands, had not the Lord rescued him,
Judge 15.11, 12, 13. which was but a fad requital for the many and great
Kindnesses he had done them. But he takes all patiently from them, desiring
only of them, that they would not lay hands on him themselves.

And now who sees not in all this, how clearly he types forth Jesus Christ, the
Heavenly and Spiritual Judge of the whole Israel of God, who taking up the
(otherwise Lost) Cause of fallen Man, in order to the bringing about of his
Restoration and Redemption, first humbles himself, and becomes like one of his
Brethren, yet without sin, having both Natures in the unity of his Person; in
which Person he goes forth against all the powers of Sin, Death and Hell, in
the name and behalf of Man lost in the Fall, and so proclaims open War against
all Powers and Principalities opposing Man's Salvation. Against whom, upon
every Engagement, he still gets the victory, and comes off victorious in spite
of all Oppositions, not ceasing both to proceed and prevail till he has
completed the work of his Peoples Redemption and Salvaaion. And all this he
does not only in his own Person, but also in his own Power, as the Son of God;
for otherwise he acknowledges he could do nothing, Joh. 5.30. (even as Samson
without his seven Locks was weak, and but as another man, Judge. 16.17.) But
Christ, as the Son of God, trod the Wine Press alone, Isa. 63.3. bore the Wrath
and Curse of God, endured the most bitter pangs of Death, and most intolerable
torments of Hell, till the Father beheld, and said he was satisfied, Isa.
53.11. Mat. 17.5. and thereby he stopped the mouth of devouring Justice, and
took away by his Obedience, Passive and Active, all Power of Condemnation from
the fiery Law, with respect to all New Covenant Members; and so he ascended up
on high, and led Captivity Captive, depriving Death of its Sting, and the Grave
of its Victory; thereby fulfilling every Condition in the New Covenant, whereby
it is made entirely free of it self, and the Members thereby are made entirely
free also in themselves, as they come actually by Faith, through true
Regeneration, to be invested therein. Here note, that Christ finding his People
in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity; dead in Sins and Trespasses;
shut up under Gates of Brass, and Bars of Iron; charged with an infinite Debt,
and for that exposed to eternal Misery, if not immediately set free; and also
insulted over by the Devil, and trampled upon by all the powers of Hell: I say,
Christ, when first appearing in the Flesh, finding his Inheritance given him by
the Father, Joh. 7.6. thus given over to Strangers, does first release and set
them all at liberty, by paying all their Debt for them, and suing forth of the
Court of Heaven a free and full Discharge in their behalf; subduing withal in
due time all their Enemies both within and without, does in the second place
defend and preserve them in this liberty and heavenly freedom to which he has
restored them: And all this by virtue of his own Power and Merit, without any
assistance from them either in whole or in part. Nay, He, as Samson, was
delivered up by his Brethren, the Men of his own Nation, into the hands of
heathen Infidels, to be Crucified and put to death, a sad requital to him for
his kindness. Nay, further I may speak it, and you hear it with sorrow and
shame, Where is the Christian who in a spiritual sense does not again and again
give Christ over, so far as lies in his power, to be Crucified over and over,
by giving way to the Enemy to take possession of his Heart? But happy they that
lay not hands upon him themselves, on purpose and in despite, for that is the
unpardonable Sin. But I haste.

5thly. SAMSON typifies Christ in his Marriage. This is the Point upon which
our Text treats, we will therefore pass it by till we come to the words.

6thly. HE typifies Christ in his Death: For it is said of him, That he gave
his Enemies a greater stroke, and did more execution among them at the day of
his death, than he had done in all his lifetime, Judge. 16.30. Which is more
especially true in Christ Jesus; for he gave the Powers of Hell a greater
stroke at the day and hour of his Death, than he had done in all his Lifetime
by his Word and Miracles; for then it was that by death he overcame him that
had the power of death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 2.14. Then it was that he took
away the Handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to
us, nailing it to his Cross, Col. 2.14 and having spoiled Principalities and
Powers, he made a Show of them, openly triumphing over them in it. Then it was,
that through the Eternal Spirit he offered up himself to God without spot;
whereby he became the Mediator of the New Testament, to the end, that by the
means of Death, for the Redemption of the Transgressions that were under the
First Covenant, they which are called might receive the promise of an Eternal
Inheritance, Heb. 9.15. Then it was that he was once offered to bear the sins
of many, and unto them that look for him, he will appear the second time
without sin unto Salvation: Blessed are all they that wait for him in sincerity.

BUT I come to the matter in hand.

AND in the first place I would note by the way four things, from the four
first Verses of this Chapter, antecedent to our Text.

1st. SAMSON's falling in Love with a Woman in Timnath, a Daughter of the
Philistines, ( Ver. 1.) and from hence I observe, That as Samson loved this
Philistine Woman, though dwelling in the House of his Enemies, and so by nature
one of them; so also Jesus Christ loved his Church when in the House of his
Enemies, viz. the fallen Estate; and not only so, but whilst she was an Enemy
he laid down his Life for her, Romans 5.8.

2dly. THE oppositions he met with from his Father and his Mother in the
pursuit of his Desires in taking her to be his Wife, ( ver. 3.) and hence I
observe, That Persons out of a sincere Zeal, may sometimes oppose God in his
most Wise and often times various Dispensations.

3dly. THE Reasons moving them so to do, ( ver. 3.) which was, because she was
a Stranger of another Nation, and uncircumcised; and the Israelites were
forbidden to Marry with such by the Law, Deuteronomy. 7.3. And from thence I observe,
That God can turn all things, yea even sin it self, so, as that it shall
conduce abundantly to his Glory and his Peoples good, benefit and advantage.

4thly. I would note Samson's Answer to his Father and Mother when by them
opposed for loving of this Daughter of the Philistines, Get her for me, for she
pleases me well. And from hence I observe, 1. That as no Oppositions nor
Persuasions could remove Samson's Affections from this Philistine Woman, so
nothing, no not sin it self, could nor can ever be able to separate or remove
the Love of Christ from his Church, Jer. 31.3. Romans 8.38, 39. But contrariwise,
the Love of Christ will move him to separate and remove all sin, with whatever
else offends him, from her, in his own time. 2. As the want of Circumcision,
and several other things required by the Law, could not prevent Samson's loving
and marrying of this Philistine Woman, so want of inherent Qualifications, etc.
cannot hinder Christ's loving and espousing of his Church to himself, Ezekiel.
16.6, 7, 8. But contrariwise, his Love to her has, does, and will move him to
wash and cleanse her, fit and qualify her, renew, enrich, and adorn her so, as
may render her most well-pleasing in his Eyes, Ezekiel. 16.9, 10, 11, 12, and 13.

AND this brings me to our Text, in which I would note four things also.

1st. SAMSON's Journey down to Timnath, a City of the Philistians, and from
hence take this Proposition; That as Samson went down to Timnath, a City of the
Philistines, to take a Wife from thence; so Jesus Christ came down from Heaven
into this sinful bewildered World to purchase Marriage, and Betroth unto
himself his beloved Church and Spouse, Hos. 2.19. Jer. 3.14.

2dly. HIS occasion thither, which was to Marry the Woman whom Love
(notwithstanding her nonconformity to the Laws and Customs of Israel) had made
so well-pleasing unto him. And from hence take a second Proposition, That as
Love was the only impulsive or moving cause which brought Samson down to
Timnath to Marry this Woman, who otherwise could not have been acceptable to,
no more than she was in an Eye of reason fit, for him: so likewise mere Love
was the impulsive cause which alone moved Jesus Christ to come down upon the
Earth to Marry his Church unto himself, whom had she not been so loved by him,
could never have otherwise been acceptable to him, being in her fallen Estate,
in an eye of reason upon all accounts so unfit for him.

3dly. HIS Company which went down with him, which was his Father and his
Mother, he would do nothing in the case without their Company and Consent,
which affords us this third Proposition, That as Samson, notwithstanding the
ardency of his Love, would do nothing without the knowledge, advice, company
and consent of his Father and Mother; so Jesus Christ in all his Proceedings in
and toward his Church, did not only in all things conform to the Will of his
Father, but also had the Father still present with him to bear him company,
Mat. 26.39. And so much was he delighted therein, that when, through excessive
sorrow and trouble, he had but the least apprehension of his Fathers absence,
how vehemently did he cry out, Ely, Ely, Lama sabachthani, i. e. My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me, Mat. 27.46. Oh happy that Man or Woman among us
this day, that is thus tender on, and desirous of the Heart-inriching
Soul-ravishing Love, Company and Presence of Jesus Christ.

But again, 4thly. LET us note the terrible opposition that Samson met with in
his Journey, even when he came nigh to the place; so the Text, coming to the
Vineyards of Timnath, Behold, a young Lion roared against him: Young, noting
vigor and nimbleness; a young Lion, noting strength, cruelty and fierceness, a
frightful Adversary indeed, especially considering how unprepared Samson was to
an eye of reason for such an Assault; which affords us this fourth and last
Proposition, viz. That as Samson in going about to Marry and Espouse this Woman
of Timnath, this Daughter of the Philistines to himself, met with many
oppositions, but more especially this young Lion; so Jesus Christ in
endeavoring the Redemption and Espousal of his Church unto himself, has and
does meet with many oppositions, but especially that roaring Lion the Devil, 1
Pet. 5.8. For, 1. when he was in the Flesh in order to the Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption, how often did this Lion, this Devil, set upon him, and not
contenting himself with daily troubling, vexing and persecuting of him by his
wicked Instruments the Jews, he first drives him into the Wilderness to tempt
him there, where he deals with him as it were Hand to Fist, but still does no
good. Again, 2. He stirs up his Disciples to molest and grieve him, first Peter
by his fleshly advice; hence Christ says, Get thee behind me Satan, etc. Mat.
16.23. Then, secondly, Judas to betray him; for says the Text, Satan entered
into him again. Thirdly, Peter to deny him, and that with Oaths, saying, I know
not the Man. Oh horrible! And after all this, he again comes himself (as it
were) accompanied with all the Powers of Hell to assist him, and taking him at
the greatest disadvantage, even when under the heavy burden of his Fathers
Wrath, according to Psalm. 69.26. as designing, if possible, at once to strike
him down to Hell for ever. But blessed be God, it was not possible, etc. Joh.
14.30. The prince of this world comes and has nothing in me. See then the
Devils Malice, though he had nothing in Christ, yet would he not cease to
afflict Christ whilst in his reach; and he carries the same mind toward
Christians also, Luke 22.31, 32. Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to have you,
that he may sift you as Wheat, etc. Again, secondly, when he comes in the
Spirit, in and by the Gospel, actually to call and unite his People to himself,
the Devil still cease not to interrupt him in his Proceedings, if by any
means he can, although in this respect he does not directly so much fight
against Christ as Christians; for he knows he can do no good with him, he long
since overcame him upon Mount Calvary, Heb. 2.14. By death he overcame him that
has the power of Death, even the Devil. And now seeing he can do no good on
Christ the Husband, he desires to have poor Believers the Church, that he may
try and sift them as Wheat: And truly, Beloved, the Devil has put many a poor
Christian hard to it, he has made many a one cry out, Oh what shall I do? And
I doubt not but many of you in this Congregation have met with him to your
sorrow; and so by woeful experience know these things I now speak to be true.

BUT to all you that are laboring in this bitter warfare and hour of trial,
this day of Jacob's trouble, let me say thus much to you, Have a care of
trusting to the Arm of Flesh, and of putting confidence in Man; Have a care of
selling your selves for naught, by putting confidence in that which cannot
save; but consider our great Samson is spiritually come down in and by the
Gospel, and he is among us and present with us, and if he do but as much as
show his Head or make bare his Arm in any of our Hearts and Souls, then the
Devil is gone, he is fled, and though we seek him at such a time we cannot find
him; and why? well, because Christ is come down to dwell with us. Oh, Sirs,
could we but live more by Faith with and in Christ, we should be less troubled
with the Devils Company. But I haste.

BELOVED, time will not permit me to speak to all these Four Propositions thus
raised from the words, I shall therefore make choice of the Fourth and last of
them, for the subject of my remaining Discourse at this time, viz.

THAT as Samson in going about to Marry and Espouse this Woman of Timnath, this
Daughter of the Philistines to himself, did meet with many Oppositions, chiefly
this young Lion; so Jesus Christ endeavoring the Redemption and Espousal of
his Church to himself, has and does meet with many Oppositions and Opposers,
but especially that roaring Lion the Devil.

IN the handling of which Point, I shall observe this Method:

First, TO show the State and Condition of Christ's Church in general, and
every Member thereof in particular, before called by, and United or Married
unto Jesus Christ.

Secondly, I shall consider whether the Church first seeks unto Christ, or
Christ unto the Church, in order unto the effecting of this Blessed Union or
Marriage.

Thirdly, MENTION some of the greatest Lets, Hindrances and Impediments, which
do most interrupt this Blessed Union and Agreement betwixt Christ and his
Church.

Fourthly, I shall give you some Cautions in order to a timely prevention of
the dangers occasioned thereby.

And, Lastly, MAKE some short Application.

First, I shall show the State and Condition of Christ's Church in general, and
of every Member thereof in particular, before called by, and United or Married
unto Jesus Christ: but I must be brief in the whole.

And, First, THE State of Christ's Church in general, and of every Member
thereof in particular before called, etc. is a State of Deadness: This is plain
from Paul's words to the Church at Ephesus, Fph. 2.1. But you has he
quickened, who were dead in sins and trespasses. See also verse. 4, and 5. Now
this deadness is twofold: 1. A deadness to God and all Goodness: And this
deadness is, 1. Absolute: And, 2. Universal. 1. Absolute, not a deadness in
part, as some do vainly imagine, as if Man was partly dead, and partly alive to
God by Nature: No, for Man is wholly dead, so as that there is no Spiritual
Life to Heavenly things remaining in him. 2dly, It is an Universal deadness, or
a deadness throughout: Death, says the Apostle, Romans 5.12. past upon all men,
for that all have sinned: And as it passed upon all, so it obtained a Complete
Dominion over all; so that take an unconverted Man, that is altogether natural,
and such a Man is, with respect unto God, a dead Man; his Heart, his Will, his
Mind, his Affections, together with all other Faculties of the Soul, are
altogether dead, and lifeless. And, secondly, it is a deadness in sin, not to
sin, for so is the truly godly, according to their measures, but a deadness in
sin: Hence note, a natural Man thus dead in sin, is First not sensible of sin;
secondly, he is not troubled for sin; thirdly, he is not burdened with sin;
fourthly, he has no true desire to be delivered from sin: true, he may have
some Convictions, and perhaps sometimes sharp ones too, but it is either not
for sin as sin, or else but for some particular Acts of sin more notorious than
ordinary; in the mean while, not seeing that his whole Nature is polluted, and
that the best of his Actions, whilst out of Christ, is but as filthy Rags,
which instead of meriting any good thing for him, does rather, like the Blood
of Abel, cry to Heaven for vengeance upon him; for without Christ we can do
nothing, John 15.5. that is, nothing well-pleasing to him, for whatsoever is
not of faith is sin. O that the World could once be brought to see this! then
Men would have done talking of Free Will, and of a power in Man, whilst in
Nature, to do that which is good; then would they be brought off trusting in,
depending upon, or boasting of their own Righteousness; then should we all fall
down as one Man before the Lord, crying out as with one Voice, Oh wretched men
that we are, who shall deliver us from this body of sin? Romans 7. 24. Then
should we know what Christ means in that notable place, John 5. 24, 25.

But, Secondly, THE State of Christ's Church in general, and of every Member
thereof in particular, before called by him, etc. is a State of Hardness and
desperate Wickedness; but still I mean as to the things of God: for, alas! if
the Devil tempt, if the World allure, if the Flesh lust after its own things,
if any Profit, Pleasure, Honor, Preferment, or Advantage be offered to us, Oh
how soon then have we an Eye to see, an Ear to hear, and an open Heart to
receive these things, though tending never so much to our Souls ruin and
destruction! but on the other hand, God may call and call again, he may stand
at the Door and knock day after day, he may cry aloud in our Ears by his Word,
Works and Providence, he may threaten Death, Damnation and Destruction by the
Law; and again sweetly tender Grace, Mercy, Forgiveness of Sins and Salvation,
by the Gospel, time after time, and in Sermon after Sermon, and yet for all
this, Man, whilst in Nature, has neither Eye to see, Ear to hear, nor Heart to
receive: Oh sad Condition!

But again, Thirdly, THE State of Christ's Church in general, and of every
Member thereof in particular, before called by Christ, etc. is a State of
Blindness and Insensibility; for though Man in this Estate lie in the Gall of
Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity, chained up in the Devils Prison, where Satan
himself is Jailer, though he be in a State which if lived and dyed in, will
certainly usher him into the Pit of Hell; and though he be posting with the
greatest Expedition toward everlasting Damnation, sleeping and snoring in a
Condition near equivalent to the Damned in Hell, and though he hear all this
from the Scriptures and God's Ministers, yet still he remains blind and
insensible, till God move upon the Heart. See Ephesians. 4.18.

But, Fourthly, FOR I haste, The State of the Church of Christ, and every
Member thereof, whilst in Nature and uncalled, is a state of Alienation from
God: Alas! whilst thus, they have no true knowledge of him, nor fellowship with
him, they see him not, nor enjoy him, though in him they live, move and have
their Being; they rise up in the Morning, and ly down again at Night, Day after
Day, Month after Month, and yet have not God in a godly way as much as once in
all their thoughts; they rarely do as much as once seriously consider whether
they be going, to Life or Death, to Heaven or Hell, to God or the Devil.

Fifthly, and lastly, THE State of Christ's Church in general, and every Member
thereof in particular, before effectually called by Christ to himself, is a
State of Deceiveableness: This Paul confesses to Titus, Titus 3.3. For, alas!
generally, nay, I think I may say always, they that are most without God have
the least sense of the want of God; they that are most with the Devil, are in
the least fear of the Devil, and they that are really the greatest sinners, are
the least troubled for their sins; for either they are wholly Carnal in their
Lives as well as Hearts, and so minding no Religon at all, or else they fall a
doing and working for Life, building upon their Prayers, Duties, Works and
Obedience, thinking these shall stand them in some stead; concluding, that if
they can but live Civilly, deal Justly, do their Duties orderly, and keep all
God's Commandments to the utmost of their Power, according to the Law: Well
then, undoubtedly all shall be well with them, both in Death and Judgment, and
consequently to Eternity, though they know nothing, no nothing of Christ, the
Gospel, Faith, nor Self-denial; not minding that the Scripture says, That
there is no name given under heaven whereby we can be saved, but the name of
Jesus; and that whosoever believes not in him shall be damned, for without
Faith it is impossible to please him; but Do and Live is the only Religon
consistent with the fallen Nature, it is wholly a stranger to all Gospel
Mysteries, and so I fear are too many called Gospel Ministers, else why is
Free Will and Man's works and Righteousness cried up at such a height at this
day, to the great dishonor of Christ and the Gospel in so many places and
persons? and why is there such Heart-burnings against such as preach the Pure
Gospel of Christ, whereby Man and his Righteousness is laid in the Dust, and
Christ and his Righteousness exalted, according to the Scriptures? But to
conclude this Point, Paul most plainly tells us what all Men are by Nature: For
indeed there is no difference. In the second of the Ephesians, 11, 12. 1st.
Gentiles in the Flesh. 2ly. Uncircumcised in Heart. 3ly. Without Christ. 4ly.
Aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel. 5ly. Strangers to the Covenant of Grace.
6ly. Void of Hope. 7ly. Without God in the World: a dreadful Condition indeed;
and this brings me to the Second Particular.

To consider, Whether the Church first seeks unto Christ; or on the contrary,
Christ first seeks unto the Church, in order to the effecting of this blessed
Union or Marriage betwixt them. And the Solution is plain, First, as intimated
by the Text; and 2ly. As confirmed by all the Scriptures relating thereunto:
1st. As intimated by the Text, thus, viz. As Samson first sought unto, and
endeavored after this Philistine Woman, in order to the concluding of this
Contract betwixt them, and not she unto him: So in like manner Jesus Christ
first and primarily seeks unto his Church, in order to the bringing about of
this happy Union, and not she unto him. This also is plain from many
Scriptures, as from the 16th. of Eezekiel, from the 3d. Verse to the 14th.
Where 1st. The Church lay in the open Field polluted in her blood. 2ly. There
was no eye to pity her. And yet, 3ly. When she was in this condition, Jesus
Christ in mercy came and passed by. And 4ly. Her time, notwithstanding her
misery and shame, was to him a time of love. And 5ly. He did all this whilst
she in her self was dead, as to any Affection toward him; and therefore says
he, ver. 6. And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy own blood,
I said unto thee, Live; yea, when thou wast in thy blood, I said unto thee,
Live. See also the 2d. of Hosea, where when the Church was backsliden from, and
which is worse, (though always the issue of a backsliding Spirit,) hardened
against him: Then he came in Mercy (though she perhaps at the first did not so
look upon it) and hedged up her way with Thorns, to the end that though she
pursued after her Lovers, yet that she might not overtake them, ver. 6, 7.
2dly. He takes away all her Fullness, Joy, and Mirth, all her Delight in her own
ways, and removes from her all her pleasant things, ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. 3dly.
He visits upon her all the days of her former Wickedness and Idolatry, ver. 13.
And, 4thly. After all this, he, as it were, turns Suitor to her: For (says he)
I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and there will I speak
comfortably unto her, ver. 14. Alas, poor dejected, doubting Souls! whilst God
is a bringing of them into the Wilderness, or into a bewildered state, as to
their own Apprehensions, are even frightened with fears and terrors, lest he
should destroy them there, and give them over to perish for ever, little
considering that it is God's way to keep his best Wine till the latter end of
the Feast; and in the Wilderness to speak most comfortably to them, giving them
in the Valley of Achor, or Trouble, a Door of Hope; and that there the Knot of
Union is to be tied, which is never to be loosed more; and that then they must
call him no more Baali, viz. My Lord,; but that they must henceforth call him
Ishi, that is to say, My Husband, v. 16. A blessed Conclusion! And let me tell
you, There is none of you here this day that are Suitors to God, but God has
had first a great suiting of you to bring you to that. Oh! admirable Love and
Condescension! that ever the Great God of Heaven, and Lord of Eternity, should
become Suitors to such Hell Hounds as the best of us are by Nature. Again,
Observe that Text in Jer. 3.12, and 22. where the Lord most earnestly and
compassionately suiteth, exhorts and inviteth his Church, with all possible
persuasions, to return from her backslidings; for, says he, I am married unto
you, ver. 14. only acknowledge your iniquities, and that you have transgressed
against me: And then, Return, Oh hacksliding Children, and I will heal your
backslidings. And indeed here the Lord not only suited, but prevailed: For mark
the Answer they returned him, ver. 22, 23. Behold we come unto thee, for thou
art the Lord our God, in vain is salvation looked for from the hills, and from
the multitude of mountains, for in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel.
The God of Heaven grant that we may return him the like Answer with Heart and
Mouth, this day, and all other times wherein he by the Gospel is inviting us to
come unto him. See also the words of David, Psalm. 27.8. When thou, O Lord,
said, Seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy face, Lord, will I seek.
Oh dear Friends! has not God a long time been a suiting of you by the Gospel
to come unto him? and has he not often called aloud of you, saying, Seek ye my
face? I know you cannot deny this. Well, but let me ask, Was you ever brought
to cry out with David, Thy face, O Lord, will I seek? True, it may be you have
said thus with your Mouths; but pray note, Did your Hearts ever say so? Says
holy David, My heart said, Thy face, O Lord, will I seek. Pray consider it. But
to conclude this Point also, Mind what John says in his First Epistle, 4.10,
and 19. Herein is love, says he, not that we loved God, but that he loved us;
And we love him, because he loved us first. Alas, Beloved! had not God loved
and sought after us, till we had loved and sought after him, then had we never
so much as once lifted up our Eyes toward him, till with the Rich Man we had
been in Hell; which would have been too late either to have sought after him,
or looked up unto him. I might mention many more Scriptures to the like Effect,
but time will not permit. Besides, these are sufficient already laid down, the
sequel whereof amounts to this, That as Samson first sought unto this Woman of
Timnath, this Daughter of the Philistines, notwithstanding her Nonconformity
to the Religion and Laws of Israel, and not she unto him: So Jesus Christ
seeks unto his Church in true Heavenly and Divine Love, and not she unto him,
notwithstanding, not only her Nonconformity to, but also her Enmity against the
Religion and Laws of his Kingdom, as she lies in Nature, and when he thus
first applies himself unto her.

AND from hence I infer,

FIRST, That Christ in seeking after, and calling of his People to himself,
has no respect to Antecedent Qualifications in them, for he knows better than
we, the impossibility that a bitter Fountain should yield sweet Water, or a bad
Tree bring forth good Fruit: Therefore says he to the Pharisees, Oh generation
of Vipers, how can ye being evil, do that, or as the word is, speak that which
is good, for out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks, Mat 12.34.
But a Blind Man will not believe this, because he is Blind, and cannot see nor
understand the Truth: But says Calvin, Whatsoever a Man thinks, purposes or
does, before he be reconciled to God by Faith in Christ, is accursed; and not
only of no value to righteonsness, but of certain deserving to Damnation:
Institut. page 370. And says Luther, Whosoever goes about to please God with
works done before Faith, goes about to please God with Sin, which (says he)
is nothing else, but to heap Sin upon Sin, mock God, and to provoke him to
Wrath: O that men would once consider these things!

SECONDLY, From hence I infer, That though the Church of Christ in general,
and every Member thereof in particular, be brought by Sin through the Fall into
a lost Estate, which, as was before observed, is a State of Deadness, Hardness,
Blindness and Alienation from God; yet there is a time wherein he will gather
and call them all home to himself. There was a time in which Samson went down
to Timnath, to take this Daughter of the Philistines to Wife: And accordingly
there is a Time wherein God will gather his Elect from the four Winds of the
Heavens: There is a Time for every one of Gods Jewels to be gathered into his
Treasure, and for every one of his Sheep to be brought into his Fold; though
God's People be born in Sin, He will not have them to dye so: for there is a
time, wherein I says the Lord will call her Beloved that was not Beloved. And
this has the Father appointed, Ephesians. 1.10. That in the dispensation of the
fullness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both
which are in Heaven, and which are on Earth, even in him. And, beloved, this
time shall assuredly come upon every Soul belonging to God: the Lord stir up
our Hearts to look for it, for except we be converted and born again, we can
never enter into the Kingdom of God. An uncalled State is therefore a dreadful
State, for while a Man is so, he knows not whether he belong to God or no: But
certainly such a one may conclude, that for the present he belongs unto the
Devil, the Lord awaken all such.

THIRDLY, From hence I would infer, That God must condescend and come down to
us, (which indeed he has done both in Flesh and Spirit) before we can ascend
to him. So Samson went down to Timnath. A Man whilst in Nature, and so
consequently dead in Sin, is no more able truly and sincerely to ascend up to
God, either in Affection, Faith or Practice, than a Stone to lift up it self
into the Air, or a Bird to stye which has no wings: What could the dry Bones
do, which the Lord says was the House of Israel, till the Spirit of the Lord
came upon them? Ezekiel. 37. What cause then has every Soul amongst us to be
humble before the Lord, and to be abased in our own Eyes, and to cry out with
David, Psalm. 115. 1. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be
praise! and with Paul, 1 Cor. 4.7. What have we that we have not received? And
with Isaiah, Chapter 26. 12. Thou, O Lord have wrought all our works in us! But
many Professors at this day suppose a possibility of setting up Christ too
high, and of laying Man down too low in himself: But how this comes to pass I
could never yet understand: sure I am there is a great deal of both Possibility
and Danger of setting up Man and his Righteousness too high, and thereby
disesteeming of Christ, and his precious Death and Merits: never was there less
reason to cry up Man's Works and Obedience, (I mean so as to boast thereof, or
depend thereupon) than at this day, in which they are (I may speak it with
sorrow) so little practiced. But were but the Free Grace of God, Christ Jesus,
and Faith in him duly exalted, and freely preached in Life and Power, it would
I think be the only way, truly and without Hypocrisy, to reform Men's Lives,
and to work their Hearts into a godly sorrow, which would issue in it true and
evangelical Repentance never to be repented of; but there being so much
Legality among Professers at this day, has undoubtedly been a great occasion
of so much lukewarmness in the World in Matters of Religion.

BUT I come to the Third Particular; viz.

TO mention some of the greatest Lets, Hindrances and Impediments which do most
interrupt this blessed Union and Agreement betwixt Christ and his Church; which
indeed are many, but time will but permit me to mention some few.

AND the first main Let or Hinderance, is the want of a thorough sight, and a
true sense of the Miserableness of the condition in which we are by Nature; and
accordingly an enjoyment of rest and satisfaction, though both false and
Soul-destructive in that condition. And thus much even Nature it self teaches,
That no Man will seek unto a Physician for a cure, unless he be first sensible
that he is troubled with such a Distemper as does necessarily call for, and
require such a Cure: And who knows not, that even the best of us are a great
deal more ready and forward to incline to, and seek after the Benefit and Cure
of the Body, than the Benefit and Cure of the Soul; insomuch that a Man of whom
I have heard, who deserting and forsaking the Work of the Ministry, in which he
had spent much labor and travel, to take up the Practice of Physic; and being
asked the reason why? He returned this Answer, Because (said he) I saw People
were a great deal more careful of their Bodies than of their Souls, and much
more free to lay out their Money and Pains for the one than the other. And
Christ himself tells us, That the whole need not a Physician, but they that are
sick. The reason therefore why Christ, our great Physician of Souls, is so much
slighted, is because so few are sensible of their Souls Maladies and Distempers.

AND the case is the same in the Point in hand; for the main reason why poor
Sinners are no more free to change their Estate, to forsake their first
Husband, viz. the Devil, and the World, and to be joined and married to Jesus
Christ, is because they see not the danger and misery which they lie in and
under, in the Condition in which they are.

A SECOND Let or Hinderance in this Matter, is Persons being so much in Love
with their present States, and the Pleasures and Profits which, as they
suppose, they enjoy therein. For the proof of this, see that Place in Matthew.
22. at the beginning: Where the Text tells us, That a great King (i. e.) God,
made a Marriage for his Son, (i.e.) Christ; and sent forth his Servants to call
them that were bidden to the Wedding. But what says the Text? Well, they would
not come. Again he sent forth other Servants to tell them that all things were
ready; This was not only to invite, but also to persuade: But what says the
Text? Ver. 5. Well, They did not only refuse to come, but they also made light
of it, and went their ways, one to his Farm, and another to his Merchandise.
Alas, their Purses were full, they had Riches enough at home; they knew not
that they were wretched, poor, blind, miserable and naked, Rev. 3.17. Yet it is
not the bare having of the World, and the Things thereof, that hinders; but it
is the inordinate loving thereof. This is that which spoils all: In 1 Timothy
6.10. The Apostle tells us, That the Love of Money is the root of all Evil.
Mark it; It is not the Money it self; for the Creature is good; but the
inordinate Love of it, this is the root of all Evil. Therefore, pray, mind what
our Lord says, Luke 14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not his Father and
Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters; yea, and his own Life
also, he cannot be my Disciple. That is, Whosoever pretends to come to
Christ, and hates not all these things, with what else can be named besides
Christ, in comparison of, or in competition with Christ, cannot be his
Disciple, and then for certain, not his Spouse. Oh Beloved, many keep a great
stir about Sin being the main Let in the way of Union betwixt Christ and a poor
Soul; but, I tell you, it is not Sin, but the Love of Sin, that separateth
betwixt Christ and the Soul. See Rev. 22.15. Whosoever loves and makes a Lie,
is cast out of the Holy City; not he that barely makes a Lie, through
weakness, or by reason of Temptation; but he that not only does so, but also
loves to do so; this is the Man of the Lord's Anger. Therefore, says David,
If I delight in Sin, God will not hear my voice. This therefore is the main Let
in our way of Union with Christ, because we Love Sin, and love the World,
together with the Pleasures and Profits thereof; we love the Flesh, and we love
our Lusts, our Selves, our Works, and our own Righteousness; and therefore we
cannot love Christ. And further, provided that we should hate Swearing and
Drunkenness, and yet love Pride and Covetousness, this is nothing; or if we
should hate Pride and Covetousness, and yet love Deceit and Hypocrysie, we are
still no better: This is but as it were, to change one Devil for another, and
so keep a Devil still. But I cannot enlarge.

THE Third Let in our way of Union with Christ, which I shall now mention, is
want of Faith in Christ. And truly, Beloved, this is a great Mountain in our
way; indeed this is the Hydra, the Monster-Sin, Unbelief; for as there is
nothing impossible to him that believes, so there is nothing possible to him
that believes not: For as Faith has the pre-eminence above all other Graces,
so Unbelief has the pre-eminence of all other Vices. And how many a poor Soul
is there that is both sensible of, troubled for, and burdened with Sin, and
also sees a want of, longs for, and desires to be with Christ, and yet has
little or no Union with Christ, by reason of Unbelief? Yea, there are many that
are weary of the World, weary of Sin, weary of the Devil, and of themselves
too, accounting in their very hearts all things nothing in comparison of
Christ, and yet for all this, have little or no Fellowship with Christ, because
of the want of Faith. Oh, therefore this want of Faith is a great Soul-plague;
it is as the Devil's Castle, and Tower of Defense, from whence he shoots so
many Darts at the Souls of the Afflicted. The Lord in Mercy arm us all against
this Unbelief. And truly, my Friends, there is no reason for the persons before
spoken of, to doubt of God's favor, of all persons in the World; for all the
free and blessed Promises in the Gospel run with a direct tendency to and upon
them: I beseech you therefore, if there be any such here this day, that you
would take courage, trust in God, and doubt no more; and the Lord give and
grant you Hearts thus to do; for I know there is no such precious Herb as Faith
is, grows in the corrupted Garden of Man's Heart by Nature. But oh you proud,
obdurate and hard-hearted ones, whose hearts the Lord never yet touched, nor
who never yet trembled at Gods Words; to you be it spoken, the Dread ought to
lie at your doors; for there is not a Curse written in all Gods Book, but it
runs with a direct tendency to and upon you, as little as you fear it, think of
it, or are troubled for it now; yet the Day is a coming, even at the Door, when
you shall be made to know it: The Lord God give you hearts to see it in due
time, before it be too late, and the Offers of Grace be hid from your Fyes. But
there is at this day a sort of Professors of Christianity in the world, who
pretend to Faith and a holy Life, or rather first a holy Life, and then Faith,
as they suppose; and these are still crying, Do, do, do; and upon doing, they
pronounce Men blessed, happy and safe; not regarding in the mean while, whether
such have any Faith or no; or if they have, whether it be rightly founded upon
Christ or no, without leaning to, or depending upon any thing else, especially
in point of Justification: But oh that such Persons would seriously consider,
1. That Man, as Man, and whilst cut of Christ, can do nothing: So says Christ
himself, Without me ye can do nothing, John 14.5. But the strongest Argument
that ever I met with, to convince me of the truth of this, is recorded in John
5.30. Where Christ says thus; I can of mine own self do nothing: And from
hence I infer, That if the sinless, spotless, and only Son of God, did
acknowledge, That he could of his own self do nothing, that is, as he was Man,
etc. then is it most high Presumption for a poor mortal, sinful, wretched
Creature, Dust and Ashes, to say or think, that of himself, as separate from
the Grace, Power and Goodness of God in Christ, he can do any thing; that is,
any thing acceptable or wellpleasing to God. 2. Let them consider, that
whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, Romans 14.23. And also, that without Faith it
is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. And lastly, Let them consider, that
Faith is the Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. and a Fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. And
if so, then, pray, what is sinful Man in and of himself, but a poor, lost,
helpless, nothing, undone Creature: And this must man be made to see, before
ever he can truly close with Christ Jesus in Truth and Sincerity. And when once
he comes thus to be stripped of all, and made nothing in himself, then is he a
fit Object of Mercy, in which God once coming to work Faith in the heart, in
order to an embracing of Christ, then a blessed Union betwixt Christ and the
Soul is immedily brought forth.

BUT, Fourthly and lastly, For I cannot stand to mention any more Particulars;
Another dreadful and most mighty Let in this way of Union betwixt Christ and
his Church, is the Devil; of whom it is said in another case, and may
accordingly be said in this; He that now lets, will let, until he be taken
out of the way, 2 These. 2.7. And indeed it is him, which the young Lion in our
Text does most directly point at; for as the young Lion roared against Samson,
when he came down to Timnath, to take this Daughter of the Philistines to Wife,
so the Devil roared against Christ, both when he came in the Flesh, to purchase
and redeem his Church; and also as he comes in the Spirit, to call and
sanctify his Church, in order to the betrothing of her unto himself in an
everlasting Oneness: But at the former of these, to wit, his coming in the
Flesh, the Matter in hand does seem more directly to point; for in the latter,
to wit, Man's Calling and Conversion, as indeed all a Christians Lifetime,
after really made a Christian, the Devil does not so directly strive against
Christ, as I said before, as poor Christians; for he despairs of ever doing
good of him, who has already led him captive, and appointed him his Bounds,
saying, Hitherto shall thou go, and no further; But Oh, says he, let me have a
turn with Christian Man; I once overcame Man when sinless in Paradise, and
perhaps I may do so again, though he be made sinless in Christ, Luke 22.31, 32.
But alas, poor Satan is mistaken; for Christians have now Christ to defend
them, and to fight their Battles for them, which Adam in Paradise had not; and
therefore, as Christians, not so easily drawn to sin, that is, to sin with
delight, as he did: And again, provided they do sin still, they have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
Propitiation for their sins: But however, many a poor Christian is many times
hard put to it by the Devil; for it is not in vain that Peter exhorts to be
sober and watchful, because the Devil went about as a roaring Lion, seeking
whom he might devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. For Peter knew by woeful experience, how hard
a thing it was to resist and withstand him. And indeed this is one main Reason
why the righteous are said to be scarcely saved, 1 Pet. 4.18. And see but at
your leisure what dreadful War he made against the Church in Revelat. 12. And
what Joy the Saints made in Heaven, ver. 10. when he was cast from thence. But
why do I thus numerate Scriptures? I will appeal to all your Experiences, that
know any thing of God. And Beloved, let me ask you, Do you not find this Devil,
this Dog of Hell, do you not find him, I say, tempting, tossing and turning you
over and over, to and again? Do you not find him lurking in every corner you
come in; and laying Snares in every thing you meddle with? Do you not find him
rising up and lying down with you, going to Bed and Board with you, in Light
and Darkness, Day and Night still with you? And for sure he designs you no
Good; it is your dear and precious Souls he still aims at: The Lord deliver us
all from his hands.

But perhaps you will say, Alas we know by most woeful experience, that all
these things are true, and that we are daily thus troubled with the Devil upon
all Accounts; but oh, how shall we do to withstand and overcome him?

I Answer, If you would stand against, and be saved from the Devil, then flee
from, and renounce your selves, as well as him; for if Self be kept alive in
your Bosoms, the Devil will not be far from thence. Both sinful and righteous
Self must be put off, if once Jesus Christ be rightly put on. And pray Sirs,
further, have an eye to the Son of God, our great Samson, who is come down in
and by the Gospel into our Philistine Land, to marry us, notwithstanding the
uncircumcision of our Hearts and Natures, to himself; who, though thou can
put no Power, Goodness, Merits, nor Deserts as a Weapon into his Hand, will yet
notwithstanding, by his own Almighty Power tear Satan in pieces like a Kid, in
his own time, as Paul told the Romans, Chap. 16.20. The God of peace shall
bruise Satan under your feet shortly. Believe in the Lord your God, so shall
you be established, 2 Chronicles. 20.20.

I might now come to show you some of the principal Ways, Means and Methods
which Satan takes, and makes use of, in order to the disturbing, molesting, and
if it were possible, hindering of this happy Union betwixt Christ and
Christians; but Time not permitting, I must pass that, and so come to the
Fourth Thing premised from the general Proposition, viz. To give you some
Cautions, in order to a timely prevention of the Dangers occasioned by the
aforesaid Lets; and they are these that follow: And first, To the Righteous.

CAVTION 1. And to such, I say, First, Have a care, That after God in some
measure has come in upon your hearts, and that you have had, as you suppose,
some Tastes of this heavenly Union, and are brought not only to see your selves
to be in Death and Darkness by Nature; but also, through Mercy, to be brought
into the Land of the Living, by Grace; and have seen the Day dawn, the Shadows
flee away, and the Day Star of Grace arise in your hearts, so as that you have
been made to say, The Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone, the Flowers
appear on the Earth, the time of the singing of Birds is come, and the voice of
the Turtle is heard in my Soul, saying, Arise my Love, my Dove, my fair One,
and come away: I say, have a care, that after all this, the Devil meet you not,
and rob you of your first Love: God is oftentimes pleased to permit Satan to
try his Children, Rev. 2.10. The Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that
ye may be tried. And be sure the Devil will run at long Rope, he will strain
his Commission to the utmost, to do you a Mischief; and tender Grapes are soon
spoiled: And I know the Devil will often assault you that are in this
condition, with these, or the like Temptations; Oh Soul, will he be saying, now
thy Troubles are over, and thy Dangers past, thy Darkness is fled away, and
Light from Heaven is broken in upon thee; thou need therefore, to take no
further care; it is not possible that thou should err or miscarry; thou
may now sit still, and take thine ease; for the time of thy prosperity is
come; thou shall sit as a Widow, full of sorrow no longer; therefore take
Courage, (and surely well thou may;) for what is it that God requires in his
Word, that thou have not done? thou have mourned, prayed, repented, believed,
and reformed; and is not this enough? God is none such a hard Master: Lift up
thine Eyes therefore, behold the World is before thee; Is there never an Object
in it well pleasing to thee? What need thou be so precise? Do thou not
read of a Gospel-Liberty? Thou may safely endeavor after, and delight in the
lawful things of this World, and yet take no harm; witness many great and
approved Professors that do the same.

BUT Beloved, have a care of these and the like Temptations; for as they are of
and from the Devil, so they tend to your Souls ruin and destruction: It was the
great Fault of the Galatians, that they began in the Spirit, and ended in the
Flesh; and it will be no less fault in you: And truly Saints are not distressed
and troubled for a while, that so afterward they may live again to the World
and to themselves; that is but a counterfeit Conversion: But alas, we see too
many Examples of this nature, at this day in the World; many set forth fair for
Heaven, in all outward appearance, for a while, and yet afterward wither and
dry away: The Lord make all these Examples as so many awakening, warning
Caveats to us, to be the more watchful; for though all sleep till the
Bridegroom's Voice be heard, yet woe to them that sleep afterward: Oh the many
Evils occasioned by a lukewarm Spirit! Who is able to express them? But in a
word, Luke warmness, if it prevail, sets open a door, forth at which all
present Enjoyments of God take their Flight, and in at which Satan, Sin, Death
and Darkness come in. And truly, when once it comes to this, the Face of Heaven
looks black upon such a Soul: Therefore I beg of you all that hear me this day,
have a care of a lukewarm Spirit.

CAVTION 2. Again Secondly, If you find God delivering you from this dangerous
Rock of Lukewarmness, directing your Feet from this dreadful Path, which
directly leads down to the Pit, so as that Satan can do no good of you here:
Then have a care on the other hand, of splitting your selves upon the no less
dangerous Rock of Hypocrisy and Self-conceitedness. And to prevent this,

1st. SEE that you be found in the Faith, especially in the great Article of
Justification: 1. Holding Justification by Faith. 2. And that not Subjectively,
but Objectively; not as a bare Act in us, but as Beholding, Receiving,
Embracing and applying of Jesus Christ, according to that clear and most
precious Text, Acts 13.39. And by him all that do believe, are justified from
all things, etc. And,

2ly. BE careful to live Holily, and as careful to do it sincerely; the Grace
of God inforceth Holiness, but hates Hypocrisy: and that you may do this,
1st. See that you expect not that Holiness should bring you to Christ, but that
you should derive Holiness from Christ, being by Faith Primarily brought unto
him. 2ly. That the performance of good Duties moves not God to give his Grace
to you, but his Grace first given to you, and wrought in you, moves you to
perform good Duties, if you do them aright.

3ly. THINK not that your love to God or to Goodness, does produce love to God
toward you, which was not in him before; but contrariwise, that God's Love to
you manifested and revealed in you, produces and begets love in you, both
to God, Goodness, and Good Men; nay, to your very Enemies. But Oh wherewith
shall it be lamented, that this Godly Love, which always produces Christian
Unity, is so much wanting at this day among professors. But,

4ly. IN all your Holy Actings, do not, as it were, Act for Life, or that you
may receive Life; but on the other hand Act as from Life already received from
Christ by Faith, and revealed and wrought in your Hearts by the Spirit.

LASTLY, Be not puffed up with, or by, any thing that you do, have done, or can
do. Oh forget it! look over it, take Christ's Advice; let not the left Hand
know what the right Hand does; and when you have done whatsoever is commanded
you, still account your selves unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. And be sure
you hold fast the Foundation and Corner stone, Christ Jesus, and bring nothing
as a Ground of your Faith into the presence, and before the Face of God, but
Christ and him alone. Oh observe the words of Luther upon his Dying Bed, which
are said to be his last words! Says he, Christ have I loved, Christ have I
feared, Christ have I served, Christ have I preached, in Christ have I
believed, and unto Christ I commend my Soul. Beloved, here was a Blessed end;
here was a Comfortable and Glorious End: The Lord bring us all to such an End
for his Names sake. And would you come to such an end? then beware of
Hypocrisy. But I haste. A word or two more of Caution to the Wicked, and so I
come to the Application.

AND in the first place, if there be any Persons among us this day, that are
Ignorant of, and Strangers to God, and his workings upon the Souls of his
People, and that are mindless and regardless of God, Christ, the Gospel,
Heaven, and their Souls Salvation, living either in desperate Wickedness, Moral
Civility, or Legal Holiness, and yet without God; Well, to all such I would
say, Oh have a care, have a care how you dally away your precious time!
Consider your Souls lie at stake, and if you miss of Christ you are undone for
ever; remember the Rich Man, Luke 16. who never lift up his Eyes till he was in
Hell. Oh examine before hand, what you will do upon your Dying Beds, when you
must take your Leave of Friends and Relations, go off the Stage of this World,
and pass into endless Eternity. Beloved, pray mind me, there is as it were two
great Porters, if I may so speak, which stand beside the Gates of Death, viz.
Christ and the Devil; Christ as it were on the right hand, and the Devil on the
left, and when the Soul of a Righteous Man passes the Gates of Death, Christ,
whose everlasting Arms are still spread under all his, with open Heart and
Hand, is there ready to receive him, and will not suffer Satan as much as once
to come nigh him, but will say, No, Satan, the time of this Souls warfare is
accomplished; thou have had thy time to try and sift him, and have caused him
to feel many a bitter hour of Trouble, but I who long since bought him, have
saved him from thy Hands, and will now receive him to Glory, where thou shall
never trouble him more; for precious to the Lord are the Death of all his
Saints, and Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, for
they rest from their Labors, Trouble and Toil. But on the other hand, when a
Wicked Unbeliever dies, and comes to pass the Gates of Death, presently he
falls into the Jaws of the Dog of Hell, i. e. the Devil, and is caught in the
Arms of Satan, and so hurried down into Eternal Flames; and if he cry, Lord,
save me; No, says Christ, for in thy Life time thou contemnedst my Grace and
Gospel, and cast off my Counsel and Reproof, thou set light by my Death and
Merits, and would have none of my Salvation, I will therefore now Laugh at thy
Calamities, and mock when thy Fear comes; Depart thou from me, O thou Worker
of Iniquity.

O consider this, all you that forget God, and while it is called to day, and
while the Door of the Bride-grooms Chamber stands open, hear, fear and lay it
to heart, return to the Lord, accept of Grace, and embrace those things that
belong to your Peace, before they be hid from your eyes: For the Devil designs
nothing more, than to draw you on with one Temptation or another, in Blindness
and Forgetfulness of God, till Death has closed up your Eyes; and then he
knows well enough that Hell shall close its Mouth on your Souls: if you miss of
Christ, you miss of Heaven for ever.

AGAIN, Secondly, Beware that upon your turning from your evil ways, you do not
close with a false Faith in an unfound way of Religion; for it will be a sad
thing if you talk your selves to Hell with heavenly Words, or go to Death and
Judgment with a Lie in your right hand. But may be you will say, But how shall
I turn aright? I answer, I shall direct you to the Lord's own counsel, Jer.
4.1. If thou will return, O Israel, (says the Lord) return unto me. Mind the
words, Return unto me: It is not enough to turn to this or that Man's
particular Way or Form, nor to join to this or that Congregation, though never
so pure and Apostolical; neither is it enough to turn from a vain and sinful,
to a good and godly Life; from Vices to Virtues, from evil and wicked Works, to
an outwardly, holy and righteous Conversation, though all these are good in
their places, and always certain Adjuncts of true Christianity, and evermore
Concomitants of true Faith in all that are truly godly, so far as possible.

BUT the Root of the Matter lies in this; a sincere and godly turning to the
Lord; I say, To the Lord; and a closing in the first place with Jesus Christ,
by Faith, as our Mediator, Advocate, and only Savior; as our King, Priest, and
Prophet; as our Head, Lord, King, and Husband, for ever. Taking him as of God,
he is made over to us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption;
believing that he has bought us, and paid our Debt for us; that he has
acquitted us from Sin, the Law, Curse, Death and Hell; and that by him we are
accepted of, and justified before God Almighty; and that our Sins are laid upon
him, and his Righteousness imputed to us by God the Father, according to that
golden Text, 2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him: And that now
henceforward we must not live unto our selves, but unto him that has redeemed
us, and died for us; and that we must fear him, and serve him; not as Slaves,
but as Sons; not for Rewards, but of a ready Mind, accounting it as our Meat
and Drink to do the Will of God, according to his Word, knowing that a
Free Will Offering is only acceptable unto God. These things I commend to your
Consideration; I would enlarge further, but that time calls for a Conclusion.
However take a few words of Application.

AND first of all, by way of Examination. And because we are upon a Matter of
very great Importance, I desire we may all be faithful to our own Souls herein.
The several Particulars which I shall commend to your Consideration, by way of
Examination, are these following.

FIRST, Pray let us examine, Whether Samson be come down to Timnath? I mean,
Whether Christ Jesus be come home to our Hearts? Whether he has given an
awakening and an effectual Call, in and by the Gospel, to our Souls, which has
brought us out of darkness into his mavelous light; and out of the Kingdom
and Territories of Satan, Death, and Hell, into the Kingdom of his dear Son?

OBJECT. But may be you will say, But how shall I know it?

ANSW. To which I Answer, by these three following Marks:

FIRST, If Samson be come down to Timnath; if Christ be come home upon your
Hearts, to call your Souls home to himself, as aforesaid, then has he given
you a true sight and a sense of your Philistine Condition, of your
Uncircumcised Estate, which you are in by Nature: A true sight of which does
chiefly consist in these five things. 1st. In being brought to see your selves
to be the chief of Sinners, even as Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. 2ly. In being brought to
see the exceeding sinfulness of this Sin wherewith you are thus polluted, Romans
7.13 3ly. In being made truly sensible of the dreadful Curse with the which the
Law threatens you for, and because of this sin and sinfulness, Gal. 3.10. 4ly.
In being accordingly made sensible of your own insufficiency, by any worth or
merit in your own selves, to satisfy for the Sin, or deliver from the Curse,
whereof you are guilty, and with the which you are attended whilst you are in
this condition. 5ly. In being brought to see at what an infinite distance you
stand from God in this Estate; and consequently to see how far you are, 1st.
From Reconciliation with God; and, 2ly. Of the Certainty of your Damnation, if
you be not reconciled unto God.

SECONDLY, A Second Mark is this: If Christ has called you to himself, out of
darkness, into his most glorious light; then as he has let you see an
insufficiency in yourselves to save your selves, so he has let you see an
All Sufficiency in himself, whereby you are brought to understand, that though
you be wholly lost in your selves, yet that there is a full and absolute
possibility of your being both redeemed and saved in and by Jesus Christ; so
that despairing in the first place of all power, peace and safety without
Christ, you may be brought wholly and alone to confide in Christ for the same:
And this is a sure and most happy Condition, and I beseech you be serious in
the Examination of it.

AND, Lastly, The Third and last Mark is this: If Christ has called you home
to himself, as aforesaid; then are your selves become a burden to your selves,
and you find your greatest Enemies to be them of your own House, which makes
you call and cry day and hour unto the Lord your God to help, uphold and
strengthen you against Self, and all its Assistants; that so being freed from
the same, you may be given up wholly to Christ Jesus, both in Faith and
Practice; which is a Condition most desirable to all true Christians, though
God knows too many Professers at this day are strangers to the same.

SECONDLY, A Second thing which I would have you to examine, is, Whether this
young Lion, the great Opposer of Christ, viz. Satan, be destroyed and slain,
yea or no?

OBJECT. But may be you will say, How shall I know that?

ANSW. If this young Lion be slain; I mean, If Satan be overcome in and upon
your account, then you may know it in some measure by these following things.

FITST, If Satan be thus overcome, then you are made sensible that it was not
you, but another upon your account, that did thus overcome him, even Christ
Jesus; and so consequently, that not to you, but to him belongs all the Glory
for evermore.

SECONDLY, If Satan be thus overcome by Christ Jesus, in you, and for you, then
are you abundantly troubled for that you can no more love, and give Praise to
Christ Jesus for the same; for Beloved, I am very much satisfied, that it is
one of the greatest Troubles that a true Child of God meets withal, even
because he finds himself no more forward in loving and praising of Jesus Christ
for all his Gifts, Favors and Mercies: Yea, and truly I hope there is some
among us this day, whose Minds and Spirits have been greatly burdened many a
time, because they could deny themselves no more, and esteem of Christ no
better in Matters of this nature: And pray note it, It is a good sign of a
Christian, in whomsoever these Thoughts do reside; for Self-Love, Pride, and
Spiritual Ambition, is of all things most contrary to God, and destructive to
Godliness.

BUT, Thirdly and Lastly, If Satan be thus overcome in you, and upon your
account; then are you in some degree united and married to Jesus Christ.

OBJECT. But may be you will say, But how shall I know whether I be so Married
to Jesus Christ or no?

ANSW. To which I answer: If you be Married to Jesus Christ, then it will
appear in these following things.

FIRT, You will have a higher Esteem of Jesus Christ, than of any thing else
whatsoever: Yea, he will be to you the chiefest among ten thousand, even
altogether lovely; so that you will be brought to think one day in his Courts
better spent than a thousand elsewhere.

SECONDLY, You will think every hour a lost hour, that is not spent in the
fellowship of his Love, and enjoyment of his Presence; yea, and often will you
be bewailing your selves, that you have spent so much time without the same;
crying out unto God after this manner, and saying, O Lord, how many a day and
hour have I spent in wickedness and vanity, without either seeing or enjoying
thee! O my God! which now occasions abundance of trouble to my Soul, even when
I consider it.

THIRDLY, You will think your selves Losers by all things you receive, in which
you receive not Christ Jesus. Then it will not satisfy you to have Lands and
Livings, Gold and Silver, Wife and Children, unless you have Christ too:
Neither will it satisfy you to enjoy Gospel-Priviledges, and Gracious
Opportunities, unless you enjoy and possess Jesus Christ in all and every of
those things; for no Wife that sincerely loves her Husband, does ever account
her self happy in the enjoyment of any thing wherein she does not enjoy her
Husband; even so in like manner God's dear Children are not content with any
thing that they do possess or enjoy, wherein they do not possess and enjoy
Jesus Christ: And Oh, Sirs! let me freely speak it, these Persons are not
content with Gifts, no, not with heavenly Gifts, without the Giver. Do they
come to hear Sermons? still they are searching for God's Power and Presence in
and under the same, or else they are not contented. Do they Pray, Read, or
Receive the Sacraments? Well, still it is the same; all things without God are
nothing in their esteem.

FOURTHLY, If you be thus Married to Jesus Christ, then are you soon aware of
any thing that does interpose betwixt Christ and your Souls; yea, if a Cloud do
but come over the Face of the Sun of Righteousness, so as to darken the
Glorious Light thereof in your Souls, then are you quickly sensible of it. And
if that this Cloud remain upon the Face of the Son of God, Christ Jesus, so as
that Spiritual Darkness do long continue in and upon your Souls, O how often
are you then enquiring, and saying, Oh why does he hide his Face from me! and
why is his Chariot-wheels so long in coming!

FIFTHLY, If you be thus Married and United to Jesus Christ our Spiritual
Samson, you are very Earnest in the promoting of Christ's Glory. O when you hear
Persons giving Glory to fleshly Wisdom, Humane Learning, Natural Abilities,
Moval Civility, or any thing of the like Nature, which seems to lessen or
derogate from the Glory of Christ Jesus, O how near does this come home to your
Heart; for better a great deal a true Christian endure to hear themselves laid
low, and trampled in the Dust; yea, and accounted as bad, nay worse than
nothing, than to hear Jesus Christ abased and set below his place; O this cuts
them to the very Heart!

SIXTHLY, If thou be Married to Jesus Christ, then it is thy Hearts desire to
walk in all his Ways, and in all things to conform to his Will and Pleasure. A
Tender and Loving Wife takes more pleasure in doing and observing her Husbands
Will and Pleasure than her own: So in like manner Christ's Church and People do
most heartily desire to do Christ's Will; yea, and account it as their meat and
drink to do the same.

SEVENTHLY and lastly, If thou be married to Jesus Christ, then art thou
oftentimes in Great Trouble that thou can keep no more faithful and true to
him than thou do; yea and how often art thou taking occasion, from the
observation of thy own weakness and proneness to backslide from God, to detest
and abhor thy self, to lay thy hand upon thy mouth, to admire Gods
unspeakable Love, and to cry out with the Church in the Lamentations, Chapter 3.22.
It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not. And hence it comes to pass that the continual Cry of thy Soul is,
Not unto me, not unto me, but unto Samson, even Christ my Lord and Husband, be
all the praise and glory for ever and ever.

MANY more things I might propose to your Consideration, to be Examined by you,
but time being spent I omit them, and shall only add two words more, and so
draw to a Conclusion. And the first word is by way of Terror to the Wicked, who
neither are Married, nor desirous to be Married to Jesus Christ. And the Second
is by way of Comfort, to all such as apprehending themselves to live in the
Land of the Philistines, afar off from God, do long, breath, groan, pray, and
most earnestly desire to be brought nearer to, and wholly joined with Jesus
Christ as their Lord and Husband.

I begin with the first, viz. such as neither are Married nor desirous to be
married to Jesus Christ: And to all such I say, that it had been better for
them that they had never been born, than that they should live and dye without
Jesus Christ; better had it been, that their bodily Eyes had never seen the Sun
in the Firmament, than that their Souls Eyes should not see the Son of God in
the Gospel: Better had it been that such had never had a being in this World,
than that they should have an Eternal being without Christ in another World: O
Dear Friends, I would be plain with you, and pray mind what I say, As the Tree
falls, so it lies; no Conversion in the Grave. True, the Grave may be as a Bed
to rest in, but it will not, it cannot be as a Shop to Trade in. Therefore let
Old and Young, Rich and Poor, that hear me this day, be advised to turn to
Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. And Sirs, if you do but come by a true and
sincere Faith to lay hold on Jesus Christ in Sincerity, fear not but it shall
be well with you to Eternity. And in your turning to God, beware of this, That
your outward Appearance as to Lives and Conversations, do not go before or
without your Hearts and inward Inclinations: And further, have a care of
seeking after God in another way than he himself has appointed. Consider, that
not in the way of Works, but in the way of Faith we are to meet with, live and
walk with Jesus Christ, for the Just shall live by Faith. And pray note it, it
is not every one that cries Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; because all that profess the Name of Christ, have not Hearts endued
with sincere Love to Christ; and I must tell you, that a sanctified Heart is
better than a Silver Tongue, and a heart full of Grace is much better than a
head full of Notion. Ard certain it is, that you may pretend to be Gods
Servants, when you are not his Sons; but undoubtedly, if you be his Sons you
will be his Servants, not by constraint, or for Rewards, but most freely, and
with a ready mind: And one word further I desire to commend to you, and I
desire you to observe it: A Man may seem a Christian, and not be so: but if a
Man be a Christian, he must of necessity seem so.

AND so I come to the last Use, which is a word of Comfort to all such, as
apprehending themselves to live in the Land of the Philistines, I mean afar off
from God, do long, breath, groan, pray, and most earnestly desire to be brought
nearer to, yea, and wholly to be joined with Jesus Christ, as their Lord and
Husband: And to all such I would say, fear not, for your Redeemer lives, and
the most holy One of Israel will be your Refuge. He that is the God of Glory,
and that inhabits Eternity, can and will help all that love him, fear him,
trust in him, and depend upon him.

OBJ. But perhaps thou will say, True, I desire, yea and that with all my
Heart, so far as I know it, to be made one with, and Married unto Jesus Christ:
But the Devil, this roaring Lion, of whom you have spoken, does so withstand
and oppose me herein, that I am afraid that what I desire herein can never be
effected: Surely never poor Soul was so tempted with, and oppressed by Satan as
I am.

TO which I Answer, Poor Soul, thou feel no Man's burden but thy own,
neither does Satan's Temptations to another trouble thee, but do but thou ask
another in thy Condition, and he will tell thee that he is tempted even by
Satan as thou -- But may be thou will say, But I think there is none in such a
Condition as I am. To which I answer, Why, what a State art thou in? Well,
perhaps thou will say, First, I am full of Sin, and sinful pollutions, and so
consequently more abominable in my self than a Toad: So that when I come before
Christ Jesus to beg Mercy and Acceptance, alas, I see that I deserve none. And
besides, when I come I have almost always the Devil to bear me Company, on
purpose to prevent my embracing of, and being joined unto Jesus Christ, and
therefore surely never Person was in my Condition: To which I answer, Alas poor
Soul, thou art quite mistaken, for there is not a true Christian, but is in the
same Condition less or more, yea, I my self could tell thee the same Story, and
much more; yea, and that by woeful Experience: But however, for thy better
satisfaction I shall commend to thee an Example from the Scripture. See Zech.
3.1, 2, 3. and note it well; says the Prophet there, He (speaking of God)
showed me Joshua the High Priest standing before the Angel of the Lord, and
Satan stood at his right hand to resist him: And says the Text, Joshua was
clothed with filthy Garments, and stood before the Angel. -- Now Joshua in
this place is a Figure of the Church, and the Angel of Christ. The Text
therefore teaches us thus much, That when the whole Church in general, or any
Member in particular, do come before Jesus Christ, in order to Justification
and Salvation in and by him, then and at that time they come clad with filthy
Garments, so undeserving of acceptance; and also have the Devil to bear them
company, in order to the preventing of their either joining with or confiding
in Jesus Christ as their Lord and Husband, accordingly as thou say of thy
self, so thou art not alone in this Condition: But pray mind how Joshuah in
this Estate was freed, rescued and delivered both from his filthy Garments, and
also from the Devil: See the third and fourth verses. Christ first rebuked
Satan, and then caused Joshua's filthy Garments to be taken away, clothing him
himself with changes of Raiment; and as he did to Joshua, so will he do to
thee, if thou believe but in him. But perhaps thou will say, Nay, but I am
Poor, Barren and Unfruitful: I answer, Even so do all God's People judge
themselves to be; they are crying out of their Leanness daily and hourly, and
think with and of themselves, That they do nothing for God; but though they
think thus of themselves, yet God thinks otherwise. And indeed this I have
observed over and over, That the Godly have still such low Thoughts of
themselves, and are base in their own Eyes; whereas the wicked, on the other
hand, are proud and lifted up, and have high thoughts of themselves; and it
seems by our Saviors Words, That both the Righteous and the Wicked will have
the same thoughts each of themselves at the Judgment-day. See Mat. 25. from 31.
to the end, where first he tells the Righteous, That they had fed him, clothed
and visited him, etc. But they cry out, Lord, when did we so and so? Alas! they
took no notice of their good doings: Well, but Christ did. Oh blessed
Professors! it is to be feared there is too few such at this day; for most are
looking upon what they are, have, know, and do; and Oh! this spoils Religion,
puffs up with Pride, and undoes the Soul. But the Righteous cry out, When saw
we thee hungry, sick, or in Prison, and did these things unto thee? But now
mark when he turns him to the Wicked, saying, I was so and so, and yet ye did
not such and such things unto me: They answer, Lord, when saw we thee so and
so, and did not these things unto thee? Alas! Blind Souls, they had deluded
themselves with the doing of this and that all their Life time, when as they
had done nothing in God's account; forasmuch as they had not Believed on the
only begotten Son of God; for not Doing but Believing brings the Soul to Jesus,
and so to Truth and Holiness in and by him. Oh that Professors would seriously
weigh these things! But, alas! few do. But however, when the Lord shall pour
forth more of his Spirit according to his Promise, upon his People, then shall
they be brought to this.

AND now, Dear Friends, Time and Strength being gone, I shall conclude,
commending you to our Heavenly Samson, even to him that is able to keep you
from falling, and to present you faultless before the Face of our Fathers
Glory, with exceeding Joy: To whom be ascribed endless Praise through Infinite
Ages. Amen.

CONSIDER what you have heard, and the Lord give you Understanding in all
things.

FINIS.
Books Sold by William Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-street.
Books written by the late Reverend Dr. John Owen. 1. HIs Exposition on the
whole Epistle to the Hebrews, in 4 Vol. with Exercitations concerning the
Messiah; wherein the Promises concerning him to be a Spiritual Redeemer of
Mankind, are explained and vindicated: His Coming and Accomplishment of his
Work according to the Promises, is proved and confirmed. The Person, or who he
is, declared. The whole Economy of the Mosaical Law, Rites, Worship, and
Sacrifices, is explained. And in all, the Doctrine of the Person, Office, and
Work of the Messiah, is opened: The Nature and Demerit of the first Sin is
unfolded: The Opinions and Traditions of the Ancient and Modern Jews are
examined: Their Objections against the Lord Christ and the Gospel are answered:
The Time of the Coming of the Messiah is stated; and the great fundamental
Truths of the Gospel vindicated. Folio. 2. A Discourse concerning the Holy
Spirit: Wherein an Account is given of his Name, Nature, Personality,
Dispensation, Operations and Effects. His whole Work in the Old and New
Creation is explained: The Doctrine concerning vindicated from Oppositions and
Reproaches: The Nature also and Necessity of Gospel Holiness; the Difference
between Grace and Morality, or a Spiritual Life unto God in Evangelical
Obedience, and a Course of Moral Virtues, are stated and declared. Folio.
Books in Quarto, written by the same Author. 1. THe True Nature of a Gospel
Church and its Government: Wherein these following Particulars are distinctly
handled. I. The subject Matter of the Church. II. The formal Cause of a
particular Church. III. Of the Polity, Rule or Discipline of the Church in
general. IV. The Officers of the Church. V. The Duty of Pastors of Churchs. VI.
The Office of Teachers in the Church. VII. Of the Rule of the Church, or of
Ruling Elders. VIII. The Nature of Church Polity (...), with the Duty of
Elders. IX. (...)cons. X. Of Excommunication. XI. Of the Communion of Ch^es.
Price bound 3 s. 2. The Doctrine of Justification by Faith, through the ^ion of
the Righteousness of Christ, explained, confirmed and ^dcated. 3. A Declaration
of the Glorious Mystery of the Person (...) Christ. God and Man. With the
Infinite Wisdom, Love and Power of God in the Contrivance and Constitution
thereof. As also the Grounds and Reasons of his Incaruation, the Nature of his
Ministry in Heaven, the Present State of the Church above thereon, and the Use
of his Person in Religion. With an Account and Vindication of the Honor,
Worship, Faith, Love and Obedience due unto him in and from the Church.
Books in Octavo, written by the same Author. THe Nature of Apostasy from the
Profession of the Gospel, and the Punishment of Apostates declared, in an
Exposition of Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. With an Enquiry into the Causes and Reasons of
the Decay of the Power of Religion in the World; or the present general
Defection from the Truth, Holiness and Worship of the Gospel. Also, of the
Proneness of Churches and Persons of all sorts unto Apostasy. With Remedies
and Means of Prevention. Exercitations concerning the Name, Original, Nature,
Use and Continuance of a Day of Sacred Rest. Wherein the Original of the
Sabbath, from the Foundation of the World, the Morality of the Fourth
Commandment, with the Change of the Seventh Day are enquired into. Together
with an Assertion of the Divine Institution of the Lords Day, and Practical
Directions for it is due Observation. The Nature, Power, Deceit, and Prevalency
of the remainders of Indwelling-Sin in Believers. Together with the ways of
it is working, and Means of Prevention. Opened, evinced and applied, with a
Resolution of sundry Cases of Consciences thereunto appertaining. A Vindication
of some Passages in a Discourse concerning Communion with God, from the
Exceptions of William Sherlock, Rector of St. George Botolph-lane. (...) ^ourse
concerning Evangelical Love, (...) Peace and Vni^ With the Occasions and
Reasons of present Differences and Di(...) about things Sacred and Religious.
Written in the Vndi^ of the Princsples and Practice of some Ministers and
others. (...) ^rief Declaration and Vindication of the Doctrine of the Tr^. As
also of the Person and Satisfaction of Christ. Accommo^ed to the Capacity and
Use of such as may be in danger to be ^educed: and the establishment of the
Truth. A Discourse of the Mortification of Sin in Believers: 1. (...)
Necessity, 2. The Nature, and 3. The Means of it. With a Resolution of sundry
Cases of Conscience, thereunto belonging. A Treatise of the Dominion of Sin and
Grace; wherein Sins Reign is discovered, in whom it is, and in whom it is not:
How the Law supports it; how Grace delivers from it, by sealing up it is
Dominion in the Heart: From Romans 6.14. Bound 1 s. A brief and Impartial Account
of the Nature of the Protestant Religion, it is State and Fate in the World,
it is strength and weakness, with the Ways and Indications of the Ruin or
Continuance of it is public National Profession. Price stitched 6 d. A brief
Instruction in the Worship of GOD, and Discipline of the Churches of the New
Testament: By way of Question and Answer: With an Expllication and Confirmation
of those Answers. Price bound 1 s.


