arms of Cromwell PROTECTOR OLIVARIVS DEI GRA REIPVB ANGLIAE SCOTIAE ET
HIBERNIAE, andc
By His Highness. A PROCLAMATION FOR THE Better encouragement of GODLY MINISTERS
and others, and their enjoying their Dues and Liberty according to LAW.
HIs Highness the Lord Protector having been informed by Complaints from
several parts of this Nation, how much discouragement has been lately given to
many Godly and Painful Ministers endeavoring Reformation according to the
present happy Establishment, by the practices of some, not only in withholding
from them the Tithes and other Duties, which by the Laws of this Commonwealth
are belonging unto them as Public Preachers; but prosecuting them by
Indictments for not using the Common Prayer Book, not administering Sacraments
unto all their Parishioners, and the like omissions; and considering how apt
the evil example and suggests of some few persons is, to provoke and mislead
others; has thought it fit and necessary to apply a seasonable remedy for
preventing so great an evil. It is evident, that as soon as the Lord began to
deliver this Nation out of the darkness of Popery in the times of Edward the
sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, much opposition was raised against that
Reformation; on the one hand by Popish Priests, who pretending a Conformity,
continued in their several Cures, but yet retained their old Superstitious
practices, in administering the Sacrament of the Lords Supper under the form of
Bread only, to the people, and denying the same unto such as would not so
receive it, and in private Communions, wherein the Priest only did partake of
both Elements of Bread and Wine: And on the other hand by the People, who being
wedded to their old Customs, and because they could not have Divine Service and
Devotions in such a Popish and Superstitious Form as before time, did not only
by Songs, Libels and Scurrilous reflections, endeavor to reproach the present
Reformation, and the faithful Ministers that were forward and zealous in it;
but did also refuse to allow and pay such Ministers their due Maintenance,
putting them upon many chargeable Suits, and troublesome Contentions, which
became a great hindrance to the progress of the Gospel. And as the latter of
those evils occasioned Queen Elizabeth (according to the example of Edward the
sixth before in like case) in the first year of her Reign, with the advice of
her Council, by her public Injunctions, amongst other things, strictly to
require and enjoin as follows, Forasmuch as by Laws established every man is
bound to pay his Tithes, no man shall by color of Duty omitted by their Curats
detain their Tithes, and so requite one wrong for another, or be his own Judge,
but shall truly pay the same, as has been accustomed, to their Parsons, Vicars
and Curats, without any restraint or diminution. Which Injuction, as formerly,
so then took good effect, and prevented those many Suits in Law, and other
disturbances which before Ministers were molested with: So for relief of the
People, and reforming the Superstitious practices aforesaid, remedy was
provided by a Statute made in the first year of the Reign of the said King
Edward the sixth. And although it plainly appears by the words of the said
Statute, that the same was intended only to compel the Administration of that
Sacrament under both kinds, (unto all such as should receive) according to the
first Institution, and to abolish the Superstitious practice of the Priests
receiving alone, and administering it to the people under the form of Bread
only: nor does the same enjoin the admitting all persons to that Ordinance,
but that the Minister should not without lawful cause deny the same to such as
should desire it; and by certain Injunctions set forth in the time of the said
King, several Causes were assigned for which the Minister might keep persons
from that Sacrament, which has been owned and practiced in all times since the
said Statute was made. And the Lord having by the light of the Gospel, which
has shined more clearly in our days, discovered many things necessary to be
further Reformed, for the preserving the purity of his Ordinance, did put it
into the hearts of the Parliament begun in 1640. not only to take away the
Liturgy or Book of Common Prayer, but also to impose a Penalty upon any
Minister that shall use the same, or the forms of Baptizing, Churchings,
Burials, together with the Ceremonies of the Cross, Surplice and other
Superstitious Rites in the Service of God; And likewise to provide that unfit
and unworthy persons should by the Minister be refused and kept back from the
Supper of the Lord, that those holy Mysteries might not be abused: yet
nevertheless under color of the said Act of 1o Edward the sixth, (though
contrary to the true meaning and end for which the same was made, and contrary
to that liberty given and established by the Humble Petition and Advice) diverse
godly and faithful Ministers have been Indicted, Presented, and otherwise
molested for not Administering the Sacrament to all their Parishioners, and the
Tithes and other Duties belonging to them detained upon that account, and for
not conforming to the old manner of Baptizing, Burials, and other things of the
like kind.

And as several Laws have been made both in former and latter times, for the
due and better payment of Tithes, so for the avoiding of contentions between
the people and their Ministers about the same, by the Wisdom and Godly care of
His late Highness with the Advice of His Council, an Ordinance was made
appointing Commisoners, consisting of Pious and Learned men, to judge of the
worth and fitness, both for Gifts and Graces, of such persons as shall be from
time to time presented to Livings throughout the Nation, to the end such fit
and approved persons faithfully laboring in the Work of the Gospel, might be in
a capacity without farther controversy to receive such Public Maintenance:
which after some years experience being found of great advantage, for
furnishing the Nation with a Pious and Able Ministry, has since received the
Approbation and Confirmation of Par-

Upon consideration of all which, His Highness holds himself obliged to use his
Authority that those Laws be observed, and to follow the good examples of the
Governors of this Nation in former times, for the due encouragement of the
Faithful and Conscientious Preachers of the Gospel, and preventing dissensions
and Suits between them, and such as live under their Ministry; And therefore
His Highness with the Advice of his Privy Council, has thought fit to enjoin
and require, and does hereby enjoin and require, all and every person and
persons within this Nation, that they do well and duly pay, discharge and
satisfy from time to time, their Tithes and other Duties accrewing, growing
due or belonging unto the respective Ministers and Public Preachers in their
respective Parishes within all and every the Counties, Cities, Towns and Places
within this Nation, which by the Laws of the Land are or shall be settled and
established for the Maintenance of the Minister or Ministers there, with the
Arrears thereof; And that no person or persons do withhold or diminish such
legal and rightful Dues and Duties, or molest any Minister by Presentiments or
Indictments, or otherwise: Upon pretense of such omissions or refusals, as are
by the present Establishment and Laws in force for further Reformation
permitted or allowed. And His Highness does further will and require all His
Judges, Justices of Assize, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Justices of the
Peace, Mayors and Chief Officers within their respective Jurisdictions, to take
especial care that no Minister or Ministers be molested or troubled contrary to
the liberty granted by the Humble Petition and Advice; and that the Laws and
Statutes for payment of Tithes and Duties to Ministers be duly put in
execution, and that no encouragement be given unto any person or persons who
shall deny the payment thereof upon any such pretenses as aforesaid, but that
they discountenance the same.

And His Highness does hereby Declare, That it is his full purpose through the
assistance of the Lord, to carry on and promote, to the utmost of his power,
the Work of Reformation so happily begun and owned by God, and that he will
make use of the Authority the Lord has betrusted him with, for the Protection
and Encouragement of such Godly and Painful Preachers of the Gospel, whose
hearts are engaged, and whose care and labors shall be conscientiously
exercised in furthering so blessed a Work, in the enjoyment of the Liberty
aforesaid; And His Highness further pleasure is, That His Highness Judges,
Justices of Assize, and all other his Justices of the Peace within this
Commonwealth, do take special care that no person or persons (in prejudice of
the Liberty given by the Humble Petition and Advice, or any other Laws or
Ordinances in force) be interrupted, molested or troubled for their going to or
from any place for the Service of God on the Lords day.

Given at White Hall the Twenty fifth day of November, in the year of our Lord
God, One thousand six hundred fifty and eight.
LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the
Lord Protector, 1658.

And are to be sold at the Sign of the Seven Stars in Fleetstreet over against
DUNSTANS Church.


