THE WHITE STONE OR, A Learned and Choice TREATISE OF ASSURANCE: VERY Useful
for all, but especially weak Believers.

By Nathanael Culverwel, Master of Arts, and lately Fellow of Emmanuel College
in Cambridge.

2 PET. ^.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.

LONDON, Printed for John Rothwel, at the Fountain and Bear in Cheapside, 1654.

THE WHITE STONE: OR, A Learned and Choice Treatise of Assurance: very useful
for all, but especially weak Believers.
2 PET. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


ASsurance of salvation is a truth of great and precious consequence, of sweet
and comfortable influence into the whole life of a Christian: A truth which has
scarce had liberty to unmask and show it self in former times, and so has
seldom or never been fully treated of: A truth which could never be more
welcome and seasonable then in times of danger and uncertainty; when all other
things are in a doubtful and wavering condition, then to make our Calling and
Election sure; to set up a spiritual Militia, and to put the soul in a posture
of defense, in such an heavenly preparation, as it may be fit to meet with all
conditions; He shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed trusting
in God: He is just like the Philosophers good man (...), foursquare, that, cast
him where you will, like a Die, he falls always sure and square; He Is built
upon the same foundation that the whole Church of God is; He Is built upon a
Rock, and though the waves dash, and the winds rise, though the storm
increase, and the floods beat in, yet the house stands, the foundation's sure,
it is built upon a Rock, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
I Will make him a pillar in the Temple of my God, as Christ promises to the
Church of Philadelphia; even like one of those Pillars in Solomon's Temple: The
name of the one was Jachin, and of the other Booz; nothing but stability and
strength, as the words imply; Christian assurance fortifies the soul, and
prepares it against all conditions.

Now, as for the drift of our Apostle in this Chapter, 'twas to persuade the
Christian Churches of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia; Bithynia, to whom he
wrote, that they would be fruitful and abundant in the graces of God, that they
would grow in grace, and add grace to grace, and so to increase in them all,
till they came to a full and perfect stature in Christ: For he that lacks these
(says the Apostle) is blind, and cannot see a far off: he is pore-blind,
and cannot see so far as haven and heavenly things: And then he is forgetful
too of the very first principles and rudiments of Grace; he forgets that he was
purged from his former sins in the Laver of Regeneration in Baptism, when he
first entered into Covenant with God.

Wherefore do ye rather give diligence to make your Calling etc. You that have
a spiritual eye, and an enlightened soul, and can discern the things of God,
and you that are mindful of the Covenant made with him, do you, brethren, give,
etc. for this if any thing will make you fruitful in the works of grace; for by
these you must maintain your assurance: these are the fruits and evidences of
your salvation, the fruits of the spirit, and the first fruits of eternal life.
Christians that make their Calling and Election sure, will and must be fruitful
in good works. The Papists interpose (...) in this verse; and Beza says
indeed, that he found it in two ancient Copies, but though it be left out in
the letter, yet we include it in the sense; good reason to leave it out in the
text, because all the Greek Copies do, two only excepted; but yet we take it in
in the interpretation, and freely acknowledge that no Christian can be assured
of his salvation, who is not fruitful and abundant in good works, as Fulke and
Carthwright do very well satisfy the Rhemists Translation.

In the words you have (1.) An usual compellation, Brethren. (2.) An
Apostolical exhortation, and that to a double duty, one subordinate to another.

The (1.) and principal in intention, to make your Calling and Election sure.
The (2.) (which is a means to the former,) to give diligence. And if you look
upon the first again, you shall find in it. (1.) A propriety, your Calling and
Election. (2.) A method and order, first your Calling, and then your Election.

As for two of the particulars, we will but point at them, because they are not
so properly intended in the words. For

1. The compellation is frequent and obvious in every Epistle; and shows

1. An Apostolical Suada, by which they were wont to wind and insinuate
themselves with them; for affection does strongly engage the judgment. And all
Rhetoric is little enough to win hearts, and prevail upon some men's spirits.

2. An Apostolical meekness: Peter a Star of the first magnitude, yet calls the
lesser Sporades his brethren; A glorious and eminent Christian, a tall Cedar in
Lebanon, yet acknowledges the meanest and lowest Christians his brethren. He
learnt this of his Lord and Master, who was not ashamed to call them brethren;
And shall the Disciple be above his Lord? 'Twere well if the Pope, who will
needs be Saint Peter's successor, would follow him in this. And who art thou, O
profane Ismael, that scoffest at the Children of the Promise under this very
name and notion of the brethren?

2. And then as for the propriety, (...), your Calling and Election.

1. None can be assured of another man's salvation, unless it be of such whom
the Scripture tells us were in the state of Grace; whose sincerity is made
famous to all the world; to whom the spirit has set its broad seal, and given
them a public testimony that they were within the Covenant: for others we know
in general, that there are a select and peculiar company whom God has chosen
out as his jewels, but we cannot say certainly and infallibly of such a
particular persons, of any Individuum, that he is a chosen vessel. Of some it is
evident and apparent, that for the present, they are not in the state of grace;
we are sure that as yet they are not efficaciously called, but we know not
whether they be chosen; for others we have great hopes, and an high degree of
probability, that they are truly born again, but yet we have no absolute
certainty; for Hypocrisies will go so far, as that the best Critics may be
deceived. And a man can never tell certainly another man's sincerity, unless he
could supply the place of conscience. An Hypocrite may spin so fair a thread, as
that it may deceive his own eye, he may admire the cobweb, and not know himself
to be the Spider; how much more easy may he deceive a stander by? And as for
any extraordinary spirit of discerning, I know no ground for it, nor any
promise of it in the Scriptures.

You Will say, this takes much from the communion of Saints, and from the
sweetness of Christian society, if we cannot tell who are true members of the
mystical body, fellow-brethren and fellow-heirs of the same promise.

1. Though we cannot tell absolutely and infallibly, yet we may know very
probably; we know there are such a peculiar people, a chosen Generation, a
Royal Priesthood, and we know that such and such are the likeliest in the world
to be of this number, so as we have no reason to distrust them.

2. We must commend much of this to Gods providence, who very seldom suffers
Hypocrites to go undetected; he that is the great searcher of hearts will be
sure to meet with them: he hates a rotten heart, and will be sure to make it
odious.

3. It Is fitting that this and many other privileges should be reserved for
Heaven, that so we may long after that the more. There shall be a pure and
unmixt communion, the perfect beauty of holiness. Nothing shall enter there
that makes a lie, nothing of Hypocrisy; but glorious Angels, and glorified
Saints sunning themselves in the presence of God, shall keep company together
to all eternity.

2. (...). Christians are chiefly to look to their own Calling and Election.
They are indeed bound to promote the good of others, and to look upon their
lives with such Rules as Christianity allows; but they must be sure to dwell at
home, and be acquainted with their own breasts, to make their own Calling and
Election sure; for they cannot be sure of another man's condition, so as they
may be of their own.

And thus we have dispatched those two particulars which lay more collateral in
the words, and were not directly intended in them. We now come to the very mind
and drift of the Text, which branches it self into these four propositions,
that will fully explain the nature of Assurance, though we keep within the
bounds of the Text: It streams into these four particulars.

Observe. 1. A Christian may be assured of his salvation.

Observe. 2. Assurance of salvation requires all diligence.

Observe. 3. Assurance of salvation deserves all diligence. Both implied in Give
diligence.

Observe. 4. The way to make our Election sure, is first to make our Calling
sure.

And now you may look upon the Text, as on a pleasant Vine, situated in a
fruitful place, (...), i. e. in the horn of the Son of Oil or fatness, as the
Prophet speaks, you may sit under the shadow of it, and its fruit will be sweet
unto you. For you see how it has spread it self into spacious and goodly
branches, such as are all laden with fair and swelling clusters; clusters of
Canaan, that are ripened with those heavenly Sunbeams that shine out upon
them; and richly filled with all spiritual sweetness. And this fruit of the
Vine will cheer the heart of man to all eternity. As for us, we'll be sure to
prune off all such sproutings and luxuriancies of style, as may any way steal
from the sap and strength of so great a truth in hand, as the Hebrews call
those sproutings, (...), i. e. little Epicures, always feasting upon the
sweetness of the Tree, and putting the root to continual expenses: we'll prune
off all these. And if there be any Clusters lie lurking under the leaves,
truth's not so obvious to every eye, we'll (if we can) spy them out. The
Vintage will be long, we shall gather but a cluster at a time, and press it in
the Application.

A Christian may be assured of his Salvation, for Saint Peter would never
exhort them to give diligence for an impossibility, for that which could not be
obtained. We Will move in this order, and show

Observe. 1. What Assurance is.

2. Arguments for Assurance.

3. The manner how Christians are assured.

4. The special times of Assurance.

5. Make Application.

I. And here first, what Assurance is.

It Is a reflex act of soul, by which a Christian clearly sees, that he is for
the present in the state of grace, and so an heir apparent to glory; or in the
words of the Text, by which he knows his Calling and Election.

It Is a reflex act, and so

1. Assurance is situated in the souls most noble, most closeted, most
private, and most spiritual operation.

1.) Reflex acts are the most noble and most royal operations, the most
rational and judicious acts of a most intelligent spirit. Reason is now in its
exaltation, it sits upon the Throne, and exercises a Judge-like power; all the
faculties of the soul must appear before its Tribunal, and give up a strict
account, (...), as the Pythagoreans were wont to pose and catechize themselves:
your inferior sensitive Creatures can go poring on upon a present object, and
blunder on in a diract way, but are far enough from any reflex acts; although
some talk of reflexiveness in sense too, (as to see that they see, or the like)
but it is but a fancy of their own; Sensitive Creatures could never reach so
high as a reflect act; and indeed sensual men know not what belong unto it, but
the reasonable soul can retire into it self, and take a view and survey of its
own actings.

2.) It is the most secret and retired operation; the soul withdrawes and bids
the body farewell, and even here becomes an anima separata: it retires into its
Closet, and bolts it self up, where none can peep in, none can evesdrop it.

3. The most refined and spiritual working of all, this is most abstracted from
matter. The soul here does not commerce with outward drossy objects, but looks
upon it self, fixes its eye upon its own face. This is the most spiritual
employment of the soul, which does most strongly argue its immortality, and
shows it to be a spark of Divinity: How does the prime and fountain Being
spend all Eternity, but in looking upon his own transcendent and glorious
Essence? in viewing the bright Constellation of his Attributes, and seeing some
shadowy and languishing Representations of himself in the glass of the
Creatures? It Is one of the chief works of a Christian, to reflect upon himself,
Vita est in se reflexio; as the grave Moralist Seneca speaks. The Prodigal came
to himself, when he came to reflex acts, so i King. 8.47. When they shall turn
to their own hearts, etc.

II. But yet this working of the soul is but weak and transient, it is fleeting
and desultory, it quickly vanishes; which shows a great disorder and
irregularity in the spirit, that that which is the noblest and most proper
operation, that borders upon Divinity, men are least ver'st in it. How rare is
it for men to reflect upon their own conditions, to enter into an exact trial
and examination of their own ways? Radius reflexus languet, as the Optics
speak; The beam begins to be weary, and is ready to faint, it gives a weak and
languishing Representation: it is true of intellectual beams too, radius
reflexus languet. O how quickly are men weary of serious thoughts and
considerations? they look upon them as melancholy interruptions, turbida
intervalla. You had need of good arguments to persuade men to entertain a
serious thought; outward objects, these divert the mind, and take it off from
its greatest work. As a man that sees his natural face in a glass, (as St.
James speaks) goes his way, and presently forgets what manner of man he was.
The soul scarce knows its own visage, it looks abroad and is a stranger to it
self. Many a man's soul has scarce looked upon it self all his lifetime.

III. It consists in a reflex act, 1 John 2.3. (...).) and so differs from
faith; it is one thing to believe, and another thing to know that I believe.
Our Divines go somewhat too far, ( Calvin, Perkins, etc.) when they put all
justifying faith in a full persuasion. Ames says, it is when they deal with the
Papists, who put it in a bar assent: but (me thinks) they should rather be
more wary there, left they give the enemy too much advantage. I rather think,
that being men eminently pious, it was as they found it in their own souls, but
all are not so strong in Christ. Assurance is the top and triumph of faith:
faith, that is our victory, by which we overcome the world: but assurance,
that is our triumph, by which (...), we are more then Conquerors. It Is flos
fidei, the very luster and eminency of faith. Faith that is the Root, Assurance
is the Top-branch, the flourishing of faith, faith with a gloss upon it.
Justifying faith, that does not only dwell in the understanding, in nudo
assensu, but requires an act of the will too, which must embrace a promise:
indeed it calls for an act resulting from the whole soul, which must receive
Christ offered unto it: but now assurance consists only in the mind, and so
there you have the difference between faith of Adherence, and faith of
Assurance. The first is an act of the whole soul, the latter is a work of the
mind only; it arises e sensu quodam spirituali; whereby we know and perceive
that we believe. And when I say every believer may be assured of his salvation:
I don't say that every believer is assured of it; No, every one is to labor for
it, to give diligence, as our Apostle speaks: but every one has not yet
obtained it: Assurance is not of the Essence of a Christian; A man may be a
true Child of God, and certainly saved, though he have not Assurance; He can
have little sweetness and comfort without it, little joy and peace, but yet he
may be in a safe, though in a sad condition. It Is required to the been esse,
not to the esse of a Believer.

1. For the promise is made to the direct act, and not to the reflex. Believe,
and thou shall be saved, that is the voice of the Gospel: Not, know that thou
do believe. Now there is many a weak Christian that has faith, and yet does
not know that he has it; Faith like a grain of mustard seed, lies hid for a
while, but it has a vigorous and operative spirit, and will work out in time,
and spread it self into goodly branches. The least degree of faith, if it be
true, brings salvation, but it does not bring assurance.

2. Many true Christians are in a state of desertion: all their light is
eclipsed, their joy and comfort is put out. Nay, they look upon God, as an
enemy; they are so far from being assured of their salvation, as that they
verily think themselves in a lost condition, and yet all this while are in a
true state of grace. Their condition is cloudy and dark, and very uncomfortable
for the present, but yet it is safe; they are true bel^evers, and yet far enough
from assurance. An excellent place in Isaiah for this* Isa 50.10. Who is among
you that fears the Lord, that walks in darkness, and has no light? let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God; some may truly fear God,
and yet walk in darkness and have no light, not the least glimpse of
assurance, no beam of Gods favorable countenance, yet let him trust in the
Lord, and stay himself upon his God. He may do this though he has no light, he
may multiply direct acts, though he has no reflex acts. And here he may lay all
the stresse of his salvation, lean upon the grace of God in Christ, and with a
sweet recumbancy rest himself upon his God.

And this consideration may strengthen many (...) bruised Reed, and revive many
a drooping spirit, who for the present do not know that ^hey believe, their
case may be good for all this. ^hou may be a true believer, though thou art
^ut a weak believer; nay, though thou think ^^y self no believer; I do not
speak this that ^^y should rest in this condition; no, this were against the
text; All must give diligence to make ^^eir Calling and Election sure: And a
Christi^^ can have little or no quiet, till he attain to ^^surance.

And thus you have seen the nature of assurance, we shall in the next place
prove, that a Christian may be assured of his salvation.

1. Ab esse ad posse. Many Christian has been, and is assured of his salvation.
Scarce any eminent Christian in the whole Book of God, but has set his seal to
this truth, by his own particular experience. This is so clear as the
adversarie^ themselves cannot deny, but that many choic^ ones have had a full
and satisfying light springing in upon their soul, and clearing their eternal
condition to them. But they say it is by way o^ extraordinary Revelation, a
special Priviledg^ vouchsafed to some few of Gods choicest Worthies by a rare
indulgence. But this is spoken gratis, and is contrary to the present
experien^^ of many thousands of Christians; 1 John 5.1^ The very drift of St.
John's Epistle, is that Ch^^stians might have assurance. And besides, tho^
mediums by which Christians attain to ass^rance, are common to all: All of
the^^ have the spirit dwelling in them: all ha^^ the fruits of the spirit, and
a sweet te^^ money of their own spirits; though some ha^^ it in a weak measure,
and cannot reach to a P^^rophory: all come not to this full assuran^^ but yet
these are the usual ways, by which (...) attain to it, which have nothing in
them of ^^traordinary Revelation: they are via Reg^^ and yet via trita too.
Add to this the scope of the text. St. Peter exhorts all to give diligence to
make their Calling and Election sure, which, to what purpose were it, if it
came only by special and extraordinary Revelation, which does not depend upon
their diligence?

2. Search into the nature of faith it self, and you will see that it does much
tend to assurance, and has some vicinity with it. There Is a double act of
faith, as the most acute Ames observes. (1.) The actus primus, by which I
believe in Christ for the remission of my sins, and justifying of my person,
which is properly justifying faith. (2.) Actus ex fide emanans, by which I
believe that my sins are remitted, which does necessarily presuppose the former
act: for thou have no more reason to believe that thy sins are remitted, which
does necessarily presuppose the former act: for thou have no more reason to
believe that thy sins are remitted then any other, till thou have first
received Christ for the Remission of thy sins. And this is contained in the
Article of the Creed, I believe the remission of sins; not only in general, for
this the Devils believe and yet tremble: but the Christian peculiarizes it, and
draws sweetness out of it, I believe the forgiveness of my sins. And of this
latter it is meant, that fidelis certus esse potest certitudine fidei de
Remissione peccatorum, Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, (...), a sweet
(...), and holy security of spirit, for Assurance is nothing but apex fidei,
the highest degree of faith. And it is the speech of Aquinas, Quicunque habet
scientiam vel fidem, certus est se habere; nam de ratione fidei est, ut home
sit certus dei his quorum habet fidem. Faith does of its own accord raise and
advance it self to Assurance, and that by reason of the applying and
appropriating virtue which is in it; It Is faiths Idiom, my Lord, and my God: by
a sweet Monopoly it engrosses all to its self; and yet leaves enough for
others. Now a man that strongly grasps a Jewel in his hand, knows that he has
it; The hand of faith lays hold on Christ, and knows that it receives him: so
the want of Assurance in a believer, does merely flow from the weakness of
faith, for though it be true, that to believe, and to know that I believe, be
two distinct acts: yet this you must know and observe, that the strength and
clearness of a direct act, will necessarily infer a reflex act. Those truths
which I do clearly and evidently know, I also know that I know them. And that
which I strongly, believe, I know that I believe it: So the want of assurance
comes from the imbecility of Faith. And the Papists that place faith only in a
mere assent, may well deny assurance; for they take away that clasping and
closing power by which it should unite its self with its object.

3. From the nature of the promises: for this is the drift of the promises, (as
it is Heb. 6.18.) that the heirs of promise might have strong consolation: Now a
believer can have but weak and unstable comfort without Assurance. What if all
the clusters of Canaan were laid on an heap? What if all the Cordials of the
Gospel were strained into one cup? were the soul any thing the better if it
must only tantalize, see them and want them? What sweetness can a Christian
draw from a promise till he knows that it belongs unto him? Will this enrich a
man, to know that there are Pearls and Diamonds in the world? Will this
satisfy a fainting Israelite, to know that there is a Canaan, a land that
flows with milk and honey, although (it may be) he shall never come neer't?
Nay, is it not a greater sting and vexation for the soul to think, I know there
are pure fountains and pleasant streams, but yet I may die with thirst* there
are spiritual dainties, and precious delicacies, but I am not sure to have one
taste of them: many a promise looks with a pleasant and propitious eye, but
it is not fixed upon my soul; so that take away a Christians interest and
propriety in a promise, and what becomes of his consolation? God has given his
word, his oath, his seal, his earnest, and all to this very end, that a poor
Christian may be assured of his salvation, that he might have a strong and
vigorous consolation; so that to deny him this, is to annihilate the word of
God, to frustrate the oath of God, to evacuate the seal of God, and as much as
in them lies to make him lose his earnest, and to leave the soul in an
intricate and perplexed condition.

4. From the nature of Christian hope; there is a vast difference between the
Moralists hope, and that which is the Theological grace, and yet this is scarce
took notice of; they require these three ingredients into the object of hope:
that it must be (1.) bonum, (2.) futurum, (3.) incertum; but Christian hope is
certain and infallible, it looks upon good as to come, and as certain to come;
indeed it is nothing but (...), as Clem. Alexand. elegantly, blood running in
the veins of Faith; if hopes expire, Faith will presently bleed to death. That
good which Faith sees, Hope waits for; Faith eyes it as present, but yet at a
distance, and hope tarries for it till it come. Christian hope is nothing but a
waiting and expectation of a certain good; you have a pregnant text for this in
Heb. 6.19. Which hope we have as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and
steadfast. Hope were but a poor Anchor if it should leave the soul to the
courtesy of a wave, to the clemency of a Rock, to the disposing of a storm.
Hope were but a weak Anchor, if it should let the soul be lost with
uncertainties, if it should leave it in danger of shipwreck. I, but this Anchor
is (...), and it pierces within the vail, it will be sure to have fast hold,
'twill fix upon heaven it self, upon the sanctum sanctorum. See another, Romans
5.2. (...); Now that is a poor glory to triumph in uncertainties, to triumph
before the victory; little cause of joy and exaltation, till the soul be
provided for eternity. I can tell you the very possibility of being damned, is
enough to extinguish joy; so that till the soul come to be in a safe condition,
safe for all eternity, and till it know it self to be in this safe condition,
it is so far from being joyful, as that it cannot tell how to be quiet. A
probable hope will bear up and support the soul, a door of hope in the valley
of Achor: but it will not quiet and satisfy the soul. The least dawning of
hope in the initials of grace, does mightily cherish and encourage the soul. O
how pleasant are the eyelids of the morning! how welcome is the daybreak after a
dark and disconsolate night! Nay, the very possibility of being saved, was that
which first drew us all to look after heaven; the very consideration, that
there was Balm in Gilead; But the weary soul will never rest here, the Dove
will never take this for an Ark: No, the beams of Gods love will shine out
stronger and brighter upon the soul, and ripen his hope into assurance,
Christian hope when it is in its full vigor, is all one with assurance, Romans
5.5. (...), but if hope could be frustrated, it then might make ashamed:
disappointment would cause a blush: hope differed will make the heart sick, and
uncertain hope will s^arce make the soul well; a Christians hope is not like
that of Pandora, which may fly out of the box, and bid the soul farewell,: no,
'twill never vanish, till it be swallowed up in fruition. The hope of the
Hypocrite, it is as his righteousness, like the morning-dew: but the hope of a
Christian it is like the morning-light, the least beam of it shall commence into
a complete Sunshine, it is Aurora gaudii, and it shall shine out brighter and
brighter till perfect day. We shall further clear this truth, if you consider
the manner how Christians are assured of their salvation, the third thing you
propounded.

1 By the graces of God which are in them, those precious seeds of mortality,
and the prints of the spirit, by which they are sealed to the day of
Redemption. Grace is the spirits stamp, by which it marks the soul for its own;
the first fruits of the spirit, the least grace, if true and sincere, is
sufficient to salvation, and therefore the sense of the least grace is
sufficient to assurance.

Object. But how shall the soul know that it has these graces in truth, and not
in shadow and color only? how shall it be certain that these are not
counterfeit and painted?

Sol. There might be given mny signs and characters of true grace, that it must
flow from a principle of sincerity from a principle of love, that it must be
comfortable to the grace of Christ; but all this will not satisfy, for the
soul will still question how shall I know that my graces are such? so then that
which we must ultimately resolve it into, is that in Romans 8.16. For in the
mouth of two or three witnesses every thing shall be established; Now we have
here two witnesses, omni exceptione majores, we have a double Testimony, a
twin-Testimony. The same spirit bears witness with our spirits that we are
the Sons of God; (...), he confirms what the other says; both the witnesses do
fully agree, and make up one entire testimony, the soul may say here, as Paul,
Romans 9.1. I speak the truth, I lie not, my Conscience bearing me witness by
the Holy Ghost.

The whole work of Assurance is summed up in this practical Syllogism,
Whosoever believes shall be saved: but I b^lieve, and so shall certainly be
saved. The Assumption is put out of doubt.

1. Conscience comes in with a full testimony: And if natural Conscience be a
thousand witnesses, then sure an enlightened and sanctified Conscience can be
no less then ten thousand; 1 John 3.10. He that believes has a witness in
himself, a Certificate in his own breast, (...): for as the same Apostle, 1
John 3.20. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God. (...) here is the same with conscience, for the Hebrews have no
other word for Conscience but (...). So then, if our heart acquit us, (...), we
have as much liberty as we can desire. It fears not now the edge of the Law,
nor the fiery darts of Satan: it does not stagger with sense of its own
weakness and unworthiness, but comes with confidence to the Throne of grace.

Obj. 1. Jer. 17.9. (...). Supplantativum Cor prae omnibus, so Arias Montanus,
(...), and inscrutabile, desperabile, so Hierome and our Translation,
desperately wicked: it is properly insanabile. Some think Paul alludes to this
place, and does explain it in Romans 2.5. (...). The Seventy read the words,
(...)* and translate it accordingly.

Sol. 1. Now as for the mind of the place: I find Expositors of great name
and worth, understanding it of the unregenerate heart, of the heart of man,
that is in the state of corrupt nature, of whom it is said, that All the
imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart, are altogether evil continually.

Sol. 2. The drift of the text is, to show the deceitfulness of men's hearts in
respect of others, for it is brought in by way of Objection. The Jews they are
cunning and subtle, and can delude the Prophets, and so think to evade the
Curse. No; but I the Lord search the hearts: I have a fair window, an open
prospect into the most reserved spirit: it is as clear as Crystal to my eye.

Sol. 3. Yet it is true, that the most sincere heart is very deceitful, the
heart of a David, of a man after Gods own heart, is full of windings and
turnings, and many deviations, such secret passages as himself knows not of.
For who has known the error of his ways? No man yet had such a piercing
insight into his own soul as to be acquainted with every motion of it. None can
so anatomize his own spirit that it shall be (...), so as every vein and nerve
and muscle shall be obvious and apparent to his eye; But what does this hinder,
but that the general frame and bent of the spirit, the byas and inclination of
the soul may be clearly known? The soul knows which way its faculties stream
with most vehemence. Conscience cannot be bribed, 'twil give in the true
judgment, especially an enlightened conscience. There Is none, but if he search
and examine his own soul in a strict and impartial manner, may know whether he
be sincere and cordial or no. There Is none but may know the general frame and
temper of his spirit, 1 Cor. 2.11. Who knows the things of a man, but the
spirit of a man that is in him? The Testimony of conscience is certain and
infallible. Many a wicked man by this is assured, that for the present he is in
a miserable and damnable condition; he knows certainly that as yet he is out of
the Covenant; and hence many times there are lightening flashes of terror fly
in his face, the very sparks of Hell compass him about. Does not thy Conscience
often tell thee, O profane wretch, that as yet thou art a Child of wrath, and
galloping to damnation with a full Cariere? why then may not the heart of a
Christian tell him as certainly, that he is a Child of God by adoption, and an
heir of promise? nay, speak O Christian, where e're thou art, and speak aloud
that we may hear thee, does not thy own soul tell thee, that thou art in a sure
and happy condition? so sure as nothing shall be able to separate thee from the
love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord. Why are Christians so often enjoined,
(...), to try their own spirits, if that after all their diligence thet cannot
tell what to think of them? All uses of examination were vain and frivolous,
which yet are the very life and spirits of preaching. And Ames tells us of a
donum discretionis, which Christians have, by which they can discern true grace
from counterfeit. There are certain (...) by which they may distinguish them
and judge of them in themselves, though not in others certainly.

Object. 2. If all thus by the testimony of conscience may know their own frame
of spirit, whether they be upright or no; why then are not all true Christians
assured of their salvation? what have they not their consciences and hearts
about them?

Sol. 1. Many are not sufficiently acquainted with their own spirits, they do
not keep so strict a watch over themselves, they are not verst in their own
hearts, they don't try and search their ways, they have riches and a treasure,
and do not know of it.

Sol. 2. It is in so great and weighty a matter: Eternity does so amaze and
swallow up the thoughts, as that they are ready to tremble, where they are
certain and secure; A man on the top of a Tower knows that he is safe enough,
and yet when he looks down he is afraid of falling.

3. Conscience sometimes gives a dark and cloudy testimony, when it is
disquieted and charged with new guilt, the soul cannot so clearly read its
evidences. And then it begins to question its condition. It may be it has dealt
hypocritically in some one particular; and now it begins to question all its
sincerity.

We do not say then that Conscience does always give a clear and full
testimony, but sometimes it does, and that with absolute certainty.

2. Now comes in the second witness, and the great and supreme testimony of the
spirit himself, witnessing with our spirits that we are the Sons of God, Romans
8.16. we render it, the same spirit, but in the fountain is the spirit it self,
not (...), but (...), not only the gifts and graces of the spirit, but the
spirit it self.

Object. This testimony seems to be coincident with the other, for a man cannot
tell his own sincerity: it is the spirit that must reveal a man to himself; The
soul cannot see its own face unless the spirit unmask it; the spirit is more
present and conversant with the soul, then the soul is with it self. He does
not only know our hearts, but he is greater then our hearts, and knows all
things.

Sol. We Will easily grant, that to the least motion in spirituals, there is
necessarily required the concurrence of the Holy Ghost; but withal, we say
that there is a mighty difference between working of the spirit, and the
testimony of the spirit. There Is a powerful and efficacious work of the spirit,
when faith is wrought in the soul: but yet there is not the testimony of the
spirit, for every believer has not presently the seal set to him: so that
though the testimony of our own spirit cannot be without the help and influence
of the spirit, yet it is clearly distinct from the Testimony of the spirit; for
here the spirit does enable the soul to see its graces by a present light, by
the souls light; But when it comes with a testimony, then it brings a new
light of its own, and lends the soul some auxiliary beams, for the more clear
and full revealing of it, so that you see according to that plain text in the
Romans, There are two distinct Testimonies, the spirit witnessing with our
spirits; And St. John is the most express, Beloved, if our hearts condemn us
not, then have we confidence toward God. Now the testimony of the spirit is

1. A clear testimony, a full and satisfying light springs in upon the soul,
scatters all Clouds, all doubts and questions; it is as evident as any
demonstration; 1 John 3.24. By this we know that he dwells in us, by the spirit
which he has given us. Christ when he went to heaven, he left the Comforter,
not only to the Church in general, but to every particular soul that believes,
to print his love upon the soul, (...), etc. Chrysostom. If a creature, though
never so glittering, should tell men so, there might still be some hesitancy;
I, but the spirit witnesses. The secret and inward testimony of the spirit is
as strong and efficacious; nay, more powerful then if 'twere with an outward
voice. If an Angel from Heaven were sent on purpose to a Christian by Christ
himself; Go tell him that I love him, that I shed my blood for him, etc. 'twere
not so certain.

2. A sure testimony, for it is the witness of the spirit, who can neither
deceive, nor be deceived, (...), sufficientissimum Testimonium, as Cajetan.

1. He cannot deceive, for he is truth it self.

2. He cannot be deceived, for he is all Eye, Omniscience it self.

And he does (...), he dwells in the breast and bosom of God: he is fully
acquainted with the mind of God, and he reveals it to the soul. The Papists
make the spirits testimony to bring but a conjectural certainty. But the most
renowned Perkins answers them, (1.) That it is such a certainty as makes them
cry Abba Father: not only think so, and speak so, but with all courage,
confidence, intention of spirit, cry Abba Father. (2.) It is opposed to the
spirit of bondage, and therefore takes away doubtings and tremblings. (3.) The
very end why the Holy Ghost comes to the soul, is to make all sure, and
therefore is called a seal and an earnest. Now he assures the soul

1. By a powerful Application of the promise; for as faith does appropriate the
promise on our part, so the spirit applies it on Gods part. As Satan, that
lying spirit, casts in doubts and fears, and tremblings, and working upon the
remainder of corruption, plots against the peace and well being of the soul; so
this holy spirit, by the comforting, working upon that principle of grace,
which he himself has planted in the heart of a Christian, does study and
contrive the welfare of a believer. And as the spirit of bondage does strongly
apply wrath and the curse; so this sweet spirit of Adoption applies grace and
mercy. The spirit of bondage strikes terror into the soul, by a mighty
Application of wrath; this curse flames against thee; this threatening this
curse flames against thee; this threatening is shot off against thee; these
vials of wrath are prepared for thy soul: So the spirit of adoption does set on
strong and vigorous apprehensions of mercy; this pearl of price, it is to enrich
thee; these Evangelical cordials, are to revive thee; this balm in Gilead is
prepared for thy soul. The spirit of Adoption speaks love and peace, and
pardon; and that by particular Application of the promise to us; As when the
promise of Remission of sins, and life everlasting by Christ is generally
propounded in the Ministry of the word, the holy Ghost does particularly apply
it to the heart of such a one, and does seal up the promise to the soul; That
when faith says, this promise is mine, this belongs to me: the spirit does
strongly apply it, this is thine indeed; and this does belong to thee: These
are the secret (...), the whisperings and breathings of the holy spirit, the
secret (...) by which it converses with the soul; The spirit of God has free
and often intercourse with a believing spirit. And this is far enough from any
vain Enthusiasme, any extraordinary Revelation; it is no imaginary thing, but
such as many a soul is acquainted with, and has tasted of.

2. By a bright irradiation beaming out upon the soul, and clearing its
evidences, discovering its graces, and showing them to be true and genuine; not
only by giving the soul a spirit of discerning, (for that we referred to the
former Testimony) but the spirit brings in its own light, and makes those
graces, which were visible before, more eminently conspicuous; The spirit of a
man, was the Candle of the Lord, (as the wise man speaks) which gave a weaker
and dimmer light, but yet such as was enough to manifest the Object: I, but now
there are glorious Sunbeams come rushing in upon the spirit, the spirit shines
in the soul with healing under his wings. The graces of the spirit, these flow,
like a pure and Christalline stream; and the light of the spirit shines out
upon them, and gilds the water. See a plain text for this, 1 Cor. 2.12. We have
received the spirit which is of God, that we might know the things which are
freely given us of God: Light sets a gloss upon all the world, and this
spiritual light gives a luster and oriency to graces; it puts a beauty upon
them, such as the soul is much taken with; We have received an^ heavenly light,
that we may see heavenly things. Now thou know thy faith to be lively, and
thy Repentance to be sound, thy sorrow to be ingenuous, and thy obedience
sincere; thy love to be unfeigned, and thy fear to be filial: for the Spirit has
set his Seal to all thy graces, and ha^ acknowledged them for his own.

Object. 1. O but many have thought they have had the spirit, when they had it
not: and the Devil, that foul spirit, can transform himself into an Angel of
light.

Sol. But 1. One man's self-deceit does not prejudice another certainty. What
if one man flatter himself in a false light, and please himself i^^ a mere
shadow of assurance; must all men need follow his example? A man that is in a
drea^ thinks himself awake, when he is not: I, but ((...) hope) for all this, a
man that is awake, may ce^tainly know that he is so. Many a Travel (...) has
thought himself in the right way, when (...) has been out of it: and yet this
does not hinde^ but that he that is well acquainted with t^^ Road, may know that
he is in his way. Wh^^ if one man take Copper for Gold, must all m^^ do so too?
One man's folly and vanity does not at all hinder another Assurance.

2. The spirit comes with a convincing beam; Light shows both it self and other
things too; the Sun by its glorious beams does paraphrase and comment upon its
own glittering Essence; and the spirit displayes himself to the soul, and gives
a full manifestation of his own presence. The soul knows the aspect of the
spirit, better then we do the face of a friend. The light of a presumptuous
wretch, is like a blazing Comet, and does but portend his ruin: it carri^s a
venomous and malignant influence in it; and the light of an hypocrite is but a
flash, and coruscation, very brief and transient. A man may sooner take a
glowworm for the Sun, then an experienced Christian can take a false delusion
for the light of the spirit.

3. There is a twin-light springing from the word and the spirit. Try the
spirits; To the Law, to the Testimony: if they speak not according to the rule,
it is because there is no morning in them.

The Scripture was all endited by the spirit, and the spirit cannot contradict
himself: You do but greeve the spirit, (whoer'e you are) that pretend to any
Revelation, that agrees not with the Word; Nay, the spirit has revealed his
whole mind in the word, and will give no other Revelation, any otherwise then
we have spoken of. And whoever he is that rebels against the light of the Word,
he shall never have the light of the Spirit. Whilst thou do not follow the
directing light of the spirit, thou shall never have the quickening and
cherishing beams of it.

And thus you have heard the double Testimony: the Spirit witnessing with our
Spirit, and now you must know, that

1. The Testimony of Gods Spirit is always accompanied with the Testimony of
our own spirit: and so that word Romans 8. is significant, (...) which is
properly of one, that does only confirm what the other says: But then 2. A man
may have the testimony of his own spirit, that has not the witness of Gods
spirit. The Spirit as it breaths when it pleases, so it shines when it pleases
too: Well then, the question is, whether the Christian, who has but the single
testimony of his own spirit, may be assured of his salvation?

Mr. Perkins propounds the case, and resolves it thus: If the testimony of the
Spirit be wanti^g, then the other testimony, the sanctification of heart, will
suffice to ass^re us. We know it sufficiently to be true, and not painted fire,
if there be heat, though there be no flame; thus he: And his meaning is, as
indeed the thing is, that it is a true assurance, thou^h not so bright an
assurance. I may see a thing certainly by the light of a Candle, and yet I may
see it more clearly by the light of the Sun. And for my part, I think that
certainty does not consist in puncto, but may admit of a latitude; and receive
magis and minus: And the contrary principle does delude many. There Is an
absolute and infallible certainty in faith, and by this I know the creation of
the World: well, but besides this, I know it by reason and by unquestionable
demonstration, and I think this adds to my certainty. So here; though one
testimony be enough for Assurance, yet a double testimony makes it more
glorious. Certainty admits of degrees, and a man may be more certain of a
thing, that he is already certain of. Take two Christians, both may be assured
of their salvation; and yet one may have a clearer assurance then the other
has: One may have a double testimony, and another but a single, Nay, the same
soul may have at one time a double testimony, and at another but a single. The
light of the spirit may and does often withdraw it self, and leave only the
witness of our own spirit; and yet then the soul has assurance. But yet the
soul should aim at the highest Plerophory, at the top of assurance: Then quench
not the spirit, lest you put out your own joy; greeve not so sweet an
inhabitant, that comes to comfort you, give him no cause to withdraw his light.

Quest. But what if the soul have not the witness of Gods spirit, nor of its
own spirit neither? What if it have no present light, no certain evidence?

Answ. There Is one way left yet; have recourse to former Assurance. Do thou
certainly know and remember, that once thou had a sweet serenity of soul?
that an enlightened conscience upon good grounds, did speak peace unto thee?
Did thou never see the light of the spirit crowning thy soul with satisfying
beams? Art thou sure that once he did bear witness with thy spirit, that thou
were the Child of God? Why then, be sure still that thou art in the same
condition; for there is no total falling from grace. Thy light (it may be) is
put out for the present: Conscience does not speak so friendly to thee, as
'twas wont. And thou have greeved the spirit, and he has took it unkindly, and
has held off his light for a while: But now can thou remember the days of
old, when the Rock poured out Oil unto thee, when thy branch was gr^en and
flourishing? Can thou certainly recall thy former Assurance? Can tell the
time when the spirit did set his seal unto thee, and confirmed all thine
Evidences? Well then, lay down but perseverance for a ground, and thou art
still assured of thy salvation: The spirits testimony is of an eternal truth:
And heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, then one beam of this ligh^ shall
vanish, though now it be not apparent to thy eye. When the soul for the present
is cloudy and dark, it may cherish it self with former assurance. Now that a
soul may have no sensible Assurance for the present, and yet may remember
former Assurance, is clear in that holy man David, Psalm. 51.12. Restore unto me
the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free spirit. David's joy was
extinguished, and he would fain have it lighted again: Three things implied in
the word Restore. 1. That for the present it was taken away. 2. That once he
had it. 3. He remembers that he had it, and therefore prays, Restore unto me
the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free spirit; that was the
spring of David's joy, the testimony of the spirit witnessing with his spirit,
was that which did uphold and staff up the soul. David's own spirit was now
very unquiet, and Gods spirit did withdraw himself; and now the best
refreshment that David has, is from former Assurance. It Is true, there is some
sadness and bitterness in this consideration, when a Christian shall think what
he has lost. O, my soul was once a beautiful Temple, full of fair windows, and
goodly prospects, and glorious light; I could take a prospect of Canaan when I
pleased, but now I dwell in the tents of Kedar, nothing but blackness and
darkness. There is trouble and a sting in these thoughts; but yet there is some
honey and sweetness too: Was I not once a friend of God, and does he use to
forsake his friends? Did he not once speak peace to thee, and does he use to
recall his words? Did not he shed his love in thy heart, and is not his love
immortal? Did not his spirit seal up thy soul, and is not the print of that
seal indeleble? speak, did not he once show thee thy name written with his own
hand in the Book of life, and does he use to blot out what he has written? Do
not thou remember, did not he smile upon thee in such and such an Ordinance,
and are his smiles deceitful? O no! rest satisfied, O Christian soul, and quiet
thy self in those rich expressions of his love, which he has formerly bestowed
upon thee; O question not his goodness, but prepare thy self for receiving of
it. The streams are dried up, but yet the Fountain is full; thou have had some
tastes of it, though now thou art dry and thirsty: and thou shall have in time
fresh bubblings up of his grace toward thee; in the interim, take this for a
cordial. Those former drops which thou have tasted of it, will cherish thy soul
to all eternity. The least drop of grace shall never be exhausted, the least
spark of true joy shall never be exstinguisht; all the floods that the Dragon
can vomit out of his mouth, shall never be able to quench it. But then

4. Put the case thus, that there be no Sunlight, nor Starre-light, nor
relics of former light; neither the testimony of Gods spirit, nor of our own
spirits, nor any recalling of former assurance; what must the soul do now? Now
look to the dawning of the day, to the first Crepusculum; look now to the
initials of grace, to the preface of sanctification. Thou can not, it may be,
show any fair and lively pourtraicture; I, but have thou the first draughts and
rudiments of holiness? Thou have not any goodly and delicious clusters of
Canaan; O but see if the tender grape do bud. There are not any ripe fruits of
the spirit, but yet are there some blossomings of holiness? thy graces don't
flow out into so full and fair a stream; but can thou see any bubblings up of
goodness in thee? Thou have not yet the strength a well grown Christian; well,
but is there the vagitus of an Infant? Look now to the souls prizing of a
Christ, to the whimperings after the breast, to the breathings and longings
after its Beloved, thoughts upon him, desires for him, endeavors after him,
there is much comfort and sweetness in these: I, and some kind of assurance For

1. Be sure, that God that has begun this great work in thee, will never give
over till it be full and complete; he does not use to leave his work imperfect.
The least tendency to goodness is cherished by him; The very first motion, it is
of his own planting, and it shall lack for no watering, and he himself will
give it an increase.

2. The least seed of grace, as it is choice and precious; so it is very vigorous
and operative, it will never leave working till Christ be formed in thee. Who
has despised the day of small things? Thy spark may spread it self into a
flame, and thy tender bud may flourish, and bring forth much fruit. He that is
richest in grace, beg^n with as little a stock. He that is now a tall Cedar,
was once a tender plant. Improve but present strength, and God will send thee
in fresh supplies, Auxiliary forces, and thou shall walk from strength to
strength, till thou appearest before God in glory. Thy light shall shine out
brighter and brighter till perfect day, Donec, stabiliatur dies, according to
the Syriac, till thou come to a firm and well established assurance. The least
peeping out of light, the least dawning of the day is pleasant and comfortable.

5. If thou can not spy out any grace in thy self, borrow light of another.
Lay open thy soul to an Interpreter, one of a thousand, h^ may explain thy
condition, and paraphrase upon thy soul better then thou thy self can. This
Interpreter, one of a thousand may more exactly analyze thy condition, and show
the context and coherence of it. It Is the speech of Elihu, Job 33.23. There
meets him a Messenger, an Interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto him
his uprightness; He Will show thee, here is grace, and there is grace; here is a
true pearl, and there is a spark though in ashes, and there is an evidence. A
discerning and experienced Christian may show thee cause of joy, when thou
can find none thy self. It Is no shame to borrow light, especially spiritual
light.

6. One step further. What if after all this there be not the least glimmering
of light, nothing of a spark, nothing of a beam; a total eclipse, all Clouds
and blackness and darkness, and the very valley of the shadow of death? yet
even here will we fear none ill.

1. When reflex acts are wanting, be sure to multiply direct acts: when there
is no certainty of Evidence, yet even then have a certainty of Adherence and
Recumbency. Now grasp a Promise, take fast hold of that precious offer, roll
thy self upon the free grace of a God in Christ; lay all the stresse of thy
salvation upon it, with a gallant and heroical resolution; If I perish, I
perish. Thus Job, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. Thus our Savior,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And this must needs be a strong act
of faith, even then to rely upon God when he seems thine enemy; to trust in an
angry and displeased God, and when he frowns on thee, yet then to lean upon
him. Like men ready to be drowned, be sure to take fast hold; cast Anchor,
though in the dark.

2. Study self-denial, and though thou long and breath after Assurance; yet
resign up thy self wholly to his will, and be content to want assurance, if he
see it best for thee. Take heed of murmuring in the wilderness, in the saddest
and most deserted condition. Throw thy self at his feet, with this resolution;
O my God, I Will bless thee for those eternal treasures of sweetness that are in
thy self, though I should never taste of them: I Will bless thee for those
smiles of thy face, which thou bestowest upon others, though thou will not cast
one gracious look upon my soul: I Will bless thee for those rich offers of grace
thou make unto me, though I have not a heart to lay hold of them.

3. Put thy soul into a waiting posture, and stay till he please to display
some of himself unto thee, and make some of his goodness pass^ before thee. One
beam of his countenance, on^ gracious smile, one propitious glance of his eye
the least crumb of the hidden Manna; it is worth waiting for all thy lifetime.
And when I speak of waiting, I mean not that the soul should stand still, and
do nothing; no, this were against the Text, Give diligence, etc. improve all
present strength, wait upon him in prayer, beg one glimpse of him, be earnest
for a taste, for a relish of the hidden Manna; and wait upon him in his
Ordinances, here the spirit breaths, here Manna's rained down, here God shows
his face, here is the sealing place, the spirit confirms the word, and prints
it upon thy soul. Thus wait upon him in his own way; I, and wait upon him in
his own time too, don't think time tedious; He that believes, makes not haste,
which St. Paul renders; He that believes is not ashamed; as if to make haste
and be ashamed were all one. God will wonderfully prepare the soul, that he
means to fill with his love. Assurance is too precious a thing to be powered
into every spirit: He will not put new wine into old bottles. God is all this
while making thee more capable of his love; and though for the present thou
have no assurance, yet thus trusting and waiting upon him, thou art in a great
tendency to it. And put the worst that can be imagined, that thou should die
under a Cloud; yet thy condition were safe, and thou shall come then to a full
assurance; nay, to a full possession of thine inheritance, and thou shall see
the glorious Sunshine of the face of God, a beam of which thou did so much
long for here.

We come now to the fourth particular: those special sealing times, when
Christians have their Assurance and Plerophory.

1. Many times at their first conversion, God does then seal up the work of
grace in the soul. When the spirit of bondage has past upon the soul, and by a
strong conviction, has applied particularly guilt and wrath unto it; the fatal
sentence is pronounced, and the soul is filled with the scorching
pre-apprehensions of hell and damnation, and trembles at the very though^ of
eternity: Now for the Gospel to bring the^^ welcome news of a pardon, and for
the spirit o^ adoption to apply grace and mercy unto the soul: for the
prison-doors to be broken open and a poor captive set at liberty; to have al^
the Chains and fetters beaten off, and to b^ brought into a mavelous light;
to have all the balm of Gilead powered into him, Evangelica^ fruitions and
cordials prepared for him, and which is the very extraction and quintessence
(...) all, the love of a Savior shed into his heart What strong impressions of
joy, think you, m^ there be in such a soul? What precious inf^^ons of spiritual
sweetness? What secret springings and elevations of spirit? What triumphs, what
Jubilees, what love-raptures? I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine. I must
appeal to your breasts that have found this great and heavenly work wrought
upon your soul; it is you only that have tasted the joy of the holy Ghost, that
is glorious and unspeakable. And do you tell us, had not ye then the first
relish of the hidden Manna? was not it very sweet and delicious? had not thou
then the first glimpse of the White Stone? and was not it very bright and
orient? had not thou then the Spouses kiss, and was not it precious and more
worth then a world? did not thou then first hear the soft language and
whisperings of the spirit, and was not his voice lovely and pleasant? I know
your souls dance within you, with the very recalling of so happy and golden a
time, and you pant and breath after more of this communion with a Savior, and
truly he deserves an Anathema, that does not prefer the very possibility of
having of it before all the world. Hosea 11. ^ct. When Israel was a Child, then
I loved him; I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms, (...): I
taught him to foot it on the ways of Religion, (...); I drew them with the
cords of a man, all gentle and persuasive solicitations, with bands of love, I
was to them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and I laid meat unto
them. The yoke of bondage the soul was under, God freed the soul, brought him
to an easy pleasant yoke. God has a special care of tender plants; when Israel
was a tender vine, O then he fenced it, and hedged it, and shone out upon it,
etc.

Now Christ is thus pleased to reveal his love, to unbosom himsel unto the
souls of young Converts, for their greater encouragement in the ways of grace:
At the first step to heaven, he gives them a viaticum. If after the soul had
been steept in legal humiliation, and possessed with fears and terrors, and
amazements compast with Clouds, and now at last it has been drawn by a mighty
work to receive a Savior; If after all this it should have no Sunshine, it
would droop and languish, and be ready to pine away; it would be very unfit and
unserviceable, the wheels of the soul would move heavily: God therefore oils the
wheels, poures the Oil of gladness into the soul. And now it moves like the
Chariots of Aminadab, with a nimble spontaneity. Christ begins to flourish
through the Lattices, lets in some of his love into the soul; I, and gives it a
sense of this love too, and this constrains it to obedience, and sets the soul
a longing for more of this love, and for more sense of this love; and so it
will never leave longing, til it have a full fruition of it in heaven: this is
Gods method, this is the usual progress of grace in the soul.

And hence you may see why young Converts are usually so active in the ways of
Religion, so forward and vehement. O, they have fresh apprehensions of the love
of a Savior; what an eminent alteration he has wrought in them, how they are
raised from death to life? O, they can tell you long stories of his goodness,
what great things he has done for their soul. So that their affections are
raised: there is a flush of joy the soul runs over, and knows no banks, no
bounds. Thus God does many times seal up the work of grace in the soul, and
gives a satisfying light at the first conversion: but yet I cannot say that
this is always so, for there are diversities of workings, and grace sometimes
wrought in the soul after a more still and undiscernable manner; as we shall
have occasion to speak more hereafter.

2. Sacrament-times, are sealing times. I speak of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper; for as for those secret breathings of the spirit upon Infants in that
other Sacrament of Baptism, they are altogether unsearchable, and past finding
out. Now in the Lords Supper you have the new Covenant sealed up unto the soul;
the soul has not only his graces increased, but they are printed clearer; that
seal of the spirits does print a Christians evidences with a clearer stamp. You
have plaIn and visible representations of the love of a Savior; and you have
the sense of this love powered out into you. A Christian feeds not only upon
sacramental bread, but upon hidden Manna too, and has tastes of that love that
is sweeter then wine. Here Is a feast of fat things; The soul is satisfied as
with marrow and sweetness; spiritual refreshments like fat things, they are
sweet, and they are filling too; yet not like the fat things that have a
cloying fulsomness in them; no, these carry a delicious relish with them, such
as the soul takes present complacency in them, and has a longing appetite for
them. The soul never nauseats the feast of fat things; but the more it feeds
upon them, the more it hungers after them. Now the two grand ends of this
Sacrament in reference to a Christian, are 1. Growth of Grace. 2. Sens^ of
Grace. It Is a Sacrament of Augmentation by which a new-born-infant-soul may
grow up to its just proportion and full stature in Jesus Christ; and it is a
Sacrament evidencing this hi^ condition to the soul. Christians come hithe^ ad
corroborandum Titulum; the smoking fla^ comes hither to have some light, and
the bruise^ Reed comes hither to have some strength; the worm Jacob crawles
into the presence of a Savior, and is sent away with an encouraging voice,
Fear not, thou worm Jacob. Many a tender babe in Christ, has stretched out his
weak and trembling hand, to lay hold of a Savior, and has found virtue coming
out from him. Many a thirsty soul has come breathing and panting after the
streams of water; it has opened his mouth wide, and he has filled it. The
longing and affectionate soul has come with vehement and enlarged desires, and
has found full expressions and manifestations of his love toward her. Many
acloudy soul has come hither to see if he could spy out one beam, and has bin
sent away brighter then the Sun in all its glory. You that come hither with the
most ample and capacious souls; tell us whether you be not filled up to the
brim, whether your cup don't overflow? O what heavenly intercourse is there
between you and a Savior? what pleasant aspects? what mutual love-glances?
what smiles and blandishments? Do not you find in your own souls, a full
Paraphrase upon the book of the Canticles, that book of Loves? He comes with an
earthy and drossie soul, that is not raised and advanced with such glorious
mysteries.

And yet my meaning is not, as if every true Christian that had received this
Sacrament, must needs have assurance; No, we know

1. Believers themselves may receive unworthily, as the Christian Corinthians,
(when Paul tells them) they came together for the worse, and not for the
better, he speaks it of such as were truly in the state of grace. Thus he
concludes his discourse, You are chastened of the Lord, that you might not be
condemned with the world. And thus the soul may go from a Sacrament with less
comfort then it brought thither.

2. Many that have much joy and sweetness from a Sacrament, real and spiritual
joy, I and strength and vigor too, yet it may be have it not in so great a
proportion, in so high a measure; their cup is not so brim full, as that it
should reach to assurance. All that do truly partake of these heavenly
delicacies, yet don't go away equally satisfied. Some have but a taste which is
enough to cherish them, others a full draught which does mightily enliven them.
So then, all we say is this, those Christians that have assurance, have it
usual at these times, and some Christians that have wanted assurance, yet here
have found it, which should strongly engage all to come hither with great and
solemn preparation, quickening and exciting their graces, improving all present
strength, breathing and longing after these pleasant streams, widening and
enlarging their affections, opening their mouths like a dry and thirsty Land
that waits for some satisfying showers, and would fain be filled.

3. Times of employment are sealing times. When God intends a Christian for
great and eminent service, he first makes his goodness pass before him, he
sheds some of his love into his heart, which does both constrain him to
obedience, and encourage him in it; his smile makes the soul go cheerfully
about his work, his presence gives life and vigor to a performance. The
servants of God wait on him, fix their eyes upon him, look whether he gives
them a propicious glance, they walk in the light of his countenance, they
follow the direction of his eye, they won' move unless he breath on them. Moses
will not stir without assurance of his presence. All the clusters of Canaan shall
not entice him, he had rather dwell with briars and thorns in the wilderness,
with the good will of him that dwells in the bush: He had rather be in a
barren, and desolate and howling wilderness: then in a pleasant and fruitful
Land, in a delicious Land without the presence of his God. He knows there is no
sweetness in Canaan without him; there is more sting then honey in the Land of
Promise, unless ^e be there; and Canaan it self will prove a wilderness if he
^ithdraw himself. The beams of his gracio^^ Presence, these gild a place: they
can turn a desert into a Paradise, and can make a prison glorious. The love of
God in Christ it is attractive and magnetical, and draws the soul along when
it is once touched with it, this will draw Moses to the Land of Promise, this
will carry him through all difficulties. God sheds some of this love into Moses
his heart, and then he goes on with cheerfulness and alacrity. And so it was
with his successor Joshua. God calls him to an honorable employment, to be
the Shepherd of his little flock, to guide and govern his people Israel. Now
how does he prepare him for so great a work? why, he strengthens him, and
heartens him with a promise of himself, with assurance of his love: Fear not,
but be of courage, I am with thee: Thou have my presence, thou shall have my
blessing, I have done much for thee, and I will do more for thee; be faithful
in my service, and be courageous, and do not doubt of the love of God toward
thee. Thus God when he called Abraham to that great expression of obedience in
the sacrificing of his Isaac, he first warms his heart with his love, and seals
up the Covenant of grace to him: he spreads before him ample and comprehensive
Promises, I am thy God All-sufficient, I am thy Buckler, and thine exceeding
great reward; and this will bear up and support Abraham, though the staff of
his old age be taken away, and by his own hands cast into the fire.

And this was his usual dealing with the Prophets, when he sent them with great
and weighty messages. He first reveals his goodness to them, before he reveals
his mind by them, he assures them of directing mercy, of protecting mercy that
shall bear them company, that shall go along with them: and this puts a
generous undauntedness upon them, that they fear not the frowns of men, nor the
threatenings of men, nor of the greatest of men: this makes Jeremy to set his
face like a flint, and Esaias to lift up his voice like a Trumpet, to tell Israel
their sins, and Judah their transgressions.

And this is that which prepares the Martyrs for their sufferings. God tempers
and allayes that Cup, he drops some of his goodness into it, and sweetens it to
them. He first sets his seal to their souls, before they set their seal to his
truth; he diets them with the hidden Manna, and gives them beforehand the
White Stone, as a sure pledge of victory. What is it but this that makes them
devour torments, and come to them with an appetite? it is this that softens the
flames, and turns them into a bed of Roses; it is this that fills their souls
with joy, and their mouths with praises: that makes them more cheerful in their
sufferings, then their Savior in his; for they usually have the face of a
reconciled God shining out upon them, which was wholly withdrawn from him, when
he cried out, my God, my God, why have thou for saken me?

4. Praying times are sealing times. The same spirit that indites the Prayer,
seals it up. When Hannah had put up her Prayer, 1 Samuel 1.18. the text says
expressly, that her countenance was no more sad. As it is the great privilege of
assurance, That Christians may then with confidence cry Abba Father: so also
it is a great means to Assurance. The hearing of prayers is a mighty
strengthening to faith; and the strengthening of faith does strongly tend to
assurance. Besides, Christians may pray for assurance; they may be importunate
for a glimpse of his face, for one beam, for one smile, and his bowels will not
let him deny them. Hence you shall find it, that such as are most frequent in
Prayer, are most blessed with assurance. Praying Christians have much intercourse
and communion with their God. And thus there may be a national kind of
assurance, I say a national plerophory; when God shall pour out a spirit of
prayer and supplication upon his people, and they with united and
concentricated abilities shall besiege the Throne of grace; there is no doubt,
there can be no doub^, but at length he will yield up such a mercy to his
praying People.

5. Times of outward exigencies are sealing times, 2 Cor. 4.16. Though our
outward man decay, yet our inward man is renewed daily; that feeds upon hidden
Mannah, a precious restaurative for a fainting Christian: Manna you know was
rained down in the wilderness; and when the Israelites provision failed them,
then Manna was rained down. When the water-pots are filled up to the brim, then
was the water presently turned into wine: and so this hidden Mannah is provided
for sad and cloudy conditions. We except only the case of total desertion, when
the soul has not the least light shining in upon it, which is the severest
judgment that a true Christian is capable of: but in other distresses,
especially outward and temporal distresses, he does reveal himself more
immediately to them. And though the creature frown, yet he will smile upon
them. Believers they are the friends of God, and it is no part of friendship to
forsake them in the saddest times. St. John, when a banished man in the Isle of
Pathmos, then God shows him that glorious Revelation. Paul and Silas, when in
prison, then brim-full of joy, which breaks out into Psalms of praise. In the
fiery trial, as there is some scorching, so there is some light too. And God
does prepare his people for the seal of the spirit, by thus melting and
softening their heart; for the softer the heart is, the clearer will the print
of his love be. When God had brought that great sickness upon Hezekiah, and
thus had dissolved and softened his heart, he presently prints his love upon it:
(...), Thou have loved my soul from the Grave. God does then most express his
love, when they have most need of it. The white Stone sparkles most oriently in
the darkest condition. O how gloriously does God shine in upon the prisons of
Martyrs? what frequent visits does he give them? it might even make men
ambitious of their sufferings, that they might have some such expressions of
his love toward them.

6. Times of Victory and Conquests over lusts and temptations are sealing
times. God after such, victories will give his people a triumph. This is
expressed in that text of the Revelation, Rev. 2.17. (...), To him that overcomes
will I give to eat of the hidden Mannah, etc. Thus when Saint Paul was
wrestling with, and conquering that great temptation, whatever it was, that is
mentioned in 2 Corinthians 12. God then gives to eat of the hidden Mannah, and
strengthens him with this, my grace is sufficient for thee. He gives him the
white Stone with that Motto graven in it, my grace, etc. Thus that noble
Christian, and famous Convert of Italy, Galeacius Caracciolus, when he had
scorned the pomp and luster of the world, and had trampled upon all relations
for the love of a Savior: when Satan that cunning Angler of souls had spent
all his baits upon him, and he had refused them all: O then what a deal of
precious sweetness slides into his soul? what rushings in of glorious joy? he
had never such joy at Naples, as he had at Geneva. You may hear him pronouncing
an Anathema to all such, as shall prefer all the gold and silver in the world
before one days sweet Communion with Jesus Christ. As none have more dregs of
wrath then relapsing and apostatizing spirits, (Remember but Spira's case;) so
none have sweeter and choicer mercy then the faithful Servants of the Lord
Jesus, that follow him in the hour of temptation. Apostates are sealed up to a
day of vengeance, but these are sealed up to a day of Redemption. Thus the
mourners in Ezekiel, that would not yield to the abominations of the times,
must have a seal set upon them. Thus that Virgin-Company in the Reveiation,
that would not prostitute their souls to Antichristian folly, have the seal of
God in their foreheads. This is the happiness of a Christian, that he has a
sweet satisfaction in self-denial;

in denying sin, in repulsing lust, in conquering temptation, in pulling out
his right eye, in cutting off his right hand, in mortifyiug the body of death,
he has a sweet satisfaction in all these. And thus you have seen those special
sealing times when Christians have this high plerophory, these riches of
assurance: we come now to speak of them in a more Applicatory way.

1. Times of assurance, they should be times of humility and dependence upon
God. When Moses had been so long in the Mount, and had a luster upon him by
conversing with God himself, presently at the foot of the Mount he meets with
matter of humiliation. The Israelites have made them a golden Calfe; Thy
people, says God to Moses, they have done this. And the Apostle Paul, when he
had been rapt up into the third Heaven, and had heard there some of Arcana
Coeli, things that neither could nor might be uttered; for both are employed in
(...) there then comes a Messenger of Satan to buffet him, he must be put in
mind of himself by a thorn in the flesh, and that least he should be exalted
above measure with abundance of Revelations. A creature cannot (...), a little
thing will puff up a bubble, a small happiness will swell up the Sons of men.
Pride as it twines about the choicest graces, so it devoures the sweetest
comforts. But yet there is nothing tends more to the soul-abasement and
self-exinanition, then the beholding of Gods face, then the seeing of his
glory, this will make the soul abhor it self in dust and ashes. The more God
reveals himself unto the soul the more will the soul see that huge
disproportion that is between it self and a Deity. There Is none here below that
ever saw more of Gods face then Moses and Paul had done, and there were none
that ever had lower apprehensions of themselves. They knew well enough what the
Sunshine of his presence was, what a glorious sight it was to behold his face,
and yet they had rather part with this, then he should part with his glory.
They are like men amazed with the vastness and spaciousness of the Ocean, and
make nothing of a little inconsiderable drop of Being. They that know not these
treasures of love and sweetness, those heaps of excellencies that are stored
up in God, these are the grand admirers of themselves. But when the soul comes
to have a prospect of Heaven, and fixes its eye upon an object of the first
magnitude the creature disappears, self vanishes and loses it self in the
fullness of God. And if God do assure thee of this his love, thou can not but
wonder at the greatness of his goodness, especially when tho shall recollect
thy self, and think upon thine own unworthiness. Thou that did not deserve a
beam of his face, what does he give thee a full Sunshine? Thou that could
not look for the least taste of his love, what does he give thee a whole
cluster of Canaan? Thou that did not deserve the least crumb of the hidden
Mannah, does he fill thee an Omer full of it? Nay, yet higher; Thou that did
deserve a brand from his Justice, does he give thee a seal of his love? he
might have given thee gall and vinegar to drink, and does he flow in upon thee
with milk and honey? he might have given thee the first flashes of Hell, and
does he give thee the first fruits of Heaven? what could thou have looked for
but an eternal frown, an ddost thou meet with so gracious a smile? O then fall
down and adore his goodness, and let all that is within thee bless his holy
name. Tell me now, i^ there any ground for pride in such a soul? doe^ not
assurance bespeak humility; and speak a mere dependence?

2. Times of Assurance, they should be time^ of trampling upon the creature,
and scorning of things below. Do thou now take care for corn, and wine, and
oil, when God lifts up the light of his countenance upon thee? is this same
Angels food, this same hidden Mannah, i^ it too light meat for thee? Now thou
art within the Land of promise, feeding upon the grapes and pomegranates of the
Land, do thou now long for the garlic and onions of Egypt? Now thou art
within thy Fathers house, and the fatted Calf is slain, will thou now still
feed upon husks? Art thou clothed with the Sun, and can not thou trample the
Moon under thy feet? O let them scramble for the world that have nothing else
to live on. Pray give room to the green Bay-trees to spread themselves abroad;
but don't thou lose thy fatness and sweetness to rule over these. Art thou
sure of Heaven, and would thou fix thy Tabernacle upon earth? Is it good for
thee to be here? or would have any more then the light of Gods countenance?
is it not enough that thou art sure of happiness? is not a Fountain enough for
thee? why will thou drink in muddy streams? and thou that art filled with the
love of a Savior, can thou tell how to spend a thought upon the world? is
not there more beauty in a Christ then in a Creature? is not he the fairest of
ten thousand? away then with adulterous glances, for why should thou embrace
the bosom of a stranger?

3. Times of assurance they should be times of watchfulness, and more accurate
walking with God. To sin against revealed love is a deep and killing
aggravation. To sin against light is too too much; but to sin against love is a
great deal more: this heightened Solomon's Idolatry, (1 Kings 11.9.) that he
turned from the God of Israel which had appeared to him twice. What will thou
with Jeshurun wax fat and kick, and kick against bowels too? To provoke God in
a wilderness is not so much as to provoke him in a Paradise. What could he
have done more for thee then he has done? and what could thou have done more
against him then thou have done? and will thou still requite him thus? will thou provoke him with Manna in thy mouth? Does he give thee the sweet clusters
of the Land, and do thou return him wild grapes? that which is the strongest
engagement to obedience, do thou make it an encouragement to sin? art thou so
willing to dash thy joy, to lose thy peace? And O how will it please the powers
of darkness to see thee abuse a beam? The Devil has several designs against
the welfare of a soul. First, if it were possible he would keep thee from any
grace at all. But secondly, if he cannot do that, he would keep thee from
strength of grace, from growth in grace; he would break the bruised Reed, and
he would quench the smoking flax. But then if he cannot prevail here neither;
then in the thir^ place, he would keep thee from sense of grace* in a sad and
cloudy condition: he envies thee one beam, one smile, one glance of his eye.
But then if the riches of Gods goodness do so run over, as that he will give
thee a sense of his love; then fourthly, in the last place, he would not have
thee abuse his grace, and turn it into wantonness. But when God has planted
thee in so happy a Paradise, don't thou listen to the whisperings of the
Serpent. Thou that art sealed by the holy spirit, don't attend to a lying
spirit. The devil that great plunderer of souls, would fain rob thee of thy
Jewels, of thy joy and peace, and happiness: but do thou hide them in a
Christ, in the wounds of a Savior; and take heed of blotting thine Evidences;
thou that art a Child of light, be not ruled by a Prince of darkness. If God
give thee a sense of his love, walk more ^tedfastly, walk more accurately with
thy God.

4. Times of assurance they should be times ^f inviting and encouraging others
in the ways ^f grace. Thus the Psalmist, when his Cup over^owes, he calls
others to taste of it, O taste and ^e how gracious God is, that ye may trust in
him. ^hou may now bring a good report upon the and of Canaan, thou may
show them the ^odly fruits of the Land, that were cut down (...)he brook
Eshcol. Men look upon Religion as a rigid and austere thing, that comes to rob
them of their joy, they must never have a smile more, they must never have a
Summers day after it; but thou can tell them of the sweetness and
deliciousness that is in the ways of grace, thou can assure them that all
the ways of wisdom are pleasantness; thou can satisfy them, that grace does
not mean to take away their joy, but only to refine it, that it does not mean
to put out the light, but only to sn^ffe it, that it may burn brighter and
clearer. There is no such joy to be found in the ways of sin, there is no such
joy to be extracted from the Creature; no, the sweetest and purest honey it is
sucked from (...) flower of Paradise. Spiritual joy it is the mo^^ clarified
joy; I, and it is solid and massy joy beaten joy, like beaten gold, (...). I,
and it is lasting and durab^^ joy. All the Creatures make but a blaze, but t^^
least spark of this it is immortal. Can there be (...) sweeter Sabbatisme of
spirit? can there be (...) happier composedness of soul, then to be provided
for eternity; to be sure of heaven, (...) happiness and glory; to have the
revealing (...) Gods love, the displaying of himself, the bea^ings out of his
face? is not the least appeara^^ of his love more worth then a world? are (...)
the gleanings of spirituals better th^^ ^he v^^tage of temporals? me thinks an
assured Christian, like a Galeb or a Joshua, should be able and ready to
confute all the false intelligence of the spies, and to answer the weak
objections that they bring against the Land of Promise. Awake O sluggard, and
arise, there is no Lion in the way, or if it be, it has honey in it: There are
no Sons of Anak, or if there be, before Israel even these mountains shall
become a Plain.

5. Times of assurance they should be times of store, (...). Now treasure up
beams, heap up light, store up hidden Mannah. To be sure, this Mannah will not
breed worms, Then thou may confidently applaud thy self, Soul, take thine
ease, thou have goods laid up for many years. Happy thou, if this night thy
soul be taken from thee. Storing up of former evidences, is a good provision
against a cloudy day.

6. Times of assurance should be times of breathing after full possession. The
espoused soul should long for the Nuptials, for the full consummation of its
joy: and by a heavenly gradation it should ascend in its thoughts. Is there
such sweetness in one cluster of Canaan, what shall there be in the full
vintage? is there such pleasantness in a prospect of the Land upon the top of
Mount Pisgah, what happiness shall there be in enjoyment of the Land? is there
such glory in a beam of Gods face? what shall there be in an eternal Sunshine?
is there such a sparkling luster in the White Stone, what then shall there be
in all those Pearls that garnish the foundations, and make up the gates of the
new Jerusalem? is there so much in the preface of glory, what shall there be in
the inlargements and amplifications of it? is there so much in the Aenigma,
what is there in the explication? can you see so much beauty in happin^sse,
when her Mask is on, how glorious then will she appear when she is unveiled?
does the soul sing so sweetly in a Cage of Clay, what melody, think you, shall
it then make when it is let loose to all eternity?

We now come to wind up all in a word of application.

Now the more pure and delicious a truth is, the more do the men of the world
disrelish it: the more bright and shining it is, the more offensive to their
eyes. The more orient the Pearl, the more do they trample upon it. Evangelical
discoveries meet with the fiercest oppositions. The Serpent will be sure to
wind into Paradise, and the seed of the Serpent ever knew how to still
venomous and malignant consequences, out of sweet and flowery truths. It Is the
Devils work to imprison all truth, but the nobler and more precious truths must
be sure to be put in the lowest and darkest D^^^^^s. As here now, Assurance of
salvation, it is the very Crown and joy of a Christian; the Flos lactis, the
Cream of that (...), that is to nourish souls: it is the budding and blossoming
of happiness, the antedating of Heaven, the prepossession of glory; it is the
very Pinnacle of the Temple, the (...); how fain would he throw Christians from
thence? how would he blast glory in the bud? how fain would he pull down the
Suburbs of the new Jerusalem? how would he stop all the fresh springs that are
in these? how would he seal up the luscious influences of the Pleiades? how
fain would he Lycurgus-like, cut up all the vines of Canaan, that no spy might
ever bring one Cluster of the Land of Promise? He himself must feed upon
nothing but dust, and how does he envy them their hidden Manna? That Son of the
morning is now bound in chains of darkness, and how does he envy them their
light and liberty? how fain would he cloud and eclipse their Sun, and stop it
in its race? nay, set it ten degrees backward? How does he envy them one beam
of Gods face, a grape of Canaan, one smile, one glance of Gods eye? Now he
could find out no fitter instrument to rob Christians of their joy, then
Antichrist that grand enemy of the Church, that spiritual Nero, that Tyrant of
souls, that vice- Beelzebub, that Prince of darkness that rules in the Children
of disobedience. He rules them, and yet they are Children of disobedience for
all that. This Bestian Empire, (for so it is styled in the Revelation,) delights
only in sensuals, and strikes at spirituals. It strikes at the vitals of
Religion, at the power and essence of godliness. Here are the men that must cry
down Assurance under the names of presumption, security, an heap of
Enthusiasmes, as if this hidden Manna would breed all these worms. If men do
but dip in the Honey-combe, and take some of these voluntary drops that sweat
from it freely, of their own accord, as Saul told Jonathan, they must certainly
die for it. O this were a way to open their eyes, as it did Jonathans. They are
loath to let men taste and see how gracious God is, lest they might trust in
him.

There are therefore two things which I shall here endeavor by way of
Application.

First, to give you a brief discovery of those grounds that necessitate the
adversaries of this truth to deny assurance.

Secondly, to take off that vain and frivolous cavil, that assurance is a
Principle of Libertinisme, and that if men be once assured of their salvation,
they may then do what they list.

And first for the grounds that make them deny assurance. And though I might
here show at large, that all Popery, the Q^intessence of it is extracted out of
guesses and conjectures, their whole Religion is but a bundle of uncertainties,
a rude heap of contingencies, built upon the thoughts of others, upon the
intentions of a Priest; yet I shall let that pass now, and give you these four
considerations that prevail with them to deny assurance.

1. They lay too much stresse upon good works. Now assurance is too goodly a
structure to be built upon such a foundation. They part stakes between grace
and merit, and so leave the soul in a tottering condition. There is so much
pride bound up in the spirits of men, as that they are loath to d^pend upon
another for their happiness, they would have an innate and domestic happiness
within themselves. But alas, self-bottomings are weak and uncertain, and they
that build upon their own good meanings, and their good wishes, and good
resolutions, upon their good endeavors and good works, when they have done
all, they have built but the hou^e of the Spider. These that spin salvation o^t
of their own bowels, their hope it is but as a Spid^rs web. And there are many
that neithe^ thus spin nor toil; and yet I say unto you, tha^ a Pharisee in all
his glory is not clothed like one of these. If men do but enquire and look a
little to the ebbings and flowings of their own spirits, to the waxing and
waining of their own performances: surely they will presently acknowledge that
they cannot fetch a Plerophory out of these. Believe it, the soul cannot anchor
upon a wave, or upon its own fluctuating motions. So that it is a piece of
ingenuity in them, to tell men, that whilst they build upon the sand, they can
have no great security that their house will last long: they may safely say of
the Spider, that it can have no certainty that its house shall stand. Whilst
they lean upon a Reed we will allow them to question whether it will not break or
no; nay, if they please, they may very well question whether it will not pierce
them through. They can be sure of nothing unless they be sure of ruin.
Assurance cannot be founded in a bubble, in a creature, for the very essence of
a creature is doubtful and wavering, it must be built upon an immutable Entity,
upon the free love of God in Christ, upon his royal word and oath, the sure
expressions of his mind and love, upon the witness of the Holy Ghost, the seal
of God himself. Here the soul may rest, and lean, and quiet it self, for with
God there is no variableness nor shadow of turning. The creature is all shadow
and vanity, it is filia noctis; like Jonah's gourd, man may sit under its shadow
for a while, but it soon decays and dies. All its certainty is in dependence
upon its God. A creature, if like a single drop left to it self, it spends and
wastes it self presently: but if like a drop in the fountain and Ocean of Being,
it has abundance of security. No safety to the soul, but in the arms of a
Christ, in the embraces of a Savior. No rest to a Dove-like spirit, but in the
Ark of the Covenant, and there is the pot of hidden Manna. You know that dying
Bellarmine was fain to acknowledge, that the nearest way to assurance, was only
to rest upon the free grace of God in Christ. And they what cry down duties so
much, if they would mean no more then this, that men must not trust in them,
nor make Christ's of them, nor Saviors of them, (as they use to express it)
we will easily grant them this, if they will be content with it.

2. They take away that clasping and closing power of faith it self, by which
it should sweetly and strongly embrace its own object. They would have the soul
embrace cloud^, and dwell in generals; they resolve all the sweetness and
preciousness of the Gospel, either into this Universal, Whosoever believes
shall be saved: or else, which is all one, into this conditional, If thou
beleevest thou shall be saved. Now this is so far from assurance, as that the
Devils themselves do thus believe and yet tremble. The thirsty soul may know
that there is a Fountain; but it must not presume to know that ever it shall
taste of it. The wounded soul (with them) may take notice that there is balm in
Gilead, but it must only give a guess, that it shall be healed. They will not
allow the soul to break the shell of a promise, so as to come to the kernel.
They silence faith, when it would speak its own Idiom, My Lord, and my God. O
what miserable comforters are these: How can they ever speak one word upon the
wheels, one seasonable word to a weary soul; when as all they can reach to, by
their own acknowledgement, is to leave the soul hovering betwixt heaven and
hell? And as they say in matter of reproof, Generalia non pungunt: so it is as
true in matter of comfort, Generalia non mulcent. Yet to see how abundantly
unreasonable these men are; for in the matter of their Church, there they
require a particular appropriating faith, a monopolizing faith, that the Church
of Rome is the only true visible Church: and this is no presumption with them.
Thus they can embrace a dull error, and let go a pr^cious truth. But the true
Church of Christ, as it is it self built upon a Rock; so every member of the
Church has the same security. And the soul with a spouse-like affection, does
not only conjecture who is her well-beloved, but is in his very arms, and
breaks out into that expression of love and union; I am my well-beloveds, and
my well-beloved is mine. But how strangely does their conjectural certainty
take away the sweetness of such Relations? Christians with them must only
conjecture that they are the Sons of God, the spouse must only guess at her
beloved Husband; the sheep must hope that this is the Shepherds voice. O how do
they emasculate and enervate Religion! how do they dispirit it, and cut the
very sinews of the power of godliness! But all you that would find rest to
your souls, must know, that you can never apply a Christ too much that you can
never appropriate a Savior enough, that whole happiness is in union with him.

3. They deny perseverance, and so long may very well deny assurance. And yet
the Arminians have an art of reconciling assurance, and non-perseverance. They
allow men a little brief assurance for one moment, a breve fulgur, a little
coruscation of joy, that only shows it self that it may vanish and disappear.
The sum of their meaning amounts to thus much: For that moment that thou art
in the state of grace, thou may be sure on it, but thou can not be sure
that the next moment thou shall be in the state of grace. As if a Christian
were only a Ball of fortune to be tossed up and down, at her pleasure. And indeed
they make grace as voluble and uncertain, as ever the Heathen did fortune. And
if they would speak out, grace with them is Res vitrea, quae dum splendet
frangitur. And vasa gloriae with them are little better then vasa fictilia:
they can dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel. And then make no more of it
then Epictetus at the breaking of a Pitcher. (...), it is but a usual thing;
Hodie vidi fragilem frangi. Vain men that think the grace of God as mutable and
unconstant as they themselves are, that can remove men from Heaven to Hell as
often as they please, that with a daring Pen can blot names out of the book of
life, and reverse the seal of Heaven when they list. This must needs strike at
the root of assurance, and leave the soul in such sad doubts as these. It Is
true, I am now feeding upon the milk and honey of the Land of Canaan; but I may
return to the wilderness again, to the bondage of Egypt again. It Is true, I am
now a Temple of the holy Ghost; but how soon may I become a prison, a dungeon,
the receptacle of every unclean spirit? What though I be now a vessel of
honor, how soon may I become a vessel of wrath? and though I be for the
present in the loving hand of a Savior, yet I may be to morrow in the
unmerciful paw of the Lion. Pray tell us now, has the soul any great security
all this while? are the friends of God no surer of his love then thus? It Is
happy for Christians, that it is not in the power of these men; no, nor of all
the powers of darkness, to put a period to their joy; no not to put the least
comma or interruption to it. No, they may as soon dethrone the Majesty of
Heaven it self, they may as soon pluck the Crown from his head, and wrest the
golden Scepter out of his hand: nay, they may as soon pluck out the Apple of
his eye, they may as soon annihilate a Deity, as pull thee out of his hands, as
rob him of one of his Jewels. Thou art kept by the mighty power of God through
faith unto salvation. We cannot close up this better then with that heavenly
(...), those triumphant expressions of the Apostle Paul: For I am persuaded,
that neither life, nor death, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor
height, nor depth, etc.

4. They never had any assurance themselves, and so they would willingly deny
it to others. There is so much pride and envy in the spirits of men, as that
they are very loath, that others should have more happiness, or be more
sensible of happiness then themselves. They do here Calamum in Cord tingere;
they tell you what they find in their own hearts, nothing but conjectures and
shiverings, and tremblings, nothing but slavish doubts and fears. But the
voice of assurance, it is a still voice, the spirit speaks; (...). That soul
only hears it, to which it speaks. The sparklings of the White Stone are secret
and undiscernable to a carnal eye: No man knows it, but he that has it. It Is
Manna (...); not the visible and obvious Manna that was rained down by the
tents of the Israelites, but that that was reserved and laid up in Vrna aurea.
Spiritual tastes and relishes, spiritual experiences, they are wholly
unexpressible, they are altogether unimitable. There are two things which the
most refined and accomplished Hypocrite cannot possibly reach unto. 1. He cannot
express the life and power of a Christian. 2. He cannot express the joy of a
Christian. As no man can paint the Being of a thing, so no man can paint the
sweetness of a thing. Who ever could paint the sweetness of the Honey-combe?
the sweetness of a cluster of Canaan? the fragrancy of the Rose of Sharon? the
sweet voice of a Lute? (...), etc. The Painters eye steals a little beauty from
the face; and perhaps his hand makes restitution, restoring it again in the
picture, and that is all you can expect of him; nay, it is well if he perform so
much: As for the expression of vitals, or the representation of essentials,
it is Vltra Penecillum, so that he must let this alone for ever. Believe it,
sincerity cannot be painted. The joy of the holy Ghost cannot be painted. It Is
easier painting of faces then of hearts. Men in an unregenerate condition,
cannot know what assurance is, till their hearts be changed, or unless they
could read the hearts of Gods people. Men will deny the most certain and
unquestionable things, if they themselves have no experience of them. Upon this
account many a fool has said in his heart, There is no God; because he had no
communion with him, he did not attend upon him. Thus others deny that there is
any such sweetness in the ways of God, because they were never acquainted with
them.

In Music, what though there be never such variety of graces, such
inarticulate elegancies, such soft and silken touches, such quick stings and
pleasant relishes, such musical amplifications and flourishes, such nimble
transitions and delicious closes; you will scarce convince a deaf man of all this,
till you can give him his hearing. Or suppose a blind man should obstinately
deny that there were a Sun; truly I cannot tell how you could well convince him,
unless you could give him an eye, or else persuade him that he is defective in
somewhat which others have. To speak of assurance, and the voice of the spirit
to some, is but to speak Riddles and Paradoxes. Here I have told you much of
light, and beams, and Glory; I had as good told some of you, of Clouds, and
shadows, and darkness. I have spoke much to you of the fruits and clusters of
Canaan; had I not as good have set before some of you briars and thorns, would
you not have had as much sweetness in them? I never promised to show you the
Manna; for I told you 'twas hidden: yet we have told you the things which we
have seen and known, and what we have tasted of the Word of Life; and that
which I doubt not, but many of you can set your seals unto.

We come now to take off that vain and frivolous Cavil, that assurance is a
principle of Libertinisme; that the Apples which the Spouse longs for in the
Canticles, will breed too much wind; that hidden Manna will breed worms, that
those flaggons full of wine, which the Spouse would so fain be comforted
withal, will fume up too much into the head. O, say they, if men be once
assured of their salvation, they may then do what they list. But

1. God will not put new wine into old bottles. God never prints his love upon the
heart, till the heart be renewed and prepared with Evangelical meltings; and
the same Seal that prints his Image too. A flinty heart will not take the seal of
the Spirit. The sparkling White Stone is never given till the heart of stone be
taken away. The new name is not given, till the new creature be framed. God
will not distill one silver drop of such precious sweetness upon the soul, till
it be enclosed for his own Garden. And though the outward Sunshine with
liberal and undistinguishing beams, shines both upon the good and the bad, upon
the Rose and the Nettle; yet the light of Gods countenance beams out only upon
the Apples of his own eye: the Sunshine of his gracious presence, glides only
the vessels of Honor, and puts a luster upon none but his own Jewels. And
though the pourings forth of ordinary goodness fall upon a wilderness
sometimes, as well as on a Paradise; yet these more choice and luscious
influences of heaven, slide only into the hearts of Gods peculiar ones. Believe
it, thy soul must first become an Ark of the Covenant, before thou shall ever
have a Pot of hidden Manna in it.

It Is true, that If God should thus display his goodness, and seal up his love
to the soul, whilst it were still in an unregenerate condition, whilst it did
still hanker after its lusts and corruptions, it would then indeed sport it
self more securely in this Sunshine of mercy, and turn this grace of God into
wantonness. Thus men of sordid and ignoble spirits, will trespass more upon a
friend; then upon an enemy; an injury will keep them in better order then a
courtesy. Thus nettles will sting most violently, when they are handled most
gently. Thus the wretched Indians adore the Devil, because he is their enemy,
and neglect the Majesty of heaven, because it is so propitious. When God shines
out upon ungrateful dunghils they return him nothing but venomous and malignant
evaporations. We Will easily acknowledge, that if these men should have the White
Stone, they would trample upon it: For you see how they deal with ordinary
mercy, which the bounty of heaven heaps upon their heads.

There are such Pleonasmes of love in God, such runnings over of goodness, as
that much falls upon these. God breaks the box of common mercies, and fills the
whole world with the savor of i^. But what tribute and Revenues of glory has
he from them for all this? Why, they violate his Laws, and profane his name,
and fight against him with his own weapons, (...), with his most precious
mercies, gifts and parts, and all they have shall oppose him that gave them. Of
their Jewels they make a golden Calf. Do you think now that God will trust
these with his more special mercies? with his viscera and tender mercies? He
tried the Vessel with water, and 'twon't hold that. Do you think he will pour
wine into it? No, God reveals his love to none but to his friends; he sets his
seal to none, but to such whom he sets as a seal upon his heart and on his arm;
such as have an happy conformity to him, and a full compliance with him; such
as have the same interests, and the same glorious ends with himself; such as
delight in his Law, and feed upon his precepts, as upon an honey-combe. Do you
think he may not trust these with his mind, such as have a plain antipathy
against sin, against the very picture and appearance of sin; such as prefer
Hell it self before it; such as loath it, even as himself loathes it; men that
are ready to pluck out their right eyes for him, to cut off their right hands
for him? Do you think he may not manifest his love to these? What says the
Apostle John? he that is born of God cannot sin; it is a plain impossibility
that he should so far put off his filial affection, as to make it his work to
displease him: much less can he take so strong an advantage of his goodness,
as therefore to provoke him, because he knows that God loves him. These men
only tell us what they would do if they had assurance; but truly they are not
like to have it, till their hearts be changed, and then they will be of another
mind.

2. Love is a sweeter and surer and stronger principle of obedience then fear.
So that God did infatuate the counsel of that Achitophel, Machiavel I mean,
when he stilled that venom into the hearts of Princes, that they had better
rule their subjects with a Rod of Iron, then with a Scepter of Gold; that they
had better enslave them by fear, then engage them by love. The truth is, he had
given them such Rules, that he kn w if they followed them, they could not
possibly be loved; and therefore he would fain persuade them, that it is better
to be feared. And though this may seem to add some sparklings to Majesty, and
to brighten the Crown of Sovereignty; yet it leaves it far more tottering, more
unfixt and uns tled upon their heads. There is such a virulency mixed with fear:
such a tincture of hatred in it; both these affections are much of a color,
sad and pale. And therefore that Tyrant was so wise yet as to expect hatred;
Oderint dum metuant, says he, he knew whilst they feared him, that they would
hate him; And then there is a reluctance and Aversation in fear; And those
workings upon the soul, that come only from terrors, they usually prove
abortive. And what though a body be pulled and haled and scared into obedience?
the soul is not conquered with all this. A slave does but watch an opportunity
for shaking off the yoke. And then there is a depressing and disenabling power
in fear, it contracts and freezes up the motions of the soul; it clips the
wings, it takes off the wheels, it unbends the bow. Trembling and Paralytick
motions are weak and languishing. Indeed fear it is nothing but
Praecoxtristitia, a crude and indigested kind of sorrow; and it is the sowrer,
because it is not ripe. And therefore God himself that is a most absolute
Monarch, and has a boundless and infinite supremacy over all things; yet has
far more glory from them that love him, and only passive obedience from them
that fear him. Indeed he never goes about to rule any by fear, but those that
have first trampled upon love, and are no longer subjects, but professed Rebels.
It Is love that glews and fastens the whole Creation together. Those seeds of
love which God himself, (who is love) has scattered amongst Beings; those
sparks of love which God himself, (who is love,) has stamped upon Beings,
maintain the whole fabric of the world in its just beauty and proportion. The
harmonious composure of Beings, the tuning of the several strings, makes them
sound out his praise more melodiously. O how comely is it to see the sweet
context and coherence of Beings, the loving connection and concatenation of
causes: one being espoused to another in faithfulness and truth; the mutual
claspings and twinings, the due benevolence of entities. Behold, how goodly a
thing it is, and pleasant to behold Beings, like Brethren to dwell together in
unity: It calls to mind those precious drops of love, that fall from the head
of the first Being, and fell down upon the skirts of inferior entities. And is
not there as much of this love to be seen in the new Creation, in the work of
grace in the soul? Is not the foundation of the second Temple laid in love? is
not the top and pinnacle of it set up by a hand of love? Are not the polishings
and carvings of it the works and expressions of love? the witty inventions of
love? Is not the structure maintained and repaired at the constant expenses of
love? Is it not inhabited by a Prince of love? one more loving then Solomon is
there; nay, what is the whole Gospel else, but (...), a cluster of Redemption,
as some render it; what is it else but a bundle of love?

The Law that was an hammer to break hearts; I but the Gospel that is a key to
open hearts. And truly all the terrors of Mount Sina, the Thunderclaps and
the lightning flashes, the Earthquakes and the smoking of the Mountain, and
the voice of the Trumpet, have not so much power and prevalency in them, as one
still drop that falls from Mount Sion. You are now come to the Mount of Olives,
a Mount of Peace and sweetness, a Mount that drops fatness, and in this Mount
will Christ be seen. And he comes to restore all things to their primitive
love: he restores the powers and faculties of the soul to their first and
original concord; he knits his gifts and graces in the bond of love: he comes
to reconcile Beings, to make antipathies kiss each other. The Wolf and the
Lamb must be at peace, the Leopard and the Kid must lie down together. The
whole Gospel like the midst of Solomon's bed in the Canticles, (...), it is paved
with love. Now sure you cannot question whether this be the more prevailing way.
For, O think but a while, what a potent oratory there is in love, what a
welcome tyranny, what a silken bondage, what a downy and soft necessity.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou Lady and Queen of Affections! thou art
the firstborn of the soul, and the beginning of its strength. Who would not be
captivated by so sweet a Conqueror? Who would not be melted in so delicate a
flame? What heart would not entertain so pleasant an arrow? The Psalmist was
struck through with not of thy darts, when he panted so after the streams of
water. The Apostle Paul had another of thy arrows sticking fast in him, when
he cried out, The love of Christ constrains me, Vulnus alit venis, and Sacro
carpitur igne. Believe it, the strongest arguments are fetched out of Loves
Topics. We need not use many persuasions to such a soul, it has a fountain of
Rhetoric within. There is a present expansion and amplification of spirit for
the welcoming of so happy an object. O how will such a soul twine about a
Precept, suck sweetness out of a Command, catch at an opportunity, long for a
duty! How does it go like a Be from flower to flower, from duty to duty, from
Ordinance to Ordinance, and extract the very spirits and quintessence of all,
(...), crop the very tops of all. There will be in such a soul, the constant
returnings and reboundings of love. 'Twill retort the beams of heaven, 'twil
send back the stream of its affection into the Ocean. So that now as the soul
is assured of the love of God, so God also has a most absolute certainty that
the soul will (...). And thus is completed the sweet and perfect circle of
Love. Now there cannot be a more strong and a more mutual security, then that
which is thus founded. And therefore nature chooses to maintain her self by
these impressions. We see this plainly in filial and conjugal relations, where
the sweetest and surest obedience flows from principles of love. And where is
there more certainty then amongst friends; where there is a borrowing and
lending of souls, a mutual exchange and transmigration of souls? Now you know
all these Relations are clarified and refined in grace; you are the friends of
God; nay, you are the Sons of God, you are the spouse of Christ. And the
Apostle John, that speaks so much of assurance, and tells you that a Christian
cannot sin; consider but a while who he was? Why, he was the Beloved Disciple?
he that lay in the bosom of love, and breathed out nothing but pure love. I,
and his reason, it is founded in a relation of love, He cannot sin because he is
born of God. He resolves it into the (...), that same impression of love that
abides in him.

3. Consult a while with your own experience and observation, and then tell us
whether ever you knew any to walk more accurately with their God, then such as
were assured of his love. If you look up to heaven, there you see glorious
Angels, and glorified Saints, that have not only a full assurance, but a full
possession of the love of their God: that are no longer taking a prospect of
Canaan, but are now feeding upon the fruits and clusters of the land of
Promise: that have not only some scattered and broken beams of glory, but a
constant and an eternal Sunshine. And O how do they (...), not (...) only, but
(...). They have not only as we here below, some drops and sprinklings of
happiness; but they are at the very Fountain, and have fresh bubblings of joy,
full streamings out of sweetness, and can swim in the Rivers of pleasure.
Surely these men will allow the Angels somewhat more then only to conjecture
that they are happy. What must glorified Saints still dispute about their
Summum Bonum, lest they be too secure; and must Angels only be of opinion, that
they are in heaven? must they only guess at the face of God? What will they
clip the wings of the Cherubims too? Where has God more cheerful obedience then
from these? How joyfully do these ministering spirits run about their glorious
errands? how does he bid one, Go, and he goes, and another, come, and he comes.
And that which sets a fair gloss upon happiness it self is this, that they are
out of all possibility of displeasing their God. And so they are held forth as
patterns of obedience; They will be done in harth as it is in heaven.

Well, but then if they tell us that there is more danger of frail men that
dwell in houses of clay, and carry the body of death about with them.

1. We must bid them entertain honorable thoughts of the excellent ones of the
earth: for though it be true that they are not yet (...); yet God has made them
little lower then the Angels, and he has crowned them with glory and honor.
They walk with little Coronets upon their heads: Though the most massy and
brightest Crown be reserved for a day of Inauguration. They now feed upon
Angels food. God steeps them in his own nature, and in his own love, he
gradually prepares them for heaven. They are Inceptors for happiness, they are
Probationers for glory.

2. What though there be some unworthy dealings with their God, yet these flow
only from those relics of slavish principles that remain in them, some
fragments of the old Leaven that was not thoroughly purged out. And not by
virtue of a Gospel Plerophory. What does the knowing that they are Sons of
light, does this dispose them to works of darkness? Does the knowing that they
are the spouse of Christ, does this bespeak adulterous glances? It Is true, the
Sons of God may provoke him, but must they therefore do it under this very
notion, because they know they are his Sons? nay, must they do it the more for
this? This were the extremest malice that were imaginable; more malice then
the Devils themselves are capable of. What bold blasphemy then is this against
the Sons of God, and against the sealing spirit. I, and it involves a flat
contradiction too, it puts an esse and a non esse simul; because they know they
are friends, therefore they will deal like enemies; and because they know their
Sons, therefore they will deal like slaves. O what fine repugnancies are these?
Thus would they not only veil and cloud, but also spot and deface so beautiful
a truth; but that it shines out with such victorious and triumphant beams. But
if any can yet doubt, whether assurance do advance obedience, let them but a
while compare men assured of their salvation: 1. With others in the state of
grace that want assurance, or with themselves when once without it: And then
let them tell us, whether they don't differ as much as a bruised Reed, and a
stately Cedar in Lebanon? The doubting Christian does but smoke, when the
assured Christian flames. What faintings and shiverings and paleness in the
one? what vigor and liveliness, what a ruddy complexion of soul in the other?
How is the one left to the pleasure of a wave, when as the other lies safe at
anchor. The one can scarce lift up his weak and trembling hands in prayer, when
the other is wrestling with Omnipotency. The one comes behind and touches the
hem of his Fathers Garments, when as the other is in his very arms and
embraces. The one dares scarce touch a promise, scare cast an eye upon a
promise; when as the other claims it, and grasps it, and appropriates it. The
performances of the one are green and crude, and unconcocted; the others are
ripened, and mellowed with a stronger Sunbeam of Love. The one like a Lute
with his strings loose and languishing; the other is tuned up to its just
height of affection. The one like a Bow bent, sends forth his Arrows very
vigorously; the other does but drop them, and let them fall. How does Satan
wound the one with many fiery dart, that the other quenches! How does the one
fear the roaring of the Lion, which the others trample under his feet! 2. If
you should compare them with men in an unregenerate condition; O what (...),
what a vast gulf is there between them? Sure you don't question, whether God
has more service from Israelites that feed upon Garlic and Onions? Men that
are under the damning and domineering power of lusts, and are only kept a
little in awe, by some thunderings from Mount Sinai: Though they spend a few
sighs sometimes, and drop a few tears sometimes; yet when they are thus washed,
how soon do they return to the wallowing in the mire? The chaining of a Wolf,
does that meeken and soften him? or the putting a hook into Leviathan, does
that transform him? Though wicked men by fears and terrors have their bounds
set them, like the Sea, which they cannot pass; Yet they are still like the
raging Sea, they swell and foam, and cast outh their mire and dirt. And who
more wicked then they that are desperate? Those black and damned Potentates of
hell, because they are out of all possibility of mercy; how do they act ad
extremum virium in all expressions of malice and wickedness? And therefore God
out of his infinite goodness, though he does usually seal men up to life and
happiness, and lets them make their Calling and Election sure; yet he does
scarce ever, or very rarely seal men up to ruin, so as to let them know
certainly that they are Reprobates: for this would make them desperate; there
would be no living with them in the world. Or if he does show them this, he
does withal let them run into some act of violence, that presently frees the
world from them. That hope which wicked men have of being saved, though it be
groundless, yet it keeps them within their bounds and compass. Though it be
but like the Spiders web; yet the very spinning of that web, keeps them in the
mean while from a full expression of their venom. And that same shadow of
obedience which God has from Hypocrites, it is founded in some shadow of hope
that they please themselves in: and when this hope of their own framing
vanishes and deceives them, then they back-slide and apostatize.

4. Are there not other judgments enough to waken them out of a sinful
security? are there not Rods? are there not Scorpions? is there nothing but
present disinheriting? Sure you cannot but remember that famous place where God
speaks to David, and points at Solomon, Psalm. 89.32, 33. If his Children break
my sta^u es, etc. God will make his own people know that it is a bitter thing to
depart from him, and to forsake their first love. Nay, this is most certain,
that wicked men themselves are not capable of such severe temporal judgments
as the Sons of God are. That which is h^re done to the green Tree, cannot be
done to the dry. For

1. They may fall from assurance. Though they cannot lose the seed and the root
of grace, yet they may lose the flourishing and fragrancy of it. Though the
foundation of God remain sure, yet they may fall from their top and eminency.
Though they be built upon a Rock, yet they may be dashed with waves. Though the
Seal of God be of an eternal efficacy, yet they may deface the Print and
sculpture of it, so as that it may not be visible to their eye. Now what a sad
alteration will this be? Thou must not look for any more stroakings, for any
more smiles, for love-glances any more. Thou must bid thy fountains of joy
farewell. Thou must not look to see thy spouse flourishing through the Lattices
any more. Thou must expect Clouds and shadows, and veils, and curtains, and
walls of separation. The fig tree of Canaan shall not blossom, and there shall
be no fruit in the Vines, and the labor of the Clive shall fail. Thou must
pass many a day without one Sunbeam; God will seal up his sweetest
influences, he will shut up the windows of heaven, and stop the bottles of
heaven; he will rain down no more Manna upon thee. Go to thy husks, and see if
they will feed thee. Nay

2. They may not only fall from assurance, but even in a total desertion look
upon God as an enemy, and instead of a filial Plerophory, may come to a fearf^l
expectation of the fiercest w^^^h of God. Now this I say is more judgment then
wicked men are capable of here; in this respect that they never had his love
once revealed to them: whereas these are thrown down from the very pinnacle of
the Temple. And God does not only eclipse the luster of their former joy; but
dips his pen in gall, and writes bitter things against them. He was wont to
shoot nothing but the fiery darts of Love; I, but now his envenomed arrows
stick fast in them. They did once surfeit of the Grapes and Clusters of Canaan;
but now he hedges them in with briers and thorns. They were wont to taste of a
Cup of sweetness, a cup of love; but he has now prepared for them a cup of
trembling and astonishment. They had once a springtime, a budding, a
blossoming-time, the dew of heaven dropped on them, the beams of heaven visited
them: But now comes a sad and disconsolate Autumn, a fading and withering
time. Their gloss and greenness is gone; Heaven reveals it self in thundering
and lightning flashes against them, so as they shall even envy green Bay-trees,
then men of the world that are free from all this. Now is not this enough to
keep a soul in awe? The Psalmist was very near this which we speak of; he often
tells you, that his joy was put out, that his peace was gone, that he was even
ground to powder, that he was banished from the face of his God; that he was
excommunicated from that happy and heavenly intercourse with God, which once he
had. These are frequent complaints; and yet he was one

1. Of a pleasant and cheerful temper. The Scripture paints him out as one of a
sanguine complexion, the men of the world would have said he had been
melancholy else. He was one that was like a green Olive Tree in the house of
his God; a most flourishing and fruitful Christian. As if he had been one of
the Church triumphant, he was always singing fresh Halle lujahs. He had a soft
and delicate touch upon the Harp, he could still Saul's evil spirit with his
music; I, but he could not thus tune and compose his own troubled and
distempered spirit. He was fain now to hang his Harp upon the willows; and the
voice of his Lute was turned into sighing. And if he does sing sometimes with a
thorn at his breast, it is some penitential Psalm or other.

2. And yet all this while he was a King upon a Throne, he wanted not the pomp
and bravery of the world. I, but a Scepter will not conquer fears, and a Crown of
gold will not cure an aching head, much l^sse an aching heart. The smiles of the
world they bruoght him to all this, and therefore he cannot take much
complacency in them; for when he does so often envy the men of the world, and
is ready to stumble at the prosperity of the wicked; it was not so much for the
outward things of the world which they enjoyed, for those he had himself too in
a plentiful measure; but it was for the quietness of their spirits, they were
calm and serene, if compared with him, not in such fears and doubts as he now
was: they had not such conflicts, and Paroxysmes, and tumultuatious of soul as
he now had. And yet he was one that once had the face of God shining out upon
him. And therefore he desires him to restore the joy of his salvation: Lucem
read, abes jam nimium diu; Instar veris enim vultus ubi tuus affulsit, populo
gratior it dies and soles melius nitent, as he once spoke to Augustus.

So that you see here are ways enough to keep men from a carnal security. And
thus we have took off that bold calumny, so as we hope that, Nihil adhaerebit.

Having laid open at large the nature of ass^rance; we now come to handle
briefly the second observation; And that is

Observe. 2. Christian Assurance requires and calls for diligence. Sure I need
not tell you, that the most precious things are Cabinetted and locked up under
difficulties. If you look to nature, you see how she reserves her Jewels in
secret repositories; she sets them in her own bosom, and enhances their price
by rarity. There is indeed, a vein for silver, as Job speaks; but nature is not
so profuse to open it, to let it run waste, and exhaust her self. She hides her
Treasures, and puts them out of the reach of an ordinary Plunderer.

Or, if you look to Arts: There are indeed some things which float at the top,
(...), those that are but initiated into them, are presently acquainted with
them; Hence some beginners, when they have but tasted these, think they have a
present kind of omniscience. O but stay a while, there are most mysterious
things, which lurk at the bottom, and require a profounder search: they must
dive deep before they fetch up these Pearls. Thus it is in Languages, the
choicest elegancies many times are coucht in Idioms, those arcana linguarum,
you may see them like so many Pearls glittering amongst the rubbish of the
Tower of Babel. Thus it is in civil affairs, some things are visible and obvious
to a vulgar eye: the rude heap and mass of people can take notice of them:
some wheels move so plainly, as that they can see them. I, but there are more
secret springs of motion, more intimate contrivances, politic riddles, which
they only can read that are a secretio^ibus. Every design must not have a
window in it, it is comely sometimes to see Moses with a veil upon his face.

And thus it is in the wise Economy and dispensation of the Gospel. It Is true,
the whole Gospel is pregnant with heavenly mysteries: it is like that heavenly
(...), the milky way, which the wise ones of the world take for a Meteor only,
a brief (...); I, but those that are enlightened from above, know that it is
made up ex flore lucis, it is compounded of Stars less discernable; and even
here one Star differs from another in glory. There are mist ria primae
magnitudinis, such transcendent and dazzling mysteries, as that the Eagle must
be fain to shut her eye; and the Seraphim must be glad to wink. And there are
not only intellectual, but practical depths in the way of Religion: And
Christian Plerophory is one of these. For a soul to be filled with the
breathings of the spirit; And to move with full sail in the Ocean of Gods love;
And when it pleases to lie safe at anchor; I, and to be sure of coming safe to
the haven, certainly the soul must needs cry out all the while (...), O the
depth of the goodness and love of God! how mysterious are his ways, how are
his mercies past finding out!

1. Now for a Christian to arrive to so full a sense of Gods love, hic labor,
hoc opus est:

It requires diligence; For

1. There are but few that have any right and interest in the love of God in
Christ, at all.

2. Of those few that have a share and portion in his love, yet all of them
have not assurance of his love. There are but few that enter into the Temple;
I, but there is only some Aaron that ent^rs into the sanctum sanctorum, and
casts his Anchor within the V^ile And

First, there are but few upon whom God bestows his love. 'Twas always a
principle in Morality, that sweet and intimate friendship cannot be ext^nded to
many. Friends usually go by paires. Now God, though he be of vast and boundless
love, and has love enough to satisfy a multitude of worlds, yet he has chose
to concentricate it all in a few picked out of the world: that he might thus
engage them the more to himself. His large and precious love is kept for his
only spouse.

Secondly, of those few whom he loves, some are not assured of his love. He
loved them all from everlasting, yet none of them could be then assured of his
love. A nonentity cannot reach to a Plerophory. Well, but when they peept out
of their first nothing, truly they were not any rare objects of love: much
less could they then be assured of the love of their God; when they were in a
state of enmity and opposition, and the Children of wrath as well as others:
Well, but when he put them into a state of love, and made them lovely with that
beauty and comeliness, with those Jewels and bracelets, which he had put upon
them: when he loved them as his new Creatures, as his vessels of honor, that
were now cast into their just mold and fashion: When he loved them, as his
newborn Sons: yet these babes in Christ could not presently cry Abba Father.
They were his Epistle, written in a goodly character, dated from eternity,
folded up and kept secret, at length sent into the world: the superscription
was writ in time, in Vocation: Will, but all this while they were not sealed,
till the spirit comes and stamps a clear impression of Gods love upon their
softn d and melted spirits. It Is true, they were sealed as soon as they were
written in Gods eternal Decree, but they were not visibly sealed till now. Now
what pantings and breathings? What longings and entreaties? what preparations
were there in the soul, before it could obtain this?

Secondly, it requires diligence to keep assurance. O take heed of wasting and
crumbling away thy hidden Manna. God may break the staff of bread, and what
will thy weary soul do then? Take heed of losing the white Stone, take heed of
forgetting thy new name. O maintain the Oil of gladness in the Cruse. Thou that
art a Vine of Canaan laden with generous fruit; would thou willingly part
with thy sweetness, and fruitfulness? Thou that art a green Olive Tree
flourishing in the house of thy God; would thou be content to part with thy
fatness, and pleasantness? Thou were wont to stay and anchor thy soul upon thy
God; And would thou now be left to the courtesy of a wave? What? Art thou in
love with the tents of Kedar? They are black indeed; And do thou think them
comely too? Art thou weary of the Sunshine? And would thou cool thy self in
the shade? Do thou begin to loath thy hidden Manna, and would thou return
to the Garlic and Onions of Egypt? Art thou cloyed with the clusters of
Canaan, and do thou nauseate the Honeycomb? O remember, thou did not so
soon obtain assurance, and will thou so soon lose it?

Thirdly, give diligence to recover assurance, if lost: O when will the winter
be past? when will the rain be over and gone? that the flowers may appear, and
the time of singing may come: That the Vines of Canaan may flourish again, that
the tender Grapes may appear. Awake O South-winde, and with thy gentle
breathings, blow upon the Garden, that the spices thereof may flow out! Never
leave till thou find thy spouse again, thou that art sick of love: Tell him
that thou longest for a cluster of Canaan; That thou art even famished for want
of hidden Manna. Desire a new edition of his love, with all the inlargements of
affections. Lay thine heart before him, and desire new stamps and impressions;
tell him that though thou have lost the print, yet he has not lost the seal;
tell him that thou will now prize his love more then thou ever did or
could do before. Give him no rest, till he give thy soul rest, and fill it
with himself. Surely thou would not willingly set in a Cloud: thou would
not go out of the world with thine Evidences blotted and blurred: Surely thou
would not willingly be tossed and dashed with waves in sight of the haven. Had
thou not rather go to thy grave in peace? O desire him to shine out upon thee a
little before thou go hence, and be no more seen.

2. Now surely, we need not tell you, why assurance does thus repuire
diligence, For

1. You know the hearts deceitfulness, how it loves to please it self in a
shadow, in a painted joy, to flatter it self into an imaginary happiness. Most
men in the world are so confident of heaven, as if they had been born heirs
apparent to the Crown of glory: as if this new name had been given them at
their baptism, or as if they had been born with hidden Manna in their mouths.
They never knew what a question or a scruple was, nay they wonder that others
trouble themselves with them; as for them, they have a connate kind of
Plerophory. These fabri fortunae suae, have a key to heaven of their own
making, and can go to it when they please. These crown themselves with their
own sparks, and think them more glittering and precious then the White Stone.
As if they were Custodes sigilli, they can seal themselves to the day of
redemption when they please. Thus do vain men cheat their own souls: when as
'twere their wiser way, rather to commune with their own spirits, to criticize
upon their own hearts, to see what a false print they are of, what false
glosses there be, what variae lectiones? what corruptions and degenerations
from the Original? whether there be any spiritual Idioms? what are the genuine
works of the spirit? what are spurious and supposititious?

2. Give diligence, because thou have a diligent enemy that would so fain
quench thy joy, and keep it from flaming into assurance. He envied the grain of
Mustard Seed, when 'twas first sown: how then does it vex him to see it now
spread into such goodly branches, that the soul can build its nest there? He
envied thee the first blushes of the day, the buddings of the Rosy morning;
that those fair and virgin eyelids should open and glance their light upon
thee: ^ow then is he scorcht with thy fuller Sun^hine? How do his eyes water at
thy noonday ^rightness? He that would have broke thee when thou were a bruised
Reed, how would he ^riumph in thy fall, now thou art a stately Ce^ar? If he
could, he would have dispirited and took up the vigor of that immortal seed,
^y which thou were born again; He would fain ^ave spit his venom into that
sincere milk, which fed thy infant-soul; how then does he ^nvy thee those
flagons of wine, with which ^hou art now quickened and enflamed? He ^ould fain
have hindered the foundation of the ^econd Temple, and now he would fain
demo^^sh the structure, and down with it even to the ^round.

That son of the morning fell himself not only ^^om a complete assurance, but
from a possession ^f glory; and that into the most extreme dark^ess that was
imaginable, into a total impossibi^^ty of ever being happy; and now he would
very fain (as much as he can) involve others in ^he same condition: But
certainly it does add ^uch of hell to him, in that he perceives that the ^ons
of God are now fixed in an immutable con^itio^; whereas he was left in so
voluble a state, ^o that now all that he can possibly do is this, to damp their
joy for the present, to raise Clouds, and storms, and tempests; And in this
that Prince of the air does his endeavor to the utmost. And yet Christians may
frustrate him here too, and by a strong and clasping hand of faith, may lay
such fast hold of a God in Christ, as that they may even make the Devil give
over: and to all his former, may add this new despair of ever eclipsing their
glory, and may send him away as weary as he would be, if he should go about to
interrupt the joy of a glorified Saint, or of one of those Angels that still
dwell in glory. So that the more frequent his Alarms are, the more should
Christians stand upon their watch, the more should they fortify themselves,
and look to their spiritual Panoply: they should fly to the name of the Lord,
which is a strong Tower.

3. Give diligence, because it is in a matter o^ so great consequence: and to be
d^ceived h^r^ will prove the most stinging aggravation of misery that can be.
The house that was built upon the sand, great was the fall of it. There is a
counterfeit Plerophory, a blazing kind of assurance, a bragging kind of
confidence, you know the name of it, it is called Presumption^ that great
devourer of souls, that uses to slay it^ ten thousands; It Is so far from being
an Ancho^ as that it is but a swelling and impostumated wave, which tosses up
the soul a while, that it may sink the deeper. And can there be a greater
Emphasis of misery then this? Thou tookest it for granted, that thou were in
the ready way to heaven, and now thou art dropping into hell irrecoverably:
Thou expected'st no less then a Crown of glory, but can find nothing but
chains of darkness and a gnawing worm. How golden was thy dream of happiness?
did thou not fancy the light and beams of heaven ripening the fruits of
Canaan for thee? did not ^hou think thy self upon the top of Mount Pisgah,
refresht with soft and delicate breathings, ^aking a full prospect of the
beautiful Land of ^romise? Nay, did not thou think that some of the milk and
honey of the Land flowed into ^hy mouth? That thou wett plucking off green
Apples from the Trees? Nay, that thou had the ^ery tastes and relishes of the
Olives and Figs, and Pomegranates, and Grapes in thy mouth? ^ut behold, thou
wakest, and art in a wilder^ess, amongst Briars and Thorns, amongst fiery
^erpents, in a dry and thirsty Land, where no ^weetness is! Thou tookest that
for the whisper^ng of the Spirit, which was but the hissing of ^he Serpent.
Thou thought thy self in the ve^^ Suburbs of the new Jerusalem, in the
Temple, (...) the sanctum sancterum; when as thou were all this while but in an
Egypt, in a Babylon, in a prison, in a Dangeon. Thou did exalt thy self like
the Eagle, and build thy nest in the Stars: But with what indignation were thou
swept from thence? How thou art fallen, O Lucifer, son of the m^rning!

3. Consider what kind of diligence is required. And

1. Be diligent in self-reflexion. A clean heart chews the Cud, and ruminates
upon its own actions: Give thy heart frequent visits, and see whether it keeps
that print which the sealing spirit stamped upon it, read over thine evidences;
if there be the least blot, wash it out. Try thy graces by a Scripture
Sunbeam. Have thou within a continual feast? Why then do not thou envite thy
thoughts thither, that they may be satisfied as with marrow and fatness? Why
do no^ thou compel them to come in? Let them drink sweetness out of their own
Fountain, let them bless the womb that bare them, and the breast^ that gave
them suck.

Let them be afraid of entering into their hearts, that have no quietness
within, unless lik^ the Leviathan they can sport themselves in a raging S^a,
that foams out mire and dirt. But tho^ can steep and bathe thy thoughts in a
Cal^ and composed spirit. Why do not thou liste^ to thine own music? Why
do not thou glance upon thine own beauty? Assurance consists in a reflex
act, and by such workings it is maintained, iisdem alitur, quibus gignitur.

2. Be diligent in Prayer. Believe it, assurance does not come with those
vveak vvishes and velleities, that are so frequent in the mouths of many, O
that we were sure of heaven, of happiness! O that our souls were well provided
for! O that we knew what should become of them to eternity! Truly these are but
gaping and yawning desires, as if hidden Manna would drop into their mouths.
This great blessing requires a wrestling prayer. The White Stone is given to
none but a Conqueror. The spirit will not set his seal to a faint and languishing
velleity: An Echo will not answer a whisperer; a weak voice is not worth a rebound.

The truth is, there is a great deal of Vicinity and friendship, nay I think I
might say Consanguinity, between Assurance and Prayer. Prayer should be
Plerophoria quaedam explicata. Assurance does mightily enliven and animate
Prayer, and Prayer does (...), cherish and maintain Assurance.

Go then unto thy God, and be importunate with him: beg a smile, a glance, a
beam of his face: desire him to take all worldly things again, unless he will
sweeten them with his love. Tell him, thou can no longer feed upon husks, and
desire him to give thee somewhat that is fit for a soul to live on.

3. Be diligent and frequent in communion with thy God. Conversing with God
puts a luster and radiancy upon the soul; descending to the Creature, puts a
Veil upon that former brightness; sweet and familiar intercourse with thy God,
puts thee into the number of his friends; and friendship brings assurance and
confidence along with it.

Would God (do thou think?) admit thee into his most shining and beautiful
presence? would he thus display himself to thee, and make known his most secret
treasures of goodness and sweetness unto thy soul, unless he loved thee? would
thy Savior thus smile upon thee? would he thus unbosom and unbowel himself to
thee? would he thus flourish in at the lattices, unless he were thy spouse?
would he thus kiss thee with the kisses of his mouth? would he tell thee so
much of his mind, unless his heart were with thee? would he accept of thy
prayers and thy performances, thy spiritual sacrifices, if he meant to destroy
thee? did thou ever know him deal thus deceitfully with any? would he give
thy soul such frequent visits, such gentle breathings? would he so often
whisper to thee, that which the world must not hear, if thou were an enemy as
well as they? can thou think thy self in darkness, when the Sun looks upon
thee? Can thou doubt of quenching thy thirst, when the fountain bubbles out,
and flows upon thee? Can thou doubt of liberty in the year of Jubilee? What
is the Dove in the Ark, and yet can it find no rest to the soal of her feet?
Can thou question thy safety under the wings of Christ? No, whatever it was
that put out thy joy, it did first estrange and alienate thee from thy God. And
could thou but recover thy former neerness to him, thou need'st not doubt of
the same affectionate expressions from him. Communion with God, it is that which
gives an heavenly and eternal Plerophory; it is that which maintains the
assurance of glorious Angels, and glorified Saints. And that which takes away
all hope from the damned is this, that they are perpetually banished,
irrecoverably excommunicated from the face of their God: Depart from me, I know
you not: there is more in that then in fire and brimstone. But God has said
unto thee, Seek my face, and let thy soul echo out its resolution, Thy face
Lord, ^ill I seek: for all certainty flows from God, from that fixed and
unshaken Entity, from that Original immutability that is in him. And when God
sets his seal unto thee, he prints somewhat of this upon thee: And therefore
the more God gives of himself to thee, the more Assurance he gives thee.

Go then to the place where his honor dwells, go to the place where his glory
shines. You know that the Apostle Thomas, when he was absent from the Apostles
meeting, he fell into a strange distrust of that which the others were very
well assured of. Go then to those Ordinances, that drop golden Oil upon the
soul, and make its countenance to shine. Hide thy self in those clefts of the
Rock, that God may make his goodness pass before thee. God will there beam out
upon thy soul, he will warm it with his love, and will then seal it to the day
of redemption.

Observe. 3. Christian Assurance deserves diligence. It Is a miserable thing to
toil for vanity and emptiness; to sow the wind, and to reap the whirlewinde.
But to take pains for happiness, who would not be willing to this? An Israelite
that would be loath to spend his time in gathering stubble, would willingly
spend it in gathering Grapes. A wise Virgin will cheerfully put in so much
Oil, as will make the Lamp to shine. The soul will never be weary of gathering
hidden Manna. Assurance is a very satisfactory thing; men take a present and
complete acquiescence in it.

1. Consider it in Temporals, what will not worldlings do to secure their Lands,
and Goods, and Estates? How do they seek for Bonds, and Seals, and Oaths and
Sureties; and yet think all this too little? They have set up an Ensurers
Office, and will scarce venture a Ship at Sea, unless it can have an
unquestionable Plerophory; unless one will secure it from wars; and another
from Rocks; and a third from winds and tempests. And this is one of those
stings and vexations which God has put into temporals, that they are uncertain.
Many a worldling has pined away under this very notion, that his riches had
wings, and could fly away when they lift. And this was the reason, why the
Epicures were all for enjoying the present moment; because that was all they
were certain of; and therefore they would have devoured and soopt up the
quintessence of all happiness in a (...) if they could. Thus Anacreon sings
(...). And this was that which made the Heathen so angry with fortune, a
goddess of their own framing, because she put them always upon blind
uncertainties. This made the Stoics to run into the other extreme, to fix
themselves in an unevitable certainty, in a sullen necessity, to anchor upon
fate, rather then to be left to a wavering contingency.

2. Assurance in Intellectuals is very satisfactory. There Is nothing that
tortures the soul more then scruples and difficulties; it makes it to dwell
like a Lilly among thorns.

The Scepticks were a perpetual wrack to themselves. Objections fly like dust
into the souls eye, and sometimes it is fain to weep them out. How does it vex
the Naturalist that his head is so non-plust, as that he must fly to the
refuge of an occult quality? How impatient was Aristotle, what boylings and
tossings in his breast more then in Euripus, because he could not give a full
account of the ebbing and flowing of that river? He threw himself into it, as
if he thought to find more rest there then in his own spirit, discomposed only
with this uncertainty. Every question checks the understanding, and makes it
remove a little from certainty, as the learned Verulam observes. Every question
it is some grace to error, and some repulse to truth.

But how sweetly does the mind relish those first and common notions, that
carry a native light, and convincing evidence and certainty in them, and will not
give the soul leave to doubt? and how does it bathe it self in those
crystalline streamings out, those pure derivations of secondary notions, that
freely bubble out from these fountain-principles, which for their certainty
sometimes are honored with the name of axioms? And some give this rule for a
trial and touchstone of notions: Whatsoever proposition the mind does fully
close with, that is unquestionably true, because the mind cannot rest
satisfied but with certainty. And that which it gives but an hovering and
imperfect assent to, is but probably true. Now though sometimes a falsity may
come under the fair disguise of an apparent certainty, yet this is also sure,
that the mind cannot so fully and sweetly acquiesce in an apparent certainty,
as in a real certainty. As neither can the will so fully close with an apparent
good, as with a real good; for in realities there is a sure Entity at the
bottom, which is a just foundation for appearance, whereas the other is a mere
color, a surface, a shadow. And the more perfect any intellectual being is,
the more of certainty it has.

Our knowledge therefore here is but cloudy and enigmatical, shadowy and in a
glass. The nearer to God any being is, the more it has of certainty. And
therefore the Angels and Spirits that see God face to face, are satisfied with
his Image. Truth then plucks off her veil, pulls off her mask, that the soul
may salute her. And this is the great Prerogative of that infinite and supreme
Being, God himself, that he has an independent and eternal certainty, and
beholds all beings and motions of being past, present, and to come, without the
least shadow of variation. And those things which pose created beings, are more
plain and obvious to his eye, then first principles are to ours. The very
intimate forms of beings are naked and anatomized before him. He looks down
upon the Sons of men, and sees them rolling and fluctuating, tossed and tumbled
up and down in uncertainties, sometimes even questioning him in his ways and
his dealings, while as he rests in a full and absolute Omniscience. And this is
his great goodness, that he allows us certainty in those things that concern
our welfare and happiness.

3. In spirituals and eternals, assurance is very satisfactory. Religion should
be above syllogismes and disputings. Spiritual notions should have the seal of
God in their foreheads; they are not to be struck like sparks out of a flint:
but are to spring like light from the Sun; they are to flow like streams from
the Ocean. And Principles of Religion must be built upon a Rock, upon the most
sure and unquestionable grounds that can be. Men that build for eternity, had
need to lay the foundation sure, and they must build gold and precious stones
upon the foundation, that which has a solidity, and a firm certainty in it. And
if this were observed,

1. You would not have such jarres and divisions in the Church. You would not
be so much troubled with the noise of Axes and Hammers. Imposing things
questionable as certain, is agreeable to that spirit, which allows no other
assurance but this; that their Church is the true Church.

2. The mixing and blending of Religion with uncertainties, is that which does
emasculate, and dispirit, and endanger it; it is a dashing the wine with water;
it is an adulterating the gold with dross, so as it will not endure the fiery
Trial.

3. The taking up Religion upon uncertain grounds, does put men upon an odious
lukewarmness and neutrality; for men cannot be zealous for a thing they doubt
of. It puts them upon variableness and unconstancy, upon the very brim of
Apostasy; and (it may be) plunges them into it. Nay, it strongly tends to
Atheism. some do so long question, which is the true Religion, as that at
length they resolve to have none at all.

4. The leaving the success of Religion uncertain, does damp and cool the
spirits of men. The learned moralists amongst the Heathen, could never content
themselves with a fair probability only of summum bonum, but did spin it out to
an imaginary certainty. The Stoiks would have a domestic Plerophory, they must
be unavoidably happy: A mere certainty will not suffice them, it must be condensed
into a necessity. A wise man with them must irreversibly seal up himself to
happiness: And so though he were in Phalaris his Bull, he must glory and
triumph and sing Hallelujahs. But the fairer Moralists, were willing to depend
more upon the bounty of heaven, which yet they looked upon as a sure and
unquestionable thing; nay, they pleased themselves not only in a Plerophory,
but in a present possession. For you know virtue with them was Praecox
beatitudo, as grace with us is glory not fully ripe. And serenity of natural
conscience was their hidden Manna; their white Stone. Thus were they fain to
still their souls in some shadows and appearances of certainty. This sweetened
Socrates his Cicute, and made him a cheerful Martyr for Philosophy.

And all wicked men that go on merrily and securely in their ways, do frame
some imaginary certainty to themselves; which (it may be) they found upon sure
principles, but falsely applied; as this, That God is merciful, or the like.

All this I bring to show that the soul does catch at certainty and assurance,
and will rest satisfied with nothing else. For, for men to apprehend themselves
uncertain of happiness, what is it else but to be for the present miserable?
Nay, would not some (do you think) choose rather to be certain of a tolerable
misery, then to be in continual suspense of happiness? And truly such men as
have no assurance of obtaining this great end of their being, they are of all
Creatures most miserable.

The Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, and shall not the
Sons of men have where to lay their heads? Every being loves certainty: How do
Naturals combine together and unite their forces, that they may secure
themselves by an happy association? Nature will have a Plerophory, will not admit
of a vacuum, the least schism and rupture would prove fatal, and put it upon
uncertainties. Sir Francis Bacon spies this in those fallings down of water,
that thread and spin themselves into such slender stillicids, that thus they may
preserve their continuity, and when they can reach no longer so, then they fall
in as plump and round a figure as they can.

And if every Being loves assurance, then surely such a noble Being as the soul
of man, cannot be satiated with a changeable good; it cannot fix it self upon a
moveable center. Immortality is near a kin to immutability. Besides, if it were
only this, that the soul did doubt of happiness, it were a lighte^ burden; but
there is necessarily conjoined with this a fear of extremest misery. Now for a
soul to be perpetually hovering betwixt heaven and hell; nay, to have far more
ground to fear the one, then to hope for the other, and so to tremble at the
very thoughts of eternity; is not this a piece of the gnawing worm? and must
the soul live in this perpetual slavery? Is there no redemption from it? Did
not Christ come to take away this sting amongst the rest? Did not he come to
draw thee to himself, to quiet thee in his own bosom? Return thee to thy rest,
O my soul! Return to thine Ark, O my Dove! And look upon this
Gospel-Plerophory, as one of those great privileges that were purchased for
thee by a Savior. For 1. By this, thy soul, thy darling, it is fully provided
for, for eternity. Thy lot is fallen to thee in a fair ground, and thou have a
goodly heritage; could thy soul open its mouth any wider? could thy soul desire
any more then this, to be sure of being for ever completely happy? What would
the damned in hell give for a possibility of happiness? What would some wounded
spirits give for good hopes and probabilities? when as thou in the mean time
have an overflowing Plerophory. What would the one give for a drop to cool
their tongue? What would the other give for a pure stream to wash their
bleeding souls? When as thou all the while art bathing in the Fountain, art
sailing in the Ocean, art swimming in the Rivers of pleasure. Thine
understanding may well rest satisfied, for it is sure to fix its eye upon an
eternal beauty; upon the face of its God. Thy will may rest it self in the
embraces of its dearest object: for it is espoused to the fairest good, and is
sure to enjoy it with an indissoluble union. Thy purer and more refined
affections may sport themselves in the Sunbeams of heaven. There may thy love
warm and melt it self, and there may thy joy dance and exult. All that thou
have to do here below, is this; Thy Virgin-soul that is here assured and
contracted, must wait a while for the Nuptials, for a full fruition of its God,
for a full consummation of its joy.

2. This must needs sweeten all present conditions to thee. Eat then thy bread
with joy; and drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God accepts thy person,
and smells a sweet odor in thy sacrifice. Are there any pearls in the Gospel?
thou may lay claim to them. Is there any balm in Gilead? thou have a share
in it. Are there any Gospel-priviledges? thou know they are thine, and are
intended for thee. Does God bestow temporals upon thee? thou know that he
first dips them in love and sweetness. Mount Gerizim is thy portion: And how
art thou above waves when as some are shipwrackt, others are tossed and
disquieted; thou have an happy protection in all thy ways.

1. Thou art secure against the frowns of the world, for heaven smiles upon
thee. Thou may laugh at the false judging and esteems of men. It may be, the
world brands; I, but the spirit seals. It may be the seed of the Serpent
hisses; I, but the holy Ghost breaths. What, though thou be forty years in
a Wilderness? Nay, what though thou be seventy years in Babylon? Will Not
Canaan, and will not the new Jerusalem make amends for all?

2. Thou art secure in times of judgment. As Job speaks of the Leviathan, The
sword of him that lays at him cannot hold, the spear, the dart, nor the
habergeon. The arrow cannot make him flee, darts are counted as stubble; he
laughs at the shaking of the spear. Who is like him upon the earth, one that is
made without fear? When God thunders upon the men of the world, he speaks but
in a still voice to thee; he darts lightening flashes in their faces, but he
lifts up the light of his countenance upon thee. Judgments are intended for
the sweeping away of Spiders webs, not for the sweeping away of Gods own
Jewels. Or if they be envolved in a common calamity, yet how is it ^olled up in
sweetness to them? when as the other can taste nothing but gall and wormwood.
Their body may be tossed a little in the world, but their soul lies safe at
Anchor.

3. In the hour of death. Thou know that providence then, means only to
break the shell, that it may have the kernel. Let them tremble at the knockings
and approaches of death, that know not what shall become of their precious
souls: Men who through the fear of death, have been all their lifetime subject
unto bondage? But thou may safely trample upon the Adder, and play in the
Cockatrices Den. The Martyrs (you know) did thus, when they embraced the
flames, and complemented with Lions, and devoured torments, and came to them
with an appetite. Assurance of the love of God in Christ, this and nothing but
this pulls out the sting of death. It Is true, that death has lost its sting in
respect of all that are in Christ; but yet such as know not that they are in
Christ, fear death still as if it had a sting: Only an assured Christian
triumphs over it; O death, where is thy sting?

4. Assurance fills the soul with praise and thankfulness. The real presence of
a mercy is not enough, but there must be the appearance of a mercy, and the
sense of it, before it fill thy heart with joy, and thy mouth with praise. A
doubting Christian is like a bird entangled and in a snare, the soul has not
its comfort, nor God has not his praise: But an assured Christian is like a
Bird at liberty, that flies aloft, and sings most cheerfully; It begins those
Hallelujahs in time, that must last for ever; It breaks out into the Psalmists
language, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his
holy Name.

Observe. 4. The fourth and last Observation which was propounded out of the
Text was: That the way to make our Election sure, is first to make our Calling
sure. And this is sufficiently warranted from the just order and method of this
Apostolical exhortation, Make your Calling and Election sure; First your
Calling, then your Election; and by your Calling, your Election: Methodus
Analytica best becoming Creatures.

Many have handled this point at large; I shall do it very briefly, and I shall
give you all that I intend to speak to it in these six particulars.

1. Election in it self is secret and mysterious. For 1. it is from eternity,
and so there was none could know it but God alone; none could know Election but
he that made an Election. A Being that is spanned by time, cannot reach to what
was done from everlasting: You cannot imagine that nonentity should listen and
hear what was whispered in the secret Council of Heaven. Thou go only by the
Clock of time; but those decrees were written with an eternal Sunbeam; thou
turnest up thy houre-glasse of time, but these were measured by an infinite
duration. Was it possible that Esau not born should see God frowning on him; or
that Jacob should perceive a smile? Thou art as far from meriting Election as a
non-ennity, and thou art as far from knowing it as a nonentity. 2. God has a
mind to keep it secret, and therefore he has set a seal upon it; not only a
seal of certainty, but a seal of secrecy. You know creatures themselves have
their closet-determinations; men have their thoughts under lock and key; they
have not windows into one another breasts, much less into the breast of a
Deity. Thou can not fathom sometimes a shallow creature, and do thou think
to reach to the bottom of infinite depths? Has God given thee secret springs of
working; has he made the wheels and motions of thy soul secret, and
undiscernable, and may he not have the same privilege himself? So then, if God
has put a vail upon Election, do thou think to see into it? When he has shut
and clasp't the book of Life, do thou think to open it and read it?

II. Vocation comments upon Election. Gods decrees, that were set from
everlasting, do bud and blossom, and bring forth fruit in time. Election buds
in a promise, and blossoms in an offer of grace. The Book was written before
the foundations of the world were laid; but it was not published till God
himself gave it an Imprimatur. The Letters was dated from eternity; the
Superscription was writ in time, in Vocation. Now you know though the Letter be
writ first, yet the Superscription is read first by him that receives the
Letter. 'Twas decreed from eternity that Decrees should be known in time. And
the (...) is (...), the fullness of time, is the time when Gods decrees are
fulfilled. When the decrees of God are ripe, then he lets the soul taste them;
and then they are sweetest. Then thou perceivest that thou art a vessel of
honor, when God puts thee upon an honorable employment. That fountain of love
which ran under ground for everlasting, bubbles up and flows to thee in time.
That (...) that was in Election, becomes (...) in Vocation. Thus thoughts of
men, when they would appear, they put on words; they take wings to themselves
and fly away.

III. There is a strict and an inseparable connection betwixt Election and
Vocation. For who is there that can blast the decrees of Heaven, or who can
reverse the Seal of the Almighty? Who can break one link of this golden chain?
To be sure, it is not in the power of created Beings to evacuate and annihilate
the Counsels of God. A creature, as it had no influence upon Election, so
neither has it any power to alter it. A shadow does not alter the Sun, but
rather shows you what time of the day it is. And then to be sure God himself
will not reverse his own seal. Nulla est litura in decretis sapientum, say the
Stoics; A wise man will scorn to blot out any thing. Nullae sunt liturae in
libro vitae. God is so full of light, as that there is no shadow of change in
him. Therefore, has God picked thee out as a Jewel, and laid thee up in a secret
repository, in the Cabinet of his secret counsel? He will then bring thee out,
and show thee in time; he means to polish thee, and put a luster upon thee; he
means to set thee as a Diamond in his Ring, and to put thee upon the hand of a
Savior. Did God from all eternity resolve to set thee as a captive soul at
liberty? Truly then thou need not doubt, but that he will in time break open
the prison-doors; and beat off thy chains and thy fetters, and give thee full
enlargement. God has been preparing a feast for thee from everlasting, a feast
of sweet and fat things, and refined, an Evangelical feast: To be sure then he
will invite thee in time; he will stand at thy door and knock; nay, he will
compel thee to come into it. God glanced an eye of love upon thee, when thou
layest hid in the barren womb of nothing; to be sure then in time he means to
woo thee, and to win thee, and to espouse thee to himself in faithfulness and
in truth.

IV. Election and Vocation, though in respect of us they have gradual and
climbing accomplishments; yet in respect of God they are equally present. For
there is no succession in eternity. There can be no Prius and posterius where
there was no beginning. It Is true, that our infinite Beings, as they cannot
sufficiently grasp an infinite essence, so neither can they measure an infinite
Duration. And therefore, our understandings put many time several periods
there, where there ought not to be the least Comma, because we span out things
by our own narrow Duration.

For Duration is nothing else but permanentia in esse, a continuation and
abiding in Being, the spinning out of Entity: And therefore as the soul cannot
see the face of God, so neither can it see the vastness of his Duration, which
is a dequate and commensurate to the Degree of his Entity. So that we being but
of yesterday, are not competent Judges of Eternity. And as the soul impriso^ed
in a body, can but darkly co^ceive of spiritual Beings, and cannot behold the
luster etc oriency of an Angel, nor it cannot behold its own beauty, much less
is it able to behold the glory of God himself: So being here conversant with
transient things that have their Orcum and Occasum, their Fluxum and Refluxum,
their Spring and Autumn, their bounds and their bottom, and dwelling among
temporals; it is not so well acquainted with the vast Duration of eternity. And
yet it can far better behold the back parts of Eternity, then the face of it;
Eterternity a part post, then Eternity a part ante; because the soul it self
is measured by that Duration. Whereas only that one supreme Being, God himself
has the compleatness and perfection of on eternity. No wonder then that our
understandings put several periods there, where there ought not to be the least
comma, because we span out things by our own Duration; that which bubbles from
eternity, comes flowing to us in time. But Vocation is as eternal as Election;
In respect of God, Jacob was as soon called as he was chosen, and that not only
in respect of the secret counsel and decree of God; but whensover God does
actually call Jacob, he calls him ab Aeterno; for Eternity is not at all spent
and exhausted by continuance, but is always in vigore viridi. It Is a
flourishing Duration that never withers nor decays. Indeed Vocation is nothing
else but Election pulling off her veil, and smiling upon the soul, and telling
her that God loves her, and manifest and displayes his love. to her.

V. It is altogether irregular and anomalous for the soul. 1. To pry into
Election. It Is dangerous to tread on the highest round first; and here it is
impossible. Thus the soul forgets that it is a creature, it forgets its own
Duration, and would be measuring it self by Eternity. The windows of the soul
must be set open for the entertaining of such light as does more immediately
flow in upon it; and the understanding must close and comply with such objects
as are best proportioned to it. Now you know that those things which are first
intelligible in their own nature, yet are not always first presented to the
view and eye of the soul. For whatsoever is first in Being may first be known;
Entity being the root and just foundation of intelligibility. And yet sometimes
secondary and junior Entity is fain to prepare the way like a John Baptist for
one that comes after it, and yet was in worth and being before it.

Thus sometimes the causes of things lurk, and lie coucht, they hide their
heads, only a little flourish out at the Lattesses, peeping out of an effect or
two. Thus the Text may be in Hebrew, when the Commentary is in Latin; many may
understand the one, that cannot read the other. Election, it is the Original;
Vocation, it is the interlineary gloss of the help of weak-beginners. It God
should let thee see into Election before Vocation, it were the only way to
frustrate and disappoint his own decree. For if God should show thee thy name
in the Book of Life, before thy heart were changed and renewed; what would this
but make thee sin more securely, and turn his grace into wantonness? Whereas
the wisdom of God never determines the end, but it also determines the means;
and as the end is always glorious, so also are the means powerful and
efficacious. Now thou can not more clearly demonstrate that thou art in a
good tendency and proximity to the end, then by a thankful use and seasonable
application of the means. And what do they do but lay a snare for their own
souls, that catch and entangle themselves with such a desperate fallacy as this
is; If we be elected, we shall be unquestionably saved; and if we be not
elected, we shall be unavoidably damned, and therefore we may do what we list.
O what a bold and blasphemous inference is this! What is this else, but to
distill the rankest poison out of the richest and most sovereign cordial? To
kindle Hell out of a spark of heavenly truth, which if it were blown up gently
by the spirit that breathed it, and kept within its just bonds; 'twould only
cheer, quicken and enliven the soul. Because thou do not as yet know whether
thou art a Vessel of honor, will thou therefore presently dash thy self in
pieces? because thou do not for the present certainly know that thou shall
come safe to the Haven, will thou therefore court the waves, rush upon a Rock,
and make Shipwreck of faith and a good conscience? would thou do thus in
temporals? Why, thou do not know how long thou shall live, the number of thy
days is certainly fixed, and thy time is an appointed and determined time: will thou therefore refuse to lean upon the staff of bread? Will thou not repair
thine earthly and decaying Tabernacle? Will thou not maintain the Oil in the
cruze? that Balsamum radicaele, Will thou break thy glass in pieces, beacause
thou can not tell how long it will run.

Is it not a mercy that God vouchsafes thee the means? Why should thou distruct
of obtaining the end, more then any other? There is not a Curtain that hides
Election more from thee then from any other; it is equally hid to all, till it
shine forth upon some in the use of means, till the Curtain be drawn, and then
it will equally shine out upon thee, if thou usest the seem means. If all
should argue as thou do, there would none be saved; if all men, because
Election is absolute and uncertain, should resolve to live as they list; who
would then set his face toward Canaan? where would God have any glory in the
world? What would become of his great name? but he will root out such an
unsavory principle as this is out of the hearts of all that love him; and that
truth which is made a fatal stumbling block to some, shall prove a solid
foundation of joy and sweetness unto them. The very possibility of Election
should banish all such thoughts as these. Who can tell but God may have been
gracious unto thee, and have fixed an eye of love upon thee? Oh then breath
after him, pant and long for him, desire him to express his mind to thee, to
communicate his love to thee.

Besides, though thou do not know Election, will mere love do nothing? Though
thy God did not intend to glorify thee; yet thou should intend to glorisie
him; Though he does not choose thee for his Servant, yet thou should choose
him for thy Lord. There is worth in him, though there be none in thee.

Resolve that into what condition soever he throw thee, though into Hell it
self, that there thou will love him, and there thou will praise him, and long
for him; that there thou will adore and honor him, and wilt grieve only for
this, that thou can honor him no more; that thou will admire his goodness to
others, his justice to thee; I, and his goodness to thee too, that lays less
upon thee then thou deservest. Such thoughts as these would make hell it self
lightsom.

VI. As Election is secret and mysterious, so Vocation may be easily known.
That Astrologer was deservedly laughed at, that was so intensely gazing upon the
Stars, so admiring their twinkling beauties, as that unawares he tumbled into
the water; whereas before, if he had but been pleased to look so low as the
water, he might have seen the Stars there represented in that Crystal glass.
Such as will needs be prying into the Star, that will ascend up into heaven,
and gaze upon Election; they do but dazzle their eyes, and sometimes by this are
overwhelmed in the depths of Satan: whereas they might easily see the Stars in
the water; they might see Election in Sanctification, in Regeneration. Now
Vocation does plainly and easily appear by that great and eminent alteration
which it brings along with it. It is a powerful Call, it is an audible and
quickening voice; the voice of the first Trumpet that awakens men out of the
graves, and makes them happy, by having their part in the first Resurrection;
great and sudden alterations they are very discernable. Now here is a most
notorious, and signal change made; Old things are past away, and all things are
become new: here is a change from death to life, from darkness to light; and
what more discernable then this? A living man may know that he is alive, and
that without any further proof or demonstration, whatever the Scepticks old or
new would persuade us to the contrary; Will you not allow a man to be certain
that he lives, till a jury of life and death has past upon him?

Could not the blind man in the Gospel (think you) perceive when his eyes were
opened? could he not easily tell that now he could see and discern variety of
objects? or must he only conjecture that he sees, and guess at a Sunbeam? must
he still at noonday go groping in uncertainties. And is there not an easy and
sure difference between those thick veils and shadows of the night, between
those dark and Ethiopick looks, and the virgin blushes of the morning; those
beautiful eyelids of the day? The smilings and flowerings out of light, much
more the advancement of light to its Zenith and Noon-day-glory? And thy then
cannot an Intellectual eye discern as well, that now it sees? that now it
looks upon God with an eye of love, with an eye of faith, with an eye of
confidence? and that now God looks upon him with an eye of tenderness and
compassion, with an eye of grace and favor, with an eye of delight and
approbation? Who but an Anaxagoras will go about to persuade a man to
disbelieve his eyes? and if a corporal eye deserve such credit why may not a
spiritual eye then expect as much? Say not then in thine heart, Who shall
ascend into heaven, to bring down Assurance from above? who shall unclasp the
Book of Life that is sealed, and turn thee to thy name? or who shall bring thee
a Certificate that is written there? Behold, it is nigh thee, even in thy
heart: The work of grace there, the Law written on the tables of thine heart,
by the finger of the spirit is the exemplification and counterpane of that
Decree; the safest way, the best way; the only way to make sure of Election, is
first to make sure of thy Vocation; Make your Calling and Election sure.

FINIS.

