PETRUS CUNAEUS OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF THE HEBREWS.

Translated by C. B.

Nec omnia, nec nihil. LONDON, Printed by T. W. for William Lee, and are to be
Sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Turks Head in Fleet Street over against
Fetter-Lane. 1653.

THE AVTHOR'S PREFACE, TO The States of Holland and Westfrisia.
Most illustrious Lords,
I Offer to your view a Commonwealth, the most holy, and the most exemplary in
the whole World. The Rise and Advance whereof, it well becomes you perfectly to
understand, because it had not any mortal man for its Author and Founder, but
the immortal God; that God, whose pure veneration and worship, You have
undertaken, and do maintain. Here you shall see, what it was that contained the
Hebrews so long in an innocent way of life; what raised up their courage,
cherished their concord, bridled their desires. Indeed, that people had Rules
of Government, excelling the precepts of all wise men that ever were; Which
Rules, we have showed, may in good part be collected out of the holy Bible.
Only, of their Military Discipline very little is delivered to our memory: Yet
must every one, that considers their victories and achievements, confess, that
the Hebrews, for military virtue, were inferior to none. For, in the quality
of banished men, when they were come out of Egypt, where they had long sat,
after a tedious march up and down in the deserts of Arabia for the space of
forty years, they encountered with mighty and valiant Nations, expelled them,
and possessed their Country, where they built new Towns, and dedicated to God a
magnificent Temple. In this most happy soil, where their valor had planted
them, their mutual concord made them grow to admiration. The Counsels of all
provided for the safety of all; and the Cities, which were many, did not every
one aim at their own dominion, but all used their best endeavors to defend the
public Liberty. That the Government might be complete and uniform, they had
the same Laws, Magistrates, Senators, Judges; and the same weights, measures,
money. Wherefore, all Palestin might be accounted as one City, but only that all
the Inhabitants were not shut up within the same Walls. Such a Community and
Conformity there was between them all. Yet, by the Law, there was one City
Privileged above all the rest; not, to have dominion over the rest, but that
all, even the remotest dwellers, should every year thrice hold their Religious
meetings in it. A thing so far from breeding any difference among them, that it
was the strongest bond of union. Thus did the twelve Tribes of Israel, every
one being multiplied marvellously into the greatness of a Nation, overspread a
very great and fertile Country. The force of enemies, the Tempests of Wars, and
other the like evils nothing prevailed against them. They always rose higher
by their overthrows, were enriched by their losses, and the keeness of their
enemies sword put the more courage in them. For a long time the Commonwealth
of the Hebrews continued in this state: till at last, after Salomons death,
having attained the height of prosperity, a great alteration happened. A
certain man, Jeroboam, all whose hopes consisted in the discord of the people,
stird up sedition among them, and drawing to his party ten whole Tribes,
constituted a kind of Commonwealth a part to himself, the head whereof was
Samaria. And now there was no longer one, but two Commonwealths. That of
Israel, or the ten Tribes, lasted but a little while, being conquered, and
carried away into eternal exile. The other of the Jews, whose imperial City
was Jerusalem, although, before the times of Vespasian the Emperor, it was not
wholly ruined, yet the power of it was so enfeebled, that it could seldom bear
up against the enemy. Certainly, none of all this had come to pass, had not
they fallen to pieces by their own dissentions, who whilst they held together,
and kept their force united, were victorious over so many Nations. The discords
of the people give the greatest advantage to the enemy. This was the cause of
the Hebrews ruin, and the same has destroyed the most flourishing Kingdoms
other Nations. Please you to return into the memory of all former times, you
shall find scarce any other thing to have given a check to the most high and
most mighty States. Fortune (though envious to such as prosper) seldom
assisteth any people to the destruction of another, unless the people first
create trouble to themselves at home, knowing neither how to moderate their
vices, nor govern their own forces. It is clear, That Politic Nation the Romans
( who as Tully says, by defending their confederates made themselves Masters
of all the world) understood exceeding well, how the most easy way to subdue
confederate people, was by their domestic troubles and dissentions. Thus, while
they aided the oppressed party, or became Arbitrators of the difference, they
brought all things into their own power, and where they had made a waste, they
called it peace. The Achaians were once terrible to all their Neighbors, by
means of a confederacy, wherein upon fair conditions the Cities of Peloponnesus
were united; Their Commonwealth was of an excellent frame, and very like to
yours (most illustrious Lords) strengthened by their united powers, and
invincible. How often did that Lordly people of Rome, knowing Greece was
inexpugnable so long as confederated, endeavor by art and cunning to dissolve
that union? The Proconsul Gallus was put upon the business: and, when he found
no success, the Spartans, by a treacherous device were added to the ligue, but
upon unequal terms, to be a perpetual cause of difference amongst them. This
afterward undid the Achaians. The Annals are full of such examples, but here is
no place to make a long relation. Rome, the Lady of all Nations, born for the
ruin of the world (as Mithridates said) groaning under the peoples discord, and
Senators faction, at last gave up her liberty, and submitted her proud neck to
the yoke of Caesar. But, to return to the Hebrews, I shall mention that in the
last place, which is the chief of all. The formention'd breach, after Salomons
death, had been probably made up again in a short time, but that the ambitious
Author of it, Jeroboam, by changing the old true Religion into a vain and
senseless superstition, obstructed the way of concord, and by a smooth oration
having obtruded upon the ten Tribes his new invention, made them very prone to
take arms, not so much now for their Estates and Liberty, as for their Altars
and Idols. These things, and many more of this sort, we have discoursed of in
this Treatise: and we thought it not unfit to see the light. You that are the
Fathers of your Country, have always had this truth in mind: That by concord a
small Estate is raised, and the greatest is by discord overthrown. Your own
experience confirms you in it, since by divine favor, and your own virtue, and
the conduct of your Invincible Leader, your Commonwealth, by many degrees, is
at last arrived to that height, that your enemies can complain of nothing, but
your greatness. As I pray for the perpetuity of this Union, whereby you are so
happily advanced; so, when I consider your wisdom, which has shined forth in
the greatest Trials, I am very confident, the same will last, as all good men
would have it, and remain for ever. Yet, I confess, we are not so secure, but
that sometimes we reflect our thoughts upon the examples of former Ages. Many
of your subjects are already gone into sides, and oppose each other with
contrary opinions, since here sprung up amongst them some unprofitable
controversies about mysteries of Religion, not understood by the most part of
the people. The multitude are carried several ways by their affections, and
every day the flame increases. Your selves understand (most illustrious Lords)
how much it concerns you to apply (and you do apply) seasonable remedies to
this distemper, lest your flourishing affairs receive some detriment by this
intestine malady, more pernicious than foreign War, than Famine, than
Pestilence. It Is vain for me to speak more, when I can propose nothing to you
out of my deepest consideration, which is not obvious to your own judgment.
Only my Petition to your Highness is, that you would vouchsafe an intentive eye
to this Commonwealth, which I have here described, the most sacred, and the
best that ever was. Here you shall find some things which Kings and Princes and
the Moderators of public affairs may select and lay up for their use. And
truly I was the more easily moved to offer these to you, in contemplation of
some excellent men sitting in your Senate, whose learning is so exact, that, if
I have brought any thing for the illustration of antiquity and of the best
Authors, they are able to pass a right judgment on it.

ERRATA.
PAge 17. l. 3. for two, r. too. p. 21. l. 7. for their, r. there. p. 122. l.
17. for mystery, r. ministry. p. 137. l. 3. for carried, r. carved. p. 150. l.
6. for good, r. God. p. 136. l. 23. for Susa, ^. Susac. p. 137. l. 13. r.
Salmanassar.

OF THE COMMONWEALTH Of The HEBREWS.
CHAP. I. The Institution of the Hebrew Commonwealth. Legislation. The
Vainglory of the Grecians. The seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah. The design
of Moses in his Laws and Ordinances.
IN this work we shall not be over curious in our method, nor make any accurate
search after materials, but lay hold upon such things as freely and familiarly
offer themselves to our consideration; and as they come into our mind, set down
our discourses upon them all. The Commonwealth of the Hebrews was founded by
that excellent Man of God, Moses, the first Man that undertook a business of
the greatest consequence in the World: For, amongst all the Actions of old,
which Fame has left upon record, this in my judgment is the most noble, the
constitution of Commonwealths, and the ordering of humane Societies by good
Laws. Nothing is more acceptable to God, the Almighty Governor of this
Universe. As the honor hereof is very great; so, many Nations have laid claim
unto it. The Grecians, among the rest of the benefits, wherewith they boast
themselves to have obliged other Nations, put Legislation in the Head of the
Account. Lycurgus, Draco, Solon, and other Ancients, are names they glory in.
Their Glory is but vain: For, all the Brags of this blown and arrogant Nation
are silenced by the Jew, Flavius Josephus, whose Apology extant against Apion
(an enemy to the Jews, and a Man so famous for his eloquence that he was called
Cymbalum Mundi) is full of admirable learning. Plin. praf.
There he shows, that the Greek Legislators, compared to Moses, are but of
yesterday: for, at what time their Father Homer lived, they knew not the name
of Laws, nor is it extant in all his Poems; Only, the people had in their
mouth certain common sayings and sentences, whereby they were governed; to
supply the defects whereof, the unwritten Edicts of Princes were upon occasion
added. The truth is, which Flavius has well observed, Moses, Homer's Senior by
many ages, is the only Man to whom this honor appertains, which so many
afterward were ambitious of. He was the first writer and publisher of Laws,
teaching the people, what was right or wrong, just or unjust, and by what
Decrees that Commonwealth was to be established, which the most high God had
commanded to settle in Palestin. Before the time of Moses, no written Laws were
known in the World: for, although mankind lived not altogether without Laws
before, yet were not those Laws consecrated and kept in any public records or
monuments. Of this sort were those seven Precepts which the Talmudists say were
given to the Sons of Noah, concerning certain Rules of righteousness necessary
for the life of Man. Wherefore they were of so large extent, that whosoever
knew them not, those the Israelites were commanded to destroy by War, and
deprive them of all Communion with mankind; And justly: For, they that had
received no Law, seemed worse than beasts; and (as Aristotle has divinely
spoken) injustice strengthened with Arms and Power is most cruel and
intolerable. Now the Arms wherewith nature has surnished Man, are Reason and
Prudence; things enabling him abundantly for mischief, if they be not
restrained and regulated by Laws. But let us return to Moses. In his
institution of that Commonwealth, the most holy upon earth, he assigned the
Supreme Power to God; and when others find other names (as the matter requires)
calling the Government Monarchy, Oligarchy, or Democracy, he conceived none of
these appellations suitable to the nature of so great an Empire: Wherefore he
ordained such a kind of Government, which Flavius says may very significantly
be styled Theocracy, that is, a Commonwealth whose Ruler and President is God
alone; For, he professed all affairs were managed by divine judgment and
Authority. And of this he gave an evident demonstration, in as much as although
he saw all matters depending upon him, and had all the people at his devotion,
yet upon so fair an invitation he sought no power, no wealth, no honor for
himself. A thing, whereby he showed himself more than Man: For, in all Men
there is implanted a desire of Rule, a desire inveterate, more flagrant and
eager than all other affections whatsoever: Which, I believe, Moses had never
been able to expectorate and extinguish, had he not seen God himself present
and president in all affairs; with whom, to seek a Partnership in the
Government, had been an extreme degree of madness. Moreover, He ordered that
the Magistrates should not be Lords and Masters, but Keepers of the Laws and
Ministers. An excellent Constitution: for, seeing even the best Men are
sometimes transported by passion, the Laws alone are they that always speak
with all persons in one and the same impartial voice; Which I conceive to be
the meaning of that fine saying of Aristotle, The Law is a Mind without
Affection. Lastly, we consider that which is not the least of all, the eternal
stability of Moses Laws: whereto to add, where from to take ought away, was a
most high offense. So that, neither old Laws were abolished, nor new brought
in, but the observation of the first was exacted of all with rigor, even in
the declination of that Commonwealth. Which was not so in other Common
wealths, being both founded and overthrown by Law-making: for, as many of the
Rulers, affecting to bring in somewhat of their own, have changed things before
well ordered; so, many good Orders by desuetude, more (which is worse)
abolished by contempt, gave security to vices. This diversity we could never
wonder at; seeing the Laws of other Nations, Inventions of humane Wit, are
enforced only by penalties that by time, or through the sloth of Governors,
lose their terror: but the Jewish Ordinances, being the Decrees of the
eternal God not weakened either by continuance of time, or softness of the
Judges, they remain still the same; and when the Ax and Scourge are no longer
feared Men's minds are nevertheless kept in awe by Religion.

CHAP. II. The prudence of the Lawgiver concerning Assignation of Lands. That
they ought not to have been the first Seizer's. The Agrarian Law, and its
inestimable Utility. The Redemption of lands. The benefit of the Jubily, and
Solemnity thereof.
FLavius Josephus often cites Hecataeus of Abdera, an Author of great Faith and
integrity, one that waited upon Alexander the great in his Wars; Many Countries
he viewed, abounding with all kind of fruits, but admired none so much as
Palestine; Of this he wrote a singular Book, out of which Josephus recites many
things in favor of the Jews. To our purpose, he says the Jews inhabited a
very good Country, and most fruitful, containing three hundred thousand Acres;
a seat, whereinto as most fit for them, the divine goodness transplanted the
Hebrews out of Egypt: For, as formerly they had spent their lives in tillage of
the ground, and feeding of Cattle; so here in a bounteous soil they might still
enrich themselves, and prosper by the same profession. So soon as the holy
people had by force of Arms possessed themselves of the promised Land, the
chief Captain Joshua presently put in execution the commands of Moses. The whole
Country he divided into twelve portions, and gave it to be inhabited by the
twelve Tribes. Then, he numbered the families in every Tribe, and according to
the number of persons gave to every family a certain proportion of Lands, and
prescribed their bounds. By this means, all were equally provided for; which is
the prime care of good Governors in every Commonwealth; a care, that the most
Politic Nations, the Greeks and Romans, in aftertimes were not unmindfull of
when they carried forth their Colonies. Had every one made that his own, upon
which he first set his foot, quarrels and commotions among the people must needs
have followed: for so it usually comes to pass; whilst every one seeks to get
and appropriate to himself what was common, Peace is lost. Moreover. Moses, as
it became a wise Man, not only to order things at present, but for the future
ages too, brought in a certain Law providing that the wealth of some might not
tend to the oppression of the rest; nor the people change their course, and
turn their minds from their innocent labors to any new and strange employment.
This was the Agrarian Law; a Law, whereby all possesors of Land were kept from
transferring the full right and dominion of it unto any other person, by sale
or other contract whatsoever: For, both they that on constraint of poverty had
sold their Land, had a right granted them to redeem it at any time; and they
that did not redeem it, received it freely again, by this Law, at the solemn
feast of Jubily. There is a great writer, Rabbi Moses Ben Maimon, he that in
his divine work entitled (...) has happily collected all the Talmudicall
doctrine except the trifles, an Author above our highest commendation, the only
Man of that Nation, who had the good fortune to understand what it is to write
seriously and to the purpose; We shall often make use of his Authority, and now
it will help us out in the matter we have in Hand. He is much upon the benefit
of the Jubily, consisting (says he) herein, that all Lands returned to their
ancient Lords, although they had passed through the Hands of a hundred buyers.
Neither are excepted, by this most learned writer, the Lands which came to any
one by donation. These could no more than other be retained from the first
possessor. It is a point of the Talmudicall Law, and I make no question but
it is very right. The same Rabbin from the same fountain declares, that
Redemption was permitted only to such as were recovered from their poverry, and
enabled by some gain or commodity that had befallen them. The reason's plain;
for, to borrow money, or to sell one piece of Land to redeem another, was to
frustrate the Law, that appointed the unable, and their Heirs, to wait for the
relief of Jubily. Yet might the Kinsmen of the necessitous, in the mean time,
buy off for their money, what the poor owner, without borrowing, could not.
These Jubily-solemnities returned every fiftieth year, beginning at the
seventh month Tisri. No other time brought with it so much public joy: for,
besides the repossession of Lands that had been alienated, liberty was given
unto all servants. Yet was nothing done before the tenth of that month, a holy
Fast and day of Expiation. The nine preceding days were all spent in public
mirth and feasting, like the Roman Saturnalia. Hear how Maimonides relates it.
From the beginning of the year, to the day of Expiations, neither were the
servants dismissed, nor did they serve their Masters. What then? The servants did
eat and drink and make merry, and every one of them set a Crown upon his Head.
After, when the day of Expiations was come, the Senators of the Sanhedrin
sounded with their trumpets, and forthwith the servants went away free, and the
old Lords took a repossession of their Lands.

CHAP. III. Again of the Agrarian Law. The danger of two ample possessions. The
Roman Commonwealth. Stolo 's Law. How the Hebrews maintained themselves. The
Legislators providence. Divine Laws of Agriculture and Pasturage.
BUt we have more to say of the utility intended by Moses in the Agrarian Law.
Certainly, it was of great concernment to the Commonwealth, as before we
noted, that the avarice of a few should not invade the possessions distributed
with so fair equality. It is not unusual with rich men to thrust the poor out
of his inheritance, and deprive him of necessaries, whilst they enlarge their
own estate superfluously. This produces often a change of Government: For, the
truth is, That Commonwealth is full of enemies, wherein the people, many of
them having lost their ancient possessions, with restless desires aspire to a
better fortune. These men weary of the present, study alterations, and stay no
longer, than they needs must, in an unpleasing condition. Time was, when at
Rome the principal men (drawing all unto themselves, insomuch that one Citizen
possessed Land enough for three hundred) were confined by Stolo's Law to five
hundred Acres a Man. But that good order, by fraud, was quickly broken. Stolo
himself was the first to violate his own Sanction, and was found guilty for
holding a thousand Acres, making use of his Sons name, whom to that end he had
emancipated. And after, by other arts, many others eluded the sentence of the
Law, themselves possessing what was purchased by their Agents. This abuse being
perceived by the wise Lelius, friend to Scipio Africanus, he endeavored to
reinforce the Law, but overborn by the adverse faction, to prevent contention
and discord, he desisted. So the way was open for license, and possessions were
enlarged out of all measure; till at last all Italy and the next provinces fell
into a few Hands, as their proper patrimony: whereof, it were very easy to
allege testimonies, but here is needless. We touched also another reason of the
Agrarian Law, namely, that Moses would not have the people languish and lose
their virtue by want of exercise. The most eminent of all their Ancestors
having led a pastoral life, and been good Husbands in the Field, their
posterity could not be better secured from the vices and incommodities that
follow idleness, than by being obliged to the same employments: which are not
only the means of getting riches, but were used by the best Men even from the
beginning of the World. Indeed, those Country employments would soon have been
deserted, had the Law permitted every one to purchase as much as he would, and
lay Field to Field; Whereby it comes to pass, that the Lords of so much Land
disdain to perform those honest labors with their own Hands, but commit the
business of Husbandry to others; such as are, for the most part, strangers
hired, or servants bought with money. The inferior people, having no Heart to
bestow their labor on Land that is not their own, get out of the Fields into
the Cities, and their immure themselves, and are corrupted with an idle kind of
life, supported by some soft and illiberall Art. Verily, after that the Roman
Senators, and those but few, engrossed to themselves the Fields which formerly
belonged to many, not the Citizens alone, but all free men neglected and forgot
the art of tillage. The Country that had once seen such brave and gallant men
as Curious, Fabricius, Cato, was now filled with the noise of chained laborers
and bondmen. The magnanimous offspring of Romulus (as Varro complains) did no
longer exercise themselves in the Cornfieldsd and Vineyards, but in the Circ
and Theater: For, they had now thrown away the Hook and Plow, who of old (says
he) had so divided the year, that every ninth day only they visited the City;
all the other days they attended their Country-affairs. Thus did they decline
from their Ancestors ways, which while they observed, they teaped a double
benefit; their Fields did abound with fruits, and their minds with virtue. For
prevention of the many public evils that arise from the forementioned
neglect, Moses a Man excellent both in divine and humane wisdom providently
decreed the privileges of Redemption, and established the Law of Jubily: A Law,
that had not the least shadow of injustice, nor contained any incommodity at
all to the buyers of Land; for, in the sale, an eye was ever cast upon the
Jubily, and with respect unto the nearness or distance of it, the price did
either rise or fall. This is that, Lev. 25.14, etc.
which is at large set down in Leviticus in these words: If thou sell ought
unto thy Neighbor, or buyest ought of thy Neighbors Hand, ye shall not
oppress (or circumvent) one another: According to the number of years after the
Jubily, thou shall buy of thy Neighbor, and according to the number of years
of the fruits he shall sell unto thee: According to the multitude of years thou
shall increase the price thereof; and according to the fewness of years thou
shall diminish the price of it: for according to the number of the years shall
he sell unto thee: Ye shall not therefore oppress (or deceive) one another.
Now, if the Seller desired to redeem his Lands, before the Jubily, it was also
with great equity ordained, that he should render back the price, only
retaining so much of the money, as the buyer had received in profits. By this
means, Restitution of Lands was made without any damage at all to either party;
and Agriculture, their old honest employment, kept up in esteem and practice
amongst all the people. What the nature and condition of that people was, to
whom Moses gave his Ordinances, cannot be doubted: for, among so many Laws
which he made, as a great number concern Justice and Religion, so the rest
which pertain to their estates and matter of profit, run all upon rules of
Husbanry. How carefully are the people taught, when to give rest to their Land,
and to intermit their seeding? what they must observe at Harvest and Vintage?
What years it was allowed to gather fruit of the Vine? Farther, with what
severity are they forbidden to sow mingled seed in the same ground; to mix
diverse kinds of Animals in generation; or put them together under one Yoke? The
rest, touching the breed of Cattle, First Fruits, and Tenths, are almost
infinite. They are handled at full in the Talmud: where they take up the sixth
part of the whole, or more. Maimonides has comprehended all in his Book, that
he calls (...), wherein are admirable secrets.

CHAP. IV. In what straight every seventh year brought the Jews. The benefit
granted to this Nation by Alexander the Great, for a certain prophecy. The Jews
had little commerce with other people. The Grecians ignorant of their affairs.
Aristotle's opinion of the Jews. Who are the best Commonwealths men. Of
Artificers.
SUch were the Laws given to the Hebrews: all whose wealth lay in the Fields.
According to the increase whereof, they were in penury or abundance? Hence it
was, that as often as foreign Kings imposed tribute on them, every seventh year
brought them into so great a straight, that they were hardly able to raise the
sum. For their Law would not permit them to till the ground that year, and to
gather in the fruits thereof, which yielded all their money. Alexander of
Macedonia, having learned at Jerusalem out of Daniels Book, that a Grecian
should overthrow the Persian Empire, glad with the prophecy, bad the Jews ask
of him some royal favor. They answered, no greater benefit could be done
them, than the remission of the seventh years tribute. It was granted. The
Samaritans, when they said much for themselves to obtein the same indulgence,
were not heard. But, of all that can be said in this kind, nothing is more
luculent than that which 1 Apol. ad v. Ap.
Flavius gives in answer to Apion, in behalf of his Countrymen: Neither do we
live near the Sea, nor delight in trading; nor have we therefore any commerce
with other Nations: but our Cities are remote from the Sea, and we our selves
seated in a fruitful Land, which we make more fruitful by good Husbandry.
Indeed, whereas several Nations are so associated by Trade, that the
Commodities of all Countries are transported and may seem natural to every
one, the Jews alone contained themselves within the bounds of their own Land,
not applying themselves unto negotiation. For they passed not the Sea, nor
visited other people, nor were visited by others. Whence it came to pass, that
the Grecians and others have delivered many fabulous reports concerning them.
For very few had certain intelligence of their affairs. Hecataeus is the only
man that has written truth; The rest have related what they had by fame and
hearsay; Which, how unsafe it is in all History, appears by Eph^rus, a famous
Author of old, who said, Iberia, which he never saw, was one City: a
ridiculous error; for 'twas not a City, but a great and populous part of the
Western World. It is a mavelous ignorant conceit of Aristotle in Clearchus,
that the Jews were propagated from the wise men of India, but had changed their
name: the Philosophers of India being called Callans, and in Cava Syria Jews. I
am ashamed, so great a man should make such a poor conjecture. But that which
the same Aristotle there adds, as it is not incredible to us, so is it very
glorious for that holy Nation. He says, when he was in Asia, there came unto
him a certain Jew, a man of so much learning and science, that in comparison of
him all the Grecians that were present, seemed to be but Blocks. Herein he has
made some amends for that, he had imprudently related concerning their
Original: which he had been better to have omitted, as a thing unknown to a
stranger. And truly to me Flavius seems to glory in the Jews obscurity, when he
says, They live in mediterranean places, and Merchants and strangers have no
access unto them. For so, they long kept their manners uncorrupted, and none of
those exotic things pertaining to luxury and riot was imported, whereby most
potent nations are undone. The rest of his words are such, that Flavius, you
may say, is proud of his Country: We dwell in a fertile Land, and in the
culture of it we spend our Labor: as if nothing could be greater or better.
Aristotle recites some Edicts, framed by most ancient Lawmakers, coming very
nigh unto the Mosaicall. Oxylus, King of the Elians, prohibited Lands to be
mortgaged for money; and the Locrians were not permitted to sell the
Inheritances of their Fathers. Which Ordinances were (as the greatest Author of
natural wisdom notes) to this purpose, that the people might not desert the
culture of their Fields. Wherefore he so often iterates it in his Politics,
that the best Commonwealth is, where the people live upon Tillage and Pasture.
He gives the reason: Because they govern themselves and their affairs according
to the Laws: for they maintain themselves by their labor, and cannot have any
time to be idle. Other Common-weals, filled with a multitude of Opificers and
Mechanics, he judges in far worse condition, because the life of such men is
unactive and sedentary, and their employment of no alliance unto virtue. It
appears hence, how vain and frigid that vulgar objection is, (which Flavius
mentions) against the Jews: In that Nation there are no inventors of new works,
no Artificers: This is no disgrace to the Jews, but the greatest praise; for
how can the invention be praise worthy, when the exercise of the things
invented is illiberall? All Opificers are conversant in works that foul their
hands; and Aristotle says well, they serve a kind of servitude, but limited,
because we use their hands and labor, not as of servants in all, but in some
one matter. So little of what is ingenuous can be found in the Shop, wherein,
beside the rest, there is also this evil, that it effeminates and weakens both
the body and mind. Wherefore in ancient Common-weals well established, (as the
most judicious Master says) Opificers were not Freemen, but strangers, and
they were a body as it were distinct and separate from the Citizens.

CHAP. V. The Hebrews hated by the Egyptians, and why. The Egyptians given to
idle Arts: emasculated by Sesostris. An Egyptian Law of inheriting trades. The
Shepherds, a third of the Egyptians, feared by the rest: and why more hated
than Husbandmen.
NOw it will be easy to observe the cause why the Jews were hated always by
the Egyptians, not only while they sojourned there, but afterward when they had
a proper seat and a Commonweal of their own in the neighboring Land of
Palestine, bounded on the South with Egypt, as Cornelius Tacitus relates.
Truly, that hatred sprang from nothing more, than a dissimilitude of life and
studies. For all the Plebeians of Egypt, set upon sellulary arts, under the
shade of their Cities took their ease within the Walls; Yea some, perverting the
offices of the virile sex, handled the spinning wheel. And as they were ever
prone by their own disposition unto softness, so afterward were their minds
more enervated by the King Sesostris; Whose study it was to soften his people,
and as the Egyptians themselves report, learned the skill of Mercury. There was
a Law too, that conduced to this end by confining their wit within narrow
bounds: for no Opificer might exercise any other Art, but that which descended
to him from his Father. Juvenal, when he would smite Crispinus (a man gotten up
to high place by evil Arts, and Caesar's favor) with a Satyricall jerk, calls
him a Plebeian of Nilus, and slave of Canopus. For so it was the opinion, that
the Priests were free, and the Opificers, which were the common people,
servants. But there was another sort far different from those, a certain third
part of the people, which lived at distance in the plains of Egypt, and near
the marshes. These were the Shepherds; active and able men, but execrable to
all the Egyptians, because they would not suffer them to be secure in their
idle course of life. These often made great commotions, and sometimes created
Kings for themselves. Wherefore the Romans in after times, when they easily
held the rest of Egypt in obedience, placed a stronger Garrison in these parts.
When you have taken the most exact view of all things, you will find, this was
the only reason that made the Egyptians, even from the first, so ill-affected
unto Shepherds; because those sedentary men and opificers could not endure
their fierce and lively spirits. Pharaoh himself, when he had decreed to abate
and depress the growing multitude of the Israelites, speaks to his men on this
wise: The Israelites are stronger than we. Come, let us deal wisely, that they
increase not, lest when War arises they join themselves unto our enemies, and
take arms against us. That opinion I think to be right and true; nor can I
assent to them, that impute the cause of this public hatred to their
superstition: as if the Hebrews, Keepers of Flocks and Herds, could not be
suffered by that Nation, who reverenced, some Sheep, some Goats, some other
fourfooted Beasts, and would not slay them, being persuaded, there was in them
something of divinity. But this Reason is very improbable; for what will they
answer, when either they shall learn out of the Pentateuch, that Pharaoh had
innumerable Flocks of Sheep; or when they shall see so many monuments of
Histories to be produced, making manifest, that a considerable part of the
Egyptians (as we have above said) lived in Pastures, and among Cattle? And yet
is that saying notable in the Scripture; All Shepherds are hated by the
Egyptians. Of Husbandmen it is not so spoken: nor indeed could their valor
(which was none at all) be feared or hated. For the lazy Clowns had all their
hopes placed not in the industrious manuring of the ground, but in the River
Nilus. The overflowing stream bred and encreast their Corn: nor did it bring
only fruitfulness to the earth, but earth it self; for being mixed with much
mud, it enlarged the Fields, and by an yearly addition stretched out the bounds
of their Land. So, the Countryman admired both his soil and Crop newly sprung,
which without his labor and care had fallen to him.

CHAP. VI. The Jubily not celebrated after the Captivity. That solemnity was
kept in the 49. year, which was the 7. sabbaticall.
COncerning the Egyptians, what disposition they were of, and how different
from their Neighbors of Judea, we have spoken sufficiently; We return, to say
a little more of the Jubily. The Agrarian Law made by Moses touching the
restitution of possessions was observed with very great Religion until the
desolation of the former sanctuary by the Assyrians. After that, Palestin lay
forsaken and incult for the space of 70. years, as the Prophets had foretold.
But when at length that fatal time was expired, the Jews indeed returned to
their ancient habitations, and the Temple was built anew, but never was the
Agrarian Law revived, nor the Jubily solemnities celebrated any more. No more
now did every fiftieth year give liberty to servants, nor restore unto the
former Lords their lost and sold possessions. Whether justly the fiftieth year
or the forty ninth was the year of Jubily, it is made a question. We join with
those incomparable men of our time that hold the forty ninth: nor can we assent
unto Maimonides in this, though for the most, we religiously embrace his
judgment. For this Author has recompensed us, for his few and little errors,
with many great virtues, and very choice observations every where. It is
observed by the same Maimonides, that as to the intermission of Agriculture,
there is the same reason of the Jubily and every seventh year; nor is this a
conjecture of the Jews only, or a probable opinion, but certain and undoubted
truth, which the Legislators own word confirms, Levit. 25. But now, if the 50,
year exactly were the Jubily, two Sabbaticall years (for the 49. is
Sabbaticall) would without intermission have been celebrated together. A
singular, strange and unusual thing. For, whereas providence had so ordained
that every sixth year in Palestin, by its exceeding fruitfulness, should prevent
the famine of the seventh, being the year of rest to the Fields, there must now
be a more miraculous fruitfulness, if two years of rest should come together.
In neither was it lawful to Plow or Sow. Therefore, the divine bounty, which
is expressed in Levit. (I will send my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and
it shall bring forth the fruits of three years) must be increased to serve for
four years, the 49. and 50. being, upon diverse reasons, both Sabbaticall. No
such fruitfulness was ever granted to any other Land or Nation. We confess
indeed the Land of Palestin was the favorite of Heaven, and much indebted to
the divine influence above other Lands; yea, things went there sometimes
contrary to the Laws of Nature. Nevertheless, seeing none of the Prophets have
given testimony to so great a miracle, nor any histories have made any record
of it, we must not, by too easy a credulity, give occasion to our Reader to
charge us with stupidity.

CHAP. VII. The three consecrations of Palestin and of the Cities; Of
Cityhouses, of Jerusalem and her privileges. Agrippa 's offense, and the Jews
embassage upon it to Nero. Of enlarging their territories: and the right of
fortifying. The ruin of the Commonwealth. The Cities of refuge.
THe Talmudists affirm, when Josuah marched into Palestin, he consecrated all
the walled Cities. This they called the first entrance. But when the holy
people was carried away by the Babylonians, beyond Euphrates, their Country was
polluted by the wicked: Wherefore, after the return of the Jews into their
seats, Ezra the high Priest, by a solemn act, restored sanctimony to the
Cities, and that was the second entrance. At last Caesar Titus, having
overthrown the Jews, profaned all again. And here the Talmudists flatter
themselves with a pleasing error. For they do yet expect Messiah, who, as they
would have it, shall invade the kingdom of Palestin, and consecrate the Cities
once more. This, say they, will be the third entrance. Moreover, the same
Authors tell us, wherein consists the Religion and sanctimony of Cities; and
why the Villages and Country were not consecrated also: Which it would be
tedious to relate. When the Towns of Palestin were assigned to the several
tribes, the Levites too received Cities for their habitations; but the Country,
the Fields and possessions were so divided, that they had no share: For they
had the Tenths only, and first fruits, and all the Sacrifices. Of these they
lived, and with these they did abound. But we must observe with Maimonides,
what is here said has place only in the Land, which by Covenant was given to
Abraham, I saac, and Jacob, and which was held by their children, and divided
amongst them. But in other regions, which were subdued by some Kings of Israel,
the Priests and Levites had their portion with the rest of the Hebrews.
Concerning City-dwellings there was a Law, that he who had sold his House might
redeem it within a year: the year being past, it was the buyers; nor had the
next of Kin any right to redeem it, nor was the Jubily here of any benefit. If
the House were redeemed, the whole price was repayed to the buyer, although the
sale and delivery had been made many months before. And the former possessor
might redeem his House, even on the last day of the year. In case he was
absent, who had bought it, or was gone out of the way on purpose, the Redeemer
addressed himself to the Court, and having there in presence of the Senate laid
down the price he had received, departed, brake open the doors, and took
possession of his House again. Thus the Talmudists. In the Cities of the
Levites it was not so but, for their houses, they had the benefit of the same
Law which was established by Moses concerning the Fields and rural possessions
of all the Hebrews, as has been said. Wherefore they might redeem them after
the year was past; and what was not before redeemed, the Jubily restored.
Amongst all the Cities, most eminent was Jerusalems sanctity, and (as the
Talmud delivers) it remained perpetual, ever since the Dedication by the most
glorious King Solomon: That Ezra consecrated it again, was unnecessary, for it
was not capable to be profaned, like other Cities, by the hands of the
Sacrilegious. Whence it came to pass, (as the Talmud-tradition is, that it was
lawful to sacrifise at Jerusalem, and to feast upon the sacrifices, even in
the dust and ashes of the destroyed City. But how great was the Religion of the
place, appeared by those Jews, whom Hadrian the Emperor permitted once a year
to visit the deformed relics of the holy City, and there to lament and
deplore the misery of their Nation. This City was not assigned by lot unto any
one tribe, but was common to them all: Wherefore the Talmudists free it from
that Law, which commands the blood secretly shed in the borders of the Tribes,
to be expiated by slaving of a Heifer. This which follows is not from
superstition but from the ancient and approved custom of the Nation. Maimonides
relates, if any had an upper room so high that it gave them a prospect to the
Holy of Holies, they might indeed once a week go up to see all safe, but oftener
or for other cause, they might not Verily King Agrippa much offended his people
when from a lofty room in his palace he took a frequent view of the Temple and
saw from on high what was done within it. The Jews, thinking this to be an
unsufferable thing, raised a high wall to cut off the Kings prospect, and
without delay sent unto Rome ten Legates, with Ismael the High Priest, and
Eleazar the Treasurer, to Petition Nero for a confirmation of that, which
Religion had compelled the people to do. What Hec^taeus of Abdera says in
Flavius, that Jerusalem was of 50. furlongs compass, inhabited by one hundred
twenty thousand persons, were not very material for us to know, but that there
is something of singular note concerning the enlargement of their pomaeria,
which Maimonides has declared out of the Talmudicall Books. And this it is. In
the enlargement of the City, the great Senate Sanhedrin, and the King* and one
Prophet, consulted the oracle called Urim and Thummim. After that they had
agreed among themselves about the interpretation of the divine answer, the
Senators of the Sanhedrin recited two Verses of thanksgiving, and having taken
two Loaves of leavened Bread, and departing presently with instruments of
Music, made a stand at the turning of every Sticet, and at all Monuments
erected in the City, and pronounced these words: I will extol thee O Lord,
because thou have lifted me up. At last, when they were come unto the place
designed for consecration, because it was to be the bound of their pomaeria,
they all stayed; and there, of the two Loaves taken with them, after the Verses
sung, they eat one; the other, they burnt in the flames. These things received
from their Ancestors, the Talmudicall writers have thus left upon record. Nor
are they improbable, seeing the like and almost the same are exstant in the 12.
Chapter of Nehemiahs commentaries. Yet in after times, the liberty of the Jews
being oppressed by the Romans, this prolation of their pomaeria depended not upon
the pleasure of the great Council, but of the Roman people. Farther, this is
also delivered by Cornelius Tacitus, that the Jews, with a great sum of money
purchased leave to fortify. Whence it appears, the Queen of Cities, Jerusalem,
was in the same condition with all towns under the Roman power, whose Walls
could not be repaired without the Authority of the Prince or Governor, nor any
thing joined to them, or set upon them: as L. 9. sect. ff. de rerum divis.
Ulpian the Lawyer says. And truly, Claudius Caesar, when he had received
intelligence that they were enclosing Jerusalem with a mighty Wall, admonished
Agrippa of that new attempt; and thereupon the King, in obedience to the
Emperor, left off the work he had undertaken. The Talmudicall writers say,
Jerusalem had this privilege, above other Towns of Judaea, that no house in the
City, after one year, could be retained by the buyer. They say also, it was not
lawful to plant Orchards or gardens there affirming that of the whole City,
which Hecataeus has written of the circuit of the Temple. Dead bodies, which
were carried any whither, were not admitted into that City, out of a respect
unto the Holiness thereof. Only two Sepulchers were there, of David, and of
Olda, built (they say) by the old Prophets. Yet were the Levits bound up with a
more strict Religion being prohibited to bury the dead in their Cities and in
the Field of their Suburbs too. Wherefore, by divine appointment, they received
from the other Tribes a parcel of ground without their own borders, where they
might lay the bones of their dead to rest. In other Towns, it was not unlawful
to bury, provided seven honest men gave assent thereto; but when once the Corpse
was carried forth of the gate, it might not be received again within the walls,
although all the people should desire it. Jerusalem, as we said above, was the
head city, the seat of Religion and holy rites; Wherefore, that being
overthrown, there fell with it the form of the Jewish Commonweal, both Civil
and sacred. Truly what Flavius says of a voice heard out of the Temple, before
the destruction of the City, Let us go hence; seems unto me to signify
nothing else, but that the Commonweal was to be dissolved, and the Scepter to
be taken away, which of old was given to the holy Nation. For within a short
time, the orders, and functions, and rites, and almost all their Laws ceased;
and there followed great confusion, desolation, and distraction. First of all
the most sacred College of the Hasideans, that drew its Original from the
Prophets, was now no more; because their custom was, to go every day to the
Temple, and to bestow voluntary charges upon Sacrifices, and upon the Porches
and Walls of the Sanctuary. And whereas Moses imposed upon strangers that
should become Proselytes, the oblation of some certain gift, this upon the
dissolution began to be deferred altogether till another time when the third
sanctuary, which they yet expect, shall be built. Nor do they any more marry
their Brothers Widows, which have no Children. And the solennity of the
Passover, never since that time, has been rightly celebrated; for the Law
commanded it should be kept in that place, wherein. God had chosen the seat of
his house. Of so much consequence was the fall of one City it has changed and
perverted all things, and brought to ruin the Commonwealth of the greatest
people in the world. Concerning other Towns of Judaea, nothing memorable comes
into our mind, but that God appointed some of them for Cities of refuge that
such as had unwittingly slain a man might find safety and protection there.
There did they endure a gentle banishment till the High Priest dyed, whose
death set them all at liberty; so that, if happy any had deceased before, yet
their bones might then be carried into the Sepulchers of their Fathers. These
towns were six; and three more shall be added to them, say the Talmud-writers,
when the greatest of Kings, Messiah, shall come upon the earth; to which they
refer that of M^ses, not spoken surely in vain, When the Lord your God shall
enlarge your borders. Besides the six Cities, the same privilege was granted to
the two and forty towns of Levits; but that the same writers deny, those places
to have been safe for them, that understood not the benefit of the Law Other
things, which may be said of the Right of these Cities, together with what the
Jews comment upon some other towns, we will therefore let pass, because we
cannot polish nor grace them by our handling.

CHAP. VIII. What Palestin had above other Countries. The Hebrew Commonwealth
could not be translated into other places. Of the Babylonian Jews: and their
power. Of the Scepter, against M^imon. The J^ws Commonwealth bound to
Palestin. No Temple to be built elsewhere.
THe Commonwealth of the Hebrews had it beginning then, when the holy people
was brought into the happy land of (...). Before which time, though in the
Arabian deserts most wholesome Laws, both ceremonial and judicial, were given
by Moses the man of God: yet all their force pertained to that Country, wherein
as the several Tribes should have several Towns, so there should be one City
singularly appointed, to be the Chamber of the Empire, and sent of sacred
rites. In the last part of the Pentateuch, the most wise Legislator, repeating
what he had given in charge before, has to our purpose added these express
words again and again: These are the precepts, the Statutes and judgments,
which ye shall observe in the Land which is given you for an inheritance to
possess. Truly, Palestin had this excellency above other Countries, that the
holy Nation and Commonwealth was affixed unto it alone. Had any one led that
people out of their proper seat, and established the same Commonwealth by the
same Laws, neither would the Commonwealth have retained its sanctimony, nor
the people their Majesty. Pertinent here and fit to be considered on our way is
that saying of Lib. 14. M^sn. in Hal. Mel. cap. 5.
Maimonides: As it is not lawful for the Jews to move their seats out of
Palestin, so neither may they pass out of Babylon into other Countries. Without
the explication of this, whosoever read the writings of the Hebrew Masters will
meet with rubs. The truth is, Maimonides speaks not of all the Jews, but of
them only who were carried away by the enemy beyond Euphrates, and dwelt at
Babylon and thereabout. Some of these, after 70. years, returned into Palestin:
the rest, moved by the beneficence of the Kings, under whom they lived,
continued at Babylon, and fixed their colonies there. The multitude of them was
very great, and at last grew up into a Nation. It Is incredible, what strength
these exiles had; for they did almost ofter both the Miter and the Diadem that
is, the Priesthood and the Kingdom, to Hircanus, h^stening out of Part^^^ unto
H^rod; and to them were committed the Arcan^ of the Babylonian Empire, which ^n
Hebrew Priest kept in a great strong Tower at E^b^tan of the M^des. These Jews
were joined in a very close alliance with those of Pal^st^^. The same
institutions, the same course of life, the same language was common to both
sorts: all things were the same. Wherefore, as God permitted them to dwell at
Babylon far from their Country, because they were free there from the contagion
of any foreign customs; so were they denied to proceed any farther, and to go to
any other habitation. This is the meaning of Maimonides where he interprets
that of Jeremy; they shall be carried into B^bylon and remain there. There is
no more question to be made of this matter. That is very glorious, which some
wise men of the higher form approved and followed by M^imon^^i, have conceived
of these Babylonians. Their opinion is after the fatal relapse and decay of
the affairs and state of Jerusalem, these Babylonian Jews are the only people
upon whom was transferred the Imperial dignity, promised in that famous Oracle:
Genesis 49.10.
The Scepter shall not depart from Juda, nor a Law giver from between his feet,
until Shiloh come. We, who reverence the excellent virtues of Maimonides, make
no scruple to reprehend his errors. Certainly, that most considering Author,
in this opinion, whilst he too much favors his Country-mens conceits, forsook
his own judgment. I am not ignorant, that the Babylonian Jews had a
Commonwealth among themselves, and administered Justice to the ^est of their
own Nation that were without Palestin. Nor do we forget, that some Peers,
descended from the house of David, always held the principality there. Yet
therefore follows not, that which Rabbi Ben Maimon would have. For the Scepter,
whereof the Oracle was, is nothing else, but the Jewish Commonwealth, that is,
that Priestly Kingdom, whereunto the Religions and Ceremonies were, not an
accession or prop, but the very soul and spirit. Besides, the custody of
Ceremonies and sacred Rites did not belong to every City, but one, wherein was
the sanctuary, the peculiar seat and habitation of the Deity. That City first
was Shiloh, afterward Jerusalem in the midst of Pal^stin. If any schismatical
Jew built a Temple or Altar in other Lands they offended against the Rights and
inviolable Laws of the Commonwealth. There is extant, among the monuments of
history, the Epistle of Onias to Ptolomy and Cleopatra; wherein he accuses his
Countrvmen because they had built sanctuaries in the Phenician Cities and
elsewhere, contrary to the Law: being himself guilty of no less fault having
built a Temple at Heliopolis, pretending the Authority of the Prophet Isaiah to
countenance his ambitions enterprise. This could not be done without violation
of the Cerem^nies. It was amongst the decrees of the most ancient Jews, which
Rabbi Moses Egyptius delivers thus: L. 8. in Hal. Biath. c. ult.
If one has transgressed the Law, and built an other house beside the
sanctuary at Jerusalem, it is not indeed to be accounted a temple of I dols;
but yet the Priest that has served there, can never sacrifice at the sanctuary
of God, which is at Jerusalem. Yea the vessels, which he has used, no man
shall apply to the Ministries of the true sanctuary, but they must be ^id.

CHAP. IX. Criminal causes judged only in Palestin, not by the Babylonian Jews
and others. When the Commonweal was of all the Hebrews, when of the Jews. What
the Scepter was. The plausible opinion of Eusebius confuted. Wherein consists
and to whom belongs Imperial Majesty.
WHat we have now said of the sanctuary is of great moment to the confuting of
M^^monides: but we must produce other Arguments to prove, that the
Commonwealth of which old Jacob spoke to Juda on his death Bed, was no where
seated but in Palestin. We will not go far; but cite M^^monides for a witness
against himself. How often does he tell us, the holy people, without the bounds
of the Holy L^nd, was loosed from many of the Mosaicall Laws? He has a notable
In Halacha sanhedrin.
d ssertation, wherein he circumscribes with certain limits the power of the
Judges, both of Palestin, and Babylon. Certainly, the greatest part of M^ses
Law is conversant about criminal causes. The judgment hereof, says Maim^^
could be no where exercised by the Babylonian Jews, no not in Palestin. And the
Jews of Palestin, as by the Law they gave judgment to their own people in all
causes, within their own Country; so, without it, they gave no sentence upon
their Countrymen, unless by the permission of the Babylonian Peers, or other
heads of the exiled Jews. Whence we gather, that the Jews of Palesti^^ judged
of crimes, in their own Country always, by virtue of the Law; sometimes out of
their Country, but by permission and leave of others: the Babylonians no where
judged of them; not in their own dominion, not in Palestin; not by force of
Law, nor by permission. And are these the men, think you, to whom was given the
Jewish Scepter, after the affairs of Palestin were broken and decayed? Surely
either the excellent writer knew not what was the dignity of the Scepter, or he
thought too well of some States of straw, that do there boast themselves to be
of David's house. But we wonder not at this light mistake of Maimonides, when
we consider by what strange interpretations others have labored for the sense
of Jacobs divine speech. I remember, I had conference, concerning this, with
the honorable Apollonius Scottus assessor of the supreme Senate, at what time
in his house at the Hague, I sweetly spent the Vacation, and with great ardor
ran over the Luculent commentations of Rabbi Ben Maimon: wherewith I was so
taken, that I crossed almost all my former notes concerning the Jewish State.
There did this Senator, such is his learning and the exceeding vigor of his
wit, signify more than once, that in his judgment no other Text in the sacred
Book is more examined by learned men, and less understood. Verily I was glad to
find of my opinion a man, whose authority and repute might encourage me to
oppose the interpretations of any other whatsoever. Wherefore by his
incitement. I think I shall not do amiss if in so great a multitude of
conjectures. I shall also publish what my judgment is, about a prophecy so
illustrious. The Argument indeed is worthy, wherein the wit of every man may
exercise it self, and show its strength. Although in this our Treatise we
handle the affairs of Hebrews and Jews in common and without difference, for
the most part, yet to secure the Reader from mistake, we will once for all
demonstrate, that the sacred Commonwealth constituted by Moses according to
Gods appointment, was always the same, and founded on the same Laws, but not
always of the same persons. A long time it was of the Hebrews, afterward by
change of times it was only of the Jews. And so, the oracle of Jacob, which is
of Juda's Scepter, pertains only to those later times. The ignorance whereof
is the cause why this admirable prophecy has been hitherto misunderstood. I
will not mention here the miserable hallucinations of Origin, Austin,
Epiphanius and others, who thought the Jews were promised by those words of
Jacob, a perpetual succession of Kings of the same tribe and the same lineage,
even to the times of Messiah. An opinion which led the followers of it into
insuperable difficulties; for they know not what to say, nor whither to turn
themselves, when they saw, from the death of Sedechiah to the times of
Aristobulus, the Kingdom of the Jews was none; and after that until Herod's
tyranny, it was in the hands only of the Hasmonaei of the tribe of Levi. These
things of late are discussed well, and with good success, in the exercitations
against Baronius, by the most learned man of our age I saack Casaubon, who is
pleased with the famous opinion of Eusebius extant in the eighth Book of his
Evangelicall demonstrations. We pretermit all things rightly said both by
Eusebius and by Casaubon, that we may not do what is done to our hand. And we
confess, among all the Interpretations hitherto divulged, that of Eusebius is
far the best. But because neither Eusebius, nor that great Scholar that follows
him, seem to me to have understood, what that Scepter is, of which the old
Prophet speaks to his Son a little before his death, nor when it was given to
the Jews, this is needful now to be cleared, but not without a preface. For it
is no pleasure to us to dissent, neither from Eusebius, whom we have ever
esteemed among the greatest writers; nor from him, whom we have above named,
the prime man of our age, the follower of Eusebius; to whom we owe so much
reverence, that no man is so great with us, as He. For He it is, by whose
conduct these our times have made admirable proficiency toward the perfection
of all learning. But we are constrained by our ingenuous love of truth, to lay
aside affection, and impartially inquire what is right. The first error of
Eusebius is, that the Scepter was given to Juda even from the time of Moses,
because this Tribe excelled always among the rest, with singular dignity, and
held a more honorable place both in the Camps and in the order of them that
offered gifts in the Temple. Which Argument moves me no more, tha^ if one
should say, the Majesty of the Scepter, at R^^^ or Athens, was not in the
Roma^^^^ Athenian people, but in one (...) which was more noble or flou^^^ing
For truly it is manifest by the most constant affirmation of ancient Authors,
that in Rome and Athens both; were many and diverse tribes, some above the rest
in dignity, place and order. What is it then? Verily I suppose the Scepter to
be nothing else, but the Majesty of Empire, Majesty I mean pertaining to the
Commonwealth it self; Wherefore, whose is the Commonwealth, theirs also is the
Scepter. Now, the Hebrew Commonwealth, from the age of Moses until the reign of
Rehoboam, was not of the Jews, but of the twelve tribes. Whence it follows,
that the Scepter, all that space of time, was of all the Israelites. But of
this Scepter, which a long time was common to all the tribes, the divine
Patriarch spoke not in that celebrious oracle. He had respect unto the later
times and the ages to come, when the tribe of Juda, the people being divided
into contrary parts, began to have a Commonwealth of their own, a sunder from
the Israelites: a Commonwealth approved and favored of God, and called
Judaicall from the name of Juda alone, until he should come, who was designed
for the King not of the Jews only, but of all Nations. And this Majesty of the
Scepter, from the time it once began to be the Jews, continued theirs, although
the State of the Commonwealth was sometimes altered, and the power was in the
hand, one while of the best men and the Priests, other while of the Kings and
Princes. It is want of judgment in them that restrain the honor of this Title
to Kings alone. For what people soever enjoys a Commonwealth of their own, and
Laws of their own, that people may justly glory in their Empire, and in their
Scepter. It is recorded, that in Jerusalem, even at the time when the people
were governed not by Princes but by the best, in the midst of the Great
Council, which they call Sanhedrin, there hanged a Scepter. Which was, no
question, a certain token of that Majesty, which In part. orat.
Tully expresses to be a certain greatness of a people, in retaining that
power and right, which appears in Empire and all kind of Honor. Not Kings, not
Princes, but Consuls and Senators managed the Roman Commonwealth, when that
Law of confederation was given to the Etolians (as Livy relates) that they
should well and truly conserve the Majesty of the Roman people. And that the
same was imposed upon all free people that were confederates (but upon unequal
terms) and friends to the Romans, the Lawyer In l. 7. ff. de captiv. and
postlim. reversis.
Proculus is a witness. Neither is it material to us, of what family or tribe
they were, who governed the Judaicall State. For, although the Hasmonaei of the
tribe of Levi many years possessed the Kingdom, nevertheless was the
Commonwealth of the Jewish people. Nero Caesar's most wise Sen. l. 1. de
clementia.
Master told him, The Commonwealth is not the Princes, but the Prince the
Common-weal's. And Ulpian the Lawyer was just of the same opinion: The crime of
Majesty, L. 1. sect. 1. ff. ad logem Jul. Majest.
or Treason (says he) is that which is committed against the Roman people, or
against the security thereof. Ulpian lived in those times, when neither the
commands nor suffrages were in the people, but the Caesar's held the Empire and
power of all: yet he, that is wont most accurately to define every thing,
ascribes Majesty to the people.

CHAP. X. The twelve Tribes of the Hebrews was never called by the name of
Jews. The ten tribes carried captive by Salmanassar never returned into
Palestin. Two tribes served the Romans, and no more, in the time of Josephus.
EUsebius is not sufficiently confuted, until we have made it plain how
imprudently he drew himself into the snare. L. 8. Demonst. evan. them. 1.
In the forecited Book are extant these words: Ever since the time of Moses,
the Governors of Israel, if you look upon them in particular, were chosen out
of several tribes, but in general the tribe of Juda was over the whole
Nation. Hitherto he agrees with himself and falls into no contradiction; but he
adds, For example, as in the Roman Empire, the Governors of several Nations,
and Camp-masters, and the Kings, greater than all the rest were not all born at
Rome, nor descended from Romulus and Remus, but sprung of many other Nations,
some of one, some of another; and yet, as well all the Kings, as the succeeding
Governors and Leaders, were called Romans, and the power and authority said to
be of the Romans, not of any other name: so must we think of the Hebrew State,
that one tribe of Juda gave an illustrious name to all the rest, though the
Rulers and Kings were created out of the several tribes, all honored with the
common appellation of Jews. See whither incogitancy will bring a man! Eusebius
concludes contrary to what himself would have. For, affirming the Scepter was
the Jews from Moses time; he proves it by this reason, because the
Commonwealth, the Empire, and the whole people of twelve tribes, had their
appellation from the one name of Juda. With this argument twice or thrice in
several places he triumphs; and you shall hardly find any other proof of his
opinion in the whole discourse. But, by his leave, all this is nothing. For,
neither did the Commonwealth, nor the Empire begin to be called after Juda's
name, till after the greater part of the Israelites, had made a defection,
drawn away by Jeroboam, who shortly at Samaria strenthened his Kingdom by
introducing a change of ceremonies and Religion. I will make it good to
Eusebius, and to all that have any acquaintance with sacred story, that this is
so. Eusebius often and with confidence affirms, all the twelve tribes were
called by the name of Jews, and has obtruded this groundless opinion upon
unwary men, nor have there been wanting some writers of greatest eminence to
defend it. We cannot yield unto it: whether you respect the times antecedent to
the seizure of the Kingdom, or subsequent. And, we may conjecture, that
Eusebius, although he does not plainly express his mind, thought it came to
pass at the rise of the Empire when the Commonwealth was first settled in the
Land of Canaan, and it was debated by what name to call it. But this has no
color of truth, wherefore that excellent man, the Defender of Eusebius, makes
him think otherwise of the time, and what he believes he thought, himself
approves and follows. For, says he, it was observed by Eusebius, that the
twelve tribes of Israel received appellation from the name of Juda; and the
appellation began to be used, when the Kingly power, which the tribe of Juda
had lost in Sedechiah, was by the High Priests transferred upon themselves. And
this, says he, is a thing most worthy of admiration, and fell out by special
providence. For, seeing in Polybius his opinion 'twas not without some great
cause that the Acheians, a little people of Greece, once gave name to all the
Grecians; surely here also we must conceive some more sublime and weighty
reason, when after the return from captivity all the children of Abraham of all
the tribes were called Jews. This error we neither can, nor ought to excuse.
The truth is this: When the Kingdom of the Israelites was rent and divided, two
tribes, Levi and Benjamin, joined themselves with the Jews; which tribes being
but few in number, and of mean estate, were accounted but for an addition; the
Commonwealth was not named from them, but they even lost their own name, and
at length the name of Jews was common to them all. There is no doubt to be made
of thus much. But what, or how this can concern the other ten tribes, let them
consider that are pleased with the conceit. Certainly, after that those ten
tribes of Israel were once carried away by Salmanassar the Assyrian, and
dispersed through Colchos, Parthia, India, and Ethiopia, they never came back
again into their native soil, nor were again conjoined with the Jews: but even
to this day, (if there be any relics of them) under the command of barbarous
Nations, they suffer the grievous punishment of their Apostasy. Wherefore, to
be in the Commonwealth of the Jews, or to have the honor a name from the
Jews, was impossble for them who had no familiarity, nothing to do with the
Jews, but were seated in another World far off, and beheld a different Heaven,
different Stars. It will be worth our pains, and much to the present dispatch,
to examine a memorable place, that is in Flavius Josephus, L. 11. c. 5.
Antiquit.
an Author of exquisit and unusual diligence, Flavius had spoken first
concerning them, who from every quarter out of the neighboring places came to
Babylon, that they might return with Ezra to Jerusalem. They all were Jews, and
their Associates of Levi and Benjamin. And then, concerning the Hebrews of
other tribes, he adds: But all the people of Israel remained in their Where
they were carried by Salmanassar beyond Euphrates.
seats; wherefore both in Asia and in Europe, two tribes only fell under the
dominion of the Romans; the other ten do still continue on the other side of
Euphrates, being infinite in number and unknown. Verily, they were under a
harder fate, whom Salmanassar led into captivity, than whom afterward
Nebuchodonozor carried away. For the Israelites were for ever restrained and
kept back by the River Euphrates, which they had once passed over. But the Jews
passed the same, and repassed, and came again at last into Palestin: and when
Palestin it self became either too narrow for them, or less grateful, they
enlarged and spread their habitations through Europe and Asia. This is the
reason why Josephus said, only two tribes of the Hebrews were brought into
subjection by the Romans. For at that time the people of Rome, although they
had almost subdued the World, and the Sun did both rise and set within the
compass of their Empire, being Lords of the East and West, they had not yet
extended their bounds beyond Euphrates. Therefore, that the ten tribes of
Israel, shut up in eternal prison by that River, were not then under the Roman
power, was truly said by the most accurate Writer.

CHAP. XI. Their Conjecture that say the Scepter of Juda was first given to
David. The prophecy concerning the Scepter not fulfilled till after times. When
the Scepter was taken away.
I Have ingenuously and freely spoken my opinion, when the Scepter, whereof
Jacobs prophecy is extant, was given to the Jews: also, what were the members
of that Commonwealth, which had its rise and beginning from the Secession of
the common people. These things Eusebius did not understand: yet he alone,
among so many Interpreters, has rightly and almost divinely judged of that
oracle. The comments of other men I will not relate. But, what Eusebius affirms
to have been done from the beginning of the Hebrew Commonwealth, very many
conjecture, came to pass at that time, when the royal power was devolved upon
David, descended of the tribe of Juda, as the sacred History does witness.
These men have already received such a solid and happy confutation from
Eusebius, that no place is left here for the industry of any other. For he
shows, that David's posterity possessed the Kingdom only for a small time,
until the Babylonian captivity: and the sundry Scriptures that speak of his
eternal throne, he has well and wisely interpreted in relation to the
Messiah. To add more of this after Eusebius, were to labor in vain; for by
his pains herein, he has eased every one. It remains only, that we answer
their doubt, who wonder why the event came so far behind the prediction
concerning the Jewish Commonwealth. For we have said, it began under Rehoboam,
and not before. But we give them to understand, this was very agreeable to the
meaning of the prophetic Patriarch. For the old Father, before his death,
breathing forth his last words to his children, says, he would tell them, what
should come to pass in the later days. Besides, in prophecies, the times are
not curiously to be insisted on: for most of them are to be interpreted with
very great latitude. Observe, in this very prophecy, when it is said, The
Scepter shall not be taken away, until Shiloh come; you would think 'twere
meant, that presently upon the appearance of Messiah, the Scepter should be
snatched out of the hands of that Nation. Which came not so to pass. For the
Jews lost not that honor, till the City being destroyed, and the Temple burnt,
they ceased to have any Commonwealth, and to govern themselves by their own
Laws. Nevertheless, the oracle was infallibly true. For although the Savior of
the World had left the earth long before, yet, for certain, these things happened
in the same age: which was presignified by the Messiah himself, where he speaks
of the destruction of the City and Temple, in these words: Verily, Mat. 24.
this Generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled. This is
enough for the wise. The rest, that love to raise doubts and scruples every
where, we regard not. For my part, seeing men of great name fluctuating among
uncertain errors, I applied my self to find out some firm ground to rest on,
which henceforth I might without danger constantly maintain. For otherwise this
matter would have often hindered our proceeding in this Treatise.

CHAP. XII. Of Dictators and Judges. Of the Senate Sanhedrin. Of the initiation
of Senators. The imposition of hands: and the solemn words. Who were chosen
into that Council, and what was their jurisdiction. Of the peoples assemblies.
WE have showed, that the Commonwealth, of which we discourse, was of all the
Hebrews for a long time, and then only of the Jews. The stating whereof
concerned us much. Now, having past the trouble of that dispute, let us declare
who they were that ruled over the Holy Nation, and what is to be thought of
their judicature, and of their Senate. The Divine goodness granted not leave to
Moses, to behold in Palestin the beginnings of that Commonwealth, whose Laws
he had published in the wilderness. That Grace was vouchsafed to his Successor
Josuah, the Captain General and Sovereign of the people; for both at home, and
abroad in the War, his word was a Law. His Successors with equal power were
they, who, for going in and out before the people, and commanding them, might
well be called Praetors and Dictators, but in the sacred Annals are, for the
like reason, named Judges. Flavius has styled them Monarchs, a name, that the
Greek writers gave also to Sylla, Cinna, Marius, and other Roman Dictators.
These Judges, in great commotions, were created by necessity: and experience
witnessed, that in War they had always good success, when the Kings very often
had their rashness requited with ill fortune. Sometime also the same Judges
were employed in civil affairs, and heard causes, but those of the greater
moment. For they seldom sat in the judgment seat. Only the commands, and the
Empire, and the Soveraingty pertained unto them. The last of their number was
Samuel, He, whom the Kings followed. Who not content with power and rule,
lifted up themselves above the multitude, in their robes and ornaments and
splendour of fortune. Moreover, besides the Sovereign Rulers and Judges of the
people, and those that were after called Kings, there were others not a few,
who consulted of the Commonwealth, gave judgment, and arbitrated business. For
there were certain Synedryes or Councils; wherein, who were the Senators, and
what where the matters of their cognizance, we must now enquire. In the first
place presents it self the great Council of the Sanhedrin, into which were
ascribed seventy Adsessors. That Council, constituted by Moses, continued under
the Judges, and Kings, and high Priests, until the last desolation of Judaea;
and was holden in that City which was the seat of the Sanctuary, and the head
of the Commonwealth. But because the first times, and the next to them, are
most part obscure, and the Holy Book has delivered to us nothing of principal
consideration concerning the City Shiloh; We will deliver what the Jews have
observed of that Council in the Princess of Cities Jerusalem, after the Temple
was built there: and then we shall speak of the other Councils, which were
either at Jerusalem, or at particular Cities. The Seat of the great Council was
in the very Sanctuary, where the seventy Senators judged both of divine and
humane things: Men, not chosen from among the Plebeians, but all most noble,
commended by their honorable Parentage, and the ancient ornaments of their
family. The place was assigned to them by Moses, who commanded they should meet
in the place which God should choose to have his name adored there. From these
Judges was no appeal. Whatsoever the other Magistrates and Judges in the towns
of Palestin and in Jerusalem it self were not able to decide, belonged unto
their jurisdiction. Two of them excelled the rest in honor and authority: one
was the head of the Sanedrin, by the Talmudists entitled Prince in every place;
the other next in degree, but inferior to him, whom they called the Father of
judgment. The rest were equal among themselves. This Senatorious dignity,
because it was most honorable, was granted to none without a legitimate act,
namely, imposition of hands. So, Moses laid his hand upon Josuah and the
seventy Elders: which solemnity being performed, presently a divine spirit from
above fell down upon them, and filled their breasts. And these, being thus
initiated themselves, admitted others after the same way. Yet could not that
rite be used without the Holy Land, because all the virtue thereof was confined
by the bounds of Palestin. It is very observeable, which Maimonides has
delivered in the fourth Chapter of his Halacha Sanhedrin. For whereas of old
this act was celebrated at their pleasure, by all those upon whom hands had
been once imposed, that right (says he) was straightened by the wise men, and a
constitution made, that no man should after that time use it, but by grant from
Rabbi Hillel, that divine old man. He was Prince of the great Council, and had
another vice President, Sameas, a man truculent and ambitious; whose followers,
when a little after they had risen up against the Disciples of Hillel, stirred
the minds of men with so much passion, that willingly the whole people was
drawn into their party. At length this imposition of hands, which had been used
long, ceased. And there was only pronounced a certain form of words (according
to Ben Maimon) of this sense: Behold, the hand is imposed on thee, and power
given thee to judge, in criminal causes also. Besides, the Talmudists have
told us of another form; whose words, because the illustrious Joseph Scaliger
In elen^ho Trihaeres.
has mistaken, we shall here restore unto their proper sense. The Talmudists,
after they had spoken of Juda the son of Baba, a stout defender of the ancient
customs of his Nation, and who, when the jurisdiction in criminals and
imposition of hands were almost lost, supported the sinking cause, add thus:
That solemn act is not only done by the hand imposed, as Moses did to Josuah;
but it is also done by a form of words only, after this manner, I impose my
hand upon thee, and be the hand on thee imposed. But the excellent Scaliger
collected from the place, that Juda had found out a form different from the
most ancient, which is there conceived (when it is not so, nor do the Talmudists
say so) being deceived by a word which be renders, besides, which in Rabbinism
signifies only. But this is a Grammatical note, and ought to be left to
others. We are here to consider graver matters. Into the Great Council, not
only Citizens of prime Nobility, as we have said, but Levits also and Priests
were chosen. And the High Priest (says Maimonides) was elected too, if he were
a considering man, and fit for Counsel. Otherwise, it was lawful to lay him
aside. For he came not to the Senate by any right of his own, but he was
admitted by suffrages. All the Adsessors were required to be entire and perfect
in body. Whosoever had any main or deformity was excluded. Nor were strangers
and foreiners received into this order, except the Mother at least were a Jew.
The Senators of the Sanhedrin had this charge, to make their progress through
all Judea, to take a view of the Assemblies of the people, to appoint them
Magistrates in every town. And all the virtue and authority of the Cabbala (a
mysterious doctrine delivered from hand to hand even from the beginnings of the
Commonwealth) was with them. Their part also it was, to make Statutes in
sacred matters, and to devise certain ways to expound the Law. Whereof
Maimonides has spoken with great care. Moreover, the causes of Prophets, who
had highly offended, were no where tried but in this great Council. Which our
Savior had respect unto, when he said in Luke, It is not possible, that a
Prophet should perish out of Jerusalem. Lastly, which is a point of the
greatest power, they did also constitute a King, and deliberat of waging War,
and giving battle to the enemy, and enlarging the Empire. But because, in
these things the common safety, and public state was so much concerned,
consultation was therein had (for the most part) with the people. For meetings
were called, wherein alone they had some share in the Government. And truly,
otherwise they ought not. Honors and Magistracies are committed to single and
select men. Plebeians have not strength and skill to bear them. In their
meetings (as Aristotle has discreetly noted) and in conjuncture, the multitude
has some understanding, and can advance the public good, because the wiser
men are present and lead the way; but single and apart they have little
judgment. Concerning a King then, and concerning War, as I have said, Decrees
were made sometimes the people being Author: all other things the Senators of
Sanhedrin dispatched by themselves. The weightiest affairs were not too heavy
for them, because they were chosen for their worth, and great abilities; by the
divine Moses rightly named Elders, not only for their age, but for their wi^dom
and experience.

CHAP. XIII. Of two other Councils at Jerusalem besides the Sanhedrin. The
Senate of 23. in every town. The College of 3. The measure of Cities. The 5.
men for expiation of slaughter. The 7. men and 3. men for ordering the
Calendar. The times disposed by Rabbi Hillel. The authority of Sanhedrin
lessened.
OF the great Senate we have said, what came to mind: the other Councils will
not detain us long. The most learned ^n Hala^^a Sanhedrin. c. 1.
Maimonides relates, that in the City of Jerusalem it self were two Councils
more. They are described in the In Misna and in Gemara.
Talmud. In either of them sat three and twenty Judges. And as the Great
Council was held in that part of the Temple, which is called Gazith, so one of
these at the Court-gate, the other was kept at the Gate opening to the Mount of
the Temple. The Dignity of them also was not the same: for the Judges at the
Mount-Gate, took it for a preferment to be ascribed into the Senate at the
Court-Gate. And again, it was a new degree of honor to ascend hence into the
Sanedrin. The distinction is exactly made by Rabbi Ben Maimon. Farther, beside
these Councils at Jerusalem, there was constituted in every town of Palestin, a
Senate for jurisdiction and the care of public affairs. It consisted of 23.
men, who sat in judgment upon the life and fortunes of the people, and
decided all causes, except a few reserved, as is aforesaid, to the great
Council. Ben Maimou also describes a certain College of three men, and says
it was in such a City, which had not a hundred and twenty inhabitants. But I am
of Aristotle's mind, that this is not a City. For, as it is not a Ship, which is
of one handful, or of two furlongs: so is it not a City, which wants a just
measure; if it be too little, it cannot (as a City should) subsist by it self;
and too much greatness turns it from a City to a Nation. But we must not call a
Rabbi to so strict account. It was the office of those three, to judge of
trespasses of moneys, and goods moveable. The Capital offenders were brought
(as I have showed) before another Bench. ^hedrin, c. 5.
Ben Maimon In Halucho Sanhedrin. c. 5.
adds, somethings were of such a kind that they belonged neither to the
seventy Elders, nor to the College of twenty three, nor to the three men: but
were to be referred to a peculiar Senate. In which number he reckons
manslaughter committed by an uncertain hand in the borders of any town. Five
men (says he) must expiate this by the Sacrifice of a Heifer. The same Author
has more of this nature, which I willingly praetermit. For we do not repeat
Dictates. That may seem strange, that the ordering of times was commended to
certain Judges; for, In eadem Halacha, eod. cap.
concerning the Leap-year, seven, concerning the month, three men determined.
But Hillel the Babylonian afterward acquitted all his Countrymen of this care:
the prime man of his age, of whom we have this honorable testimony from Rabbi
Abraham In libro juchasin.
Zacuth: Rabbi Hillel, president of the great Council composed the
Intercalation for all Israel till the times of Messiah; and that was done by
him, before the Lawful act of imposition of hands was abrogated. Had not this
same Hillel maturely prevented so great an evil, certainly the times would
have been much confused; for, not long after ceased the solennity of imposing
hands, without which those seven men and three men were not appointed overseers
and correctors of the Calendar, as Maimonides observes. But no more of this,
lest the Reader think we prepare an accurate and perfect work, whereas we only
thrust out our sudden and tumultuary Meditations. And we desire it may be
noted, whatsoever we have said of Councils has relation to the time before
Judaea had received the Roman conqueror. For he changed and repealed many
things, not for his lust or pleasure, nor out of any cruel design, but that he
might secure his Dominion. Gabinius chiefly, the Proconsul of Syria, seeing the
principal pillar of the Commonwealth was the Sanhedrin, thought it good
policy to take away the authority thereof in many towns. Wherefore at Gadar,
Amath, Hiericho, and Sephor he settled four Synedries, and a fifth at Jerusalem
(now but a part of what she was) all of equal power. And the Councils placed
by Gabinius in the other Cities, as they were not inferior to that in
Jerusalem for power, so were they far beyond it in continuance. These are
meant, if I mistake not, by In l. 17. c. de Jud. and Call.
Justinian, when he requires a Canon, from the primates, who rule the Synedries
of either Palestin. But we make no excursion into these times. The ancient
Commonwealth and primitive Institutions are under our consideration. To
enquire into the rest, and set down things that were often changed, were
unhappily to place our study, where no certain truth can be delivered.

CHAP. XIV. The creation of a King. A bad one first chosen, why. What qualities
the Prophet had respect unto. The Book of the Kingdom laid up. The power of the
Hebrew Kings. Their honor above Priests and Prophets. Kings and Priests at
first the same. The anointing of Kings made them sacred. The Holy Ointment hid
by Josia, and lost with other things.
RAbbi Ben Maimon In part. post. Misnae.
says, the Israelites received three commands from God, to be fulfilled in
Palestin; the first whereof was, to make themselves a King; another to blot out
the memory of the Amalekites; the third concerning the building of a Temple.
The performance whereof (says he) was at several times and long distant, but
in the same order wherein they were commanded. For a King was created before
the War with Amalek, and the building of the Temple was not begun, until that
most odious Nation was brought to an end, and quite destroyed. The testimonies
illustrious, which are related by the same Author, need not be transcribed
hither. In the 17 of Deuteronomy the most high God, saying the Israelites would
desire a King, adds the truest reason of it, because all the neighboring
Nations lived under the royal Government. For such is the nature and
disposition of men, inhabiting that part of the world: few prefer liberty
before subjection unto just Lords. And Claudius Civilis in Tacitus truly says
to his Batavians, that Syria and Asia serve, and the East is accustomed to the
yoke of Kings. This being so, many have admired, why God took it ill, that the
Sovereign power was transferred from Samuel to a King, since he had approved it
before, and said it should be according to the inclination of the holy people.
Maimonides answers learnedly, that the divine Indignation arose from hence,
Because they desired a King by unfaithful complaints and seditious murmurings,
not that they might comply with Gods design in the Law, but out of a distaste of
the most holy Prophet Samuel: to whom it was spoken by the voice of God. They
have not rejected thee, but me. Verily I am of this opinion, and I doubt not to
assert it, that the Kingdom was given to Saul, not out of Gods love and care of
the Commonwealth, but because he perceived his arrogance and cruelty, he
meant to glorify Samuel by this unequal comparison, and by such a successor
make his virtue the more desirable. The qualities seem but light and
superficial, but they are of great moment, which (as the Holy Book in several
places has it) were considered by Samuel in the Kings election: a graceful
look, talness of body, and such like, which affect and draw the eyes and minds
of all. These are the things, which the great Prophet, in the midst of the
Assembly, commended, when he spoke these words: 1 Samuel 10.24.
Behold, whom God has chosen: that there is none equal to him in all the
people. Wherefore, it is not the property of Barbarians only, but of the most
civil men, to think them capable of great achievements, whom nature has
graced with a goodly form and stately countenance. No less a man than Aristotle
has pronounced thus: If any personages are by nature framed so much more
excellent than others, as the images of Gods excel the images of men, it
seems meet, that the rest should be servants unto such. If this be true in
the body, much more in the soul: but the souls form and beauty cannot be so
easily discerned. To leave this: In the Holy Bible is mentioned a certain
volume, 1 Samuel 10.25.
wherein Samuel wrote the sacred rights of the Kingdom, and laid it up in the
Tabernacle. A text not well understood by Josephus; who imagined all the evils,
which God foretold the people they should fear from an unjust King were
comprehended in that volume. We on the contrary believe, there were in that
Book the Laws, which commanded the King to follow justice and equity, and to
govern the Commonwealth wisely for the peoples good: also, not to play the
Prince in lusts and riots: lastly, to retain modesty in the greatness of his
fortune, a virtue well becoming the best of men, and very pleasing unto God.
The matter is delivered in Deuteronomy thus: Deuteronomy. 17.15, etc.
Thou shall set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose: One
from among thy Brethren shall thou set King over thee: thou may not set a
stranger over thee, which is not thy Brother. But he shall not multiply horses
to himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt. For as much as the Lord
has said unto you, ye shall henceforth return no more that way. Neither shall
he multiply Wives to himself, that his heart turn not away: neither shall he
greatly multiply to himself silver and gold. And it shall be when he sits
upon the throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write him a Copy of this Law in a
Book, out of that which is before the Priests the Levites. And it shall be with
him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn to
fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes to
do them: That his heart be not lifted up above his Brethren. These words of the
Law are not obscure, and they seem to contain the sum of that volume, which the
great Prophet laid up in the Sanctuary. We said Cap. 8.
above, the Jews had such a Commonwealth, which in the Scripture is called a
Priestly Kingdom. Whence it follows, that their Kings did not only govern in
civil affairs, and military, but were Presidents of Religion and holy
Ceremonies. For they were sacred persons, to whom Gods Commission and the voice
of a Prophet gave Empire, honor and authority. Yet as the Oversight of Sacred
things, the Sovereign power and judgment pertained unto them, so the mystery
and charge of the same things was of right claimed by the Levites, that is, the
High Priest, the rest of the Priests, and their assistants. It was their
office, to slay the Sacrifices, to make expiations, to rehearse the divine Laws
before the people, and to perform other services in the Temple. The Talmudicall
writers well observe how much the King excelled all, both Priests and Prophets:
which we will relate out of In Halucha Melachim, cap. 2.
Maimonides. The words are to this effect: It was a Statute, that the chief
Priest should reverence the King, and yield him his place to sit in, and
himself stand, when the King came to him. But, the King stands not in the
presence of the Priest, unless when he consults the Urim after the solemn
manner. And, such is the dignity of the King, that even the Prophet himself, as
often as he comes into his presence, bows himself down to the earth: as it is
written, Nathan the Prophet came before the King, and, to honor him, fell upon
his face to the ground. Yet more, David himself, whom the Prophet formerly had
anointed King, so little feared to take upon him the honor of the High Priest,
that he put upon himself the Ephod, and enquired of the Lord, whether he should
pursue the enemy. The place is eminent in the Book of Samuel, Cap. 30. v. 7.
perverted by the late Interpreters, men very learned, but here they seem
indiligent. Let all men judge that have any skill in the original, whether the
words translated by them, Applicavit sibi Abiathar amiculum, Davidis causa,
signify not the same I have said, that David, having put on the Ephod of
Abiathar, consulted the Oracle [The English Bible reads it, And Abiathar
brought thither the Ephod to David. Grotius de Imperio c. 6. reads it in this
sense, Abiathar made the Ephod to come near to David, that as he stood before
the high Priest (which the King only did when he consulted Urim) he might see
whether the sparkling of the prectous stones would promise him good success.
Abiathar then had the Ephod upon him, not David. The Urim answered. i. e. God
by the Urim. vide locum.] But let us give you some more of our Collections from
the Rabbis. Herein also consisted an high point of honor, M^im. c. 2. in Hal.
M^l. and c. 7. Hal. Beth. Habb.
that the King only, and no man else, might sit in the Court of the Temple, in
any place; only the King who was of David's family. That Court was divided by
certain spaces, one part for the Priests, another assigned for the people; Yet
the Priests cuuld not sit down, though within their own prescribed bounds. The
Senators of Sanhedrin had right to sit: Maimon ib.
but, in the midst of that place which the profane common people had. Never
did the more sacred spaces of the Court behold any man sitting, but the King:
this being his Prerogative, as if he were nearer to God than the Priests
themselves, and a greater President of Religion. And, if we go to other
Nations, Aristotle says, in the first times the same person, for the most
part, was both King and Priest. This was no depraved custom, being in use,
while people followed nature more incorruptly, and saw what was right, so much
better, by how much nearer they were to the divine original. But, to speak of
the Hebrew Kings, their sacredness depended much upon their being anointed.
This was proper to them and the high Priests, as the Talmud says, That
anointing added a divine Majesty to the Kings, and made them sacred, and allied
unto God. The reason, why in those times they ordered or restored Religion, was
not because they were Prophets: (that is a groundless and erroneous opinion, for
except David, and perhaps Saul, no one of the rest prophesied of things to
come:) but Salonion and Jehoshaphat and Ezechiah and Josiah, and others
exercised power and authority over things divine, because the virtue of the
sacred Ointment had been communicated to them. This Ointment Moses was directed
to make of those aromatic ingredients which In Hal. Cele Hammik. c. 1.
Maimonides describes. And the Talmud says, it was used for initiation and
consecration until the times of J^siah, who hid it under ground in the Temple,
in a secret place prepared carefully long before by Solomon, upon notice of the
prophecies, that the Temple should at last be thrown down by the Assyrians. In
the same secret place (as the Tradition also is) the Ark of the Covenant, and
Aarons red, and the stones Urim and Thummim, with the residue of Manna, were
laid up by Josiah: and none of them all was restored to the Jews, when upon
their return from Babylon into their native seat, they built the second Temple.
Wherefore, since that time the Kings and Priests received not the same Majesty
from the mysterious initiation. Nor was the Deity so propitious to their
ceremonies and sacred rites, as before The Jews have a proverb among them,
related by In libro Juchasia.
Rabbi Zacuth: The fire lay upon the Altar, as a Dog, because the virtue of it
was extinct, after the five things were wanting in the later temple: but in the
former, that fire was like a Lion. The learned writer plainly says, the five
things were wanting, which even now we said were so hidden by Josiah, that
posterity never found them.

CHAP. XV. Jeroboams policy to get the Kingdom. The declination and change of
Commonwealths. Scipio 's moderation. The disposition of common people. Samaria
an imperial City. Change of Religion a secret of State. The division of the
ten tribes, and the miserable effects of it. The Captivity of the I sraelites,
and of the Jews. Babylon enlarged by the spoils of Jerusalem. The return of the
Jews, and the Dominion of the Levites.
THe unity of the Hebrew nation, and the frame of that goodly Empire was cleft
in two by Jeroboams policy, a man no less ambitious than valiant. Being
commander of the Tribe of Joseph in the War, and put in hope of the Kingdom by
the Prophet, rightly conceiving Princes are made by Providence, He applied his
vast and climing spirit to obtain the Dominion. First he attempted the
Soldiers faith, endeavoring to draw away their affections from Solomon to
himself: but the Plot being discovered, to avoid punishment he left his
Country, and hid his head in Egypt. After the death of Solomon he returned and
met with a conjuncture of affairs very favorable to his great designs. The
heavy tributes, the unjust exactions were a fair pretense, which he gladly laid
hold on to stir up the common people: and so brought all into a combustion, and
became the Author of very great calamities, that quickly invaded Palestin.
Verily, so it usually comes to pass, that no grear Commonwealth has a fortune
long continuing at one stay. The Hebrews were now come to the hight of their
prosperity. All was safe and quiet, incredible was the increase of riches, the
Kings and Princes near and far off were friends, and no room now was left for
their greatness to extend it self. Wherefore, being incapable of any farther
increase, what remained, but that it should according to the Law of fate,
decrease, and (which is the most miserable condition of humane affairs) decline
to the worse. Scipio Africanus, when he purged the City by Sacrifice, being
Censor, and the Scribe rehearsed to him the solemn prayer, that the Gods would
advance the Commonwealth of Rome, said, it was great enough already, and
desired the Gods only to preserve it: commanding the prayer, in the public
record, should be thus corrected. The most prudent Roman well knowing, that the
celestial bounty does not so favor its own gifts, as to make them always
peculiar to any people, feared a vicissitude and change of fortune, proceeding
(as he doubtless had in his thoughts) not only from a foreign Invader, but from
domestic causes; every State breeding, within her own bowels, diseases to
consume and destroy it self. Jerusalem is an example. The most flourishing City
in the world, where David and Solomon, two most potent and most wise Kings, had
made a deep and secure peace, could not long continue quiet. For, Solomon being
dead, although she had no enemy abroad, she found one at home. Jeroboam, of
whom I spoke, a man of a most turbulent spirit, arose; who in short time with
better success effected the rebellious design he had before unprosperously
attempted. An Assembly being called, he accused the public State, and the
condition of the times, and the Princes doings, in the presence of the people:
whose ears (he knew) are ever open, and glad to hear ill reports of their
Superiors. Liberty and other specious names he pretended, when his secret
thoughts were, how to enslave others, and get Dominion to himself. The people,
enflamed by his violent words, fell presently into seditious ways, whereby the
most ancient Kingdoms and the greatest Commonwealths usually go to ruin, or at
least are changed. Forthwith, the Captain of the Rebellion drew off the ten
Tribes, whom he had prevailed with, from the territories of Jerusalem; and, to
secure his dominion, and settle it, chose Samaria for his Imperial City. That
his Government might be more firm, he altered many customs of the Nation, and
devised another worship of the deity, a new Religion. For, setting up calves to
be adored, he renewed the old superstition, and made Religion, (the cement of
Commonwealths) a tie upon the people, to keep them in his obedience, when he
could not oblige them by the goodness of his cause. After which time, the
twelve Tribes of Israel, drunk with their sweet abominations, reeled more and
more from Jerusalem, and refused (as upon their Gods command) to have any
Communion with the Inhabitants thereof. And now, whatsoever cause of hostility
there happened else, the greatest reason always seemed that, which was taken
from their different Religions. Thus began the Kingdom of Israel, diverse from
that of the Jews, the seat whereof was at Jerusalem. And here is the spring of
all the calamities that came upon the Hebrews. For, being weakened by
themselves, and having drawn much blood from one another, they were made a prey
to foreign Nations, who before were invincible against all the world. Now Susac
the Egyptian spoiled the holy City and the Temple, and by way of disgrace set
Pillars in several places, upon which were carved ('it is a sha me to speak) the
secrets of Women. A fact, which Herodotus, ascribes unto Sesostris, by mistake
of the name, as Flavius has rightly judged. A bitter calamity, this: but the
things which a long time after were suffered both by the Jews and Israelites,
were far more grievous. And first by Salmanassar the Assyrian, was quite
destroyed and overthrown, the Empire of the ten Tribes. The whole Nation, being
carried into Media and Persia, gave place to the profane Hittites, whom
Esarhaddon soon after sent out of Persia into Palestin to inhabit the Land of
Israel. So do Kings, according to their pleasure, use to translate Nations,
like Cattle, which Shepherds drive sometimes into their Winter, sometimes into
their Summer pasture. For by this means people are tamed and softened, and they
that dare any thing at home, are held under quiet subjection in a strange Land.
Never had the Israelites, after that time, the happiness to return into their
own Country, or to repair the ruins of their Commonwealth. They had so highly
offended God by their impious Idolatry, that no length of time, nor revolution
of ages, could pacify his wrath. The Israelites being thus gone into their
eternal exile, the Jews remained to receive their due punishment likewise.
Which was inflicted on them as surely, though more slowly. In the reign of
Zedekiah, Nebuchodonozor with a mighty army subdued Egypt and Syria: and burnt
to ashes the City of Jerusalem, and the Temple, a place of infinite opulency.
In which time, Himself, upon news of Nabolassars death, hastening home to take
possession of the Kingdom, left Commission with his Commanders, to bring away
the Jews to Babylon and the places thereabout. There he assigned them their
seats, and Fields, in the culture whereof this new Colony might spend their
time and get their living. Venerable monuments of antiquity remain of Berosus
Annals, wherein it is written, that Nebuchodonozor, out of the spoils brought
thence, built a Temple to Belus, enlarged Babylon according to the Majesty of
his Empire, and girt it with Walls of Brick: Moreover, made Gardens in the Air,
and pendent Woods in favor of his Wife, who having been bred in the
mountainous parts of Media, delighted in the prospect of Woods growing in high
places. Whence appears the vanity of that which the Grecians have delivered
with great consent, that Semiramis raised those admired works. For they are
confuted by an Author in Flavius beyond all exception; namely Berosus the
Chaldean, who (as all men have believed) is most ancient, and with very great
Religion and truth has consecrated the affairs of his own Nation to eternal
memory. But the Jews were not punish^ so grievously by the hand of God, nor so
long as the Israelites. They lived in a gentle and easy exile, as in a Country
of their own: and, after seventy years were gone about, they were restored to
Palestin, rebuilt their City and Temple, and established their Commonwealth
again. Here now was the state of things much different from what it was before.
For, the Empire which before was in the House of David, was now usurped by the
Levits, after a various manner. These men, having gotten into their hands the
Supreme Power, advanced the Commonwealth indeed to the height of riches and
greatness; but, while they contend among themselves for power and honor, they
trod under foot both divine and humane things. So little of piety and modesty
did the most sacred name of Religion give to them, whom God had selected for
himself, out of all the rest, and separated so long ago, that among the holy
offices and ceremonies, they should lead their lives, far from ambition and
vain glory.

CHAP. XVI. The Priests have the Government. Their evil behavior. Of the sons
of Elisab. The temple of Garizin built. The wickedness of Onias. The virtue of
Matthias, and of Judas Maccabaeus. Alcimus his outrage. Judea again under
Kings. Of Herod, his cruelty, and iniquity.
OF the Tribe of Levi, after the restoration of the City and Temple, first the
High Priests ruled all, without assuming the Title of Prince or King. These
enjoyed themselves, or disposed of to others, all favor, wealth and power: the
rest were Plebeians, without honor, without authority. Therefore, they that
were but Levites were competitors, for so great a preferment; and used all
endeavor, some by force, some by fraud and fallacies, few by the true way, to
attain unto it. Nothing can be imagined more dishonorable, than what the two
Sons of the high Priest Elisab committed after their Father's death. For both
Jesus, by the help of a barbarous Captain, went about wickedly to deprive his
Brother Jannes of the high Priesthood, which he had received according to the
Law: and Jannes, to retain his right, became guilty of a greater wickedness;
for he slew the same Jesus with his own hand, in the temple of God, and
sprinkled the altars with his Brothers Blood. Jannes not long after had for his
successor Jaddus; Whose Pontificate likewise his Brother Manasses devoured in
his hopes: but having married, against the Law, a strange Woman, the Daughter
of Sanballet, whence arose a tumult amongst the people, he quickly perceived a
necessity lying upon him, either to lose his affinity with so potent a
Father-law, or else relinquish his hopes of the Priesthood. Here, upon long
deliberatioa with himself, at last, having communicated his Counsels to his
Father-in-Law, he conceived a notable enterprise, which all posterity talks of,
none approves. For he resolved to erect a Temple in Garizin, the highest
mountain of Samaria, and shortly received power to do so, from Alexander, by
the mediation of Sanballet. Thus he, that was not capable of the most
honorable office at Jerusalem, because he had violated the Law, became
High Priest, as he could, in another place, and in the possession of it thought
himself in Heaven. See the heart of a most wicked man, in whom you may doubt
whether his ambition or impiety were the greater. Yet was this but a small
thing, in comparison of what Onias the fourth did, out of a desire of
domination. Being made High Priest, and seeing himself too weak for Jasons
faction, to get the favor of Antiochus Epiphanes, whose protection he needed,
he forswore the Mosaic Laws, and instead of them admitted the Religions and
rites of the Grecians. And more, that he might not bear in his Body the marks
of Circumcision, he renewed his foreskin by Physical Art, and persuaded all
his people to do the like. Afterward, Antiochus Epiphanes, the High Priest
being his Minister, impiously perverted all the institutions of the Jews. And
now nothing of the sound and the ancient customs remained when Matthias the
Hasm^naean, the great restorer of the State, having taken up Arms, rendered to
the Jews their Laws, and received the Commonwealth under his Rule, with the
title of Prince. Being deceased, to him succeeded Judas in the Principality,
the same that is called Maccabaeus. Yet was there great power and authority in
the High Priest. Wherefore Antiochus Eupator after that time, cunningly having
got entrance into Jerusalem, when he distrusted Onias, upon whom he saw the
people and the State affairs depended much, placed Alcimus in his room. But he,
being gotten into the holy chair, was more depraved than his Predecessor; for
he went over to King Demetrius the Son of Seleucus, with criminations against
Judas, whose principality he could not away with. Impiety can be never quiet,
nor content with a single transgression. Wherefore he brought against his own
Country the Kings Lieutenant Bacohides, with an Army; and after his return to
the King without effecting the work, he increased the Companies left by
Bacchides, by the concourse of wicked men. From every place were gathered unto
Alcimus, Murderers, Sacrilegious Persons, Adulterers; whom their guilty
consciences would not suffer to rest at home: and he engaged them all to do him
service, by fair words and bountiful pay. At the last, this gallant Priest, to
add more unto his glorious impiety, prepared to throw down the Walls of the
Sanctuary raised by the Prophets and the Hasidaeans; But in the midst of his
design death cut him off, and in his place the people constituted, in the most
sacred office, their Prince Judas; the first of all the Jews that joynd the
Miter and the Crown together, and was both Prince and Priest. The same was
done, after him, by Jonathan, Simon and Jannes: until Aristobulus, the name of
Prince being laid aside, took upon him the title of King. And so, in the end,
long after the death of Zedekiah, Kings again ruled over Judaea, but they were
of the Tribe of Levi; the last of whom was Antigonus. Antigonus being expelled
and slain, Herod held the Scepter, which he had before received from the
Romans: a man, not indeed descended of the Royal family, no nor of the
Sacerdotall, but one of Idumaea, an insititious Jew or Proselyte; for the
Idumaeans were not truly Jews, but only accounted and called so, since the time
that Hircanus forced them to submit to the rites and ceremonies of the true
God, when before they worshipped, I know not what good, Gosan, whose rites were
kept by the Costobari, a noble family in that Country. Famous was that prophecy
of Sameas, who had long since foretold, that Herod should be given the Jews
for a King, but to be a Plague unto them. Even so it came to pass. This
Idumaean presently put to death Aristobulus the High Priest, being very young;
and after him Hircanus, allured out of Parthia; and after him, whatsoever
remained of the Hasmonaean blood, he extinguished, and left not any branch of
the old stock. Nor did the seventy Elders, the Assessors of the Great Council
Sannedrin, speed better. Thus all being removed out of the way, who might
create him either fear or danger, Herod grew up to his height, and the
greatness of his power gave him boldness to break forth into great license; for
he altered the old customs of the Jews, and brought in new, and did many things
contrary to the Laws. Whereof let us hear Josephus speaking thus: The ancient
discipline, untainted before, he weakened with Innovations: whence, in our
following times, we have had no small harm; for all those things, whereby the
multitude was heretofore led unto piety, are now neglected and despised.

CHAP. XVII. Of Messiah, King of the Jews and all Nations. The everlasting
throne is his. A word in Esaias written mystically. Balaams prophecy in the sense
of the Jews. The singular nature of Messia's Kingdom. The reprehender of
Maimonides censured. Ezekiels obscure vision, not to be curiously searched.
ANd in this manner, after the Jews return out of Babylon, they were in
possession of the Empire that had no right unto it; first the Highpriests,
then the Hasmonaean Princes, being also Levites, then Kings of the same tribe,
and lastly Herod the Idumaean; He, under whom was born Messiah, the King of
Kings, a branch of David's family. To him alone must be referred that promise
God made to David, that his throne should be everlasting, and his seed should
sit therein. Certainly, it is not spoken of Solomon, nor of any other of his
race; for, the kingdom once lost, they never recovered after the Babylonian
exile. Wherefore, unless we will (which were great impiety) make the promise
of God vain and false, we must understand that Son of David to be the Messiah,
our Redeemer, of whom the Angel has pronounced that which is written in St.
Luke: Of his Kingdom there shall be no end. The words are taken out of the
ninth of Esaiah, where Rabbi Jarchi notes: It was subtly disputed by the
Scribes, why in the midst of a word, contrary to custom, the letter Mem is
closed. A doubt not to be contemned. Thereby is signified (as the Talmudists
are of opinion) some great mystery, not opened promiscuously unto all, but
close and reserved. Amongst all the Oracles in Scripture, concerning the
greatest King Messiah, the Jews think none so worthy of admiration, as that
which Balaam uttered by divine instinct. Number. 24. But the same Interpreters,
looking narrowly into the Prophets meaning, sagely found, the words are not all
spoken of one King: but the oracle is so to be divided, that part may belong to
David, who first of Juda's race possessed the Kingdom, the rest to the Messiah,
the last King indeed of the same race, but greater and more potent than all the
other. Maimonides in the end of his Misna has handled this exactly. And the
same excellent Master there refutes those, that exspect in the Kingdom of
Messiah another face of nature, and a new course of things going on
perpetually. For, says he, they understood not the words of Esaiah in the 12.
Chapter. The dark sayings whereof do signify, that all pious and good men
shall have such quietness in the midst of the wicked, that they need not fear.
Nor has Rabbi Abraham the Son of David any just reason to reprehend Maimonides
for this: whose other reprehensions too, for the most part, are more sharp than
solid, they make a show of reason, but, when they are examined, come to
nothing. As often as I survey the sacred places, the rites and Religious
solemnities, described by the most holy Prophet Ezekiel in the last part of his
Book, I consider with my self, what they mean, or whither they are to be
referred. So different are they from Moses precepts, and the Jewish customs, as
themselves confess. What opinion is to be had of them, the In tract. Menachoth.
Talmud has resolved, and In Misna, l. 8. c. 2.
Maimonides has in brief expressed: All manner of offerings, spoken of in
Ezekiel, and whatsoever is there written of the number of Sacrifices, and of
the order of divine worship, are nothing else but the pacific oblations, which
have not been used in former ages by the people; but the Prophet shows, how
they shall be performed at the dedication of the new Altar, in the times of
Messiah, when the third Temple shall be built. This is no Jewish dream, nor
Talmudicall conceit, but a certain Truth. The Prophet has described another
Temple, which should be in Messia's reign, and other sacred rites: and has
measured the structure of the Temple, the Courts, the Gates, and the rest, by
an accurate rule of the work. The form of it, say the Jews, is not fully
understood, but Ezra, when he built the second Temple after the pattern of
Salomons, followed also the description of Ezekiels third Temple, so far as the
capacity of the most holy man could reach, in so obscure and perplexed a matter.
This we learn from the Prince of Rabbis in In Hal. Beth. Hab. c. 1.
another place. Nevertheless, it is no little blindness in the Jews, that they
hope for such a Temple to be built by the Messiah, which may be seen with the
eyes, and approached with the feet. We that are born in Messia's Kingdom know
full well, it is otherwise. All the Prophets words, of the measure of the
buildings, and the parts, have another more secret sense; but what that sense
is, and how the words are to be explained, is hard to say. For my part, with
Xenophane in Varro, I would have every man to set down what he thinks, not
what he will assert; for man may have an opinion of such things, God alone
knows them certainly. Truly the Jews when they mention some pieces of the
Bible, the reading whereof is interdicted youth, put the end of Ezekiels
prophecy in that rank. And not without cause. For the whole discourse is more
obscure than Plato's number. Let them all, who would seem the greatest
proficients in divine wisdom, call hither their industry: they will sweat
enough, before they open the least of the things laid up in those leaves. The
best interpreter can but give a handsome conjecture at the utmost, and when all
is done we must remain unresolved. This is certain, that these, and some other
things of like kind, are such, as the most high God has set above the reach of
humane wit; for, though in this light of the Gospel, great progress has been
made into science, yet somewhat is still left for admiration. Wherefore to go
farther into these secrets, than the bounds prescribed to us by the Holy
Spirit, would be a very unwise adventure.

CHAP. XVIII. The State of the Jews after Messia's coming. Of their
restitution yet exspected. The dignity of that Nation even at this day. How
much our Religion ows to the Jews. The Scripture not corrupted by them. The
Masorites diligence and fidelity.
IT was the pleasure of the immortal God, that the Jews should be called a
Royal Priesthood, and a chosen Generation, and that his sacred rites and
ceremonies should be embraced by them alone, until the day shined forth, that
showed the Messiah to the world. From that time, the Son of God ordained, that
the celestial benefits, long confined unto one Nation, should be common to
all; the Tidings whereof, sent abroad far and wide, profited believers only.
Here we must admire at the strange conversion of things. For the great Author
of Salvation, who had left his heavenly throne to relieve the miseries of men,
was entertained by profane Nations with joy and veneration: but the Jews, to
whom more than one Prophet had signified both the place and time of his coming,
knew him not, when he was come and presented himself amongst them. So great a
dullness had seized on them. Their eyes were blind, when their thoughts were on
other matters and refused to behold what was set before them in the midst.
Hereupon they were abdicated and cast off by God, and even to this day they eat
Pottage, and deplore their lost birthright. Their crime is engraven in the
Hardest Adamant, says Jeremy the Prophet. Nor did they deprecate their
punishment, but called it to themselves saying. His blood be upon us, and upon
our Children. Very memorable is that which S. Paul writes to the Romans: Romans
11. v. 25.
I would not have you ignorant of this mystery, that hardness, in part, has
happened unto Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. Certainly
there will come a time, when the Jews shall be reduced into the right path, who
do now wander miserably through ignorance of the way. The Suns of all days are
not yet gone down: their light shall once again break forth unto them: and
though they are fallen, they are not fallen away for ever. Ezekiel also has
published some prophecies in favor of them. Chapter 36. The Prophet faith, a new
heart shall be given them from Heaven, and a better understanding shall dwell
in their breast. Then shall the veil be taken off, which Moses put upon his
face; for they shall convert themselves unto God, who suffered them to live in
darkness, and in ignorance of the greatest matters, that at last he might take
occasion to show his old loving kindness. And on this wise do we commodiously
interpret these words of Paul: 2 Cor. 3.16.
When Israel shall be turned to the Lord; the veil shall be taken away: a very
obscure place to many, and wherein some have taken much pains. The thing of
which we speak, is of such consequence, that justly we cannot henceforth be
altogether averse from the Jews, as if they were given up to public hatred,
when as yet so great hopes are remaining for them. And truly S. Paul does them
reverence, and extols them with high praise, even while they are in error.
Romans 9.4.5.
To whom (says he) pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants,
and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises: Whose are
the Fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh Christ came. What Nobility could
be greater? So many Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Kings, they number among
their forefathers; and so many brave men, and men of divine virtue, whose names
are consecrated in Heaven. I confess, all the Jews at this day are of a base
and illiberall disposition; and, if you look upon their course of life, you can
hardly find any thing worthy of noble and erected spirits: Neither do we
marvel at the cause hereof. For these things go in a round, and as the times
are turned, so are men's manners. Verily, the same day that deprived them of the
fair light of liberty, and struck the Scepter out of their hands, did also so
abate the edge of their ingenuous spirits, that they have no more vigor now,
nor keeness in them. Servitude dwarfs the mind, and enchains the spirit, and
choaks all the seeds of generosity. What high thoughts can they possibly have,
who, for so many years, through the whole world, have been wearyed out with so
great scorn and contumely? whom Children, in contempt, have pulled by the
sleeve, and men by the beard? lastly, upon whom the fury of all the Caesar's
spent it self. Tiberius distributed their young men, sending them as it were
for Soldiers, into the Provinces of unwholesome air. The air of Sardinea was
very pestilent, Thither are four thousand commanded away, to meet an untimely
death. Titus cast almost as many to the beasts, when he set forth shows at
Berytum and Caesarea. Trajan himself, the mildest of all the Princes, decreed
they should not read the Law; so did other Emperors after him at several
times. This was the greatest of afflictions, and by Rabbi Zacuth is numbered
among the persecutions: They decreed (says he) a persecution, that the Jews
should not read the Law. But these things were done by Pagans: Let us, who are
joined to them with a closer bond, show them more favor, having this communion
with them, to hear the commands of one and the same God. Truly S. Paul desires
to lay down his life for them, so fervent is his charity to the Nation. And it
is his saying, Romans 11.16.
If the first fruits be holy, the lump is also holy: and if the root be holy,
so are the branches. I will not now ambitiously celebrate their praises: for
we abhor from nothing more; than such Vanity. Yet, as to these later times,
the truth is, if we cast up the account rightly, out Religion is much endebted
to that people. For who are they but the Jews, that have preserved for us the
sacred volumes of the Bible safe and sound? How many Errata's had stolen into
the Holy Scriptures, had the custody thereof been committed only to such as
Lactantius, Austin, Gregory, Chrysostom, most holy men indeed, but unskilful
of the Hebrew tongue? Amongst all the Greek and Latin Fathers that governed
the ancient Church, Origin, and (to speak the most) Jerome were the only
Hebricians: the rest had not learned so much as the very Letters; Wherefore if
the carelessness of Transcribers had made default, they were not the men that
could make amends. But this was all the Jews only study, and their sole care,
to vindicate the Books of Moses, and the Prophets, and the other holy writings,
from the injuries of time. This is their proper praise: wherein no other Nation
c^^imeth any share. There is an eminent place in Rabbi Abraham In libre
Juchasin:
of Salmantica, whence we learn. That all the Copies of the Bible were amended
according to a certain Book of venerable antiquity, written long before by the
hand of Rabbi Hillel, High Priest of the Jews, who came from Babylon into Syria
sixty years before the Nativity of our Lord God Jesus Christ. In the Kingdom of
Leon (says he) they found the Bible written by Rabbi Hillel, and by it
corrected all their Copies; part of it I saw, which was sold in Afric, and was
written 900. years before my time. Kimhi in his Grammar says, the Pentateuch
was at the City of Toledo. At that time therefore the Jews were the only
Correctors to keep the context of the Bible pure. Indeed, it had been easy for
them, to alter and corrupt those places, which seemed to condemn their follies,
when the Christians understood scarce three words of Hebrew: but piety
with-stood, and Religion would not permit them to change what was sacred.
Nevertheless, some have charged them with unfaithfulness in describing much of
the text; but these men have already had sufficient answer from learned 8.
Explan. Esaiae.
Origin. As for me, when I consider the unwearyed diligence and infinite pains
of the Masorites, I do even stand amazed; for, having revised accurately, and
compared all the parts of the Hebrew Bible, they signed them with certain
notes. This was done after the destruction of the second Temple, about the year
436. It was observed by them, not only how many Verses and words, but also how
many Letters every Book contained. Wherefore, that afterward, when extreme
barbatism oppressed the world, no tittle of that most excellent Book was lost, is
a benefit we ow to them. Not without cause have the Rabbis said, The Masora is
as it were the wall and the hedge of the Law. In Rabbi Zacuth above cited, are
Judaicall trifles, whereby forsooth it is concluded, that the Accents and the
Points were extant in the time of Ezra; which I therefore mention, that it may
be added to the rest of those vain arguments alleged by some, who in our time
deny them to be the invention of the Masorites. And in the same Rabbis Book,
by the same proof is the Targum of Onkelos referd to Ezra's age. Which,
although it be false, and easily discovers how little worth the other is, yet
will find some to defend it, the rather, that the other may not fall. Many are
so obstinately given, they care not what they say, if it may but serve to
maintain the opinion they have once embraced. That the reading of the holy
Scripture is not uncertain, and subject to any more variation, we thankfully
acknowledge the care and pains of the Jews, who lived in the later times, after
the destruction of the second Temple: For, when they were fallen from their
great and wealthy State, they made it their business, amidst their extreme
calamity, to save out of the common Shipwreck this one Chest of inestimable
value. And this is that we love them for; the rest deserve our compassion: For
they read the Tittles, and Letters, and Books, but they read them only, not
regarding nor seeking the true and sacred sense. So that, the saying of their
own well agrees unto themselves: They make that which is fundamental, a lesser
matter; and the lesser matter, fundamental. And, which is worst of all, they
are not sensible of their Childishness and folly; for, whereas all their
infelicity consists in their ignorance of the divine Law, they complain of
the loss of their Country, and of the Kingdom taken from them, and of the like
things: whose possession makes no man happy, and whose loss makes no man
miserable. Seneca tells us of his Wifes fool, Harpaste, that having on the
sudden lost her sight, she knew not she was blind, and often requested her
keeper to bring her to another house, for her own was dark. The Jews are in the
same case. They carry about in their own breast the cause of all their misery:
and suppose, by some divine favor, they should recover Canaan, they would
change their climat, not their mind. Whithersoever they turn themselves, their
night goes along too, and overshadows them: nor shall it be dispelled, before
they have thoroughly smarted for their ingratitude, and their obstinacy, and the
hardness of their hearts.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Edm. Calamy.

THE Table Alphabeticall.
A.
R. ABraham. 155 Acheians. 85 Agrarian Law. 13 17, 40 Agriculture. 20, 24
Agrippa's offense. 50 Alcimus High Priest. 147 His impiety. 148 Alexander M.
his favor to the Jews. 27 Alterations whence. 18 Ambition. 141 Anointing of
Kings. 127 Antigonns King. 149 Antiochus Epiphanes. 146 Apion cymbalum mundi. 3
Apollonius Scotus praised. 70 Aristobulus King. 149 Aristotle 's opinion of the
Jews. 29, 30 Arist. cited 5, 8, 31, 119 Arms of nature. 15 Artificers, none
among the Jews. 32 Avarice, the hurt of it. 17 Author. 1, 70, 74, 112, 114
B.
BAbylon enlarged by Nebuch. 139 Babylonian Jews. 62. Had not the Scepter. 69
Balaam's prophecy expounded. 154 Beginning of the Heb. Com. 59 Benefit of the
Jubily. 14 Berosus Annals. 139 Bible, some parts not to be read by Youth. 159.
Forbidden the Jews by Trajan. 167 Not corrupted by the Jews 168 Burial of the
dead. 55
C.
CAbala. 105 Capital offenders. 110 Casaubons exercit. 73. His praise. 74. His
error. 85 Calendar corrected. 112 Captivtty. 137 Change of Laws. 58 City-life.
21 Cities of refuge. 58 City, what. 110 Colonies. 12 Commands, three to be
fulfild in Palestin. 115 ommon-wealth founded by Moses. 2. When full of
enemies. 18. The best. 31. Affixt to Palestin. 61 Consecration of Cities. 44
Councils of the Jews. 98, 108 Country bred gollant men. 21 Court of the Temple.
125
D.
David's Scepter. 91. Everlasting throne. 153 Day of expiation. 16 Defection of
the ten Tribes. 136 Deformity. 104 Desolation of Jerusalem. 56, 93 Dominion
secured by change. 113
E.
EGyptians, their, idle life. 35 Elders. 107 Elisab's Sons. 142 Ephod. 124
Ephorus his error. 29 Equality. 12 Eusebius confuted. 74, 82 Ezekiels obscure
prophecy. 156 Ezra. 157
F.
FAthers error. 72. Unskilful in the Hebrew text. 168 Field laid to field. 20
Fire on the Altaer. 129 Fortification. 53
G.
GAbinius abates the power of Sanhedrin. 113 Gardons and Woods in Babylon. 140
God, the ruler of the Heb. Com. 6. Why angry at the desire of a King. 117
Gospel common to all Nations. 161 Grecians Lawgivers. Their ignorance of the
Jews. 29
H.
HAsmoneans. 79 Hebrews, why hated by the Egyptians 34 Hecateus praised. 10
Herod King. 149. His cruelty. 150 Herodotus error. 137 High Priest. 104
Hillel. 101, 111. Hircanus. 150 Holy of Holies. 50 Holy ointment hid and lost
with other things. 128 Homer has not the name of Laws. 3 Houses in Cities
redeemed. 47 Husbandmen of Egypt lazy 38 Husbandry praised. 22
I.
JAcobs prophecy. 64 Jarchi. 153 Jeroboam. 83. His policy. 130. Turbulent. 134.
Idolatry punished. 138 Idumaeans. 150 Jerusalems sarstity. 48. Privilege. 54.
The head City. 55 Her fall. 56 Jews had no commerce with other Nations. 28.
Spread abroad. 88. Knew not their Messiah. 161. Cast off. 162 Not without hope.
163. Their dignity. 164. Their baseness. 165. Our relation to them. 167. Our
debt to them. 168 Imperial dignity. 64 Impiety never quiet. 147 Imposition of
hands. 100 Josephus against Apion praised. 3. Jos. cited. 27, 50, 87, 151. His
error. 120 Joshua Captain General. 96 Jubily, the benefit of it 14. the 49
year. 41. not kept after the captivity. 41 Judas Maccabaeus. 147 Prince and
Priest. 149 Juda 's Scepter. 77 Judges of Palestin and Babylon. 68 Juvenal
cited. 36
K.
KEepers of the Laws. 7 Kings. 97 King created. 116. Qualities of a King. 118.
Rules for him. 120. Presidents of Religion. 122. Dignity. 123 King and Priest.
126. Anointed. 127 Kingdom of the Levites. 149 Of the Messiah. 155
L.
LAelius his wisdom. 19 Law of Jubily. 23 Laws, none written before Moses. 4.
Impartial. 8. Stolo 's Law. 18 Lawgivers, their honor. 2 The Grecian. 3 Levi
and Benjamin called Jews. 85 Levites portion. 46. Office. 122 Reign. 141
Liberty pretended, to enslave, 134
M.
MAgistrates: 106 Majesty of the Empire. 76. In the people of Rome. 79
Maimonides praised. 13. Cited. 16, 25, 41, 49, 61, 64, 68, 101, 102, 108, 115,
155 Manslanghter expiated. 111 Manasses High Priest. 144 Matthias the
Hasmonean. 146 Masorites diligence and fidelity. 169 Mem clausum. 154
Merchants. 30 Messiah. 93, 153. Reign. 157 Modesty in opinion. 158 Monarchs,
the Judges and Dictators so styled. 96 Moses, the first Lawgiver. 2 More than
man. 7. The stability of his Law. 8
N.
NEbuchadonozor. 139 Nero petitioned by the Jews. 50 Nilus fruitful. 39 Noah's
seven precepts. 5
O.
ORdinances of the Jews. 9 Opificers illiberall. 33 Onias High Priest. 145.
Renewed his foreskin. 146
P.
PAlestin. 9. Fruitfulness thereof. 11, 43. Divided by Joshua. 16 Pastoral
life. 20 Paul interpreted. 164. His charity to the Jews. 168 Peace of
Jerusalem. 133 Peace lost by appropriating what was common. 12 Personage
goodly. 119 Persecution of the Jews. 167 Pharaohs policy. 37 Plebeians single
and in conjunction. 106 Peoples Majesty. 78. Jealous of Superiors. 134
Possessions too ample. 17 Priestly kingdom. 122 Princes made by providence. 131
Progress into science. 160 Prophecies. 92 Prophets not perish out of Jerusalem.
105
Q.
QUestion of Juda 's scepter discussed. 71 Quiet of Commonwealths. 132
R.
REason and prudence. 5 Redemption of Land. 15 Of houses. 47 Refuge. 57
Religion keeps in awe. 9. The soul of the Commonwealth. 65. The cement. 135.
Politickly changed. 136 Return of the Jews. 141 Roman Commonwealth. 21 Power.
89 Royal Priesthood. 160 Rule, the flagrant desire of it. 7
S.
SAmaria an imperial seat 135 Sameas. 101, 150 Samuel. 97, 118 Sanballets
enterprise. 144 Sanhedrin. 51, 78, 98 Saul. 118 Scaliger mistaken. 102 Scepter
of Juda. 64 Schismatic Jews. 65 Scipio African. 132 Secrets to be admired.
159 Sedition brings ruin. 135 Semiramis. 140 Senators. 98, 126 Sepulchers. 54
Servants released. 16 Servitude dwarfs the mind. 166 Sesostris. 35 Seventh
year. 26 Shepherds active. 36 Solemnity of Jubily. 16 Sovereignty. 97 State,
every state breeds diseases. 133 Stolo violates his own Law. 18 Subjection
preferred before Liberty. 116 Successoy. 118
T.
TAlmud quoted. 14, 25, 48, 102, 154 Temple, the voice there. 55 Only at
Jerusalem. 66 Temple in Garizin 145 Ten tribes captive. 86, 137 Theocracy. 6
Territories enlarged. 57 Tiberius. 166 Times ordered. 111 Titus. 167 Trade. 28.
Inherited. 35 Translation of Nations. 137 Tribute heavy, an occasion of
rebellion. 131 Truth before affection. 75
V.
VArro cited. 21 Virtue lost by want of exercise. 20 Vicissitude. 133 Urim and
Thummim. 51, 124
W.
War. 105 Wealth without oppression. 13
X.
XEnophanes his saying. 158
Y.
YEar of rest. 42. The sixth years fruitfulness. 43 Leap-year. 111
Z.
R. ZAcuth. 112, 129, 167
FINIS.

