These Girdles have been Experimen^ in several Waters, at Portsmouth lately,
and at Bristoll publicly befor^Thousands, by a Man weighing One Hundred and
half, Bound Hand and foot.

Those that are desireous may see it tried in the Thames at Highwater or any
time, ten or twelve persons for a Guinnea: giveing Norice beforehand to ^^
Davis at the Red Lion Inn at Charing Cross. Where further satisfaction may be
ha^

Vivat Rex
Ars Nova Natandi, OR, New SWIMMING GIRDLES, That will safely support a Man
from DROWNING, In any kind of Water; with many other Conveniences.

By FRANCIS CRUYS, Gent.

sworn servt in Ord: to his Maty.

BRISTOL, Printed by Will. Bonny on the Back, School.

THE PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
There Is no Room for Harangues, and Long Speeches, in a Prelude to so sman an
Overture, as may be contained in less than a sheet of Paper: Therefore I desire
you, despise nor condemn not the poor Advices of a True Friend, that has taken
several Years pains, for the Preservation at a time of need: If thy L^fe be
concerned, or thy Calling be in that useful and good Servan^, but worst of
Masters, the Water. I did it out of a Charitable Design, which I pray thee so
accept; and not censure and ridicule a thing before thou Read'st or Understands
it. It is from the beginning to the end thereof my own, without the help of
any: and this the first I ever appeared in Print in; Though I confess, these last
Ten Years I have spent most time in Study and New Inventions, for the Public
Good; and as this gains Acceptance, shall proceed farther in several others,
(too many and tedious here to Relate.) If thy Condition be Rich, the charge is
little more than naught, if but indifferent, it is not much, and if Mean or Poor,
I Will show thee a way that it shall be Imperceptable, or easy to be borne: To
purchase the Dearest GIRDLE, save but One Penny per Diem, out of thy common
Expenses, and in about Fourteen Months 'twill be over, which may serve the^ thy
Term of Life, and perhaps thy Sons too; and for the Cheapest, One Halfpenny a
Day for Nine Months will defroy it: And if thou make out that thou art not
able to do that, I will freely give thee, as thou art my Brother Christian: I
shall endeavor to Answer the end of my Creation to my Neighbor, but must not
forget my Duty to my Creator, and my Self. If it is accepted by the Ingenuous
and Sober, I care not much what the contrary Parties say or think. If I am
Encouraged, I will proceed and make Thousands, but if none approve, I hope they
will pardon me if I forbear: and if those I herewith propose, will be taken,
Directions for their true use shall he given with them, and will (God willing)
Publish in the Gazzet where I may be spoken with in London next Spring:
designing to disperse these on the Sea Coasts this Winter. Who am

Your Real Friend to serve you. FRANCIS CRUYS.
Poun^ley near Newent in Gloucester-shire, October, 2^th. 1697.
ARS NOVA NATANDI, OR New SWIMMING GIRDLES.
That will safely support a Man from Drowning, in any kind of Water, with many
other Conveniences, etc.
OF Two sorts. The one an Airy Tube, filled with the Man's Breath in a moment,
and Equipt as soon; (which if time should be wanting) if 'twere on empty, and
the Man Twenty fathoms or deeper, one puff will bring him up safely on the
surface of the Water, to do any reasonable thing for his Preservation; weighing
near three pounds* and made so portable, that 'twill go in a Coat Pocket, or if
put on under a Surtoot Coat* cannot be discovered. The other, stufft with above
Ten thousand Particles; nor subject to any Accident; that does as well or
better than the other, except its bulk: But in a Ship or Boat will take up
little room, intended to ly under the Pillow of the Hammocks, and with either,
a Sailor may act his labor in a Storm without hinderance.

The Benefit of these, are not only to those that use the Seas, but to those
who are occupied in Rivers, Lakes, etc. As also for Passangers over broad
Ferrys, and Arms of the Sea, where sometimes (without a Miracle) many perish
with a sudden blast of wind. Likewise for those that must travail when Rivers
are overflown; with which a Man may not only save his own Life, but his Horses
too, without loosing time. Lastly, For the Instructing Youth in the most useful
Art of Swimming; and for Gentlemen, Others, and Ladies too (if they please) in
hot weather for Bathing, and Cooling. And either sort lasting many years, (if
not abused.) Moreover, if any small accident should happen, they shall be
repaired for the first time gratis; and afterward at Reasonable Rates, by the
Projector or his Assigns.

Who by five or six years Study and Practice, has perfected them, and will
expose them to the World for the benefit of Mankind; and by his often
amendments has made them so Cheap, that the dearest will be afforded for a
Guinea and half, and the cheapest at half a Guinea: And for his first Essay,
will make a Lottery of 1600 Lo^s for 1600 Guineas, all Prizes (and not one
Blank.) without Dec^it or Cheat, getting nothing by the Lottery, only the Sale
of his Girdles.

Guineas. One, the greatest Lot 50 Guineas. 50. 2 Lots at 25 50. 4 Lots at 12
50. 8 Lots at 50. 21 Lots at 3 63. 312 Lots at 1 468. 486 Lots at 1 486. 766
Lots at half a Guinea 383. Lots 1600 Guineas 1600.

He gains only by the last* Saves by the last save one, and looses by all the
rest, yet equally Balanced.

Those Noblemen, Ladies, Gentlemen and Others, that will please to encourage*
Charitable an Action, (that will set many Poor people at work; and by making
these gain a good livelihood;) may adventure what they plea^^ till it is full:
But in case the Subscriptions amount not to the aforesaid Sum, the Girdles only
Subscribed for can be expected, and not the Advantage of Lottery, for its equal
to the Projector Lottery or not. He can give sufficient satisfaction to any
Person concerned of himself, and circumstances in the World.

What Tickets soever any Person Subscribes for, He or She, must lay down at the
Subscribing One Third part; The Second Third part, at his Office in London,
after the Subscribers have One Months Notice in either Letters or the Gazet,
and who ever pays not in to the Projector or his Assigns in Fourteen days over
and above the said Month beforementioned, Forfeits their First Third part in
hand paid; the Last Third part after the Lottery is drawn, and at the delivery
of the Girdles.

Those Persons that shall draw the great PRIZES, and shall think them too many
for their own use, or their Friends, to give to poor Seamen, shall (if they
please) have an Allowance in the Patent to the Value of their Lots, if the
whole Project may be Esteemed and Computed, at such a Rate as may be agreeable
to both Parties, Projector and Subscribers, if they will be pleased to trust to
the Projector's Care and Honesty: who will at any seasonable time give
satisfaction to any Person willing to be concerned.

Who ever Adventures but One Guinea may have the greatest Lot; but if the worst
of Fortune happens; he will have a Girdle of half a Guinea, and if that is
dislik't, for a Guinea more may have one of the dearest sort; and the loss can
be but half a Guinea.

But those that are willing to Adventure no more than one single Guinea, are
desired to pay it at Subscribing, to avoid trouble and charge on both sides.

Those Cities, Corporations, or Fraternities, that give Encouragement, shall
have Allowance for their Poor that use the Seas, from the Projector, according
to the value and number they take off; of the Tenth Part of the Profit of them.

For what Sums the Projector or his Assigns shall receive, satisfactory
Acquitances shall be given as occasion shall require.

With every Girdle a small Volume, but an Excellent Pious Book, called. The
Christian Monitor, with a Plain and Honest Sermon, affixt on this Text,
Vigilate and Orate, shall be presented Gratis by the Projector.

A Copy of the Instrument for Subscrip-tions.
WE whose Hands are hereunto under written, Do Covenant, Bargain, Contract and
Agree to and with FRANCIS CRVYS, of White Hall, Gent. That for as much as he
the said FRANCIS CRVYS Intends in as little time as conveniently he can pass a
Patent under the Broad Seal of England; for his New Invented SWIMMING GIRDLES,
soley to the use of him the said F. C. or his Assigns, for 14 Years, by Virtue
of a Statute made for that Purpose, etc. and making a LOTTERY of 1600 Lots, for
1600 Guineas, all PRIZES, according to the afo^'d Page 11. ^^at 50 Guineas
Value in Girdles, 2 at 25 Guineas value in Girdles, etc. which shall be made as
soon as with good speed they can be conveniently: We will pay him at our
several Subscribing One Third part in Hand as ^a^nest or Contract-Money, for
the several Lots we underwrite; and the Second Third part at such Place or
Places he shall du^e^, after we have account ^^ven us by Letters, or
Publication in the Gazet, ^oy-Boy, etc. of the Time and Place or Places for the
Receipt thereof, or within One Months time (...) fourteen Days over and above
such Advise or Publication: And that in case we fail of our Second Payment of
our several Second Third parts to him, as aforesaid, we Allow and Agree that
the First, Third part shall be Forfeited to him the said F. C. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, as his Proemium.

And also that our Last Third part shall be paid in like manner, within Three
Days after the Lottery is drawn, and on the receiving our Girdles, excepting
only those that Adventure but One single Guinea. And the said F. C. does hereby
further Agree to and with the several Subscribers, that he the said F. C. shall
make and deliver to all the said Subscribers the Number of Girdles stated as
above, if the full number of the Lottery is Subscribed for: but if not full, no
Advantage of Lottery, but to the Value of Guineas Subscribed, firm,
substantial, and good for use, with all convenient speed, without Fraud or
Coven: And does further Agree and Covenant to and with the said Subscribers,
that if any small accident should happen, that any of those Girdles delivered
by him in Lots should be damaged (using his Directions) they shall be amended
and made useful (if repairable) for the Fir^^ time (...) and for the future at
Reasonable Rate^, by him the ^and F. C. or his Assigns. Moreover that if any
Person or Persons concerned shall dislike their sorts of Girdles as they are
Lotted, they shall freely exchange the Dearer for the Cheaper, or the Cheaper
for the Dearer, without any allowance of Loss, Three of the Cheaper for One of
the Dearer, or One of the Dearer for Three of the Cheaper, as soon as they can
be conveniently made. leaving their Girdles unused. And lastly the said F. C.
voluntarily Engages, that One-Tenth part of the clear profit that shall arise
to him by these Girdles, as near as he can possible compute, shall be disposed
of in Prous and Charitable uses.

The Appartenances to the GIRDLE are an Attendant to carry all Necessaries dry,
and to be had at pleasure, and may be made to contain, half a Hundred weight,
more or less, following the Man, and when occasion requires its use is to be
lasht on the Starbord-side of the Man. and when its present use is over, to
follow as it did: Any quantity of Liquors may be tack't to it without, in
Wooden Bottels, without Prejudice.

A Pillow, exceeding light, to supporr the Head, and to keep the Neck from
Akeing if a Man should lie long on his back.

Light Oars for the Hands to make way; very convenient.

A small Horn light and Cheap, to give Notice to a Vessel, much further than a
Man's Voice.

Some of these needless in a Fleet, or in Company of others, but highly ^seful
and convenient in a single Ship: and of sma^^ Charge.

FINIS.
Postscript.
THose that are not willing to Adventure in Lottery, may be Furnished with
Girdles at a Certainty, paying One third part at Subscribing, and the rest as
aforesaid; and Subscriptions will be taken by Mr. William Jordan, at the Talbot
in Worcester. Mr. William Roberts, at the Swan in Tewksbury. Mr. Richard
Cosnet, at the Bell in Gloucester. Mr. John Morgan, at the White-Hart, and Mr.
John Olave, at the Nags-head in Bristol. and in most Cities and Seaport Towns,
as soon as Time and Opportunity will permit. The Projector may be spoken with
in Tendon, at Garway's Coffee-House, or on the Royal Exchange, in the Turkey
Walk. near the North-west Corner.


