The Reading Quakers Vindicated from False Aspersions; SHOWING That
Unneighbourly Proceedings is no Testimony of Christianity or real Quakers, but
destructive to Christian Society.
Thou shall not raise a false Report; put not thy Hand to be an unrighteous
Witness, Exodus 23.1. Let the Proud be ashamed, for they have dealt perversely
with me without a Cause; but I will meditate in thy Precepts, Psalm. 119.78.
WHereas there is a Printed Sheet industriously spread, called, The Christian
Testimony of some called Quakers at Reading in Berkshire, to some Fundamental
Truths of the Christian Religion; containing 12 Queries and Answers (and a Copy
of a Letter) signed by George Jaques, William Pain and Robert Sandiland,
against some Preachers at Reading, called Quakers; wherein they tell their
Reader a Story of the said Preachers, that they refused to give them an Answer
to their said Queries, sent to Tho. Curtis, William Soundey and Benjamin
Coals, above a Month ago. Now was it such a great Crime, to deserve to be thus
exposed in Print, and that their own Friends and near Neighbors too, on purpose
to render them no Christians, because they had not an Answer in that time? Let
all sober People judge in this Matter.

Again they say, They had threatening, uncivil Language given them, and were
denied a Meeting of public Conference. As to this they do very ill to charge
T.C. W.S. and B.C. after this manner, it being utterly false that ever, to
their knowledge, they did give them any uncivil Language; and as to a Meeting
of Conference, we may say more in what follows: But they go on, and tell of
disorderly Opposition and Confusion in the public Meeting House, the 27th
September. 1696. This also is very unfair, to charge the Three Preachers above
mentioned withal, for Two of them were out of Town that Day; and as for W.S.
how can they, with any Face of Honesty, charge him with it? Had Robert
Sandiland been so innocent and peaceable, there would have been no such
Disorder that Day, nor at other times.

And as for their Charge against the three accused Persons, as that they were
unfound in Doctrine; we never heard any such Complaint until of late our
Opposers took Offense, and watched to get occasion against them to bespatter
them and other Friends, and then make a Man an Offender if he did but mistake a
Word; which is very Unchristian-like.

But the beginning of this Fraction, and of their taking this Course, was this:
When George Keith came to Reading, George Jaques and some others affecting him,
entertained some hard Thoughts against several Friends, thinking they did not
well like him, and that we were not kind enough to him; for before he came we
lived in much Love, as on a religious Score: Then several espousing his Cause,
began to discourse much of him and his Notions, until at length they began to
be very hot and contentious, notwithstanding Friends have endeavored to
persuade them, that there was not so much difference as to those things (which
they call essential Principles) between them and us, but for want of a right
Understanding of each other (which is no just ground for them to make this
Clamor) for at some Conferences, where things were moderately discoursed, some
of them, G. J. by Name, seemed to be pleased that we so well agreed;
afterward, they sent those Queries mentioned, which Friends never refused to
answer: They say they were sent above a Month ago; which shows that they were
in great haste to Print, that they could stay no longer: Those Queries then
were as industriously spread in Writing, and that before two of the accused
Persons had so much as read them; for one of them had not seen them before they
were spread far and near: Then they were earnest for an Answer, which was never
refused, but as opportunity offered Friends gave them the best Satisfaction
they could by Words, Face to Face, as looking on that to be the most
Friend-like to open our Hearts one to another, than to write Papers, living so
near one to another, and familiar Friends, (which practice has been very
hurtful;) but nothing would serve a hungry Mind after Contention, but we must
write an Answer to their Queries, though Friends had spoken to most of them,
which in effect was according to their own Positions, and agreeable to
Scripture.

And as for their Challenge to give them a Meeting of public Conference; and
to this we are required to give an Answer in a short time, because (as may be
supposed) they were in great haste to bring forth this printed Sheet to make
themselves Popular, that they might set up a Meeting by themselves; Thomas
Curtis and Benjamin Coals made this Proposition to G. Jaques, etc. That at any
time they would meet them Two and Two at a time, where they pleased, if it were
every Day (except any thing more than ordinary of Business should happen to
prevent) till they had endeavored to satisfy every one of them that was
disatisfied, excepting against none but Robert Sandiland, whom we have just
ground to object against; for he that seems to be Religious and bridles not his
Tongue, it is but Vanity; and he that may be called a Quaker, or pretends to be
one, and yet have the Impudence to say, That if he had known the Quakers had
held such Things, he would as soon have put his Head in the Fire as joined with
them: Surely such a one is not fit to be a Preacher among a People, whom he so
unworthily vilifies. More might be said, but we shall forbear at present.

It may be observed that G. Jaques, etc. to whom T. C. etc. made the last
Proposition, seemed willing to comply therewith to meet Two and Two at a time;
but when they had conferred (as we suppose with R. S. and his Wife) they
returned an Answer, That they did not except of our Proposition; and so they
went on to finish a Meeting Place, and set up for themselves in Gutter Lane.
And then their Agent John Knapp was very diligent to give abroad the printed
Sheet, who has ill requited his Friends for their Kindness to him in time of
Need. But we are heartily sorry for them, especially those that are
honest-hearted, who are betrayed, and are going they know not whither, being
listed up in their own Imaginations above the Simplicity of that Truth, which
will outlive all those that oppose the Work of the Lord, and his Servants
therein.

From a Monthly Meeting held at the Meeting House in Sun Lane in Reading, 27th
9th Month, 1696.
As we believe we speak; first hear, and then judge charitably of what we say.
IT was the Saying of wise Solomon, That in making many Books, there is no end,
etc. And if every one should Write or Print what they believe is true Religion,
it were the way to fill the World with Books. Many Testimonies have been
published by particular Friends of their Faith, and also in a general way, of
our Belief who are called Quakers, concerning the Principles of True Religion,
at sundry times; yet so unhappy is the Age in which we live, that some that are
Contentious will not believe: However, for the Sakes of others, we have this to
say in these following Particulars.

I. We do sincerely believe, That there is but one only true and living God,
who is a Spirit, the Creator and Upholder of all Things by the Word of his
Eternal Power, who is Infinite and Incomprehensible in himself; and all Words
of Men and Angels cannot define him as he is, being in all, through all, and
over all blessed for ever, whom all ought to fear and dread.

II. We sincerely believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, both as he was the eternal
Son of God from the beginning, glorified with the Father before the World
began, and also as he was the promised Seed spoken of, Genesis 3.15. The Seed of
the Woman shall bruise the Serpents Head; which the Prophet Isaiah pointed at,
Isa. 7.14. Behold a Virgin shall be with Child and bring forth a Son, and (thou
O Virgin) shall call his Name Immanuel; which being interpreted is God with us:
Which in due time was born of the Virgin Mary at Bethlehem in the Land of
Judea, Mat. 2.15.

III. We believe, That the Man Christ Jesus, according to the Flesh, was the
Seed of Abraham, to which the Promise was made, That in him (to wit Christ) all
Nations of the Earth should be blessed, Genesis 22.18. Who was the Son of Abraham,
and the Son of David, etc. Mat. 1.1.

IV. We believe, That the Man Christ Jesus had a real Soul that was not the
Godhead, and a real Body that was not the Godhead; but in a most holy and
mystical Union of the Divinity and Humanity in One, better known and understood
through a living Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, than to be expressed in Words,
Psalm. 16.10. Acts 2.27.

V. We also believe, That the same Christ Jesus that was born of the Virgin,
was the Son of God, having no immediate Father but God, Luke 1.35. Jo. 1.39.

VI. We do believe, That Jesus Christ, as to his Human Nature, was in all
things like unto us, except Sin; yet the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him
Bodily: He was both God and Man and yet but One Christ, the Nature of the
Manhood being most gloriously united with his Godhead, according to Tim. 2.5.
Heb. 2.16. And to this we may add that Saying of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom
having not seen ye love; in whom though ye see him not, yet believing ye
rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

VII. We do verily believe, That Christ's Body that died on the Cross and was
laid in the Sepulcher, did rise again the Third Day, and that he ascended up
into Heaven after his Resurrection, according to the Scriptures: And that
Heaven into which Christ has ascended in the most glorified Nature of Man, is
above the Earth, a Place of unexpressible Glory with his Father: And as he that
dwells in Heaven is unlimitable, so is the Place of his Habitation above the
reach of the carnal Mind to define where it is; yet measurably we poor Mortals
taste of it here on Earth, so that we believe it is not included in us, nor
excluded from the Regenerate; Christ is Lord of Heaven, yet as to his Godhead
he is measurably within us, by his Grace, Light and Spirit; For he that has
not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his.

VIII. We are justified and cleansed from Sin by the precious Blood of Jesus
Christ, that was outwardly shed; and we are sanctified by that precious Blood,
through the Spirit of God that dwells in us, 1 Cor. 6.11.

IX. We believe, That it is necessary for all to believe in Christ Jesus, as he
came outwardly for our Eternal Salvation; and also to believe in his spiritual
Appearance, Grace and Light, wherewith he has Enlightened every Man that
comes into the World; and in the Spirit of Truth, which is sufficient to lead
and guide into all Truth: Also living Faith in Christ as he died for our Sins,
and to reconcile us to God, and rose again, and is at the Right Hand of God
making Intercession for us, according to Romans 8.34. is necessary to be
Preached, with his inward and spiritual Appearance, by every true Minister of
Christ, as God shall require it by his Spirit, John 1.9. Mat. 16.13.

X. And we believe it is absolutely needful for every Man and Woman that do
profess themselves to be Christians, and hope to be saved by our Lord Jesus
Christ, to be very careful that they are certain and know in themselves, that
they are true and faithful Witnesses of their own true and unfeigned Repentance
toward God, and that they so believe as to have saving Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, and rightly to know what the Apostle says, viz. Not by Works of
Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by
the washing of Regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5.

XI. We believe, That all that are or shall be saved in any Age of the World,
have their Sins blotted out and forgiven for Christ's sake, and on the account
of his most holy and perfect Obedience unto Death; and what Light and Grace all
Men ever did, does or shall receive to the Worlds end, it is given to Men for
the Man Christ Jesus his sake, and by his Purchase and Merits, and continual
Mediation and Intercession, 1 Timothy 2.5.

XII. We believe, That Christ Jesus shall come again to judge the Quick and the
Dead, according to Act. 1.11. And that God has appointed a Day, in the which
he will judge the World in Righteousness by the Man whom he has ordained,
whereof he has given assurance to all Men, in that he has raised him from the
Dead, Act. 17.31. but in what manner he shall come, we must submit to the
Pleasure of the Almighty.

XIII. We faithfully believe, That there will be a Resurrection both of the
Just and Unjust; and if our Hope were only in this Life, we were of all Men
most miserable: Christ Jesus says, That he is the Resurrection and the Life,
and he that believes in him, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and he that
lives and believes, shall never die. We believe, That the deceased Saints are
at Rest in the Kingdom; for we do not believe a Purgatory or Place of Cleansing
hereafter; For as Death leaves, Judgment finds; but we believe, That there is a
Resurrection of the Body more than what we have already attained, which after
the Dissolution and putting of that which is Corruptible, we shall attain to
the full Enjoyment of that which we now, through Mercy, have the Earnest of,
Knowing that he which raised up our Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by
Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.14.

XIV. We believe, That Body that dies shall rise again, but wonderfully
changed; yet so far the same Body, as it is possible for a Natural Body to
become a Spiritual Body; God will give it a Body as it pleases him, 1 Cor.
15.38. In short, the Resurrection is a Mystery too great for the carnal Mind to
perceive; and the things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God: Let us
therefore take the Counsel of an eminent Man; viz. To be solicitous to know the
Power and inward Operation, whereby we may be made Sons of God, and attain to
the Resurrection of the Dead, as being Children of God and of the Resurrection:
If Men walk in the true Light, and so truly serve and please God here on Earth,
they shall not need to doubt or dispute about their future Being in Heaven;
their Business is to get thither, and God will well accommodate them there; Men
ought not to be too curious and scrutinous in Matters beyond their Reach, as to
the manner of their future Beings, or how they shall be reserved for eternal
Rewards.

We are Friends to all that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, more than
after Strife and Contention, Thomas Curtis, William Soundey, Benjamin Coals.

Reading, 19th 9th Month, 1696.

