The Curry-Comb turned to its RIGHT USE; Or, The Powder-Monkey to a Jamaica
Ship, Dressed with it.
By the Author of the Trip to Holland.
THE fiery Plantation Author perhaps may be angry, that I liken him to so
little an Animal as a Monkey in the Title, when in his Tower Hill Simile he
assumes to himself the mighty Image of a true bred Mastiff; though where his
Breeding is I cannot tell; for I understand at the Derby Alehouse that his
Friends never bred him a Scholar, but where his want of it appears may be
easily discernable, even by our Author, who has none.

The way to give him no further provocation is to Answer him in Latin, and then
your sure not to be understood, unless he happily lights on Tom. Brown to
expound it to him, and the way to provoke him is much more difficult to be
found, if our Champion pleases to remember who 'twas challenged him before his
Printer, and could get nothing more from him then that he lived at Islington;
And this is an instance of his Courage, Contempt, and holding up his Leg, and
scornfully pissing upon his trembling Assailant; so it is an Evident Sign our
Dealer in Similitudes, after he was not suffered to be one in Sugar, is as far
from having any just claim to the use of a Cudgel for his Talent, as he has to
the use of a Pen.

But our Author is eager for doing the World Justice, and the Unmannerly
sauce-box must be discovered, who dared yelp at the Heels of this Disdainful
Bull-dog. I warrant you he thinks he deserves as much at least as Dr. Oats for
the Discovery of his Horrid Plot against the Purses of his Majesty's Subjects.
A Bookseller in Fleetstreet showed him Feltham's Resolves, pointed out the
place to him, and with much ado, he Read it.

O Monstrum Horrendum! Here is a Plagiarism in Perfection, a whole Sheet and an
half stolen, and not fall under the Censure of some Magistrate for it. But
these two Words of Latin has sent him in the search of some Interpreter to give
him the English of them. And now in his absence, I must do my self and the
Bookseller the same Justice he pretends to do to the World.

A Gentleman brought a small Pamphlet in 12's to my Bookseller, Entitled
Batavia, or the Hollanders displayed, but no Author, or Bookseller's Name to
it, but only Printed in the Year 1697. This he told him he brought from
Holland, and advised him to Print it, as being full of pretty delightful
Remarks. Accordingly it was brought me, and after adding two Sheets and an half
to it, we agreed to call it a Trip to Holland, because a certain scurrilous
nonsensical Pamphlet had sold well under the Name of a Trip. This, upon the
Word of a Gentleman, a Title, to which our Curry-Comber has no Plea, is the
real Truth, and we were led on in this ignorance, till the Day or two before it
was published, when it was too late, to recall a Design, the Bookseller had
been at too great a charge, and trouble in carrying on, to lose the Publication
of.

He is sorry for the Man who deals in Books, and I am sorry for him who
pretends to write them; but I am sure the last does not deserve the Pity which
the first is above. Wit and Necessity should be the Ingredients of a good Poet;
but how he comes to make this applicable to a Man who improves in his Trade, is
Reputable amongst his Neighbors, and is esteemed as a Companion for better
Gentlemen than the Jamaica-Author, or his ignorant Printer (...), I cannot
tell, unless the busy Fleet Street Bookseller told him.

As he has described me to be a Little, Shallow-brain'd Fellow, so it will not
be out of the way to give a Description of him. To begin therefore with his
Face; It is Russet-colour'd, with Pock-holes in it; and as that is somewhat
broader than ordinary, so his Skull, whose Emptiness is the only Argument of a
Vacuum in Nature, is proportionable. His Body is a long Ox's Bladder, blown up
with the Wind of Derby-Ale: His Legs too have partaken of the same Flatus; and
he looks like a Man who Cudgels People as much as he talks of it. For his
Apparel, it all came out of one Shop: No one has the Impudence to call his Wigg
a Second-handed one, for it was the Cast-off of some Valet de Chamber, and he
had it from his Master, the Broker from him, and he from the Broker. The Sword
was some disbanded Trooper's, a swinging one, which was pawned for a Shilling,
and so our Author had a Bargain in it in buying it for Two. His Cravat and
Ruffles, for I must tell you, when he came to Bully me, he had Hand-Cuffs,
looked as if they had the Yellow-Jaundice, and yawn'd at as many Holes as his
own Jamaica did when it had an Earthquake, which he calls the Dry Belly-Ach.

His Fancy is not Mushroon, as he calls mine, which grows up to Perfection in
one Night; but he must have two Days and a Night to spoil what another would
have perfected in half an Hour, else he would never have spent Saturday,
Sunday, and the Night following, on so trifling an Half-sheet as his Trip to
Holland Detected.

As for his being a Transported Felon, I shall not concern my self who incerted
it, though he is so positive in his Man: Even let it be as he thinks, for I
should lose more than his Satisfaction would make me Amends for, should I take
the pains to inform him.

And for his pretending to insinuate to the World, that I called my Bookseller
the Ignorant PUPPY, my Chap, I should do well to lay the Ignorance at his own
Door, whose Brain is so shallow as not to fathom the Meaning of it. For once
therefore, to hold a Light to his Understanding, which is hid under the Bushel,
his Skull, for I told you before the Dimensions of it, I declare, I have more
Respect for my Bookseller, than to load him with any such Character; and I
desire him, who was one of the Readers, to take it to himself.

His last Paragraph but one, has Occasion for a more serious Answer. Here he
would fasten a Crime upon me, which I declare, in the Presence of God, I know
nothing of, directly, or indirectly; and know no more of what he means by his
ambiguous speaking of a Silver Tankard, than he did my Sense when I said the
Puppy, my Chap. Indeed, I have sold many Books, and cannot but think he had
done me more Justice, had he said, my Family (which he owns to be that of a
Gentleman) had been disgraced by their withholding Money from me, not by my
selling of Books. And, for writing Obscene Ballads, Bloody Murders, and Last
Dying Speeches, he cannot but remember where the Reflection lies, since he was
W -- the Printer's Journey-man for a considerable time.

The last Paragraph gives you the Declaration of our Exasperated Bull-Dog: He
tells the World, as if he were at his last Confession, he never wrote the
Answer to the Trip to Holland. And what of all this? He has Curry'd himself out
of the World's Favaur without it, by his Present of the Curry-Comb.

To conclude, for the Paper will hold no more, neither the Author, or the
Bookseller, value the Threatenings of his Cane, or his London-Spy; but both are
of the same Opinion with a great Writer at Will's Coffee-house, That now the
Fool has written himself into some Reputation amongst the Mob, he is writing
Post to get out of it again.

This Day is Reprinted The Trip to Holland; and may be had at most Booksellers.

On Thursday seven-night will be Published The London Spy taken and Executed,
with his last dying Speech.

LONDON, Printed in the Year School.


