A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of St NICHOLAS, IN THE City of BRISTOL,
August the 27th, 1691. BEING The ANNIVERSARY FESTIVAL OF THE Natives of that
City. By THOMAS CARRY, M. A. and Vicar of the Parish of St Philip and Jacob, in
the City of Bristol.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Wall, Bookseller in Bristol. 1691.

To the Worshipful Sir John Dudelstone, Knight. PRESIDENT: THE OFFICERS, And the
Rest of the SOCIETY OF THE NATIVES OF THE City of BRISTOL.
Honored Countrymen,
THE Discourse which had lately your Audience, now offers itsself to your View,
it was composed for you, and does by Right belong to you. The Design of it is,
by beating down the Price of the World, to persuade you to make such a good Use
of it, while you live in it, that you may go out of it with comfort. GOD has
blessed many of you with ample Estates, it is your Duty to return him a
Tributary Acknowledgment by a Generous Charity: That these Meditations may be
serviceable for this End, is the hearty Prayer of,

Honored Countrymen, Your most Humble Servant, THOMAS CARRY.

LUKE xij. xv. And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of covetousness:
for a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he
possesses.
THE occasion of these words, was an improper Petition presented to our blessed
Lord, by one who came to hear his Doctrine, while he was discoursing on a
Divine Subject, a certain Worldling who minded Earth more than Heaven,
interrupted him with this unseasonable address: Master, speak to my brother,
that he divide the inheritance with me, verse. 13. Perhaps, apprehending Christ
to be the promised Messiah, and mistaking the Messiah (as the Jews generally
did) to be a Temporal Prince, he desired him to exercise his Authority in this
Case.

Our Savior (whose Kingdom is not of this World) would not invade the Office
of the Civil Magistrate, or intermeddle with Matters Foreign to his
Commission, He said unto him, who made me a judge, or a divider over you? verse.
14.

The Son of God came not from Heaven to settle Men's Estates, but to save their
Souls; he was not sent to be an Arbitrator in our Worldly Concerns, but to
execute the Office of a Mediator between God and Man; not to compose
Differences about Temporal Rights, but to reconcile GOD to Man, and Man to GOD.

However, our blessed Lord, who improved all Opportunities of doing good, takes
advantage from hence to strike at the Root from whence this Interruption grew;
he does not directly fall on the Person who disturbed him in his Discourse, but
obliquely reflects on the cause of it. The Covetousness of this Man's Heart
indisposed him to attend to our Savior's Doctrine, and therefore our blessed
Lord cautions the whole Auditory against this sin: And he said unto them, Take
heed and beware of covetousness: for a man's life consists not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses.

The words contain these two Particulars:

I. A Caution: Take heed and beware of covetousness. II. An Argument to enforce
it: For a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he
possesses.
I. A Caution: Take heed and beware of covetousness. Covetousness is an
inordinate desire of worldly Riches; the Root from whence this and all other
Vices grow, is evil Concupiscence in the Heart, Sensual Lust receives distinct
Names from its different Objects; if Honor be its Object, it is then called
Ambition; if Pleasure, Voluptuousness; if Riches, Covetousness, or to use the
Apostle's Expression, The love of money, 1 Timothy 6. 10.

All desire of worldly Riches is not Covetousness, Men must labor in their
Callings, be provident in their Expenses, and lay up for their Families:
Industry is not Sin but Duty. To increase an Estate by honest means and
endeavors, is so far from being culpable, that it is a singular commendation;
but the desire of worldly Riches is then sinful, when it is immoderate, and
whenever our Love of the World exceeds its proper bounds, it is the Sin of
Covetousness. Let us then consider in what cases the desire of Temporal Things
is immoderate, and then we shall find out the Nature of this Sin.

1. The desire of Riches is immoderate, when the World alienates our Hearts
from God and our Duty; when we love the World more than God, prefer Carnal
before Spiritual Riches, labor more for our Bodies than our Souls, and for the
World neglect God's Service, and our Etenral Concerns, then we are guilty of
the Sin of Covetousness; such a love of the World is inconsistent with the love
of God: No man can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one, and love
the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other; ye cannot
serve God and mammon, Matthew. 6. 24. Love not the world, neither the things that
are in the world: If any man love the world, the love of the father is not in
him: for all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye;
and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world, 1 John 2. 15,
16.

2. The desire of Riches is immoderate, when Men use unjust means to enrich
themselves, when they exchange their Souls for the World, and have so seared
their Consciences as to use Fraud, Perjury, Oppression, or any other dishonest
Practices to increase their Estates. All these unlawful Methods are Evidences
of a covetous Heart.

3. The desire of Riches is immoderate, when it distracts the Mind with
perplexing Cares: Excessive Sorrows for the Losses and Disappointments Men meet
with in their worldly Concerns, rebellious Murmurings against the Providence of
the Almighty, Envyings and Repinings at the Prosperity of our Neighbors,
anxious and disquieting Thoughts concerning Futurity, and despairing Fears
about the Events of our Endeavors, are certain Indications of the Sin of
Covetousness; it is in Scripture opposed to Contentment of Mind in every state
of Life, and a secure Confidence in the All Sufficiency of God: Let your
conversation be without covetousness; and be content with such things as ye
have: for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5.

4. The desire of Riches is immoderate, when it is inconsistent with the Graces
of Charity, Mercifulness, and Liberality. He that has not a Heart to give to
the Poor, when God furnishes him with means and opportunities, is a covetous
Man.

The Covetous love the World above all, pursue it with Violence, stick not at
any Methods to attain their Ends, employ it to bad purposes, keep it with
trouble, and lose it with despair.

Having thus explained the Nature of this Sin, I come now to discover the Evil
of it.

1. Covetousness is an idolatrous departure from the All-sufficient Creator, to
the insufficient Creature. Whatsoever a Man sets his Heart most on, labors
most for, spends the greatest part of his time in quest of, delights most in,
trusts most to, and values himself most upon, that is his God: the ambitious
Man's God is Honor, the Epicure's Pleasure, the Gluttons the Belly, and the
Covetous Man's Riches; the World is the Idol he adores, because the gain of it
is his ultimate end; therefore the Apostle calls Covetousness Idolatry, Col. 3.
5.

The Covetous Man's Heart is wholly departed from the Lord; with the Children
of Israel he forsakes the true God, to worship a Golden Calf; with those in the
Parable of the Gospel-Banquet, he prefers his Farm or his Merchandise before
his God and Savior; he knows no God but Gain, no Paradise but an earthly
Patrimony; Bonds and Mortgages from Men, are with him of greater Value, and a
better Security than the precious Promises of God; give him Earth here, he
cares not for Heaven hereafter, neither will he part with an Estate in hand,
for the Kingdom of Glory in reversion. The Rich Man in the Gospel could boast
much of his Morality, yet he had not learnt so much Self-denial: Go thy way
(says Christ) sell whatsoever thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall
have treasure in heaven: but he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved,
for he had great possessions, Mark 10. 21. Our blessed Lord took occasion from
hence, to declare the difficulty of Salvation to those that are covetous, by
proportioning it to the passage of a Camel through a Needle's eye: How hard is it
for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God? It is easier
for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of God, verse. 24, 25.

The Covetous Man's Practices demonstrate the infidelity of his Heart; he is
always laying up on Earth, because he believes not that there is an Heaven; his
restless pursuit after Temporal Riches, is an argument he expects no other
Satisfaction than what this World can afford; his continual Labor for the
Body, is an evidence he thinks his Soul shall die with it; he that believes in
earnest that he has an immortal Spirit to be happy or miserable for-ever, will
not wholly neglect his better part, and lay out all his care on that which must
perish; the Covetous Man would not forsake God for the World, did he not
apprehend to be a greater Good: Mammon is the only Master he serves, Worldly
Gain the only Good he desires, and Worldly Loss the only Evil he fears.

Covetousness incapacitates the Heart to perform any Religious Duty after a
Spiritual Manner: How can he pray devoutly, whose Heart is devoted to the
World? How can he profitably hear the Word of God, whose Ears are never
attentive but to the Sound of Gain? whose Thoughts are on his Worldly Affairs?
No! the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word,
and he becomes unfruitful, Mat. 13. 22. The most Divine Discourses can no more
affect his Heart, than the most Melodious Music does the Ear of a Beast. When
our Savior exhorted to Charity, the Pharisees who were covetous heard all
these things, and they derided him, Luke 16. 14. How can he value the love and
favor of God, the Language of whose Heart is, Let my Corn and Wine increase,
and let God lift up the Light of his Countenance upon whom he please? How can
he bless God for his Mercies, whose unthankful Heart is not satisfied with too
much, but always ravenous after more? God and the World are so contrary in
their Natures that both cannot have our Hearts, the love of the one, does imply
a contempt of the other; it remains therefore, that a Covetous Man is a profane
and graceless Person, without God in the World.

2. Covetousness is an Argument of a base and sordid Nature: It lodges only in
narrow Souls, and earthly Spirits, a generous Mind disdains to entertain this
filthy Lust; the Covetous Man acts from and for Self, he is unprofitable both
to Church and State, and useless in every relation; he has not a Heart to
prefer the Public Good before his Private Interest.

Of all Persons in Humane Societies, the Covetous are most unfit for Public
Offices. How unqualified are they for the Power of Judicature, who never want
Hearts, when they have Opportunities of taking Bribes? Covetousness perverts
Justice either from fear of displeasing some great Personage, or from hope to
oblige him. To what base Flatteries; to what servile Compliances; to what
slavish Drudgeries, does this Vice expose Men? That Mind cannot be free and
ingenious which is inslaved with the Love of Money: Magistracy is never more
disgraced than when misplaced on Covetous Men; this sin is inconsistent with
that State and Grandeur that should keep up the Honor of it: exact Justice,
and a generous Charity tend more to secure it from Contempt, than all the
Ensigns of Authority: Liberality, and Hospitality, render it more honorable
than Swords and Maces, or a tedious Train of Attendants; and therefore Jethro
advised Moses to provide for Magistrates, Able men, such as fear God: men of
truth, hating covetousness, Exodus 18. 21.

The Covetous Man is at the best but a Slave in a Mine of Ore, a Captive in
Fetters of Gold, the Jailer, rather than the Injoyer of his Estate: This Vice
bows down the Soul toward the Earth, hinders its flight to Things above, and
eclipseth it, by interposing the World between it and Heaven.

The first sin was Pride, this cast Angels out of Heaven; the next to that, was
an Affectation to be as Gods, to know Good and Evil; this cast our first
Parents out of Paradise; these sins are very great, and cannot be sufficiently
aggravated; but they were sins of a more generous nature than this of
Covetousness; they aspired to be greater than they were, but the Covetous Man
debaseth and lesseneth himself; they would have raised themselves higher
toward Heaven, but the Covetous Man stoops lower toward the Earth, as if he
lay under the Curse of the Serpent, Upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust
shall thou eat all the days of thy life, Genesis 3. 15.

3. Covetousness is a most cruel and unnatural Vice: It fills the Head with
Cares, the Heart with Sorrows, and the Mind with Fears; What discontents at
Providence; what melancholy damps; what excruciating thoughts do torture the
Minds of Covetous Men? Covetousness is a sin and a punishment together, a
Vulture in the Heart, a Wolf in the Breast, a Serpent in the Bosom, it
oppresses the Spirits, dries up the Radical moisture, depauperates the Blood,
degradeth the Soul, and consumes the Body: a Covetous Man starves at a
Plentiful Table, thirsts in Rivers of Water, and is poor in the midst of
abundance; he lives in want of what he has, and in this is most miserable,
that he only knows the Cares and Sorrows, not the Comforts of being Rich: For
what has a man of all his labor, and of the vexation of his heart wherein he
has labored under the sun? For all his days are sorrows, and his travel
grief; yea, his heart takes not rest in the night, Eccles. 2. 22, 23. Nature
is contented with a little, but the cravings of a Covetous Mind are boundless;
Rivers of Potable Gold will not quench this Hydropick Thirst, Crowns heaped up
to Heaven cannot satisfy this Ambition; Contentment renders little much, but
Covetousness makes much but a little.

4. Covetousness is a sin of prodigious folly: Were it lawful to make Satyrs
and Invectives against any Persons, it would be against the Covetous; their
Vices may be exposed to shame and contempt, although their Persons ought to be
pitied; For what folly is it to hoard up that with care and sorrow, which is
good for nothing but to be enjoyed? Or to sweat and labor all our Lives for
those things we must leave for ever in a moment? What an unprofitable bargain
is it, to gain a transitory World, with the loss of an immortal Soul? What
madness to render our Lives uncomfortable, by denying our selves those
Blessings God has plentifully given us to make them comfortable?

We laugh at Children when we see them fond of gaudy Rattles, and gilded
Trifles; the Covetous Man does act the Child's folly in a higher Sphere, he is
taken with Gold, not for its use, but for the value the World has put on it,
he admires it more for its luster, than its convenience; it is only the fancy
that gives such a great worth to this Metal; were it not for Custom, a Bar of
Iron would be as precious as a Wedge of Gold: where Shells are used for Money,
they are as serviceable as Plate is among us. Gold and Silver are of no other
use, than as they serve to purchase the Necessaries and Conveniences of Life,
and therefore are never to be desired for their own sakes.

5. Covetousness is the root of all evil: The Schoolmen reckon up seven
Branches growing from this Prolifick Root, Aq. 2da. 2dae quaes 118.
Treachery, Fraud, Unfaithfulness, Perjury, Discontent, Violence, and
Unmercifulness. And St. Paul says expressly, They that will be rich fall into
temptation, and a snare, and many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in
destruction and perdition: for the love of money is the root of all evil; which
while some have coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced
themselves through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.

I shall briefly enumerate the principal Vices that do necessarily attend
Covetousness.

1. Uncharitableness. Covetousness makes Men hard hearted, cruel; and
insensible of the Miseries of others; the greatest Objects of Pity, make no
impression on their Affections, their Ears are deaf to the most clamorous
Necessities, the Tears of Widows and Orphans affect not their obdurate Hearts;
where this sin reigns, there is always a savage, barbarous, and unmerciful
Nature.

He whose whole work it is to heap up, will not spare any thing: So far are the
Covetous from supplying the Poor, that it is well if they do not oppress them;
the rich Glutton in the Parable, would not afford so much as the Crumbs his
Dogs did eat, to poor Lazarus, he found more mercy from the Dogs that licked
him, than from their Covetous Master. Churlish Nabal surfeited himself, but
denied Food in extremity to David and his Company: the hands of a covetous Man
are never open to give, but to receive.

The Uncharitableness of Covetous Men is a demonstration of the Infidelity of
their Hearts; God commands us to give to the Poor; he sends daily Objects to
the Doors of the Rich, and has promised to reward Charity both in this Life,
and that to come, but the Covetous do not believe a promising God, or will not
take his Word; they prefer a small Interest on Earth, before Bags that wax not
old, Treasures that fail nor, a Hundredfold in this life, and in the World to
come life everlasting.

2. Oppression. The Covetous Man measures Good and Evil by Profit and Loss;
Just and Unjust are, with him, but vain Notions, Right and Wrong are with him,
but insignificant words. Whence come Rapine and Violence, Oppression of poor
Neighbors, Invasion of other Men's Rights, breach of Contracts, litigious Suits
of Law, secret Underminings of one another, false Weights and Balances,
fraudulent Bargains, come they not from Men's covetous Hearts? The Covetous Man
forestals the Market, ingrosseth the Blessings of God, and contracts the
largeness of his immense Bounty; his Coffers are the bottomless Pit, wherein
the unmeasurable Plenty of God is lost; his Barns are full, when the Poor want
Bread to stop their Mouths from Complaints.

3. Inhumanity. When this sin grows predominant, it makes Men unnatural in
denying themselves the Conveniences of Life; sometimes they starve their
Families while they live, that they may leave them rich when they die; the
Curse of God is on such covetous Persons, he judicially suffers them to be
infatuated by this base Lust, or else they could not be so cruel to Themselves
and their Relations. Then I returned and saw vanity under the sun: there is one
alone, and there is not a second: yea, he has neither child nor brother; yet
there is no end of all his labor; neither is his eye satisfied with riches;
neither says he, for whom do I labor, and bereave my soul of good? this is
also vanity, yea it is a sore travel, Eccl. 4. 7, 8. So again, There is an evil
that I have seen under the sun, and it is common among men: a man to whom God
has given riches, wealth, and honor: so that he wants nothing for his soul
of all that he desires, yet God gives him not power to eat thereof; but a
stranger eats it: this is vanity, and it is an evil disease, Eccl. 6. 1, 2.

4. Many Doctrinal and Practical Errors spring from Covetousness. This impure
Lust blinds the Understanding, and clouds the judging Faculty; he can never
have the due exercise of his Reason, who is addicted to an immoderate love of
worldly things; the Judgment is biassed to believe those Doctrines to be true,
and those Practices good, which tend to our Temporal Interests, be they never
so false and evil, when Covetousness prevails in the heart. St. Paul says,
That while some coveted after money, they erred from the faith, 1 Timothy 6. 5.
St. Peter has foretold, That there shall be false teachers, who privily shall
bring in damnable heresies; even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring
upon themselves swift destruction: and many shall follow their pernicious ways,
by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of: and through
covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you, 2 Pet. 2.
1, 2. They are farther described: Having an heart exercised with covetous
practices, and loving the wages of unrighteousness, verse. 14, 15.

For an instance of this, we need go no farther than the present Church of
Rome; many erroneous Doctrines, and unchristian Practices among the Papists
were first invented, and are since maintained to gratify the covetous desires
of their Clergy: their pretended Supremacy, Infallibility, Purgatory; their
Canonization of Saints, Jubilees, Pilgrimages, Prayers for the Dead;
Indulgences and Dispensations flowed from this Spring: these Doctrines have no
foundation either in Revelation or Reason; they tend only to support the
external glory and greatness of that Church; and they are fond of them for the
same reason that Demetrius, and the Craftsmen were of Diana, and her Silver
Shrines: Sirs, ye know, that by this craft we have our wealth, Act. 19, 25.

The Roman Church by selling Indulgences for past Sins, and Dispensations for
Sins to come; and by exposing Masses to sale, to deliver Souls out of
Purgatory, appears to be the Mystical Babylon mentioned in the Revelation of
St. John; for this Church only answers the Character of trading in the souls of
men, Rev. 18. 13.

6. Covetousness is a damnable Sin. St. Paul disswades the Corinthians from
having any society with a covetous Brother: If any one that is called a brother
be covetous, with such an one, No! not to eat, 1 Cor. 5. 11. And he rangeth the
Covetous among those that shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 10.
Covetousness is inconsistent with a state of Grace, and therefore must be
mortified before we can attain to a state of Salvation. He who is fond of this
visible World is unprepared for the invisible; How unfit are they to live in a
World of pure Spirits, who mind only earthly things? Our Souls must be weaned
from this World, and live above it, before they can be qualified for a better;
a contempt of this by a Spirit of Heavenly-mindedness, must train us up for
that. In Heaven there are no Houses or Lands, Gold or Silver, Food or Raiment,
and therefore a sensual Worldling could not take any pleasure in it: there are
spiritual riches, intellectual Delights, holy Pleasures, there is not one thing
proper for the animal life, and therefore the state of it does not suit a
carnal Soul. He who here relisheth no Pleasures but those of sense, shall not
only lose that World he was fondly taken with, but also be condemned to a World
of unspeakable Misery, where he shall curse his Folly for giving away his Soul
for this.

2. An Argument to enforce the Caution, Take heed and beware of covetousness:
for a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he
possesses.

Sensus est admodum popularis, vitam non juvari ex eo quod quis plus in bonis
habeat quam satis sit ad naturae desideria: says Grotius upon the Text; that
is, the sense is very obvious, a Man's Life is not supported by those things
which are more than will suffice to satisfy the Desires of Nature, no Man has
truly any more than he enjoys of the good things of this life, Water in the
Brook quenches not the Thirst, Corn in the Barn satisfies not Hunger, Gold in
the Bag supplieth not our Necessities, Nature is preserved, the Body comforted
by those things we use and enjoy, not by those we keep and possess, a moderate
portion of the good things of this Life is enough for use and enjoyment, and
therefore we may be happy without abundance; the comfort and convenience of
Life does not consist in abundance, but in a competency, and therefore we
should not covet more than enough; Superfluities are more than we can use, and
why should we fondly desire them? Worldly Riches are desirable, not for their
own sakes, but for the purposes and conveniences of life, and therefore we have
enough of them, when we have as much as we can use and enjoy.

That the happiness of Humane Life does not consist in the abundance of worldly
things, I shall evince by these following Considerations.

1. Abundance of worldly things is unnecessary: The happiness of life consists
in a sufficiency, not in superfluities, we may live very comfortably with a
little, and miserably with much, Nature is satisfied with a competency of Food
and Raiment, and Happiness consists in the satisfaction of our natural Desires,
not in gratifying our extravagant Lusts; Nature is easily satisfied, but Lust
never; a Seemless Coat will keep us as warm as a Princely Robe, Water quenches
the Thirst better than Wine, Sleep is as sweet in a Cottage, as in a Palace,
plain Food satisfies Hunger, and is more wholesome than delicious Meats: rich
Apparel, generous Wines, stately Houses, and splendid Entertainments, serve
only to gratify the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life: and therefore Agur a Man much celebrated for his Wisdom, prefers a
Competency before either of the Extremes, Riches or Poverty: Give me neither
poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me, Prove. 30. 8. If the
happiness of life consisted in abundance, then all that abound would be happy,
but every day's experience convinces us of the contrary.

2. Abundance of worldly things cannot satisfy covetous desires. Nature has
Bounds, Lust none; the World has Limits, Covetousness is unmeasurable: The
Riches of both the Indies transported hither, would not content a covetous
Heart: this Lust is as unsatiable as Hell and the Grave, he that is not
satisfied with a competency, neither would he be with abundance: He that loves
silver, shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loves abundance, with
increase: this is also vanity, Eccles. 5. 10.

God has given us infinite Desires, that we might direct them toward an
infinite Good; he made the Soul of Man incapable of satisfaction but from an
infinite Good; it is God's Royal Prerogative that he alone can satisfy an
immortal Spirit; when we direct our infinite Desires to God, we pursue our
proper satisfaction, and when we are united with God we attain it, then our
Desires are terminated; we employ them for that Noble End they were intended,
and attain that infinite Good which was designed for them; but when we turn our
Desires after worldly things, they cannot meet with any satisfaction; the
reason is, because there is no proportion between the Subject and the Object;
the World, though it be very large, yet it is but finite, and a finite World
can no more satisfy infinite Desires, than a drop can contain the Ocean:
again, the Soul being an immortal Spirit, whatsoever satisfies it must run
parallel with its duration; but the whole World must shortly be dissolved, and
the Earth, and all the Works that are therein must be burnt; How then can a
perishing World satisfy an immortal Soul, that must survive infinitely the
duration of it? It remains therefore, that the Soul cannot be satisfied, but by
an infinite and eternal Good; it may make many vain Experiments, but is never
at rest, till it fix upon its proper Center God.

3. Abundance of worldly things exposes to great Temptations and Troubles.
Great Estates are gained many times with the loss of the Soul, more valuable
than the whole visible World; they that have them are subject to immoderate
Cares, and liable to great Disappointments: When goods increase, they are
increased that eat them: And what good is there to the owners thereof, saving
the beholding of them with their eyes? The sleep of a laboring man is sweet,
whether he eat little or much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer
him to sleep. There is a sore evil which I have seen under the sun; namely,
riches kept for the owners thereof, to their hurt, Eccles. 5. 11, 12.

The greatest Crowns have Thorns as well as Jewels in them, a glorious Scepter
is also weighty, Magistracy itsself is but an honorable Burden; Great Men are
liable to the Envy of Great Persons; whosoever sits upon the highest Pinnacle of
worldly Honor, is in this more miserable than the meanest, that he is liable
to a greater fall. Contentment is oftener found in a Cottage, than in a Palace;
Quietness is oftener clothed in Rags than Robes; Worldly Pomp and Grandeur,
only make it possible to be more extremely Unfortunate; Happiness is more in
Solitude and Retirement from the busy World, than in the crowded Courts of
Kings.

Agur had much reason on his side, when he preferred a Competency before either
of the Extremes; he deprecated Riches, least being full he should deny God, and
say, Who is the Lord? and poverty; least he should steal, and take the name of
his God in vain, Prove. 30. 9.

He desired rather to steer a middle Course, or to be placed in a middle
Station, than to run the hazard of either of the Extremes; certainly he who is
blessed with a competent Portion of the good Things of this Life, and has a
holy Soul in a healthy Body, is the happiest Man on Earth; he is not seated on
the top of the Mountain so as to fear a Storm, nor in the bottom of the Valley
so as to fear an Inundation, he is not so high as to be afraid of a Fall, nor
so low as to be trampled on; he is not so great as to attract envy, nor so
little as to provoke contempt; he has enough to maintain him while he lives,
and to bury him when he is dead. Again: Abundance exposes Men to many
destructive Lusts; Riches betray Men to Pride, Luxury, Sensuality, Ambition,
and Contempt of God and Religion; the Rich are careful and troubled about many
things, and neglect the one thing needful; they seldom think of God, their
Souls, the invisible World, and a Future Account, because they are well pleased
to continue here; the Pleasures of this World benumb the Powers of the Soul,
exalt Sensual Appetite; render the Way to Heaven more difficult, and dull Men
asleep in a Carnal Security.

4. Abundance of worldly things is of little use to the Soul: They serve only
for the purposes of the Body, (...) be joyful in the day of prosperity:
Religion allows innocent Mirth, and sober Festivals: It is good and comely for
one to eat and drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labor that he takes
under the sun all the days of his life, which God gives him, for it is his
portion: every man also to whom God has given riches and wealth, and has
given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his
labor, this is the gift of God, Eccles. 5. 18, 19.

But then God's Blessing must go with the use of the Creatures, else they
cannot render Life happy and comfortable; he is truly rich, who has God's
Blessing on all that he has, whether he has much or little: A little that a
righteous man has, is better than the riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37. 16. The
blessing of the Lord it makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it, Prove. 10.
22. There is that scatters, and yet increases: and there is that
withholds more than is meet, but it tends to poverty, Prove. 11. 24. When
Daniel had only Pulse to eat, and Water to drink, yet because God blessed his
Meals, his countenance appeared fairer and fatter in flesh, than all the
children which did eat the portion of the King's meat, Dan. 1. 15.

2. The happiness of Humane Life consists in the resignation of our selves, and
all that we have to God.

Then we are truly happy, when we are fully persuaded of the Providence and
All Sufficiency of God, are the Objects of his peculiar Care, and can entirely
give up our selves to his wise Conduct. The only way to satisfy our desires,
is to keep them within bounds: the only way to have our own wills, is to make
God's will our will; he that desires nothing but what pleases God, always
obtains what he desires; it is not possible to bring up worldly things to our
carnal desires; but we may by the assistance of divine Grace bring down our
desires to our present Enjoyments thus did St. Paul, I have learned in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content: I know both how to be abased,
and I know how to abound: everywhere, and in all things I am instructed, both
to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need: I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4. 11.

An unsanctified heart is unsatiable, and he that has unsatiable desires can
never be happy, because he can never obtain his desires. Self-will opposes
God's will, and so can never be satisfied, because God's will contradicts it;
and his will must be done, whether we will or not; God's will overrules all,
and then we obtain our wills, when they are subjected to the will of God. When
God gave the Children of Israel Manna from Heaven, they were not contented with
Angels Food, they murmured against his Providence; an evident demonstration,
that Bread from Heaven will not stop the mouth of an unsanctifi^d Man from
murmuring against God; the unholy, are always unthankful.

Suppose God should spread before us all the Treasures of the World, and give
us liberty to take what we would, could we do better than to refer our selves
to the All-wise God, and desire him to choose for us? If we believe him to be
All-sufficient, Wise, Good, and Faithful, we must conclude him to be fittest to
distribute to every Man his Portion; we cannot be better provided for, because
he knows what is most convenient for us, we cannot be more secure, than under
the guidance of infinite Wisdom; to acquiesce in the will of God, is to
discharge ourselves of all troublesome thoughts, because it is to cast all our
care on him who cares for us: the insufficient Creature is then most
self-sufficient, when it goes out of Self into the All-sufficient Creator; Self
is a vain Idol, that deceives all that depend on it, God is an all-sufficient
Good to all that rely on him, an unreserved Resignation of our selves to God,
is the great ground of true Content, every Dispensation of Providence is
welcome to him who believes, that all good and evil things come from his hand,
and submits his will to the will of God; a will resigned up to God, does not
only submit to him by a passive Patience, but actively concur with his
Providence, believing that state of Life to be best, which God judges fittest.
When we have this Principle of Contentment within our selves, our hearts are at
rest, we are satisfied with the present, and may cheerfully rely on God for the
future; we are then prepared for every Condition of Life; because he whose will
is swallowed up in the will of God, does always choose what God sends: it
sweetens Afflictions, mitigates Sorrows, and increases Joys; when we can
command our desires, a little will serve to render this Life comfortable; in
short, we cannot be happy without content; we cannot be content, unless we have
our wills; we cannot have our wills, any other way, than by making GOD's will
our will, and therefore without a hearty resignation of our selves to God,
Humane Life cannot be happy.

3. The happiness of Humane Life consists in doing good. Riches are good or
evil, as the Man is that enjoys them, they are not laudably good, or criminally
evil in themselves; but we make them good or evil by our management of them;
they are never to be desired, but for those uses for which they were intended;
in a good Man's hands they afford means and opportunities of acting many
excellent Virtues, as Charity, Liberality, and Hospitality; in a wicked Man's
hands they are but the Vigor of Vice, the Fuel of Lust, the Snates of the
Devil, at the best but a Talent wrapped up in a Napkin.

Let us make a good use of God's Blessings, and then we shall be happy here and
hereafter. The end of life is to do good, all comfortable Reflections come from
good Actions; good Works justify our Faith, Charity to the Poor will sanctify
the Blessings of God to us, we cannot do better, than in giving to God what he
has bountifully given us, this is to make an Offering to God, of what others
make an Idol. To do good is to imitate the highest Perfection; to be
Benefactors to the Poor, is to resemble our heavenly Father: But love ye your
enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again, and your reward shall
be great, and ye shall be the children of the highest: for he is kind to the
unthankful, and to the evil: be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is
merciful, Luke 6. 35. It is the Character of Christ the Son of God, That he
went about doing good: let us imitate him, as we have opportunity in doing good
unto all men, especially unto them who are of the household of faith: to do
good, and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased, Heb. 13. 16.

The more good we do, the more peace shall we have in our own Souls, the more
favor with God, the more comfort when we reflect on our past Lives, the more
assurance of Heaven when we come to die, and the greater reward in glory unto
all eternity: Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives
us richly all things to enjoy: that they do good, and that they be rich in good
works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold
on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18.

To do good, is to live up to that Noble End for which we were born, and to act
according to the Dignity of our Beings. He who comes into the World, and goes
out of it again without doing any good, is born in vain, and may be reckoned
rather among the dead than the living; yea, he is as useless as if he had never
been.

Riches are a Talent committed to our charge by God, he expects we should
employ this Talent to good Uses. The Rich are God's Almoners whom he has
chosen to distribute his Bounty. He gave not Riches that Men should rust in
Idleness, and surfeit with Luxury, but that we might have opportunities of
doing good. Nothing can procure a greater Reputation either with God or Man,
than Charity to the Poor; to build an Almshouse is the best way to perpetuate
our Memories; Liberality commands Honor and Respect; the only lawful way to
grow Popular, is to keep an hospitable Table; to cloth the Naked, is to give
the richest Livery; to seed the Hungry, to give drink to the Thirsty, to visit
Prisoners, and redeem Captives, is a glorious and God-like Work.

Doing good does affect the Mind with rational Pleasures, it is a degree of
Heaven to look back upon a Life full of good Works; a reflection upon a good
Action is as grateful to the Soul, as Meat to an hungry Stomach: It was Job's
Comfort in his Adversity, that he was charitable in his Prosperity: I delivered
the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The
blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the windows
heart to sing for joy: I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame, I
was a father to the poor, Job 29. 12, 13.

When God had finished the Works of his Creation, he rested with delight and
satisfaction, when he saw that all that he had done was good: And when we have
served our Generations by doing good, what a pleasure will it be to reflect
upon our past Actions? it will be a Jubilee of Joy to us, when we are going off
the Stage of Life, to be assured we acted our parts well while we were on it.

The increase of worldly riches increases sorrow; the pleasures of Sense are
short-lived, and leave a sting behind; worldly Honor is a Wind that will
either blow a Man down, or puff him up; but good Actions give a sincere Joy,
solid Satisfaction, and a lasting Peace: If thou draw out thy soul to the
hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall thy light rise in
obscurity, and thy darkness shall be as the noonday: and the Lord shall guide
thee continuelly, and satisfy thy soul in draught, and make fat thy bones, and
thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water whose waters
fail not, Is. 58. 10, 11.

Charity (my Honored Countrymen) is the Work of this day; it were not worth
our while to meet, unless in order to collect for the Poor; while we feast, it
is most improper to suffer them to starve. Let us then ennoble our Society by
our generous Charity, let us signalize our selves to our Fellow-Citizens by our
liberal Distributions. Let us give to the Poor in our Health, for Charity on a
dying Bed is not so acceptable to God; it is no great Virtue to give that away,
which we cannot keep any longer, or to surrender that which will be taken from
us by force. If we are charitable in our health, the Poor will pray for us; but
if our Charity does not commence till after Death, their Prayers are vain, and
therefore cannot do us any good; let our own hands be the Executors of our
Charity while we live, and then a Deathbed Charity will be rendered acceptable.

Let us consider the uncertainty of all things in this World, thou who now
aboundest, may shortly be reduced to want. Fortune storms a losty Castle, and
passes over a low Cottage; a blustering Wind shakes the top of a tall Cedar,
while the humble Shrub remains unmoved; an ambitious Mountain that aspires up
to Heaven, is sooner thunderstruck than the Valley. Let then the Rich
sympathize with the Miseries of the Poor, because they are subject to them:
Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which suffer
adversity, as being your selves also in the body, Heb. 13. 3.

4. The happiness of Humane Life consists in a good Conscience toward God and
Man.

Without Peace with God all Temporal Blessings are but Vanity and Vexation of
Spirit; there can be no Calm within, when God is angry without; and when the
Mind is uneasy within, the whole World cannot give the least Contentment. A
good Conscience crowns the Blessings of God with Comfort, it is the Soul's
Health, and the Body's Cordial; the Salt that seasons Earthly Blessings, and
makes them relishable; it gives Joy in Sorrow, Comfort in Afflications, and is
a hearty Friend in the Day of Adverisity. Whether we are Rich or Poor, we can
carry nothing out of the World with us, but a good or an evil Conscience, one
of those will abide with us for ever. Holiness is the life of the Soul, and a
good Conscience its proper Comfort: As he that is in Health will feed on
ordinary Diet with delight, while the sick Stomach loathes the most delicious
Meats, so to a good Conscience the worst Condition is pleasant, but to an evil
Conscience all worldly Pleasures are but vexatious Torments.

A good Man will be contented with much, or with little, or with nothing,
because he finds a full satisfaction in the All-sufficient God. Life is then
happy, when we can look backward without shame, and forward without fear, when
we can expect Death with Comfort, and meet it with Courage: when we can
meditate on the Terrors of Judgment, without being afraid of them, and have a
sense of our Reconciliation with God by Christ. A good Conscience will make our
Beds easy, and our Pillows soft; it will fortify us against the Fears of
Death and Judgment, and revive our Souls, when our Bodies languish under our
last Pangs.

God only, and his Grace content us in every State, God being immutably the
same, he that enjoys him has always enough. In all the Ebbings and Flowings of
the World, a good Man is fixed upon a solid Foundation, because the Object of
his happiness is not subject to change: Godliness with contentment is great
gain: and godliness is profitable to all things, having the promise of the life
which now is, and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8.

Let us not then seek Happiness from the vain and empty World; its Pleasures
are deceitful, fugitive, and fading; its Comforts are allayed with Sorrows, its
Joys are mixed with Grief, its fairest Days have their Clouds to darken them.
The World is of little use to the Soul while it lives in it, and of no use at
all when it goes out of it: it is confined to the Body in this state of
Probation, to prepare itsself for a blessed Eternity, and then to go hence, and
dwell in a World of Spirits; separate Souls have no use of any thing that
worldly Riches can purchase; How then do they debase their Souls who make them
Slaves to their Bodies? How do they undervalue them, who give them away for the
World?

Time is but an Instant if compared with Eternity, our Lives are but a Point,
if compared with the whole Line of Time; our pleasant Hours are but a Moment,
if compared with our whole Lives: What folly is it then to part with our Souls
for fading things which we must leave when we die, and may leave before?
Temporal things are to be used, not enjoyed; God is the Object of fruition, the
World of use; the World may have our hands, God ought to have our whole hearts:
But this I say brethren, the time is short, it remains that both they that
have wives, be as though they bad none; and they that weep, as though they wept
not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoyeed not; and they that buy, as
though they possessed not; and they that use this world, as not abusing it: for
the fashion of this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30.

When the Disciples admired to our Savior the magnificent Buildings of the
Temple, he diverted them with this Consideration: See ye not all these things?
Verily I say unto you, there shall not be left here one stone upon another,
that shall not be thrown down, Mat. 24. 2. So when we are tempted with the
Riches of this World, let us fortify ourselves with this meditation, See ye
not all these things? they shall shortly be found no where, but in the Ashes of
an Universal Dissolution.

To conclude: Let us seek happiness there where only it may be found. God only
is the proper satisfaction of Spirits, the Home of Souls, and the Center on
whom alone they can rest: Let us then present our Hearts to God, make his Will
our Rule, and imitate him in holiness; there is no true happiness without Union
with God by Faith and Love; let us then serve him with pure hearts, adore him
with all the powers of our Souls, meditate upon him, and live to him, and then
when this World shall be dissolved, we shall have a Building of God, a House
not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three Persons and
One Eternal God, be all Honor, Glory, Love, and Adoration, henceforth, and for
evermore, Amen. FINIS.

