The Cry of Blood: OR, THE Horrid Sin of Murder DISPLAYED.
In the true Relation of three several Murders Committed within the compass of
one Week, viz. of Capt. Campbell on the 4th. Mr. -- a Beadle in the Strand, on
the 6th. And of Mr. Baker, commonly called Capt. Baker, on the 7th of this
instant April, 1692. With a particular Account of the Circumstances of each
Tragical Accident.
NOT to trouble the Reader with a Long Preface (which would be as preposterous
as to make a very Large Door to a Little House), it is readily confessed on all
Hands, That amongst all the Sins which corrupt humane Nature is ready to
commit, there is none has so deep a Tincture of Guilt as Murder: And the
Providence of God has not Exerted it self more powerfully in any thing, than in
the frequent and unexpected Discovery of Marthers, when the Actors of that
horrid Crime have thought themselves most secure; yet though several Murders
of late, are not as yet, and perhaps never will be Discovered, undoubtedly the
Persons who committed them, find a Hell in their own Minds, the Stings of
Conscience being equally as terrible as the Looks of an Executioner. But
leaving such Bloody Wretches to the Torments of their own Thoughts, it may
justly be our Wonder and Surprise, that in a Kingdom Governed by such Good
Laws, and in a City Remarkable all over the World, for its Civility and good
Discipline, Murders should yet be so frequent. But Passion, Humor, Interest,
and False Notions of Honor, having blinded the Judgment, no wonder Men run
headlong into Ruin and Destruction. The Truth of which take in these Three
following Relations.

There are Two very Current, and confidently reported Stories of the Occasion
of the Death of the Unfortunate Capt. Campbell; One is, That diverting himself
on Saturday, the Second of this Month, at the Tenniscourt, Mr. Thornicraft, a
Gentleman, late of the Cursitors Office in Chancery Lane, came in as a
Spectator, being very Richly habited (as he always drestout of the common
Rode), and in observing the Play, Capt. Campbell, more than Once or Twice,
called him, My Lord (supposing him no less), which Mr. Thornicraft Resenting as
an Affront, told him, That he might as well call him Squire; for he was no
Lord, nor did he pretend to be any. But Capt. Campbell, whether Designedly, or
through Inadvertency, several times after called him; My Lord, which provoked
him so far, that he struck the Captain with his Cane; upon which Swords were
drawn on both sides, but parted by the Company, a Challenge followed, and in
the Duel, on Monday Morning, the Captain was unhappily Killed. Others again
relate it thus, and it seems much more probable, That Mr. Thornicraft Drinking
with Capt. Campbell, and several other Gentlemen, at a Tavern at Charing Cross,
when the Reckoning was called for, each Gentleman throwing down his Clubh,
there happened to be a Brass Shilling in the Sum, which was returned; Each
Gentleman in the Company flatly denied it to be his, till at last Capt.
Campbell fixed it very peremptorily upon Mr. Thornicraft; which he Resenting as
a very great Affront, that he should be thought to put off Brass-Money,
Challenged the Captain, Fought him, and Killed him.

Whatever the Provocation was, certain it is, That on Monday, the 4th of this
Month, they met at the Duke of Ormond 's Head in the Hay-Market, where they
drank a Pint of Young-Hock, and eat a Dish of Soop together, which while they
were doing, a third Person, Capt. Campbell's Friend came in; but after a little
time they took Coach, and drove to Hide-Park-Corner, and there alighted. As
they walked along the Park (the Captain having before assured Mr. Thornicraft,
that his Friend was not designed as his Second), this third Person endeavored
to moderate the Matter, and that he would expend a Round Sum of Money, rather
than either of them should hazard their Lives about a Brass-Shilling, but Mr.
Thornicraft was deaf to all the Gentleman could say, swearing, He would not be
pist upon for a Coward, but fight he would. To a convenient Place they came,
both Drew, and after Two or Three Passes, the Captain dropped; and Mr.
Thornicraft asking the Gentleman, Whether he would with his Sword revenge his
Deceased Friend's Blood? Which he declining, Mr. Thornicraft, with all speed
possible, leapt over the Pales, and is supposed to be gone directly for
Flanders.

The Second Murder, which had not so much Gallantry in it, was thus:
Lieutenant VV -- b, a Gentleman belonging to Their Majesty's Fleet, with two
other Gentlemen, having disposed the day to Mirth, met at the Greyhound in the
Strand, on Wednesday the 6th of this Month, where they Dined Plentifully and
Drank very Liberally; after Dinner Mr. L -- d, their Landlord, would needs
Present them with his Bottle, which they would not Accept of unless they might
Drink it in a Coach; the Motion was agreed to, and Coach called, into which
they all Entered, and Drank briskly about; but the Coachman being a little
Impertinent and Saucy, about their Stay, Lieutenant VV -- b leaps out of the
Coach, and to Chastise the Fellows Insolence gives him a Cut or two upon the
Head with his Sword, which occasioned a great Tumult in the Street; to Appease
which Disorder, the Beadle of the Duchy Liberty came, endeavoring to Quiet
the Disorder Received a Thrust quite through the Body, of which he Instantly
Dyed; the Lieutenant and his two Friends were carried before a Justice of
Peace, who Committed them to Newgate, where they are to Remain till next
Sessions.

The Third Murder was Committed the very next day, being Thursday, the 7th of
this Instant April; the Manner take as follows. One Mr. Baker, by some called
Captain Baker, by others Bully Baker, having past through a variety of Good and
Bad Fortunes, had the Luck about four Years since, to Marry a Widow of a very
good Estate, with whom he Lived in Love and Decency; but it seems the Lady
having Disobliged several of her Relations by this (as they thought scandalous)
Match: About a Year since some Law Suits began to Commence, which were
Prosecuted with that Violence, that Mr. Baker was forced to Abscond and Live
Incognito. His last Lodgings being in Channel-row, Westminster; he having the
day above mentioned been Drinking pretty hard with a Gentleman, his Son in Law;
about seven in the Evening they Landed at White Hall Stairs; at which very
instant of Time, a Gentleman and Two Ladies Landed; and in going along Mr:
Baker made Love in a very Rude manner to one of them; the Gentleman, their
Friend, desiring him to forbear; but he still persisting in his Temper,
Swearing he would have her from him; the Gentleman Drew, and obliged Mr. Baker
to do the like, which he did; and though he understood a Sword very well, yet
his Head not being in right order, after two or three Passes, he was run
through the Breast, of which Wound he Immediately Dyed; the Gentleman who
Killed him, making his Escape. His Body was Removed to the Sutlers by the
Horse-Guard, and his Son in Law detained that Night in the Porter's Lodge, he
being supposed to have done the Murder; but next Morning the Coroner sitting
upon the Body, and the Gentleman Examined of his Knowledge of the Matter, he
gave some Imperfect Account of a Quarrel between his Father in Law and a
Gentleman; and it being proved he had too much Liquor about him at that time to
be Guilty of any Malice, he was Discharged.

Upon the whole, How reasonable is that Prayer in the Church Littany, From
Battle, Murder, and Sudden Death, Good Lord Deliver us.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1692.


