A CRY FOR A Right Improvement OF All our MERCIES, and all those WORKS of
wonder that God has wrought among us: With some Cautions touching the
Election of the (Expected) New Representative.

Humbly presented by a friend to the Public.

Psalm. 98.1. O sing unto the Lord a new song, for he has done mavelous
things. His right hand and his holy arm has gotten him the Victory. Psalm.
47.5. God is gone up with triumph, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet. Psalm.
68.4. Sing unto God, Sing praises to his name, Extol him that rides upon the
heavens, by his Name Jah, Allelujah. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Brewster, and
Greg: Moule, and are to be sold at the three Bibles in Paul's Churchyard, at
the West End thereof. MDCLII.

A Cry for a right Improvement Of all our MERCIES.
Allelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent is taking unto him his great power, and
reigns.
HOW evidently, how eminently has he reigned in the Field, in England,
Scotland, and Ireland! How great is his Name, how dreadful, and yet how
gracious is his presence! Yea, how glorious in power is his right hand there,
where he dashed in pieces the enemy, where he brake the Arrows of the Bow, the
Shield, the Sword, and the Battle, and none of the men of might have found
their hands: when the Lord arose to judgment for the meek of the earth, and
made his judgment to be heard from heaven, through the world; O ye, All ye
Servants and saved ones of the Lord, be ye greatly engaged, and abundantly
enlarged in real praises. Vow vows, and pay them unto the Lord our God, who
shall, who has cut off the spirit of Princes, and is terrible to the Kings of
the earth; who will be exalted among the heathen, who will be exalted in the
earth, who is more glorious and excellent then the Mountains of Prey.

Who not only in our first, and our second war, but also in this our third most
difficult and dangerous contest, wherein the Enemy and old Deceiver played his
Masterpiece, contending for the old interest of the Dragon, the Beast, and the
false Prophet, under the most specious pretenses of all that is sacred; to
dazzle and deceive, and draw into the confederacy so many of our poor brethren,
and to deceive (even totally) if it were possible, the very elect.

Who I say not only in those former, but in these latter also, has not
despised the prayer of the humble, but has given in such a gracious return
unto the prayers of his poor people (so much despised by their now subdued
brethren) As again a third time to restore England into a real (and Scotland
and Ireland into a very hopeful) capacity to lead a peaceable and quiet life,
in all godliness and honesty. That the Lamb may lie down in peace with the
Wolf, and the Leopard, the Beer, and the Lion; that the hand of violence may
cease in all the Mountain of his holiness; and that none that fear him in
truth, or are sound in Fundamentals in Religion, may be destroyed or hurt in
all his holy Mountain.

Now let all that are real And as for all formal, false hearted Hypocrites, his
hand will find them out.
servants unto the God of our salvation, (that guides us with strength, and
crowns us with his saving health) let them be joyful in glory, let them sing
unto the Lord, and bless his name, and declare his salvation from day to day.
Let the redeemed of the Lord say, and do so, even fear the Lord, and serve him
in truth, and with all the heart: for consider how great things he has done
for us. And what the Lord our God does now require of us; even to do justly,
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with our God.

Now O dear Sirs, the Lord help us, he has laden us with mercies, and how
does that charge us with Duty! God has now put us upon the trial, and trusted
us with a vast charge, who is sufficient to answer it? what a price is in our
hands? a blessed price: how much may it be improved (through his grace) toward
the promoting of that great design of heaven, in ruining the man of sin,
furthering of Reformation, and advancing the Scepter of Jesus Christ in the
Church, and in the Kingdoms of this world, which shall become our Lords. O that
it may be, O let it be so: so shall we have joy, and gladness indeed; and our
brethren of Scotland that worship God in truth, and any Scots or Irish that
hereafter shall do so, shall bless God heartily that ever they were beaten by
us, as some honest quondam Cavaliers have done, and do.

Let now the worst and more incorrigible be made exemplary, by feeling the hand
of Justice. But let all that are capable of mercy, see our earning bowels
toward them, in the concernments both of body and soul.

O that they may have cause to bless God for his mercy in subjecting them unto
us! Let Us study to exalt God in the eyes of men and Angels, and especially in
the eyes and hearts of these poor deluded souls; upon whose ruins he has
exalted or established us: Is not Gods ends in smiting, and depressing, that he
may boar men's ears to receive Instruction, and cause them to turn from their
Enterprises, that he may cause their life to see the light? O that we may do
like God! let such be our ends, and the travel of our souls.

God has made us our Scottish Brethrens Masters, (notwithstanding all
difficulties, discouragements, and earnest and constant prayers, with Fastings
and appeals of their Friends to Heaven) He might have made them Ours; and we
know the duty of Masters, and the manner of Good ones, the Lord make us such.

Indeed, their deserts are very ill, but so were the deserts of Joseph's
Brethren; and we know our Saviors Rule, viz. To love enemies, do good to them
that hate us; and we must be like our Father which is in Heaven, in mercy.

Indeed, they have forfeited all their Interest in our Solemn League and
Covenant, for Unity and Amity, and endevor to promote their wealth, and can now
challenge nothing of us: But God has not forfeited his interest in us nor in
them, nor disengaged us from seeking, even in all self denying ways, to promote
his interest in them.

His Ayms in all his ways, are purely to sanctify Gods Name, to advance the
Scepter of Holiness and Righteousness in the hand of Jesus Christ, and the
accomplishment of that holy and righteous will of his; from which, if we turn
aside unto carnal Interests, we lose our selves, and our Interest in our God:
The Lord help us to serve the Interest of his Name and Scepter, and to do his
will, with all our might, and in the simplicity of our hearts.

God has great things to do in the world in these later days; and he seems to
have laid the foundation of the great things of our Age among us in these
Nations; and if we fall in, and comply with him; how happy, how happy are we:
But if we shall either by injustice, oppression, or want of bowels of mercy, or
by prophanness, or accursed self-seeking, or slothfulness, and nonprosecution
of his ends, make frustrate his Ayms in these beginnings, how dreadful will our
account be? Has any Nation under the whole Heaven such a price, such a tallent
in their hands?

God by furnishing us with such Instruments, as the better spirited of our
Soldiery, and many others like to them in single-heartedness to the best
Interest, and single-ey'd-cleer sightedness, and most heroic resolution;
together with the fame of Gods doings gone forth into all the world; and by his
mighty encouragements to our faith and confidence, by the eminent evidences of
his presence with us, and of his purposes to go through stitch with his work;
and by removing the great external impediments out of the way, has put into
our hands the greatest tallent that is in the hand of any Nation under Heaven:
And if we improve it at home and abroad, for real advantage to the interest of
the Giver, then blessed are we; but if not, then how much the more shall we be
accursed, Heb. 6.7, 8. And take the unprofitable servant, and bind him, etc.
Cast him into outer darkness.

God has once more subdued under us, all that rise up against us, and has
suppressed the Suppressor. Take we now warning by former harms, procured by
Principles of division and suppression. Let all that fear God and love his
Name, be now of one heart, and maintain the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace; not setting up Uniformity against unity of spirit; not Circumstantials
against Essentials. Let Us allow Jesus Christ to be the apportioner of the
measures, or proportioner of his own gifts, unto persons and Societies; and let
us own all that are his, and all that is his in them, and not disown, as not
persons, so not Communities, because not of our length and breadth (whether
below us, or above us:) let us rejoice that Gods name is sanctified, and
Christ's kingdom advanced in any measure, in any Societies or Assemblies, though
not of our own way; and let us desire and pray that it may be so; and that in
all the dwelling places of Mount Zion, and in all the Assemblies thereof, he
will create a cloud and smoke by day, and the bright shining of a flaming fire
by night, and prosper his own work.

And in case of offenses, let us apply to Christ's direction and Authority, and
not to the Dragons power or means; and let the help of Caesar's sword in matters
religious, be craved only against such as are inconsistent with true
Christianity, and only when the Church has done all it can, and the delinquent
is become as a heathen man, Mat. 18. But let swords be beaten into plowshares,
and spears into pruning hooks, and let none hurt or destroy in all the Mountain
of his holiness.

And take heed of any more breaches; shut the Devil out of doors; Remember, a
Kingdom divided cannot stand, has not stood; two of them have been through
division utterly demollished amongst us in these last ten years; true, their
Ruins has been, or is, advantage to the interest of God, in the promoting his
designs, and in the present peace and security to his little ones; but that is
no thank to those that gave the occasion, nor may we do evil that good may come
thereof; therefore, let us have peace amongst our selves.

God has promised his special presence (as the God of love and peace) among
his people united, and not otherwise: Let us now therefore with mutual
embraces, in peace and love, sit down under this shadow (even the shadow of his
saving health stretched over us in him who is his saving Arm, and our Lord and
SAVIOVR) with great delight, and let his fruit be sweet unto us, and let the
high praises of God be in our mouths.

And as breaches and division should be avoided under greatest peril, among the
sound principled (as for others, there is no peace to the wicked, and we must
separate the precious from the vile, the whole from the infectious, sick and
unsound.)

So also must such a spirit of malicious prejudice, and sensoriousness, which
causes Ridged, and Crabbed severity toward brethren Conscientiously
discenting, and differing in Judgment, and practices (yet sound in
fundamentals, and eminently pious) by all means be avoided; Seeing Conscience,
pure Conscience, being Gods Vice-King, may not be forced, nor ridgedly dealt
with, when it really eyes God, ( though erroneous, if not in fundamentals, and
things directly destructive.) God accepts no forced, none but voluntary service
from this creature wherein he has placed this Vice-King, whom he will have
guided by no Rule, but by the light of his own truth, Iradiating the
understanding, and by or through it, directing and regulating the Conscience.
And the Conscience that purely keeps to this Rule, is a tender thing; and is
certainly one of those little ones, which our heavenly father will not have to
be offended.

Also take we heed of Pride, and base self-seeking. That the hearts of none be
proudly lifted up above their brethren; and that we seek not great things for
our selves.

Remember we what was evidently the cause of that division, bringing that
total ruin that is come* both upon that Monarchical Kingdom in the house of
the Stuarts; And also upon that other power, which after Resided in the hands
of Lords and Commons, united with the Scots, and was eminently reputed
Presbyterian; and this latter of the Scots alone, being but a branch of the
other.

Was it not clearly pride causing contention; and self-seeking to Monopolize
the great things of the earth, that they might Rule as Lords alone? And that
malicious, ridged, crabbed spirit of severity toward discenting brethren? In
one word; was it not their balking the Interest of heaven, (which looks with an
indifferent eye upon all that are servants to it, so far as they are servants
to it) and setting up the Carnal interest of a party, in prejudice thereunto:
let the Conscience of the unbyassed Spectator speak.

Take we heed therefore of clashing with the Interest of heaven, but be we sure
we advance it with all our might, and with all our soul.

For, all Revolutions, and Changes whatsoever, but especially in the
habitations of the Church, (and more especially in these last days, wherein he
is causing those eminent Allelujahs to be said and sung unto his Name.) Are for
the perfecting of his glorious work and praises for, and in the Church or
Churches of Christ: And if any person or people empowered for this end, will not
bow and buckle hereunto; he will break them in pieces, or lay them by, and take
up others.

And in expression of our gratitude, why should not annual days be assigned in
thankful remembrance, with command that Psalms of praise be sung unto our God,
and the people stirred up to a thankful remembrance of all those never to be
forgotten works of wonder, from 1639. hitherto?

And how becoming were it, for the Governors of a people so wonderfully saved,
owned and blessed, to appoint some to draw up a full, but very brief
Representation of the most remarkable mercies toward us, with effectual
Arguments and Excitations to thankfulness in heart and tongue, but especially
in life and conversation; and in going one before another in the example of a
real Reformation, according to the vows of God that are upon us. And that we
often revive and renew all our holy Vows and Engagements to our God, in the
time of our distress.

And whiles that on the one hand, we take heed to avoid the strained and
corrupt (that I say not Jesuited) constructions of our Covenants or
Engagements, that would be obtruded upon us (as that any Persons, Family,
Society, or Constitution should by the Covenant be exempt from Justice, and so
should have commission to serve the Devil, as much as they would or could; or
that any thing should be the Rule of our Refomation, Civil or Religious; but
the Word of God and moral Righteousness:) So on the other hand, to take special
heed that none of our plain, clear, and unquestionable Covenants and
Engagements to walk with God, and with our brethren in ways of Holiness and
Moral justice, and love and mercy, in our several places and callings, be
forgotten by us, under greatest peril.

And being so drawn up and approved, then to set it forth by the Authority, and
with the Countenance of the Parliament of England: And the rather, that the
world may take notice, That whatsoever may be profanely insinuated by him that
affirms the Covenant (without distinction) to be an old Almanac out of date,
(which only some part thereof, referring to that which is not, is) or falsely
suggested by such as endeavor to impose their lewd constructions upon us: yet
that in truth the Parliament and Commonwealth of England are not unmindful of
any Covenants or Engagements that really and indeed lie upon us.

And one thing may here be moved, being not so meet to be moved by, or not so
well taken from that public hand, viz. That sure our mercies carry this
Obligation (to us) in the very face of them; like those to Israel by the hand
of Moses and Aaron.

That we ought in gratitude and obedience to God our Savior, to lead a
peaceable and quiet life, in all godliness and honesty under that Government,
and those Governors, by, or through, and under which, and whom God has by such
a mighty hand, and out stretched arm, working wonders for us, in all these
Lands, put us into such a happy posture, wherein we now stand, and for which
and wherein, he is so greatly to be feared, served, and had in honor. And I
humbly crave leave to offer the ensuing cautions, viz. That if that
self-denying resolution, for a New Representative (at this time so dangerous)
take place, what care and exact caution must be had, and given in the
qualification both of the choosers and of the chosen, so as may prevent the
utter frustration of all Gods ends (as to man's eye) intended, in all that his
wonder-working hand has wrought; and that his wisdom and mercy has entrusted
us with: which, if care be wanting, may be endangered.

And yet also, that those that are made incapable either in the one or the
other, may be clearly given to understand, that it is not out of any malice
toward them, (though deserved by them) but of mere duty and faithfulness,
which should be notoriously violated, and Gods anger provoked, if when God by
his Almighty arm and Council, has suppressed and disappointed their principles
and purposes, so contradictory to his promises and purposes, of latter days
accomplishments, we should now put it to vote with them, whether Gods purposes
or theirs shall stand? and be further let to know, that when time and good
instructions through grace shall wear off the antipathy from off their spirits,
they shall then most gladly enjoy the same privileges which any do.

It might seem weak to propound expedients in a business of such vast
concernment, and about which men of so great wisdom are engaged; and not to do
it full and effectually. Therefore I do not say I propound expedients (it being
a work fit for those of greatest wisdom, and for a small volume alone.) But in
few words, and very imperfectly to give a hint or two of what is in present
thoughts, As to say, That none should be eligible unto the New Representative,
that has acted in opposition to the Parliament, either when consisting of
Lords and Commons, or in opposition to the Parliament and Commonwealth of
England as it now consists. And that only such should be eligible, that are in
Church Fellowship with some one or other Congregation, sound in fundamentals of
Religion, (such as shall be named) and holy and regular in their practices;
according to such general marks as shall be expressed.

And also that did evidently appear in purse and person (in arms, or in
Councels and voluntary Contributions) engaged against the late invading Scots.
And that every Person Elected shall within -- days after such Election (or
before received in Parliament) present a certificate of this latter, under the
hands of the chief officers of the County or Hundred, City or Ward; and a
Certificate of his soundness in fundamentals, and Godly and regular
conversation, in Fellowship with a Congregation sound, etc. the said
Congregation owning and being owned by 7. 10. 15 -- Congregations, so and so
consisting, and coming up to such marks as shall be expressed in the act; I say
a Certificate under the hands of the Elders or chief Officers of so many of
those Congregations as shall be named. Which yet, together with the most
carefully composed oath to be taken by the Representees: nor yet any other
expedient can secure us, without the special help of heaven. Therefore solemn
seeking the face of God upon the choosing day, and place or places, cannot be
blamed.

And further, That if there shall be any resolution to make void and null the
Laws and Customs, requiring the payment of Tithes in the form and manner as is
now used, and to make provision for Ministers maintenance in some other way:
That then all care may be taken, that no disservice may be unto the work which
Tithes ought to maintain; nor unto the Commonwealth, by the discharge of Tithes
for less then the full value thereof: the Tithes being as due to that public
Interest unto which by Laws or Customs they have been reserved, upon the
settling at the Conquest and ever since, (and how long before it matters not) as
the Land is unto the present several Possessors thereof; who, or else their
Ancestors, whether Normans, Saxons or Britains, some time since the Conquest,
or at the Conquest, became possessed or repossessed of them, either by the gift
of Kings of England since, or of the Conqueror then, (for some considerations
or other) or by purchase with money: and all and every way, as to all Lands,
Tythable, I say, they became possessed or repossest of them, with that charge,
duty, or (if we may so call it) Encombrance upon them, viz. The Tithes,
payable, as by Law or Custom was due and payable: So that if we should remit
them for less them the value, we shall then clearly give away from the Interest
which they are designed unto, unto the Land-holders of the Land; which how
pious or equal it is, judge.

And the same is to be said in the case of wardships and wardlands (but as
reserved to the use of another Interest.) Its true, its not equal that a small
piece of Wardland should make all other Lands liable, nor that Orphans should
be inthraled as Wards were used to be inthralled. But most equal it is, that
that Land, which was received, either by gift or by purchase, As Ward land,
viz. with that charge or incombrance upon it, viz. as liable to bring in such
advantage to the Crown or whom the Crown would give it unto, in such and such
cases, it being but as the reserve of a Fine or Heriot unto the Lord of the
Manor; most equal it is, that if it shall be discharged of those incombrances,
they should then purchase the said discharge at a valuable Rate, giving a
valuable consideration to the State.

And further, I humbly crave leave to offer, That though it be certainly the
duty of all Ministers, when the state of things shall so require, by their own
hand labor, or industry (as they are able) to administer unto the necessicies
of their own, and of others also; And the duty of every Christian of every
Profession, Trade, and practice, in his place and station, according to his
abilities, and the call of opportunity and necessity, to hold forth the word of
life, and for the inlightning of the world, to let his light shine before men;
and causing that light to shine forth which has shined into his heart, to give
the light of the knowledge etc Yet it being also certainly a duty upon us to
make provision according as the Lord has ordained, That he that preaches the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel. That therefore provision should be made for
a comfortable Maintenance, for so many public, standing, or constant
preachers, as are necessary in every part of this Commonwealth.

And seeing we that have received so many eminent and signal mercies, must
therefore do something eminent and Signal; That therefore we not only do what
remains to be done, for the propagation of religion, to the batten parts of
great Britain; But also appoint a Committee to consider of something to be
done toward the advancing of Gods Gospel work in other Lands.

And I humbly crave leave yet further to offer to consideration; whether it
might not be an acceptable service to God, and much for the spiritual interest
of his people, if some way were thought on, to provoke Church societies, sound
in fundamentals, and well savoring of holiness, to show all fair respect each
to other, though of different strains in Religion; and to watch over each
other, and over all Church Members in their neighborhood, to what
congregations soever they belong: and upon any offense, not reformed, upon
admonition or reproof, to acquaint the Congregation whereof the party is. And
also some way to provoke all Christians to join themselves unto some one
society, well savouring of holiness, and sound in fundamentals, and practicing
accordingly.

And that to encourage and provoke thereunto; that some privileges may be
intayled upon it: as, that the being in Church Fellowship with a Society, sound
in such fundamentals, as shall be named, and practicing accordingly, being free
from scandals, according to such rules as shall be set forth; and consisting of
7. 10. 15. 20. Families at least (as shall be Judged meet) and the said society
or Congregation owning and being owned by 7. 10. 15. Congregations so and so
qualified; I say, that such Fellowships should make men capable of such offices
and places of trust in the Commonwealth (unto such a limitation as shall be
named) which others shall not be capable of; And this would also something the
better secure the Commonwealth in the choice of men to places of trust.

And to provoke all Ministers and Congregational Churches, with all care and
faithfulness, to read and expound holy Scriptures constantly: and to Chatechise
in the grounds of Christian Religion, in their respective Congregations.

And might it not be reasonable, as to prevent uncleaness, that it should be
penal for any to be in company of a woman in a suspicious way: not having such
reasons to show, as shall be satisfactory to a Jurye and might not the Law,
that suffers the starving of poor debtors in prison, that have nothing to pay
whiles their Families starve for want of them* and men of estates to lie in
Prison and cheat their Creditors, be reformed? And might not the Law for the
execution of thieves, except notorious ones, be abrogated, and some other
course thoughton, that would be worse in their thoughts then death; but more
agreeable unto Gods Law to Israel?

And if not in these things, Then wherein shall we express our real
thankfulness for all that we have received? What shall we render unto God for
all his benefits toward us? Wherein shall we express our resolved readiness to
pay our vows unto God? and that we are really and in truth, servants unto him,
who has saved our souls from death, our eyes from tears, our feet from
falling; and has put new songs of praise into our mouths. Let the more able
Party and clear sighted show; let the wisdom of the wise find out wherein, that
it may be done; That the actions of our hands may bear witness of the reality
of our hearts, in singing ALLELVJAH.

Psalm. 47.6, 7. Sing praises to our God, sing praises: sing praises to our
King, sing praises. For God is the King of all the Earth, etc.

Ps. 47.3. He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet.
Rev. 17.14. For he is LORD of LORDS and KING of KINGS, and they that are with
him are called, and chosen, and faithful.

FINIS.

