Humble Proposal For the Relief of DEBTORS, And speedy Payment of their
CREDITORS.

London Printed in the Year 1676.

An humble PROPOSAL for the relief of DEBTOVRS, and speedy payment of their
CREDITOVRS.
HOw considerable a part of the Gentry of this Kingdom groans under the Burden
of Incombrance, without any Prospect of clearing or not increasing their Debts,
is too manifest: Yet it may not be improper briefly to observe, how this evil
affects all Parties, as well Creditours as Debtours, The Creditour upon a good
Mortgage seems finally secure; But in the mean time, without actual Entry,
suffers both in the want of his present Income, and long forbearance of his
principal Sum, minority of times intervening: Having entered and being in
Possession, he bocomes the Borrowers Servant to manage his Estate upon uneasy
terms liable to Account: Improve he cannot prudently, nor scarce duly repair;
and whilst the Property is thus unsettled, the Estate is so far from
Improvement, (how capable soever) that frequeutly it sinks in Value, if not to
the Lenders damage, (which sometines happens) yet to the great hurt of the
Owner and Commonwealth. Seldom he commands his Debt without mutual trouble and
vexation, (by reason of the many difficulties and obstructions in the presant
sale of Land) which is too apt to beget ill Neighborhood and unkindness
betwixt Friends. Yet this is the Lendors best condition, for Creditours upon
Personal Security are more dangerously obnoxious to the unhandsom shifts and
practices of too many Borrowers. With Debtours it is much worse, especially if
their Debts overtop their Credit: Like Consumptive Persons, they converse with
nothing but daily and sensible decay, condemned to perpetual Bondage, from
which certainly many of them would ransom themselves by selling almost at any
Rate, but are continually frustrated and Tantalized: Either those that would
Purchase of them cannot command their Sums, (the case of too many fair
Creditours) or the Land not being for the present letten, or not letten to
satisfaction; no particular thereof will be accepted without ruinous
abatements, or some unreasonable Covenants and Conditions are imposed by severe
Purchasers, or some needless seruples raised by difficult Counsel, or some
mischievous tricks and delays contrived by extorting Interlopers: Upon these
and the like accounts it happens, that fair Estates are swallowed up, Just
Debts unsatisfyed, Civil Creditours driven to rigorous and extreme courses,
Well-meaning Debtours insolvent, Sureties exposed by their principals, Due
Payment (the lifeblood of Commerce) obstructed, the Land it self neglected
and disparaged, the Bad enriched by the spoils of Good men.

So spreading and contagious is the Nature of Debt, especially where Land is
cheap, Markets falling, and the payment of Rents generally casual; that we
cannot with Reason hope, the vast Bulk of our presant Encumbrance will ever
clear it self, or be cleared by any gradual means; Rather we have cause to fear
the further progress of it, not visibly to be prevented without some integral
Expedient: Wherefore it is humbly proposed; That all Debtours (or at least
those that have borrowed upon real Security) may be allowed to tender their
Creditours Payment in Lands of equal value, at eighteen or twenty years
Purchase, prized in the particular with such moderate abatement of former
Rents, where Farms are unletten, as shall be judged reasonable, with reference
to the fall of Lands; which payment Creditours refusing, shall from
thenceforth, claim no Vse-money: And that Creditours, after legal demand and
lapse of convenient time, may have such payments decreed of Course; The Methods
and Circumstances of Proceeding being left to the Wisdom of Authority.

Seldom is any Expedeient so adjusted, as to comply with all concernments;
should our Laws be tried by that Touchstone, there would not want Objectors
against the best of them; It is therefore held sufficient, if they be
profitable to the Majority, oppressive to none, and if upon the whole matter
the good from them expected outvie the evil surmised, which herein will easily
appear by comparing the Motives with the Objections.

For Motives, it is manifest, that many honest Borrowers will thereby be
speedily disenthralled, whose condition otherwise seems almost desperate;
Creditours, who now complain of fatal disappointment, will command their just
Debts: The Land (which is our only real and considerable fund) will not only
recover, but greatly advance its price, when there shall be few Sellers upon
Extremity, or Purchasers upon Advantage to beat down its value; Credit will
become generally sound, and the high rate of Interest (supported by
Encumbrance) may then indeed sink of it self without a Law; much of our Stock
(now hurtfully managed at Use) will be naturally turned into Trade and
Improvement; And thousands of Brokers and other Factours of Extortion may
hereafter employ their approved Abilities to the Service and Benefit of their
Country.

The principal Objections are these; 1. It supposes an Arbitrary Proceeding
without Precedent, and Powers of difficult Execution. 2. What if the Title
should prove intricate? 3. The Land may be remote or inconvenient to the
Lender. 4. Lenders may in some Cases pay more than the present Value. 5.
Borrowers will complain of being abridged in their Equity.

To the first it is answered; That whatsoever is enacted by common consent in
Parliament, should not be counted Arbitrary, though it were without Precedent;
But are there not Precedents for deciding of important Causes in a summary way?
How many such Commissions have we lately known? The late rigorous Act for the
Rebuilding of London is instar omnium to this purpose: Neither indeed can such
Authorities be here presumed to miscarry, their Rules being so easily
ascertained.

To the second, The title in Mortgages is presumed already to have been
scanned, and may in many other Cases easily be cleared; If the fault be on the
Borrowers part, the Lender may then fairly refuse, but Valeat quantum valere
potest. However if the former Security be continued to make the Sale, the
Lender cannot be prejudiced.

To the third and fourth, Why should the Creditour decline the purchase of that
Land for its remoteness, which he accepted in Mortgage, or which was at least
the fund of that Credit which he gave the Borrower, the Profits whereof should
therefore competently answer his Interest without such overplus of Security as
is now adays demanded? Can he assign any real difference betwixt Lending and
Purchasing, save the avoiding of just Duties? Let him then content himself with
the Advantages he has so long enjoyed, and consider the Borrowers Hordships,
who having all this while paid double Taxes, (viz.) both his own and his
Creditours too, is thereby not only plunged into Debt, but again more
grievously punished in the abortive Sale of his Inheritance: Whereas the
Creditour has indeed no cause to distrust his Bargain, the value whereof will
be near doubled by the general clearing of Encumbrance, and equality of future
Burdens.

To the fist, No Borrower can justly complain of that Rigor, which after
default by him incurred, does not impair, but much improve his present
Condition.

That this is not a mere Project, nor altogether New, what higher Evidence can
be offered, than that memorable Edict provided by the Wisdom of Julius Caesar,
(in times not unparallel to ours for Incombrance of Estates) related by
Suetonius, and thus Englished in the Translation of that famous Historian? As
touching Money lent out, when he had quite put down the expectation of
Cancelling Debts, (a thing that was often moved) He decreed at length, that all
Debtours should satisfy their Creditours in this manner; namely, by an
Estimate made of their Possessions, according to the worth and value as they
Purchased them before the Civil War, deducting out the Principal whatsoever
had been paid, or set down in the Obligation for the Use. By which Condition
the fourth part well near of the Money credited forth was lost.

It was the known Policy of the Roman State, after Civil Wars, impartially to
quit and cancel all manner of Debts; Hard measure one would think, for innocent
Persons, as it were, to forfeit not the Use only but the Principal; yet private
Interest, it seems, must stoop to buoy up the Public: They considered, That
the Riches of a Country, nothing is so Essential as the value of Land, to the
value of Land nothing so destructive as great Encumbrance; that by Civil War,
not only former Debts were constantly augmented, but new ones vastly
multiplied; That by reason of public distractions, the Rents of Land became
generally desperate, and even the Land it self for the present much embased in
its Price: Creditours, in the mean time, scaping the whole brunt, and thereby
every where supplanting Freeholders. They therefore aptly applied the quitting
of Use-money to balance the loss of Rents: The discharge of Principal Debts to
repair the decay of Lands and Landlords. Thus were the common sufferings fairly
distributed, and the seeds of future evils at once extirpated; there being
otherwise such a Malignity in the Nature of Civil War, that it commonly
leaves behind it a dangerous Poison and ferment. Upon such former Practice the
expectation of Cancelling Debts at that time seems to have been grounded.

From this excellent Edict, it is for our purpose remarkable, 1. That Lands
were then strictly prised to the Creditour according to their former values,
without any allowance for the fall of Rents. 2. That it was judged a modest
relief to Debtours, and rather in favor of Creditours, for them to quit only
all their Use-money incurred during the Civil War. 3. That the Law here cited
being a Law of public benefit and private Justice, was yet ordained by a
Heathen Conqueror, (not to say Usurper) and therefore cannot but better become
a lawful Christian Government? 4. That this Law seems mainly to have gratified
the Nobility, who yet were most of them sworn Enemies to Caesar: Whereas such a
Law in our time, would redress and oblige, not barely his Majesty's Loyal
Subjects, but the most approved assertours of the Cause, thereby chiefly
encumbered in their Estates.

FINIS.

