CULPEPER REVIVED FROM THE GRAVE, To discover the Cheats of that grand
Impostor, CALLED AVRVM POTABILE. Wherein is declared the grand Falsities
thereof, and abuses thereby.

Published to undeceive the people, and to stop the violent current of such a
mischievous Design.

Printed in the month of August 1655.

Culpepper Revived.
TAntara rara, Tantara rara, Pray Gentlemenwalk in and sen the beginning, A
very fine show upon my credit. Here is a woman that cures all Diseases with a
strange miraculous thing called Aurum Potabile; and truly she is not much
unlike the -- of Babylon who with her curious golden Potion, has endeavored
the delusion of many people. But in the mean time Gentlemen, what will become
of them that call Hypocrites Golden Outsides, for it may be now their fortune
to have golden insides also. Troth 'twas a rare project to enrich the Nation,
to make every man a walking West Indies; or else because every man is said to
be a Microcosm, to take care that they should not want golden Mines in their
bellies. But, can a poor silly woman do all this? No, she has two
Apple-squires, both fellowworkes, sharers with her: the one, a Gentleman
Physician, who has no more wit, but to defile his name with such a Quacking
Bill as he has fixed them to; and to venture all his credit to get a belief in
others of such a Legendary story as this woman tells. The other calls himself
by the name of F. of whom it is reported, that he was grown such a Chemical
Mercurialis, that he began a practice of extracting out of peoples houses by
force, but being discovered is fled from the punishment of his crime, which
makes me of opinion that when the stock of Gold which he pilfer'd is spent then
the Trade will fail. But as for you Dr. Aurum Potabile, or whatever other name
you are or shall be known by, and laughed at, pray take heed, for though the
woman be not so strong as Samson, yet she will certainly pull down your credit
if you let her lean any longer upon your shoulders. But hark what a noise it
makes; sure it is boiling: The virtues, use, and variety of operations of the
true and Philosophical AVRVM POTABILE pray stir um a little, lest these virtues
sees over. But what a coile is here about nothing; as much as to say the
virtues and of a true and Philosophical thing that never was in being. I
thought where we should find Aurum Potabile among the Metaphysics. They begin
Courteous and Friendly Reader, and truly he must be much their courteous friend
that credits them. And are not they in a pitiful case, that he that believes
them must do them a courtesy.

For how can that be Philosophical which being known by the effect has need of
Testimonies to prove it. A Philosopher ought to enquire out the fit causes,
constitute his axioms, adjoyn the properties and run over all the first parts
of invention before he come to the effects, much less ought he to make use of
Testimony which is without the limits of his Art. So that this Aurum Potabile
can be no means be said to be Philosophical whose chiefest argument no way
depends upon Philosophy. Besides there is no impartial man for us who has
viewed your volumes both of Philosophical and Phisical Authors, both ancient
and modern but he will so far give his verdit as to bear witness how many of
these famous and learned men have never dreamt of any such matter, how many of
them have exploded and condemned it as a thing wholly destructive and
pernicious, who certainly had they found it convenient would not have concealed
so great a benefit to mankind. And Crollius a famous Author does report that of
that he made trial of many of those Aurum Potabiles but still after the expense
both of time and money always found his labor lost. These that have brought
up this rare invention, what are they? in a word Chemists, of whom a man may
say as St. Paul spoke of the Cretians, that they are evil beasts, always
liars, regarding nothing but their bellies; they are great boasters, but small
performers, and like Tailors eminent for nothing but their long bills, who if
they come once to be known, vanish into air like the smoke of their own
furnaces. There is now a kind of conspiracy in Spittle-Fields, being a small
Congregation of three, for the third of these rare Phoenixes though he have
left his nest holds correspondence, who have entered into a combination, like
Fate, Subtle, and Dol Common in Ben. Johnsons Alchymist to cheat those fools
that they think will be catched with a golden bait. To this end they bring you
a long list of many diseases which it has cured. But so absurdly set together
that any man not blind may easily discern the impostures. For what is this but
the common custom of all Mountebanks; to delude and amuse, the vulger sort of
people are their patients; a very rare project against Bartholmew Fair.

They go on this precious jewel Aurum Potabile, as they have confessed their
Aurum Potabile to be nothing but a stone; Now Gentlemen you know stones are
very apt to be potabiles. But I have found the trick ont, they take their Gold
and by an art which they have they turn this Gold into Pearl then they
dissolves this Pearl in Vinegre and so make Aurum Potabile.

But they tell you it cures all Diseases in general, and thus they furnish it
with contrary and contradictory qualities making one and the same thing to have
a power both to heat and to cool, to bind and loosen, to cause a man to sleep
and to wake; a folly which must of necessity be laughed at by every porter.

If strengthens women in childbed, A thing very likely, being composed of Wine
and Vinegar, both which torment and inflame those parts. It cures the
Paralytic. And thus that which was counted a miracle to perform in Christ
himself, These Audacious Quacks dare ascribe as familiar to their Aurum
Potabile. If they should say that the vehicles of their Aurum Potabile are
various, thence follows this absurdity, that there must of necessity be a
greater force in the vehicle then in the Gold it self. They bring an example of
a great cure; and we can bring an example of one more strangely cured of a
consumption by Galens method who was before almost destroyed by the use of this
Aurum Potabile. Having showed you the folly of this Counterfeit bill we now
shall bring you some arguments against the use of Gold.

First, we find in the books of Ancient Physicians many other things set down
much more agreeable to the temper of man then Gold.

Secondly, we firde in Pliny a great Philosopher and sercher of nature, little
said in the praise of Gold, but much spoken concerning the hurt and
inconveniences that attend it.

Thirdly we find that Gold does defile the hands of those that ouch it by
reason of the sulphur which is mixed with it.

Fourthly, All metals are of an ill taste and sulphurous smell, which an be no
way agreeable to the body's of sick persons.

Fifthly, No metals can nourish because they cannot be concocted and turned
into blood, and therefore unapt for Physical uses. It is also the opinion of
Borasavolus, Erastus, Fallopius, and others, that which is said of Potable Gold
is altogether fabulous, and the use of it dangerous, for which they bring this
reason, for if these waters which are disolv'd out of Brazen and Leaden stills
do contract the venom of these metals, how much more will Gold which being
made Potable, sucks the venom with a greater force of heat, Besides it is to
be feared that the gluttinous matter of this Potable Gold may all at length
oppilate or stop up the mouth of the stomach and so destroy the appetite. If
they say it is hermetically prepared, we must affirm that the preparation of
Gold by fire does rather augment then diminish, noxious humor causing it to
retain and (...) or inflaming quality; neither can they so prepared by fire
also be void of hurt; for by the Confession of Paracelsus himself, fire sends
forth more subtle poisons then minerals do; therefore says Crollius, it is
better to eat the eyes of a Bsiliske mixed with burning fire then to take the
venom of Potable Gold. It is the opinions also of other learned Physicians
that there is no disease which is not fed by a salt and vitrioled spirit, which
is rather increased and formed then taken away by that spirit of salt by which
Potable Gold is made. Now suppose that Gold in it self were harmeless: Yet let
us consider what becomes of it after their Chemical preparation, First it is
calcinated, to Purify that which they say is the Purest of all metals and
without any ill quality already. But Calcinated it is, that is, reduced to
ashes.

Then what becomes of the Gold, or at least of the virtue of the Gold? It is by
Praecipitation, or cementing brought back again, both which are performed by
corrofives or by Amalguma which is done with Mercury, and with what danger ask
the Gold Smiths? If they say it may be dissolved; perhaps it may; but by no
other way then by corrosive waters as Aqua Regis etc. which are compounded of
Aqua fortis and Sal Amoniack, and other such like ingredients, which being thus
incorporated into the Gold without any possibility of separation doubtless do
make their Potable Gold not so useful as they imagine to the body's of weak and
sick persons. Neither is this all which is done by their Chemistry, for they
impurely separate that which was so purely composed before, and by so doing
they do not only soften the hard mass or boil out the matter which is the
force and quality, but they destroy the Metallic form it self, so that the
Gold cease to be that which it was, for the form of the Gold being destroyed
the Gold must of necessity be destroyed. Where is then this Potable Gold so
much talked of? Thus have we discovered to you the abominable fraud of these
impostors, who instead of their useful tincture sell you nothing but mere
colors and painting stuff, and instead of Potable Gold a mixture of Mercury,
Vinegre, Sal ammoniack, and Tartar, things that of all others as they prepare
them are the most destructive to humane body's.

But they say that they will refer to a Treatise which being now coming forth
from a silly and confident woman and others, the Reader may be assured to be no
other then the borrowed and translated Libells of these bragging Mountebanks
who have been so often confuted by the most learned Authors. How many hundred
persons the thing it self has destroyed their are enough to witness. And
therefore we cannot choose but testify to the world the unspeakable Damage of
such a book as would entice men under such Golden pretenses into their utter
ruin. How much the thing and book it self is a grand abuse may appear by the
persons that carry it on; such whom partly despare of livelihood, and partly a
continual habit of Deluding has hardened to an Impudence so destructive to the
Nation, neither will they stick to defile the fame of the dead so they may gain
their ends. Thus are they now obtruding upon Culpepers name their pernicious
libel to gain credit upon the people, whereas there is nothing more false then
that he made it, as is manifest by the copy, which was never writ by his hand,
though it were the custom of that laborious Author always so to do. Since
then the book is so notorious a fraud, what may we then think of that Aurum
Potabile which it treats of. These are therefore to give notice to the people
how they buy their own destruction from the hands of any Mountebank, whether in
Spittle-Fields or else where, Hoping they will be as little deluded by any
specious pretenses, which the Stationer not far from Leaden Hall shall cast
over this Illegitimate Libel to the injury of the dead; not suffering him to
rest quiet in his grave, though by his oppressive practices and hard
imprisonment he had so soon brought him hither; after he had got the most part
of his estate by his Label, yet still intends to obtrude printed papers into
the world which he never writ. If this suffice not we shall give a further
account of him and the rest of them hereafter. Thus we have given a faithful
account of this imposture of Aurum Potabile which we desire the people to
believe for no other reason but for their own good.

Philaretes, Tantarara, Tantarara, Spittlefield.
FINIS.

