PETER'S PATTERN Newly Revived, with Additions,

OR The perfect PATH to Worldly Happiness* As it was delivered in a Funeral
Sermon preached at the interrment of Mr. Hugh Peter's lately Deceased,

By I. C. Translator of Pineda upon Job, and one of the Triers.

Gusman, Lib. 1. Chap. 2. Verse 4. Amicus Plato, sed magis amica veritas.

London Printed in the Year 1659.

royal blazon or coat of arms DIEV ET MON DROIT
After they had sang the two first staves of the tenth hymn of Larners twelve
Songs of Sion, to the tune of The Knave of Clubs, the Parson proceeded in his
Text, as follows.
GUSMAN, lib. 2. Chap. 3. Verse 26. The latter part of the words.

Let us while we live make use of our time, for a man's life is ended in a day.


BELOVED,
THe scope of this reverent Divine is in these words to hold forth unto us, the
excellency of human wit and policy, in this self-seeking and deceitful world.
And indeed I hope I have not made a wrong choice of my Text, not knowing any
one whereon I could better ground the praises of our departed Brother here
before us; you all knowing how great a Disciple of our Author he was, being
indeed the very pattern and exemplar of his Godly and Religious life. But now
to explain the words aright, we shall deal with them, as Joyners do with court
Cupboards and round Tables, first pull them asunder, and then put them together
again; I use this comparison, that you may know me to be a man of trade, that
is to say, one that trades in the word, or if you will have it otherwise, a
holder-forth, according to the last and most sanctified institution. First,
then, you have an exhortation in these words, Let us; Secondly, the time given
us to make use thereof, while we live; Thirdly, the thing to which we are
exhorted, that is, to make use of our time; and lastly the supreme reason of
this exhortation, for a man's life is ended in a day. Let us while we live, make
use of our time, for a man's life is ended in a day. First then of the first,
that is to say, of the words, Let us; But here you must give me leave to excuse
the great abuses that have been put upon these two poor innocent monosyllables.
I confess they have been crumm'd thicker than Habakkuks brown loaf into the
porridge of the Cavaleers, commonly called the Common Prayer Book, when they
cry Let us pray, Let us kneel; But believe it, my beloved, I have now
rebaptized them, and washed them cleaner from that profanation, than ever
tripes were scowr'd from their filth by the nicest Huswife in Field Lane. Now
being thus purified, you will find Let us, to signify sometimes as much as,
hinder us not, Quixot the 12. verse 8. Hinder me not fair Dulcina from the
enjoyment of your sweet Company, that is, Let me enjoy your sweet Company;
sometimes as much as to say Suffer us; says the reverent Buscon, chap. 7.
verse 5. to his Master in great affliction, Suffer us not to be starved to
death, that is, Let us not be starved, etc. Yet it is not meant here as in
those places, by way of petition, but is a kind of rousing up of the spirits,
to a certain action. As when the Carrmen would heave a great load into their
Carts, they exhort one another by crying hey boys; or as when the Coachman
would have his horses to go faster than ordinary, he incourages them by saying
stir up, in which sense our learned Gusman uses this expression, Let us, in
this place, as it were a word of incitement or stirring us up to any
undertaking: Some when they use these words in this signification do clap one
another on the back, which adds a greater emphasis to them. But he goes on, Let
us, says he, while we live. And here you are to understand two things; what is
meant by We, and secondly what is meant by the words in general while we live.
Note then that We is a particle of distinction, which shows you that there is
another sort of men to whom our deer Gusman does deny the precious comforts
held forth in this verse; for my beloved, I would not have you think, that when
he spoke this, he had piggs in his belly, as Calvin in his comments upon this
place does erroniously conjecture. By We then, is meant, the godly, such as I
and you are whom the Lord has chosen to the conjoyments of this World. The
other sort of men here implied are all those who profess to be our enemies,
men that would cut off our ears with the paring-shovels of their malice, and
whip our backs with the scourges of their fury; for did not the word intimate
this distinction, our deceased Brother had not used so many pious and painful
endeavors to advance some men, and destroy others, that is to advance his own
godly party, and destroy his wicked foes; Let us says he, while we live, that
is while we are in power, while we live in authority, or be in favor with
those that Govern, whether it be a single person or a Commonwealth, or if you
will have it otherwise, while we are in a thriving condition, while men think
us Godly and Faithful, and consequently trust us with preferments or profit, I
say when the Lord shall put such opportunities and abilities into our hands,
Then my Brethren, Let us make use of our time; Let us take hold of them with
both hands, and hold them as fast as a Mastiff holds a Sow by the ear. Let us
make use of our time, that is, Let us use all endeavors, ways, plots, means,
manners, tricks, and policies, whether lawful or unlawful, to raise and advance
our own ends, whether they be only honorable, or profitable, or both. And when
we have attained that which we seek, Let us use the same inventions, that the
ungodly may not gain them from us, and thence take an occasion to triumph over
us. The fathers of the order of Industry at the Council held at Biscay in the
year 1590, made a decree, that every one should keep his own, and get what he
could from another. I speak this, that I may not leave you altogether without
authority in the explanation of my Text, but of this more anon. We shall now
proceed to the reason of the words, For a man's life is ended in a day; As much
as to say, the life of man is very short; For whereas it was formerly above an
ell and a nail long, it is now no longer than a span. How vast a while did
Methuselah live to enjoy the pains and labors of his youth? But no sooner had
our dear Brother Mr. Peter's got an Estate, a little Chariot, and an Onesimus or
two to wait on him, thinking to comfort himself with the blessings of the
creature, but he was snatched away from us, even as a boy snatches a pippin out
of an apple-womans basket. Some in regard of the shortness thereof, have
compared the life of man unto a Lilly; but I am clearly of opinion, that it was
a mistake; seeing that of that flower is made a precious oil that prolongeth
the days of man by curing festred wounds, and broken pates. Others have likened
it unto a rose; but with as little reason; for we know that of the rose is made
that excellent conserve which is good against the cough of the Lungs, one of
the greatest enemies to life; I therefore rather agreeing herein with that
great light of the Spanish Church Lazarillo de Tornes, shall compare our
beloved Brother unto a Marigold, and his ending in a day, unto the fading
thereof. For as the flowers of a Marigold swimming in the top of a mess of
porridge which is the food of the body, is a great ornament thereunto, so my
beloved, was he a great ornament to our Religion which is the food of the Soul;
and even as that closes up at the setting of the Sun, so did he end in a day,
even in that day that the Sun of our Religion was forced to withdraw himself
from White Hall. Thus much for the Exposition; I shall now proceed to the
Doctrine that creeps out of my Text, as a Fox creeps out of his hole; That it
is the duty of every professor, seeing that he has but a short while to stay
in the world, to make the best use of his time; The particulars of which
Doctrine I shall labor to make good unto you by reason and example. First then
that there is a duty that lies upon every professor, we find evident by this,
that there is in all men not only a laboring and panting, but also a tie upon
them to look after self-preservation, for if a Child of God be in want and
woeful necessity, as many times they are, the Law of nature does oblige them to
seek after maintenance, and not to destroy themselves and their family: says
Gusman in his second book, c. 3. v. 15. Poverty is daily death, so that he who
avoids not poverty, seeks a daily death, and is consequently a daily murderer
of himself, at least he intends it: now an intention to Sin, without
repentance, is a sin as great as the act it self. This it was that urged the
Holy Gusman to undertake those many achievements which he performed; For says
he in another place, Book the 1st. c. 8. v. 12. I thought it not my Duty to
live in Idleness; Therefore when Necessity, the best School-mistresse of the
Godly, that makes Magpies to speak and Spaniels to fetch and carry, had made
him to consider his duty, he was not slack in the exercise thereof, so that
betaking himself to the religious calling of a Thief, he stole the Cooks silver
Goblet, the Grocers Royals, and couzened the Cardinal of his Barrel of
Conserves. Moreover my beloved, this Duty of self-preservation caused our dear
Sister Agatha, as you may read in the first book of pious Francion, not only to
bethink her self, but to bestirr her stumps also; Finding her self therefore to
be of a well shaped body, and of comely features, and lovely in the eyes of men,
she became an Harlot, and was unto the brethren a great comfort in the frail
distresses of Human nature: whereby she was stored with wealth, and increased
in worldly enjoyments. This Duty it is that obliges Butchers to preach, and
Cobblers to pray, that teaches them to make profession of Religion, and then
causes them to take on them the gainful function of the Ministry, whereby they
may be the better enabled, after the sweet consolations of boiled beef and
bag-pudding, to sing Psalms, and rejoice in their families. All these things
our deceased Brother knew full well, which made him persist in the performance
of this duty until the end. He soon found the sweet gain of preaching, and
made such a dextrous use of it, that he was beloved of his Rulers, and dyed
with the blessing of Job; for I may say of our dear Brother, as the Text says
of him, That the Lord blessed his latter end more than his beginning. The Lord
reward that blessed man who first invented this profitable and advntagious
science. Thus much for the first part of our Doctrine, That there is a Duty
lying upon every Professor. Now my beloved I shall come to tell you what that
Duty is: it is true the words of my Texts are so plain, that you may in a manner
pick it out of the words, with as much ease, as you can pick out the marrow of
a Leg-of-mutton-bone with a scewer, or the wrong end of a spoon; For say they,
Let us while we live make use of our time, seeing the life of man is ended in a
day. So that here you see what Duty that is, That you ought to make use of your
time; But perhaps you do not know what it is to make use of your time, which
is the next thing I shall inform you. Know ye then my Brethren, there are
swarms of such men as make profession of Religion, who are not all of one trade
or occupation, but some follow one thing, some another, according to their
several gifts. For some are Stitchers of cloth, some are Bodies-makers, some
are Translators, some are Soldiers, and fight the battails of the Lord, some
are Broakers, some are Hewers of wood, that is to say Carpenters, some are
drawers of water, that is Victuallers, and Innkeepers, some are those that gape
for State employments, and some, though I deny not that any of these may take
the Ministry upon them in time, are Preachers of the Word, as soon as ever they
have done playing at Trapp. Now that every one of these professions may profit
in their several Vocations, there are required these nine gifts.

The Gift of convenient boldness. The Gift of Nonsenc The Gift of Leasing. The
Gift of accusing and informing. The Gift of Ignorance. The Gift of Cozening.
The Gift of Thieving. The Gift of Covetousness. And the Gift of Hypocrisy.
I have placed the gift of convenient boldness in the Van, and the gift of
Hypocrisy in the Rear, knowing that a professor cannot well go on upon any
enterprise without the one, nor well come off without the other. Now though a
Professor ought always to have an inward working of these gifts, yet the
perfection of them is required in some sorts of Professors more than in others:
For example, The gifts of impudence, lying; and cozening, do more properly
belong unto those who have trades and occupations of selling and buying. The
gifts of ignorance, lying, impudence, informing, cozening, and hypocrisy
belong unto such as seek preferment, whether Civilor Military; but all of them
together are requited to make up a Minister of the word. I shall not here stand
to tell you in particular how every own of these callings ought accord ng to
their several gifts to make use of their time; but in general, as a Footboy
skippeth over kennels, skip over those instructions which concern the
Professors that are of my own Livery. First therefore, that a Preaching
professor may make use of his time; it is required that he should be stored
with Impudence, even as a Woodmongers Wharf is stored with Faggots and
Sea-coal. The uses of it are these two, first, to encourage you to the most
desperate enterprises; and secondly, to make you scorn the reproaches of those
that reprove ye: As for example my beloved, If you see one of your enemies
seated in a warm living, and that your heart pant and thirst after the same,
you ought then to put on your nightcap of Devotion, and your garment of
Hypocrisy, and go unto your Superiors and say, Yonder is a man who is not of
the Congregation of Professors, who is planted in a rich Living, he is a
scandalous and disaffected person, and I am more worthy than he, pray put me
into his place; If men therefore rebuke you, and call you accuser and devil,
then ought you to make use of your gift of impudence, and laugh at them all.
Thus did holy Nigh throw out unrighteous Juxon out of his Parsonage of Fullham.
Thus our brother Marshall became possessed of his fat Living in the Land of
Essex. This emboldned our departed brother to hold forth in the Pulpit of
White Hall, where so many learned (as the heathen call them) had been before
him. What cared they for the reproaches of men, for their hearts were seared
with the hot Iron of impudence finding themselves at ease and filled with joy?
This likewise emboldened the poor Spaniard, as we find in the book of our dear
Gusman, Book 1. c. 7. First to beg money, nd then without bidding sit down
cheek by jowl with the Ambassador; for says he in the last verse, He was
carried away with bravadoes and an impudent behavior.

The next Virtue, we are to make use of is the gift of Nonsense: for perhaps
thou may not be a Scholar, nor one of the number of the learned, and it may
concern thee to talk two hours together; thou ought therefore to be well
furnished with Nonsense, that thou may be enabled to go through with thy
work; to which purpose often repetitions, and telling of tales do very much
conduce; as when our departed brother, told the story of his being in heaven
and hell, and the tale of Puss in her Majesty.

The next gift is that of Lying, which may be very profitable to thee, and
whereof thou may make a very great advantage; for if thou art bid to preach
for the benefit of thy Rulers, if then thou art furnished with soul-cozening
doctrine; If then thou have the right art of lying and wheedling the people, by
telling them that the cause thou speak of is the only true cause, and that
God will certainly own them in their obedience to it, then there will arise
unto thee a very great emolument. With these arts our deceased brother
furnished the Parliament with Basins, Rings, and Bodkins Thus he by telling
them that Ireland was a place that flowed with milk and honey, and where
broad-cloath of twelve shillings a yard grew upon the trees, enticed the
soldiers over against the public enemy. Thus we read in the forementioned
Chapter of Gusman, How the same Spaniard by relating the nobleness of his
family, though he were but a Cobblers son in Cordova, and by boasting of several
great actions, which he never did, got of the said Ambassador both money and
his dinner. We find also Mr. Sterry practicing this gift, when he to ingratiate
himself with his new Master, our late Protector, he assured him that his father
was sitting at the right hand of God, when most Divines do affirm the contrary.

The next thing requisite for a man that will make ye but use of his time, is
the gift of accusing and slandring; know thou not (O Man) that slanders are
like the defilement of printers ink, easily laid on, but hard to rub off? If
then thou seek to work any one into disfavor with his Superiors, that thou
may obtain thy desired end, make thy first shot at him with the pot-guns of
slander; for the disgrace thou throwest upon him, throws him out, and tosses
thee into the haven of thy wishes. Thus our deceased brother never left
accusing unsanctified Lawd, till his head had satisfied his wrath, and the
benevolences which the Professors bestowed on him out of his worldly profits
had appeased the hunger of his almost famished purse: Thus the brethren
likewise accused the Lord Craven, being of the race of Ishmael, and got his
estate.

Thy next gift is Ignorance; For thou must know that there are few wise men in
authority; Think thou then O foolish Galathian, that any man will advance
such a one as is more cunning than himself, no thou must at least pretend
ignorance, and if after such advancement, thou do grow wiser than thy
brethren, then I say make use of thy time, says blessed Machiavel in his Book
of the Right Path to preferment, Let every man counterfeit that humor which he
finds most advantageous to his designs. Therefore neither our deceased brother,
nor any of his faithful brethren the Tryers would advance those whom the
heathen called the grave, learned, and wise, but the meanest of the people,
that were of the simplest and weakest capacities. There came a learned man, and
one of the weak brethren, and contended for a place, says our, deceased
brother to him that was learned, What is Faith? who answered him discreetly
according to the learning of the Schools; then he demanded the same question of
the other, who replied that Faith was a sweet lullaby in the lap of Jesus
Christ; at which words our deceased brother, lifting up his hands to heaven,
cried, Blessed be the Lord who has revealed these things unto the simple;
Friend, thou according to thy deserts, shall have the Living.

The next thing important is the gift of Cozening, For yot. know my beloved the
common people are a simple soru N creatures, who must be deluded into their own
good Do woe not otheir good is the good and safety of their Governors; w not
deceive Children whom we would give Physic unto, by anointing the brim of the
Cup with honey? So do we sweeten the bitter purges, which are the peoples Taxes
and Impositian, with the delicate allurements of Liberty and Religion. So our
late Reverend Lord Oliver of blessed memory, for whom our dear Brother, the
Lord reward his Soul, has pimp'd full often, as you may read in our dear
Sister Brisco's book of Divine truths, so I say he by consening every body that
he dealt with, by the right management, or the seasonable taking and breaking
of his oaths and protestations, became a Monarch. Thus did the devout Lazarillo
cosen the Priest his Master of his bread, I shall give you his own words, l.
1. c. 3. v. 11. I pray my beloved turn to the place and mark it, for it is a
very precious Text. Says he, as I was musing how to get victuals, and feeding
upon the sight of the Chest wherein my Masters bread was locked, there came a
Tinker to the door with a bunch of keys, who seemed to me to be an Angel in
disguise, said I to him, have you a key that will open this Chest, he assayed
and opened it, by which means I made many a fair loaf invisible that my Master
never knew of.

Another thing mainly conducing to him that would make use of his time, is the
Gift of Covetousness. Therefore says the Text, of that blind Hermit who was
Lazarillo's Master, that for all his gains, there was never a man so wretched a
niggard. The reason thereof is, that there may come changes, and that the
Professors may be forced to fly, it be hooves them therefore while they may to
make use of their time, that is, to hoard up and save against the day of
adversity. You have the examples of most Professors for it, whose doors we find
continually shut, and never opening to the least expense of a crust, though a
poor man should beg his heart out. This makes us, not to be content with our
Livings, but to set up Lectures and private Congregations, which brings in
unspeakable profit; nor content with this, ome of our Brethren sitting in the
Tryers chair which is the seat of authority, have privately taken to themselves
the r-ewards of well doing, loath to spoil the charity of men, by receiving
tankards of Silver, rundlets of Sack, and sometimes ready money, the Lord of his
mercy make them thankful. Our deceased Brother was a mighty admirer of Canes
with silver heads, and making his admiration known, he profited exceedingly.

The last important Gift is the gift of Hypocrisy. The reason hereof is, that
he who will compass a design must go the best way he can to do it: Now he
that cannot get his ends by force, must seek to attain them by cunning; but it
is found, that in these days there is no cunning like that of seeming Godly.
As Mr. Sedgewick has well observed in his Book of spiritual experiences.
Therefore is this gift very necessary; For which cause, says Tiberius the best
of Christian Emperors, That he who knows not to dissemble, knows not to rule,
and with him accords our brother Spurstow in his book of the privileges of the
Saints. All the world knows how conducing it was both to our deceased Brother
and his dear Master, and what advantages they got thereby, I shall not
therefore insist any more upon further examples.

Having thus made out by reason and example that it is the duty of every
Professor, while he lives in this world, to make use of his time, and the means
and ways how to do it, I shall now proceed to application. Is it so then that
every Professor ought to make use of his time, then let this serve for a use of
Exhortation, to exhort every one of ye to make the best use of your time; That
is to say, get Money, get Estates, get Friends at Court, and labor to enjoy the
promises; the fat of the land, my beloved, is your fee-simple, therefore let
not Canaan be taken from you. If your Rulers would have you worship them and
adore them, do so, beloved, for they are Gods, and ye ought to do so. If they
would have you preach false Doctrine and deceive the people, do so; It is their
interest, and if theirs, yours also, do not they feed ye, and cloth ye, and
put you into fat Livings? be therefore obedient to them in all things. If they
would have you procure, procure for them, as your deceased Brother did before
ye, and went down unto his grave in peace. I but some will say these things
are unlawful; But hear what says our dear Brother Horace of sacred memory In
vetitum nefas ruimus, we ought to run into that from which we are forbidden. To
confirm this, I shall only give you two or three motives, and so conclude.
First from the inconveniences following the neglect of your Duty, and 2ly.
from the conveniences that hang upon it even as pears hang upon a tree at the
latter end of Summer. The inconveniences arising from the neglect of our Duty,
are Poverty and necessity; Therefore Gusman, being in great want, and finding
that brickbats were too hard to feed on, and that the rafters of a house were
not to be roasted, thought there was no better way to thrive, than by becoming
a Churchman: for says he, then shall I have something to eat, knowing well
that a dominus vobiscum never tasted of hunger. Again, if thou were married, and
thy wife should see her Neighbors go finer than she, and should complain, and
thou not be able to supply her, would it not be a great trouble and vexation of
spirit to thee to hear the clamours of thy dear Consort? The next motive is the
Folly and indiscretion that men would justly accuse ye off, that when it is in
your power to make use of your time, you should be such wood-Cockscombs as to
refuse it. The conveniences a rising are first the respect of men, secondly
the respect of women, and thirdly the certain gain and profit which has
always belonged unto us; For if you make use of your time, men will respect
ye, worship ye, and place ye uppermost at their meetings, while you sit a
straddle upon their Consciences, as Balaam rid upon his Ass, without the least
wincing or contradiction at all. The women will feast ye, and cram not only
your bellies but your purses, nor shall there be a good bit eaten at the table
of their Husbands of which you shall not partake, to the great envy of the
wicked. When you come down sweating from your pulpits, they will put ye into
warm beds, and rub over your weary limbs with their soft and tender hands. An
my beloved, these are precious, I say precious enjoyments; Therefore I shall
conclude in the words of my Text, Let us while we live make use of our time,
taking for our pattern the life and manners of our deceased Brother here before
us; of whom that I may make him a short Encomium, I shall say thus much; That
from his youth he followed the calling of the Ministry, and because then the
wicked prevailed, and he was a sufferer, he went about giving consolation to
those that suffered for theft, and such like criminal offenses. Afterward he
travailed, and as he found occasion he sowed his Seed sometimes in fruitful,
sometimes in barren soils: and I may say this of him, that while he lived such
was his zeal, he laid many a Whore of Babylon on her back. When the faithful
began to exalt their horns in this Nation, He was a great fomenter of the
quarrel, and gave occasion to the rest of his Brethren to fish in troubled
waters. To his Prince he was a great assistance in all his designs, laying
aside that notional impediment of a Stateman, called Conscience, that he might
be the more serviceable to his Country; His Charity was not unknown, He giving
two notable examples thereof, in his relieving our two dear Sisters, the
Butchers wife and Mrs. Littleton, in both their afflictions. He died not
without associates to accompany him to his last rest; for as I am informed,
that on that night that he departed, departed also a dear brother and Sister of
ours, the Hangman and Moll Cutpurse. He was first unwilling to dye, knowing
what comforts he left behind him, but seeing there was no remedy, he leaned his
head on the pillow, and peaceably yielded up the Ghost. When T^ribazus a noble
Persian was arrested, at the first, he drew his sword and defended himself, but
when they charged him in the Kings name, then he yielded himself willingly: So
when Death arrested our dear Brother, at first he started and strugled, as a
man shrinks at his first putting his feet into the cold water, but when he
recollected his thoughts, and considering that death was sent to him as a
messenger to bring him to Eternity, he embraced it, and he went to his long
home as willingly as a young Bride goes from her friends into the Country with
her new married Spouse. And thus having tired your patience, before which time
we never use to make an end, I shall conclude, still desiring you not to forget
the example of our departed Brother, and the words of my Text, Let us while we
live make use of our time, for the life of man is ended in a day.

FINIS,

