The Case of John Cresset, Gent. truly stated, and humbly presented to the
Consideration of Parliament.
JOhn Bodvel, Esquire being seized in Fee of 1700 l. per Annum, Intermarried in
1638, with Ann the Daughter of Sir William Russel, and by Indenture dated the
20 of February 1639, settled his Estate, (by which settlement amongst other
things) there was a Provision made for raising 5000 l. for his Daughter or
Daughters, that he should have at the time of his Decease to be paid them at
their Age of 21 years or day of Marriage which should first happen.

John had two Daughters, Elizabeth and Sarah, Elizabeth died in July 1662,
Sarah the 21 of December 1657, Intermarried with the Honorable Robert Roberts,
Esquire had by him Issue several Sons and Daughters in the lifetime of her said
Father, who died the 28 of March 1663, after whose Decease one Thomas Wynn, Esquire
with others set up a pretended Will of his, whereby he had totally disinherited
his said Daughter Sarah and her Children, given her only 5000 l. and devised
all the rest of his Estate to Griffith Wynn Son of the said Thomas Wynn, and
one Thomas Bodvel both Infants:

Whereupon several Suits arose, the management whereof was committed to the
care of John Cresset, who undertook the same, and 'twas as much as possible he
could do, so that he was forced to put off above 38 Causes, and deny to meddle
with any other business for several years together, whereby he was greatly
prejudiced in his Practice.

There were six Suits in Chancery, two in the Prerogative Court, and several at
Law violently prosecuted (the expense and charges being quick and great,) Mr.
Roberts wanting Money to defray the same, prevailed with Cresset to procure him
supplys as he had occasion.

Whereupon the said Cresset borrowed for him the several sums, and of the
several persons in the Account following mentioned, and became bound with him
for the same, amounting in the whole to about 4000 l. to defray the charges of
these Suits, his Journey into Wales to take possession of the Estate, and
paying his Fathers Debts, and Funeral charges.

Robert and Sarah by Deed indented dated 1. March, 1663, assigned to the said
Cresset the 5000 l. Portion due by the Deed of the 20 of February 1639, and
also the 5000 l. given by the pretended Will aforesaid.

The tediousness, intricacy and trouble of those Suits is so well known, that
there is no need to give any account how many Hearings there was in Chancery,
each holding three whole days, how many days Hearings in Parliament upon the
Appeal? how many afterward before both Houses, and his Majesty and Council;
(when before them by Bill to make null and void the said Will,) what care
Cresset took, what trouble he had, and industry he used, and the charge that
those proceedings must necessarily occasion, is submitted to judgment.

John Lord Roberts, Sir Richard Wynn, and Henry Wynn in trust to raise money,
by perception of rents or sale of part of the premises wherewith to pay
Bodvel's Debts due when he died, and his Funeral Charges, and then to pay 5000
l. to Sarah Roberts for her Portion according to the Deed of 20 February 1639,
remainder for life to Sarah, remainder in Tail to Charles Bodvell, Roberts her
Son, (which Act Cresset consented unto, though it cut off half his Security,
relying upon their Promises of giving other Security in lieu thereof).

This Trust they having accepted, and sold Land for 1700 l. and paid part of
Bodvell's Debts therewith.

Cresset made Application to them for his 5000 l. and prayed Land might be sold
for the same, had often Promises from some of them, that there should so be,
and for that purpose had Particulars given him, and was desired to find out a
Purchaser, or one that would lend Money upon a Morgage to pay himself 5000 l.
and 2000 l. of Bodvell's Debts; Note by this, that in 1666, Mr. Roberts knew
there was above 5000 l. due to Cresset.
and Mr. Roberts by his Letter dated the 28 Febr. 1666, gave Assurance that the
rest of Cressets debt (over and above the said 5000 l.) should be otherwise
secured, whereupon a Purchaser was found. But the Lord Roberts would not do any
thing therein other than what by law or equity he should be directed.

Cresset having used all manner of Endeavors waited two years after the Act,
and receiving no satisfaction, being arrested and sued by several persons to
Judgments and Executions taken out by surprise and executed upon him, was
forced to sell Lands of his own of the yearly value of 300 l. at least at great
under-rates to raise money for to pay part of the said Money so by him borrowed
for the said Roberts with the Interest thereof, whereby he lost his Estate, and
was vastly prejudiced in his Practice, Credit, and Reputation; and finding no
relief by fair means. He thereupon in

John Lord Roberts, Sir Richard Wynn, Henry Wynn, Robert, Sarah, and Charles
Bodvell Roberts, setting forth the matters aforesaid, and his Debt, how he
suffered for want of receiving the same, prayed a Decree for sale of Lands.
This Bill (before filed) was delivered to Henry Wynn to carry to John Lord
Roberts, and to amend as he pleased, the said Cresset being assured it should
be a suit by consent only, to have the Judgment of the Court for the Trustees
Indemnity; which Bill was ^mended by Mr. Wynn, and approved of under his hand
to be exhibited against the Tru^ees, and so delivered back, and was engrossed
and filed.

To this Bill al^ the Defendants (except John Lord Roberts) put in their
several Answers Michaelmas Term f^llowing, confessed all the matter of the
Bill, and R. Roberts, and Sarah his Wife confessed Cresset debt, the justness
of his account and demands, the great services he had done them, and his
^^fferings for them, desired Lands might be sold to pay him, and submitted to
the judgment (...) the Court, being ready to observe the directions thereof.
But the Lord Roberts he put into Answer, whereupon the Right Honorable the
Lord Keeper 16 January 1668, writ to ^is Lordship to desire him (if he thought
fit) to appear and answer the said Bill; but he d^ not answer, though Cresset
offered to submit himself and his concerns to his Lordships ow^ appointment and
determination.

Cresset being assured by Mr. Roberts, and his Lady, that the Lord Roberts
(though he had not answered would abide the judgment of the Court thereupon, at
their importunity he moved for a ^earing against the other Defendants.

February 1668, and the Cause was set down ^he Defendants served to hear
Judgments, and Counsel entrusted accordingly.

Rob^^ts sent to Mr. Henry Wynn to insist at the hearing upon three things:
First, that his Lordship had not answered, neither was he in contempt,
therefore no Dec^^e ought to be made. Secon^^y, That Robert Roberts had been in
the possession, received the Profits ever sinc^ Bodvell died, of his Estate,
and thereby was paid the 5000 l. in question. Thirdl^, That Bodvell's Debts and
Funeral-Charges was to be paid before the 500 l. and those not yet paid.


At which ^^me Mrs. Roberts telling the said Cresset and Mr: Wynn, that the
Lord Roberts was not satisfi^ with his Accounts, which occasioned his being
angry. Cresset offered to put off the hearing for 14 days if the Defendants
would consent, and then appear gratis, a^^ in the mean time wave all his
Securities, Judgments, Releases, and come to an account w^^h any person his
Lordship should appoint, and abide by that persons determination if his
L^rdship would be pleased to be satisfied therewith; this accordingly was
agreed unto. ^e said Cresset sent to the Lord Roberts to that purpose, and
Edward Nosworthy, Esquire (a person well acquainted with Suits, and the
chargableness of them) was appointed to inspect the A^^ompts, the which were
carried to him, left many days with him, he audited and allowed ^^e same in Mr.
Roberts his presence, and no exception taken to them. But Cresset never heard
c^^ word from Lord Roberts after that time, or could receive one penny of
money. Thereon

Roberts had not answered.

Ro^^rts served with a Letter, desiring him to appear and answer.



Roberts to appear and answer.

Robert ^is Answer came in, and therein says, He knew of no Money lent by
Cresset to his Son, bel^^ves Cresset had no Estate of his own to lend, nor
Credit to borrow any considerable sum (...) others, nor believed that he had
sold Land to pay Mr. Roberts Debt; says, he was his Sollic^^tor, had received
Gratification suitable to his desert, and made great advantage of the said
Robe^^ Roberts employ, and been enabled thereby to purchase Lands, and heard
some of Bodvell's D^bts remained unpaid.

This Answer caused the Persons of whom the said Cresset had borrowed Money for
the said Robert Roberts to suspect he designed to defraud them, and made them
sue him; when as the said Cresse^ to that day had never received directly or
indirectly one penny, either of the principal Mo^ey borrowed for him, or
Interest, or for Law-charges, or for all his labor and pains, six years
Solicitation, or so much as a mourning-Ring at Bodvell's Funeral; but was
really above 6000 l. out of purse for Principal, Interest, and Law-charges.

Upon this Answer Cresset writ to Mr. Roberts to know the meaning thereof, and
desired to be vindicated from the Aspersions cast upon him thereby, in answer
whereunto he sent the Letter following.

March 10. 1668.
SIR, What occasioned those reports (your Letter mentioned) I know not, but
since the untruth arises even to scandal, I think my self obliged to vindicate
you by this short Narrative of your actings for me:

When my Father in Law died I retained you in my concern against Mr. Wynn,
which as I take it multiplied into four several Suits, all which you carried on
with unwearied fidelity to the abandoning all other business and Clients
whatsoever. Thus I had not only your care but your kindness to such a degree as
made you insensible to others; and as I engrossed your Pains, so had I the
command of your Purse which you most freely opened as my business required:
such was my condition at that time as I could not look upon it to be less than
a providence which directed me to you, Note, in his Petition to the King and
Council, 8 January 1674, he calls it his great misfortune that he met with
Cresset, because Cresset is no ^onger able to furnish him with money, or
forbear what he has lent to, or paid for him.
for it had been impossible for me without you to have managed any of those
Suits mentioned, in regard of their great charge and expense. I must and shall
ever assert that in all my whole business, you were to me as a Parent, a
Counselor, and a Friend, my advantage was all you aimed at; for you did lay
out your self with that frankness that till I was your debtor for 2500 l. you
never so much as asked me to give you a Bond or any Security. Nay when my
business grew so chargeable to you that you were forced to take up great sums
of Money to carry it on, you would not throw it off nor be discouraged but
borrowed even to the Morgaging your Land for me, and was forced to sell it at
great loss to satisfy part of my Debt: The danger you run was evident to the
world; insomuch that my Lord Mandevil has many times wondered, how you would
give me so much Credit that could not give you any good Security; Note, the Act
took away the 5000 l. given by the will of Bodwell, by setting aside that Will,
and that was assigned to Cresset as well as the 5000 l. settled by the Deed of
the 20. Feb. 1639.
and such as it was you parted with half of it when the Act of Parliament
passed for the Preserving that Estate, which with so much care and pains you
got at last settled: whatever money you borrowed for me, I had it on as good
terms as my Lord Mayor and Aldermen could have took it up, of all which sums
I am still your Debtor, having not satisfied you of one farthing, nor given you
any thing as a Reward, though I intended you a thousand pounds as an
Acknowledgments of my Gratitude. To the matter of your Accounts I must say,
that although I saw most of the money disbursed, and that you gave me the
Papers to peruse before we Endorsed any thing by way of Accounts upon the Deed
of Mortgage; yet such has been your Integrity that you have from time to time
subjected the whole to a Review and new Examination so often as it has been
asked, and particularly of late to Mr. Nolworthy for the satisfying of my
father: I must not only bear you witness what you have done, but what you have
suffered for me, if you require it at my hands: and though it has been to such
an extremity as I am almost ashamed to mention, yet could it not alter your
Respect to my Father against whom you put not in your Bill before a year was
elapsed for the settlement of that Estate; and when you did, it was with advice
of my Uncle Henry Win, who judged that way necessary to secure the Trustees.
I am so much engaged to you, that I can never be weary of doing you Right by
thus asserting your truth and friendship to

Sir, Your most affectionate Friend and Servant, R. ROBERTS.

For John Cresset Esquire

Cresset filed a General Replication.

Subpoena to rejoin returnable immediate, was awarded against the Lord Roberts,
and the Cause to be heard in Easter-Term, unless cause shown first general Seal.

Roberts served therewith.

Cresset filed Interrogatories, and proceeded to examine Witnesses to prove all
the matters of his Bill, which by Lord Roberts his Answer he was forced to do,
and has examined all the Persons of whom he borrowed Money for Mr. Roberts to
prove the same.

Cresset examine the Defendant Henry Wynn as a witness in this Cause de been
esse.



March made absolute, and the Cause ordered to be set down.

Cresset's Counsel attended, but no cause against the Order of 31 March was
shown: of which taking Certificate, the cause was set down to be heard the 17
May, 1669. Sub poena's to hear Judgment, returnable the 15th of May, were taken
out, and all the Defendants served therewith.

Roberts moved for further time to examine his Witnesses (without giving
notice) upon which Motions further time was given, the Subpoena returnable
immediate to rejoin, set aside, and the said Cresset,

Roberts, and all other the Defendants de Novo to rejoin.

Roberts did comply with:



Roberts Craves a Commission to examine Witnesses into Cornwall.



Cresset moved that a short time might be appointed for executing the said
Commission and Publication to pass; (well knowing there could be no material
Witnesses to examine but what were in Town, and therefore proposed) in Court.

First, That if Lord Roberts would set down in writing what he would examine
unto, Cresset would consent to admit it at hearing, or send down a Commission,
execute the same and return it, so as to bring the cause to hearing in Trinity
Term. Secondly, If Lord Roberts would put in such an Answer as the other
Defendants had done (and had promised he should do) then Cresset would wave his
Depositions taken, and examine no more, but go to hearing upon Bill, and
Answer. Thirdly, If Lord Roberts would furnish Cresset with 3500 l. to pay his
Debts, he would consent to account again to any Person his Lordship should
appoint, and stay two or three years for the rest of his Money, his Lordship
securing what should appear to be due above the said 3500 l. which last offer
was often made before the Suit began, in hope to have preserved Bodwels Estate
from Sale.
The Court ordered Mr. Sergeant Maynard to attend his Lordship, acquaint him
with these Offers which to the Court seemed fair; his Lordships Answer was
desired, the Cause declared not fit to be delayed, but ordered to be heard the
latter end of the then next Trinity Term.

Maynard attended Lord Roberts with the said Order, but no Answer returned,
only that day Lord Roberts named Commissioners into Cornwall, and Craved two
Commissions more, one into Carnarvanshire, the other into Anglesey.

Cresset gave Commissioners names into all three Counties, and struck
Commissioners; desired the Defendants Clerk so to do also, but could not obtain
the same.

Cresset moved the Court to call upon Sergeant Maynard for to give the Lord
Robert his Answer to the Propositions aforesaid, and to appoint a short time
and certain place to execute the Commissions, and order the Cause to be heard
in Trinity Term following.

The Lord Roberts his Answer was, that he could not go to hearing till he had
examined his Witnesses, unless Cresset would admit; that Mr. Roberts had
received the whole 5000 l. in question out of the profits of Mr. Bodwell's
Estate; prayed time for such Examination till Michaelmas Term.

Whereupon the said Cressets Council offered to allow that Mr. Roberts had
received all the Rents (except of his Mothers Jointure) that had grown due
since Bodwells death; and if the Court at the hearing thought fit that should
be deducted out of the 5000 l. in Question, then would consent to examine the
Quantum.

Secondly, The Court was informed that Richard Edwards, who is, and then was
the Bailiff that let, set and received the Rents of all Bodwell's Estate was
then in Court, and had been examined by Cresset to know what Mr. Roberts had
received, and was only able to prove the same, and therefore his Lordship
needed no Commission.

Thirdly, It was also insisted on, that the Lord Roberts knew of the Assignment
to Cresset, yet suffered Mr. Roberts to receive the profits of the Estate,
delays the hearing, puts no stop to the Receipts, and endeavors to deduct what
is received out of Cresset's 5000 l.

Fourthly, Satisfied the Court that the Commissions ought to be made
returnable, second return of the then next Trinity Term, at which time the said
Commissions were ordered to be made returnable.

Cresset moved for the carriage of the Commissions (which by the course of the
Court he ought to have had) but the same was denied.



Roberts gave notice to move for New Commissions; Whereupon Cresset with his
Counsel waited six days together to defend the said motion but the same was
never made until,

Roberts Council, (when Cresset's were most of them absent and without their
Instructions) moved; Whereupon it was Ordered, That Lord Roberts should renew
the Commissions, execute them at time and place to be appointed by the Six
Clerks, return them so as that Publication should pass at Michaelmas, and the
Cause be heard in Michaelmas Term, 1669. (This ex part.)

First General Seal, Cresset moved against New Commissions for that Publication
was past duly, and no Affidavit made; that Lord Roberts had not seen the
Depositions, or that he had any material witnesses to examine, both which it
was prayed might be made before any new Commission issued, and that Cresset
might carry the Commission, if any must go, it being his due (according to the
course of the Court.) All these things were denied: Commissions were granted
and made out, time and place to execute them was appointed by Lord Roberts.

Michaelmas Term next before Publication pass, to the end the Defendants may be
served to hear Judgment before Privilege of Parliament should come in.

October, 1669.



Carnarvanshire, where were examined no Witnesses that did any advantage to the
Defendants, save only Richard Edwards that was in Court when the Commission was
moved for, and had been examined to, and proved the same in Court before.

Cornwall, and there not one Witness examined to any the matters in Issue, or
concerning this cause; so that the said Commissions were only for delay, and to
put the said Cresset to unnecessary charges.

Robert Agent gave notice to move the Court on the 23. of October, to put off
the hearing for three weeks, on pretense that the Commission executed the 24
August was not returned, which Commission was in his Lordships Kinsman's hand,
and kept out all that time.

Cresset waited with his Counsel to defend the Motion, but none was made;
Thereupon he fee'd and instructed his Counsel for the hearing on Monday the 25
of October 1669.

Fountains Motion the same was put off on pretense the said Commission was not
returned, and this done without giving the said Cresset his Costs for his
Counsel attending that day, which was never done to any before.

Rainsford, who decreed Land to be sold to pay the said Cresset 5000 l. in
question, with damages for the same from the time it should have been paid,
directed an Account to be taken of what Profits was received of Bodwel's Estate
since the Act of Parliament; those to go in first place to payment of Bodwel's
Debts and Funeral-charges, when those paid, if a Surplusage remain, the
Trustees to pay the same to Cresset in part of his 5000 l. and damages and sell
Land for the Remainder, the Master to compute Interest, set out Land to be
sold, appoint time for Sale, if not sold by time appointed; Cresset to produce
a Purchaser, and the Master to sell for the most that can be gotten; the
Trustees to convey to such Purchaser; who was thereby decreed to hold and enjoy
the Lands bought by them against the Trustees and all the Defendants; and if
any Debts or Funeral-charges remained unpaid, that not to hinder selling to pay
Cressets 5000 l. with Interest; there appearing Land sufficient to pay all: and
it was reserved to the Court to consider of the said Cresset's cost to be given
him.

Roberts his Agent petitioned Lord Keeper against the Decree as to the point of
Interest, alleging, that by the Act payment of Interest was not warranted,
and that there was but 4000 l. due to Cresset, the other 1000 l. was given for
Solicitation.

Ordered, that the Register attend the Judge to settle the Decree, and in the
mean time the Inrolment staid.

This Petition was presented after the Order was settled and entered, and Sir
Walter Littleton been twice attended, and never objected against, till after
the Judge was gone into Northamptonshire, so that it appeared only a Design for
delay.

For upon this Order (though no proceeding were stopped, yet) the Defendants
refused to attend the Master; Whereupon

Cresset petitioned the Lord Keeper to hear the Cause himself as to that point
of Interest, and offered to abide his Judgment, but his Lordship refused so to
do as he did to hear the Cause at first.

Rainsford was attended by Council on both sides with the Register, when Lord
Roberts his Solicitor put off the hearing till next day.

Robert's Agent never came till after the time appointed, when he brought Mr.
Justice Ellis, but the Judge was gone abroad: having suspended the giving
Judgment till 26 January, 1669.

Roberts nor none in his behalf attended as they promised the Judge to do:
whereupon he confirmed his Decree, but ordered it to be stayed a day or two, to
see if the Lord Robert's Agents would attend; of which he caused notice to be
given.

Cresset attended with Council at great Charge.

Roberts his Agents presence, who complaining that he was surprised, his
Lordship ordered both sides to go back to the Judge upon that Point of
Interest; in the mean time the Decree to be deposited in Mr. Dugdale's hand.

Cresset was in, advised him to let the Decree be altered, and made to pay
Interest only for 4000 l. because in the Account there was mention of 1000 l.
given for 3 years and halfs Solicitation, and such Interest to begin from the
time of the Act of Parliament only, which done there could be no manner of
Objection made against it by the Lord Roberts, but declared he would not make
that alteration without the said Cressets consent, (this in the Presence of Mr.
Justice Ellis), to which Proposition Cresset consented; the Decree was
accordingly amended, signed, and enrolled, and Sir Walter Littleton attended,
who took the Account, stated Cresset's 5000 l. principal Money decreed him, and
the Interest thereof to be 5820 l. appointed the same to be paid the first of
July 1670, and reported no surplusage of Rents or Profits in the Trustees
hands; and at the Lord Roberts Councel's instance the whole Estate was set out
to be sold, a particular whereof was brought in by Richard Edwards the Bailiff,
with the Names of every Tenant, and the Rents they paid. This when brought in
was brought in at much greater rates then let for, (on purpose as is conceived)
to deceive a Purchaser, whereupon he was ordered to be examined upon Oath, and
upon his Examination he put in the Margent the true values of every Tenement,
these Lands or so much thereof as would raise 5820 l. was ordered to be sold.

The reason why (as the Master in his Report declares) he did not set out
particular Lands, for the said 5820 l. at that time was, because the Lord
Roberts Counsel insisted, That if the Lands free from Encumbrances should be
sold, it would greatly prejudice the Estate, and therefore they hoped to
exchange the Lands in Jointure in Anglesey (whereof Llanigred Park was a part)
for Lands in Carnarvanshire, and so to sell all Anglesey Lands, and preserve
the Infants Estate in Carnarvanshire (being the best part thereof) entire, and
sell as little reversion as could be.

Roberts (who had all along before seemed to consent to sell Land to pay the
5000 l. and Interest, and had told and writ Cresset word that he being in
Possession and receiving the Profits of Bodvell's Estate should not hurt him,
for that he received the same upon Account of an Assignment of a Sequestration,
from his Mother in Law which she had for Arrears of Ally-money pretended to be
6000 l. but assigned for 3000 l.) secretly writ the following Letter to Mr.
Heart, who was the Lord Roberts's Solicitor, and he brought the same to Sir
Walter Littleton who gave it to Cresset.

1 January 1669. Mr. HEART,
MR. Vermuyden informs me that Mr. Cresset has preferred before the Master of
Chancery an Account in my Name, I do hereby assure you he never consulted me in
the Case, nor had any direction from me therein, as I am ready to make Oath,
wherefore I do utterly protest against it.

And as to my Receipts of all or any part of Bodvell's Estate, I do profess I
never did it to pay Funeral Charges, Note, this 5000 l. was assigned to Cresset
on the 10. of Mar. 1663.
nor upon any such like trick, but having by Mr. Bodvell's deed of Settlement
in Marriage a Title to 5000 l. portion, I thought my self legally entitled to
receive the Rents even before the pretended Will was set aside, and since the
Act of Parliament mentions that 5000 l. I continued the same, and hope that no
Court of Equity will ever make me an Accomptant to the Trustees since I had a
legal interest to such a sum as will clear me upon the balance of my Receipts
with what was my due.

As to any Defalcations I demand not one penny, for I received many Debts due
to Mr. Bodvell, and Arrears of Rent, Mrs. Vermuyden had 600 l. per Annum, and
yet Mr. Roberts to lessen Cresset's Receipts would charge himself with the
Receipt of all the Estate.
and therefore charge my self with the Receipt of the whole Estate in
possession ever since the Act of Parliament passed, being three years this
Christmas.

I here send you Mr. Cresset's Defeazance, of which I must give you thus the
History: My Wife and I sealed an Assignment of the Portion to satisfy him for
2400 l. then laid out, I signed several times as he laid out, but my Wife
signed only the first time. Then at Oxford when the Parliament sat, I gave him
a Judgment as farther security, whereof this is the Defeazance; and methinks
thereby he can claim but 3000 l. for though it be said that to acquit my self
from the 6000 l. I must not only pay 3000 l. but perform certain Articles and
Covenants relating to the Deed therein mentioned, Note, It is 3400 l.
yet I do suppose he concluded himself thereby to have only remedy upon the
Judgment in case such Covenants are not performed, and therefore Bodvell's
Estate not liable at all to pay it, or but the remainder of the Portion in my
hands, which accounting my Receipts as aforesaid cannot be more than 3000 l. I
think.

I am your affectionate friend, R. ROBERTS.


Walter Littleton made the aforesaid Report, and it was ordered to be confirmed
unless Cause.





Roberts petitioned the Lord Keeper for a Bill of Review upon the same point
concerning Interest which had been determined upon five hearings as aforesaid;
this contrary to the course of the Court was granted; but from the sixth of
March to the eighth of June following (being three Months) the order never
drawn up or entered, nor proceeded upon till

Cressets Money was near the time of being paid (to wit, the first of July
1670) then a Bill of Review was exhibited, and the only Errors assigned were,
First, That Interest for 4000 l. was decreed, and payment of Interest is not
warranted by the Act. Secondly, That the Act says, The 5000 l. in question
should be paid after the Debt, and Funeral Charges of Bodvell were paid; and
they appeared not to be paid so the 5000 l. not due:


Cresset put in his Plea and Demurer as follows; Demurred for that there was
no error in Law in the body of the Decree whereupon a Bill of Review could be
brought to ground a Reversal thereof.

Nor was there error so much as in fact or judgment in the body of the said
Decree, for that it might have stood with the Justice of the Court to have
decreed Interest for the whole 5000 l. and not for 4000 l. only, and that from
the time the same was payable to Sarah Roberts, and not from the time of the
Act of Parliament only, inasmuch as the said 5000 l. was not a Duty created by
the Act of Parliament, but directed by the said Act to be paid according to
the Deed of 20 Febr. 1639, which made it a Debt payable when the said Sarah
attained the age of 21 years, or day of Marriage, both which happened before
Bodvell died. And howbeit by the Act it was made payable to Sarah Roberts, and
that after Debts and Funerals paid, yet that did not alter the said Cresset's
title to the same, nor ought it to hinder him from receiving the same before
the payment of the Debts and Funerals, for that in the Act there is a saving of
all men's Rights and Interest either in Law or Equity, and the said 5000 l. was
Assigned to the said Cresset long before the said Act of Parliament, and was
the first debt upon the Estate.

And it was further pleaded that without paying Interest it was impossible to
perform the Act of Parliament, which enacts 5000 l. to be paid: The Act was
passed four years before that time, the Interest came to 1200 l. besides all
costs and charges in the recovering the same; so that to pay 5000 l. then was
not to pay above 3300 l. and the Trustees might delay payment till the whole
Principal should be drowned, and the said Cresset only receive the Interest of
his Money.

And that the Debts and Funerals were not paid ought not to hinder Payment of
Cresset's 5000 l. for that the Trustees were entrusted to pay both them and the
5000 l. and by their own showing there is Estate enough so to do, and the not
paying them is latches in themselves whereof they ought to have no benefit.

Nor ought the Bill of Review to have been admitted in as much as there were
not proper parties thereunto, the Decree being against six Defendants, five of
which abided by the same, and the sixth bringing the Bill of Review alone.

Nor ought such Bill of Review to be brought till the Decree be performed and
the 5820 l. paid but not one penny thereof, was either paid or secured,
therefore prayed a Dismission with full costs.

July 1670, the Plantiffs to have notice.

Roberts Agents moved to put off the hearing till after Michaelmas, on pretense
his Lordships Council were out of Town, when as Mr. Sergeant Maynard, Mr.
Collins, and Mr. Colthrop, were all in Court.

Cresset finding delay to be the only design, did (as he had many times before
to his Lordships Agents done) offer in Court to take his 5000 l. without
Interest, so it might be forthwith paid, and Bodvell's Estate be preserved from
sale; therefore prayed that the hearing might go on, his Council being all
fee'd.

The Lord Keeper declared Cresset's Proposition was honest and fair, and
ordered the Lord Roberts his Solicitor to give his Lordship notice thereof and
bring his Answer next day, when if he did not agree thereunto, he would proceed
to hear and determine the Cause.

Cresset having offered to wave Interest, might not the L. Keeper as well have
settled it so now, as to discharge him from his offer put him to 12 l. charges,
and then take away his Interest without his consent, and against the opinion of
all the Judges, as by the following order he did do.
Cresset's Counsel was again Fee'd and attended, and the Lord Roberts not
complying with the Offer, the Lord Keeper discharged the said Cresset from the
same, and proceeded to hearing, but after a full hearing, when ready (as
supposed) to give Judgment, upon the earnest importunity of the Lord Roberts
his Counsel, his Lordship deferred giving Judgment till the 8th of November,
1670. when he declared he would desire the Assistance of some of the Judges.
This Order Cresset could not get passed till 6 November, 1670. when Lord
Robert's Solicitor would not let that Declaration concerning the Assistance of
the Judges be put into the same; of which by Petition the 7th of November,
Cresset gave intimation to his Lordship, and prayed Judges might be called to
Assist him; Nevertheless

Cresset's Counsel was not prepared) and reversed so much of the Decree as
concerned selling Land to pay Interest, but confirmed the Decree in all other
points, and ordered an Account to be taken of all the profits of Bodvells
Estate from the time of his death, and decreed Cresset to find a Purchaser that
should (buy not only Land for payment of his own Debt, but also) so much as
should raise Money to pay all Bodvells Debts and Funeral-charges mentioned in
the aforesaid Report of the 11. February, 1669. and which were not paid, or
said therein to be secured by Mr. Roberts; The Master to sell the Land for the
most he could get, agree conveyances, and appoint a short time for sealing the
same; and if not sealed by the time appointed, then the Trustees to pay
Interest from the time of tendering a Purchaser; This Order could not begot
passed till 17. December, 1670. when my Lord was attended to settle the same.

John Coell, (Sir Walter Littleton being dead) and his Lordship ordered that
Cresset should have Interest for his whole 5000 l. and that the Deeds
concerning the Land that should be sold, should be delivered to the Purchaser.

John Coell made his Report that he had heard both sides several days, and
found by the Account annexed, (Copies whereof Lord Roberts his Agents had, were
heard thereupon and took no exception unto) that there was sufficient raised to
pay all Bodvells Debts and Funeral-charges, and all the Arrears of Hern's
Annuity, due at Christmas then last past, with a Surplusage of 791 l. which he
allowed Mr. Roberts for Costs, and this by the Profits due from the time of
Bodwells death till August 1670.

And that Cresset had produced a Purchaser to buy the Lands in the Shcedule
annexed, (whereof Bodvell Seat and Lanigred Park was a Part) that offered 13
years Purchase for what was in possession, 7 years for Reversion after one
Life, 5 for Reversion after two lives, and pressed him to sell. But upon Lord
Roberts his Council's desire (to have ten days time to see if his Lordship
would pay the Money or produce a Purchaser to give more than Cressets Purchaser
offered or to buy other Lands,) he had given him 14 days time, when, if the
money were not paid, or other Purchasers to buy other Land or give more for
these Lands produced, he would proceed to sell and settle the Conveyances.

Note.
By Sir Walter Littletons Report dated 11 Feb. 1669. It appears they designed
that Lanigred Park should be sold and Bodvell was put in by Cresset.

First, because there was no other Estate in possession that was free from
Encumbrances. Secondly, in hopes the Trustees would pay the Money decreed
rather then suffer the Principal Seat to be Sold, Cresset neither designing nor
desiring to have it (as by the following account will appear.)
John Coell makes a Second Report and certifies that the 20 January Lord
Roberts his Council attended him, told him his Lordship was loath to have
Bodvells house sold, but had given no order to pay any money, or could produce
any other Purchaser, either to buy other Land, or give more for the Lands
mentioned in his former Report; but certifies further that upon the great
Importunity of Lord Roberts his Council, Cresset offered for the Preservation
of the Estate, that if the Lord Roberts would pay him 1000 l. the middle of
Febr. and secure the rest (with interest from the time the Court should direct)
to be paid at Midsummer, the said Cresset would accept the same, or if the Lord
Roberts would clear Anglesey Lands from all Encumbrances (as he proposed to
Sir. Walter Littleton) and exchange those Lands in Jointure there, and give
Mrs. Bodwell Lands in Carnarvanshire for them, he would buy the Lands in
Anglesey and leave Bodvell, which offer they prayed 14 days time for his
Lordship to answer unto, and did not doubt to receive the same, which time was
granted, and elapsed, and new Summons issued, but the Defendants did not
attend, therefore he had sold the Lands in his former Report mentioned to the
person, and at the Prizes therein expressed, and would settle Conveyances,
allow the same under his hand; and appoint short time for the execution thereof.







First, because the Master ought to have Reported what or how much had been
Received before the Act, and what and how much since the Act of Parliament and
of whom, and for what.

Secondly, Because the Master appointed 5000 l. of the Purchase-Money to be
paid to the said Cresset, intimating that the said Mr. having reported a
Surplusage received, over and above what would pay Bodvells debts and
funeral-charge, he should have said how much such Surplusage was and in whose
hands, and ordered the same to have been paid in part of the 5000 l. to have
saved so much of the Estate from sale, and the Mr. ought not to have allowed of
a Purchaser, the Lands being much undervalued, no allowance made for 2000 l.
worth of Wood, nor care taken for the Preservation of the Principal Seat of the
Family, and place of Residence of the Wife and Children of the said Rob.
Roberts, who on the purchase will be turned out of doors.

Bodwells Demesnes, and not valued to, or paid for by the Purchaser; if there
were, then Lord Roberts to have time till Midsummer to cut it and carry it
away, leaving sufficient boots of all sorts, and for the Ornament and defense
of the Mansion house.

Cresset should have Interest for 5000 l. from the time when he first tendered
his Purchaser, That the writings concerning the Lands sold alone, and true
Copies of such as concern the Lands sold with others, be delivered to the
Purchaser; And Sir. John Coell to compute the Interest, Note, the Purchaser
Robert Stapleton Esquire was a Trustee for Cresset.
and settle the payments thereof, according to the Decree of the 8. of November
1699. and the Purchaser Decreed the possession of the Lands sold, and to enjoy
the same to him and his Heirs and Assignees for ever, against the Lord Roberts,
and all other the Defendants in the causes, he paying the said Cresset 5000 l.
out of the purchase Money and the other 126 l. remained, etc. thereof as Sir
John Coell should direct.

All these Orders, Decrees, and Reports, Accounts and Rentalls being signed and
Enrolled upon such mature deliberation as aforesaid.

John Lord Roberts (Sir. Richard and Henry Wynn Esquire) appealed from them to the
house of Lords, and for ground of Relief insisted upon the same Reasons
contained in the Exceptions to Sir. John Coells Report.

Cresset Answered the said Appeal setting forth the matters aforesaid.

Nemine Contradicente, with this special direction that it should be without
prejudice to the said Cressets going back into Chancery for his Costs of Suit,
which by the Decree of the 8. of November 1669, was reserved to the
Consideration of that Court.

Cresset exhibited a Counter Appeal to have had Interest money from the time of
Mr. Bodwells death according to the Decree, which Appeal for quietness sake he
waved at the Bar and would not suffer to be opened. Thereupon that also was
dismiss't.

After these dismissions Sir John Coell was daily addressed unto to settle
Conveyances and compute and set out Lands for Interest according to the order
of the 6 March 1670. who after above 20 times being attended by both Sides made
the Report following.

Bodvells demesnes but what was necessary for Boots and Ornament to the house,
and that Cresset had allowed for it in his former purchase.

Secondly, that he had computed Interest for the 5000 l. for one year which
comes to 300 l. and set out and sold Land of 13 l. 31 s. 4 d. per annum and the
126 l. above the 5000 l. in the last purchase Money in Satisfaction for the
same.

Thirdly, that he had allowed of Conveyances according to the Lord Roberts and
the other Defendants Council's own amendments, and appointed them to be
executed by John Lord Roberts Sir Richard Wynn, Henry Wynn, Robert and Sarah
Roberts, when tendered to them and Sarah Roberts and her Husband to levy a Fine
of the Land sold to the use of the aforesaid Robert Stapleton and his Heirs for
ever, and all the Defendants to make further Assurance within 7 years if
needful for ascertaining the Title and freeing the Lands sold from Bodvells
Encumbrances. And that Lanigred Park should be liable after Mrs. Bodvells life
to pay to Joseph Hern or his Assigns (during his wifes life) what can be made
thereof toward raising the 100 l. per annum Annuity which that Park and three
Townships in Carnarvanshire are obliged to pay: And that all the Arrears of the
said 100 l. per annum which should grow due before Mrs. Bodvell's death, should
be paid out of the said Townships and Lanigred Park not be liable to the same,
etc.



Cresset agreed unto.



John Coell upon an Order to him directed Reports as follows.

That all along Pending the Reference before him both before and after the
Appeal to Parliament, and after the dismission out of Parliament when he was
attended to settle Conveyances, Cresset did in his presence offer the
Defendants that if they would set out Lands in lieu of Bodvell of the same
yearly value, and sell the other Lands in his purchase for the value they were
let for, to preserve Bodvell house and demesnes from Sale and to keep the
Estate in Carnarvanshire entire. He would exchange the said Bodvell house for
such other Lands as they should set out; but that offer would not be accepted
nor would they set out other Lands, whereupon the Conveyances passed as the
Defendant amended them. The Report was made and entered, after which some
Amendments were desired to be made. And the Defendants Council and their Agents
agreed if such Amendments were made they would not oppose the Confirmation of
the Report.

Whereupon Cresset consented, and the Report was sent for from of the file; and
with the Conveyances were amended in all points desired.



Henry Wynn, Esquire

Mr. Roberts (who all along had hindered Bodvell from being left out of the
Conveyances, and promised to seal,) and his Lady declared they would not seal
till my Lord Roberts had sealed.

John Lord Roberts in Cornwall, but was not admitted to his Lordship. He
tendered the Writ of Execution and Conveyances in his Hall, but no servant would
receive them.

Complaint thereof being made to the Court, it was ordered,

Roberts Clerk in Court should be deemed a good service of him, and that all
Process of contempt returnable immediate should issue against Robert and Sarah
Roberts to enforce them to execute the Conveyances. And that an Injunction
should issue against the Tenants to enjoin them to attorn and pay their Rents
to Stapleton.

And it was further ordered, That Sir John Coel should tax Cresset's Costs of
Suit, unless cause shown the then next third general Seal, Lord Roberts Council
desiring to be heard to that point only.

Roberts his Clerk in Court was served with the Decree, and an Attachment
returnable immediate issued against Robert and Sarah Roberts for their
contempts.

Cresset (having attended with Council three days of motions upon notice given
him that the Lord Roberts would move against the Order of the 12th. of July
1671, and no motion being made, he then moved the Court; and it was Ordered,
That tendering the Decree and Conveyances at the Lord Roberts house, should be
a good service upon his Lordship; and if his Lordship did not seal, then upon
Affidavit thereof a Sequestration should issue without further motion against
John Bodvell's Estate, and a Writ of Assistance to put the Purchaser in
possession of the Lands sold, and that the Master should proceed to tax Cresset
his Costs according to the course of the Court.

Robert and Sarah Roberts.

Roberts was attended in Cornwall by an express Messenger, and then sealed the
Conveyances, which done, Mr. Roberts and his Lady had the Conveyances tendered
to them again to seal, which they both refused to do, on pretense that
Bodvell's House and Demesnes were conveyed thereby.

Cresset went into Carnarvonshire to serve Sir Richard Wynn; when he came
there, met with a Letter from Mr. Roberts conjuring the said Sir Richard not to
seal, which so far prevailed as that Sir Richard would not execute the said
Deeds till Attachments were sent for from London and executed upon him, which
cost the said Cresset (together with his Journey) above 100 l. The Letter was
as follows.

SIR, How my Father who occasioned all this sale and refused to let Mr. Cresset
have 3000 l. worth of Land, should now seal away the value of 8000 l. and of
both the Mansion-houses with the best of all the Lands, and the very name of
the Family, is a thing so unjust and shameful, that it is the talk and wonder
of every body; you are the chief of my Wife's Family, and if you now become the
preserver of her and her Estate, it will make the world honor you, and us ever
to serve you; and be sure of this that at Michaelmas-Term next his Money shall
be paid him, and so you shall not have so much as the trouble of a Suit, and it
had been now ready, if any one could but have expected such a compliance of my
Father, my Wife, and I never shall seal, and therefore think not, Sir, we can
ever assent, (as you were informed.) We abhor to sell away the name of Bodvell.
My Wife gives you her humble service, and thanks, and both of us are obliged
beyond expression of

Your most humble Servant and Cousin, R. ROBERTS.

For Sir Richard Wynn Baronet, at Gwidder in Carnarvonshire.

Cresset having a Copy of the aforesaid Letter from Sir Richard Wynn,
immediately writ to London to Mr. Roberts, (who had assured him before his
going out of Town, that he would give him no hinderance in the Country.) In
answer to which Letter Mr. Roberts writ to him, dated the 29th. of August 1671,
wherein among other things he uses this Expression:

But since Sir Richard Wynn stops his hand upon my account, I shall propose
this to you that you press him not to seal, for if I do not shortly, either pay
the whole sum of the Decree, or for all the Carnarvonshire Lands I will be
bound to join in the conveyance, etc. This you may consent to without
prejudice, etc.

Robert and Sarah Roberts.

Sir John Coel being attended to tax Costs according to the Order of the 26th.
of July the Defendants got time to move the Court to know whether Costs of the
Appeal in Parliament should be taxed, and they gave Cresset six several Notices
to move the same, at which times he attended with Council at great charge, but
they never moved. Whereupon, Cresset moved to know his Lordships pleasure in
that point, when it was ordered that the Master should proceed to tax the Costs
in general, unless upon notice good cause should be shown the then next seal.



Cresset endeavored, but could get no day appointed for attending his Lordship
for that purpose, though he often petitioned for the same.

Robert and Sarah Roberts.

Mr. Roberts and his Lady their pretense for not sealing, being because
Bodvell's House was sold, and promising to seal if they might have that again:
At their desire Cresset referred it to the present Lord Keeper, and Sir Thomas
Chichly their own Uncle (both of their Nomination) to settle what should be
paid or given him in exchange for the same, the Referees met, Note, this
agreement was to be executed on or before the 25 of March 1671.
made an agreement, to which Cresset consented, and they promised to perform,
thereby put Cresset to great charge in getting Conveyances drawn for the
Execution thereof. But Mr. Roberts and his Lady never performed the same.

Robert and Sarah Roberts lodged in Whitehall, and therefore he could not
attach them.

Cresset moved again for Costs when it was ordered that Sir John Coel should
tax Costs, since the Decree against John Lord Roberts, and that a Sequestration
should issue against John Bodvell and Robert Roberts their real and personal
Estate for the contempt of the said Roberts and Sarah his Wife, unless cause
should be showed the then next Seal (though by Affidavit it then appeared) they
had due notice of that days motion.

Roberts further time till the first day of the then next Term, peremptorily to
show cause against his paying of Costs, but disallowed the Reasons offered by
Mr. Roberts and his Lady, their Council against the Sequestration; and Ordered
that the same should issue.

Roberts motion, it was Ordered, That no Costs should be taxed against him
personally, but that Cresset should have all his Cost of Suits taxed, and Sir
John Coel to tax them accordingly, the same to be paid out of Bodvell's Estate,
unless on notice to Robert Roberts and his Trustees, good cause to the contrary
should be shown the then next day of motion.

Cresset should have his Costs relative to these Suits both before and after
his Decree, Coel to tax them, and to be paid out of Bodvell's Estate.

Roberts, and Robert and Sarah Roberts moved, whereupon notwithstanding all the
former Orders, the Court Ordered Cresset should have Cost taxed since the
Decree only, and to be paid as aforesaid: Which Order they kept from passing
until

Cresset's motion, That Mr. Flatman the Defendant's Clerk in Court should bring
back the Order, pass it, and attend the Master therewith: Which done,

l. Costs only, Note, that one motion might have settled these Costs as well as
15, and saved the charge of the rest of the Motions, Notices, and Affidavits of
giving notice of those Motions, and drawing up those Orders.
which was very little more than paid the charges of the several motions made
for Settlement thereof.

The Sequestration being issued, and one Richard Edwards appointed one of the
Sequestrators, he has ever since received the Rents of the Estate sequestered,
and refused to pay the same to Mr. Roberts without Cresset's consent, which Mr.
Roberts in September 1672, prevailed with Cresset to give for that year upon
his promise that if he did not end the difference betwixt him and the said
Cresset between that and Christmas, that then he and his Lady would seal the
Conveyances in question, (the said Cresset giving him two years time to redeem
Bodvell's seat at the price the Lord Keeper, and Sir Thomas Chichly had valued
the same at upon the reference in Febr. 1671,) and promising further that He
would repay the said money which he should so receive of the said Edwards.

Cresset relying upon this promise got Writings drawn for that purpose, which
he carried to Mr. Roberts in December. 1672, he kept, but did not execute the
same, but when he received them, he promised that he would forthwith go to his
Father into Cornwall, and submit himself to his pleasure, whereby he doubted
not to regain his favor, and capacitate himself to end the said Cresset's
business; if not, he would certainly at his return seal the Deed in question.
This Journey he took accordingly, but it proved ineffectual; nevertheless to
this day he has not sealed.

Edwards received the Rents of the Sequestered Lands again, and refused to pay
them to Mr. Roberts as before, until such time as he prevailed with Cresset for
another direction for that purpose, the which Cresset was persuaded to grant.

First, Because he was unwilling to be an Accomptant to the said Roberts, or to
the Court when the said Decree should be performed. Secondly, Upon Mr. Roberts
his securing the 250 l. Cost taxed as aforesaid by a Bill of sale of the Goods
in Bodvell's House, dated the 19th. of March 1672, and a Bill under hand and
seal to Edwards to pay him out of that years rents, 130 l. to make up the said
250 l.
But the said Roberts having got Cresset's Letter, never acquainting the said
Edwards that he was to pay any part thereof to Cresset, got the whole Rents out
of his hand before due, so that nothing was paid to Cresset that year.

Vermuyden who had a Jointure in most of the Lands sold to Stapleton happened
to die, which Cresset well hoped might have been of some advantage to him in
his Purchase which had cost him so dear, and to help make up the great loss he
had sustained, and the vast charge of the Suit aforesaid, but the contrary has
happened, as by the following Narrative will appear. For in

Roberts acquainted Cresset that his Lady had now a mind to have all the Lands
again that were sold, intimating they were too good a bargain by the life
falling, (never considering that she might have lived twenty years, Note, This
was never desired while it was a Reversion.
and that the hazard was reciprocal both to the Vender and the Purchaser)
Cresset desiring if possible to preserve their Estate, consented that they
should have all again, paying thirteen years purchase for the Possession, and
seven for the Reversion after one life (which rate he allowed when he
purchased) and that at the same yearly value he bought them at, or that they
paying him the principal Money he paid, and his Interest, and his Charges of
the Suits; Mr. Stapleton should re-convey to them (though the Lands are worth
more) neither of these Offers were grateful, but a Reference was proposed to
the Right Honorable the now Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England; the which
Cresset consented unto, upon Condition that he might have Security from them to
abide his Award; My Lord Keeper being attended, no Security could be given,
Therefore by his Lordships advice,

July 1674. what should be paid Cresset for the said Lands: one moiety whereof
was to be paid the 16 July 1674, the other moiety on the 8th. of November
following; otherwise they to Seal the Conveyances, to levy a Fine, to wave all
Privilege, and to quit all Pretenses to the Estate in question, this to be
done without prejudice to the Decree if the Award should not be by them
performed, upon this Order.

His Lordship was often attended by the parties, sometimes by themselves, and
at other times with Counsel, and Cresset wholly submitted to his Lordships
determination, and petitioned him to make his Award.

May 1674 for making the said Award, was enlarged by a second Order of Consent
till the 16. of July 1674, his Lordship was frequently attended in that time,
and by Cresset petitioned to make his Award, which he thought not fit to do,
because he could not find Mr. Roberts had any Money, but declared he was ready
to have delivered his Judgment, if he could have seen Money ready.

So that all this Time, and great Charges was lost, and the end Cresset had in
the Reference wholly frustrated, for he could never expect any advantage by
such Reference, or that my Lord should have given him more (but rather less)
than the Land was worth, but well hoped for an end of trouble, and if he had
not Money then, to have his Conveyances executed, (when the time limited for
the payment thereof had been elapsed,) by which Sealing it is to be observed,
nothing does pass for the Estate in Law, is already conveyed, and Cresset is in
possession, and Mr. Roberts and his Lady their being made parties, was only to
testify their Consents for their Trustees Indemnity; but being made parties
and not Sealing, it frightens persons from becoming Purchasers, or lending of
Money upon a Mortgage, without which Cresset cannot pay their Debts, but must
lie in a Gaol for them, whilst they (who by means as aforesaid are become
Masters of his Estate) live plentifully in a Palace.

From the 16th. of July 1674. to November 1674. Cresset pressed the renewing of
the aforesaid Reference to the Lord Keeper, which frequently was promised, and
he put to great charge in going (as well as loss of time in attending) at
Whitehall for that purpose, but all in vain, for a Reference to his Lordship,
(or to any other person) would not be consented unto, though Cresset frequently
offered to refer it, either to Mr. Attorney or Mr. Solicitor General (both of
them of Mr. Roberts his own Council,) or to any other honest and understanding
Person he or his Lady should name.

Note, No 5000 l. was offered till the Estate came into possession.
In November 1675. Mr. Roberts told Cresset that if he would take five thousand
pound (not only for the Lands aforesaid, but) for all other the Debts due to
him from him (which was above two thousand five hundred pounds more) and give
up all his Securities, that he had for the same (and trust to his Honor to pay
the rest when he was able) then he should have it presently paid him, otherwise
declared he would do nothing; this being unreasonable and unconscionable,
Cresset did not consent thereunto.

First, because he could never find where any Money was, or any Person that
would pay it.

Secondly, because there was not only above two thousand five hundred pound
more due to him as aforesaid; but the loss of his Practice, Credit, and Eleven
years trouble and service ought also to be considered.

Thirdly, for that the five thousand pound offered was less by three hundred
pounds than he paid for the Lands alone in the year 1670, when they were most
in Reversion, besides the Charges of these Suits which has cost him above
twelve hundred pounds, and the Interest of his Purchase-Money which comes to
above twelve hundred pounds more; so that in all the Land lies him Bona fide,
in at least seven thousand seven hundred pound, and the Rents received is not
above seven hundred and sixty pound; therefore the offering five thousand
pound, is to offer One thousand nine hundred and forty pound less than really
the Land lies him in.

Note, This Petition Mr. Roberts was acquainted with had it shown him, and he
amended it, and it was delivered as he amended it.
Cresset finding no way of Accommodation of these matters, Petitioned his
Majesty in Council, setting forth his Case, and that Mr. Roberts for three
years past had taken shelter in Whitehall against Law and Justice; that if
Whitehall should be a Sanctuary against all his Royal Process, the end of the
Law would be frustrated; The Courts of Law and Equity rendered useless, and all
Judgments and Decrees of such Courts become insignificant; prayed therefore
that Mr. Roberts might be ordered forthwith to Seal the Conveyances in
Question, or otherwise that he might have leave to attach him by a Serj^^nt at
Arms in Whitehall.

Roberts, that he expects he should speedily take care to satisfy the Justice
of the Petitioners Demands, or return his Answer to that Board.

Roberts was served with the Order and the Petition it self, but in stead of
answering thereof; he on the

Cresset, charging him with having given in d^ceitful Accounts, and with
demanding double his due, and striving to defeat him of Seven hundred pound per
annum of the best of his Estate; and exacting of Eight thousand pound for
Solicitation, etc. by which Petition, (whereof not one single Paragraph was
true) it is presumed he designed if possible to have begot in his Majesty, and
that Honorable Bard such an ill Opinion of Cresset and his Cause, as to have
diverted them from doing, (or at least prevailed with them to have delayed)
Justice, and certainly he could have (...) other end, considering that although
upon the reading of the said Petition, It was Ordered that Cresset should
forthwith have a Copy of it, and put in this Answer thereunto; yet to his day
Mr. Roberts has never drawn up that Order, nor did he ever give Cresset notice
thereof, or served him with any Copy (as he ought to have done) but the said
Cresset having intitution thereof from others, took a Copy at his own Charge,
and returned his Answer to that Honorable Board in writing, wherein he set
forth the substance of the matter aforesaid; as also something to clear the
reason of his Demands, and to vindicate himself from the false Aspersions by
that Petition cast upon him, of demanding Eight thousand pound for
Solicitation, or unreasonable Charges for the Suits aforesaid, this Answer was
put in the 15 Jan. 1664. and therein

l. secured by Assignment of the two five thousand pound Portions aforesaid,
bearing date as in the Margent.

Note that in the said Assignment the said Roberts and Sarah his Wife, Covenant
that they would not receive any of the two five thousand pounds themselves, but
that the said Cresset should receive the same for his own use, and first
satisfy himself not only the 2400 l. aforesaid, but also all such other sums
as the said Cresset should lay out for or lend unto, or become bound with him
the said Robert Roberts for, together with all such costs and damages as he
should be put unto concerning the same.

Cresset having before that time given in an account of Six hundred seventy and
six pound more due to him from the said Roberts; the said Roberts then allowed
the same, and by an indorsment on the back of the Assignment aforesaid, made
the said two five thousand pounds liable to pay the same.

Roberts allowed of a third account for four hundred and fourteen pounds 8 s.
and 10 d. more; and by an indorsement as aforesaid, secured the same in manner
as the 676 l. was, and it being the Sickness year, Cresset had from him a
Release under hand and Seal from being further called to an account for any of
the aforesaid Sums: And the said Cresset considering that the said Mr. Roberts
was in the possession of Bodvells Estate, and not knowing but that the Rents by
him received might then after be deducted out of the two five thousand pounds
assigned to him, desired a further Security from him, who thereupon (by the
advice of the Atturny General) gave a Judgment of Six thousand pounds
defeisanced for the payment of 3490 l. 8 s. and 10 d. then due as aforesaid, in
April then next following, and also to perform the Covenants of the aforesaid
deed of Assignment, which Cresset humbly conceives was but reasonable for him
to ask, and Roberts to give, and not any exacting of a double security for the
self-same sums of Money.

Roberts and allowed of, there appeared due more, 580 l. for securing whereof
(by like indorsment upon the back of the aforesaid Assignment) the two five
thousand pounds therein mentioned was made liable, Note, Mr. Roberts promised
to pay Cresset 1000 l. a year before; And if he had paid it down when he
secured it, it would have been less by a 1000 l. than by his ordinary course of
practice he might have got in that time without half the trouble he had in this
cause or loss of Practice, Credit or Estate.
as also to pay unto the said Cresset one thousand pound for his three years
and half time then wholly spent in Mr. Roberts his Service, and the aforesaid
Judgment of 6000 l. was made liable also to pay the same.

So that the total sum then due from the said Roberts and secured as aforesaid
was 5070 l. 8 s. 10 d. Of all which Sums, or for his eight years loss of time
since, or his sufferings (by sale of his Estate at under-rates to pay Mr.
Roberts his Debts contracted) as aforesaid, or for the loss of his Credit, by
being sued for him, and his Practice, Cresset could never get one penny. Add to
this 5070 l. 8 s. 10. the Interest thereof for eight years and half, 2586 l.
The Money lent and laid out for Roberts between the 6 of July and 26 of Febr.
1666, 250 l. And the Interest thereof for eight years; 120 l. Cressets charges
he has been put to in defending himself at Law against Mr. Roberts Creditors,
300 l. And the charges of this Suit in Chancery, which has cost 1200 l. Makes
the whole Demand to be 9486 l. 8 s. 10 d. Besides the Interest of these last
Sums expended in Lawsuits, and of the Money paid by Cresset to Mr. Roberts
Creditors for Interest-money, Procuration, Continuation-Money, and for altering
Securities since the 6th. of July 1666, all which ought to be allowed Cresset,
it being principal out of his Pocket, and being computed amounts to about 600
l. And all that Cresset has received toward satisfaction of these Demands out
of the profits of the Lands sold, amounts not to above 760 l. Note, That the
aforesaid 4070 l. and 250 l. Principle-money was borrowed by Cresset for Mr.
Roberts, and he being bound with him for the same, has been forced to pay it,
together with Interest and Charges to the persons of whom it was borrowed: to
wit, Note, As Money was borrowed, Mr. Roberts had part of it, and left the rest
with Cresset to defray Charges, which he himself saw disposed, but Cresset kept
the Account, and from time to time gave him account thereof, the which he
examined, and afterward stated, allowed and gave Releases upon the same, so
that Cresset has no Account with Roberts, save to have the Money he was bound
with him for, and the Interest and his Charges of Suits that he has paid, and
been at upon his Account.
Of Mr. John Jones in May 1663, 800 l. Of Mr. Ralph Suckly in Aug. 1663, 1000
l. Of Sir Jeremy Whichcot in Febr. 1663, 500 l. Of Mr. Edward Rudg Merchant in
1664, 500 l. Of Sir William Roberts Daughter, 500 l. Of Sergeant Maynard, 200
l. Of Mr. Tratford of the Inner Temple, 300 l. Of Mr. Caesar, 500 l. In all
4300 l.

Which Sums were not all spent in the charges of the Suits.

For the charges of seven Suits in Chancery, two in the Prerogative-Court, two
Appeals to the Lords-house, and many Suits at common Law did not cost above
2650 l. which (considering what the transactions of those Causes were) was less
by far than his own Council thought it had cost, but there was paid 185 l. 16
s. 11 d. for Mr. Bodvell's Funeral-charges 300 l. For Arrears of Ally-money due
to his Wife 643 l. 4 s. 10 d. Mr. Roberts had himself of the Money borrowed, 80
l. 5 s. 6 d. of it was allowed for procuration and continuation Money, and 466
l. was paid for Interest of the Sums borrowed from the time of their being
lent till the 6th. of July 1666.

Note that in February 1666, when the Act of Parliament passed to null Wynn's
Pretended Will, and vest Bodvell's Estate in the Trustees aforesaid; 5400 l.
would have paid all Cresset's Debt, the charges of the Suits, and the several
Sums laid out, for and paid to him as aforesaid. And if the Trustees according
to the trust reposed in them, by that Act had so soon as the Bill passed, sold
Lands, raised 5000 l. and paid it to Cresset, Cresset's Debt had been satisfied
all but 400 l. which he would have been content to have staid for, or to have
lost (so as the Estate might have been preserved from sale) but they neglecting
to do the same, put Cresset to vast charges, and suffered the Interest-money to
rise high; therefore it is their own fault that the Account now is so great and
ought not to be charged upon Cresset as an extravagant demand, which Mr.
Roberts (because he cannot persuade Cresset now to take 5000 l. for the 5000 l.
which should have been paid in 1666, and the Interest thereof, and his charges
as aforesaid,) most unkindly endeavors to do; which 5000 l. Cresset has no
reason to take; considering that the payment of 5000 l. now were not to pay
above 1700 l. inasmuch as the Interest comes to 2586 l. (the charges 1500 l.
(besides his trouble and loss of time which is considerable) which Sums put
together makes in all 9156 l. so that there having been but 760 l. received by
profits of the Land, there remains of the said 9156 due 8386 which makes it
clear that to pay now 5000 l. is not to pay 1700 l. principal Money as
aforesaid.

Nevertheless the said Cresset by his said answer under his hand delivered to
his Majesty in Council offered again to refer himself to the determination of
the Right Honorable, the now Lord Keeper: or Sir William Jones, or Sir.
Francis Winington, or to any other honest or understanding person his Majesty
should name, provided such Referee might be enjoined to make his Award in some
short time, and that security be given by the said Roberts to perform that
Award before the end of Hillary Term then next ensuing, and therefore prayed if
this would not satisfy that his deeds might be executed, or leave given to
attach (Mr. Roberts and his Lady as by his former Petition was desired) humbly
offering then to consideration, as he does now,

First, whether Cresset could have done more than he has done, either in
getting Bodvells Estate for Mr. Roberts or endeavoring to preserve it to him,

Secondly, whether (after Land was decreed to be sold, and Cresset compelled to
find a purchaser, and by Reason of the Defendants refusing to set out Lands, it
was put upon him to say what he would buy (and he had made choice of Bodvell
for the reasons aforesaid) Cresset could have done more than he did (both
before and after the sale and during the Appeal to Parliament and afterward in
Chancery before the Conveyances were executed) to preserve Bodvel's demesnes to
them: As also, whether he could have done more since his Conveyances were
Executed to let them have it again than he has done, by making the several
offers and references aforesaid to persons of his own Nomination and Relations.

Thirdly, whether after accounts delivered stated allowed, and Releases given
upon them in 1663, 1664, 1665, and 1666. as aforesaid; and security given for
the moneys due upon those accounts, and after Recovering in Chancery upon those
Securities (where the said Roberts and his Lady by answer swore the said
accounts to be Just, and desired Lands might be sold to satisfy the same,) And
whether after such decreed, confirmed, upon a Bill of Re-view and affirmed by
Judgment in the house of Lords, upon an Appeal, (and no exceptions taken to the
Accounts in any of these Courts, where if there had been any occasion, they
might properly have complained, and have received relief;) The said Roberts and
Sarah should now be admitted to Ravill into accounts so solemnly stated, or to
allege against their own Oaths their acts under their hand and seals and their
continued declarations to all persons upon all occasions (of the said Cressets
Integrity and Justice toward them) merely with design to take away his
reputation, which is his life (whose Estate they have made themselves Masters
of by means as aforesaid) and that in a place where (if there were just cause
offered) they could receive no Relief.

Nevertheless Cresset submitted to his Majesty's and the pleasure of that
honorable Board, praying to be heard, offering to make good every Parragraph
of that Answer.

As also that the Land sold is not 700 l. per Annum, nor any more than 538 l.
though sold to him at 590 l. per Annum, and not above 200 l. a year was in
possession when sold, and 180 a year come into possession by Mrs. Vermudens
death, the rest remaining Reversion to this day.

Roberts should have a Copy thereof and forthwith put in his Reply thereunto.

Cresset served Mr. Roberts with a Copy of that Order and his said Answer.

Roberts not replying: Cresset petitioned again for a day of hearing, and it
was ordered that the Cause should be heard the 12. of the said month, and both
parties then to Attend,



Roberts petitioned to delay the hearing a week longer, upon pretenses that he
had not timely Notice thereof. And it was then ordered that the Cause should be
peremptorily heard the 19 of February 1674.

Roberts do not Satisfy Cresset before the end of Easter Term 1675. he could
not longer protect him against Justice and the Law:

In the mean time Mr. Roberts and his Lady declared, they will never Seal the
Conveyances in question, but rather go beyond Sea, and there live, till they
enforce Cresset to depart with his right at their own rates the Consequence
whereof, (if Cresset for want of Relief should be compelled so to do) will be
that (after eleven years Troubles, Suits, delays, and vast Charges (having
parted with his own Estate to purchase Bodvells Estate for them) he must
inevitably ruin himself and Family.

Upon all which Consideration be most humbly Prays, That a short Act may be
passed for the Confirmation of the Decrees, Sale and Conveyances aforesaid, and
to Confirm the Estate sold to the Purchaser, his Heirs and his Assigns for
ever.

The CASE and GRIEVANCE of John Cresset Gentleman; Humbly presented to
Parliament for Relief.


