The CASE of Capt. John Hutchinson, in Relation to his Petition now before the
House of Commons, against Col. Lillingston, and the Agent to the Regiment, Mr.
John Thurston.
THE Regiment of Colonel John Foulke, West Indies: And the Petitioner, by Order
of his Colonel (for the Service of the said Regiment) was sent on Shore, and by
accident left behind when the Fleet sailed from Cowes.

That the Petitioner endeavored to have sailed with the said Fleet, by
Marching some Men from Salisbury to Southampton, Eighteen Miles one Morning by
Eleven of the Clock (the Tide being contrary) was kept there till Three of the
Clock, and as soon as the Tide served the Petitioner did go to Cowes, and the
Fleet was then Sailed out of sight; afterward the Petitioner went to
Portsmouth, and after to Cowes, where he engaged the Resolution Privateer to
carry him to Plymouth to have gained the Fleet, but could not; his Baggage was
in the Fleet, and the Petitioner never left the Sea Coast till he sailed after,
in hopes to find them.

That before the Petitioner arrived at Barbados and the Leeward Islands, the
Fleet which Convoyed the said Regiment was Sailed from them; whereupon the
Petitioner Imbarqued for England again: And in September, 1693. in his return
was Wounded, and taken Prisoner into France.

The Petitioner in December, 1693. arrived in England, and found his Company at
Salisbury, in the same Condition it Arrived from the Indies, which then
consisted only of Twenty three Men, Sergeants, etc. included; only his Ensign
had Listed Two Men, which the Petitioner paid him for: Nor were any of the
Companies in the said Regiment then Recruited.

Colonel Foulke being Dead, Colonel Lillingston came to have the Command of the
same Regiment.

That the said Colonel having said, (and probably may do) that he lay under a
necessity to Recruit the Petitioner's Company, by reason of his inability;
forces the Petitioner to inform this House, that he can make it appear, (was
it material) that to the same Regiment, whilst Sir John Guise and Colonel
Foulke had the Command of it, before it went into Ireland, the Petitioner
Raised above Two Hundred Men; and after it came from Ireland, and the said West
India Voyage, a considerable Number; and a Company in Colonel Brudenel's late
Regiment, in 1696.

That the Petitioner Raised Men, and Mustered with his Company at Salisbury for
the Months of January and February, ( viz. Three Sergeants, Three Corporals,
Two Drums, and Twenty five Private Soldiers, as by the Muster-Roll may appear:
After this Muster, about the beginning of February, the said Colonel
Lillingston Ordered Seventeen Men from Two other Companies to the Petitioners
Company, being then to do Duty at Plymouth. The said Colonel Ordered Pay only
for the Effective Men till the Fourteenth of February; by which time the
Petitioner had Raised to make his Company near full: And the Money he paid for
Advance or Subsisting the Men he Raised before that time, was out of his own
Pocket.

That by the First of March 1694, the Petitioners Company was full (as by the
Muster-Roll may appear) within One Man, and that Raised by the Petitioner soon
after: Which Company was Completed thus.

Come back from the West Indies 23 The Colonel added 17 The Petitioner Raised 23
63. The Complement of a Full Company.

The Petitioner was also at the Charge of taking Two Men who Deserted the
Regiment, and were never Mustered by him; which Two Men Colonel Lillingston
took from him, without any allowance to the Petitioner.

That the said Colonel Lillingston, or Mr. Thurston, the Agent to the said
Regiment, (as the Petitioner most humbly conceives) do unjustly detain from him
the Accounts of his Company, from the First of October, 1693. to the Fourteenth
of February following, which is the time the Petitioner should receive some
advantage by it, toward the great expense of Raising Men, Buying and Fixing
Arms, and all other Necessaries to make good a shattered Company. And also the
said Colonel or Agent do unjustly detain other Sums of Money out of other
Accounts since the Fourteenth of February.

The Sums which the Colonel or Agent detain, are in all about 160 l. out of
which (to the best of the Petitioners knowledge) there is no just Charge
(except what shall be thought fit to allow the said Colonel for the aforesaid
Seventeen Men) and he having Two from the Petitioner, as aforesaid, remains due
to him but for Fifteen. However, if the Petitioner may have the Accounts of his
Company, which is his Right, as by an Act of Parliament in the Fourth and Fifth
of K. William and Q. Mary, Entitled, An Act for Punishing Officers, etc. he
never refuses any just Charge.

And the Petitioner Appeals to the Honor of all the General Officers in this
House, if it be not Customary when they have had occasion to put Men to a
Company, or some Officers to Raise for others, to Charge so much per Man.

That the Petitioner's Refusing to Sign a Discharge in full to Agent Thurston,
is the Reason the Petitioner is Deprived of his Half Pay.

The Petitioner humbly Prays, That Col. Lillingston, or his Agent may deliver
your Petitioner his Accounts, and Pay to him his Due. And that your Petitioner
may be restored to his Half Pay.

(...) CASE.


