The CASE of Algernon Sidney Esquire as it appeared before the Committee, November.
10th.
AGmondesham is an ancient Borough, but for the space of near 200 years had
sent no Burgesses to Parliament until the year 1640.

Mr. Sydney believing, that of common Right those only ought to have Voices in
Elections who pay Scot and Lot, unless there were Prescription to the contrary
(which a Usage of Forty years if admitted cannot make) or the Case had been
judged by the House, did by his Council desire the Opinion of the Committee
thereupon; and the Committee did judge that none ought to have Voices but the
Inhabitants paying Scot and Lot.

This point being determined, it was not necessary for Mr. Sidney to insist
upon the Poll taken by Humphry Gardener, (who took it by the appointment of
Francis Child Constable, and had taken all the Polls that had been within
Thirty years last past) nor that which was taken by Mr. Henry Danvers perfectly
agreeing with it, whereby it did appear, that all the Householders being
admitted, he had 74, and Sir William Drake had but 64 Voices; and therefore for
the ease of the Committee he did admit of the Poll taken by Sir William's
Agents. Whereupon it did appear, that Mr. Sidney had Thirty nine Voices proved
to be good; and of those remaining who paid Scot and Lot, there were but Twenty
eight to vote for Sir William, though none had been liable to exceptions.

This being plain, Sir Williams Council accused Mr. Sidney of Bribery, and for
proof of it, produced John Clerk, a poor Labourer; who said, that the day
before the Election, Mr. Sidney in the presence of many had told him, that at
present he could do nothing for him, but after the Election he would give him
Satisfaction: That about a Month after, Richard Norwood Overseer of the Poor,
who had voted for Mr. Sidney, gave him a Noble, and that others who had also
voted for him, said, that Norwood had given a Noble to each of them.

Clerk and Harwood said, one Luffeman who had voted for Mr. Sidney told them,
Norwood had given him a Suit of Clothes.

Harwood and Gillmer said, that about a Month after the Election, Nobles apiece
were delivered to diverse of the Inhabitants by Rich. Norwood; and all three
confessed they heard of no other Moneys given.

Rich. Bachelor said Leered told him, Mr. Sidney had given him Money after the
Election.

It was also said, that some of those who were for Mr. Sidney had scandalized
Sir William, saying, he was a Papist and a Pensioner.

In Answer to these Calumnies,
Mr. Tanner and Rich. Norwood, men of Credit, proved, that John Clerk had often
desired to speak with them before the Election; which they, knowing him to be a
dangerous fellow, refused, unless it were in the presence of three or four
Witnesses, and that he did tell them, large Offers were made to him by Sir
William if he would Vote for him; that he had a Letter from him to that
purpose; that he knew enough to overthrow Sir Williams Election, though he had
Twenty Votes more than Mr. Sidney; and would make the best of his Market.

They also say, that since the Election he affirmed, that he had given his Vote
for Mr. Sidney freely, and that neither Mr. Sidney nor any other on his behalf
had spoken to him for it.

Coll. Danvers and Mr. Halford Merchant of London, prove, that they were
present when Clerk and several others came to offer their Votes to Mr. Sidney,
and that he told them he would serve the Town and Country as well as he could,
and hoped it would be to their satisfaction; but no mention was made of any
Money or Personal Reward.

They also prove, that the day after the Election, Mr. Sidney being to return
to London, many poor People came about his Coach, beging of him; and he being
told it was a thing decent and customary to give something to them, did first
oppoint Five pounds, and afterward Five Pounds more to be given to them, which
accordingly was put into the hands of Rich. Norwood, Overseer of the Poor, to
be distributed amongst them.

Richard Norwood Overseer, and James his Son say, they did receive Ten Pounds
by Mr. Sidney's Order, and did distribute it publicly to such as were Poor
men, paying no Scot or Lot, and had voted for the most part for Mr. Sidney; but
that they had done it on their own heads, without any Order's or Intimation
from Coll. Sidney directly or indirectly to dispose of it otherwise than to the
Poor of the Borough.

Norwood further says, Luffeman had never any Clothes from him in four years
before the Election, nor at any time since, nor ever by Order from Mr. Sidney.

Tho. Petit says, Horwood an Innkeeper desired him not to give Evidence for Mr.
Sidney, because they should get Money by a new Election, if his could be made
void.

As to the reproachful Language against Sir. William Drake, Mr. Sidney says,
that he cannot rule other men's Tongues; that he no ways approves of the
License usually taken in such Cases by using ill Language; that Sir William
must suffer that, as well as others: And if the Committee had not appeared to
be weary, he could have proved such Language was then and still is used of
himself every day by Sir William himself and others, his Friends and Agents,
which neither he nor they, as he believes, (...) undertake to make good.

Mr. Sidney proved by several witnesses, that Sir William and his Servants had
endeavored to deterr Tho. Ley, Charsely, Petit, Tench and others, from voting
against him, by threatening to pull down their houses, or vexing them with
suits; which having been done before the Election, has been executed since the
Election.

Hereupon Mr. Sidney desires it may be observed,

1. That the Ten pounds which he appointed to be given in the presence of many
that begged of him, and to be put into the hands of the Overseer of the Poor,
cannot be understood otherwise than that he designed it to be distributed unto
such Poor only as then begged of him, and were under the care of the said
Overseer.

2. That it was after the Election openly promised, and publicly distributed.

3. Clerk only pretending a Promise in obscure words, no ways agreeing with
the Testimony of Coll. Danvers and Mr. Halford, men of Reputation, nor
justified by any others that were then present, though he said there were many;
and his undue practices testified by Tanner and Norwood, show that he no way
deserves to be credited.

4. It is not pretended, that any one man paying Scot or Lot, received a Penny,
and though Mr. Sidney could not hinder such as did not pay, to give Votes, he
did think they ought to have none, and upon his Motion it was so judged by the
Committee.

5. Whatsoever the destribution of that Money was, he is not to answer for it,
it having been done not only without but contrary to his Direction, as is
confessed by Richard Norwood who was trusted with it.

And Mr. Sydney does further affirm as in the presence of God, (as he would
have done to the Committee, had he not been told it was unusual for any person
to speak there except by his Council) that he never did intend it should be
otherwise disposed of than as Alms to the Poor that then begged of him, and
such others who took Alms and did not pretend to have Voices; and he never
know, heard, or imagined it had been otherwise disposed of, till upon the
Evidence before the Committee it did appear to be so. And Mr. Sydney is ready,
if it be required, to produce his Servant who gave the 10 l. to the Overseer of
the Poor, and several others whom he did not summon before the Committee,
because he had no reason to believe any Objection could or would have been made
against him for his said Charity, that can and will prove Mr. Sydney's
directions for the distribution of the said 10 l. were such as he has before
alleged; and therefore he humbly hopes that the indiscreet or unfaithful
disposal of his Charity by the Overseer of the Poor, shall not reflect upon
him, or prejudice his Cause.

FINIS.

