THE CASE Of Sir John Lambert, Bar. Samuel Shepherd, and John James David,
Merchants of London. Humbly offered to the Consideration of this Honorable
House, for RELIEF.
SIR John Lambert, Bar. Samuel Shepherd, and John James David, bought of Henry
Bray and John Bowden, Twenty three Tuns and a Quarter, of French Prize Wine,
taken by the Success Privateer of Guernsey, lying at Penryn near Falmouth; and
accepted Bills of Exchange for 1050l. drawn by the Collectors there, for the
Customs thereof; and shipped Twenty one Tuns and three Hogsheads of the said
Wine, on Board a Coaster, called The New Topsham, William Dair Master, bound
for the Port of London, who sailed from Falmouth with her Majesty's Tin
Vessels, having for Convoy the Dover and Sunderland Men of War.

YET notwithstanding the Convoy, the said Vessel called The New Topsham, which
had on Board Twenty one Tuns, and three Hogsheads of the said Wine, was in the
Night, off Beachy-Head, taken by a French Privateer, and carried into Calice,
and there sold.

WHEREUPON the Merchants above, applied to be relieved from the Payment of the
said Bills of Exchange, because the said Wine never came to Port, but were
taken and carried into Calice, and there sold, as aforesaid; and therefore did
no Ways supply the Market, or hinder other Importation, to the Prejudice of Her
Majesty's Customs.

BUT the Duties of the said Wines being appropriated to the Use of the War,
they have not been able to obtain further than Time to pray a Bill or Clause
for their Relief.

AND therefore they humbly hope this Honorable House will, in Consideration of
the Hardship of their Case, discharge the said Bills of Exchange, and not
suffer them to pay Custom for Goods which never came to Port; or give them
Leave to import Wines Custom- Free, to the same Value with those lost, as is
allowed where Goods are exported that never reach their Port, in which Case,
the Merchant has always been suffered to export Custom-Free, to the same Value.


