THE CASE Of several Thousands of poor distressed MARINERS IN THE ENGLISH NAVY,
KEPT Out of their Pay upon the Account of Q's and R's put upon their Names in
the Navy Books.
IT is the Misfortune of the poor Sailors of the English-Navy to have few or no
Friends to take their Part, or represent their Grievances to the Parliament, in
order to have them Redressed: Justice indeed carries an equal Balance, but
both the Scales hang over the Earth, without any respect to the Sea. Though our
Sailors are as true to their Country as the Needle of their Compass is to the
Course they Steer, as faithful as the Steel to the Loadstone; yet are they
little minded, by those in whose Power it is to do them Justice, as if their
Generation were Monsterous, because their lives are Amphibious; are born on the
Land, and do Service on the Water, yet have common Justice on neither: They are
Englishmen but till they are 16 or 18 Years of Age, and then arrived to the Ne
plus ultra of their Liberty, their Freedom being in perpetual danger, liable to
be invaded by every Press-Master; and those which were born to the Rights and
Immunities of Englishmen, all have their Property knocked on the Head at once,
and are hawl'd away and constrained on Board-Ship, an Honorable sort of
Vassalage. Thus Wives have their Husbands torn from their Arms, Mothers the
only hopes of their Families forced into Confinement more durable and uneasy
than that of their Wombs, Fathers and Sons imprisoned in one Wooden Goal. But
were this all, the Bondage would seem more easy; the Mariners never think their
Service to their Country too much, they Plough the wide Ocean, contend with the
raging Billows of the deep; and with a Bravery peculier to the Sons of the Sea,
meet and fight their Enemy with a wonderful Contentment and Alacrity, in
defense of their Country, and those Rights and Privileges of which they have
so small a share. Indeed their Country has not been backward in making a
Generous Allowance, suitable to the Bravery of Men engaged in such dangerous
Enterprises; but their ill Stars have laid them under such dismal
Circumstances, under such a monstrous and unparalled Conduct, that in the
midst of the Plenty provided for them, they have been in the greatest Wants. It
is commonly observed in dealings amongst Mankind, that the Service of Laborers
requires present Money, and the Laws of the Realm have a great respect to the
Wages of Servants, allowing them to be first paid, even before Bonds, or any
previous Obligations of a contrary Nature: But some would have every Sailor an
Exlex, and would make us believe that the same decorum of Justice is not to be
used in States and Governments, as is practiced amongst Men of inferior Ranks
and Qualities: However, as the Debts to the Sailors are National, it ought to
be a National concern; and Grievances of this kind boing unredress'd, may
procure a National Judgment.

That the Q's and R's upon the Navy-Books, are a common Grievance, the poor
Widows of Sailors, and their Attorneys, will loudly justify to their great
Grief and Loss.

The R's upon the Navy-Books is an immovable Letter, very significant of
Injustice, and serves there as a Period in other Books, putting a full stop to
the Sailors Pay; and though the Person that sets the permanent R may be but a
Cipher himself in the account of Justice and true Worth, yet his Letter R, is
productive of vast Sums of Money, into the Pocket of some Body or other, to the
Ruin of the Seamen. This R, in Navy Language or Character (which you please)
signifies Run, and this Run is of different Meaning and Signification too, it
is Crambo'd and tortured most damnably, forced to express the meaning of any
thing the Commanders of the Navy please.

If a poor Man be set sick a Shore, so that he cannot get a-board his Ship
before she Sails, then he is made run upon the Books: If he be a Shore by the
Captains Order, about the Ships Business, and some Orders from Above force the
Ship out of Harbor before he can get a-board, the Ship runs away from him, and
he from the Ship at the same Time: If he go immediately on Board another Ship,
yet he is Run still. The immovable R, of the Navy, is as fixed as the Law of the
Medes and Persians. If he make Interest at the Admiralty to get the R taken
off. (for it is in the Power of those Men you know to do mighty Wonders) why
then his Petition comes out with this pretty Device at the bottom, read the
11th of February, refused, J. Burchett.

But farther to discover the meaning of this significant Letter R, I shall.
give an Account how it is applied to the poor Sailors upon the Navy-Books.

I. Such as never designed to desert the Service, but being returned from long
Voyages, and their Ships being either in Port or Dock, have adventured to visit
their Friends, in order to provide themselves with Apparel and other
Necessaries, and perhaps have met with Press-Gangs belonging to other Ships,
and forced on Board; this has been esteemed by the Navy a Desertion, and they
have made such Sailors Run, upon their Books.

II. Those that have been turned over from one Ship to another, and after
having served some time in the latter, their Tickets for their Service in the
former Ships have been delivered them and after having served on Board several
other Ships, perhaps two or three Years, after being set sick on Shore, the
first Tickets with the rest, have been made Quaeri'd or Run, and their Wages
forfeited.

Now, that such Practices as these are contrary to all the Law, Justice, and
Reason in the World, is demonstrable.

I. Such as have their Tickets given them, are supposed to be guilty of no
Crime at that juncture; and such Tickets are, and have been esteemed as the
Kihg's Bonds and Bills of Exchange, and were formerly Paid upon sight. Now, it
is very hard, that a Sailor transgressing in one Ship, should become so guilty,
as by that Crime to forfeit all his Wages in former Ships: So that good and bad
Service, according to Navy-Justice, are alike Punishable.

II. Many well-effected People to his Majesty's Service, and out of Charity to
their distressed Neighbors, have supplied many Sailors with Money, to the full
value of their Tickets, and when they come to the Navy to be Paid, receive
nothing but an R for their Money,

III. The Quaerying and Running of such Tickets, have abominably lessened the
Credit of the Navy, in respect of Wages, and made the most glorious Navy in the
World the most scandalous, by such Barbarous abuses, insomuch that Tickets
formerly sold at 2 s. 6 d. per Pound, are now sold for seven, eight, ten, and
twelve Shillings loss.

The next thing to be Considered, is the Letter Q upon the Navy-Books, which
stands there as near Injustice, as it does to the Letter R in the Alphabet.
This Q is generally put upon such as are set sick a Shore; and then the poor
Sailor is to Quaery for Justice, which he may do till he is Blind, and never
find it. That this Practice is Barbarous and Inhumane, is very evident.

I. It sinks the Laborers Hire into private Pockets, deprives distressed
Families of their Bread, purchased by the hazard of humane Life, and brings
unnecessary Charge upon Parishes.

II. This Q is a new Letter in the Navy-Books, Quaeries being never heard of,
till the Year 1690, before which time, every Man set sick a Shore had his Wages
paid him, and was discharged from the Service.

III. The great Sickness, which at and since that time happened in the Fleet,
was the Foundation of these Quaeries; a very hard Case, that a Sailor must lose
his Money because he has lost his Health in the Service; must have bad Pay,
because he has been poisoned with bad Provisions.

IV. Many, if not most of those, who have been set sick a Shore, have thought
themselves Discharged, according to former Custom, being altogether ignorant of
the new Practice of the Navy.

V. Many that have been long Voyages, and sick for many Months together, seeing
the Major part of the Ships-Crew Buried, have been thereby desheartened to go
a-board Ship again; Diseases being more dreadful to Sailors than Battle or
Storm.

VI. Nor can it be rationally expected, that such as have contracted
Indispositions and Distempers, by unwholesome Provisions, or a contagious Air,
should after a Months Refreshment in sick Quarters, or laboring 6 or 12 Months
under their Maladies in an Hospital, be fit to return a-board Ship, or be
capable of doing his Majesty Service; but the contrary is evident, by the vast
numbers that died soon after their return on Board, as well as those that were
set sick a Shore.

And would it not now be just to pay such Men their Wages? Would it not be for
the Honor of his Majesty, for the Reputation and Credit of the Nation to
consider their Cases, and pay the Debts due from the Nation to such?

1. As have been set sick on Shore since the conclusion of the Peace. 2. To the
Executors and Attorneys of such as died in Sick-Quarters, Hospitals,
Hospital-Ships. 3. To such as after Recovery entered on Board any of his
Majesty's Ships. 4. To such as have been Wounded or hurt, and received
Pensions, or Smart-Money for the same. 5. To such as continued Six Months, or
upwards, in Sick Quarters or Hospitals, or have been discharged from thence as
Incurable. 6. To such as the Captains of Ships have discharged by Tickets, as
unserviceable, as being either Sick, Lame or Blind, etc.
This Usage of free born English, might move Compassion in any but in those
whose Business it is to cheat them, and raise their own Fortunes out of their
Ruins. This indeed is a miserable Scene of humane Cruelty, unknown to the
Heathen Nations, and yet practiced in a Christian Country, built on the Pillars
of good and wholesome Laws, and under a Government set up (for no other reason
that I know) but on purpose to distroy such Arbitrary Proceedings, and to
dispense common Justice to all Men. There is little more difference betwixt a
Gally Slave and an English Sailor, than that one serves in expectation of Pay,
and the other without it, yet one is sometimes as well paid as the other. This
barbarous usage of Mariners, have made them instead of deserting our Ships of
War, and taking Merchants Service, forsake their Country, and Sail with
Foreigners in hopes of better Justice and Usage abroad, than they have met with
at home. This barbarious Usage has made many Thousands of them turn Pirates
during the last War; and those that turn Freebooters are generally the Flower
and Youth of the Seamen, so that in time our Ships shall be Manned only with
decrepid old Age, and the refuge of the Sea, to the weakening of the Nation and
Government; for every Sailor lost is a Stone taken out of our National Walls,
which suffering such continual Dilapidations, will at last tumble down, and
leave us exposed to the Insults of any Invader.

And after all, Pray what is become of the Money that was ordered to pay the
Seamen, upon whom the R's and Q's have been put? If it remains still in the
King's Hands, there is yet some hopes of relief left to the miserable Sailors;
but if it be otherwise disposed of, their Disease seems Incurable. When we look
into the Pay-Office and see there some Clearks at 30 l. per Annum purchasing
Estates, others turning Merchants, and employing vast Sums of Money in Trade,
we may give a shrewd Guess what is become of the poor Sailors Money. And how
shall their Creditors be paid? How shall their Widows and numerous Fatherless
Children be provided for? Will not the charge to the several Parishes, upon
this account, be havier upon the Subject than the Taxes during the War.

And now they apply themselves to you the Honorable Members of the House of
Commons, as the last resort of Distressed Englishmen, they have born you
better fruit then some that have been better Paid, you have found the Navy to
be your chief Support but your Ships without Mariners are but floating Castles,
mere Machines of War, altogether useless, and such your Ships will be, if the
Grievances of the Sailors are unredress'd.

G. B


