THE CASE OF Peoples Duty In Living Under A Scandalous Minister, STATED and
RESOLVED.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Tidmarsh, at the King's Head in Cornhill, near the
Royal Exchange. 1684.

THE CASE OF Peoples Duty In Living Under A Scandalous Minister.
Honored Sir,
I Must needs acknowledge that Yours is indeed a most sweet and pleasant Seat,
but there is this inward allay (as you say) to that outward Felicity, that your
lot is cast under a Scandalous Minister, your Light is Darkness, your Salt has
lost its Savor, and your Tree of Life is guarded (as you complain) by an evil
Angel. And now what course is to be taken? What must you do for your Souls
health? This makes your dwelling Meshec and your otherwise most delightful
Habitation, as among the Tents of Kedar.

I could heartily wish you had asked my Opinion in a more pleasing Subject, and
that you had commanded me to speak in a Cause wherein I might have more hopes
of being heard, instead of this which is surrounded with almost invincible
prejudices. However, to comply with your importunity, I shall make bold to
offer some few things in Answer to the Question propounded by you.

1. If his Life be Notorious, make it yet more so by complaint; let his
Diocesan know it, and see to it that the Church Censures pass upon him. The
Laws are not so weak; nor yet their Administration so remiss, but they will
ease you and themselves of such a rotten Member; they will withdraw the fuel
to his exorbitances, by suspending the Profits, and disable him from all
public taking Gods Word into his mouth, who hates to be reformed by
suspension from his Office: Nor need you be afraid of so doing, for all good
Men will approve and applaud this your most Pious Zeal; they will thank and not
upbraid you for it, and will even concur with you in the doing of it. Whereas
it is on the other hand a great failing, that all the Neighborhood almost will
agree to tell the story of such a Ministers miscarriages and sins to one
another, and indeed in all Companies; but few or none have the courage or
faithfulness to report it to such as may and would remedy it. What shall they
become Informers? As if that were a worse name then Whisperers or Backbiters.
Shall they peal upon their Ministers? Yes certainly, this would be the greater
Charity; yea, this might prove a Charity indeed; for this might wound his Soul
in order to his cure, while the other only wounds his good Name incurably; this
may be a means to Reform him, whilst the other serves only to blast his
Reputation, and perhaps hardens him in his sin; this Answers all the ends of
Discipline, and roles the guilt from your selves and the Church, whilst the
other does but gratify some naughty vile affection in your selves and ethers:
In a word, this makes for the glory of God, the other only to your Ministers
defamation and discredit. Provided your Proof be plain, and there appear no
Design but what is good and honest at the bottom, I dare say, that such as
preside in the Government, will both right and thank you.

2. But if your Ministers failings be only now and then, a being merely
over-taken with a fault, and comes under the head of sins of infirmity,
methinks love might cover them, and a spirit of meekness might by degrees cure
them; soft Words might melt his heart, and good Exhortations proceeding from
sincere and unfeigned affection, joined with your own pregnant Example, might
gain him to God, and make him your Convert instead of your becoming his. Are we
commanded to exercise this point of Charity to every Brother, and not to our
Minister? Or do we judge or conclude him less sensible of our affection and
tenderness, than a rude and illiterate Neighbor? Or is he the only Man in all
the Parish to be despaired of, whom no sweetness can oblige, and no warnings
work upon? Sir, Give me leave to tell you, that till this like method be
essayed, and that more than once or twice, to win him, you have not discharged
your Duty to God or to him. Perhaps he is not so bad as he is painted, report
may have wronged him, you know this Age is easy to believe any thing that
makes against the Ministry in general; some study to find or to makes faults
where indeed there are none, others lay Temptations in their way purposely to
make them fall, thinking by becoming privy to their failings, to make them fear
to have the greater awe upon them, or to render them more plaint to all their
politic secular Ends and Designs; at least to justify their own sins by
making them of the Company; or to silence the noise of their own guilty
Consciences, and salve their crazed Reputations, by appearing zealous for God
and Goodness, in crying as loud as they can against them. Besides Ministers
tell the People of their faults, and it is a kind of pleasing revenge to some
to find fault with them again. Nor must I forget their taking Tyth, which you
know in this Sacrilegious Age is a most unpardonable crime, and a scandal
sufficient, that a Minister is a Gentleman and Rich, that he behaves himself
like a Man, and will not disfigure his face or effeminate his voice to humor a
Party; who though they spoke a Minister never so holy, and never so powerful
both in Life and Doctrine before, yet he forfeits all by keeping a Coach, or
being made a Bishop; which by the way, is a strange confutation of that so much
approved Doctrine of never falling from grace. These Sir, are some of your own
Observations in Discourse betwixt you and I, and how often have I heard you say
what Notice you have taken of some chief and leading Men in their Country, who
have seemed never more delighted, at Market or such like public Meetings, then
when they have fallen upon the Subject of reviling the Ministry? That Man being
always the most welcome Companion, who could expose any of them most. Remember
I beseech you with what regret you have bewailed this thing to me, as a most
unchristian and unseemly Behavior, as an infallible sign of a most ulcerated
rotten heart, and the effects of direct direful Atheism, void of all regard to
God whose Ministers they are, and void of common Civility or Christian Charity,
which should teach them to hide, rather than with Solomon's Character of a Fool,
to make a mock of sin. I am fuily confident God will one day judge these jolly
Men in earnest, for all that pastime they make of their poor Ministers
infirmities, which are indeed rather matters of Humiliation and Mourning to
Men, who are any whit under the sense and power of sincere godliness. I had not
called these Passages to your memory at this present, was it not that I am
exceeding jealous for you, lest any Practices of yours should give any
countenance or encouragement, to such as set themselves thus in the seat of the
scornful.

3. But let it be granted, that your Minister is indeed scandalous: Yet this in
my Opinion will not warrant you, in your designed purpose of leaving his
Ministry. For,

1. Since you are so much offended and grieved with the Errors of his sinful
life, there is the less danger of infection, or getting any harm to your self,
by what you observe and censure in him. Your Souls health I am persuaded, will
never be impaired by those sins, which your Soul abhors: Quibus mali placent
in unione, ipsi Communicant malis. Quibus vero mali displacent, and eos
emendare non possunt, non factis eorum, sed Altari Christi Communicant.
Augustine. Epist. 162.

2. Since you say that your Minister is nevertheless a very excellent Preacher,
which is not a thing impossible; I conceive your Wisdom and Duty is to
distinguish betwixt the good and the bad, to put a difference betwixt his
Doctrine and his Life; for Gifts and Grace you know Sir are two different
things, and a Man may have Gifts for the edification of others, and yet want
Grace for himself. St. Augustine I am sure makes a vast difference betwixt the
visible Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and the invisible Grace of God, in
his Controversy with the Donatists in this very Argument, as you shall see
anon. And on Matt. 23. Ideo audiuntur (says he) utiliter, qui etiam utiliter
non agunt. And St. Paul supposes that a Man may be a Preacher unto others, and
yet become a Castaway himself, 1 Cor. 9.27. We read in the Gospel of an
unfaithful and unjust Steward set over the Household of God. It is further plain
from Luke 9. that Judas was sent forth and commissioned with the rest of
Christ's Disciples. The holy Spirit charge the Bishops of several of the
Churches of Asia, with sundry heinous failings and sins, and yet honors them
with the glorious title of Angels of their respective Churches, Rev. 2. and 3.
Chap. Yea our Savior himself tells us Mat. 7.22, 23. that many will be
disowned and condemned by him as workers of Iniquity, who yet have prophesied,
cast out Devils, and done many wonderful Works in his Name. From which it is
plain that a graceless Person may have extraordinary gifts for the Work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ: Those holy persons, such as
Zachary, and Simeon, Anna, Mary, and Joseph, continued all along in the
Communion of the Church of the Jews, whose Rulers were so vile as to flay the
Prophets, and to kill those that were sent unto them from God. Yea we find our
Savior and his Apostles frequently in the Temple, attending upon the
Ministration of the High Priests on their Solemn Feasts, though generally in
those days they came into their places by bribery, were very bad Men and not
qualified as the Law of Moses required. We read likewise that it was the manner
of our Savior Christ, to enter into the Synagogue every Sabbath day, to hear
the Scribes and Pharisees read and expound the Law, whose wicked lives he
nevertheless most vehemently inveighs against upon all occasions. You shall
furthermore find our Blessed Lord, besides his own Example and Practice, to
give Directions to his Disciples and the Multitude, in the very Case which is
before us, Mat. 23.1, 2, 3. saying, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses's
his Seat; all therefore (mark that) whatsoever they bid you observe, that
observe and do; but do not ye after their Works, for they say and do not. What,
hear these whom thou have denounced so many bitter woes against, even woe upon
woe in this very Chapter? What the Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, those
blind Guides, whited Sepulchers; Graves that appear not? That bind heavy
burdens and grievous to be born, and lay them upon other Men's shoulders, but
they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers; that shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against Men, that neither go in themselves, nor suffer them
that are entering to go in; that devour Widows Houses, and for a pretense make
long Prayers, etc. What, shall we that are thy Disciples, and can hear such a
Heavenly Preacher as thou art, who speak as never Man spoke, go to hear such
wretches as these? Yes, says Christ, They sit in Moses's Chair, have the stamp
of public Warrant and Authority, therefore hear them: St. Augustine brings this
Text of our Savior, to prove the same Question I am about, and to the same
purpose. Laicus enim qui vult^bene vivere, cum attenderit Clericum malum, quid
dicit? Dominus dixit: Quae dicunt facite, quae faciunt facere nolite. Ambulabo
viam Domini, non sequar istius mores; audiam ab illo, non verba ipsius sed Dei.
Sequar Deum, sequatur ille cupiditatem suam. Augustine. in Johan. c. 10. Modo ea
quae ad Cathedram pertinent recta praecipiant, says St. Hierom. Vult autem
Dominis hunc ordinem Divinitus esse constitutum, ac proinde audiendam esse
veritatem, etiam ex ore mercenariorum and hypocritarum doctorum; so the Learned
Mr. Beza upon the Text. Whereas the Priests were sometimes simple, and
sometimes wicked Men, lest any should despise the Ordinance of God for their
unworthiness, the promise is made by God, Numb. 6.27. And they shall put my
Name upon the Children of Israel, and I will bless them, says Mr. Amsworth.
Expositors all (all that ever I saw at least) agree in this matter. I might
also to strengthen this, add the Testimony of the Ancient and other Modern
Churches, but I shall content my self with transcribing the 26th Article of the
Church of England, saying, Although in the visible Church, the evil be ever
mingled with the good, and sometimes the evil have chief Authority in the
Ministration of the Word and Sacraments: Yet, for as much as they do not the
same in their own Name, but in Christ's; and do Minister by his Commission and
Authority, we use their Ministry both in hearing the Word of God, and in
receiving the Sacraments: Neither is the effect of Christ's Ordinances taken
away by their wickedness, nor the grace of Gods gifts diminished, from such as
by faith, and rightly do receive the Sacraments ministered unto them, which are
effectual, because of Christ's institution and promise, although they be
ministered by evil Men. To this Doctrine do all the best Reformed Churches
agree, witness the Harmony of their Confessions: The contrary, unto which is
the Doctrine of the Papists, and Anabaptists, and Brownists, and Family of
Love, with some others only of the most extravagant of the Dissenting Parties,
from the present establishment. Our Lord Christ acknowledges the power even of
Pilate over himself, and says, It was given him from above.

If he be indeed your lawful Minister, sent by them in Authority, and so
settled by the Laws of the Land (as I know he is) this is interpretatively the
Will of God, and your Duty seems to me to be plainly chalked out by the Holy
Apostle; Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your
selves: for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give account, that
they may do it with joy and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you.
So also 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. And we beseech you, Brethren, to know them which
labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem
them very highly for their work sake. Again, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that
rule well be counted worthy of double Honor, especially they who labor in the
Word and Doctrine: But if ill, honor them nevertheless as Rulers, not only in
point of Maintenance, but Esteem, for so I conceive we may infer from the Text.
Honor them for Gods sake, as set over you in the Lord; for their Work sake, as
Watching for your Souls; for their Character sake, as Elders and Rulers; for
their Doom sake, that they may be able to make their Account with joy, and not
with grief, and for your own sake, lest the contrary Practice be unprofitable
for you. For the Ordinances are Gods, their Efficacy is from God, and your
Service herein is done to God, on purpose to confound all glorying in Man. St.
Paul speaks of some that preached Christ out of envy, with purpose to add
Affliction to his bonds; Phil. 1.15, 16, 17, etc. (who therefore must certainly
be very bad men) yet since Christ was preached, he therein did rejoice, yea,
and would rejoice. You do not think that the Morning and Evening Sacrifices
under the Law were to be neglected, because of the sinfulness of Elies Sons, or
that their wickedness gave warrant to the people to abhor the Offerings of the
Lord. St. Paul taxes the Corinthians, for manifold Enormities and Sins in the
receiving of the Lords Supper. And it is not unlikely, but the Ministers might
share too much with the People in those failings which were so prevailing and
general; yet all his Arguments tend to the better qualifying themselves to
become more worthy Receivers: but by no means in the least to the exempting
them from that most necessary and most indispensible Duty. I know you will say,
you plead not to be excused from the Ordinances, but only for a liberty to hear
some body else. But then, Sir, what becomes of that mutual Relation betwixt a
Pastor and his People, and of that mutual Obligation of Duty of each toward
other? How shall they hear without a Preacher? says St. Paul. And how shall
they preach without Hearers? say I.

But you will again say, That some body will hear him if you do not; to which I
reply, If your Principle be good and true, they ought not; and if the rest
follow your Example, who are a leading Man in the Parish, they will not.

Whence it follows, that the People are at liberty to go to whom and where they
list, while the same Man, as you and I have known, shall leave the Church of
England to go to the Presbyterians, from thence to the Independants, thence to
the Anabaptists, next to the Quakers, and at last cast off all regard to the
Worship of God. So true is that saying, That Toleration in one Age is Atheism
in the next, if not in the very same; or that, That the first step to Apostasy
is the forsaking of Public Assemblies.

Considering all which, I am confident, all the worst of Inconveniences from a
Minister that is a bad Liver and yet teaches well, are not worthy to be put in
the Balance with those sad and dismal ones abovenamed, to which more might be
added.

But, Sir, I am further to beseech you to weigh seriously and without prejudice
these following Considerations, with respect to the public as well as to your
self.

1. That upon this very same Principle, that you think of leaving your Pastor
upon and his Communion, viz. Because he is a wicked sinful Liver; did Donatus
found that lamentable and woeful Schism, which did create so much disturbance
and misery to the Church of Christ in St. Augustine's time, and a long time
after, I had almost said ever since. And as it began in a sad Schism, and was
accompanied with manifold grievous Heresies in the Church; so it went on with
Commotions and Rebellions in the State: Donatus and his Faction, as they grew
in power, denying Obedience and Conformity to the Public Laws, upon the
account that they were made and administered by wicked Men.

I would undertake for the truth of this sad Example in each particular, if I
thought that you either knew it not, or were so hardy as to deny it. But we
need not look back so far, for it was this very Principle, which first set on
foot, and after brought to pass those Barbarities, Outrages, and bloody
Executions in Germany of later days. And in truth, that Doctrine which blew the
Trumpet to our lamentable and unhappy Commotions here in England, both in
Church and State. For First, they began (as you well know) to traduce the
Bishops and whole Clergy as most sinful and wicked Men, calling them Idol, Idle
Shepherds; dumb Dogs; swearing, drunken, unclean Priests; Incaruate Devils,
Cogging, Cozening Knaves; Desperate, formal Atheists; Robbers, Wolves, etc. for
the sad Truth of all which with a great deal more, I need only to turn you to
their public Sermons, Libels, and Centuries which are now in Print, and some
of which, even the most invective, have been lately reprinted.

Next, for the good King and his Government in the State; His Sacred Majesty
King Charles the First was so sensible of the like hard Speeches and Prints, as
he himself says, The worst Effects of open Hostility came short of those
designs: for I can more willingly lose my Crown than my Credit, nor are my
Kingdoms so dear to me, as my Reputation and Honor. Again, These soul and
false Aspersions, were secret Engines at first employed against my peoples love
of me, that undermining their Opininion and Value of me, my Enemies and theirs
too, might at once blow up their Affections, and batter their Loyalty.

Thus this Principle hatched up the Covenant for Reformation and more pure
Religion, as was pretended, and that fed and maintained that long and bloody
Civil War, which ended in the Ruin of King and Laws, Religion and Church, for a
time. I had not revived the memory of these said Truths, had it not been
necessary to show you what bad use designing Men make of this bad Principle;
how under the appearance of Zeal against Sin and Jealousy for God and his
Glory, it carries them to all violation of Sacred Duty, and exposes all
Persons and Things that are Sacred, to all sorts of most ungodly Outrages and
Villainies; so easy a thing is it to find faults, and make Offenders, when
partiality and prejudice come to sit upon the Bench, God help the Innocent.

Donatus and his Party, after his Example, refused Communion with Caecilianus
then Bishop of Carthage, because he was as they said a Traditor (i. e. had in
times of Persecution delivered up the Bible to be burnt) denying therefore to
hear him preach, or to receive the Sacraments at his hands. But when after a
full hearing before Constantine the Great, together with a great number of
Bishops for that purpose assembled, he was purged from the Slander, and
declared guiltless; then Donatus and his Faction said, he had been ordained by
Felix who was a Traditor; therefore his Ordination was null and void, and this
is made guilt enough to justify their defection.

Pope Hildebrand Decreed and Commanded, That no man should hear Mass from the
mouth of a Priest that had a Wife.

The Rhemists further say, That the Sermons of Heretics (and so they term all
Protestants) must not be heard though they preach the Truth; their Prayers and
Sacraments are not acceptable to God, but are the howlings of Wolves.

And our Modern Dissenters will teach you, That if a Minister conform to the
Laws of the Church, and read the Common Prayer, he is also not to be heard, or
the Sacraments received from him.

At this rate, Sir, who is Innocent? Whither will you go? Who shall be your
Pastor? Or will you have none? At this rate you may separate and separate from
all the Churches, and from all the Men in the World, till you come to abhor
your own dear self; for what Man is there that lives and is not a great Sinner?
And sure I am, you would be loath that your Wife, and Children, and Servants
should rebound this Argument upon you, and plead Exemption from their known
respective Duties, upon the pretense that you are a sinful Man: for if you
rightly consider it, the dint of the Argument will hold good against Parents
and Masters of Families, as well as against Magistrates and Ministers, and then
farewell all Order and Government in the World.

No, Sir, Government is a Sacred thing, and an Ordinance of God, and so are
Governors as such, whatsoever they are in their private, personal capacity.
And was I to give account in short, of that shameful disobedience and
stubborness in Children; that perverseness, self-will, and unfaithfulness in
Servants, generally complained of by Parents and Masters of Families at this
day, I should ascribe it to the want of that reverence and regard, which God
expects from us, toward them that Rule over us both in Church and State. Men
may read their Sin in their Punishment, while their Consciences will tell them,
that they are but paid in their own kind, measure for measure; and that they
have furnished their Children and Servants with Proofs and Examples against
themselves.

2. Next to the public Security, I must offer to you the Consideration of your
private peace, which is in danger to be lost by such rash defiance to your
Minister.

For the Laws are on his side, as long as he performs his Duty according as
they have Enacted; and if he be either a man of Stomach, or shall think himself
bound to put the Laws in force against you, this will make your life uneasy to
you, will sour your temper otherwise never so sweet; will ruffle your Spirit,
stir up all your passions, and at last provoke you most insensibly, to some
Indecencies against him both in Word and Deed.

And let me tell you, Sir, you will certainly find it a most uncomfortable
thing to live at variance with your Pastor, a vexation like to that which the
Wise Man calls a Continual Dropping. Besides that, it will mightily prejudice
you against all his Doctrines, though never so sound, and good, as often as you
shall hear him. For it is necessary the Word be received with meekness, or else
it will never profit you, since the wrath of Man cannot work the righteousness
of God. It will prejudice you against his Person, prejudice you against his
very Name and Mention; it will so every way prejudice the present healthful
Constitution of your own Soul, as instead of Cure, you will unavoidably fall
into those Diseases which you seek to prevent. Not to say any thing of what
hazard your Estate may run in a Case which so nearly concerns your Soul: for in
my most deliberate thoughts, I had rather you should quit your present Station,
as pleasant as it is, and in the strength of Abraham's Faith, seek a Land of
Promise and Blessing from God, than live where you do at variance with your
Minister, which has neither Promise nor Blessing belonging to it.

3. It is also matter of discredit in the Eye of the World: for men are not yet
so wholly devoid of all respect to God, but they will in heart bear some secret
regard to their Minister for Gods sake, and to his Office, for either love or
fear of Laws and Government under which he serves.

These things have a great awe over the Minds and Consciences of Men, and carry
such a strange unaccountable sway with them, as you must be a Man of
extraordinary Credit and Influence, not to say Considence, to think to
over-bear them. Such has been the constant Reverence, and so great, which the
mere light of Nature has taught the worst of Heathens to show and express
toward the Ministers of their Idol gods; which is certainly much rather due to
such as minister at the Altar of the only Great and True God. Fear the Lord
with all thy Soul (says the Son of Syrac, Ecclesiasticus 7.29.) and reverence
his Priests. Fear the Lord, and Honor the Priest; ver. 30. It is also a Wise
Rule which the same Author lays down Chap. 19. v. 8, 9. Saying, Whether it be
to a friend or foe, talk not of other Men's lives, and if thou can without
offense, reveal them not, for he heard and observed thee, and when time comes,
he will hate thee. When St. Paul had unadvisedly reviled Ananias that most
corrupt and wicked High Priest, he corrects himself, saying, I wist not,
Brethren, that he was the High Priest; for it is written, Thou shall not speak
evil of the Ruler of thy people; Acts 23.4, 5.

4. I might also press the consideration of that ill use which the more
ignorant or more wicked in your Town and Neighborhood would make of your
Example, to wander at large like Sheep without a Shepherd; or to stay at home
and go no where, or to keep the Sabbath at the Tavern or Alehouse, instead of
Feasting together at the Table of the Lord: together with those sad
consequences to your own Family, while you it may be go one way, and your Wife
another, and your Children and Servants pretend to Worship each and all of them
in a way by themselves; to the gradual ruin of all Peace and Piety in your
Family, in the room of mutual Edification and Comfort. But I know a word to the
Wise is sufficient, and I am minded to have done.

Wherefore, Sir, were I worthy to be listened to, I would advise you should
abide in the Station wherein God has placed you, sitting down with quiet and
thankfulness under the use of such means as his gracious Providence has
afforded you; doing your own Duty to God, in a constant diligent Attendance
upon his public Ordinances, and to your lawful Minister for the sake of God.
You may countenance him in his Office, and yet discourage him in his Sins. The
worse he is, pray the more for him, and talk less against him, but take more
pains with him to recover him; and if nothing will do, wait with patience till
God put you under some milder and more comfortable Dispensation, by removing
him one way or other from amongst you, and sending you a better in his place.
Which thing I am confident God will do for you in his good time, if he see you
thus to deny your self, in mere obedience to him, by casting your self and
cause upon him, and wholly referring it to him; free from all indirect projects
and practices of your own, which may argue your being dissatisfied with the
present provision which he has made.

In the mean while, if you edify by your Minister in nothing else, this
exercise of Faith, and Patience, and Meekness, and Love, and Unity, and
Uniformity, will become far better Evidence of your real Edification and growth
in Grace, than any you will be able to produce in the contrary course. For
whoever they be that minister to your Losts or Passions, or merely to a Party,
will never minister truly to your Edification. And indeed woe to this present
World, that Men's growth in Grace should be measured by their heats and
contentions about indifferent things, by being ready to quarrel at the times,
and to arraign the actions of Superiors, and Governors in Church and State, by
being always complaining of the miscarriages of other Men, but especially
Ministers; as if all the title Men had to virtue in themselves, consisted in a
certain delight which they took, in repeating and proclaiming other Men's vices;
which is such a kind of Edifying as Infernal Spirits boast of, and which is
indeed only proper to the Accuser of the Brethren, did Men rightly consider it.
Where envy and strife is, says the holy Apostle, Jam. 3.16. there is confusion
and every evil work; as also that this sort of Wisdom is from beneath, even
earthly, sensual, devilish, v. 15.

Because I foresee and know the Consequences of these things, both in
reference to the public, and your private Peace, to the rending the Church and
your own Soul asunder, I am therefore concerned to warn you against every thing
that has but a necessary appearance or tendency thereunto, as much as against
all inclinations or tendencies to Drunkenness, or Adultery, or Stealing, or
Forswearing your self, and the like.

For a Conclusion, Let me remind you of the Advice of the Blessed St. Paul to
the Corinthians in the like Case, where one was for Paul, another for Apollo,
and another for Cephas, and all were in that respect, and therefore carnal)
saying, I have in a Figure transferred these things, to my self and to Apollo
for your sakes; that ye might learn in us not to think of Men above that which
is written, that no one of you be puffed up for one against another: Therefore
let no Man glory in Men: 1 Cor. 4.6.

And here Sir, I had concluded your trouble in reading these Lines (having
already transgressed the Lines of an Epistle) did I not fear you might fancy I
had some Design in writing some of these at least, to make an Apology for the
sinsulness of Ministers Lives, which God forbid; and my comfort is, that you
know me better. But lest any may hereafter become privy to these Papers, who
may be inclined by Inrerest, Party, or Prejudice, to Judge so hardly; I think
it therefore needful to add, that I abhor all Debauchery and Ungodliness in any
Man, but most of all in a Minister, who has so solemnly Consecrated, not only
his mouth, but his whole Self, Soul and Body unto God; so that to desecrate or
unhallow either, is an high point of Sacrilege against God, and a most
grievous Scandal to the World; while all good Men are afflicted to see it, and
all bad Men are hardened in their wicked Courses by it. While the poor wretch in
all his Preachings plays but the Orator against himself, and each good Sermon
which he makes, is but a fresh Indictment of his old wicked life. No, no, I
wish from my heart, that every Minister in his respective place, was as St.
Paul for his Conversation in Heaven, and an Apollos for his Eloquence in the
Pulpit; that he was furnished with both a Mouth and Wisdom, which Gainsayers
were not able to contradict: I mean in few words, that he was himself a living
Word. This would be a means to heal our divisions, and make up those breaches
amongst us, which the sins of both Preachers and Hearers keep open; and in Gods
good time help to make us of one heart and of one mind. Amen.

Though my own sad Observation for the present, gives me to see that as yet
this alone will not do it: For as much as it is too too manifest and plain,
that in such places where the Ministers live every way exemplary and blameless,
and are sound, laborious, and faithful in their Preaching; yet even in those
places the Breaches are kept open, and the Separation continued. Whence I
cannot but conclude there is something else at the bottom, besides the pretense
to Religion and Reformation, which keeps men from their Duty, and at that
distance one from the other: But the making Men of one mind in an House, as
well as the working effectual grace in Man's heart, is a Dispensation beyond the
reach and power of Man, and indeed is the only Prerogative of God, who seems to
me to have reserved this so great a Blessing, and so much to be desired, for
another World, or some other Age of this: In the mean time it is a great
comfort that you and I have got thus far on our Journey, toward our longed for
rest, in so much Prosperity and Peace, free and secure from all those amazing,
staggering temptations of the Primitive Christians; under the good Providence
of God, and gracious Protection and Sunshine of mild, and most merciful
Governors, whom God of his goodness yet preserve, notwithstanding all our
frowardness and unthankfulness; so as we may live to to see our Childrens
Children, and Peace upon Israel.

I have thus far gratified your pressing importunity upon a most unpleasing
Subject, in compliance with my Duty to your Commands, and to exemplify how
much and how far I am to be commanded by you, who indeed am

SIR, Your most humble Servant
Aug. 28. 1684.
FINIS.

