The CASE of several Hackney-Coachmen in and about the Cities of London and
Westminster and the Suburbs, occasioned by one Robert Murrey, and his
Adherents, to the utter Ruin of many Families, for his and his Accomplices
private Interest.
I. THE said Robert Murrey, a common Projector, in the Year 1682 obtained an
Act of Common Council in London, to restrain all but 400 Hackney Coachmen to
ply in and about the City of London and Suburbs thereof, under the Penalty of
Forty Shillings each Coach for every Offense: By which Project the said Murry
did get clear to himself Four hundred and fifty Pounds, besides all Bribes and
other Incomes; but the Coachmen that were oppressed by the said Murrey's
Project, having obtained the then Attorney General's Opinion, That the said Act
was against Law, staid several Suits, and cast the said Murrey, or those
employed to put the said Act in Execution.

2. That then the said Murrey and his Accomplices did obtain an Order from Sir
Edward Villers, then Knight-Marshal for the Liberty of the Verge (viz.
Westminster, Whitehall, and St. James's) to suppress the Hundred Hackney
Coachmen from plying with their Coaches within the Liberties aforesaid, and did
with Money hire Men and keep them from their said Employment, until one Thomas
Cadman did send his Servant with his Hackney-Coach to ply within the said
Verge, after having suffered Nine Weeks Restraint, by means of the aforesaid
Order, resolving to see by what Right they held their Power; whereupon the
Knight-Marshals Men immediately seized upon the said Cadman's Servant, and kept
him Prisoner at White Hall for above Six Hours, until he gave a Note under his
Hand of Forty Pounds penalty to appear before the said Sir Edward Villers the
next Day by Nine of the Clock: And the said Thomas Cadman appeared accordingly
on his said Servants behalf before his Honor, and made him sensible of the
Oppression, who was thereupon pleased to take it off, and never put it upon the
said Coachmen after.

3. That the said Murrey and his Accomplices afterward Solicited his Honor
Capt. Cheek, then Governor of the Tower of London, to keep the said One
hundred Hackney Coachmen from taking up any Fare upon the Bulwark Wharfe before
the Tower Gate, under the Penalty of Five shillings for each Coach so
offending, so that many poor men suffered thereby, until the said Thomas Cadman
Petitioned his Honor, and made him sensible of the Abuse put upon them by the
aforesaid Murrey and his Accomplices, so that now the said Robert Murrey,
having made what Money he could of the said 400 Hackney Coachmen, came to those
he had formerly ruined, and by his deluding Speeches prevailed upon some poor
Hackney-Coachmen and others not qualified for that Employ, to assist him with
Money to solicit the then Popish Commissioners to License 600
Hackney-Coachmen, and to pay more Money in one Year for working their Coaches
in the streets, to the Commissioners and the said Murray and his Accomplices
than all the said Hackney-Coachmen were worth, and if the Rich Men should pay
the Poor Men's Debts; the Commission was Sealed and Security given in to the
Lords of the Treasury in November, 1688. (as the said Coachmen are credably
informed,) And if it had not pleased Almighty God to send His Highness, the
then Prince of Orange, to their Relief at that very time, the said
Hackney-Coachmen had been all ruined and undone by the unjust and wicked
Contrivance aforesaid.

4. That when the said Murrey saw the late King James was gone out of this
Kingdom, and his Popish Commission of no effect, Did with the assistance of a
Friend or Two in London, for his own By-Ends since Christmas last, get the Act
of Common Counsel revived. And the said Coachmen being informed, that the said
Murrey, and several others, are endeavoring, for their own private Interest,
and to the Prejudice of your Petitioners, to procure one or more Bills, of
their own framing, to be brought into this Honorable House, for the Regulating
of Hackney-Coaches. The said Coachmen therefore humbly desire that the Act made
for Regulating of Hackney-Coaches in the 13th and 14th Years of King Charles
II. may be vived, with the Addition only of One Hundred Coaches. And that they
may be settled at the same Yearly Rent that was Limited by the said Act.

Wherefore we most humbly beseech Your Honors to take the Premises into Your
Serious Consideration; And we and all the rest, as in Duty bound, shall ever
Pray, etc.

Thomas Cadman, Thomas Whittle, Peter Welsh, John Hurt, John Sheldarick, George
Loverick, John Beaver, John Hugins.



