A Venice Looking-glass: OR, A LETTER WRITTEN very lately from LONDON to
ROME, by a Venetian Clarissimo to Cardinal Barberino, Protector of the English
Nation, touching these present distempers.

Wherein, as in a true Mirror, ENGLAND may behold her own spots, wherein she
may see, and foresee, her Follies passed, her present Danger, and future
Destruction.

Faithfully rendered out of the Jtalian into English.

Fas est, and ab host doceri. Printed in the year, 1648.

THE TRANSLATOR TO HIS COUNTRY.
O England, (specially thou besotted City of London) if thou be not past
cure, or grown careless and desperate of thy self, be warned by this Stranger,
who, having felt thy pulse, and cast thy water very exactly, discovers in thee
symptoms of inevitable ruin. Diverse of thy own Children have oftentimes
admonished thee with tears in their eyes, and terror in their hearts, to
recollect thy self, but they have been little regarded: Let a Forreiners
advice then take place, and make some impressions in thee, to prevent thy utter
destruction.

TO HIS EMINENCE, THE LORD FRANCISCO BARBERINI, Cardinal of the most holy
Apostolic See, and Protector of the English Nation, at his Palaces in Rome.
MY last to your Eminence was but short, in regard I had been but a short time
in this Country, I have now made a longer sojourn here, and taken a leisurely
information of all matters; therefore I shall give your Eminence an account
proportionably: For by conversation with the most indifferent, and
intelligenc'd men, and by communication with the Ambassadors here resident, I
have taken some pains to pump out the truth of things.

I find, that angry star, which has lowr'd so long upon Europe in general,
has been as predominant, and cast as direful aspects upon this poor Island, as
upon any other part: Truly, my Lord, in all probability this people have passed
the Meridian of their happiness, and begin to decline extremely, as well in
Repute abroad, as also in the common notions of Religion, and indeed in the
ordinary faculty of Reason: I think verily the Ill Spirit never reigned so much
in any corner of the earth by those inhumane and horid things that I have
observed among them, Nor is it a petty Spirit, but one of the greatest
Cacodaemons that thus drives them on, and makes them so active in the pursuance
of their own perdition.

To deduce matters from their Original, Your Eminency may please to
understand, that this King at his access to the Crown had deep debts to pay,
both of His Fathers, and his own, he was left engaged in a fresh war with
Spain; and had another presently after with France, and both at one time, but
he came off well enough of those: Afterward never any Country flourished in
that envied happiness, and wanton kind of prosperity; This City of London was
grown to be the greatest Mart, and mistress of Trade, of any in the world,
Insomuch, as I have been certainly informed, the King might have eaten merely
upon His customs 4000 crowns a day: Moreover, she had a vast bank of money
being made the scale of conveying the King of Spaines treasure to Flanders:
Insomuch that in a few years she had above ten millions of his moneys brought
hither, which she might have remitted in specie or in merchandise, and for
which this King had five in the hundred for coynage: Yet could he not get
beforehand with the world, having a sister with so many Nephews and neeces,
having a Queen with diverse children of His own, (at least 16 of the
Blood-Royall) to maintain, with diverse profuse Courtiers besides, which made
Him more parsimonious then ordinary. The Wars then growing more active 'twixt
Spain and France, as also 'twixt Holland and Spain both by Land and Sea, and
diverse great Fleets of Men of War as well French (who were grown powerful
that way) as Dunkerkers, Spaniards, Hollanders, and Hamburgers, appearing daily
in His narrow Seas, and sailing close by His Chambers, the world wondered this
King had no greater strength at Sea, in case that any of the foresaid Nations
should do him an affront, as some of them had already done, by denying to dash
their Colors to His Ships: Insomuch that in Holland and other places he was
pasquill'd at, and pourtrayed lying in his cradle lullaby'd and rocked asleep
by the Spaniard: Hereupon being by advertisements from His Agents abroad, and
frequent advice of His Privy Council at home, made sensible of the danger,
and a kind of dishonor he was fallen into, and having intelligence that the
French Cardinal began to question his title to the Dominion of the Narrow
Seas, considering He employed no visible power to preserve it, He began to
consult of means to set forth a Royal Fleet: but in regard the Purse of the
Crown was lightly ballasted, and that he had no mind to summon the three
Estates, because of some indignities he had received in former Parliaments by
the Puritan party, (a race of people averse to all Kingly Government, unless
they may pare it as they please) his then Attorney General, a great
cryed-up-Lawyer, put it in his Head to impose an old Tax called Ship-mony upon
the Subject, which the said Lawyer did warrant upon his life to be Legal, for
he could produce diverse Records how many of his Progenitors had done the like:
The King not satisfied with his single opinion, referred it to His Learned
Council, and they unanimously averred it to be agreeable to the Law of the
Land; yet this would not fully satisfy the King, but He would have the Opinion
of His twelve Judges, and they also affirmed by their several vouches the said
Tax to be warrantable; Hereupon it was imposed and leavied, but some refusing
to pay it, there was a suite commenced, during which all the Judges were to
re-deliver their opinions jointly, and the business being maturely debated and
canvased in open Court diverse months, and all arguments produced pro and con,
nine of the said twelve Judges concluded it Legal: Thereupon the King continued
the imposition of the said Tax, and never was money employed so much for the
Honor and advantage of a Country, for he sent out every Summer a Royal fleet
to scowre and secure the Seas; he caused a Galeon to be built, the greatest and
gallantest that ever spread sail: Nor did he purse up, and dispose of one penny
of this money to any other use, but added much of his own Revenues yearly
thereunto: So the world abroad cried up the King of England to be awake again;
Trade did wonderfully increase, both Domestic and foreign in all the three
Kingdoms; Ireland was reduced to an absolute Settlement, the Arreares of the
Crown paid, and a considerable Revenue came thence clearly to the Exchequer of
England every year, the salaries of all Officers, with the pay of the standing
Army there, and all other Charges being defrayed by Ireland her self, which was
never done before. Yet for all this height of happiness, and the glorious
fruits of the said Ship Money, (which was but a kind of petty insensible Tax,
and a thing of nothing to what has happened since) there were some foolish
people in this Land which murmured at it, and cried out nothing else but a
Parliament, a Parliament; and they have had one since with a vengeance.

But before this occasion, it was observed, that the seeds of disobedience,
and a spirit of insurrection was a long time engendring in the hearts of some
of this peace-pampred People, which is conceived to proceed from their
conversation and comerce with three sorts of men, viz. the Scot, the Hollander
and the French Huguenot. Now an advantage happened that much conduced to
necessitate the convoking of a Parliament, which was an ill-favored traverse
that fell out in Scotland; For the King intending an Uniformity of Divine
worship in all His three Kingdoms, sent thither the Lyturgie of this Church,
but it found cold and coorse entertainment there, for the whole Nation, men,
women and children rise up against them: Hereupon the King absolutely revoked
it by Proclamation, wherein He declared 'twas never His purpose to press the
practice thereof upon the Consciences of any; therefore commanded that all
things should be in statu quo prius, but this would not serve the turn, the
Scot took advantage hereby to destroy Hierarchy, and pull down Bishops to get
their demeanes: To which purpose they came with an Army in open Field against
their own Native King, who not disgesting this indignity, Mustred another
English Army; which being upon the confines of both Kingdoms, a kind of
Pacification was plaistred over for the present. The King returning to London,
and consulting His second thoughts, resented that insolency of the Scots more
then formerly: Hereupon He summons a Parliament, and desires aid to Vindicat
that Affront of the Scot. The Scot had strong Intelligence with the Puritan
Faction in the English Parliament, who seemed to abet his quarrel, rather then
to be sensible of any national dishonor received from him; which caused that
short-lived Parliament to dissolve in discontent, and the King was forced to
find other means to raise and support an Army by private Loanes of His Nobler
sort of Subjects and Servants: The Scot having punctual Advertisments of every
thing that passed, yea, in the Kings Cabinet Council was not idle all this
while, but rallies what was left of the former Army (which by the articles of
Pacification should have been absolutely dismissed) and boldly invades England,
which he durst never have done, if he had not well known that this Puritan
Party which was now grown very powerful here, and indeed had invited him to
this expedition, would stand to him. This foreign Army being, by the pernicious
close machinations of some mongrell Englishmen aforementioned, entered into the
Bowels of the Country, the King was forced to call this present Parliament,
with whom he complied in every thing, so far as to sacrifice unto them both
Judge, Bishop, Councellor and Courtier; yea, He yielded to the tumbling down of
many tribunalls of Justice, which were an advantage to his Prerogative; He
assented that the Prelates, who were the most Ancient and Prime Members of the
upper House, and had priority of all others, since the first constitution of
Parliament in the enrollment of all Acts, He assented I say that these, who
were the greatest prop of His Crown should be quite outed from among the Peers;
He granted them also a Trienniall Parliament, and after that, this Perpetual;
which words, to the apprehension of any rational man, carry with them a gross
absurdity in the very sense of the thing: And touching this last Grant, I had
it from a good hand, that the Queen was a friend to this Parliament, and your
Eminence knows how they have requited Her since, but the maine open Councellor
to this fatal Act was a Scot.

Now the reason which they alleged for this everlasting Parliament was one of
the baldest that ever I heard of, it was, that they might have time enough to
pay the Scots Army, whereas in one morning they might have dispatched that, by
passing so many Subsidies for that use, and upon the credit of those, they
might have raised what money they would.

The Parliament finding the King so pliable, and His pulse to beat so gently,
like ill-natured men they fall from inches to else in seeking their advantages:
They grew so peremptory as to demand all the military strength of the Kingdom,
the Tower of London, with the whole Royal Navy, which they found in an
excellent equipage, gramercy shipmony; so that the benefit of Ship-mony, which
they so clamoured at, turned most to their advantage of any thing afterward.

The Scot being Fidler-like returned to his Country with meat, drink, and money,
the King went a while after to keep a Parliament there, wherein he filled every
blank, they did but ask and have, for He granted them what possibly they could
propound, both for their Kirk and State, many received Honor, and they divided
Bishops Lands amongst them: for all which unparalled Concessions of Princely
grace, they caused an Act already in force to be published, viZ. that it should
be damnable Treason in the highest degree that could be, for any of the Scots
Nation conjunctly or singly to levy arms, or any military Forces, upon any
pretext whatsoever, without His Majesty's royal Commission; and this they
caused to be don by way of gratitude, but how they performed it afterward the
world knows too well.

The King returning to London, in lieu of a wellcom to his two Houses of
Parliament (to whom also before his departure he had passed more Acts of Grace
then all his Progenitors, take them all in a lump) they had patched up a kind
of Remonstrance, which was voted in the dead of night, wherein they exposed to
the world the least moat in former government, and aggravated to the very
height every grievance, all which the King had redressed before; and this
Remonstrance, which breathed nothing but a base kind of malice, they presented
as a nosegay to their Soverain Prince, to congratulate his safe return from a
foreign Country; which they caused to be printed and published before he could
give any answer thereunto. The King finding such a virulent spirit still reign
in the House, and knowing who were chiefly possessed with it (whom he had
impeached before, but saw he could get no justice against them) in such an
extremity, he did an act like a generous Prince, for taking the Palsgrave with
him, he took the first coach he met withal at his Court gate, and went to his
House of Commons in person to demand five Members, which he would prove to be
Traitors in the highest degree, and to be the Authors of all these distempers,
protesting upon the word of a King, that they should have as fair and legal a
trial as ever men had; in the interim he only desired that their persons might
be secured: The walls of both Houses, and the very stones in London street did
seem to ring of this high carriage of the Kings, and the sound went thence to
the Country, whence the silly Plebeians came presently in whole herds to this
City, and strowting up and down the streets, had nothing in their mouths, but
that the privilege of Parliament, the privilege of Parliament was broken, though
it be the known clear Law of the Land, that the Parliament cannot supersede or
shelter any treason.

The King finding how violently the pulse of the gr^sly seduced people did
beat, and there having been formerly diverse riotous crues of base Mechaniques
and Mariners, who had affronted both his own Court, and the two Houses besides,
which the Commons, to their eternal reproach, connived at, notwithstanding
that diverse motions were made by the Lords to suppress them, the King also
having private intelligence that there was a mischievous plot to surprise his
person, removed his Court to the Country.

The King departing, or rather being driven away thus from his two Houses, by
this mutinous City, he might well at his going away have obraided her in the
same words as Henry the 3. did upbraid Paris, who being by such another
tumultuous rabble driven out of her in the time of the Ligue, as he was losing
sight of her, he turned his face back, and said, Farewell ungrateful City,
I will never see thee again till I make my way into thee through thy Walls:
Yet, though the King absented himself in person thus from the two Houses, he
sent them frequent messages, that they would draw into Acts what he had already
assented unto, and if any thing was left yet undon by him, he would do it;
therefore he willed them to leave off those groundles fears and jealousies
wherewith they had amused both City and Country; and he was ready to return
at all times to his Palace in Westminster, provided that his Person might be
secured from the former barbarisms and outrages: But in lieu of a dutiful
compliance with their Prince, the thoughts of the two Houses ran upon nothing
but war: The King then retiring into the North, and thinking with a few of his
servants only to go visit a Town of his, he was denied entrance by a fatal
unlucky wretch, who afterward was shamefully executed, with his eldest son, by
command of his new Masters of the Parliament: The King being thus shut out of
his own town (which opened the first door to a bloody war) put forth a
Declaration, wherein he warned all his people that they should look to their
proprieties, for if He was thus barred of his own, how could any private
Subject be sure to be Master of any thing he had, and herein he was as much
Prophet as Prince; For the Parlement-men afterward made themselfs Landlords
of the whole Kingdom, it has been usual for them to thrust any out of his
freehold, to take his bed from under him, and his shirt from off his very back.
The King being kept thus out of one of his towns, might well suspect that he
might be driven out of another, therefore 'twas time for him to look to the
preservation of his Person, and the Country came in voluntarily unto him by
thousands to that purpose, but he made choice of a few only to be his guard, as
the Parlementteers had don a good while before for themselfs: But now they went
otherwise to work, for they fell a levying, listing, and arming men by whole
Regiments and Brigades till they had a very considerable Army a foot, before
the King had one Musqueteer or Trooper on his side: yet these men are so
notoriously impudent, as to make the King the first Aggressor of the war, and
to lay upon Him all the blood that was spilt to this day, wherein the Devil
himself cannot be more shameless. The Parliamenteers having an army of foot and
horse thus in perfect Equipage, 'twas high time for the King to look to
himself, therefore he was forced to display his royal Standard, and draw his
sword quite out: Thus a cruel and most cruentous civil war began which lasted
near upon four years without intermission, wherein there happened more
battles, sieges and skirmishes, then passed in the Netherlands in fourscore
years, and herein the Englishmen may be said to get some credit abroad in the
world, that they have the same blood running in their veins (though not the
same brains in their sculls) which their Ancestors had, who were observed to
be the activest peeple in the field, impatient of delay, and most desirous of
battle then any Nation.

But it was one of the greatest miracles that ever happened in this Land how
the King was able to subsist so long against the Parlamenteers, considering the
multiplicity of infinite advantatages they had of him by water and land: for
they had the Scot, the Sea and the City on their side; touching the first, he
rushed in as an Auxiliary, with above 20000. Horse and Foot completely
furnished both with small and great ammunition and arms, well clothed and
moneyed: For the second, they had all the Kings Ships well appointed, which are
held to be the greatest security of the Island both for defense and offense,
for every one of them is accounted one of the moving Castles of the Kingdom:
besides they had all the other standing stone-Castles, Forts, and tenable
places to boot: Concerning the last, (viz. the City) therein they had all the
wealth, bravery, and prime ammunition of England, this being the only Magazin
of men and money: Now if the King had had but one of these on his side, he had
in all probability crushed them to nothing: yet did he bear up strangely
against them a long time, and might have don longer, had he kept the campane,
and not spent the spirits of his men before Towns; had he not made a
disadvantagious election of some Commanders in chief, and lastly, had he not had
close Traitors within doors, as well as open Rebels without; for his very
Cabinet Council, and Bedchamber were not free of such vermin, and herein the
Parlementeers spent unknown sums and were very prodigal of the Kingdoms money.

The King, after many traverses of war, being reduced to a great straight by
cross successes and Counsels, rather then to fall into the hands of the
Parlementeers, withdrew himself in a Servingmans disguise to the Scors army,
as his last randevous, and this plott was managed by the French Agent then
residing here; A man would think that that Nation wol'd have deemed it an
eternal honor unto them to have their own King and Countreyman throw himself
thus into their arms, and to repose such a singular trust in them upon such an
Extremity: but they corresponded not so well with him as he expected, for
though at first when the Parlamenteers solicited their deer Brethren for a
delivery of the Kings person unto them, their note was then, if any foreign
petty Prince had so put himself upon them, they could not with honor deliver
him, much less their own Native King; yet they made a sacrifice of him at last
for 800000. Crowns; whereupon Bellieure the French Ambassador being convoyed
by a Troop of horse from the King toward London, to such a stand, in lieu of
larges to the soldiers, he drew out an half crown piece, and asked them how
many pence that was, they answered 30. He replied, for so much did Judas betray
his Master, and so he departed

And now, that in the course of this Historical Narration I have touched upon
France, your Eminence may please to understand, that nothing almost could tend
more to the advantage of that King, then these commotions in England,
considering that he was embarked in an actual war with the House of Austria
and that this Island did do Spain some good offices; among other, by transport of
his treasure to Dunkerk in English bottomes, whereunto this King gave way, and
sometimes in his own Galeons, which saved the Spainard near upon 20. in the
hundred, then if he had sent it by way of Genoa; so that some think, though
France made semblance to resent the sad condition of her Neighbor, and
thereupon sent the Prince of Harcour, and the foresaid Monsieur Bellieure to
compose matters, yet she never really intended it, as being against her present
interest and engagements: yet the world thinks it much that she should
publicly receive an Agent from these Parlamenteers, and that the French
Nobility who were used to be the gallantest men in the world to vindicate the
quarrels of distressed Ladies, are not more sensible of the outrages that have
bin offered a daughter of France, specially of Henry the great's.

But to resume the thread of my Narration, the King (and with him, one may say,
England also) being thus bought and sold, the Parlamenteers instead of bringing
him to Westminster, which had put a Period to all distempers tossed him up and
down to private houses, and kept the former Army still a foot: And truly I
think there was never Prince so abused, or poor peeple so baffled, and no
peeple but a purblind besotted peeple would have suffered themselfs to be so
baffled: for notwithstanding that no Enemy appeer'd in any corner of the
Kingdom, yet above 20000. Tagaroons have bin kept together ever since to grind
the faces of the poor, and exhaust the very vital spirits of town and
Country, and keep them all in a perfect slavery: Had the Parlement-men, when
the Scots were gone, brought their King in a generous and frank way (as had
well becom'd Englishmen) to sit among them, and trusted to him (which of
necessity they must do at last) as they had gained more honor far in the world
abroad, so they had gained more upon his affections then I believe they will
ever do hereafter.

But to proceed, the King having bin a good while prisoner to the Parliament,
the Army snatched him away from them, and some of the chiefest Commanders having
pawned their souls unto him to restore him speedily, in lieu thereof they
tumbled him up and down to sundry places, till they juggled him at last to that
small I Will where now he is surrounded with a guard of strange faces and if happly
he beginns to take delight in any of those faces, he is quickly taken out of
his sight. These harsh usages has made him become all gray and oregrown with
hair, so that he looks rather like some Silvan Satyr then a Soverain Prince:
And truly my Lord the meanest slave in St. Marks galleys or the abiect's Captif
in Algier bannier is not so miserable as he in diverse kinds, for they have the
comfort of their wifes, children and friends, they can convey and receive
Letters, send Messenggers upon their errands, and have private discourse with
any; all which is denied to the King of great Britain, nay the young Princes
his children are not permitted as much as to ask him blessing in a letter. In
so much that if he were not a great King of his passions, and had a heart cast
in an extraordinary Mould, these pressures and those base aspersions that have
bin publicly cast upon him by the Parliament it self, had bin enough to have
sent him out of the world e're this, and indeed it is the main thing they drive
at, to torture his brain, and tear his very heartstrings if they could: so that
whereas this foolish ignorant peeple speak such horrid things of our
Inquisition, truly my Lord it is a most gentle way of proceeding being compared
to this Kings persecutions.

As the King himself is thus in quality of a captif, so are all his Subjects
become perfect slaves, they have fooled themselfs into a worse slavery then Jew
or Greek under the Ottomans, for they know the bottom of their servitude by
paying so many Sultanesses for every head; but here, peeple are put to endless,
unknown, tyrannical Taxes, besides plundring and AcciZe, which two words, and
the practice of them (with storming of Towns) they have learnt of their pure
brethren of Holland: and for plundrings, these Parlementeer Saints think they
may robb any that adheres not to them as lawfully as the Jews did the
Egiptians: It Is an unsommable mass of money these Reformers have squandred in
few years, whereof they have often promised and solemnly voted a public
account to satisfy the Kingdom: but as in a hundred things more, so in this
precious particular they have dispensed with their Votes: they have consumed
more treasure with pretense to purge one Kingdom, then might have served to
have purchased two; more (as I am credibly told) then all the Kings of England
spent of the public stock since the Saxon Conquest: Thus have they not only
beggered the whole Island, but they have hurld it into the most fearfull'st
Chaos of confusion that ever poor Country was in; they have torn in pieces
the reins of all Government, trampled upon all Laws of heaven and earth, and
violated the very Dictamens of nature, by making mothers to betray their
sons, and the sons their fathers, but specially that great Charter, which
is the Pandect of all the Laws and Liberties of the freeborn Subject, which at
their admission to the House they are solemnly sworn to maintain, is torn in
flitters: besides those several Oaths they forged themselfs, as the
Protestation and Covenant, where they voluntarily swear to maintain the Kings
Honor and Rights, together with the established Laws of the Land, etc. Now I
am told, that all Acts of Parliament here are Laws, and they carry that
Majesty with them, that no power can suspend or repeal them, but the same
power that made them, which is the King sitting in full Parliament; these
mongrell Politicians have bin so notoriously impudent as to make an inferior
Ordinance of theirs to do it, which is point blank against the very
fundamentalls of this Government, and their own Oaths, which makes me think
that there was never such a perjured pack of wretches upon earth, never such
Monsters of mankind.

Yet this simple infatuated peeple have a Saint-like opinion of these Monsters,
this foolish City gards them daily with Horse and Foot, whereby she may be
said to kiss the very stones that are thrown at her, and the hand whence they
came, which a dog would not do: But she falls to recollect her felf now that
she begins to be pinched in Trade, that that her Mint is starved, and that the
Prince commands both Sea and River: yet the leading'st men in her
Common Council care not much for it, in regard most of them have left
traffiqueing abroad, finding it a more easy and gainefull way of trading at
home, by purchasing Church Lands, plundered goods, and debts upon the Public
Faith; thus the Saints of this Island turn godliness into gain.

Truly my Lord, I give the English for a lost Nation, never was there a more
palpable oblaesion of the brain, and a more visible decay of reason in any race
of men: it is a strange judgment from heaven, that a peeple should not be more
sensible how they are become slaves to Rebels, and those most of them the scumm
of the Nation, which is the basest of miseries: how they suffer them to
tyrannize by a mere arbitrary extrajudiciall power over their very souls and
bodies, over their very life's and livelihoods; how their former freedom is
turned to fetters, Molehills into Mountains of grievances, Ship Money into
Accize, Justice into Tyranny: For nothing has bin and is daily so common
amongst them as imprisonment without charge, and a charge without an accuser,
condemnation without appearance, and forfaitures without conviction.

To speak a little more of the King, if all the infernal fiends had ligu'd
against him, they could not have designd and disgorg'd more malice: they would
have laid to his charge his fathers death, as arrand a lie as ever was hatched
in hell: they would make him foreknow the insurrection in Ireland, whereas the
Spanish Ambassador here, and his Confessor who is a very reverend Irish man,
told me, that he knew no more of it then the grand Mogor did: they charge him
with all the blood of this civil war, whereas they and their instruments were
the first kindlers of it, and that first prohibited trade: they intercepted and
printed his private letters to his Queen, and hers to him, (Oh barbarous
baseness!) but therein they did him a pleasure, though the intent was
malicious, their aim in all things being to imbitter and envenom the hearts of
his peeple toward him; and this was to render him a glorious and well-belov'd
Prince, and for making him rich, all which they had vowed to do upon passing
the Act of Continuance, they have made him poorer then the meanest of all his
vassalls, they have made him to have no propriety in house, goods, or Lands, or
as one may say, in his wife and children: 'Twas usual for the father to hunt
in his Park while the son hunted for his life in the field, for the wife to lie
in his bedds, while the husband laid wait to murder him abroad; they have
seized upon and sold his private Hangings and Plate, yea his very Cabinets,
Jewels and Pictures.

Nor are they the honorablest sort of peeple, and men nobly extracted (as in
Scotland) that do all this, (for then it were not so much to be wondered at) but
they are the meanest sort of Subjects, many of them Mechaniques, whereof the
lower House is full; specially the subordinate Committees, who domineer more
ore Nobles and Gentry, then the Parliament-Members themselfs their Masters.

Touching those few Peers that sit now voting in the upper House, they may be
said to be but mee^ Ciphers, they are grown so degenerate as to suffer the
Commons to give them the Law, to ride upon their backs, and do most things
without them: There be many thousand Petitions that have been recommended by
these Lords to the lower House, which are scornfully thrown into corners and
never read; their Messengers have used to dance attendance diverse hours and
days before they were vouchsafed to be let in or heard, to the eternal
dishonor of those Peers, and yet poor spirited things they resent it not: The
Commons now command all, and though, as I am informed, they are summoned
thither by the Kings Original Writ but to consent to what the King and his
great Counsel of Peers (which is the true Court of Parliament) shall resolve
upon; They are now from Consenters become the chiefest Counselors yea
Controwlers of all; nay some of this lower House fly so high as to term
themselfs Conquerors, and though in all conferences with the Lords ^hey stand
bare before them, yet by a new way of mixed Committees they carry themselfs as
Colleagues: These are the men that now have the vogue, and they have made their
Privileges so big swollen, that they seem to have quite swallowed up both the
Kings Prerogatives, and that of the Lords: These are the Grandees, and Sages of
the times, though most of them have but cracked brains and crazy fortunes; Nay
some of them are such arrand Knaves and coxcombs, that it is questionable whither
they more want common honesty, or common sense; nor know no more what belongs
to true policy then the left leg of a joint-stoole: They are grown so high a
tiptoes, that they seem to scorn an Act of Amnestia^, or any grace from their
King, whereas some of them deserve to be hanged as often as they have hairs upon
their heads; nor have they any more care of the common good of England then
they have of Lapland, so they may secure their persons, and continue their
Power and Authority, is sweet, though it be in Hell. Thus, my Lord, is England
now governed, so that it is an easy thing to take a prospect of her ruin; The
Scot is now the rising man, who is the third time struck into her bowels with
a numerous Army: They say he has vowed never to return till he has put the
Crown on the Kings head, the Scepter in his hand, and the sword by his side; if
he do so, it will be the best thing that ever he did, though some think that he
will never be able to do England as much good as he has don her hurt; He has
extremely outwitted the English of late years: And they who were the causers of
his first and last coming in, I hold to be the most pernicious Enemies that
ever this Nation had; for it is probable that Germany will be sooner free of the
Swed, then England of the Scot, who will stick close unto him like a burr, that
he cannot shake him off; He is become already Master of the Englishmans soul,
by imposing a religion upon him, and he may hereafter be master of his body.

Your Eminence knows there is a periodicall fate hangs over all Kingdoms after
such a revolution of time, and rotation of fortunes wheel; the course of the
world has bin, for one Nation, like so many nails, to thrust out another; But
for this Nation, I observe by conference with diverse of the saddest and best
weighdst men among them, that the same presages foretell their ruin as did the
Israelites of old, which was a murmuring against their Governors; It is a long
time that both Judges Bishops, and privy Counselors have bin muttered at,
whereof the first should be the oracles of the Law, the other of the Gospel, the
last of State-affaires, and that our judgments should acquiesce upon theirs;
Here as I am informed; 'twas common for evry ignorant client to arraign his
Judge; for evry puny Clerk to censure the Bishop; for evry shallow-brain
homebred fellow to descant upon the results of the Council Table: and this
spirit of contradiction and contumacy has bin a long time fomenting in the
minds of this peeple, infused into them principally, by the Puritanicall
Faction. Touching the second of these (I mean Bishops) they are grown so odious
(principally for their large demeanes) among this peeple, as Monks were of old,
and one may say it is a just judgment fallen upon them, for they were most busy
in demolishing Convents and Monasteries, as these are in destroying Cathedralls
and Ministers; But above all, it has bin observed that this peeple has bin a
long time rotten-hearted toward the splendour of the Court, the very glory of
their King, and the old established Government of the land: It Is true there
were a few small leakes sprung in the great vessel of the State, (and what
vessel was ever so tite but was subject to leakes?) but these wiseakers in
stopping of one have made a hundred: Yet if this Kings reign were paralleled
to that of Queen EliZabeth's, who was the greatest Minion of a peeple that ever
was, one will find that she stretched the Prerogative as much: In her time as I
have read in the Latin Legend of her life, some had their hands cut off for
writing against her matching with the Duke of Aniou, others were hanged at
Tyburn for traducing her government; she pardoned thrice as many Roman Priests
as this King did she passed diverse Monopolies, she kept an Agent at Rome, she
sent her Sargeant at Arms to pluck out a Member then sitting in the House of
Commons by the ears, and clapped him in prison; she called them saucy fellows
to meddle with her Prerogative, or with the government of her household, she
managed all foreign affairs, specially the wars with Ireland soly by her
privy Counsel; yet there was no murmuring at her reign, and the reason I
conceave to be, that there was neither Scot or Puritan had then any stroke in
England.

Yet, for all their disobedience and grumblings against their Liege Lord the
King, this peeple are exactly obedient to their new Masters of the House of
Commons, though they sit there but as their Servants and entitle themselfs so;
and also though in lieu of the small scratches which England might happily have
received before (all which the King had cured) these new Masters have made such
deep gashes in her, and given her such deadly wounds, that I believe are
incurable.

My Lord, I find by my researches, that there are two great Idols in this
Kingdom the greatest that ever were, they are the Parliament and the Pulpit;
it is held a kind of blasphemy, if not a sin against the Holy Ghost to speak
against the one, and the whole body of Religion is nailed unto the other, for
there is no devotion here at all but preaching, which God wot is little better
then prating. The abuse of these two has bin the source of all the distempers
which now reign: touching the latter, it has served as a subservient Engine to
prop up the power and popularity of the first; these malicious Pulpit-men
breath out nothing thence but either sedition, schism or blasphemy: poor
shallow brained Sciolists, they would question many things in the old Testament,
and find Apocrypha in the New: And such is the violence wherewith the minds of
men and women are transported toward these Preachmen, and no other part of
devotion besides, that in all probability they will in time take a surfeit of
them: so that give this giddy peeple line enough there will be no need of
Ca^holique Arms to reduce them to the Apostolic Church, they will in time pave
the way to it themselves, and be glad to return to Rome to find out a Religion
again.

There was here before, as I am informed, a kind of a face of a Church, there
were some solemnities, venerations and decencies used that a man might discover
some piety in this peeple; there was a public Liturgy that in pithy
Patheticall prayers reached all occasions; the Sacraments were administered with
some reverence, their Churches were kept neat and comely; but this ^^sty race of
miscreants have nothing at all of sweetness, of piety and devotion in them;
it is all turned to a fatuous kind of more zeal after learning, as if
Christianity had no sobriety, consistence, or end of knowledge at all: These
silly things, to imitate the Apostles time, would have the same form of
discipline to govern whole Nations, as it did a chamberfull of men in the
infancy of the Church* they would make the same coat serve our Savior at 30.
years, which fitted him at three: It Is incredible how many ugly sorts of
heresies they daily hatch, but they are most of them old ones newly furbish'd;
they all relate to Aerius, a perfect hater of Bishops, because he could not be
one himself. The two Sectaries which sway most, are the Presbyterians and
Independents, the Presbyterian is a spawn of a Puritan, and the Independent a
spawn of the Presbyterian: there is but one hop 'twixt the first and a Jew, and
but half a hop 'twixt the other and an Infidel; they are both opposite to
Monarchy and Hierarchy; and the latter would have no Government at all, but a
parity and promiscuous confusion, a race of creatures fit only to inhabit Hell:
and one of the fruits of this blessed Parliament, and of these two Sectaries is
that they have made more Jews and Athiests then I think there is in all Europe
besides; but truly my Lord I think the judgments of Heaven were never so
visible in any part of the Earth, as they are now here, for there is Rebel
against Rebel, House against House, City against Army, Parliament against
Scot, but these two Sectaries, I mean the Presbyterian and Independent, who
were the firebrarnds that put this poor Island first in a flame, are now in most
deadly feud one against the other (though they both concur in this to destroy
government:) And if the King had time enough to look only upon them, they would
quickly hang, draw, and destroy one another.

But indeed all Christian Princes should observe the motions and successes of
these two unlucky Incendiaries, for if they should ligue together again (as
they have often played fast and loose one with another) and prevail here, this
Island would not terminate their designs, they would puzzle all the world
besides. Their Preachmen ordinarily cry out in the Pulpit, there is a great
work to be done upon earth, for the reforming all mankind, and they are
appointed by Heaven to be the chief Instruments of bringing it about: They have
already bin so busy abroad, that (with vast sommes of money) they brought the
Swed upon the Dane, and the very Savages upon the English Cavalier in Virginia;
and could they confederat with Turk, or Tartar, or Hell it self against them,
they would do it: they are monstrously puffed up with pride, that they stick not
to call themselfs Conquerors; and one of the chief ringleaders of them, an
ignorant homebred kind of Brewer, was not ashamed to vaunt it publicly in
the Commons House, that if he had but 20000. men, he would undertake to march to
Constantinople, and pull the Ottoman Emperor out of his throne.

Touching the other grand Idol the Parliament, it is true that the primitive
constitution of Parliament in this Island was a wholesome piece of policy, because
it kept a good correspondence, and closed all ruptures 'twixt the King and his
people, but this thing they call Parliament now, may rather be termed but a
cantle of one, or indeed a Conventicle of Schismatiques, rather then a great
Counsel; it is like a kind of headless Monster, or some ectropiated carkas; for
there is neither King nor Prelate, nor scarce the seventh part of Peers and
Commons, no not the twelfth part fairly elected; nevertheless they draw the
peeple, specially this City, like so many stupid animalls, to adore them.

Yet though this institution of Parliament be a wholesome thing in it self, there
is in my judgment a great incongruity in one particular; and I believe it has
bin the cause of most distempers; It is, That the Burgesses are more in number
then the Knights of Shires; for the Knights of the Shires are commonly
Gentlemen well born, and bred, and versed in the Laws of the Land, as well as
foreign governments, diverse of them; but the Burgesses of Towns are commonly
Tradesmen, and being bred in Corporations, they are most of them inclining to
Puritamism, and consequently to popular government; these, exceeding the
Knights in number, carry all before them by plurality of Voices, and so puzzle
all: And now that I have mentioned Corporations, I must tell your Lordship,
that the greatest soloecism in the policy of this Kingdom, is the number of
them; especially this monstrous City, which is composed of nothing else but of
Corporations; and the greatest errors that this King, specially his Father
committed, was to suffer this town to spread her wings so wide; for she bears
no proportion with the bi^nesse of the Island, but may fit a Kingdom thrice as
spacious; she engrosseth and dreines all the wealth and strength of the
Kingdom; so that I cannot compa^e England more properly then to one of our
Cremona geese, where the custom is, to fatten only the heart, but in doing so
the whole body grows lank.

To draw to a conclusion, This Nation is in a most sad and desperate condition,
that they deserved to be pitied, and preserved from sinking, and having cast
the present state of things and all interests into an equal balance, I find,
my Lord there be three ways to do it, one good, and two bad:

1. The first of the bad ones is the Sword, which is one of the scourges of
heaven, especially the Civil sword.

2. The second bad one is the Treaty, which they now offer the King in that
small Island where he has bin kept Captif so long, (in which quality the world
will account him still while he is detained there) and by that Treaty to bind
him as fast as they can, and not trust him at all.

3. The good way is, in a free confiding brave way (Englishmen-like to send for
their King to London, where City, and Country should petition him to summon a
new and free full Parliament, which he may do as justly as ever he did thing in
his life, these men having infringed as well all the essential Privileges of
Parliament, as every puntillio of it, for they have often risen up in a
confusion without adjournment, they had two Speakers at once, they have most
perjuriously and beyond all imagination betrayed the trust both King and
Country reposed in them, subverted the very fundamentalls of all Law, and
plunged the whole Kingdom in this bottomless gulf of calamities: another
Parliament may happly do some good to this languishing Island, and cure her
convulsions, but for these men that arrogat to themselfes the name of Parliament
(by a local puntillio only because they never stirred from the place where
they have bin kept together by mere force) I find them by their actions to be
so pervers, so irrational and refractory, so far given over to a reprobat
sense, so fraught with rancor, with an irreconcilable malice and thirst of
blood, that England may well despair to be healed by such Phlebotomists, or
Quacksalvers; besides they are so full of scruples, apprehensions, and
jealousies proceeding from black guilty souls, and gawl'd consciences, that
they will do nothing but chop Logic with their King, and spin out time to
continu their power, and evade punishment, which they think is unavoydable if
there should be a free Parliament.

Touching the King he comports himself with an admired tempered equanimity, he
invades and o'remasters them more and more in all his answers by strength of
reason, though he have no soul breathing to consult withal, but his own
Genius: he gains wonderfully upon the hearts and opinion of his peeple, and as
the Sun uses to appear bigger in winter, and at his declension in regard of
the interposition of certain meteors 'twixt the eye of the beholder and the
object, so this King being thus o'reclouded and declined shines far more
glorious in the eyes of his peeple; and certainly these high moral virtues of
constancy, courage and wisdom com from above; and no wonder, for Kings as they
are elevated above all other peeple and stand upon higher ground, they sooner
receave the inspirations of heaven; nor does he only by strength of reason
outwit them, but he wooes them by gentleness and mansuetude; as the Gentleman of
Paris who having an Ape in his house that had taken his only child out of the
cradle, and dragged him up to the ridge of the house, the parent with ruthful
heart charmed the Ape by fair words and other blandishments to bring him
softly down, which he did; England may be said to be now just upon such a
precipice, ready to have her brains dashed out, and I hope these men will not
be worse natured then that brute animal, but will save her.

Thus have I given your Eminence a rough account of the state of this poor and
pitifully deluded peeple, which I will perfect when I shall com to your
presence, which I hope will be before this Autumnall Equinox; I thought to have
sojourned here longer, but that I am grown weary of the clime, for I fear
there s the other two scourge of heaven that menace this Island, I mean the
famine and pestilence, especially this City, for their prophanenes, rebellion
and sacrilege: it has bin a talk a great while whether Antichrist be com to
the world or no, I am sure Anti-Jesus, which is worse, is among this peeple,
for they hold all veneration though voluntary proceeding from the inward
motions of a sweet devoted soul, and causing an outward genuflexion, to be
superstitious, insomuch that one of the Synodicall Saints here printed and
published a Book entitling it against Jesus Worship.

London this 16. of August, Stylo loci, 1648. So in the profundest posture of
reverence I kiss your vest, being My Lord, Your Eminences most humbly devoted,
J. B. ^.


