1699

Col. Michelburne's CASE

THE CASE OF Col. John Michelburne, Late Governor of Londonderry; AND THE
REGIMENT then under his Command.
THE Eminent and Acceptable Service performed to the Crown of England, in that
vigorous and gallant Defense of the City of Londonderry, during the Siege which
was begun by the Irish in the Year 1689, is so well known, that it will need no
further Recommendation here, than to show the Opinion which the best of Judges
had thereof, even the King Himself; as may appear by that most Gracious Letter
which He was pleased to send to the Governors, immediately after the Raising of
the Siege: The Copy whereof follows.

WILLIAM REX,
TRusty and Well-Beloved, We greet you well:
The eminent and extraordinary Service you have performed to Us and Our
Kingdoms in general, by your late resolute and unparalleled Defense of that
Our City of Londonderry, as it does oblige us in the first place to an humble
Acknowledgment to Almighty God for his signal Mercies in supporting the Hearts
and Courage of our good Subjects, amongst those great and various Distresses,
arising from a furious Opposition without, and yet a more pressing Necessity
within those Walls, and sending them at last Deliverance, and bringing them by
your Conduct to triumph over their Enemies, which we cannot but attribute to an
immediate Divine Assistance, inspiring them with a Zeal for the True Religion,
a Love for their Country, and an unshaken Fidelity toward us; and must ever
own it as a continuance of that Miraculous Providence, which has hitherto
conducted us throughout in our Endeavors to re-settle these Nations in all
their Civil and Religious Rights and Liberties: So, in the next place, taking
into Our serious Consideration, as well the Importance of this Success, as the
Constancy and Bravery by which it has been brought to pass; We will not omit
signifying to You the just sense We have of the whole Action; in which having
the greatest Opportunity that can be put into your hands of any Subjects of
obliging their Prince, You have in all Points acquitted your selves to Our
satisfaction, even beyond what could be expected: Insomuch, that it now lies on
Our part to make such Retribution, as well to You, the Commanders in Chief, who
have been the happy Instruments, under God, of this Deliverance; as others, who
have signalized their Loyalty, Courage, and Patience in this time of Trial;
that all Our Subjects being encouraged by this Example, may be stirred up to
the Imitation of it in the like Hazardous, but Honorable Enterprises: We Will
therefore, that you rely on Our Royal Favor toward You; as also, that in Our
Name, you assure the Officers, Soldiers and Inhabitants of that City, that We
will take a fitting Occasion to recompense their Sufferings and Services in Our
Cause: So that neither they, nor any other of Our Loving Subjects, shall ever
have reason to repent them of a Faithful discharge of their Duty. And so We bid
you farewell.

Given at Our Court at Hampton Court this 16th Day of August, 1689. Shrewsbury.

To George Walker,and John Michelburne, Esquires, Governors of Londonderry.

Yet notwithstanding that His Majesty had so largely expressed His Gracious
Acceptance of this Service; upon the Stating of the Accounts of the Army in
Ireland (which now lies before the Parliament) the said Colonel Michelburne and
Regiment, are not brought into Pay till January following, which was the Year
1690, which excludes them 10 Months and 25 Days short of the rest of the
Forces; notwithstanding they received Commissions, Mustered, and did Duty equal
with the rest of the Army: And what Money, Clothes and Provisions they received
in the Year 1689, was stopped from them out of their Pay in the Year following;
because (as they were told) they were not put upon the Establishment till that
time: And that this may appear beyond contradiction, we have thought fit to
insert the Copy of a Report, upon the Petition of Colonel Michelburne, referred
to a Committee of the Honorable House of Commons, in the Year School.

UPon Examination of the Matter contained in Colonel Michelburne's Petition; It
does appear to this Committee, by a Commission under His Majesty's Hand (when
Prince of Orange) bearing date the 5th Day of February 1688, That the said
Colonel Michelburne was thereby appointed Major of a Regiment Commanded by
Colonel Sheffinton; with which Regiment the said Colonel Michelburne marched
into the Town of Londonderry in April before the late Siege, where he continued
with his Regiment in Defense of the Place till the Death of Colonel Baker,
which happened about the middle of June, when Colonel Michelburne was chosen by
the whole Garrison Governor and Commander in Chief with Dr. Walker; the said
Colonel Michelburne performing all the Duty during all the Difficulties of the
Siege, having all the Charge of the Military part; and, by God's Blessing and
Assistance, defended the City to the last Extremity, until happily relieved
with Provisions by Major General Kirk: Upon which the Enemy raised their
Siege, burnt their Camp, and marched off.

That upon Major General Kirke's coming into the Town, the said Colonel drew
out the Garrison, when the said Major General did Muster the said Colonel
Michelburne's Regiment upon View, and gave him a Commission, dated the 3d Day
of August 1689, to be sole Governor of the said City, and Colonel of the said
Regiment.

And it further appeared to this Committee, by His Majesty's Royal Letter under
His Sign-Manual, dated the 6th of August 1689, Counter-sign'd, Shrewsbury, and
Directed to George Walker and John Michelburne, Esquires, Governors of
Londonderry; Graciously acknowledging the Eminent and Extraordinary Services
performed by them (as His Majesty was pleased to Express it) in the resolute
and unparalleled Defense of the said Town; and therein promising a just
Retribution, as well to the Commanders in Chief, who had been the happy
Instruments, under God, of that Deliverance, as others, who Signalized their
Loyalty, Courage, and Patience in that time of Trial; and that His Majesty
would Recompense their said Service and Sufferings.

And it further appeared to this Committee, That the said Colonel with his
Regiment in February 1689, by the Command of Duke Schonberg, did join the Army,
and was posted upon the Frontiers, and has continued in His Majesty's Service
till the 4th of April last past, when they were Disbanded in Ireland.

And it further appeared, That His Majesty was Graciously pleased by his
Commission dated the 11th Day of August 1690, to confirm the said Colonel
Michelburne the Command of Colonel of the said Regiment, with a Clause in the
said Commission, To take place, as if the said Commission bore date the 10th
Day of March 1688.

It also further appeared to the Committee, by an Account Signed by Mr.
Pansford, Deputy to Mr. Fox, Paymaster-General of Ireland, That there remained
due to Colonel Michelburne and his Regiment for their Pay, from the First of
January 1689, 16028 l. 18 s. Out of which Sum there ought to be deducted as
paid to the said Colonel for the Use of his Regiment at three several Payments,
before they were upon the English Establishment, 1078 l. 19 s. 6 d. as is
certify'd by Mr. Abbott, then the Deputy to Mr. Harbord, late Paymaster-General
of His Majesty's Forces in Ireland; so that there remains due to the said
Regiment on this Foot 14949 l. 18 s. 6 d.

There also remains due to the said Colonel Michelburne for his Pay, as
Governor of Londonderry, at 20 s. per Diem, during the time he Commanded there,
992 l.

And the said Colonel Michelburne delivered in a List of the Officers of his
said Regiment, which is hereunto annexed.

Upon which Report the Honorable House of Commons were pleased to Address His
Majesty on his behalf; but being still wanting of their Pay, he is enforced to
make this further Application; in which he asks no more, but that he may be put
upon equal Terms with the rest of the Army; whereas he and his Regiment have
not yet received any Pay (excepting the abovementioned 1078 l. 19 s. 6 d.) for
Ten Months and Twenty-five Days, in which that Remarkable Defense of Derry is
comprehended: And therefore he hopes it may be thought but just, That as much
Regard should be had to this Debt, as to any other Arrears of the Army, since
the Service performed for it has been esteemed of as great Consequence to the
Nation, as any thing else that has been done during the War, by those that
received their Pay in due time.

It may further be offered in behalf of Colonel Michelburne, That 'twas the
continuing in his Post, and not leaving it at a time when the Service required
his Attendance, that brought him under this inconvenience and loss: For who can
doubt, but that if he had come for England with Dr. Walker, he had been at
least as well entitled to a Reward for his Services as the Doctor; upon whom
His Majesty most bountifully bestowed 5000 l. and also might have procured his
Regiment to have been then put upon the Establishment, and have received their
Pay in order as well as others? But indeed it has not only been his misfortune
to have received no Reward, but even the Government of Derry, in which he had
been Commissioned, was procured over his head by a Gentleman that had the
opportunity of making Application for it in England, while he was prosecuting
the Service of Ireland. And notwithstanding he had arrived to the Post of being
the Eldest Colonel (next the General Officers) of the whole Army in Ireland,
yet he was one of the first that was reduced in the Disbanding the Forces there.


