A VINDICATION OF THE LORDS PRAYER, AS A FORMAL PRAYER, And by CHRIST'S
INSTITVTION To be used by Christians as a Prayer; against the Antichristian
Practice and Opinion of some men.

Wherein, Also their private and ungrounded zeal is discovered, who are very
strict for the observation of the Lords Day, and make so light of the LORDS
PRAYER.

By MERIC CASAUBON, D. D. one of the Prebandaries of C. C. Canterb.

LONDON, printed by T.R. for Thomas Johnson at the Key in St. Paul's Church
yard, 1660.

TO THE READER.
THE first occasion of this Treatise (Christian Reader,) was the Relation of a
strange affront done publicly unto Christ, or if you will more punctually, to
the Lords Prayer, in the chief Church of Oxford, by one that had then (under
usurping Powers) the chief Government of that famous University. When the thing
was done, (for I have heard it confirmed by diverse) I know not precisely: this
I know, that ever since I heard of it, I never was at rest in my mind, though
it might be a good while before I had the opportunity, until I had written
somewhat in Vindication of it. It did trouble me, that any man professing
Christianity, should so much dishonor Christ; much more, that he durst (an
argument of dismal times;) do it in such a place: most of all, that when he did
it, so many Christians then present, had the patience to see it, or the
confidence to tarry in the place, where such an Affront was done unto him they
call Savior. Since that, much has been added, to my indignation both, and
admiration, when I have been told, that many that professed another way, and
went under another Title, notwithstanding what they had said of it publicly,
did shamefully comply with the Court-Preachers and Parasites of the times, and
had given it over, they also, many, or most of them, I know somewhat is said in
their defense; but that somewhat (if I be not mistaken in this Treatise) makes
the case rather worse: and if such poor shifts may serve for so fowl Acts, let
us talk no more of Scripture against Papists, or any others: I know nothing so
gross, but Scripture may be pretended for it, with as much or more probability.
What is here presented unto thee, Good Reader, was written and ready for the
Press, above a year ago, as some can witness, that have seen it, and read it.
How it happened, that it was not printed before; one occasion was, that I have
been often away; and when in Town, not always at leisure to think of it. But if
it be now seasonable, (as I hope it is) it is nedless to make any further
Apology, why not before. Only this it is fit thou should know, that if it had
been now to do, (since this blessed alteration, for which God make us all
thankful) my expressions might have been fuller and plainer, in some places.
In a place, where I say, this might happen to them, as a Judgment, for
opposing, yea, persecuting somewhat, once the glory of the English Reformation,
and the best of things that have been (by humane contrivance and Authority)
established among men; I hope I shall be understood, to mean this of the
English Liturgy or Book of Common Prayers. Indeed that is my meaning: and I
hope, I say no more of it, than I can (with the help of God) make good against
any that shall pretend to oppose it, by either reason, or Scripture. Yet I
know, even of late, what outcries are made against it. Will the Reader give me
leave, to give him a taste of their objections? It does much trouble them, that
by it, some Lessons out of the Apocrypha are appointed. Well, if that were
thought fit to be altered, that is little or nothing to the substance of the
book. But is this such a thing in the mean time, that deserves such outcries?
O, but things fabulous, false, contradictorie out of them are read. Indeed this
were a grievous imputation, if they were proposed unto the people, as any part
of the Word of God. Though this we may say withal, that many things may appear
false, ridiculous, contradictory, at first hearing, as they may be set out,
which upon better examination, will not be found so. But if nothing must be
read or heard in a Church, but what is unquestionably true, and good, that is,
divine: Lord, what will become of Sermons then, such especially as we have had
of late years, in many places? Men indeed make bold to call them generally, the
Word of God; but I hope no body is so stupid, as to think all treason,
blasphemy, nonsense, false doctrine, delivered out of Pulpits, to be truly the
Word of God. But Sermons, some will say perhance, are the Ordinance of God.
However, so much will follow, that somewhat may be tolerated, (in the Church)
for a greater good; that is liable to some inconveniences. And I think no sober
impartial man will deny, but that Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and other Books that
go under that title of Apocrypha, do afford as good things for the Instruction
of people, as many Sermons usually, that are not of the worst. Well: what are
Prayers, that are made extempore, or would be thought so, at least: so much in
request in these late times, are they not liable to the same inconvenience? If
any man shall infer hereupon, that therefore none but prescribed Prayers,
allowed by public Authority, are so fit to be used in a Church; I for my part
should readily subscribe; but I doubt the necessity of the inference, will not
so easily be granted by all men. Truly, It might have been hoped, that the sad
experience of these late times, since every man, Papists only, and Prelatical
men excepted, have been left to their liberty, would have disposed men truly
zealous for the Protestant Interest, to a better Opinion of former times, when,
to the grief of the Adversaries of it; the Protestant Religion here flourished;
and to entertain now with joy, what once in peevishness, and love of Novelty,
they did not so much care for. But I doubt there is somewhat else in it. What
that is, (if not already too visible to the world;) I rather leave to their own
consciences. One passage, or Testimony (for the Eminency of the Author, and his
exquisit Judgment in such things; our late Gracious Sovereign, now a glorious
Martyr in heaven;) I would have added to this Treatise, where the Reader shall
think most convenient. It was not then in my thoughts, when I was upon it;
though indeed the Book highly deserve, never to be out of our hands. The words
are, Some men I hear, are so impatient not to use, in all their Devotions,
their own invention and gifts, as they not only disuse, (as too many) but
wholly cast away and contemn the Lords Prayer, whose great guilt is, that it is
the warrant and original pattern of all set Liturgies in the Christian Church.
King Charles the First, in His Sacred Meditations, chapter 16. upon the Ordinance
against the Common prayer book.
I will not excuse my self for this passage: in the rest, if the Reader think I
have said more than I needed, I crave his pardon, and bid him Farewell.

A POSTSCRIPT.
SInce this was printed, and ready to come forth, a book (or Pasquil rather, it
is so full of railing:) entitled, The Common Prayer Book unmasked, etc. came to
my sight, and I thought my self engaged by the Argument, to look upon it. It is
such a piece of exquisit Nonsense, of groundless impudent Sophistry, with
bitter railing, and much profane jeering all along, that I must needs think,
they that have patience (exceptengaged by some particular consideration) to
read such stuff, without detestation, may as plausibly be persuaded to sing
Ballads, in stead of Holy Hymes, and to think that men serve God best in
Tap-houses-The whole strength of the Book lies in this: The Masse-Book,
Breviaries, etc. are idolatrous popish-Books; therefore whatsoever is taken out
of them, (or may be supposed to be taken out of them, because to be found
there) is popish, and idolatrous. Now a good part both of the Old and New
Testament, besides the whole Book of Psalms, is to be found in Mass-books, and
Breviaries: Is any man so blind that dooh not see what will follow? And is it
not the same reason for many godly prayers and forms: (not to speak of
Ceremonies, though it be true of them also) that were in use in time of purest
Christianity, long before Popery was heard of; yet to be found in Mass-books
and Breviaries? Or is it the bare word Mass, that turns all into Idolatry?
why might not it be a good word, whatever it is now, a thousand years ago? Many
ages are not yet passed, when Canticles, or the Song of Songs, ( as it is in
the Original,) was called in English, the Ballad of Ballads. Now many, if not
most ballads, we now so call, are profane, or ridiculous; and that word now, a
word of Scorn; therefore the Canticles, or Song of Songs, shall be no longer
part of Scripture, but mere Idolatry. Certainly, it must be granted, that wise
Governors see much more, than ordinary men: else, such senseless impious
stuff, a man would think, would not be permitted to be public. But, what is
all this, may some say, perchance, to the Lords Prayer, our subject? Alas! who
sees not, if all that is in Missals and Breviaries, or say, taken out of them,
(immediately perchance, not originally,) be idolatrous; then, we know what must
become of the Lords Prayer, being there more than once upon several occasions,
and the first thing there that offers it self to the view, in some of those
Books. This did oblige me to take some notice of the book: and so, I have done.

ERRATA.
Page 4. l. 7. r. whom. p. 18. l. 7. r. independents. p. 19. l. 2. r.
transsubst. p. 29. l. 17. r. end of f.. p. 32. l. 2. r. had. p. 54. l. 12. r.
Enthusiasm, p. 80. l. 5. r do but lat. p. 81. l. 10. r. quaeram. p. 92. 11. r.
Isa. 66.11.

A VINDICATION OF THE LORDS PRAYER, As a formal Prayer, and by Christ's
Institution to be used by Christians, as a Prayer; against the Antichristian
Practice, and opinions of some.
WE will forbear all Prefaces, and Rhetorical insinuations, and hasten to the
main business. Truth may need such sometimes, by reason of men's infirmities:
and there be examples in Scripture, that may contend with the choicest
Rhetoric, humane Authors afford, to justify it, if need were. But in such a
case as I conceive this is, where common sense, best reason; Authority, divine
and humane; all that can be desired in a cause, are so manifestly visible, the
best Rhetoric we can use, is to use no Rhetoric at all. It is the nature of
Truth, to be most lovely, when seen naked: but it is not the luck of all Truth,
to carry so much light, and luster with it, as will pierce through all
Obstacles, and make it visible to all eyes. I hope it is the luck of this, that
we contend for here: the Reader will quickly see, let him but read; I will not
say without prejudice, (for that is not to be hoped) but not obstinately
resolved against the ingenuity of his confession, though his conscience be
convicted.

And here in the first place, we profess, we pretend not to write against any,
who say, or teach, that what Christ has commanded, so commanded without
limitation of time or place, absolutely and generally to be observed, ought not
to be done by men that profess Christianity. There is no man so simple, but
would presently make this inference: This were to deny him in deed, whom we
profess to honor and worship in words. Except we should perchance establish
such a power upon Earth, equivalent or superior to the power of Christ: a
power to abrogate, or ratify, at pleasure, what is commanded: Which opposes
and exalts it self above all that is called God, etc. 2 These. 2.4. How far
this may belong to the Pope of Rome, who by his Canonists and others, does take
upon himself to have a power, Supra and contra omne jus: contra jus natural
gentium; civil, humanum, divinum, etc. contra Apostolum: Vetus Testamentum,
etc. to make de peccato non peccatum, and de non peccato peccaum: how far I
say, the Pope of Rome may be concerned in that place of Scripture, I will not
enquire. There be even of that side (professed Papists) that have laid it to
his charge, and applied those very words unto him. But it is not to our purpose
to enquire: They are not Papists, who we have to do with. We say therefore once
again, We do not pretend to write against any, who maintain positively Christ
should not be obeyed: Or yet more particularly; not against any, who
acknowledging these words of Christ, recorded Mat. 6. and Luke 11. Our Father
which art in Heaven, etc. to be a prescript form of Prayer; forbid us, and
forbear themselves, to use it as a Prayer: but against them, who allow not
these words to be a Prayer, but a bare direction or platform of Prayer only:
and upon that account, forbid, and forbear, as I have said: who therefore will
be ready to say, The question is not properly of honor, or dishonor done unto
Christ, but of the right use, or understanding of his words.

This may seem plausible at first hearing. But here I must desire the Reader to
consider; that scarce ever was any opinion so false, or so impious, but men
could find some words to set it out in another shape, if we will content our
selves with a superficial view; or will look at a distance through such
prospectives, as shall be put into our hands. We charge the Papists with
impiety, for denying to ordinany Christians the use of Gods Word. They will
say, they honor the Scripture, in keeping them from it, who, (through
ignorance and simplicity) are more likely to abuse it, than to make that use of
it, for which it was given. That they were given us to do good, being committed
unto such hands as have skill to handle them; not to do hurt, which. in the hands
of ignorant, illiterate people, they are most likely. If good words and fair
pretenses will serve the turn, it cannot be denied, but, in this cause, such
will easily be found, to make it plausible: though no cause can less pretend to
solidity of reason, (if we come to the trial of either Scripture or Antiquity)
to make it true. Again, we charge them of Sacrilege and Impiety in maiming the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper of one essential part, whilst they keep ordinary
people from the use of the Cup. The question is not, what we can prove, but
what they pretend. No such thing as we lay to their Charge, I am sure, that can
be called either Sacrilege, or Impiety. The very Anabaptists, the rankest of
them, (the Alumbradoes of Spain, or Quakers of England) who deny and despise
all Scriptures; can we charge them of any impiety, if they may tell their own
tale, and be believed without any further reasoning? They will say, They
honor, though not what we call Scripture: yet, the word of God, as much as
any; that is, their inspirations, and raptures, and the Oracles of their own
breast, their inward light; which they pretend to be the only true Word.

Since therefore it is certain, that no opinion can be so impious in it self,
but it may be masked with words able, if not to make it plausible and popular;
yet, to hide the impiety: laying aside what is pretended, as altogether
impertinent: we will come to the true state of the question, which we conceive
to be this.

Whether it may, or does clearly appear, by the plain literal obvious sense, or
construction of Scripture; confirmed by all circumstances of the Context; all
probability of humane ratiocination: the sense and practice of all Christians,
since the very beginning of Christianity, (so far as can be traced by History)
in all ages, in all places; that these words, Our Father, etc. as set down in
St. Matthew, and St. Luke, were prescribed by our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS
CHRIST, as a very form of Prayer, to be used by all professing Christianity, in
those very words, as a Prayer; yea, or not.

A question of very great moment, as I apprehend it, the consequent, or
consequence whereof; if the affirmative part of it be proved, will be,

First, that they who either by their example, or persuasions, bereave
Christians of it, are guilty (Prayer being a thing of such consequence in
Religion) of horrible, detestable sacrilege: and may seem themselves (to
others) to renounce thereby to no small part of Christianity. We speak to, and
of professed Ministers only in all this Discourse.

Secondly, whilst it may probably be conceived, that a main reason that leads
them unto this, is a great opinion they have of, or to their own conceptions in
praying; which they therefore (in ordinary construction of reason) must be
thought to prefer before this form; this form, I say, by such undeniable,
uncontrolable, (to common sense and found reason) evidence of Scripture made,
and prescribed by Christ himself; (The Son of God, in whom all the Treasures of
Wisdom are hidden, etc.) hence it will follow, that they are guilty (though I
hope not intended by them) yet guilty of high Blasphemy against CHRIST, their
God and Savior.

Thirdly, whilst they seek evasions against such evidence of Scripture: such
evidence, as no other point, or doctrine of Christianity, can pretend unto
greater: it must needs follow, that by this their example, they give a most
pernicious example to the most pernicious Heretics, of present, or future
ages, to shift all Scriptures, though never so clear against them, and do much
countenance the Blasphemies of some Papists, in calling them a Nose of Wax,
etc. as also, stop or obstruct their own mouths for ever speaking against
Quakers and Anabaptists, who certainly may pretend to as much ground of reason
for denying all Scriptures, as any can, for denying the use of the Lords
Prayer, as a Prayer unto Christians; so demonstrably grounded upon Scripture,
commanded by Christ himself, confirmed by the practice of all Christians in the
world.

This is the true Estate of the question, as I apprehend. If any think fit to
add, in the last place; That in case we come short of our proofs, and cannot
make our charge good, we must needs be guilty, either of inexcusable ignorance,
or intolerable uncharitableness, or both: I am content.

If any shall think I have used aggravation in it, I am sorry. My conscience
does bear me witness, I intended it not. I pray God heartily it may never be
laid to their charge; as I verily believe, that none of these things are really
intended by them. But in a business of this nature, where I conceive the honor
of Christ, and the good of all Christians, so much interested; I think I should
unworthily prevaricate, if I should not use plainness of words, and call (...),
as the old saying is. But this I have said of my belief, as to their intention:
I mean it of such, as are true Christians in the main Fundamentals. As for the
professed Anabaptists, Quakers, Enthusiasts, or however called, who have
apostatized from the right says: such, as they frequently blaspheme against
the Person; so no wonder, if they frequently and purposely blaspheme the Prayer
of Christ. As I have heard it reported of some, (some years ago, great
pretenders to the spirit of prayer) they should often say, If Christ were alive
again (conversant in earth amongst men; intended I suppose:) he would be
ashamed of that prayer. Others have been heard, (wretched Miscreants!) to say,
they thanked God they had forgotten it. As bad or worse has been said of the
Scripture in general, we need not wonder at it.

Though they blaspheme not in words, yet they may be thought to do somewhat in
deeds, of much affinity: who though they allow Children perchance, and simple
people, in private, and inferior subordinate men; as Lecturers, and Clerks, in
Churches, to use the Lords prayer: yet themselves will not do it that honor,
as to use it in that simplicity of words, as delivered and commended unto us by
Christ, but, either not at all: or so dislocated, (which we should not except
against, if done in imitation, and not in liew of the Lords prayer) and
dismembered with their own cenceptions, that little or nothing of it does appear
in its own shape and form.

Now we are to proceed to the consideration of the Text; we will first consider
of a general objection, or evasion rather, which I find some have used in this
very point. We urge the plain literal sense. Yes, but all things (say they) in
Scripture, are not to be taken literally. We grant it: but withal we say, to
make use of this objection upon all occasions, when we find our selves pinched,
without any ground at all, of either words, reason, circumstance, etc. is as
much as to void all Scripture, and to substitute our own phansies and
imaginations in lieu of it. The Scripture says. Thou shall not worship images,
Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, steal, etc. Yea, but every
thing in the Scripture is not to be taken literally. What then is the use of
the Scriptures, I would fain know, if it be enough to say so, when we would not
have it to say, what crosses our humors, interest, or prejudice? The Reader
will give me leave to insist a little upon this point. It will be of good use
to our present occasion, and he will find it before he come to the end. All
things in Scripture are not to be taken literally: No: there be many Types and
Figures in the Scriptures; Metaphors and Translations: many things spoken by
way of similitude, which must not be understood literally; and may easily be
understood, without any other Comment (or exposition) than nature and common
sense. God speaking unto men, does condescend to speak to them in the language
of men. When Christ styleth the Pharisees, Generation of Vipers, can any be so
simple, or so malicious, as to make him say, that they were really begotten of
Vipers? or when he says to his Disciples; that he is the Vine, and they the
branches: that he intended it of a real Vine and Branches? When the Psalmist
calls his God a Rock: who would, who could, man, woman or child; (that is come
to the age of understanding) argue from thence, that David was an Idolator,
because he did worship stones? But here is nothing of that nature; (figurative
or metaphorical) in the words we have to do with; we shall not need to say more.

Again, Prophecies, are obscure: it is their nature to be so, not many things
in them (we grant, ordinarily,) to be taken literally; but we need not insist
upon it: here is no thing of that nature neither.

Again, Mysterious, sacramental things are commonly involved in figures: it is
their nature to be so. That is not a Sacrament properly, that does not show
somewhat that may be seen, whereby it would have somewhat understood that is
not seen.

And do we wonder if Figures be used, when they are spoken of? Or should we in
reason press the letter in such speeches, even against all sense and reason?
Will any man say, that the Circumcision was a Covenant, literally, because it
is so called: or that the Israelites were in motion, when they did eat the
Paschal Lamb, because it is called the Passover? Or that Christ, before he was
made flesh, was a Stone, because St. Paul says, Christ was the Rock that
followed the Israelites? If therefore Christ says, the Sacramental Cup is the
New Testament, or Testament in his blood, (as St. Paul expresses him) or that
the sacramental bread is his body; can we be charged with infidelity, because
we believe a figure in the words, (the proper style of Sacraments) though in
that figure, a reality, as to the benefit, as considerable to us, as we could
expect from a visible presence, or participation.

Again, St. Austin has a rule, and much notice is taken of it: Si praeceptiva
locutio est, aut flagitium, aut facinus vetans, etc. Where we have a command,
(says he, or to that effect) that commands nothing against civility, or moral
honesty: we must take it literally; otherwise figuratively. But here is nothing
in this question of the Lords Prayer that comes within that compass, nothing of
that nature objected against it, (that I know of,) or the use of it, though the
irreverent carriage of some men in some places) (as I have heard) might make
some men suspect, that they (if otherwise sober and religious) apprehended
somewhat in it, very offensive to religious ears.

And now that the Reader may know this is no digression, I must tell him, I
find them, by some that have written against the use of the Lords Prayer, as a
prayer, them, I say, that stick to the plain literal meaning of Christ's words
in the institution of this holy Prayer, charged with some Popery, or imitation
(at least) of Popery, upon this very ground, because Papists stick to the
literal sense of these sacramental words, Hoc est corpus meum, this is my Body:
I will set down their words, In eo vero quod tantopere urgetis verba ipsa:
Quando oratis, dicite, Pater noster, etc. quid aliud agitis, quam quod Papistae
solent in quaestione Sacramenti, urgentes (...), and ad nauseam usque
objicientes verba illa, Hoc est corpus meum. They are the words of one
Franciscus Johnsonus, who had the reputation of a wondrous able man among the
Sectaries, (or Puritans) of those times, in answer to John Carpenter, a
reclaimed Papist, a son of the Church of England.

What particular Sect, besides a Puritan them an was of, I know not. Some what
it seems between Presbytery, and right down Anabaptism. For Anabaptism he
disclaims. And Presbyterian Government (at the very last of his discourse) as
well as Episcopy, he pronounces to be derived from the Antichrist. Whether
Independants were then known, I know not. But let the Readee judge what these
men would bring Religion, and the word of God unto. If this be Popery, or
Popish, when there is no imaginable ground, or color for any other, to stick
to the literal sense of Scripture: If I say to a thief, steal not; and tell
him, it is forbidden in the Scripture, what a ready evasion will he have?
whilst I think to convince him by the word of God, he will impeach me (and
truly we know many have really suffered for more ridiculous and groundless
imputations, as the Surpliss, and the like:) of being a Papist, or a friend to
Papists: (to their cause I mean; for their persons we may love and honor, as
they shall merit, I hope, without offense:) or perchance of making the
Transubstantiation an article of my faith, because I press the literal sense
against stealing. The best is, ordinary theft, the Law provides against: but
Sacrilege, both by the Law of God, and by the rules of right reason, a greater
theft, will easily be avoided by this sophistry; and perchance, instead of a
crime, be made the Character of a Saint. As this is, so is all the rest, that I
find in that great Champion (as he was accounted in those days) of Sectaries,
against the use of the Lords prayer: such ridiculous, senseless sophistry, as I
scarce remember the like, in any thing that ever I read. But in such a case,
(to prove twice two, not to be four: that the snow is black, and the Sun the
cause of darkness:) who can expect it otherwise? Yet in this perchance we may
commend his ingenuity above some others, that he freely confesses the literal
obvious sense to be of our side.

This prayer then, (or pattern of prayer if you will) is set down, and recorded
in two Gospels, St. Matthew and St. Luke; the same words (in substance) in both
Gospels: but as diverse have well observed, uttered by Christ, (and recorded
accordingly by the Evangelists, as spoken and prescribed by him) at two several
times, and upon several occasions: which makes it the more binding, because
twice delivered in the same form.

In St. Matthew, Christ begins with the Doctrine of praying in general, and
after sundry precepts and instructions, proceeds to a particular form: After
this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father etc. which is well observed by the
Arabic translator, exhibited in the late London Bible, (that noble, and little
less than miraculous work, if we consider all Circumstances) where we find this
division; first, from ver. 5. to verse 9. Doctrina Orandi, Consilium de
oratione: then, Formula Orandi: an excellent method, much neglected in these
days of Inspiration; when ignorant illiterate creatures are put to it, illotis
manibus: who though they know little or nothing of Prayer in general, more than
this, that they must be so long, and keep saying whatever it be, yet are made
believe, (and are soon persuaded) they do it far better, than they, who have
long studied the duty of prayer in general, and think, it becomes them to
consider of what they say, when they are to speak to Almighty God, upon any
particular occasion.

Now before we proceed to further examination of the words, it will not be
amiss to take into consideration, what has been (so far as we can find by
books) the opinion of men in general, concerning this duty of prayer.

In ancientest times among Heathens, (that is, men that had the light of nature
only to guide them:) it did belong unto Poets, who were the Theologues, or
Divines of the times, to teach men forms of prayer for every Deity they
worshipped. Such forms of Invocations of Orpheus, so called; of Homer, are yet
extant. The doctrine of prayer was handled by philosophers; as Aristotle, among
others; but that work of his is not extant. But by Plato also, which is yet
extant. In that Treatise Plato does much commend a form of prayer, composed by
some ancient poet, not named by him, unknown to us, which Calvin in his
Institutions, as I remember, takes good notice of, and is exhibited in Greek by
Hugo Grotius in his Annotations upon Matthew. A very commendable form indeed;
the Author and those times considered; and which may be said, in some respects,
to come nearer to the Lords prayer, than many prayers that are made after that
pattern, as is pretended. For I take that part of the Lords prayer, to be a
very considerable part of it, where we are taught to pray, That the Will of
God, not out will, be done: For so I think the words ought to be understood,
and supplied, out of that other exemplary form of prayer, used by Christ
himself, and for himself, (at that time) particularly, O my Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me, nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will, Mat. 26.39. And again, verse 42. Thy will be done: And so again, verse
44. Whereas our prayers commonly, instead of referring our Wills to Gods Will,
are, that our Wills may be done, and that too, with much importunity. Yea
sometimes, we are ready to expostulate with God, if we have not what we ask;
though God knows, when we have it, we have many times occasion enough to wish,
that we had not had our wills; that God had not heard our Prayers. Again, In
the Lords Prayers, we pray for our daily bread: which are general words,
translated by some, panem indigentiae^ nostrae: referring particulars to God,
who knows better than we, what is convenient for us, if we durst trust him.

Now that old form commended by Plato, was this.

(...).

In Plato indeed, (...), because of the verb (...) that follows, as in prose;
but without the verb, that is, as in the verse, ordinary construction does
require (and so it should have been printed in Hugo Grotius) (...): as it is in
the Anthologie of Greek verses, and elsewhere. Yet an Infinitive might have
stood well enough for an Indicative, if the former verb had been so too. But
this obiter: In latin diverse have done them; be content with my translation for
this once, to save me further labor of seeking.

Quae data * That is, things honest and just, according to the opinion of
diverse ancient Philosophers, who maintained that nothing was truly profitable,
but what was honest and just: So Plato, so diverse others. Tully in his Offices
at large. Neither was this an Opinion in the School, or Academic only for the
Exercise of their tongues, or wit, (as some lately in the Pulpit, Get faith,
etc. if it be true) but an Opinion maintained and asserted by some of them in
their greatest trials; as may appear by those words of Tully, when the
Common-real was invaded by Caesar, and compliance the only way to save, or to
get Estates; he then wrote thus unto his friend, Quid rectum sit apparel: quid
expediat, obscurum est; ita tamen ut si nos ii samus qui esse debemus, id est,
studio digni, and l^teris (...), (that is, constant to our Principles and
former Profession) dubitare non possimus, qui^ ea maxim conducant quae sunt
rectissima. What grounds they had for this opinion, that had no certain
knowledge of any reward after this life, I know not. Christians have, I am
sure. Let them look to it whom it concerns.
conducent, vel non orantibus ultro
Da Pater Alme: preces damnosas, Alme, negato.
As for the sense in English, though I love a good verse heartily; yet my self
I know, was never born to be a Poet in any Language, and therefore never minded
it; yet I think it necessary to put the words into some Rymes, that it may be
known what they are (verses) in the Original. Great God, we thee beseech, those
good things us to grant,
Asked, or unasked; thy self does know we want.
As for those things we ask; if such as in the end
Hurtful (thou know) will prove; from such, great God, defend.



Juvenal the Poet, has a whole Satyr of this Subject, of the ignorance of
man, in point of praying. Persius, another; both insist upon many particulars,
to show the danger of rash, hasty prayers. In the Old Testament, there be many
prescript forms of prayers, according to best Interpreters. David's Psalms in
general were used, (and certainly intended many of them from the very
beginning) most of them by the ancient Jews, before Christ's time, to that
purpose. But more of this by and by.

In point of reason therefore, since prayer has always been a matter of such
difficulty and danger withal; and that prescript forms have been used, not
among Heathens only, but Israelites also, who would not think it most probable,
that when Christ said, (as his words are recorded by St. Matthew, verse 9.)
After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc. He intended a prescript
form? Or if he had not intended it so, yet the words in ordinary construction,
importing so much, he would have used some words to prevent our mistake? Some
fly to the word (...) here, and tell us, it imports sometimes no more, than a
resemblance or likeness. We grant it. But what word is there almost to be
found, or can be used by any man or Author, but is sometimes taken in a
different sense? The question is, whether any ground for any such sense in this
place; such sense, I mean, as should exclude the more usual and ordinary. No
man I think will deny, but that in ordinary construction, when it is said, you
shall say thus; The words that follow there, are intended, and no other. As
when God in Exodus often says unto Moses, Go, and say unto Pharaoh, Thus says
the Lord God of Israel, that those very words there recorded, were used by God
unto Moses, when he gave him his commission. And Genesis 45.9. Thus says thy son
Joseph, etc. It follows, verse 27. And they told him all the words of Joseph,
which he had said unto them. Infinite places of Scripture might be produced:
some, where the very same words are repeated; but that I think it will be
granted by all men, that as there is a Thus of similitude, which we deny not;
so of Identity; which by the due consideration of circumstances, and coherence,
is generally to be determined.

It is well observed by some, that have written of this Subject, that had
Christ intended a mere model of prayer by those words, he would rather (in all
probability, were it but to prevent our error) have said, pray that your sins
may be forgiven you, etc. as elsewhere, pray that your flight may be in the
summer.

Lastly, Though I know the word Amen, is used, not at the beginning only, but
at the end also of some speeches, that are not prayers properly: yet it will
not be denied, that it is most proper at the end to formal prayers: witness St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 14.15, 16. so that even from this word may be be collected
somewhat, which alone would be of no great weight perchance; but joined with so
much evidence, and other necessary consequence, is not impertinent.

Now were it so that this prayer, and Christ's words about it, had been
registered by St. Matthew only, I think no more could rationally be required, to
persuade men that are not apt to be swayed by somewhat else more strongly than
reason. There be many other truths delivered, with less evidence of truth,
which we generally embrace, both in the Old and New Testament. As on the other
side, we must confess by sad experience, that no Truth can be delivered with so
much evidence, and manifestation of words and circumstances, but private
Interest, partiality, faction, prejudice, and the like, may draw to a contrary
sense: so that if men cannot persuade themselves (though no wonder, if they do,
even they that otherwise are judicions enough: strong interest, if men once
give way, and be worldly given, will blind best Judgments in time) and their
consciences, that it is so: yet they will hope by cunning and sophistry, they
shall be able to persuade others. But Gods providence in this particular, has
otherwise ordered it. For as if St. Luke had foreseen (by the Spirit) a
possibility that some would, or might stick at, and draw Arguments from the
(...) in St. Matthew: he has used such words, as every man must confess, leave
no ground at all for scruples (though sought and desired) and evasions; except
we fly to figures and metaphors, of which somewhat has been said before.

But before we set down the very words, we must take notice of some
circumstances of story belonging to this business, which St. Luke does here set
down. First, That Christ had been praying, when the Disciples did petition him,
that he would teach them to pray. Prayer is a duty that Christ himself was much
conversant in: we find that by many places: yet it is observed by some, we do
not find expressed any where, that Christ prayed with his Disciples (ordinary
common prayers excepted) but always by himself. Others add, nor in the Temple
publicly. How the observation will hold, will not much concern. If his
Disciples has heard him often, there was good ground for their request, that
when they should not have the comfort of his prayers by bodily presence; yet
they might not want the comfort of praying in his own words, when himself
should be out of sight; such words as they might presume (with the concurrence
of a pure and well prepared heart) should always be most acceptable, as to
Him, from whom they had received them; so to Him, that had sent him with a
promise to hear petitions in his Name: very likely therefore (they might think)
to like them best that should come with a double stamp both of his words and
name. But if they did not often pray with him, when he used other prayers than
those that were known and ordinary (of which we shall say more by and by) the
less they had been acquainted with his practice in that kind, from which they
might frame a pattern to themselves: the more reason they had to require of him
a certain form, which might supply their want.

But secondly, the Disciples ground their petition upon St. John's example, Lord
teach us to pray, as John taught his Disciples. Now I think it is not doubted
by any man, or Interpreter of Scripture, but that John delivered unto his
Disciples a formal prayer. Had St. John only delivered unto them a pattern to
frame their prayers by, I doubt they would have been much unsatisfied. It
requires no little skill or judgment, to follow a pattern well. It is not
likely John Baptist his Disciples were such ready men all, that he would trust
them with a bare pattern. And whereas it is very probable (I am not alone that
think so) that St. John's Disciples were, if not known and discerned from
others abroad (as the Pythagoreans by their (...):) yet much united and
fastened among themselves, by this prayer their Master had taught them: had it
been a bare pattern, they might have jarred even unto Sects, and factions for
all that: as we see all Christians do not pray after one sort, who pretend all
to follow the same pattern.

This may be further confirmed by the consideration of what was usual among the
Jews. Now so it is, (it cannot be denied, but by them that are past shame, who
to advantage that cause, whatsoever it is, to which their Interest has wedded
them, will adventure upon any thing) that the Jews, time out of mind, had been
used to set forms of prayer. That they used no other in private, and upon
extraordinary occasions, no man I think ever said: but that in their solemn
devotions, and most public occasions they did use set forms, all Prorestants
and Papists (as many as I have seen, or at this time remember) are consenting.
First of Numb. 23.4, 6. who can doubt, but the words contain a prescript form
of Blessing, [In this wise, or in this set form of words] the Annotations
there. But it is one thing to bless, another to pray, say some. Indeed a man
may pray, and neither bless nor curse, that is certain: but to say, that
blessing may not be the Subject of a prayer, either public or private, as well
as any thing else, is as ridiculous, as it is apparent, that this blessing here
prescribed, is a very formal prayer. The Text is as clear, 2 Chronicles. 29, 30.
Hezekiah the King, and the Princes commanded the Levites to sing praise unto
the Lord, with the words of David, and Asaph the Seer. And 1 Chronicles. 16. the
Psalms (or psalm, as there joined) stand upon Record, that were appointed by
David, and particularly verse 35. And say yea, etc. the Annotations there: [It
is a phrase of incitation, etc. or, it is a direction to use this form, Hos.
14.2. Duke 11.2.] The latter Quotation, Luke 11.2. referring to these very
words and subject we are now upon. Psalm the 20. is a form of prayer, or
intercession, as the psalm following of Thanksgiving, as most Interpreters do
agree. Diverse others psalms there be intended for set forms, upon several
occasions, observed by most Interpreters. Ainsworth upon the 24. psalm, out of
a passage of Maimonides, shows what psalm was appointed for every day of the
week, at the time of Divine service, long before Christ: and some of those
psalms, I am sure, though commonly called psalms or songs; are prayers and
intercessions, and nothing else; as particularly, Psalm 94. Others tell us of
whole Liturgies, (or public service-books) of those days yet extant, in part:
after which I shall not need to make further enquiry at this time, because I
think I have said enough to this purpose; and no more, I think, but will easily
be granted.

It was proper enough, I think, to take notice of those things, observed by St.
Luke certainly, for their further satisfaction, (in this very point) that
should need it. But now we are come to the words themselves, I would desire the
Reader, for a while to forget all that has been said hitherto, (but withal, to
lay aside, if it were possible, all prejudice and partiality) and when he has
read the words in St. Luke, (And he said unto them, When ye pray, say, Our
Father, etc.) to consider with himself, whether he think any thing wanting to
them, to make them plain, and express enough. I will say more; let it be
granted, (for a while at least) that Christ intended those words, as a form of
prayer to be used by his Disciples, and by consequent, by such as should
pretend to him in after-ages: I would have the Reader to pause and consider
with himself, what words more express, more pregnant and significant, could be
used to that purpose, to prevent all doubts and evasions. The words themselves
run in the form of a prayer, that, no man does deny: and therefore a man would
think, had there been no more in the Text, but; And he said, Our Father, etc.
his intention had been plain enough, You shall pray thus: that is not more
express, but more binding. But when you pray, say: for my part, I must confess,
what words could have been used more express, or more binding, I can think of
none. I deny not, but Christ might have used more words. He might have said,
had he pleased, or thought fit: You shall have your desire: I will teach you,
what you shall say. You shall have a form of prayer from me, which you may use:
nay, what you made your request, I shall lay upon you, and all Christians of
all ages, as a duty: When ye pray, say: In your best devotions, though you use
other prayers, as your particular occasions shall require; yet use this, as
your best prayer, Our Father, etc. He might have said, I know the time will
come, when men out of an high conceit of their own parts, and in opposition to
others, whom they shall use, or have used so and so, will not allow these words
to be prescribed by me as a form of prayer, etc. Some such words, I grant,
might have been spoken: but as there is no part of Scripture so clear or so
generally received, but may be abused, quarrelled, denied; so is there as
little reason for any such words in this, as in any other place, that has
afforded matter of strife, and contention in any age of the world.

After such evidence of Scripture, that is, of the word of God: the consent or
authority of man may be thought superfluous. And what if all men, all
Christians that have been hitherto, in all places, in all ages of the world,
had not all been of one opinion about it, would not, should not, the greatest
part have served? would it not have become men, that pretend to honor the
Scripture so much, as the Word of God; and to be such enemies to them that
dishonor it; have become them, I say, where the Text is so clear and express,
to have adhered unto it, even against the consent of the major part? Should we
believe nothing as Christians, but what is clearly declared in Scripture, and
may be said to have been assented unto by Christians, in all ages, and places
without any contradiction or opposition: I doubt our faith would be much
abridged. But we must be as good as our undertaking. If we have not general
consent of former and latter ages, (so far as can be found out by History:
those new men of the late reformation excepted) evidence of Scripture shall be
no good plea for us; will forfeit our cause.

Some it may be will here expect, that we should begin to search into ancient
Records and Monuments for the opinion and practice of the ancient Christians,
and primitive times of the Church: which with all that are not blinded by
faction and self-love, must needs be of great Authority. But others with more
reason would think, I might better have spared this labor, since I have to do
with men, who as either sufficiently convicted of the truth of our plea, in
this particular; or because they think it not worth the while (trusting to
their own pretended illumination) to take the pains to enquire further into it,
will sooner yield to us the matter of fact, then contend about it; and only
except against the validity of the example, or authority, alleging for
themselves, that whether it be so or no, they do not think themselves bound to
follow them. If you ask them the reason, they will tell you, because they were
but men, and might err. Let the Reader remember, that the express letter of the
Word of God, was yielded unto us before: and now we are to come to the consent
or authority of men, we are told, that men are but men, not Gods. But we go on.
They were but men, they say; truly I say so too, they were but men, not Gods;
but, men that lived so many ages nearer to the source and spring of that
infallible authority then familiarly conversant, (we speak now of the
ancientest, or primitive Christians:) and resident among men. Men, who
generally forsook all things that are dearest unto men usually, (for which
things many in this age, make nothing to forsake their former faith:) to adhere
unto Christ: Men, by whose holiness of life, and intolerable (to flesh and
blood) sufferings for Christ, more than by their preaching, whole kingdoms and
Nations of Pagans and Infidels were gained to the faith of Christ: and why the
consent of such, so many, in several ages; in different places of the world,
should not be more considerable: but I will proceed no further in the
comparison. Certainly, if any man (not engaged by worldly interests) can be so
simple, as not, of himself, to be sensible; I will not expect that any
reasoning can restore him. And why should it be a wonder to a rational man,
that some are so simple among Christians, who knows that natural fools and
Idiots, are little less than worshipped by the Turks (the great Conquerors of
the world) for no other respect, but because fools and Idiots? We therefore
take it for granted, until we know of any that oppose it; that we have
(besides clear Scripture; Consensum and consuetudinem, the general consent and
practice of one thousand and five hundred, or six hundred years on our side.
But it will not be amiss, to set down some of their words for the better
satisfaction of the Reader. Ultimo, sequitur tritum illud vestrum and
Papisticum argumentum (says Johnson before named) de consuetudine mill
quingentorum annorum. (Let the Reader take notice, that he calls this
prescription of 1500 years, arpopish argument, whereby he does yield to
Papists, much more than I would, or can: I know nothing among them truly
popish, that can prescribe to so much antiquity) De quo^etiam si^constat, quod
vos pro concesso sumitis, hoc tamen semper tenendum, vocem Dei in Scriptura
esse regulam sidei, etc. He does not say, it is altogether so, but whether so,
or no, (for he brings nothing to disprove it:) his evasion is, consent of many
men or ages, is nothing, because the Scripture only is our rule. And again, a
little after, Postrema tua ratio petita est ab authoritate Patrum, ut vocantur,
quos certum in multis errasse, etc. Here we have the consent of the Fathers
yielded to us. We would commend their modesty for yielding to the truth so far;
if at the same time, they did not more immodestly oppose their own judgments
to the acknowledged consent and authority of so many ages; and so many, much
better men, than themselves can pretend unto.

So from former times, we come now to latter, or present. We will not mention
the Papists, (so called) though no man can deny, but there be among them, men
of great learning, and I believe, religious: but because there is no question
of their consent, and their authority not so much stood upon by them we have to
do with: therefore needless here, as I imagine. As for Protestant Divines, or
others, I think we need not search into the writings of particular men, and
trouble the Reader with multitude of quotations, which every body that can
read, and has access to books, may easily store himself with, if he will: the
practice of all Protestant Churches in all places of Europe, (I can give no
account of Independent Conventicles) which may appear by different Formularies
and Liturgies by them set out, as the best evidence of their opinions
generally, so I suppose will give best satisfaction: so that although some
particular acknowledged Protestant Writer should be found to be of another
mind, yet it can be no prejudice to what we have said of their general consent.
Now for their Formularies, in a business so exposed to every man's scrutiny,
that will take any pains to satisfy himself: I shall not use many words: I
have some, have had, and seen many more, in several languages: never yet
lighted upon any, in which the Lords Prayer was not prescribed, to be used by
Priests and people in express terms, as in the Gospel. So upon confidence,
that this also will be granted unto us, I shall forbear further labor. As for
particular authors: though I said before, we cannot undertake for, nor are
indeed bound to take notice of every particular man: yet I may truly say, no
such is known unto me, either by any reading in former times, or by any
quotation, that I have met with in others upon this occasion. Calvin says of
it in his Institutions, as much as I would desire, and so in his Harmony: but
that he has an expression, which might be wondered at: (non jubet nos
conceptis verbis uti) had he not presently after explained himself, by a more
full expression, ut nuper dixi, etc. They do him great wrong therefore, that
would persuade us otherwise of him, taking the advantage of some particular
words when his meaning both by his practice (witness those Formularies set out
in his time, printed at Geneva) and by his writings is so easily known. Neither
ought we to wonder, if neither Calvin, or any other, whilst they commend unto
us the Lords Prayer, be careful, at the same time, to prevent, that their words
might not be drawn to a wrong sense, as though they commended it as the only
prayer to be used either publicly, or privately: which would be a great and
dangerous mistake: but of that more afterward. I have mentioned Luther
somewhere, as a great admirer of this holy Prayer. It shall not be amiss
therefore to set down some of his words. In his Enchiridium piarum precationum,
which I have by it self, in a handsome form: but in his works also, in the
Wittenburg. edit. (A. D. 1558) to be found: he says; Sum autem plane certus,
Christianum satis abunde orasse, si Orationem Dominicam, vere ac recte oret:
quocunque id tempore, and quamcunque ejus volet partem. Ne que enim si multum
verborum numeres, ideo bona est oration: quod Christus quoque testatur, Math. 6.
Sed si crebro, ac cum magno ardore ad Deum suspires.

And again in the same book: Ubi ad verbum totam Orationem Dominicam recitavi,
partem unam, aut plures, si libet, repeto, etc. and concludes: Hic meus est
orandi mos, et ratio. Nam quotidie adhuc Orationem hanc Dominicam, quodammodo
sugo, uti infantulus: bibo, and mando, uti adultus; nec tamen ea satiari
possum. Atque etiam dulcior and gratior mihi est ipsis Psalmis, quibus tamen
mirifice and unice delector: quos and maximi facio. Profecto res ipsa clamat, a
summo and praestantissimo artifice, eam orationem esse compositam, and
praeformatam.

In another Treatise he says: Cum haec Oration a Christo habeat originem, debet
indubitanter eminentissima, nobilissima, optimaque censeri: qua si meliorem
scivisset integerrimus ac fidelissimus magister, eam quoque nos ille docuisset.
I will not undertake for the exactness or propriety of the expression, (in
those words, si meliorem scivisset) which the vehemence of his admiration and
affection suggested unto him. It would make a man suspect, that even in those
days, he had met with some that thought, they could pray as well, if not
better, and perchance under pretense of imitation, would have been content (if
they might) to leave it out of their public devotions. But I do but suspect.
It is apparent, he was a great admirer of it, and had very great zeal to it;
and for it. Luther's zeal to this prayer, puts me in mind of Ludovicus Vives,
a Papist indeed, not a Protestant, but generally acknowledged a learned, wise,
devout man: he has written a Commentary, as he calls it, upon the Lords
prayer. How zealously he was affected toward it, and how much he had it in
admiration, his preface will show; it is well worth the reading. But of
Protestant Divines, I make no question, but a man might make a whole book, that
should collect their several Elogies, and testimonies concerning this Prayer,
as it is a form of prayer; but that it is not our business here. General
consent is the thing that we contend for, and upon which we have in part
grounded our case, in the stating of it. And for that we have appealed to the
Formularies, that are extant of most Protestant Churches beyond the seas: which
is the most direct and pertinent proof, that any man can expect. And if we knew
any thing objected by any body in opposition to what we mantaine, we would take
notice of it. I find nothing of that nature in Johnson, before spoken of,
though Carpenter had not omitted it, but put it to him in direct terms.
Nullane Protestantium Ecclesia praeter vestram Synagogulam oculos habuit, aut
mentem? An vos soli sapitis, etc. (in St. Augustin's words against Donatus) to
which particular I find no answer at all, though the answer, (as called) be
large and tedious in general beyond measure. It seems therefore he could not
deny it, but all Protestant Churches were of another mind. If he had known any,
certainly we should have heard of it. What notice therefore I have taken of
particular men, as Luther and Calvin; is over and above, because of their
eminency: Perkins in England, his authority would once have gone a great way,
with those men especially, that pretended to more than ordinary strictness in
religion. What his opinion was in this matter, shall be seen at the end, where
we take notice of some objections.

But now since we have named some particular men, and have seen what devotion
they had ( Luther especially) to this holy Prayer: with what zeal, and
admiration they speak of it: let it not pass without some further observation.
I make no question, but the like may be said, and observed of diverse others
eminently pious and learned in all ages. I have heard of some particularly in
our age; men of great fame, that have professed to receive singular comfort of
it, which might also be gathered by their frequent use of it in time of
sickness. Now I would gladly know of those men (and I wish they would take it
into their serions consideration) of those men, I say, who not only forbear
the use of it themselves, but also forbid it to others; and when used in their
presence, have showed much trouble and indignation, as it is reported of some
and may be true, for ought I know, of many more: whether it be likely, or
possible, that such averseness and antipathy in them: such zeal and devotion
in others, whom themselves perchance will not deny to have been pious and
religious; should proceed from one and the same spirit. And if they cannot find
in their hearts to say, or to thinck, that it was a spirit of illusion, that
led those good and godly men unto such esteem and admiration of this prayer:
from what spirit can their antipathy proceed? For my part (and I doubt not but
it is the mind of many thousand Christians in England besides) though I know my
self too great a sinner to expect that God should afford me those extraordinary
ravishing contentments and delights of the soul, which I believe he has done,
and does unto many, more deserving; in the use of this holy prayer: Yet I
should be very sorry, it should be in the power of any man living, to bereave
me of that right and privilege I have, as a Christian, unto it, and the use of
it, whilst I live: and I shall ever believe, that a reverent use, and high
esteem of it, as immediately proceeding from, and commended unto us by such a
ONE, to whom all manner of adoration is due; is no small part of that worship
we owe unto God.

All things that have been said hitherto well considered, it may perchance make
some wonder in some, what should induce men; some, learned, and conscientious
otherwise; (as it is to be hoped:) but however, men, that profess
Christianity; to be so set against this prayer, that bears the name of the
Lord and Savior of men: and I remember an observation in Aristotle, that, to
give full satisfaction in a doubtful business, (...), etc. We should not only
tell what is truth, but also take pains to discover the ground of the error,
or that which is false. First then it must be granted, that even before these
times, there were some in the world, that begun to hatch this monster: but
being but few and inconsiderable, standing divided from all the Reformed
Churches in Europ; it leaves a wonder still, their opinion should be embraced
by men accounted sober, and making profession of the protestant Religion. We
say therefore in the second place, that the spirit of Enthasiusme, since the
reins of order and discipline have been loose, and all liberty left unto men (
Papists and Prelaticall, for so it pleases them to join us, only excepted) to
follow their own fancies in all things belonging to Gods worship; having much
prevailed (as it has done in some ages of the world before this) among us, men
have been very prone, to think themselves inspired in the use of their
extemporary faculty, which formerly (and it may be, formerly too much
neglected) they had not been so well acquainted with: and through ignorance of
Nature, and former times, (as has been declared, and proved at large
elsewhere*) did apprehend a supernatural cause, where indeed there was no cause
at all: and this probably might make them by degrees, to loath and contemn this
holy prayer. A third reason may be, the violence of opposition: (...), as St.
Basil called it; Prelatical men having been used as they have been, put out of
all, silenced, made incapable etc. it was very consequent, their cause should
be made as odious, as art and invention could make it.

God forbid I should take upon me to excuse any thing that has been amiss. If
I did not believe of myself, there was somewhat of that kind (in Church, or
Commonwealth, or both:) yet the judgments of God (whom I believe to be most
just) so great, and so heavy, would make me think so. But, why so many things
formerly practiced and observed in the Church of England, as for example;
public Catechizing, so necessary to uphold Christianity among men, though not
so pleasing to itching ears, as ordinary preaching is: the use of the
Sacraments, which in diverse Parishes, where formerly duly administered, are now
scarce known, or named: the observation of some principal holidays, as the
anniversary commemoration of the birth of Christ, of his Resurrection etc. by
which (though abused by profane men, as all things may be) the faith of most
was much confirmed, honor and homage, in the most solemn manner, done unto
Christ; not to mention some more private things; as childrens daily asking
their Parents blessing upon their knees, (a custom, though not elsewhere
observed, that I know of; yet much commended by many strangers, that have seen
the practice of it in England, as I can witness:) and the like; and among the
rest, the reverent use of this holy prayer: why these I say, and the like
should be so neglected, discountenanced, and, (in some places, at least) in a
manner abrogated, having oftentimes thought of it with grief, I can give my
self no reason more satisfactory to my wondering, than that it is done in
opposition to the former Clergy, because by them religiously observed: Such is
the nature of opposition; especially where private interest does oblige. But
yet, after all this, as to this particular of the Lords Prayer: to speak my
mind freely: I look upon it, rather as a judgment, than an error: or if an
error, yet as the punishment of another: this, justly inflicted for somewhat,
that was more wilful and arbitrary. Let their own consciences tell them
(professed Ministers, or Clergy men I mean; I have nothing to do with others)
whether they have not, somewhat against conscience for politic ends, fiercely
opposed (I will not say persecuted) somewhat, (once, the glory of the English
Reformation) which though it pretend not to Divine authority, yet may pretend
to the best of things established by humane, among men. And, what if the more
opposed, because this very prayer is part of it, too great a part of it, as
they pretend? May not we think therefore that this has happened to them, as a
judgment, that their folly might be made manifest? But I will not be too bold
upon secret judgments: though I have their example, if that would acquit me
before God. Sure I am, and I think I may boldly speak it; those Christians
have much to answer for, who upon so little ground of reason, and against such
manifest Scripture, could so easily be drawn away from that piety, which they
were bred unto, and in a manner, sucked from their mothers breast; by the
example, or persuasion of such leaders. But thus it is (and no wonder) when a
people is once come to that, as to reduce, (with those false Israelites, the
Prophet Ezekiel describes chap. 33. v. 31, 32.) all religion to the pleasure of
the ear. And for them that are such, for ought I see, let them but have what
they affect, they may quickly be brought to swallow any thing, be it the
grossest point of Popery; and yet think themselves very religious; yea, (if
their Preachers tell them so) good Protestants.

There seems nothing to remain, but some objections to be taken notice of. But
I would omit no means untried. Some things, though more remote in sight, may
sometimes work more with some, than more concluding proofs, Et quae non prosunt
singula, multa juvant. This Prayer is commonly called, The Lords Prayer, and
there is reason for it; and there is a day called, the Lords day, (more properly
so, than The Sabbath:) we will see what we may draw from this common
appellation, or denomination from the same Lord. Our beginning may be thought
somewhat remote. They that are more quick, will soon perceive, what we drive
at. Others, I desire them to have patience, and to read to the end, before they
judge.

I do not know any thing, whereby a man may sooner and surer find himself,
whether he be a true Christian indeed, a true Convert, or believer: then by the
generality or simplicity (rightly, understood)of his obedience, and conformity
to the Laws and Commands of Christ. I will not go to the Planets or Climates,
to fetch a reason. I will not believe, (though the Patrons of Astrology, do
not stick to say it) that any man is born, either a Murderer or an Adulterer.
But sure it is, that all men are not born by their natural complexion, with
equal advantage or disadvantage, to either virtue or vice. Some have none, or
few notable vices: not so much, or perchance not at all, out of any love or
knowledge of goodness, but because they find no inclination to be evil. They
love, every body: are not malicious perchance, not revengefull; it is their
nature, not religion. Humble, quiet, temperate in all things: it is their
nature. We may say of them, as Seneca of those of the Golden age, Ignorantia
rerum, innocents erant. Multum autem interest, utrum peccare aliquis nolit,
aut nesciat. Some of these natural Innocents (as to the world, and the public)
it may be, there are yet in the world, men and women, in some places. We are
bound in the judgment of Charity, to account them virtuous, to honor and
admire them as such, because we see their works: we cannot judge of their
hearts. But if they have no other motive to goodness than nature, or custom,
or education; I know not how far it may acquit them from worse: I am very
confident it will never bring them to heaven. So far, wise Heathens have gone,
who plainly teach and determine, that without (...), (reference to God) no man
is truly virtuous or innocent, though he may appear so outwardly by his
actions. So the wiser Heathens; others, in stead of God, they say, Reason; non
est virtus, cui non constat ratio, disputed at large by Seneca, and others. But
those so generally innocent (in sight) by nature; I doubt they are not many,
except they be innocents indeed, in another sense. Most men are of a mixed
temper, as to vice, so to some virtue. Some men are not given to women: though
there were no Laws to bind them, one wife does serve their turn very well:
Chastity is their virtue. It may be, as little subject to Wine: they look upon
all excess in that kind, as the effects of brutish sensuality. But then for
malice, or envy, or pride, perchance covetousness (which all good natured men,
as we call them, do much about) these, all, or some of them, are so natural
unto them, that though they are told what they are, and known for such, by all
that know them; yet themselves know it not; and though perchance they do not
care to have many like themselves, yet they will sooner believe them fools and
Idiots that are not, than be persuaded out of their humor: it is so natural
and pleasing. That man, that is all vice, without any natural propensity to
some virtue, is not a bad, or vicious man properly, but a Monster: and so
indeed set out by the Satyrick, Monstrum nulla virtute redemptum A vitiis: and,
Illaudatus in the best of Poets, (very significantly) a man that could be
commended for nothing; when he intended (as ancient Grammarians well observe)
the worst of men, a Monster, such a one as Busiris was, of whom it is spoken. I
cannot tell, how easy generally; but certainly the way to heaven would be much
easier, might we but take a liberty, to what is most natural unto us, and yet
be good Christians. He that is virtuous indeed, that is, for God and
conscience sake, is, though not equally inclined by nature, yet equally
resolved in his mind, to whatsoever is either commanded, or forbidden by God in
his Word. If he be vicious in some kind (as who not?) more than another, it is
not because he thinks better of his vice, or for want of striving against it:
but because as yet he has not, (to his great grief and sorrow) been able to
master his nature: and it may be, long striving, if sincere and real, may prove
at last, through Gods Mercy, to his advantage. This, I think, is a very sure
way, for every man to examine himself. And this is the way that St. Paul went
to convince the Jews, in a place. The Jews in St. Paul's time were no
idolators. They had been in former ages: they were now free from that sin: it
is not laid to their charge no where in the New Testament. St. Jerome observes
it very particularly, and some others also. They extremely abhorred all other
Nations of the world upon that score, and deemed them altogether unworthy of
Gods mercy. St. Paul appeals to their consciences: he tells them first, that in
other things that were forbidden as well as Idolatry; as, Theft, Adultery, etc.
they could not but know themselves guilty generally, as well as the Gentiles.
He comes at last to that very thing, wherein was their greatest confidence,
they were not Idolaters; Thou, says he, that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit
sacrilege? I will not enquire how far the Jews were guilty of that great sin,
Sacrilege, in those days: It is enough for our present occasion, that St.
Paul, to abate their confidence in that they most trusted to, does object unto
them one great sin which they could not acquit themselves of: and it is
possible, he did insist upon Sacrilege particularly, as a prophet, for the
instruction of after-ages, as foreseeing that this horrible sin of Sacrilege
would be committed ordinarily, and frequently (the time would come) under
pretense of hatred to Idolatry.

Well: we return where we began: as there is a day in the week, called The
Lords Day: so there is a prayer as ordinarily called, in all ages since Christ,
the Lords prayer: Both pretend unto the Lord, and the same Lord; the Savior
and Redeemer of the world. I would fain know what is the reason, that some show
so much zeal to the one, beyond what has been known or practiced in any age
among Christians, or is at this day, in any place of the world, besides
England, and those places that have relation to it; grounding upon Scriptures,
of which there is great controversy, and variety of opinion among learned
Protestants, as may appear by their Writings; and toward the other, of which
never was any question before, but unanimous both practice and opinion, among
Christians of all ages; toward that, they show so little zeal and affection?
Truly, I think, as our Repentance, our obedience, should be general, and
absolute, if true and real: so should our zeal too, if true zeal: Nay, St.
James says it positively, that true zeal, (he speaks it of (...); Wisdom,
immediately: but he began with (...): and what he says of Wisdom, belongs
unto zeal, as the chief subject and occasion: for so indeed the word (...)
ought to have been translated here, as I conceive; Zeal: as well as Romans 10.2.
They have zeal, etc. and not envying. No man does glory of envying, but of
zeal, many, God knows, without cause, 10.14. And verse 16. Zeal and strife, or
contention, that is, a contentious zeal, by a noted Scripturefigure) is (...),
without partiality: a pregnant weighty word.

I will not enter into any disputation here, or interpose any thing of mine own
Judgment or Opinion, concerning the observation of the Lords day: This I say,
which no man can deny: It can never be showed, that such preciseness was ever
used, or thought necessary in the observation of it, as is required by some
men. First, for Practice: The first Emperor that was a Christian, and settled
Christianity in the world, made a Law, it might be lawful (in case of
unseasonable weather) to gather the fruits of the earth upon the Sunday. I know
that Law was afterward repealed, and I know what is said by some, it was made
in favor of the Gentiles, and not for Christians. I will not argue it here:
but it is well known, there is enough to be said besides of former times. If we
look upon the practice of Protestant Churches, (which I think will go further
with many) in Geneva, in Calvin's time at least, how then it was, cannot but be
known unto most, because observed by many: I will forbear the particulars. In
the Low Countries, till the Synod of Dort (it is a shame, I confess) nothing
almost was unlawful upon that day: And it is observed in course of History,
Monks and Friars were the first, that brought this preciseness in fashion in
England.

Now for the Opinions of Protestant Divines beyond the seas, I know not of any
at all, that have gone so far as the English: nayther indeed has it been much
questioned, till of late Gomarus, a great Anti-Arminian (upon information
perchance of what was done in England, under pretense of Zeal) his Investigatio
Sabbatbi, who indeed does go very far, as not allowing either name Diem
Dominicum, in that sense, as commonly understood, or thing as grounded upon any
authority of either Old or New Testament. He was opposed by Dr. Riuet, the most
authentic of these late times, but with great moderation; who also, though
dissenting in other things, does yield unto him, (and Gomarus in his Reply, is
not little pleased with it) that the observation of one day of seven, has no
ground at all upon the fourth Commandment, or Old Testament. Dr. Prideaux, the
public Professor of Divinity in Oxford for many years before these late wars,
(a man generally accounted by the preciser sort, as well as others, till this
late Reformation, and that he was a Bishop, both learned and godly) did
publicly maintain at a solemn Act in Oxford, almost as much as Gomarus, and
quotes diverse Protestant Divines, as Calvin, Bullinger, Ursinus, and others,
for his opinion. The Book is translated into English: the Reader may do well
not to rest upon what I say, but to peruse the book it self, being made so
common and vulgar: it may be, he will not repent his labor. Walaeus, another
Protestant Divine, no obscure man, neither; is the man, who, of all outlandish
Writers I have seen, has written, or may be thought to have written most,
(though long before) in compliance to these times: yet even he, where he tells
us of the Edicts of the Synod of Dort, for the more strict observation of that
day, commends their moderation, in that they did not condemn them that were of
a different opinion; in his Preface; and in his Book, he allows very well of
Constantine's Law, for liberty upon Sundays in harvesttime, when the weather
proves unseasonable; as also of moderate and civil recreations upon that day,
so it be after the public service of the day performed, and not before, or
between.

Now for the Scriptures, which are the Rule of our faith, if a man look upon
the Old Testament, upon a supposition, that what is there concerning the Jewish
Sabbath, is applyable (a thing not easily proved) to the Lords day, or Sunday
of the Christians: so he shall find many things both in the Law, and in the
Prophets, that may be thought to require great preciseness. But if we look into
the New Testament, (our most immediate Rule, as Christians) there will not,
neither in all that is recorded of Christ, as either spoken or done by him in
the four Gospels; nor in all the Writings of his Apostles, any thing be found,
that does make that way, but rather to the contrary: which is some wonder, if
it were so material to Christianity: especially, after so much recorded in the
Gospels of Christ's speeches, tending, in ordinary construction, to the
abrogation of that legal or ceremonial preciseness. And it may be further
observed, that those (for the most part) who commonly press those passages of
the Old Testament, concerning the Sabbath, notwithstanding that so much is to
be said against the pertinency of those allegations: yet in other things, as in
matter of usury (contrary to the opinion and practice of most of the old
Clergy, or prelatical men,) they can swallow abundance of Texts, which in all
probability (though I conclude nothing) should make it unlawful, at least, in
Clergy men. For my part, as I said before, I conclude nothing; and I hope the
ingenuous charitable Reader, will not conclude from any thing I have said of
the Lords day, that I am against the religious, yea, and strict (in some
respects) observing of it. I am not, I never was: I will say more: if a man be
not fully resolved and satisfied about this point, but though he have taken
pains to be satisfied, stands in a kind of Aequilibrium, or Even-ballance,
between both opinions, so that for ought he knows either of them may prove
true, or false; in such a case, provided that he condemn not others, that go
another way; such especially, as do it with a (...) of faith and conscience, as
to themselves, (men otherwise religious in their life and conversation) and
that he make it not a cloak of disobedience, to oppose lawful, Authority,
which in all things lawful or doubtful, ought to be obeyed: in such a case,
Isay, with these cautions we have inserted: I hold it much safer, according to
the old saying, Peccare in meliorem partem: to be more precise, than he need
perchance; then (for ought he knows) to take more liberty upon that day, than
God has allowed. But the case being so, between the Lords day, and the Lords
Prayer: that of the one, no question has ever been among Christians: of the
other, (as to that which is required by some, that would be thought most
zealous) much question and controversy: how this can stand with true impartial
zeal and piety, that the one should be so much pressed; and the other so little
regarded, I leave it to the unpartiall reader, his further and sober
consideration.

I might very well end here. For after so much light of Scripture, and so much
weight of authority, (the best that can be desired in a cause) I make some
question, whether it be so lawful and warrantable, to give ear to any
objection. What if a man will undertake to prove by Scripture, that there is no
such thing, as the Resurection of the dead, or the immortality of the soul:
there is Scripture enough (it is true) for both; to satisfy a man that is not
wilfully blind, or factiously refractorie; a Quaker: an Anabaptist. However, he
is but a poor Sophister, that cannot form objections, yea frame arguments (in
show) out of the Scriptures against both. To dispute with such, is to yield to
them (so it may thought, at least) that they have some ground to doubt: and
that is some wrong to the truth. Not to hear them, I hold it generally the best
course; both for them, (if not past all hopes) to reclaim them: and for others,
to keep them within sobriety. However, after so much premised, because all men
are not of one temper, and some more taken with slight, then weight, in point
of reason: I will take notice of such objections that I have met with, or
could think any way considerable.

Truly many are not so, especially such as I have met with in that Johnson,
before named. You shall have a taste, if you please, that you may judge of the
rest. Hear then, I pray, one of his maine proofs, why what we call the Lords
Prayer, cannot be a prayer: If it be so; says he, as you say, (that, Our
Father etc. is a prayer) I would know of you, whose prayer shall it be called?
Christ's: his Apostles: or ours? If you say Christ's; why Christ did not so pray
for himself: (else he that had no sin, must be thought to have prayed for
remission of sins, p. 22.) but taught his Disciples so to pray. If you say,
the Apostles: we do not find in all the New Testament that they did ever use
it. If you say: Ours: then it will follow, that we did pray before we were
borne etc.

I am so far from thinking, that this wants any refutation, that I cannot
otherwise think, when I read it; but that the man had some distemper in his
brains: and had I been acquainted with him, I would freindly have persuaded
him to have gone to a physician: I am very confident, good physic would do
more good, (if themselves could be persuaded,) to many, great sticklers, and
much followed, (such has always been the palate of the generality,
especially when wordly success does countenance the act:) then all the arguing
of the world. Well: you have had a taste of this man's sophistry: you had my
judgment of him before. In stead of a refutation, you shall hear what more
sober men (of these times) have written concerning this title, under which this
holy prayer commonly passes. Mr. Dan. Cawdry: and Mr. Herb. Palmer: members of
the Assembly of Divines in Sabb. Rediv. or, the Christian Sabbath. page 341. in
the margin: over against these words in the Book: [Then besides all that has
already been noted of the Lords Day, it is hereby also entitled to an
Institution from the the Lord himself: from Christ: as being parallel in
phrase, to the Lords supper: which beyond all peradventure, had no other
institution but Christ; etc.] There, in the margin: [The primitive Church seems
to bear witness to this, calling the Prayer instituted by Christ, by the same
term, (...): Oration Dominica: neither can it signify any thing, but the prayer
of the Lords institution, though the generations after, weakened this
testimony, by calling Churches so.] I think, the last words, if they had
thought fit, might have been spared: since it is certain that Churches were so
called, for another reason; not because instituted (particular Churches) by the
Lord; but because consecrated (though now much abused, some by abominable
profanation: and others, in some places irreligiously pulled down, to build
private houses, or to make money) to the Lord. Walaeus had told them so long a
go: [ Sed nec ea consequentia est necessaria, quia (...), seu Dominicum vocari
potest; non tantum quod ab ipso Domino; sed etiam quod ad ipsius memoriam, ut
veteres loquuntur; aut in ipsius honorem, et adipsius cultum est institutum:
sicut altar Domini, and festum Domini, etc.]

The next objection, that I shall take notice of, is such a one, as the Reader
perchance would not have expected, but I cannot satisfy my conscience, if I
should conceal that from him, which, I confess, has troubled me more, then
all that I have read of that nature. I took notice before of what some
particular men had said of this holy prayer, as Luther, Calvin, and others. Now
I shall tell the Reader with grief, I find learned Mr. Hugo Grotius, most cold
in this point. For though he also say, (quod cum fructu fieri potest:) that is,
he allows the Lords prayer to be used as a Prayer, and says it may be done
profitably: yet taking all his words together upon this occasion, I know not
how to excuse him. We shall consider of some of them by and by. In the mean
time, I would not have any man, either to wonder at it, or to value much his
authority herein. There is no man can speak so highly of him, either of his
parts, or performances in all kind of learning, but I shall willingly
subscribe. However, nothing can be said of him so high, that can make me think
him more then a man, (...): a mutable Creature, by nature (as Plato well
defined him) as well in the affections of his soul, opinions of his mind; as
temper, and condition of body. Solomon was a notable example; and after him, we
need not wonder at any man. What happened to Grotius in his latter days; I am
loath to say: I wish his own books; Annotations upon the Scripture, and others
since, did not so evidently proclaim. They that labor to excuse him, if any
do, they but laterem lavare: and will sooner bring themselves into suspicion,
than acquit him. Among other his extravagant conceits of his old age, one was,
De communicando sine Symbolis: or, Sine pastore; or to that effect: for I have
it not at this time: which was answered by Sirmondus, or Petavius (I know not
which: I am grown such a stranger since these times of Reformation to those
books I once had and read) and as I take it, he made some kind of recantation,
by disavowing part of it. No wonder therefore, I say, if Grotius was no better
friend (at that time) as to set prayers, in general; so particularly, to this
incomparable pattern and president of all set prayers, and prescript forms.
But Grotius, when truest Grotius, was I know, and can say it; a great admirer
of the Church of England, as settled under King Charles the first, and other
Princes of happy memory. Let the Reader guess, to use no other arguments at
this time; by what he wrote to me in a letter A. D. 1639. of Hooker his
Ecclesiastical policy [Richardi Hookeri scripta ante annos multos vidi, and
quanquam in sermon mihi non percognito, facile cognovi exactissimi Operis
utilitatem: quae tanta est, ut hunt quoque librum Verti, sed in Latinum
sermonem pervelim. quaero si quis hic est, qui id efficere cupiat. caeterum
tibi id ipsum cordi esse velim.] Hence does appear, how desirous he was, that
Hookers books were turned into Latin, for the good he expected they would do,
if more generally known. We have them in English, God be praised: but do we
read them? In very deed, such is my opinion of that incomparable work, that
did not I believe the world (that is, the greatest number of men) really mad,
in the true Stoicall sense: and that it is some degree of madness (especially,
after long wars; confusions and alterations of states) to expect it otherwise:
I would persuade men that have been buyers of books these 15. or 16. years
last past, to burn one half, at least, of those books they have bought, (they
were as good do so, as to fell them for nothing) and to betake themselves to
the reading of Hooker: not doubting, but by that time they had read him once,
or twice over accuratly, they would thank me for my advice; but God, much more,
that put it into their hearts to follow it.

It may be some Readers would be better satisfied, if I had produced the whole
letter from which that passage was taken: others, more likely, should I do it,
would think I sought occasion to let the world know, how great I was, with that
Great man. Truly, if the first will be granted unto me, I will not stick at the
latter. I never was very prone to to seek acquaintances: I have had some
opportunities, which I have declined. But Mr. Grotius did me the honor (Mr.
Vossius I think persuaded him) to write to me the first letter, and so begun
our acquaintance and communication. And truly, I will confess, I did ascribe so
much unto his worth, and singular integrity, I was not less proud (though I
think not many can say, they ever heard me brag of it; nor any, that I showed
his Letters) of his acquaintance, then if it had been with the greatest Prince
of Europe. And though my love to the truth, has compelled me to acknowledge so
much of his inconstancy in his latter days; yet my comfort is, (I have reason
to believe it, as I have elsewhere declared) he dyed a good Christian, and a
Protestant; and my hope is, he has a reward in heaven, for his zeal to the
Christian Religion, for which he has written so excellently well, and his
continual desire and endeavors for peace: besides his other performances, by
which the honor of Learning has been so much advanced. And if I may speak the
truth without offense, I verily believe his great dislike of our doings in
England, was no small occasion of his falling out with our Religion: besides
the unkind dealing, and vigorous opposition of some of his own Country, from
whom he might have expected more favor, having raised that Nation to the
highest pitch of Glory (in point of learning) that any Nation has attained
unto. Well, I am willing to believe, that some Reader will desire to see the
letter: but however that it may give less offense, (if any offense at all) it
shall not be here, but at the end, where it may be taken in, or left, as the
Reader shall think fit.

This great block in my way removed, as I hope it is, we proceed to objections.
We do not find, say some, (and I find it in Grotius too) upon any Record of
Scripture, that either Christ, or his Apostles, did use this prayer. We said
before, he does not deny, but it may be done cum fructu: but he does not make
that the chief, or principal use of it. For my part, grant me the use of it as
a Prayer, and so intended by Christ himself: I think it very needless to
contend with any man about the rest: whether intended principally as a Prayer,
or a direction to Prayer. If it be a Prayer, there is no question to be made,
and it will follow by necessary consequence, that it is a Direction of Prayer
also, as it is his prayer, who spoke nothing, did nothing, but is set out unto
us for our (according to our power) imitation; our Lord and Master Jesus
Christ. Yet if we must say somewhat to that business, I would say, but without
contention, I should think that principally intended by Christ, which was most
direct and pertinent to the request, made unto him by his Disciples. Now if it
be granted, (which has been spoken to before) that what his Disciples desired,
was a form of Prayer: what will follow upon it, any man may gather. But I
determine nothing peremtorily: I will leave every man to his own Judgment, in
this particular. Well, the objection is, We do not find that Christ, etc. as
before. I know that Grotius is not the first that has so argued: I am sorry it
can be said, that a man of his judgment did ever entertain this, as a material
objection. No sober man, I think (and this also before spoken of,) will deny,
but that a very form of blessing is prescribed by God, Numb. 6.23. etc. Yet we
do not find it in the whole Scripture. Again, We have a form of baptizing
prescribed. Mat. 28. by Christ himself, In the name of the Father, etc. but no
example of it elsewhere, that I know of in the New Testament, though we read of
many baptized by the Apostles and others: and I think to this day, is a form of
Baptism among Christians, in all places. We might insist in many more such
things; out of the Old and New Testament, if need were.

Some press this further: not only this Prayer is not found used, as a Prayer,
but neither in the Acts, nor any of the Epistles, though diverse things
concerning Prayer in general, are there prescribed: yet no mention at all of
this Prayer is made. This may be thought to have a show of somewhat: but in
effect, it proves nothing, as by diverse instances, of the same nature, if
fearch be made, will appear. Act. 20.35. (...); is mentioned, as one of Christ
his memorable sayings, which yet in none of the fouer Evangelists is found. We
can make but a negative argument of it, which at the best is of no great
validity: but after such evidence of positive proofs, is very impertinent.

But yet I cannot tell, whether it may so peremptorily be affirmed, that no
mention at all, express or implicit, is made of the Lords prayer in the
Writings of his Apostles. There may some places be found perchance, where it
may not improbably be thought alluded unto by some words. When the Apostles
tells us in several places, that this or that is the Will of God: they do it
often, and emphatically, sometimes; who can tell, but it was with some tacit
reference and allusion, to the words of the Lords prayer, which they knew were
daily repeated and assented unto, by those primitive Christians they wrote
unto, and therefore might enforce their exhortation to such and such duties,
from their own secret consent, included and expressed in their daily prayer?
But since this occasion is given me, I shall crave leave I may but propose
what, long before I had any the least suspicion, that ever the Lords Prayer
should want any defense in England, had been in my thoughts. I profess, I see
men take so much liberty, I have no great fancy to new interpretations. I had
much rather (were I to write upon the Scripture) defend one old received
interpretation upon good grounds of reason, than be the author of two new,
though probable. This makes me to suspect the more, what I have to say, because
I find it no where. But because it was in my thoughts, as I said before, long
before I had any thought of this occasion; in that respect, I suspect it less.
In those words of St. Peter, chap. 1. verse. 17. (...), etc. I have thought it
very probable, that he might intend the Lords prayer. First, That the word,
(...), and (...), does properly (and so commonly used in the New Testament)
signify, To call upon in prayer; and generally, To pray, will easily be
granted I know. Beza translates, Si cognominatis patrem: The words may be
translated, If you call upon him as Father, or, If in praying, you call him
Father. Well, here is no great alteration in this, from what is commonly
received. But what can we infer upon this, that will more particularly concern
the Lords prayer? I ground chiesly upon the words following, (...), etc. which
indeed seem to promise least: yea, to cross rather what we would have: but, if
well examined, it may prove otherwise. I must here appeal to the Hebrew
Idiotism, whereof the New Testament (though written in Greek) is full. As for
example, Acts 8.20. (a common example) where the Original has it, (...): it is
rendered very truly in the English, exceeding fair, without any mention of God,
which is in the Original words, and might seem strange to them that are not
acquainted with the Hebrew phrase: to them that are, not at all: and so of
diverse places. Upon this ground of the Hebrew Idiotism, I think it may be said,
That to be in heaven, as in the Lords prayer; (Our Father which art in Heaven:)
and, To judge without respect of persous, ((...)) according to every man's work:
as in St. Peter, may amount to one and the same sense. For proof whereof, Psalm
115.2, 3. Wherefore should the heathen say, where is now their God? But our God
is in the Heavens; he has done whatsoever he pleases. The Psalmist, out of
doubt, and so expounded by some Ancients, intended by these words, that
although God, for some secret causes, best known to himself, did defer the
execution of his justice, or just vengeance upon them, who had used his people
so and so: yet in heaven he was for all that: wanted neither power, nor will,
but in due time would reward them, both them that had done, and them that had
surfered wrong, according to their deserts. We say still, when we appeal to
God, upon occasion of wrong and oppression, There is a God in Heaven. But if
this be not express enough, I hope the next will be. Psalm 7.6, 7. Arise, O
Lord, in thine Anger; lift up thy self, because of the rage of mine enemies;
and awake for me to the judgment, that thou have commanded. So shall the
congregation of the people compass thee about: for their sakes therefore return
thou on High. Return thou on high, that is, to heaven: (so the sense does
require; and all the Rabbis agree:) from whence God, as to the apprehension of
men, is supposed to absent himself, when he does not execute judgment, but
suffers the wicked to prevail in this world, as we see he does often. The
Reason of this speech, is, Heaven is, properly, the Throne of God. Heaven is my
Throne, the earth is my footstool, (Psalm 66.1.) Now Thrones among men, are
chiefly established for, and by Justice; therefore when Gods Justice does not
appear among men, they suppose him, for a time, not to be in his Throne, that
is, in Heaven. There be many phrases in Scripture, in the Psalms especially,
that have reference to this, which we have spoken of elsewhere ( Annot. upon
Psalm 7. v. 7.56.2.68.18. and alibi.) Interpreters that observe not this
Idiotism, are put to it. I only observe more, that presently after these words
in the Psalm, Return thou on high: it follows, The Lord shall judge the people:
judge me, O Lord, as if he had said, No sooner is God returned to his place,
his Throne, his Heavens, but we shall be sure to hear of Justice, and just
judgments executed. The truth is, God is always in Heaven: always just: nay,
always doing justice. For what is more just and reasonable, than to suffer
them to be exercised in this world, for a while, with temporary afflictions and
oppressions; whom he has destinated to eternal happiness in the Kingdom of
heaven? And to suffer them to prevail and prosper, for a while, (though not
always so neither: And God knows, how inconsiderable a time, compared to
Eternity) who for their wickedness and infidelity, are to undergo such an
eternity of darkness and misery? Which is a manifest Token, says the Apostle,
of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the
Kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer, seeing it is a righteous thing with
God, etc. And in the parable of the Rich man and Lazarus, Son, remember that
thou in thy life time, receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil
things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. But these things,
though certain and true to the eye of Faith, (confirmed also by sound and solid
Reason, if well looked into) yet, not so apprehended, ordinarily. Therefore the
Psalmist says in a place, That God is known (in the world) by the judgments
which he executes. So then, God (in one sense, for we exclude not others, as
we shall say by and by;) is said, To be in heaven, to return on high; or, to
Heaven: when he does administer Justice, or just Judgments: or (to speak yet
more particularly) When by those judgments he executes; viz rewarding the
good and bad, faithful and Infidels, according to their deeds: he does
manifest himself a just God. According to this sense, those words in the Lords
prayer, Our Father which art in Heaven, are not only alluded unto, but fully
paraphrased by St. Peter, when he says, And if ye call on the Father (or, as
we said the words may be rendered, If ye call him Father, when ye pray) who
without respect of persons, judges according to every man's work, pass the
time, etc.

Besides this, the coherence is much better by this interpretation. The
Apostle, immediately before, used an argument to press to holiness, because
God is holy: and to make his argument more weighty, he quotes Scripture for it:
For it is written, be ye holy, etc. He proceeds here, and grounds another duty,
to wit, holy fear, upon our relation to God, as a Father. Now though it be true
that impartial justice, may belong to a Father: yet the ground of this
dependence, and St. Peter's inference, is somewhat obscure, except he allude
and ground upon the words in the Lords prayer, and their connection there, Our
Father, which art in heaven: according to that interpretation, we have spoken
of, which to them that St. Peter wrote unto, could not but be familiar enough.
And this is as much, as if he had, here also, quoted Scripture. As if he had
said: Remember and consider well, that in your daily prayer, prescribed unto
you by Christ himself: as you call God, your Father, Our Father; which may seem
to promise indulgence: so you add, which art in heaven: to put you in mind,
that God is just; impartial, who without respect of persons, judges according
to every man's work, which as I said, is equivalent to that quotation of
Scripture in the former ver. Which nevertheles if it be granted, or suposed to
have been St. Peter's meaning, it does not follow, that those words in the
Lords prayer, which art in heaven: admit of no other sense; or that St. Peter
would have it so. It is enough, if the words will bear this sense also, without
any violence offered unto them. But this, as I said at first, I propose as not
improbable, and no otherwise; not so much in answer to what is objected (which
needs it not:) as to contribute somewhat, (occasion being given) toward the
right, or at least, probable understanding of a place of Scripture.

Another Objection is: If those words (...), say ye; must be understood
literally, then we must never pray otherwise, but use those very words allways:
and so, no other prayer, but the Lords prayer, shall be lawful. But this we
know is against the practice of all Churches, from the beginning: whence they
would infer, etc. Here I shall say, what common sense might suggest, unto any
man; It is one thing to underand words literally; another thing, precisely
peevishly: or to speak more plainly, maliciously. (...): pray always, or
without ceasing, 1 These. v. 16. But this we know, precisely taken, cannot be:
nay, contrary to other places and expressions of Scripture. Therefore the
Apostle does not mean it, of real and literal praying. The Apostle says:
Children, obey your parents in all things. Col. 3.20. but this we know,
precisely taken, ought not to be. For Parents may command many things, and do
often, contrary to the law of God. Therefore the Apostle intended it not of
literal real obedience: or, not of carnal parents. A hundred such places we
might produce: but these may suffice to show the absurdity and iniquity of this
kind of argumentation. But, I say still: When, and where, there is good
evidence for the literal meaning. In doubtful places, a man may use his
discretion.

I say Secondly: By the very circumstances of the Text, it may be gathered,
that Christ's answer did not tend unto this, to forbid men other prayers. Teach
us to pray, as John did his Disciples, not, teach us to pray; barely, and
absolutely. Or, what we shall say when we pray: but, as John taught his
Disciples; so teach us also some particular form, whereby we may be known unto
others thy Disciples: and which our selves may use with confidence at all times
as an unquestionable, unparalled form. Teach us: us: in common: such a
prayer therefore, that may sit all men, at all times. But we know, that as the
condition of men upon earth, (some rich: some poor: some married, etc.) is
very different: so must their occasions of praying: nay, the same men have not
allways the same occasions. Very unlikely therefore, that such a prayer should
either be expected by the Disciples, or intended by Christ that should be of
such an extent, as should include all particular occasions. But however, if the
emphasis of the word used by Christ, to endeare this prayer unto us, and to
prevent all evasions, had any ambiguity in it: yet God be thanked, there be
Scriptures enough, (besides the constant use of the Church,) to take it away,
and to satisfy the most scrupulous. Neither, indeed, do I hear of any, (what
future times may produce, I know not) that makes any scruple, to pray in a
Church with the Assembly; ( Quakers, and Anabaptists, I meddle not with:) or in
his house, with his family; because Christ has said, When thou prayest, enter
into thy Closet: and when thou have shut thy door, etc. So that this is a mere
cavil. I wish some would take more notice of those words there: Use not vain
Repetitions, as the heathen do: for they think they shall be heard for their
much speaking. The words, I think, are express enough; and I know no
inconvenience, that would come of it, but that some men would loose somewhat of
that contentment they find in the length of their prayers, upon a pleasing
conceit of immediate inspiration.

But yet after all this, let me add, though the Lords prayer, does not exclude
other prayers, private, or public, not upon particular occasions only, but at
no time: and that we have warrant enough from Scripture for such: and that to
be able to express himself, upon all occasions, both publicly, and privately
(many can privately, who have not the confidence to do it publicly) readily
and fluently: but, pertinently, and reverently withal; is to be accounted a
great gift: which though all men have not, (not the best; the learned
sometimes:) yet all men should desire, and honor it in others, that are
Orthodox and Religious, (for it is well known, that some that were neither,
have had it in a large measure:) yet after all this, I say, I must add, that
the Lords Prayer, with little, or no alteration at all, may be used upon
particular occasions, whether public or private; yea, and repeated (for which
we have Christ's warrant and example: Mat. 26.44. And he left them, and went
away again, and prayed the third time saying the same words; O my Father, if
(...) be possible, let this cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but
as thou will, verse 39. and 42.) to very good purpose, as I conceive. For when
we have once opened our case before God, and what our hearts incline us to
desire, being of it self lawful and warrantable: this done, if presently we
betake our selves to the Lords Prayer: Thy Will be done in earth: or as Christ
himself, to the same effect; Nevertheless, not my will, but thy Will be done: I
think our prayers might prove more acceptable to God, more profitable to us,
then often, when we long insist upon our desires. For God knows, such is our
ignorance, we seldom know, what is best, or expedient: and it often falls out,
that when we have obtained what we prayed for, we have afterward occasion to
curse the hour, that it ever came into our hearts to pray for such things. This
is a point that has been handled by Poets and Philosophers, (as was before
intimated:) but very little understood and practiced by many Christians: not by
them, I am sure, who not only prescribe and press, very peremptorily, what God
shall grant: but also are ready to quarrel and expostulate with him, if they
have not what they ask. And this is called zeal; when it is done by way of
prayer: which would be little better than Blasphemy, in ordinary reasoning.

We see daily, how many things fall out contrary to expectation. I would ask
our brethren, the Scots, (without offense, I hope) when they prayed so
zealously in their Churches, for the success of their own, and the English
Armies against their Sovereign, they then thought or believed, they prayed for
their own confusion: and that the time would come, within few years after, and
the same Parliament yet sitting, that we should give God thanks in our
Churches, for killing them in the field? Or that Politic noble man, who when
trusted by the King to reconcile differences in Scotland, did foment them under
hand; would he have thought, when he saw his policy to succeed, and hugged
himself in his bosom for it; that the end of it within a while, would be, the
loosing of his head upon a Scaffold, by those men, whom his plots had raised,
and his hands strengthened? There is store of such public examples, which every
man may suggest unto himself. [(...): Thus did he pray; but, O the blindness of
his mind! In that he prayed, and had; his death and woe did find. Hom] But to
insist in more and samiliar private experience. One main subject of private
devotions, are Children: Ut sint superstites, that they may live; and according
to the course of nature, outlive us. The very word Superstitio, once a good
word, (taken for Religion, in general) had its Original from thence, as Cicero
somewhere does teach. Whatsoever is objected by Lactantius, or any other
against it, is very impertinent; as to them that are versed in these things,
will appear. Most ancient Heathens, when they treat of Superstition, insist
upon this particular of Parents. Now if we shall appeal to davly experience:
How many Fathers and Mothers, who prayed for such and such Children, before
they had them; or, when sick, or in danger, as the only thing almost that made
them happy, and which they would expect from God, in this world at least;
afterward have thought both themselves, and those very Children, had been very
happy, if they had never been born, or dyed young: and that God had been very
merciful unto them, if he had not heard their prayers? It is so, of all
worldly things. habet has vices conditio mortalium, ut adversa exsecundis; ex
adversis, secunda nascantur. Occultat utrorumque semina Deus, and plerumque
bonorum malorumque causae sub diversa specie latent. So the Orator, very wisely
and truly. How then can it be otherwise? The Comic therefore, not less truly,
than elegantly.

Stulti haud scimus, quam frustra simus, quum quod cupienter dari Petimus
nobis; quasi quid in rem sit, possimus noscere. Certa amittimus, dum incerta
petimus, atque hoc evenit In labor atque in dolor, ut mors obrepat interim.
How much safer then (as we said before) when we have laid open our case and
present apprehensions upon it, before God: to betake our selves to this Holy
Prayer, which from his authority, that commended it to us, and other good
considerations that should endear it to us, will both teach and help us, to
elevate our hearts from those wordly transitory petty things, Wives, Hu bands,
Children, etc. in comparison) into better objects: The glory of our Creator in
heaven: the advancement of his Truth, in the world: humble submission to his
heavenly Will and Wisdom, in all things, from whom all that is truly good, and
nothing but good does proceed: from which things so thought upon and desired,
as we are taught by this Holy Prayer, our own eternal happiness does depend.
And here it may be observed, that whereas; Mat 7.2. it is said, If ye then
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children: how much more shall
your Father, which is in beaven, give things to them that ask him? In St. Luke
we find it, If ye then being evil, know how to give good things unto your
Children, how much more shall your heavenly Father, give the holy Spirit to
them that ask him: as if, (heavenly things, increase of Grace,) that, the only
thing either considerable, or that we can safely and securely pray for. And if
we so use the Lords Prayer, with these thoughts; this preparation of heart; we
may (I said before) if occasion be, use it often in one day, to our great
comfort, and with less superstition I dare say, than some others their
Battologies, or affected long prayers, condemned both in the Old and New
Testament. All this while I have not forgotten what St. James says, The
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man, avails much. Elias was a man,
etc. Though somewhat might be said to that particular case: there be
extraordinary times and occasions; yea, and persons too: (...): of the same
nature, as we are; Mortals, similes aliis (as the vulgar Latin very well, Acts
14.15. not Gods) yet endowed with extraordiuary zeal, and raised of purpose
sometimes, for some extraordinary Act: but we have said enough already, to
prevent Calumny, as though we disliked others, whilst we commend and vindicate
the Lords prayer.

To tell us, that this prayer has been, or is yet, (being mumbled upon beads,
in an unknown language, and the like) much abused, and to make that an
objection against the use of it, after it has been so clearly proved, that no
one duty of Christian Religion, can pretend to more evidence, of either
Scripture-authority, or universal consent: every man that is not very simple
and ignorant, must needs understand, what will be the consequent of such an
argument. For what was ever, or is yet more abused, than the divine Scriptures;
what more than praying or preaching? what more than Religion in genetal? under
the mask whereof, what mischiefs? what miscarriages, both public and private
have been contrived? What indeed is so generally abhorred among men, that has
not been acted under that sacred name? Neither is it so among Christianr only.
Look into ancient stories, when Paganism was the Religion of the world: look
into latter stories of the Turks, or any other Nation: even now the present
divisions of the Turks among themselves (as our News books tell us) go under
the name of Religion and Reformation: Tantum relligio potuit suadere malorum:
in every man's mouth, and observation. And of Christian Religion particularly,
we are told in some late Relations, that the Turks themselves, (some of them,
at least) confefs Christian Religion, to have been a good Religion for a long
time, till it came to be corrupted, and abused by the Professors of it: which,
they say, made God to send Mahomes, to establish a new. This may serve for a
warning to others: sober men will not use such arguments.

We did promise, Mr. Perkins before. his words are these, And whereas sundry
men in our Church (I must appeal to the knowledge of them that know more than
I; for in all my time, I never heard of any: except, Mr. Perkins understood,
men that were borne of the Church of England; but since divided from it, by
faction and singularity: such as the forenamed Johnson; and his adherents) hold
it unlawful to use this very form of words, as they are set down by our
Savior Christ, for a prayer; they are far deceived, as will appear by their
reasons. First, say they, it is Scripture; and therefore not to be used as a
Prayer. I answer: that the same thing may be the Scripture of God, and also the
prayer of man: else, the prayers of Moses, David, and Paul, being set down in
the Scripture; cease to be prayers. again say they: That in prayer we are to
express our Wants in particular, and the Graces which we desire. Now in those
words, all things to be prayed for, are only in general propounded: I answer.
That the maine wants that are in any man, and the principal Graces of God to be
desired, are set down in the petitions of this prayer in particular. Thirdly,
they plead, that the pattern to make all prayer by, should not be used as a
Prayer. I answer, that therefore the rather it may beused as a Prayer: and sure
it is, that ancient, and worthy Divines, have reverenced it as a prayer,
choosing rather to use these words, then any other: as Cyprian De Orat. Domini,
and Tertul. lib. de suga in persecut. and August. sermon. 12.6, de tempore.
Wherefore this opinion is full of ignorance and error. So he. You may see by
the beginning, that Mr. Perkins had no mind (by acknowledging them of the Church
of England, in those days) to deal with them, as another man might have
thought they had deserved. Yet it is somewhat, that even he did charg them of
gross ignorance, and error.

I have done with objections. There may be more, but I do not think them
considerable: and there will be no end, if we must hear, or the Reader be
told, what any man can say. I will conclude all with those excellent words
(though indeed the substance of them is in St. Cyprian) I find in the book
entitled, A Collection of Private Devotions etc. often printed: (and well
deserving it:) in the preface of it: A prayer [the Lords prayer] whereby we
have not only Christ's own name, to countenance our suits (in whose name if we
ask any thing, we shall have it: says the Gospel:) but Christ's own words
also, who himself is our Advocate: and being best acquainted with the Laws,
and phrases of his Fathers Court, has drawn up such a Bill for us, both for
matter and form, as shall make our supplications acceptable and prevalent with
Almighty God. And though men should speak with Angels tongues, yet words so
pleasing to the ears of God, as those which the Son of God did compose, cannot
possibly be uttered, nor any prayers so well framed, as those that are made by
this pattern.

FINIS.
The Letter mentioned, and promised here, Page 84.
Reverendo viro, D. Merico Casaubono, Presbytero, Canonico Ecclesiae
Primitialis Cantuariensis.
Vir Reverende,
Animarum te curam gerere, nec Cantuariensium tantum and Anglicarum, sed and
externarum, satis ostendunt, tot missa ad me munera, talia omnia, ex quibus and
ego possim fieri melior, and alii qui per me beneficii tui participes fient.
Theophylactus, Graecorum ante se compendium, velut vox est Graecae Ecclesiae,
Pauli sensa bona fide custodita, nobis exhibens. Acta Regem vestrum optimum,
Scotosque inter, non quidem efficient, ut ego motus illos feroces, imo feros,
quos damnavi semper, magis damnem; sed ut quod mihi semper visum fuit, aliis
etiam firm persuadeam. Multum autem refert existimationis Regiae, haec acta
verti in Gallicum sermonem, nec quiescam donec ei labori aliquem idoneum
invenero, and ad id animavero. Richardi Hookeri scripta, ante annos multos
vidi; and quanquam in sermon mihi non percognito, facile cognovi exactissimi
operis utilitatem: quae tanta est, ut hunc quoque librunt verti, sed in latinum
sermonem pervelim. Quaeram si quis hic est, qui idefficere cupiat. Caeterum and
tibiid ipsum cordi esse velim. Anglicana versio libri nostri pro veritate
Religionis Christianae, valde mihi placet, and (...). Ego eundem librum latin
rursus nunc editurio, additis pro mantissa testimoniis, ad quae liber respicit.
Paro and de jure belli ac pacis editionem novam, cum novorum testimoniorum,
quos fine libri, annotationum vice, subnectam, ingenti accessione. Heinsiana ad
Novum Testamentum ubi accepero, (expecto autem in horas) cogitabo, an aliquid
nobis quod dicamus, reliqui fecerit. Quod Johannis Reigersbergii, hospitis
quondam tui, memor esse pergis, in eo rem mihi pergratam, ac tua summa bonitate
dignam facis: est is nunc in patria sua, quoquo iturus est, circumlaturus
semper secum mentem plenam sensu beneficiorum tuorum. Literae viri supra omnem
praedicationem positi, patris tui, multum hic leguntur. Si quas habes praeter
editas, aut aliorum ad ipsum argumentosiores, eas si publico dones, multos
demerearis, me autem potissimum, ejus quae in ipso eluxit, pietatis simul atque
eruditionis, maximum admiratorem. Mitto tibi quas habet (...), ut Patris, ita
tui amantissimus, Labbaeus. Si qua repererim alia, etiam eorum te faciam
participem, semperque aut ostendam, aut cupiam certe ostendere, quanti and
maximum patrem fecerim, and faciam ejus vestigiis tam faeliciter
insistentemfilium. Lutetiae, 19. Septembris: M. DC. XXXIX.

Tuus toto animo, H. GROTIVS.


