THE CASE OF HIS MAJESTY'S Sugar Plantations.
BEfore England had any Sugar Plantations of its own, Portugal had about Four
Hundred Thousand Pounds per Annum for Sugar from England, to the great
Enriching of Portugal and Impoverishing of England.

The Portugeeze having set High Customs upon their Sugars, and letting none
Trade at Brasil but themselves, gave the English Encouragement to Adventure
upon Planting it, who have so increased, that they not only Supply England with
all the Sugar it wants, whereby 400000 l. paid Portugal formerly for Sugar is
saved; but great Quantities of Sugars have been Transported to Foreign Markets,
to the vast increase of the Wealth of the Kingdom, and by consequence the value
of the Lands of England.

In the Trade to the English Sugar Plantations, about 400 Sail of English Ships
and 8000 Seamen are annually Employed.

All the Ships that go from England are Laden with Manufactures and Provisions
for the Supply of the Plantations, with Clothes, Tools, and Utensils, and
Victual, which all pay Custom to the King outward, and on which many Families
in England do subsist.

The Planters have at their Cost, brought above 100000 Negroes from Africa,
whereby so many New Subjects are added to the Crown.

The French King taking Notice of the great Wealth and Strength the Sugar
Plantations bring to the Kingdom of England, and also of the difficulties the
English Plantations are under, by reason of the Acts of Trade and Navigation,
which enjoining all the Sugars of the English Plantations to be brought home to
England, and there to be Landed, and pay the King a Custom before it can be
Transported to any Foreign Markets, which is a great Charge, has thought it
feazible, and with great Application has set himself to become Master of that
Trade; and the Dutch have done the same, and granting more ease to their
Planters, in producing and disposing of their Sugars, than the English have,
the French are so far increased, that their Sugar Plantations, which are
Martinico, Guadeloupe, Marigalant, Grenados, St. Christophers, Kayan, and part
of Hispaniola, do already find an Employment for Two hundred Sail of Ships, and
Seamen proportionable, andare increasing daily: And the Dutch have already many
Ships annually Laden with Sugar from Surinam, which they make a Business of
State to Improve.

This Increase of the Sugar Trade of the French and Dutch, has brought those
Sugars that were worth between 5 and 6 l. the Hundred Weight, when the last
Book of Rates was made, to be worth now not above 35 s. out of which the
Planter pays 5 s. Custom, and 4 per Hundred to the King in the Plantations;
insomuch that an Estate that was formerly worth 2000 l. per Annum in the
Plantations, is not now worth 600 l. per Annum; and if any further Imposition
be laid, will yield little or nothing, to the undoing many Thousand English
Families, many of which reside in England; for which Reason the Planters
intended to have Addressed to this Parliament, for reducing the Book of Rates
to the present Value of Sugars.

This low Value of the Commodity causes the Inhabitants of the English Colonies
to forsake them, and remove to other places, whilst the King of France uses
all Imaginable Industry to strengthen and fill his Plantations; (some of which
are in sight of ours) with Inhabitants, having made Dunkirk a Free Port for his
own Sugars, where no Customs are paid in or out; by reason of which the Markets
of Flanders and Holland, etc. are furnished with French Sugars at 2 s. 6 d. per
Hundred cheaper than the English can, by reason of the Acts of Trade and
Navigation.

This Increase of the Strength of the French Plantations and decrease of the
English, has made many of the Planters consider of withdrawing their Stocks,
for fear if a War should happen with France all would be lost.

The English Sugar Trade being apparently decaying under the present
Impositions upon Sugar, can by no means bear more and subsist; and it is of
great advantage to France to have our Plantations ruined by more Impositions on
their Sugars: for should the French gain the Sugar Trade from the English,
England would lose the Employment of 400 Sail of Ships and 8000 Seamen, and
France would gain it, which would differ the present Balance of Seamen 16000,
besides the loss of a Native Commodity, that has brought so much Wealth to the
Kingdom, and would also be the loss of the Trade of Africa for Negro's.

It has been ever the Practice and Policy of Trading Nations, to set the
Public Taxes on Foreign Commodities and not those of their own growth.

In the time of the Usurper Cromwell, when all things were raked into to find a
Revenue to support his Usurpation, no Excise was put on Sugars of the growth of
the English Plantations.

England is an Island whose Wealth and Strength consists in Trade, which cannot
be preserved but by being Master at Sea; and the Plantation Trade is near one
half of the Navigation of England, and whether it be so convenient to hazard
the loss of it by over-burthening it, since an Imposition may be set on
Commodities of Foreign growth, that will be equivalent, is humbly submitted.

And whereas some seem to be of Opinion that an Imposition will fall upon the
Buyer only, and not hurt the Planter, it is a Mistake for the Reasons following.

For it was found by Experience in the time of the late Rebellion, when there
was an Excise imposed, the Buyer refused to buy Commodities of the Importer,
unless he would clear the Excise, so that the Importer came generally to pay
the Excise as well as the Customs. And it is well known that all Commodities
are in Value as there is a greater or lesser quantity of them at the Market. If
the Imposition does not lessen the quantity of Sugar imported, it cannot raise
the price, and then by consequence the Imposition must be born wholly by the
Planter. If it does lessen the quantity of Sugar imported, it lessens the
Employment of our Shipping and Seamen, and the Kings Revenue, and will
constrain those Planters who are forced to leave Making Sugar, to forsake the
Plantations, as having no Employment there; which will so weaken them of
Defendants, as they will be in hazard to become a prey to the French or their
own Negro's; which will be a total loss of that Trade to this Kingdom, and be
the ruin of many Thousand English Families, who in England and the Plantations
subsisted by that Trade of making Sugar, or by furnishing Clothes, Tools and
Utensils.

FINIS

