MEMORABLE DAYS AND WORKS OF GOD, In the Year Past. 1645.

OR A Catalogue of the Cities, Castles, Towns, and Forts, that have been
taken by the Parliaments Forces since January Last.

LONDON Printed for. J. Bartlett. 1646.

Memorable Days and Works of God in the Year past 1645.
January
the 10th Archbishop Land be headed that Arch-Traytor to Church and State: the
Arch-enemy of Godly Ministers, and Godly people: and Arch-incendiary of the
three Kingdoms, since whose Execution (whatever the Cabinet Papers
Prognosticated) it has pleased God wonderfully to prosper our Armies.

January the 11th

Victory at Culham, near Abingdon, against Prince Rupert, S. Henry Gage slain
(the then Governor of Oxford) and many others of note. A good Check to their
new General.

Uictory over Gerard in Pembrooke-shire: 900 slain and taken, beaten again,
at the end of this month.

January the 21th

Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX Voted our chief Commander: In the Cabinet Papers
reptoached as a Brutish General, but raised and assisted of God to bring down
the wise, and mighty things: A terror to the enemy, and Object of envy to our
own, who are carnal.

Strensham-House taken, and made our Garrison.

February
the 22th Partshall-House taken: two Jesuits: Gentlemen.

Shrowsbury Surprised: eight Knights taken, many Officers, 15 Ordnances, 2000
Arms. A Beautiful Town, and of great consequence, to hinder the enemies
Recruits out of Wales and otherwise.

Feb. 28

Weymouth wholly retaken: 180 slain, 38 Ordnance tataken, 40 Ships, After
three weeks labor, and conflicts.

March
the 12. Sir James Long taken, and his whole Regiment, four hundred horses.

Col, Holborne takes horses from Goring several times.

Likewise Sir William Waller at the Devises.

Great actions of Sir William Brereton at Chester: and Major General Brown at
Oxford.

April
14. Rebellion in Kent quickly suppressed.

Refractary troopers there, and elsewhere, quietly and safely reduced to
obedience. A great mercy.

24 Blechendon House taken, 70 Horses 2 or 300 muskets. Item the Queens
Colors, 400 Horses, 200 prisoners 200 slain.

26 Col. Conquest taken, Major Bamfield, 3 Captains.

At Whitney 3 Colors taken, 120 Horses, 10 Officers, 27 At Bampton bush, Col.
Sir Henry Vaughan taken, 2 Liev. Colonels, Major Lee, 5 Captains, 8 Lieut. 8.
Ensigns, 20 Ser^^anes*

May
11. A Plot against the I Will of Ely, happily prevented.

Taunton in extremity releived, by the flight of the enemy.

A wonderful mercy, to brave people: great wealth saved.

1^ Evesham stormed, and taken: 120 Horses, 500 arms. Gaunt-house taken, and
made our Garrison.

June
10. Greenhough-house taken: with all the Ordnance and Ammunition.

Hougham-house taken: 60 Horses: 100 Arms three Captains.

14 The Glorious Victory at Naisby: When the Lord magnified his servant
Fairfax, and gave an earnest of further mercies. Arms taken 9000. Horses 2000:
Prisoners 4540. 12 Ordnance, Letters for discovery.

Sundry Knights, and Colonels, brought in afterward.

18 Leicester regained, 14 Ordnance, 30 Colors, 2000. Arms. 500 Horses. 50
Barrles of Powder.

A great mercy. As the loss was unexpressible.

23 Castles in Shrop-shire rendered: Cause, S^^ke, and Shrowarden.

28 Carlisle rendered: 20 Ordnance. 1000. Arms.

Highworth Garrison taken: 100 Arms.

Horses in diverse parts taken: 100, 60. 50. 45, 60. or 70,

June 4.

Taunton again mightily releived.

9 Victory at Langpart. against Goring.

10 More: Sundry Colonels taken: 2000 Prisoners: 2000 Horses: 4000 Arms:
Colors of Horse 35: of Foot 21. two great Ordnance, thirty of their Regiments
broken. A wide door of hope hereby opened, for recovering the West.

14 ^^^rough^. Garrison taken, and other.

21. 22. Bridg-water stormed, and taken A Mighty Piece.

Fontefract Castle yielded to the Parliament.

Froome-Cannon taken by storm: of the Scotts.

Three small Garrisons Garrisons near Bridg-water, quitted.

23 Raby Castle surrendered to the Parliament.

Chadwick house taken by the Lyme-men,

25 Scarborough-Castle Surrendered to the Parliament.

28 Bathe Yielded up to the Parliament 4 Ordnance.

Eighty Horse of the Kings Lifeguard taken.

August.
3. Clubmen, Leaders taken at Shaftsbury. 51.

4 Club-men routed, 2000 Arms taken. 300 men,

Uictory over Gerard. and Haverford west taken.

Yo^ghall releived. A great mercy. Sliga taken, 150 Horses Sundry Castles.

15 Sherborne Castle stormed, taken and demolished, In it 16 Ordnance taken,
many Officers.

28 Portshead point taken, 6 Ordnance 200 Arms.

Sep. Carew and Mamarby Castles taken. Nunny Castle taken.

11. Bristoll Stormed, and surrendered to the Parl. Think how great Strength,
and Wealth, and what a mercy not easily dived into. O love the Lord etc.

13 Montros Routed, and Scotland revived. A Wonder! Let the Kingdoms study
thankfulness.

23 Devizes Castle taken. 300 arms. Ordnance. And Lacock house.

Cardiffe Castle taken. 16 Ordnance. 400 arms.

And Picton Castle.

Wales begins now to awake, and grow regular.

24 The Caveliers routed at Rowton heath. 11 Colonels taken. with other
Officers: 2000-Horses 1500:-Prisoners.

26 Barkly Castle stormed, and surrendered to the Parl. And Farley Castle in
Sommersetshire.

Oct.
Sandall Castle yielded to the Parl.

6 Winchester Castle yielded to the Parliament: with great provisions 7
Ordnance 700 Arms.

14 Bazing house taken by storm: with great riches and provisions The
Rendivouz of popery and wickedness.

Chepstow and its Castle taken: 17 Ordnance:

Digby and Langdale rowted at Sherborn in Yorkshire:

600 Horses taken: 5 Colonels, 3 L. Colonels, 7 Captains

18 Lankford house delivered to the Parl.

19 Tiverton taken by storm, and strange providence: 4 Ordnance 4 Majors 7
Captains: 7 Lievetenants:

Carmarthen delivered to the Parl with ordnance, Arms, Digby and Langda^e
again rowted: at Carlisle sand^.

24 Monmouth, and its Castle delivered to the Parliament 7 Ordnance: 300. arms:

Novem.
Victory at Denbigh: 5 or 600 Horses taken: 400 prisoners:

6 (...) Castle delivered to the Parliam^t: Welbeck-house flighted,

10 Werton house delivered to the Parl.

16. Beeston Castle delivered to the Parl.

Dec.
7. Lathom house delivered to the Parl.

Taken i^ from the enemy an other Garrison ly^ng West of Exeter Called
Callantine house and therein 30 or 40 horse and as many prisoners.

Taken in Skypton Castle 7 piece of ordnance 300. arms (...) horse and 4
Barrells of powder.

With many other, which time would fail to observe and illustrate. Oh for a
complete history, which would set forth Gods glory, and these Kingdoms
happiness.

And now England, what does the Lord thy God require of thee but to fear tht
Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul- Deuteronomy. 10. 12.

Means to render to the Lord according to all his benefits

1 Be a receiver in the maine: by making Christ sure to thy soul so to get a
full and right title to these inferior mercyes: And this will sweeten every
benefit, and lift it up high in thy thoughts, seeing it al comes from so
heavenly a spring of love; when a soul can be thankful for Christ first, and
for other favors in him: when it sees salvation wrought, and applied, and so
takes the cup of salvation The heart hereby is marveilously warmed, and
enlarged unto thankfulness and a small mercy elevated, as a pledge of greater.
Is it not received in Christ, who is the heir of all things? Does it not come
swimming to us in his blood? And the want hereof is one chief cause of the
great unthankfulness we see in these times: some dead and heartlesse, others
grosely prophaine, the love of Christ would have constrained them, and been
stronger then death, to do and suffer for him to the uttermost: 2 Cor. 5. 14
and Cant. 8. 6. 7.

2 In deep thoughts set together Gods greatness and thy vileness. That such
a God should do such things for so wretched and unworthy a creature as thou
art. Man would not do so for a stranger, especially for an enemy: Only he
that is infinitely good, and free in all he does, one that works for his own
sake, because mercy pleases him yea, he works with delight to do his people
good, Ps. 35. 27. he has pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, Thus
many became so thankful, Luke 1. 48. considering the Lord to be mighty, and
her self in a low estate, a heart spiritually humble is ever a thankfuil
heart, As man's worth goes down so Gods goodness goes up.

3 Prize and remember the mercies thou receivest, It is not the having of
mercies that makes one thankful. but the esteeming and magnifying of them as
they are, many mercies grow stale by the commonnesse of them: as the Sun that
shines daily, and the Gospel which is preached plentifully, victories, and
deliverances are now adays ordinary matters therefore not duly regarded, He
that slights my kindness will scarce thank me for it, or he that forgets it,
so of God and his people, Psalm. 105. 5. and. 106. 13.

4 Put case ye wanted such and such mercyes, which for most part are best
seen in the want of the^: What mischeife would it have been, if the enemy had
prevailed at Naisby, and other places? If they had entered into so many of our
strong places, which were left? If an arbitrary Government had been erected and
thereby a perfect slavery? If popery had been introduced, and the Gospel
banished? Sit do woe and think what a sad face of things would have now
appeared: remember all the way which the Lord thy God has led thee in these
heavy times as Deuteronomy. 8. 2.

5 Pray to be able and willing to render, As thou prayest for the increase of
other graces, so pray also to be acting and exciting this grace of
thankfulness, God, if entreated will enlarge thy heart to run the way of his
Commandments.

6 To prayer add thine own endeavor, Strive and strain to do this duty? as
David. 103. 1. Bless the Lord, O my soul and all that is within me, Bless
his holy Name Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.
Water comes not up without pumping: and we have dry hearts, there needs an
holy violence to be used, as Mat. 11. 12.

7 There needs some thought taking: as David, What shall I render to the Lord
for all his benefits toward me? Psalm. 116. 12 God studies to do us good, and
waits to be gracious: and that by a counsel from all eternity has thoughts of
peace toward his Church, thoughts of supply of delivetance, of turning all to
good.

Finis.

