The CASE of several of His Majesty's Loyal Subjects, very much oppressed,
contrary to the Laws of this Land as they are advised, humbly represented to
the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in Parliament assembled.
1. BY Act of Parliament, in the Year 1663. 400 Hackney Coachmen were Licensed
to ply in and about the Cities of London and Westminster during that
Parliament, and until the first Sessions of the next Parliament and no longer
except continued.

2. The said Parliament being Dissolved, and another Called and also Dissolved,
and nothing done in that Affair, the Act expired.

3. We, the number of 100 Ancient Coachmen, who have served persons of Honor,
and Gentlemen of Quality, all of us Loyal Subjects, and many of us sufferers
for our Loyalty and Affections to King Charles the First of ever Blessed
Memory, presented our Petition to the then next Parliament, praying for the
reasons following to be added to the 400 formerly Lycenced.

Reasons. 1. That the Buildings and the Inhabitants were so much increased that
there was more occasion for 500 then for 400 when the Act was made.

2. That we being Ancient Coachmen bred up only to that Employ, and had no
other way to get Bread for our selves and poor Families.

3. That we supposing that after the expiration of the aforesaid Act of
Parliament the same liberty might extend to us that all other Coachmen had, did
lay out all our little Substance in buying Coach, Horses, and other
Conveniences for our Calling, and accordingly followed our Calling, until
about May 1683, we were by an Act of Common Council prohibited from letting our
Coaches to Hire in the City and Liberties of London, and had several of our
Coaches seized and carried to the Green-yard, and forced to redeem them with
Fines, sometimes 20 s others 40 s and some 50 s and some have paid 5 l. in ten
days time: Others have been sold by them both Coach and Horses, according to
the will and pleasure of those Arbitrary Lawmakers: Some of our persons
imprisoned, and there kept for the space of three months; others till they
could get Bail, and then put Fines upon them as they please.

4. And by the exercise of this cruelty upon us, the Coachmen pretended to be
Licensed by the Common Counsel, did join together, and appoint 27 of their
number to meet, and hold Consults for raising of money amongst themselves, to
suppress and ruin us in our Calling in the City, and Liberty of Westminster
also, and did with money hire men, and keep us from our Employ, until we did
make our Agrievance known by our humble Petition to his most Gracious Majesty
King Charles II. of ever-blessed Memory; and the better to effect their design
to ruin us, they have raised at several times 3200 l. and upwards.

5. and lastly, We the oppressed have to our ruins stood several Suits with the
said 400, and in all the said Suits cast them: but now our small Substance
being spent, and they having a great Stock of Money, we must suffer under their
Prosecution, unless prevented by the Goodness of this Parliament.

Wherefore we most humbly beseech your Honors to take the premises into your
serious consideration, that when our Petition shall be presented unto your
consideration, to vouchsafe us relief according as to your Wisdoms shall seem
meet; and we and all the rest, as in duty bound, shall ever pray.

Tho. Cadman, Tho. Whittle, Peter Welsh, Lewis Morris. Tho. Genings.



