The CASE of John Burrowes Draper and George his Son, Joshua Morris Gent.
Elizabeth his Wife, Christopher Potter, Gent. and Phillis his Wife, Sarah
Burrowes and Martha Burrowes, Spinsters; which said John, Elizabeth, and
Phillis, Sarah, and Martha, were Brother and Sisters, and Legatees of George
Burrowes of London Merchant, deceased.
THAT Sir Alexander Rigby of London Knight, now a Prisoner in the Fleet, stands
indebted to John Burrowes, etc. by Bond under his Hand and Seal, dated the 24th
of October School, of the penalty of 2100 l conditioned for the Payment of 1057
l. 4 s. on the first of November, 1699.

That the said Sir Allexander is charged in Execution in the said Prison, by
Virtue of a Judgment obtained on the said Bond, but has not paid one Penny
Principal Interest or Charge contracted or due on the said Bond, or ever
offered any Composition, and has always declined giving any Account of his
Estate.

That the said John Burrowes, etc. being informed Sir Alexander is procuring an
Act of Parliament to be released of his Confinement, humbly presume to lay
before this Honorable House the State of their Case, viz.

That George Burrowes of London Merchant, Dyed in the Year 1693, by his Will
did leave his Effects (after his Debts, Funeral Expenses, and some small
Legacies paid) to be divided among John Burrowes, etc. in such manner and
Proportions as in his said Will are mentiond, and appointed his Father George
Burrowes sole Executor of his said Will, who duly proved the same.

That the greatest Part of the Testators Effects lying in the Hands of his
Partner in Italy, the said Executors did empower the said Sir Alexander to
demand and receive the same on the Behalf of the said Executor, in order to be
divided amongst the said John Burrowes, etc. according to the Purport of the
said Will.

That the said Sir Alexander accordingly received the said Money for which the
said Bond was given as aforesaid to the said Executor, being the Balance due
after all he demanded for his Trouble and Expenses were deducted.

That the said Debt was not contracted in Trade with the said Sir Alexander,
whereby any Profit might have accrued to the said John Burrowes, etc. but all
Money paid into his Hands.

That the said Sir Alexander about Seventeen Years ago, and soon after he
entered into the said Bond, failed and has had all this Time to pay such of his
Creditors as he pleased, (some whereof he owns to have paid) and to spend,
dispose of, or intricate his Estate at his Pleasure, and now pretends to
surrender up his Estate to his Creditors, without any Assurance they shall have
a Penny in the Pound.

That the Principal and Interest due on the said Bond, amounts to a large Sum,
and is a great part of the Substance of the said John Burrowes, etc. That the
said John Burrowes, etc. cannot learn it was ever practicable for a Debtor
under the Circumstances aforesaid, to be discharged paying his just Debts so
large, by the Indulgence and Authority of Parliament.

That the said John Burrowes and Christopher Potter have each a Numerous Family
of Children now Living.

The said John Burrowes, etc. the Premises considered, most humbly crave their
Case may be taken into Consideration, and that they may not be deprived of
their said just Debt by Authority of Parliament.

THE CASE OF JOHN BVRROWES, etc.


