A DECLARATION BY Sir Edward Dering Knight and Baronet.

With his PETITION To the Honorable House of Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.

Juven. Sat. 3. Quid Romae faciam' mentiri nescio. --
London, Printed by J. Raworth, for Philemon Stephens, at the golden Lion in
Paul's Churchyard.

April 1. 1644.

TWo months together, I did in my own house enjoy so happy a privacy, as that
nothing could add to the sweet satisfaction thereof, but the sight and company
of my children, which I wanted: my wife at chosen times came into my study,
and made my stolen commons a feast with her society, whilst my servants
thought me far from home. This contentment was in May and June, 1642.

In this time I received, from some very near, in Place, Trust and Favor with
his Majesty, several Expresses to call me unto York; which by several
returns of mine I was studious to decline: But they persisted, and used the
Kings Name unto me, a sure Engine to make me move: It was then a lawful Duty
in me to attend; for how great soever our fears then were, yet we were at that
time in actual Peace.

Ambition (I praise God) did never swell a thought in me. I had too much
felicity at home, to exchange my real happiness for gilded hopes: yet those
Letters (then received) did hold out that bait fairly to me. If
Court-employment had one quiet Sphaere, I might possibly have been an
endeavourer above twenty years since, when my taste was quicker, the golden
Fetters would have seemed lighter, and my access (by means of a powerful hand
there) more clear and easy for me: But my desires in that kind were not warm,
either then or now.

But I found (at that time) my privacie was not like to be lasting, I had
intimation that my safety was shaking; and then, between being drawn and
driven, I went toward the King willingly; but out of my own house, and from my
own Country, the most unwilling man that ever went. Through Surrey and Oxford,
I went to His Majesty at Leicester, and with him to Coventry, and then to
Nottingham, before the Standard was set up; since when, I have been constantly
attendant, until I came into the Protection of Parliament on the second of
February, 1643.

The woeful misery of this Land, the utter ruin of the Church of God in this
Kingdom, and the final period of the famous English Nation, I did conceive
would prove the undoubted issue of these bloody Wars; which may (as usually) be
succeeded by Plague and Famine, unless some blessing from above do send a
speedy Close. Now no Close did I think expectable, but by the Sword: For the
strength of the Parliament being made up in the Act of Continuation, the three
Estates had therein tied us up in a Band indissoluble. Indissoluble indeed,
unless by them who made it; or else (as the Gordian knot was losed) by the
Kings Sword. Therefore (God forgive me) I did (as is there too common) execrate
that Law, and was not friend enough with King and Parliament for making it.
Thus I hated the only Cure, Strength and Security of the Land, being as (in
another kind) S. Paul said of himself) exceedingly mad (Act. 26. 11.) Yet
again, with S. Paul, from a Persecuter I was made a Convert: for as he (1 Timothy
1. 13.) I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly; that is, God had not
opened my heart, but suffered me to go on according to the inward dictates
there, which (though erroneous) I followed: but at length I was better blessed.

Whilst I was there, I had as much as was sit for me to expect: and though I
kept the distance of Duty, yet could I make my own admission to His Majesty
upon every occasion; such was His gentle goodness toward me: and I was
received with that regardfulnesse, which gave growth unto my love, and
preserves my love unto His Majesty wheresoever I shall be; though I shall
only serve the Parliament in the now great Controversy between them; for I
have taken a Covenant for the King and Parliament, I must be faithful to both:
But where I cannot serve the King in his personal Commands, and serve him also
in his Politic Capacity, wherein he is most eminently in his Parliament, I am
resolved to be ruled by the wisest of Kings, who assures me ( Prove. 11. 14.)
That in the multitude of Counselors there is safety; and therefore I shall
anchor there.

No man can with justice and reason expect from me any depth of Discovery, or
that I should be the man to open the Mystery of all the Oxonian Designs; I
was not of such inward admission. This Declaration therefore cannot speak any
high particulars; yet shall it publish to the world some Motives of my Return,
being the same wherewith the Honorable House of Commons are pleased to be
satisfied; which by way of Petition speaks thus:

To the honorable House of Commons assembled in Parliament: The HUMBLE
PETITION OF Sir EDWARD DERING Knight and Baronet.
Humbly shows,
THat no force, nor any constraint has brought me hither, but my own free
Choice, pursued with Industry; and this Choice grounded and confirmed in me
upon many sad Meditations, which have begotten as many serious Invocations to
be directed in the best Way.

Some few Motives to manifest the honest reallity of my purposes, I ask leave
to lay down in this Petition; But beforehand professing my self very sorry for
bearing Arms against the Parliament.

1. I considered, That in removing my self hither, I do not forsake my Duty and
Allegiance to the King, but really pursue it; and shall actuate it better then
before, in a true Obedience, both to him and to the Parliament.

2. I did in this honorable House take the Parliamentary Protestation, one
Clause whereof is for the Privilege of Parliament: This (as an argument for my
Return) came late into my thoughts; but since it came, I have much wondered at
my self, how I could be so long transported, to assist in a way, to destroy
this very Parliament which I have vowed to preserve.

3. I dare not say, That the Kings Promises are forgotten and unperformed: I
had rather hide then open so un-Royall failings, if I knew them; But certainly
something has, at some times appeared like unto such breakings; And, I think,
the Petition out of Wilt- shire on Tuesday or Wednesday last, spoke little
less to the King Himself.

4. The fear of an anti- Parliament at Oxford; and a particular fear lest I
should (as diverse of the Members there professed I should) be shortly called
into that Convention, made me not only endeavor to come away, but to hasten
unto the true Parliament here.

5. Some Clergymen, and others, do speak a language there, as if the King
could come no other way to his own dwellings here, unless by Conquest: But
that way of prevailing does carry the terror of desperate Consequences with
it; and is likely (I fear) to lead into Arbitrary Government and Popery. And I
have been confident, That the King, with forty servants, might come to
Westminster, and stay there with undoubted safety to His Person: So I have said
at Oxford, and I do still assuredly believe so; and God will bless Him, if He
do so.

6. I could never reconcile the Cessation in Ireland, to the Vows made in
England.

7. When the first Declarations of this honorable House gave public Caution
of a prevailing Popish party, I confess I had then no more but an implicit
faith in that sense of the House at that time: It is since explicited unto me:
And the first Scene is played home in Ireland, which already is the Popes,
denomination being given Ex majore part. Some late Defections have been to the
Romish mis-belief, and diverse Papists are daily trusted with Commands.

For these Reasons I am come to render my self into the protection of the
Parliament; and that with a clear, candid, hearty integrity of Respect and Duty
to this honorable House. I am come in, in a happy hour, when the providence
of heaven has brought me in, under the shelter of a Declaration by both
Kingdoms; who both have therein promised, That I shall be received into favor,
and that with special consideration of the time of returning; wherein I have
the honor to be the first Suitor that lays hold on your offered Favors.

Most humbly therefore I pray, That your free Reception of me, may seal the
full Liberty which is promised; And I shall daily pray for the happy issue of
all your Consultations.

Hereunto I do only subjoyn this, That I observe that in matter of Religion,
they are yet in love with those specious, pompous, loud, exterior complements.
One single groan in the Spirit, is worth the Diapason of all the Church-Musick
in the world. Organs, Sackbuts, Recorders, Cornets, and c. and voices are
mingled together, as if we would catch God Almighty with the fine air of an
Anthem, whilst few present do or can understand. Vbi belluinis strepitibus
cantillant, Dum hinniunt discantum pueri, mugiunt alii tenorem, alii latrant,
contrapunctum, alii boant altum, alii frendent bassum, faciuntque ut sonorum,
plurimum quidem, audiatur, verborum, and oration is intilligatur nihil. In this
Devotion made up with noise like the Dionysian Orgy's, there is a parasiting
part of the Clergy, who love with these lazy performances to amuse the people
so much, that they had rather the Kingdom should be blown up, then that the
King should forbear to hear the blowing of Organs: Some of these (I doubt not)
do think the Cathedral part of this great Contention, worth this War and
Blood. One of these has several Times argued with me, That the King is guilty
of Perjury for consenting to the Bill of taking away the Bishops Votes in
Parliament, and disabling Clergymen to officiate in the proper acts of
Laymen.

This fascinated part of the Clergy, who adore this external pomp, who
measure Devotion by the ear, and take Relion in a Tune; these are as apt as
ever to ramp up again into all the amplitudes of the power they had, and then
will fall again into the excess of all their former sins, and we then are as
sure to fall into all our former sufferances. If these gayeties had not been
retained, England (since the Reformation) had been more pure and chaste in
Religion, then of late it was. Foedera servasset si non formosa fuisset. But
God be thanked, who has given us a living Parliament to watch these
misleaders, these Romish back-sliders: He has not yet withdrawn his love from
this Nation; nay, he now does chastise us, therefore he loves us now. Let us
therefore be every one careful to amend his ways, so in our new Covenant we
vow, and that is the way to mend a Family, to mend a Province, to mend a
Kingdom: One Achan may trouble a whole Host. Yet who does inwardly consider
this, though a Heathen could observe it?

Hesiod. op. and die. Lib. I. (...)

For many times a whole City is punished for one wicked man's sake. Lord grant
that Heathen Poets may not rise up in Judgment against the Christians of
England.

EDWARD DERING.

FINIS.
IMPRIMATUR.

Jo: White.
Martii 28. 1644.

