The DEVOUT COMMUNICANT Exemplified, in his Behavior Before, At, and After The
SACRAMENT Of the LORDS SUPPER.

More Practical, Useful, and Suitable to all the parts of that Solemn Ordinance
than any yet extant.

In this Impression is added a Prayer before, and another after the Sacrament;
together with more particular Directions and Meditations for the Time of
Receiving.

But they made light of it --

Matthew. 22 5. London Printed for Thomas Dring, at the Harrow next Chancery Lane
in Fleetstreet, 1675.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE Sir K. L. Baronet.
SIR,
AMong the Multitude of Practical Divine Treatises are none more numerous than
on the Lords Supper, nor more diversely handled: Not a few well-disposed persons
yet complain they are at a loss, not so much which to make use of, variety here
distracting; as that they know not how to form Directions into apposite
Meditations: they sequester, they sit, they seem to reflect as others, but know
not what to say in themselves, to their great discomfort and discouragement.
The ensuing Manual is so methodically digested for their assistance, and
presented to your self, not as one that needs it, but the Composer a better
evidence of his great esteem of a person so constant, so devout a Communicant;
so eminently Charitable, so rarely Tempered, so truly Honorable. If it
displease any, I borrow of so many to discharge one great debt; methinks my
Honesty in owing it may satisfy; their allowing me also to make the best use
of theirs I were able. And if this be a bad one it is a right hand error; I hope
they will not condemn, but pity and pardon me I was no better advised; my ambition
being not to appear in publik, but to be publicly useful, and to let the World
know how much I am,

SIR Your great Admirer, and Humble Servant.

A PREMONITION To The READER.
ALthough the ensuing Treatise was designed to be ushered into public view,
without any other Epistle than that Dedicatory to one, who is for no other
witnesses of his eminent Piety then those two, which are more than ten
thousand; yet it is found requisite to advertise those who are willing to make
use of it.

1. As to that part of Preparation which respects Humiliation for sin, Matter
enough for which every one may find there, by examining his manifold breaches
of the Law and Gospel; yet the Communicant in an especial manner is to reflect
upon, and be deeply humbled for his own iniquities, and particular failings
since the foregoing Communion; but no exact example could be given of what
himself is only conscious.

2. For Prayers the Week before, and Morning of the Communion, they refer for
Memorysake to the requisite Graces and Ends in going to the Ordinance.

3. More matter is provided than I doubt will be spent at the time of Receiving
in this Frozen Age, so deviated from the Primitive, when all Christians still
partook of that one Cup; yet those that (notwithstanding all endeavors) have
Memories so unfaithful as they dare not trust, may (for ought I know) by Book
make use of so much of that they judge most pertinent, as the spaces of joining
with the Minister will admit.

4. A Prayer before, and another after the Sacrament, with more particular
directions and meditations for the time of Receiving, is added in this Edition,
to satisfy those who thought them wanting (though the Author did not) in the
first.

5. If any thing be judged unsuitable, because not usual, there is matter enough
besides. They are left to their liberty that are not of my mind.

Some Books printed for Thomas Dring at the White Lion next Chancery Lane end
in Fleetstreet.
Englands Imminent Danger, and only Remedy, faithfully considered and
represented* By an Impartial Hand. Necessary to be read by all people in these
times.

Titles of Honor, by the late famous and learned Antiquary, John Seldom of the
Inner Temple, Esquire The third Edition, with Additions and Amendments by the
Author. Folio.

The History of Romish Treasons and Usurpations, together with a particular
account of many gross Corruptions and Impostures in the Church of Rome, highly
dishonorable and injurious to the Christian Religion: to which is prefixed a
large Preface to the Romanists; by He^. Fowlis, B. D. Folio.

A Relation of a Conference between Bishop Laud and Mr. Fisher the Jesui^^. The
third Edition. Folio.

The Consecration of Places for Gods public Service, Worship, and the
Reverence due unto them: vindicated by The wemys M. A. in (...).

The Devout COMMUNICANT.
Frequent Celebration.
DO this in remembrance of me, is a permission, and an injunction; it is our
Duty as well as our Benefit to re^eive Christ; so not to receive him, both our
^n and misery. It Is more then a command charge of a dying Testator, and
Savior. As the benefit is of infinite merit, so should he acknowledgment be an
Eternal Memo^ial. His death should always live in our ^earts; and we so careful
in doing this, ^^at when he comes again, he may find us (...) doing. Does he
not now thus bespeak ^s? Can the King of Kings take it kindly (...) your hands,
when he has killed the fat^d Calf, furnished his Table, sent forth his
Servants, saying, Behold I have prepared my Supper, come, eat of my Bread, and
drink of my Wine which I have mingled, all things are ready, come unto the
Marriage, and you make light of it, (so mean are your thoughts of his fare and
company) or desire to be excused because you are not dressed, when indeed you
never went about to make you ready? Do you not provoke him to leave you, to let
you go sorrowing to your graves? to say, None of those that were bidden (though
they see the plenty) shall taste (the sweetness, fatness, goodness) of my
Supper; was there ever any so dear, so precious? cost it not the Master of it
his own life to make it? If out of courtesy you invite a poor man to the best
that can be had, and he saucily, ungratefully find fault with your meat, ask
you, why you troubled him to come to so poor Provision, or send word, you have
nothing worth coming for, he can provide for himself, has better at home, and
better company, would you think he deserved the worst bit of it, or another
invitation? it is a sign you value not, you slight Com^ with me: If you loved me
you would ^till ^e seeing, looking upon, desiring to be with me; where I am
wont to walk, to manifest my self, to sit at my Table, to sup with my
Disciples, and never be at rest without a renewed sense of my love unto you;
you are they I live and dye for, for whom I do and suffer so much, of whom I
will always think upon, in whose Thoughts I love to live, and because my
departure is at hand, and I must go away from you, this memorial I leave with
you, to put you always in remembrance, when you see it, think of me who in the
very night I was betrayed, when taking that doleful farewell of an ungrateful
world, was so mindful of your good and comfort, to arm, establish, and refresh
you; and will you neglect, dis-esteem, contemn it? does not the benefit of my
passion without your desert, plead for the constant meditation of it without
your scandal? The frequent, faithful remembrance of what I did and suffered for
you, is my chief request, and your only requital, and yet do you distaste what
I ^mbraced? and endure not to think of what I refused not to endure? loath you
the cup of Salvation, that cost me a cup of Astonishment? Have I left the Glory
of my Father to be clothed with, and dwell in flesh? Led a life of suffering,
undergone a shameful, painful, accursed death, rose again, ascended, prepared
mansions, taken possession for you, where I plead your cause, and will come ere
long to absolve you before all the world, and with whom you shall be for ever?
Have I given such costly evidences of my love unto you, and love you not to do
this in remembrance of me?

Do] But for thee (dear Savior) I had been for ever undone; for thee then and
for thy sake, what is it that I should not do? Thy desires are my Injunctions:
there is Authority enough in thy love to do thy pleasure. Since thou would have
no nature but mine, I will have no will but thine: When once signified by
command, upon my obligation I should, upon my Fealty to thee the King of the
Church, and Sovereign as well as Savior of my Soul, I ought, I may, I must not
dispute, nor delay, I dare not but must Do; else, how must I be looked upon,
when the King commands all his loving Subjects to take the Oath of Allegiance,
and I stay away and refuse? Do I not publicly disown him for my Sovereign, who
has enjoined the Celebration of this, as an evidence and symbol of my Relation
to, and communion with him? Is not this appointed for a memorial of his death,
whereby he delivered his people, and destroyed their enemies; transcendently to
us, what the Passover was to the Jews, and the neglect of it more provoking?
yet, the man that is unclean, and is not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep
the Passover at the time appointed (when he might and ought eat it) even the
same soul shall be cut off from his people, because he brought not the offering
of the Lord in his appointed season, that man shall bear his sin. There Is a
punishment annexed to the neglect, as well as ill performance of it; he that
eats irreverently, is guilty of profaning the Lords Body; and he that eats
not, of despising it, and of preferring his lusts before him; the one eats
damnation to himself, and the other by not eating, judges himself to be in a
damnable State. It Is dangerous staying in that condition wherein we judge our
selves unmeet society for Christ; if I cannot partake of his Supper here, how
can I think my self fit to feast with him in Heaven? or hope to look on his
face with comfort there, and take no pleasure to behold, remember, come near,
have any thing to do with him here? will not his presence be most terrible
then, to whom his memory is no way delightful now? Am I troubled for neglect of
other duties, and not of this, when Christ's Items at the last day are made up
of sins of omission? Dare I pick and choose, when, whosoever shall keep the
whole Law, yet offend in one point, is guilty of all?

This] Not to climb a Cross, or undergo a bitter passion for thy sake; I should
not think much to do that, who have done so much more for me. Not to be had to
a Scaffold, but to come to thy Table; not to go to Slaughter, but a Feast; not
to Bleed or Burn, but to Eat and Drink; and that not Bread of Affliction, or
Water of Adversity, which flags the Spirit; but such Bread and Wine as confirms
and comforts my Heart: Not a Mourners Bread, Tears; or a Martyrs Cup, Blood;
but a Saviors fare, Blessed Wine and Bread, yea in them (what both is and
makes blessed) his body and blood, meat and drink, bread of life, and well of
life, that both joys my heart, and saves my soul. Did thou on the Cross drink
Vinegar, (made infinitely more tart by my sins) for me; and shall not I at thy
Table drink Wine for my self, made infinitely sweeter with the blood it
conveys? Did thou drink a Cup of wrath, and shall not I drink the cup of
Blessing? Eat the bread of affliction, and shall not I eat the bread of life?
suffer thy passion, and shall not I enjoy it? Did thou stretch out thy hands
on the Cross, and shall mine be withered and shrunk toward thy Table? Had
thou bid me do some great thing for procuring so great a good, that there had
been between the service and reward no disproportion, should I not endeavored
to do it? how much more when thou bidst me eat and live? I am not saved but by
thy Body, I shall be damned without thy Blood. Did thou offer them for me on
the Cross, and shall I not take the pledge from thee at thy Supper? Do thou
give me a Title to them, and shall I bar my self of possession? rob my self of
thy mercy, and my right, of no less then the price of my Redemption? Do thou
give me the purchase in thy Blood, and shall I deny my self the Seal in thy
Church? Dare I be guilty of so great a Robbery and Rebellion, to violate thy
will and seal? to steal at once thy Bread and Cup, and Scepter against thy
express Will and Testament? to take the Bread and Cup out of my own hand, and
the Scepter out of thine? to deprive my soul of thy Body and Blood, and thee of
thy Authority? by thy grace I will never but observe as thou appointest: If
this be thy command, O Savior, I am a Rebel as much to my good, as thy Law, a
damned Rebel if I do not this.

In Remembrance] I blush Lord to see my self need thy memento. Have I a room
for the trash of the world, and none for thee? memory for what I list, and none
for what I should? O thou that have so done thy mavelous works that they
ought to be had in everlasting remembrance; whose name is wonderful, and all
thy works as thy name, and this above all thy works, can I ever forget thee?
can I forget my self so much, that breaths not a moment on Earth, or out of
Hell without thee? If I forget thee, O Savior, let my tongue cleave to the
roof of my mouth; If I remember not thee, let my right hand forget her cunning.
Sure that harp had never known the tune of joy, nor hand to do with harp, had
not thou put a world (all out) in order again, and set all in tune. And is that
all, when I owe a thousand lives unto thee, to require, not my Body, but my
Mind? to say, Remember, not to Dye for me, but to forbid thy Memory to Dye in
me? O thou loving and Blessed above all Beloveds, when thy passion is engraven
by thy own hand in an Holy Mystery for my mind to wear, shall not I keep this
memorial? Shall I not wear thy Ring who am so ready to wear a Death's Head to
preserve alive the memory of a dead Friend? O that I may ever keep this Manna
that came down from Heaven, not in a Leaden, but Golden pot; not in a dull,
barren, bareley contemplative, but humble, tender, active, precious memory;
which moves all good affections to thee, and promoves all good abilities for
thee. Such a memory will mind, and do all Duty; admire and love thee, obey,
endure, do, and suffer for thee; establish Faith, excite Repentance, inflame
Love, maintain Constancy. I cannot but repent, believe, and love to the end, if
thou be in my mind: If I fail payment of any duty to thee or man, it is because
I do not remember thee.

Of me] Of my Death, and your redemption by it. This Sacrament then is an
obelisk to the eternal memory of thy passion; so often as I neglect it, what do I
but pull down this Pyramid of everlasting date, set up in the Church for a
solemn memorial of thy death, and bury thee and thy Merits, as the Jews did thy
Body, but in a worser grave, not in a Garden, but Desert, a grave of Oblivion?
Wretch am I, that have need of such an help to my memory, and spur to my Duty,
as both a Command and a Sacrament; it casts reproach on me, O Savior, that
thou should give thy Body for me, and I scarce give my mind to thee; that I
should have so great a room in thy heart, and thou so hardly get any in mine;
that thou should be more ready to bleed for me, then I to think of thee. Dear
Jesus, thou did empty all thy veins for me, shall not I find a vessel to
preserve thy precious Blood? Do I not spill what thou shed, if I let it run out
of my memory? yet art thou put to it, to find me both blood and mind; and when
thou have done all that, out of remembrance of me (lest it should be forgotten)
ordain'st a Sanction and Sacrament, saying, Do this in remembrance of me. But
more wretch I, if I do not so do, for Lord, if I do thee honor, do thou not
do me favor for it? If I give thee glory, is it more my duty then felicity to
do it? If thy Sacrament, is it not my benefit? Receive I not great honor in
it? Reap I not good benefits by it? conveys it not the Blood Royal of Heaven
into me? Am I not related to, Brother of Christ, Heir and Prince of Heaven by
virtue of that Blood? Is not the Godhead bodily in him? and is not this Body
mystically in me, and I near allied to God by the Communion of that Body? And
can he want Demeans that is such a Prince? Is not the Earth thy gift, and
Heaven in thy power? O thou Son and Heir of all! And have I not thy Spirit, thy
flesh to pledge for all, the conveyance sealed in thy Blood, and thy Merits
made over and assured in thy Body? O Lord, I am so much concerned in honor and
estate to do what thou command, that if I consider my self, I shall do it to
thy memory, in remembrance of me, as well as thee.

Wherever God has bestowed a vital principle (Faith, whereby the Just live) he
affords nourishment to sustain it; and an inclination, and attractive faculty
toward it: Christ Crucified is, as the cause of our new birth, so the food
which sustains and preserves us in it, unto whose Body and Blood there must
needs be as proportionable an appetite in a new Christian, as to Milk in an
Infant, that being more nourishable then milk, and Faith more vital to desire
it then Nature. Oh! I know not what (grace and comfort) I have lost, that
others have found in the Conscientious use of this. If there be any thing in
the lively discoveries of the evil and desert of sin, the wrath and love of
God, the cordials of the Gospel by frequenting it, might it not have been much
better with me in my Spiritual condition? is not this great Hypecrisie and
Dissimulation, to complain of the hardness of my heart, and not apply the Blood
of Christ to soften it? of the prevalencie of corruptions, and not bring them
to his Cross to subdue them? of my timorous spirit, and not come where God
secures me, and gives evidence for the discharge of his covenant and promise?
that God is departing, when I stand at a distance, and will not come nigh him?
is withdrawn from my Soul, when I withdraw from my Duty? that I am a stranger
to spiritual joy, when I will not come to draw water out of the wells of
Salvation? of die weakness of grace, and not use of all means of strengthening
it? can I refuse my food, yet be nourished? grow in grace, and neglect the
means? not grow, and be guiltless? live in a known sin by neglecting a plain
commanded Duty, and expect the rewards of obedience? may not partial obedience
to Gods commands well increase my doubts of his favor? Is not this to slight
and disesteem a firm conveyance of all Christ's purchased benefits, here offered
and assured to Believers? and then think not much (Soul) if thou go without
them for ever, who art also so unwilling to bind thy self to thankfulness and
obedience for them. Meals which are for nourishment must be often, it is not
told me how often I should eat or drink, the sense and feeling of the wants of
my food directs me to, makes me do it often. Am I not apt to grow dull,
lukewarm, cold to, and in duty? to contract guilt, blot my evidences, disturb
my peace, to forget him and his matchless love? Is he so much in my serious
thoughts as he deserves? Is it enough to have some accasional thoughts of him?
Do I not complain that I love, and think of him no more, can apply him no
better, have so little of him, am so insenble of his kindness, and affection to
his members? Is it not a sin and shame I no more solemnly dwell in meditation
upon him, am no more in praising of, rejoicing in him? Do I not often need so
great an help to soften my heart, to renew my repentance, to strengthen and
confirm my Faith, Hope, and Resolutions; to increase, inflame my love, and
thankfulness, fix my thoughts more solemnly upon him, apply him, get and
maintain more intimate communion with him, closer knit my soul to him and his
members? Is it not a sad sign I perform no Duties, as, and to those ends I
ought, but out of custom, without expecting, therefore without finding any
great advantage from them? Are the consolations of God small unto me? is it not
a sign when I was there I missed of the benefit? Have I not cause to repent of
my former receiving, when it left not earnest breathings for the like
opportunity? was it possible for me to meet with God, to taste the sweetness,
the fullness of Christ, to experience the reachings forth of my love and
desires, the pleasures of acting grace, and not long for another meeting? By
thy grace I will therefore communicate with more devotion; repent with greater
contrition, walk with more caution, pray more earnestly, receive with more
reverence, and I doubt not but I shall find my affections increase together
with the Spiritual benefit. The frequent solemn exercise of our graces must
needs dispose strongly to Habitual ones; and hugely promote the Interest of
Religion. It cannot be that the Sacrament be undervalued by frequent
repetitions, without great unworthiness of the person (setting light by and
loathing spiritual Manna) and an unworthy Communication: for he that receives
worthily, increases in the love of God and of Religion, and the fires of the
Altar are apt to kindle into a flame, and when our Lord enters into us, and we
grow weary of him, or less fond of his frequent entrance and perpetual
cohabitation, it is an infallible sign we have (or are ready to) let in his
Enemy; no Secular object has any pleasure in it, long beyond the hope of it;
for the possession and enjoyment is found so empty, that we grow weary of it;
but whatsoever is spiritual, is less before we have it, but in the fruition
swells our desires, enlarges the Appetite, and makes us more receptive and
forward in the Entertainment. Nor is it likely they will suffer for, who refuse
to banquet with him. They proclaim they have no portion in David no inheritance
in the Son of God. Oh he qualms of undesirous Communicants should justly stir
up the faithful to loath it in themselves.

Habitual Preparation
THe death of Christ, in regard of his intent, was a Sacrifice to God, but of
the Jews the greatest cruelty and murder. When a profane person comes, he
sheds the blood of Christ, which a Believer receives; and by Faith feeding on
it, being one with Christ, makes as great satisfaction to God, as if he had
suffered to Eternity. This new wine must not be put into an old vessel; else
the wine will be spilt and the vessel perish. Christ and Belial cannot cohabit;
he will not enter through a besmeared door, nor dwell in a nasty house; Feet
that walk in filthy paths are not to tread his holy place; nor a heart full of
rancour, hatred, uncharitableness, to sit down at this feast of love; Hands
dipped in blood, polluted with unlawful gains, stained with spots of the flesh,
or stretched out to injure him in his members, are most unfit to be reached
forth to receive him in the Sacraments, to handle those holy mysteries: Those
Teeth that grind the face of the poor, to eat the bread of Angels; the Mouth
that is full of rotten, corrupt communication, evil speaking, reviling, or that
thirsts after the blood of our neighbor, to drink the Blood of Christ; Eyes
gazing on vanity, to look on Jesus. Oh, how pure ought I to keep those doors of
my Soul, at which the King of Glory so often enters? Shall I kiss his hand with
filthy lips? put hallowed bread and wine into a noysom sink? go to that Table
as Swine to their trough, in my pollution? ravish, contemn the grace and mercy
of God? tear them asunder from the conditions he has annexed to them? He will
not be one with an Harlot; nor seen with the same eyes. His Body never saw
Corruption, nor will be mixed with it: It lay in a Virgin Womb and Sepulcher,
and still resides only in Virgin Souls, Devoted, Consecrated, set apart to his
use and service. His glorified body is no more capable of dishonor, nor will
enter into an earthly soul. Unclean birds receive nothing* but the Carcass of
the Ordinance; the Bread without the Body, the Wine without the Blood; both
without the blessing; the Elements, but not the Sacraments; such are guilty of
his Body and Blood, for reaching out their hand with purpose to receive him
into a polluted soul, though he withdraw himself that they cannot partake of
him: They disgrace their Prince, by showing it to his Statue erected for his
honor and remembrance; are guilty of Treason by offering Indignity to his Seal
and Picture; dishonor done to the Image and representation, reflects upon the
Original; he is personally in Heaven, and will be no where Sacramentally but in
the Heavenly part of man; he finds no rest in a heart full of vain, vicious
thoughts; it stinks like the lake of Sodom; he retires thence vexed with the
unclean Conversation of the impure Inhabitants. When he approaches to a soul,
and finds it a Cage of unclean Birds, he flies with the wings of a Dove to
cleaner and whiter Habitations. But if we avoid, hate, and have no fondness of
affection for them; and with complacency entertain the contrary, then Christ
has washed our feet, and then he invites us to his Supper. The unavoidable
infirmities of our lives, against which we daily strive, and for which we never
have any kindness or affection, are not spots in these feasts of Charity, but
instruments of Humility, and stronger invitations to come to Rites ordained for
corroboratives against infirmities, and for growth in the inner man. But
remanent affection to a sin, enmity with neighbors, secular avocations to the
height of care and trouble, excuse not, but increase men's sin, and secure their
misery It Is just they graze with Goats, that refuse to wash their hands that
they may come to the Supper of the Lamb. The excuses wherewith they palliate
their neglects of waiting upon our Lord, and accepting his kindness, all grow
upon this bitter root of an unholy careless life, loving the world and the
lusts thereof: the only reason is, they have a mind to live as strangers to
him, and not to be his household servants and domestics, for then they might
always come unto him. They think they must not come so often, because to prepare
themselves costs them so much time; but would they spare so much, as to lead a
holy life, and be at so much trouble as to please God in other things, they
would not find it so laborious to please him in this. Kept they always a fear
of God in their Souls, they would without much pains be fit to approach with
fear and reverence into his presence; would they fear to do what God has
forbidden, they would not fear to do what he has commanded: but while they
refuse to obey him in one thing, no wonder they do in another. Religion
concerns not our actions only, but the frame and disposition of our hearts and
minds; and the same habitual graces are to be daily exercised, though in a
lower measure and degree. Every day is to be holy to the Lord, though every
action in the day be not equally holy. When we labor conscienciously to stand
to our first Promise and Covenant, all the actions of our lives become holy;
and so we are holy in our Shop, by diligence and justice; at our Board, by
temperance, thankfulness, charity; Abroad, by an innocent, useful conversation;
in our Closet, by Prayer, and Meditation; yea, prudence, and the ends of health
and cheerfulness will make our sleeps and recreations holy, and not to be
reckoned among pastimes, but the necessary seasons of doing little or nothing,
that afterward we may be worthily employed. A Christian behaves himself not
for such a set number of days, as if so much time were to be spent in Holiness,
and so much in sin; but as if he accounted his whole life an opportunity of
serving God, and of cleansing himself from all that filthiness, which will not
let him see his face. He receives daily what daily profits, and so lives that
he may daily receive it. A Holy Life is a perpetual Sacrifice, and he that so
lives, keeps his heart as an Holy Altar, always warm and glowing within him;
he offers up daily such Sacrifices as are acceptable to God, and prepare him
for a due commemoration of this great Sacrifice; a constant abstinence from all
forbidden things, and care to perform such duties as maintain a lively sense of
God in our Souls, would make us vehemently hunger after this Heavenly Food. A
circumspect life makes us both fit and desirous to converse with God every day;
good Actions beget in us greater longings after grace, and good desires make us
still do well, out of hope to have more grace; when a good man lifts up his
heart to God, he draws down God into his Soul, that he may work with his hands
that which is good in his employment, in which he is not so busy that his
hands should grow so heavy, or dirty by it, as to be unwilling or unfit to lift
them up again to God. Such a Combination is there between all that God requires
to make them easy and familiar, pleasant and desirable, and our obedience
impartial and universal. A holy behavior in our calling, converses, and use of
the creature, disposes us to Acts of immediate worship, that requites and
returns the kindness by disposing and fitting us for a holy deportment for the
future, which is it self an invitation of God to our souls; much more when
seconded with the Attractives of Holy Prayers and affectionate desires. The
sweetness of such converses with God, and the power of his Grace consequent
upon our hearty desires, engages and enables us to a holy conversation, which
brings us (from familiarity with the Devil) to fellowship with God, the
happiness of which is so great, that it excites us to do all we can to maintain
and prevent our being tempted from it. Good Hearts daily mortified, and
strictly watched over, like dry wood, with one blast kindle the flame of love,
stir up the Grace of God in them; while those soaking in the world, like green
sticks, all their puffing, blowing, and prayers will scarce fetch any fire. Oh!
would I every day prepare for the day of death; or (which is of a like
consideration) the day of Communion, (nothing less will sit me to Communicate
then to depart hence;) set my self in order, meditate often every day on
Christ's first and second coming; not stay a minute, but instantly grieve for,
severely condemn my self, and renew my resolution to amend all, and pray for
particular strength against whatsoever I have observed amiss: would I consider
where I fall oftenest, from what principle this default comes, what are the
best remedies, and pass on to a real and vigorous use of them. Did I resolve to
have God frequently in my thoughts, to bring it to pass to have so great a
dread and reverence of him, that I may be more reallie ashamed, troubled,
confounded, to sin in his presence and observation, then of the severest man's;
and to have a perpetual intercourse and converse with him: Or would I actually
attend to what I do, and consider every action, and speak so little that I
might consider it; I should find, that upon the day of Communion I should have
nothing to do, but to Revive my Graces ^y Prayer, Praises, and the exercise of
^evotion.

Actual Preparation.
HOliness is our profession; and all the time after one Communion is the ^^me
of preparation for the next; and every Receiving a repeated conspiracy against
the Interest of the Devil. He that is ^lways well vested, will deck and trim
against a Wedding day; wise Virgins ^o forth to meet him, having Oil in their
Vessels and their Lamps burning; ^ut when they hear the Bridegroom's ^oming,
they arise and fall afresh to ^imming their Lamps, to snuff them, ^^ir up the
fire, and apply the Oil to ^^ake them burn brighter and clearer. ^^ow another
repast approaches, I must ^eny my self lawful things; sequester ^^om my
ordinary business; abstain from ^^e most lawful enjoyments and chastest
^mbraces, that I may give my self unto ^^ayer; and more fully know the state of
my Soul; with a greater intention an^ ardency of spirit examine my self eve^
about the coldness of my Prayers; (...) neglects in the daily review of my self
the smalness of my sorrows; the weakness of my services; my daily neglects
ignorances and unavoidable infirmities a^ to God, my self, relations, and
others; i^ an especial manner, any failing since the last Communion. If there
be but a little passion, a rash word, a vain thought, etc and besides my sorrow
and afflicting m^ self for, hatred and amendment of it just after its
commission; I am now t^ bewail it over again, to call my self t^ a strict
account for it, to drown it i^ another flood of tears, more firmly t^
strengthen my resolutions against it, an^ prepare it to receive another wound,
(...) mortal stroke from the wounds of Jesus that it may never live more; more
deeply apprehensive of the evil of sin, more sorrowfully bewail it, more
rationall^ resolve against it, open a greater vent an^ passage for my tears;
affect my hea^ more deeply with my needs, and the certainty of supply, and so
raise my self to (...) greater height of humility, desire and confidence; to
excite my appetite and more lively apprehensions, and vigorous affections,
rouse my thoughts, and meditations to a greater fervor; more solemnly to
recollect what I have learned, to stir up my remembrance, and renew a sense of
my wants and weaknesses; to imprint the ends of the Institution more firmly in
my memory, to consider what Acts are most proper when I shall be at his Table;
to stir up those affections beforehand, which will prepare a more lively
expression of them when I come there. To renew acts of Charity and forgiveness,
pass by all injuries and offenses, be reconciled perfectly to my brethren, and
to take care there be not the least grudge, or spark of anger that lies buried
in my Soul unquenched; all passions hushed and laid, the Soul smooth, fair, and
not a wrinkle upon its brow. More strictly and solemnly to search, purify,
cleanse, and cast out all the leaven; to pray with greater appetite, praise his
Name with a more delightful relish. To distaste all oher things, to disburthen
my self, to lay aside every weight, and the sin that so easily besets me, to
get as near Heaven as possible; to render my mind more sensible of God, and
more fit to receive a deeper impression from his hand. To excite the strongest
acts of Faith, the vehementest flames of love and longings after Christ and his
blessings, (which prepares for the enjoyment) Holy desires, joy, and
thankfulness at the approach of so blessed an opportunity. To renew my
resolutions and vows of holy obedience, to mortify my lesser irregularities,
and to bind the obligations faster that are upon my Soul. To have a lively
sense of the ends for which I go; in what estate my Graces stand; what I am to
ask; and for what I ought to plead the Blood of Christ; voluntarily to offer
more of my time and thoughts to Religious Exercises, and to do that over again
with a greater fervor, which I have been doing since the last Communion. To
recover my self to the same, or rather higher degrees of Zeal, fervor, and
sublime admirations; to apparel, trim, and dress up my mind with braver notions
and brighter ornaments. To get my manners, carriage, and behavior, rightly
formed, and handsomely composed, for this Feast with die great King.

He that understands the excellency and holiness of the mystery, the glory of
the Guest, the infinite benefit then designed, and the increase of degrees by
the exercise of those previous acts of Holiness the manner so contrary, as
worthy and unworthy; the effect of the Ordinance so much depending on the
manner of receiving; the advantage so great of Communion with Christ's Body;
the danger no less then Damnation; that it will set one forward, and contribute
very much to an happy or an unhappie eternity (a man cannot at all be
supposed in any state, wherein this thing will be indifferent to him) will not
be inquisitive, into the just measure, but do it heartily, devoutlie,
reverentlie, and as much as he can, put himself in to a meet disposition tobe
so familiar with God.

Solemn Sequestration.
A Journey, an unfixed Heart, undischarg'd of earthly thoughts, traveling up
and down afar off unfits as well as a dead body, or gross sins. Earthly
thoughts in the Temple, if not driven away before, will be buzzing, pestring,
vexing me, and corrupt the Sacrifice. If I go with a loose, ungirt spirit, I
cannot instantly entertain my Lord; his work must stay until I be ready; I
must be girding when I should be working, or do it fumblingly, and awakedly,
not with dexterity and activity. Let your loins therefore be girt, and you your
selves like men that wait for their Lord, that when he comes and knocks, you
may open to him immediately. It concerns me now to put my self into that order
and state of good things, as if to morrow I were to dye; to suppose my self
seated before Gods Tribunal, and to see whether I can reasonably hope my state
is changed, my sins pardoned, and mortified, to consider, that unless I dare
dye that day if God should call me, there is little reason I should dare to
receive the Sacrament of ^ife, or Minister of death. If I be mistaken about the
truth of Grace now, I am undone for ever, without true Repentance; by my
unworthy going, I bind the guilt of all my other sins upon my Soul, and add
this to all the rest, guiltiness of the blood of Christ. He that communicates
worthily, is justified from his sins; and to him death can have no sting to
whom the Sacrament brings life and health. And if I judge Righteous Judgment,
I shall soon find what pinches most, what makes me most afraid, what most
criminal and least mortified; so shall learn to make provision accordingly.
Enter then my Soul into thy chamber, solemnly sequester thy self from all other
Avocations, that we may tend upon the Lord without distraction. Shut up, set a
watch at the gates of thy heart; let it not be open till that solemn day be
over; If other thoughts be hankering, and hanging about for entrance, testify
against them, rebuke, and threaten them, let thy spirit in a holy indignation
rise up against them; the only means that from that time forth they come no
more in such a season. Farewell my Wife, and Children, Friends, and secular
concerns; abide you here at the foot of the Mount; be hushed and laid, deadned,
and mortified, all irregular earthly passions, and affections. I have something
else to do, you are a clog unto my soul; tread not, nor whisper in this solemn
place, where is no room but for God alone; trouble me not, the door is now
shut, I am about a great work I will not, cannot open to you.

And Oh thou that look from Heaven, that fashionest the hearts of men, and
considerest all their works; enlighten, enliven, and convince me; affect,
assist, and prosper me; own, accept, and bless me; call in; and restrain the
looseness, and wanderings of my thoughts. Fix, unite, and fill my heart with an
awe, a dread, and reverence of thee; with suitable thoughts, apprehensions, and
meditations to the present occasion; and let my meditations be attended with
suitable affections. Let all flesh be silent before thee; let thy spirit rest
upon me; let this season be improved, not carelessly, sloathfully, or
negligently; but sincerely, and uprightly, with my whole soul, heart and
strength; to thy praise, and my great advantage at thy Table, and in the day
when thou shall judge the secrets of men's hearts by Jesus Christ.

Strict examination.
I Am about to sit at the Lords Table, among his own Children; I know
beforehand, the King (attended with his glorious Angels) will come in to see
his guests; Christ's garment, covers only Christ's members; he is too just to
be bribed, too great to be slighted, too wise to be deceived, too jealous to be
provoked, too good to be forfeited. Oh what solemn provision shall I make for
so sacred a presence, but a serious, diligent, deep enquiry into, with a full
and awful discussion of the particular present estate of my Soul, whether I be
such as may be assured he will bid me welcome; being reconciled to him, and
endued with those vital qualifications which pre-dispose me for an Ordinance
that supposes me within the Covenant it seals, and to have spiritual life it
sustains and nourishes, by conveying that true food of life Christ Crucified. I
must be born before I can eat; Uncircumcised persons were not to eat the
Passover. The inward of Ordinances are only enjoyed by them that are inwardly
Christians. Those only that bring true Graces, receive real Comforts; we take
Christ; and then eat him; none find any nourishment, relish, or sweetness in
his blood, but those who have received him, and so have a propriety in, a
little to him (and the nearer the Interest, the greater sweetness). He must be
mine first in claim and title, then in fruition and comfort; no juice or sap
from the Vine, except a branch in it; no grace is there improved, but what I
have along with me I must prove my right to the purchase, ere I can take
possession. It Is high Treason to annex the Kings Broad Seal to forged Writings;
no receiving the benefit, without showing the condition, and my interest in the
Covenant; that is sealed to them only that come up to the terms of it. Now, this
is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel,

^aith the Lord, I will put Jer. 31.31, etc.
my Law in their inward Heb. 8.10, etc.
parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God and they shall be
my people; and they shall know me from the least unto the greatest, and I will
forgive their iniquities, and remember their sins no more. And Oh my Soul! have
I an inward right, an actual interest in this Covenant?

Is the Law of God writ in my Heart? A permanent (that no Time, Temptation,
Tribulation, can obliterate) universal counterpane, answerable conformity,
legible by others in my Conversation, and by my self in my Constitution of Soul
strongly inclined, disposed and persuaded to all cordial, sincere, entire,
cheerful, spiritual obedience, out of a principle of love to God, and to
glorify and enjoy him: delighting, meditating in it day and nights; being
renewed according to his Image, in Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness.

Have I a Covenant Relation to, and Interest in God? Am I one of his people by
[Federal profession,] not ashamed of, but openly declaring and avouching my
self to be his, rejoicing, and glorying therein as my great privilege and
happiness? [In all Covenant-Relations to God and Christ?] Do I fear, love,
obey, submit to, depend upon him for direction, provision and protection; am I
wholly at his dispose, as my only, wise, faithful, loving [Father?] Do I
forsake all other Corrivals and Competitors? cleave only to him in all conjugal
love and faithfulness? Do I delight in, am I unsatisfied without his presence
as my [Husband?] Do I purify, and keep clean his Temple? demean my self
toward him as my [Inhabitant?] Esteem, live upon, and rest fully contented
with him as my [portion?] Am I his by [Federal Appropriation?] not sin's,
Satan's, the World's, my own; but entirely his [In all I am] Body and Soul? are
my Eyes his, to behold his wonderful works? my Ears to hear his Heavenly saving
Word? my taste and smell his to relish his surpassing sweetness in the
Creatures? my Tongue to proclaim and Triumph in his praise? my Hands to work
that which is good? my Feet to walk in his ways? all my senses and members,
abilities, and faculties, instruments of righteousness? Is my understanding
his, to know, discern, contemplate upon him? my Memory to treasure up, and
retain his councels, and covenants, promises, and dispensations? my Conscience
his Deputy to accuse, or excuse under him; my Will his, to will, or nill in
subordination to him? my grief, hatred, and detestation, to mourn for, abhor,
and fly every thing offensive to him, or obstructive of my delightful
enjoyment of him? my desire, love and delight his, to long for, embrace,
acquiesce fully and contentedly in him? Am I his, in all I have? Do I approve
my self his in all my relations and stations, inward qualifications and
endowments, outward goods and possessions? In all I can do or procure, undergo
or endure for him? Am I willing and ready to give my self to and for him?
taking up my Cross daily and following him? rejoicing I am accounted worthy to
suffer for his name?

Have I a sanctified knowledge of God? as to his Essence, Attributes, Personal
distinctions, Word, and Works? of Man in his Creation, Corruption,
Restoration, and Perfection? of Christ in his person, Offices, Estates? of the
Covenant of Grace and the Lords Supper, in its efficient, material, formal, and
final cause? And is this my Knowledge experimental, heart purifying, and
humbling, communicative, growing, affectionate, efficatious, and obediential?

Are mine iniquities forgiven and forgotten by God? Do I groan under them as my
greatest evil and heaviest burden? forsake them in affection and commission?
Have I sincerely confessed, bewailed, loathed them, and my self for them?
unfeignedly striving against, and desiring to be freed from the filth, power
and dominion, as well as the guilt, and punishment of sin; from a love and
sense of Gods kindness, and goodness to me? Is my heart calmed and quieted
through Faith in Christ, being thereby at peace with God? enlarged to bless him
for pardon? Am I earnest with him more and more for assurance of it, purity of
heart, establishment in his ways? Is there in me a hearty, sincere disposition,
inclination, and propensity to pardon the offenses of others? pitying, and
lamenting, meekly reproving, proving, and covering their infirmities: a
readiness to help them rejoicing in their welfare as my own, especially the
demeanest Saints, in whom is all my light?

Christ is not to be received of all comers, John. 1.12.
nor entertained by every guest, Can. 3.4.
nor touched by every hand, Mat. 9.21.22.
nor found by every enquiry. Can. 5.6.
He is offered in the Gospel to all, but gives himself here, and is received by
such alone as have, and have I a spiritual hunger and thirst after him? Mat.
5.6.
An ear to hear him Mat. 13.9.
An eye to see him, 1 Cor. 11.29.
A foot to come to him Mat. 11.28.
A hand to take him, 1 Cor. 11.24.
Arms to embrace him; Can. 3.4.
A mouth and taste, to eat and drink, relish and digest him, Can. 2.3. Mat.
26.26.
A breast to retain him. Ephesians. 3.17.
Bowels of affection toward him and his members? A Heart to mourn for my
piercing of him? to be truly thankful for, and above all to prize him?

Are not these Infallible Scriptural Characters of Christ's Disciples? Can I
appeal to God and say, Lord thou know all things, thou know it is thus
with me? or, am I willing to venture my eternal condition, my last gasp upon my
present hopes? Have I a solid ground of confidence, when I shall appear naked
before Gods Bar, when the secrets of hearts shall be manifest? will these pleas
find acceptance in that day, when all the world must be saved, or damned by
him? Oh my Soul! make nothing the foundation of thy peace, but what God has
made the condition of thy Salvation; let nothing satisfy us now, but what will
save us then; for if our hearts condemn us, God is greater then our hearts, and
knows all things: but if our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God.

Deep Humiliation.
BEfore I go for a full discharge, I must narrowly look into the Book of my
Conscience, cast up my accounts, and see how infinitely I am indebted to my
God; view my self in the glass of his Law and Gospel: Search my Soul so to the
bottom, that none of my wounds may fester, but be all discovered and cured:
consider from whence I am fallen, before and since the last Communion, and
repent: and O that I may be so sensible of my sin and misery, that I may be
truly apprehensive of, and thankful for infinite love and mercy.

I dare not presume to compass thine Altar, most holy Lord, before I have
washed my hands in Innocence, and purified my heart by Repentance, and Faith in
the blood of my Redeemer. I will now therefore call my sins to remembrance, and
set them in order before mine eyes and remember mine own evil ways, and my
doings which have not been good, and loath my self in my own sight for my
iniquities, and for my abominations.

O I am not able to reckon up or remember my innumerable breaches of thy most
holy Commandments. The

1. By not knowing, acknowledging, thinking, remembering, choosing, believing,
esteeming, adoring, loving, desiring, fearing, obeying of, trusting, joying in,
acquainting my self with, not demeaning my self toward thee as God, and my
God: but preferring sin, self, Satan, the world, any thing before thy self. The

2. By mis-apprehensions, gross conceits of thee, not setting my whole delight
in, reposing all my confidence on, expecting all my happiness from, addressing
all my complaints, prayers, praises unto thee, not worshipping thee as to
manner and means agreeable to thy word. The

3. By not acknowledging, or effectually remembering and delighting to speak of
thee as I have had occasion, to make thy praise glorious, or doing it
irreverently, dealing falsely in my Covenant with thee; not vindicating thy
Honor, not grieving for thy Dishonor; weariness of thy commands,
non-observance, distrust, misapplication of thy providence; unthankfulness for
great mercies; dejection, impatience under small crosses; insensibleness,
incorrigibleness under judgments and afflictions, not using thy Name,
Attributes, Ordinances, Works, every thing whereby thou may be known, as is
required. The

4. By unmindfulness beforehand to prevent or avoid whatsoever might distract
in the duties of the Sabbath; not preparing my self, not resting from needless
thoughts, words, actions; mis-spending it in idleness and vanity, not
performing public and private duties of Prayer, Reading, Hearing, Examination,
wheting thy Law upon my heart and others, contemplating thy Word and Works with
that care, reverence, sincerity, spirtualness, profit, delight, as I ought; not
calling the Sabbath a Delight, Holy of the Lord, Honorable. The

5. By not behaving my self answerable to my several Relations; with all due
reverence and respect to my Natural, Ecclesiastical, Political Parents, in
heart, word, behavior, prayer, thanksgiving for Superiors, covering their
infirmities in love: not admonishing and encouraging Inferiors in well-doing;
not by a grave wise, holy, exemplary carriage, procuring glory to thee, and
preserving the honor and authority thou have put upon me, not regarding the
dignity and worth of my Equals, or rejoicing in their gifts, advancement,
prosperity, as my own. The

6. By sinful anger, hatred, secret grudges, injurious thoughts, excessive
passions, distracting cares, immoderate use of diet, labor, rest, recreation;
reviling, saddening, provoking, grieving speeches? falling short in maintaining
mutual Friendship, and in following peace with all men, sowing discord among
Brethren, concealing their dangers, unprofitable conversation, quenching,
suppressing holy suggestions, preferring things of time before eternity; or, by
whatsoever may tend, not to the health but prejudice of my own or others Soul
or Bodies; not weeping with them that weep, being senseless, hard-hearted,
unaffected at public evils and others miseries. The

7. By unchaste thoughts purposes, affections, looks, company, words, actions,
or listening to them; not laboring to quench my fleshly concupisence, by
watching over my senses, heart, and ways; not shunning all occasions to, or
acts of uncleanness, in or with my self or others: not keeping my body and
soul from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, but making my heart a cage of
impure thoughts, my mind a stie of the unclean spirit. The

8. By unbecoming arts in Bargaining, not dealing with others as I would men
should with me: not endeavoring by all just means to procure, preserve, and
further the welfare of others as well as my own: withholding good from them to
whom it was due: suffering Christ to stand at, and go away from my door,
hungry, cold, naked, succourless, and when the leanness of his cheeks pleaded
pity, the hardness of my heart would show no compassion. The

9. By slandering, backbiting, detracting, reviling, harsh, flattering,
misconstruing, discouraging, sinister intentions, words and actions: listening
to, and spreading the faults of others, not charitable in my thoughts and
speeches to them, not freely acknowledging their gifts and graces; not readily
receiving a good report, but willingly admitting an evil one; not discouraging
tale-bearers, flatterers, slanderers; not loving, desiring, rejoicing in,
caring for, defending and upholding their good name not sorrowing for, and
covering their infirmities; but practicing, or not avoiding my self, or not
hindering what I can in others, such things as raise jealousies and suspicions,
procure an ill name to my self or others. The

10. By self-love, evil thoughts, covetousness, inordinate prizing, and
affecting, distrustful, distracting, solicitous care and study in getting,
keeping or using temporal things; discontent with my own estate, envying and
grieving at my neighbors; unlawful motions and affections to things that are
his.

And to these I have added multitudes of sins against the Gospel, by not as I
ought laboring to acquaint my self with it. Ignorance, flighting of, not
sufficiently esteeming, admiring, thankful for that infinite love in my
Redemption; not loving, rejoicing in Christ and him Crucified, relying on, and
owning of him in all his Offices, accounting all things loss and dung for him;
not taking that pains I ought to know him, and the power of his resurrection,
and the fellowship of his sufferings, and to be made conformable to his death;
if by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead, and be made
perfect as my Father in Heaven is perfect. Not claiming his promises as my
heritage, nor esteeming them the joy of my heart, and as unsearchable riches,
exceeding great and precious; not believing, prizing, embracing of, hoping,
waiting for the good of them, with so much readiness and steadfastness as their
excelcellency and certainty requires; and applying them as I ought to this and
the next life; not careful they have their due effects on my Soul, in making me
partaker of the divine nature; not dying daily to sin nor acting, and growing
in grace, and in the knowledge of Christ: not thirsting after righteousness,
and that poor, mournful, meek, merciful, pure Spirit that shall be blessed; not
confessing but being ashamed of Christ before men, and my relation to him; not
denying my self, taking up my Cross and following him. Not doing all things to
the glory of God, nor rejoicing in him always. Not receiving, not doing the
good, nor improving time, mercies, judgments, foreign perturbations, national
discontents and divisions, irreligious confusions, domestic distinguishing
favors, as I ought. Strangeness, niggardliness unto, inconsiderateness of the
worth, fearlesness of the loss of my precious Soul; caring more for the Body
then it or others; not troubled for such as are negligent, poisoners, murderers
of theirs. Not sufficiently convinced of, humbled for, the corruption of my
nature, mind, conscience, will, affections; of the evil of sin, and lying under
the wrath of God, hiding, excusing, lessening of, not making that narrow search
after, not being grieved for my sins in any proportion to their multitude and
greatness; as considering that wretched injustice, folly, and unkindness I
have expressed by them, loving darkness, hating the light; receiving the grace
of God in vain, turning it into wantonness crucifying the Son of God afresh,
tempting, grieving the Holy Spirit; hardly forsaking my beloved sin for thy
sake, who have freely given thy only Sow for mine: That carefulness, that
clearing of my self, that indignation, that fear, that vehement desire, that
zele, that revenge, that watchfulness, resolving, striving against sin,
improving all advantages for avoiding and subduing it, I find not that is
wrought in those who sarrow after a godly sort: nor applying my self with all
earnestness to the only means of pardon end reconciliation in the Gospel.

Time and strength would fail me to repeat how often I am partaker of Family,
National, Church, other men's sins; by setting an ill example, provoking,
consenting to, conniving at, countenancing, permitting sin where I might
correct or hinder it; hating my brother in my heart ^y suffering sin upon him.
Delightful society with evil doers, taking pleasure in the cause of my
humiliation, to see them pave their way to Hell with their own ^ands; making
that matter of sport, which nothing but the dearest drop of the hearts blood of
God could expiate; laughing ^^t that which makes damned souls shed ^ivers of
tears: they shall be damned that ^ave pleasure in unrighteousness. By not
^eeking the things of Christ as my own, not preferring Jerusalem above my chie^
joy, not having the care of the Church lying upon me. My heart trembles no^ for
fear of the Ark; nor is my soul vexe^ from day to day with their unlawfu^ deeds
among whom I live. Oh how little do I mourn for the suffering of others for the
signs of Gods anger, for the sins (...) the times! when do I go apart and moun^
for Englands crying abominations, or loo^ upon London, a sinful City, and weep
ov^^ it?

And oh the infirmities, imperfection iniquities of my holy things! Oh ho^ much
carelessness, unpreparedness, impenitency, unbelief, pride, hypocrisy, u^
spiritualness, earthliness, formalitie, slightness, deadness, heartlesness,
distraction indisposition, weariness, want of relish attends my attendance on
so great a Majesty! Unanswerable walking, resting (...) the mere outside of
duty, when I do not e^joy Communion with thee in them!

And dare such a guilty abominable s^ner sit down with thee at thy table? such
Dog that has so often returned to his w^mit, go and take that which is so holy
such a Swine wallowing in the mire, ha^ to do with those precious pearls? that
has already so often trampled them under my feet, carelessly neglecting, or
unworthily receiving those holy mysteries, rather defying them then adoring
thee, by bringing such troops of my Saviors professed Enemies (unrepented
sins) along with me, as if I came not to commemorate, but to renew his Passion,
to crucify him afresh. Oh I have much reason to fear I am guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord, by earing and drinking unworthily; in that I have not
hungered, and thirsted after nor partaken of it so often as my necessities, and
opportunities required; nor approached it with such a solemn Preparation,
Examination, Humiliation, and cleansing the secrets of my heart from all sin;
nor renewed the Covenant-Conditions, Faith and Repentance; nor received it with
that reverent behavior, and those inward dispositions; nor been so especially
careful in making, good my Covenant Engagements, and Resolutions, as becomes a
worthy Communicant. Oh how can such a loathsome wretch go to be entertained by
thee in so near a Communion, that cannot expect, that am below the least good
look from thy gracious eye? Oh how dare such a vile miscreant presume to drink
of the Cup of Blessing, who have deserved such a curse from thy hand, as that
thou should hurry me to thy Bar of Justice, and not admit me to the Seals of
the Covenant of Grace: to be covered with shame and confusion of face, while
thy Children come with boldness and present themselves before thee, arrayed in
the righteousness of thy Son; whilst they are lifting up their heads with joy,
knowing the time of celebrating their Redemption draws nigh; I may be hiding
my self in the Dens and Rocks of the Mountains, saying, fall on me and hide me
from the face of him that sits upon the Throne. Dragged away by cursed Fiends
to the place of Torment, with hideous scrieks to an innumerable company of
Devils and Damned Souls; instead of going to the house of God, the assembly of
his people, with the voice of joy and gladness, with a multitude that keep holy
day. While the Sun of Righteousness arises with healing in his wings unto those
that fear thy name; thy wrath may burn against me as fire, and consume me as
stubble. The day of joy and gladness, feasting and rejoicing, sacrifice and
atonement to thy sincere servants, may be a day of wrath and trouble, darkness
and gloominess, distress and desolation to me: while they with joy of heart are
saying, come let us go unto the house of the Lord, oh our feet shall stand
within thy Gates, O Sion, thy Courts, O God! I, the great day of his wrath is
come, and who shall be able to stand? In stead of holding out to me the golden
Scepter, thou might break me with a Rod of Iron, and dash me in pieces like
a Potter's vessel; while they are rejoicing and giving honor to thee at the
Supper, I might lie under the wrath of the Lamb, lifting up mine eyes in Hell,
begging a drop of water to cool my tongue. I might see them sit down with the
King at his table, and my self thrust out into that place where is nothing but
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Thou art ready to entertain those
that are bidden, but I am not worthy; for making light of thy provision and
invitation, preferring the things of the world before it, thou may justly
say, I shall never taste of thy Supper; or, if I go, it might be not for the
better, but for the worse; I might meet with a frown instead of a smile; a
blow, a breach, a curse, instead of a blessing. Thou may in stead of bread
give me a stone, for the Cup of the New Testment a Cup of wrath and Trembling.
Thou may turn my heart into a stone, instead of turing my heart of stone into
an heart of flesh. The bread of life may be to me a stone of stumbling, and a
rock of offense to fall on me and grind me to powder. For my going aside from
thee, and defiling my self: the wine that comforts and makes worthy Receivers
fruitful in grace, may be unto me as the water of Jealousy, bitter within my
bowels, causing my belly to swell, and my thigh to rot; nd I may be a curse
among the people. His blood might be laid to my charge for my condemnation,
sealing up all my other fins; instead of being sprinkled upon my Conscience, to
humble me for, and cleanse me from all sin.

Behold I am vile, viler then the earth but look upon me in thy Son, and thou will love me, and be well pleased with me; mine only hope is in that grace and
mercy made known in and through him: I have broken thy commands, but he has
fulfilled them; affronted thy Justice, but he has satisfied it; deserved thy
wrath, but he has endured it; the chastisement of my peace was upon him, let
the merit of his righteousness be upon me, and by his stripes let me be healed.
His Blood is my only refuge, oh let it be my Atonement, or I perish
eternally. Wherefore did thou shed it, but to save sinners? Remember not what
I have done against thee, but what he has done and suffered for me. Oh when I
consider thy greatness and my unworthiness, thy purity and my uncleanness, thy
glory and my shame, I am confounded and discouraged; but when I consider thy
mercy and wisdom, bounty and goodness, readiness to forgive, and desire to
impart thy self unto thy servants, then I am encouraged to come with boldness
unto thee. Thou never despised him that called upon thee, or forsook any that
abode in thy fear: It was never known that any who trusted in thee were ever
confounded. Oh respect not the greatness of my offenses but of thy goodness;
though I have so often broken my part of that Covenant the Sacrament Seals, yet
be thou pleased to make good thine, to be merciful to my unrighteousness, and
to remember my sins and my iniquities no more. Thou know how intolerable a
thing it is to lie under thy wrath to all eternity, and therefore love to do
miracles of mercy, because thou love not that a sinner should perish. Have
mercy upon me according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my
transgressions; wash me thoroughly from mine iniquities, and cleanse me from all
my defilements, with the merit and virtue of that Blood which thou have so
abundantly shed for penitent sinners; that I may with an undefiled soul eat of
the purest sacrifice, the Lamb slain from the beginning: so I shall have no
spot in me for which thou will judge me at thy Table, or condemn me at thy
Tribunal.

Being in Christ reconciled unto me, oh give further evidences of thy fatherly
affection, by bestowing a double portion of thy grace upon me now thou call
me to this Ordinance; and who is sufficient for these things? I have neither a
meet Sacrifice to offer, nor a meet vessel to receive thee. I know not what to
say or do; how to pray or receive, prepare or behave my self; not sufficient of
my self to think any thing as of my self, but my sufficiency is of thee; the
preparation of the heart and answer of the tongue is from thee; the God, the
promiser, the Giver of grace as well as glory, that invites all to come unto
thee, with assurance of finding with, and receiving from thee whatsoever is
requisite for their refreshment, support, and comfort; ho every one that,
thirsts, come ye to the waters; and he that, has no money, come ye buy and
eat; yea, come buy wine and milk without money and without price. Thou
preparest a table for us in this wilderness, where we eat of thy own Bread, and
drink of thy own Cup; omittest no expression of tender love to treat us as a
most indulgent Father. But shall the time of receiving come, before thou come
into my soul to stir up thy graces in me? Ganst thou that so loved me, who was
of no worth, while yet in my sins, as to die for me, neglect me in thee? shall
I, whose only hope is to be saved by Christ, be sent away with the guilt,
instead of the comfort of his Blood? Oh of his fullness let me receive, and
grace for grace; let thy Spirit help mine infirmities, thy grace be sufficient
for me, thy strength be made perfect, more eminently manifest in weakness.
Array me with the righteousness of the Saints, put upon me the Lord Jesus; let
me be found having on the Weddinggarment at the Wedding-supper; such a
preparation of Soul as may qualify me for it, such a degree of reverence and
humility, saving knowledge, godly sorrow, renewed repentance, new obedience;
lively faith, unfeigned, love, joy and thankefulness, holy desires,
self-denial, suitable, solemn, heavenly meditations, as becomes a worthy
Communicant. Oh thou true food of my Soul! receive me who am to receive thee;
quicken me with thy Spirit, feed me with thy Flesh, satisfy me with thy Blood,
vouchsafe me thy Grace, communicate to me thy Nature, let me receive life from
thee to act and live unto thee, who measurest not thy gifts by our petitions or
desertss, but our wants and thy own mercy.

Earnest Supplication for Requisite Qualifications.
TO go to that Ordinance which requires all imaginable liveliness and activity
with dull and cloudy affections, will be my sin, and an aggravation of it, if
through want of diligent endeavor to get my Soul affected and inflamed, by
stirring up the graces of God in me; and whither shall I go for this but unto
thee, the author and finisher of them? how shall I do it but by thee? Oh do it
for me.

Holy Reveronce and Humility.
Affect my heart with an awful reverence and selfbasement upon my so near
approach unto thee in this solemn Ordinance, toward the greatness of thy
Majesty, with whom I there come to renew my Covenant; toward the excellency
of thy Son, whom I come to receive into my Soul; toward the holiness of thy
Spirit, whose assiance I hope for, and by whom I come there to be established in
my Union and Communion with Christ and his Members. Oh how durst I who am
nothing but folly and infirmity, misery and sin, shame and death, presume to
come so nigh; for behold the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee, unless thou
had invited and commanded it? If so much Sanctity, Reverence and Devotion was
requisite as to the Ark, the Temple, the receiving thy Law; Oh how shall I
behave my self now I go to receive thy very self? or Communicate with thee,
that deserves not to come before thee? Oh how Humble should I be who am to
receive a gift of Free Grace? Was he Humble that was all Purity, and shall I be
proud who am so defiled? The high and lofty One dwells not in a haughty heart,
but with him that is of a contrite, humble spirit; not will he that humbled
himself to the death be taken into a proud Soul. Oh that I may therefore have
grace, whereby I may serve thee acceptably, with reverence and godly fear, and
be clothed not only with the Righteousness, but Humility of Christ, be low and
mean, base and vile in my own eyes; I am not worthy to be called thy Son, make
me as thy meanest servants, the lowest room at thy Table; give my sins thy
pardon, my soul thy grace, my person and service thy acceptance in thy beloved;
and what thou do convey, seal to me by what I am to receive.

Without Knowledge the Heart, Saving Knowledge.
the duty cannot be good; but the Covenant thou have made with thy people is,
they shall all know thee from the least to the greatest. Oh let me come with
knowledge of the nature, necessity, use and ends of the Ordinance. Direct me
how to behave my self at, and meditate upon those Divine Mysteries, that I may
not be a blind offerer, nor bring a blind offering; but offer unto thee a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable, reasonable service; that I may receive with
understanding, discern the Lords Body; look into the Mysteries of the
Sacrament, lest not knowing the meaning, Ifeel not the comfort of it; but be
alienated, estranged from thee through the ignorance that is in me.

That. I may eat the Passover with bitter herbs, Godly Sorrow.
give me a deep sense of my own vileness and unworthiness; take, away this
heart of stone and give me a heart of flesh, that I may loath my self in my own
sight for mine iniquities, and for mine abominations, be filled with shame and
sorrow, hatred and indignation against my self, for my offending so good and
gracious, so loving and bountiful a Father, Redeemer and Sanctifier: That I may
look upon him whom I have pierced, and mourn for him, with detestation and holy
revenge against those my sins that cost him so dear, were the cause as well as
any other men's of his death, and would have cost me damnation; abominating them
as the scourges and thorns, nails and spear thar Afflicted, Crucified my
dearest Savior, the Lord of Glory. The day of mourning for him is at hand, oh
that I may then slay my most beloved lusts! be revenged on them for it, and for
their endeavoring to rob me of my spiritual Birthright, my eternal
Blessedness. Let me call to mind, and be truly sensible of every sin, and of
the evil of it, and of thine and my Savior's love manifested to me in his
sufferings. There where he appears most Bloody, let Sin oppear most deadly;
that I may receive abroken, bleeding Christ, with a broken contrite Heart; a
Sacrifice thou will not ^espise, O God, prepare in me; that being weary and
heavy laden, I may be capable of his refreshment; being supled in my own tears,
I may be fitter to be washed in his blood.

And seeing thou give thy self only to thy Disciples and Friends, New
Obedience.
work in me fresh purposes of amendment; that being willing and obedient, I may
eat the good of the Ordinance. Let there be conformity, that there may be
Communion; let me not put that new wine into an old impure, but new Heart. I
cannot Eat the Passover and stay in Egypt still; let me do it with my loins
girt, ready to march toward the Promised Land. Thou confirmest thy Covenant,
and expectest I restipulate with thee, that I cast out, and execrate the old
leaven. Seeing the Covenant of Grace sealed, let me seal a Covenant of
Obedience; seeing by the merit of Christ's death I am purchased to be thine, by
the power of it let me be dead to sin, and both receive life, and change my
life; let me bring a wounded heart to, and carry wounded sins from thy Table;
dye to sin, seeing Christ dyed for sin; let me take him by way of surety, and
give up my self to him by way of surrender; receive him as a Savior; and
submit to him as a Prince; set my self apart for thee on that Feast of
Dedication. Let me approach with the most sincere, fixed resolutions of an
entire resignation; and receive such grace and strength from thee, as may
enable me faithfully to perform them; that I may find my self in the number of
those, to whom my Savior allows such special manifestations of himself, by
lifting up the light of his countenance upon them, by intimating his good will
and love unto them, his fullness and righteousness for them, as Shows his
constant abode with them.

Let no profane or unseasonable Thoughts enter into my mind while I am about
that Holy Solemnity; Purity.
let me lay aside, leave behind me, and be kept from all carnal earthly vain
Imaginations; drive away all drowsiness, carelessness, slothfulness; idle
apprehensions; that I may wholly contemplate upon, and give up my self unto
him, who sacrificed his Soul and Body for me; and come before thee with such
Reverential Hungering, and Holy Affections, as is due to the hand that
reaches, to the seal that secureth, to the food that strengthens that
spiritual life in us, without which we can never be happy. O thou that call
me unto thee, let thy compassion pity my vileness; let thy mercy pardon my
sinfulness; let thy grace cleanse my filthiness; let thy wisdom enlighten my
darkness, let thy strength support my weakness; adorn me with the wedding
garment, the righteousness of thy Son, and holiness of thy Spirit; that all my
nakedness may be covered, and my great deformities hid from thine eyes: pardon
me by thy mercy, that I may receive thy grace; and fit me by thy grace, that I
may receive thy mercy; help me so to accuse my self, that thou may acquit
me, so to judge and condemn my self, that thou may absolve me; so to
exercise a holy revenge upon my self, that thou may spare me. Let thy Spirit
be thy Harbinger to provide entertainment for thy Son in my Soul, that he may
find ^t swept of sin, and garnisht with grace; make it day in my Soul by hopes
and desires, before I there receive the Sun of Righteousness.

Faith is thy own gift as well as Christ; Faith.
I believe, Lord help my unbelief, that I may besprinkle my soul and Conscience
with his blood; not only look upon and remember but close in with, and receive
him there tendered: Eat his flesh and drink his blood; apply him as taking on
him our nature, and and giving it as a ransom for sin; That I may not stagger
at the promise through unbelief, but be strong in faith, giving Glory to God;
being fully persuaded that what thou have promised thou will perform. When I
see Bread and Wine upon the Table, let me see Christ there as a feast in token
of my reconciliation with thee, and on the Cross as a Sacrifice, offering up
his Body and blood to thee; observing the Bread broken, let me see Chrirst
crucified for, and offering himself unto me; upon the Wine pouring out, let me
behold how his blood was poured forth for my sins. As I receive Bread and Wine
for bodily sustenance, so cause me to feed on, digest improve his body and
blood; having the, same expectation of Spiritual and Eternal life from him,
that I have of temporal life from my food. Let me eat not only the Bread of the
Lord, but the Bread which the Lord, that as by my senses I receive ^he Elements
to my Corporal, so by faith (...) may receive and apply him to my Spiri^^al
nourishment. Let the Ordinance be a ^^vely resemblance, remembrance, and
^pplication of the sufferings, and earnest of the Supper of the Lamb. Let
Christ be (...) lively set forth, as if Crucified before by eyes, dying for me:
that beholding, ^mbracing, and even putting my fingers unto the print of his
nails and feet, and ^hrusting my hand into his side; so fully ^erswaded of his
suffering for me, that I ^^ay not be faithless but believing; saying, ^y Lord
and my God, he loved me and ^ave himself for me; my beloved is mine and I am
his. O that I may so touch him, ^s may find and feel strength, peace, vir^ue
come from him, and be healed of all ^^y uncleanness; that they may not be unto
death, but unto the glory of thy ^ercy^ in pardoning, and grace in purifying
(...) polluted a Wretch. That it may be he food, the feast of my graces; the
poi^^on, the funeral of my corruptions. Let ^^e so feed on his blessed Body,
and bathe ^^y soul in his precious Blood, that my Soul may magnify the Lord,
and m^^ Spirit rejoice in God my Savior; who^^ having not seen I may love, in
wh^^ though now I see him not, yet believing, (...) may rejoice with joy
unspeakable and fu^^ of glory.

Circumcise my Heart to lo^^ thee with all my Soul, Love.
and wit^ all my strength. Let my hear^ be ravished with this infinite merci^^
in thee to sinful miserable man, in cotriving and giving so glorious a
Reddeemer and Redemption to save him and now in presenting us with such special
Seals of his love, and admitting u^^^ into so near, so holy a Communion (...)
For this let me be dissolved into lov^ to thee and thy Son, and to man for his
sake; and into a steadfast vow of lif^ and death to thy service; that I will
give and forgive, do, and suffer any thing for thee. Let me be filled with holy
raptures, joys and hopes in so great a goodness, who having done this, will
de^^ me nothing, and (maugre the rage and malice of hell) not see my soul lost,
for whom all this is done. Oh let me meet with strong endearments of Affections
melting, and flowing over to^ards thee, languishing with desires enjoy thee,
even turned into, made (...) of love for thee; that I may be the ^isciple whom
thou love, and laid in ^y bosom. Oh deal with me as thou ^ften do with
those that draw near to ^^ee; though I burn not with so hot a ^ame, yet through
thy grace I crave it ^f thee, that I may participate with, and be numbered among
such fervent ^overs. If I cannot say I am sick of Love, ^et am sick that I
cannot love thee? ^here will thou give me thy love, ^dmission to more familiar
fellowship, ^ear^r manifestation, sensible feeling and assurance of thy love
and affecti^n unto me, that I am beloved of ^hee. Give me grace to love the
Lord jesus in sincerity; let him dwell in my ^eart by Faith and Love; that
being ^^oted and grounded in Love, I may be ^ble to comprehend with all Saints,
that is the breadth, and length, and ^epth, and height, and to know the love
of Christ which passes knowledge; that the remembrance of him may pierce ^e
with grief, transport me with love captivate my will, engage all my affections
to him and for him. And let me kno^ I am passed from death to life* because
love the Brethren. Shed abroad the love in my cold frozen heart, and infla^^ it
with fervent affection to thee and thing While my love is burning toward the
self, oh how can it choose but be impar^^ to thy Friends, who sincerely love
the^ and on whom thou have set thy heart, ar^shed thy love, thy spirit, whereby
the are made like unto thee? They m^^ needs be lovely in my eyes, to who^
Christ is precious. Oh let me not con^^ to this Love-feast with a bitter but
chan^^ table spirit! Purge out therefore t^^ old leven of malice, which will
sow the Ordinance to me. Oh that our F^ther in Heaven may look down upon (...)
children feasting together in mutual lo^^ and delight, in the remembrance of
(...) that love he has shown us, and joy^^ expectation of what further he has
p^^mised to us.

Let me not sit sad a^ dejected, Joy and Thanksgiving.
as if I liked (...) the provision, or though my self not welcome. Ma^^ this
real, magnificent, solemn, sumptuous Feast, these Celestial Viands wherewith
thou feedest thy people, by thy gracious comfortable discoveries of thy self, a
spiritual banquet unto my soul, a feast of fat things, a feast of wine on the
lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wine on the lees well refined! Do not
only stand and knocks, but open the door of my heart; vouchsafe to come in and
abide with me; that there may be a cheerful, comfortable converse: sup with me,
and let me sup with thee, that I may be abundantly satisfied with the fatness
of thy house, (feel and find abundance of soul-satisfaction reached out to me
in the Ordinance; and do thou make me drink of the River of thy pleasure:
quench my thirst after carnal, and let me be filled with Divine pleasures,
ravishments and contentments flowing from the inexhaustible fountain of Divine
plenty. Let my soul be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and my mouth
praise thee with joyful lips. Let me come before thee with thanksgiving, and
praise thee with my whole heart. Let there be Angels work at Angels food, make
me joyful in thy house of prayer. By and for him let me offer the Sacrifice of
Praise to God, the fruit of my lips, giving thanks unto his Name in the great
Congregation, and Praise thee among much People.

Thou art ready to give bread to the hungry, to fill them with good things,
Spiritual Thirst.
and the water of life to him that is athirst. Thou art not straightened in thy
self, but I am straightened in my own bowels; the desire and the meat, the
necessity and relief, are all from thee. Oh thou that providest Food, give also
a stomach; bid, and make me welcome! say, eat, oh Friend; drink, yea drink
abundantly, oh Beloved! Oh create and stir up in me earnest longings and a
Spiritual appetite; that I may come to be made partaker of the good things thou
have prepared for me, with enlarged affections, and longing desires after,
answerable to my need of the Ordinance, and Christ offered in it, as full
nourishment for my Soul under the forms of Bread and Wine; and with strong
expectations to receive him and his benefits, with desire let me desire to eat
this Passover; open my mouth wide that thou may fill it: As the Heart
pants after the water-brook, so let ray soul pant after thee, O God.

The Evening Close.
AND now, oh gracious God, leave me not to the dullness, the deadness, the
hardness, the impenitency, the unbelief, ^he barrenness, the earthliness, the
impo^^ency, the distraction of my own Heart! Oh enrich the Ordinance with thy
own ^resence. While the King sits at his Ta^le let my Spikenard send forth
the smell ^hereof. Descend into my heart by the ex^^tations of thy grace and
influences of thy by, and let me ascend unto thee by the ex^^cise of grace, and
pious addresses. Awake ^^ou North wind, and come thou South, ^ow upon my
Garden, that the Spices ^^ereof may flow out; Make every grace (...) my soul
lively, active, and fragrant, by the ^eathings and inspirations of thy Holy
Spi^^t. O abide with me, because it draws ^wards the time of receiving; what
do I there thou be not there? If thy presence go not ^^ong with me, carry me
not hence. Let Christ ^^pear unto, and be known of me in breaking of Bread; let
me carry away not only Bread, but Light, Life and Health; that with open face,
beholding as in a glass the glory (the love, the mercy, and goodness) of the
Lord, I may be changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord. O let me remember* and do thou remember what thy Son has
suffered, that I may be thankful, and thou so sensibly gracious unto me, that I
man taste and see how good the Lord is.

I am altogether, unworthy of my desires (...) but what thou do for any, is
not because they are worthy, but because it pleases th^^ to do for thine what
they ask of thee according to thy will. With what confidence go we to Market
with money in our hand? we doubt not returning without our errand; Oh we would
come as confidently expecting the giving out of grace to us, as if we were able
to putchase it for thou have bid us come buy Wine an^ Milk without money and
without price and have promised, and art more willing (...) give the spirit to
them that ask it, th^^ Parents Bread to their Children, whi^^ they cannot deny,
whatever shift th^^ make for it: our love to our Children (...) but hatred; our
compassion, hardness; our bowels rocks in comparison of thine to thine: why
then will thou not hear me? Turnest thou a deaf ear to me? Can thou deny me?
Did any of the seed of Jacob seek thy face in vain? Who ever approacht to this
overflowing Fountain of sweetness, but carried away some drops? ^or sat by so
great a flame, and received not some warmth from it? why then lies my Soul so
cold, so frozen, so dead before thee? O will thou not relieve a hungry beggar?
will thou not grant the request of an ^mportunate Petitioner? Shall I go away
^mpty from an inexhaustible Treasure? Hungry from a Feast? Dry from a Fountain?
Cold from the Sun? Sad and com^ortless from a Feast of Love? Oh! ^ake it a type
and earnest of our Eternal ^anquet: Feed me to that by Faith and Love, and seal
me to it in Spirit and Con^ience; let me enjoy thy lightsom revi^^ng company in
this state of absence and ^bscurity. Away, my Soul from this ^^rk, deceitful,
vexing world; love not ^^y Disease, thy Fetters, thy Calamities; ^yn not with
those that take up their rest (...) this side Heaven, saying, it is good to be
here. Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar;
that I remain in this sinful, polluting place, among a strange people, and am
kept so long from my Fathers House. Oh that I had wings like a Dove, then would
I sly away and be at rest; lo then would I wander far off, (as legs and wings
could carry me) and remain in the wilderness; I would live in the solitariest
place of the Earth, for my greater freedom from sin, and enjoyment of my God.
This flattering, vexing world should soon see me quit it; my base heart should
soon be (...) of me; rather than undergo their uncessant troubles: I would
hasten my escap^ from the windy storm and tempest. Oh wretched man that I am!
who shall deliver me from the body of this death (...) Which so often troubles,
grieves and overclouds me, distracts and hinders me, allure^ and intangles me?
When shall I have done trifling and dallying, roving and repining, fretting and
disputing? Whe^^ shall I only talk and walk with thee be; composed and fixed,
Spiritual an^ Heavenly, love, choose, and obey thee delight, rejoice, joy, and
glory in thee Oh when will thou unloose the cords of this tottering Tent? When
shall this Mud-wall crumble into dust? When shall my earthly house of this
tabernacle be dissolved? When shall I be carried to those eternal mansions? Why
is his Chariot so long in coming? Why tarry the wheels of his Chariot? Has he
not sped? Has he not divided his gifts? Has he not obtained his purchase?
Has he not prepared a place for me? Shall I ever be at home in the body, and
absent from the Lord? Make haste, O thou whom my soul loves, and come in
glory, as thou first came in humility; and conform them to thy self in
glory; whom thou make conformable to thy sufferings and humility. Keep up
our faith, our hope, and our love; by the exercise of them let us have our
Conversation with thee in Heaven; and daily vouchsafe us some beams of thy
directing, consolatorie light, in this our darkness; and be not as a stranger
to thy scattered Flock, thy disconsolate Spouse in this distant state, this
desolate Wilderness. O show thy self more clearly to us; testify to our Souls,
that thou art our Head and Savior, that we abide in thee by the Spirit which
thou have given us, abiding and overcoming in us, and as thy Agent preparing us
for eternal Life. Let not our darkness nor thy strangeness feed our odious
unbelief; nor my corrupt habits choke or smother my new resolutions and sweet
meditations. These weak, wavering thoughts, these faint desires, these sickly
affections in my Soul will not live a night, unless my gracious God interpose
his Power, preserve and cherish them. Oh seeing thou have given me to bestow
some small pains on my Heart, and to conceive some good hopes, let them not be
dashed in pieces in so short a moment: spread the wings of thy goodness over me,
and maintain that, which not I, but thy Spirit has wrought in me; let me find
all, when I awake let me still be with thee, O blessed Trinity, to whom be
ascribed Kingdom, Power, and Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

The Communion Morning Dress.
AH, where am I? what do I? all the Children of the Bride-chamber are ^p and
ready, and I slumbring in my Bed! Tell me, ye Fairest, what made you up so
early, and dressed so soon? A^^as, our Lord was up before us all; ^e called us up
by break of day, and wondered we were not trimming our Lamps, not decking our
selves, know^ng with whom we were to meet, to feast ^o day. Our Beloved spoke
and said unto us, Rise up, my Love, my Fair Ones, and come away. This is the
day which the Lord has made, we will re^oyce and be glad in it. How should we
welcome it with suffcient joy and thankfulness, for the approach of so great a
Blessing that brings our Savior so near unto us!

It Is too too late; I will arise and get ^e ready; but where are my Cloths? Oh
^ow poor, how empty, how naked am I! Oh for the fairest, sweetest robe of
^houghts and wishes out of my Fathers, Wardrobe; Oh for my silken, golden twist
of Faith to hang the Jewel of God^ sorrow, and Humility, Love, and thankfulness
upon: I am never dressed till they be on. Oh where are they? I saw them by me but
just before I went to bed; what was I then so long about, but gathering, tying,
raising them up? Ah this vain World, this envious Devil, this evil deceitful
Heart, has been ravelling, stealing them out, or hid them from me, that now I
am as far to seek as ever. Oh whither shall I? what shall I do to find them?
behold the Bridegroom comes, and I am not ready; I cannot, dare not go to day.
Now will my Lord be angry when he comes in, to see his guests; he looking over
them, will say where is such a one? was he not bidden? I Am sure I invited him.
If I go undrest, he will ask how came I in, not having on a Wedding Garment? to
either I shall be speechless. Ah foolish, (...) careless heart! to let Earthly
so entangle thy Heavenly Thoughts; thou know not now how to unloose them,
which heed and care might have prevented: my horrible negligence and guiltiness
makes m^^tremble to go, yet not dare to keep away; for where should my polluted
Soul be washed but in that Fountain set open for) sin and for uncleanness? Oh
thou that wilt in no wise cast off him that comes unto thee; dis-intangle my
thoughts from all things below, and dress me up as pleases thee; overlook my
manifold weaknesses and imperfections in my preparation; if I knew nothing by
my self, yet were I not thereby justified; I have no Righteousness of my own,
and if I had, I would not mention it before thee; though I were Righteous, and
had the greatest fitness and perfection a creature is capable of, yet would I
not answer thee; I would not plead, but supplicate; not stand upon my Right,
but petition thy Favor; not expect thy Justice, but crave thy pity, I would
make supplication to my Judge. The Righteousness of man is not pleadable before
a Righteous God: if thou should be extreme to mark what is done amiss by the
best men, in the best actions, O Lord who could stand? we are all as an unclean
thing, and all our righteousness are as filthy rags; my person is loathsome and
abominable; my preparation and best performances carry in them matter, of my
own death and indictment, except thou (oh) cover them with the Robe of Christ's
Righteousness, and sprinkle them, with his blood, they can find no acceptance
with thee. And Oh thou who for our sake tookest upon thee our passions and
sensibilities, our weaknesses and sufferings; so art become a merciful High
Priest, and pitiful to our infirmities, receive a wearied sinner an
overbur-thened Conscience, an afflicted, polluted Soul into thy care, custody,
and cure. The humility and sorrow, love and purity of any Creature, is not
sufficient to make me worthy to be fed with thy Body, nourisht with thy Blood,
united to thee, to dwell and be one with thee; but what I cannot be of my self,
let me be made of thee, who of God art made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption. Oh weigh thine own, not my merits that I may
offer up an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing unto
thee by Christ Jesus the life of them that believe, and the Resurrection of the
dead From him I hope for victory against my sins, strength in Duty against my
weakness, succor in my life against temptation, in my death against despair,
after death against damnation* I presume upon thy help, not because I ^ave
deserved it, for I have been an unprofitable servant, but because thou have
redeemed me, for thy Blood cannot be unprofitable. Help me, if not for my
misery which I have deserved, yet for thy mercies which thou have promised; for
thy goodness is more ready to forgive, then thy power to punish: and thy Blood
cries ^ouder for pardon, then my sins for punishment. Thou have not yet
forgiven so much as thou have promised, nor promised more than thou have
puchas'd. Has thy Blood satisfied for more sins than I can commit, and shall
it not satisfy for those (...) have forsaken and do detest? Have thou
purchased Mercy for more then repent, and will thou not show it on those to
whom thou have given Repentance? Have thou been so long calling, that thou
should at last reject me? so long promising Salvation that thou should at
last deny me? I am thy Debtor for thy purchase, but thou art mine for the
promise. (...) could not oblige thee by my desert, but thou have obliged thy
self by thy word. I plead not the merit of my obedience, but the mercy of the
Covenant which thy L^^^ and mercy moved thee to make, and thy Truth ties thee
to perform: Free grace made, thee a promiser, and thy promise has made thee a
Debtor. Thou art not more Free in making promises, then faithful in making them
good: a God that keeps Covenant unto a thousand generations*

And oh that I could now la^^ aside my Body with my Business put off this
outward man for^ more naked, The Soul Fixed.
inward spiritual sight, that my mind might be rendered more sensible of him;
fit to receive (...) deeper impression from his hand, that nothing but him
might enter in. Away* be gone ye wandering, worldly, vai^ thoughts, for I am
going to my God: sti^ not up, nor disturb the Beloved of my Soul; come not near
I charge you, make no noise to displease him, or to call m^ away from,
entertaining and enjoying o^ him: yea (Lord) bid them be gone, and not dare to
appear before thee. It is the voice of my. Beloved, I hear him inviting me to
his Table; I see him coming to entertain me; let all flesh therefore be silent
and not be so bold as to whisper in his presence.

Welcome holy thoughts and pure desires: Oh happy time wherein I may embrace my
Savior, and solace my soul in the arms of my dearest Love! Awake my
Understanding, Will, and Affections; awake my Glory and my Heart; awake all ye
Powers, Faculties, and Graces of my Soul, and all that is within me be summoned
in, stirred up, and wholly bent to attend this service. My costliest Box of
Ointment cannot be bestowed better then on my Savior: my greatest care and
caution, love and labor, then in his service. And inflamed with Love.
And how shall I put my heart into a flame of love, a frame to meet him, better
then by considering the wonder of his love unto me? Oh how free, unmerited,
disinterested! preventing not only our desires, but our knowledge, surpassing
our wishes as well as our deserts.

He loved us first. Had we deplored our Apostacy, implored his Grace, reformed
our Ways, returned before invited, made the first overtures of Reconciliation
with him; this had carried something of inducement for procuring his love: but
that he who had receive the injury, should address himself to him that did it;
that the offended party should pray and beseech the offender to be reconciled?
that he whose right was to punish, should first offer terms of grace and pardon
to them that had done him all the wrong, and make Compensation of it to
himself! Herein is love, not that we loved him, but that he loved us first,
even before we had a Being; so little could we deserve it, that our felicity
in his Decrees, preceded our existence in the world. His goodness is so
entirely its own principle, and motive, that even out Creation since which
alone we can pretend to merit it) is the effect of it, as well as our
Redemption. When no eye pittyed, no person interceded, no hand could relieve,
he visited and redeemed us, unable to add to, or diminish his essential
happiness. If thou sinnest, what do thou unto him? if thou be righteous,
what give thou him? our best services are dues, not tributes; not to
advantage him, but to discharge our selves, as acknowledgments we have all from
him. He does us good, not because we are, but he liberally so. The fire we
kindle on God's Altar, warms and enlightens us, but not Heaven at so distant a
remove; not is wanted in the Regions of this Sun which shines upon us Dunghils,
not out of any invitation his Beams find there, but because it is his Nature to
be freely, obligingly diffusive; nor is disturbed or loses its light, but we by
turning away our eyes, or sending up the black and noysom vapors of our lusts.
I cannot but stand amazed at the low stoop of thy Sacred Majesty, in matching
with so mean, so base, so stained a Family. Thou tookst not on thee the nature
of Angels, but the seed of Abraham: They are bound in chains of darkness,
whilst thou art drawing us with cords of Love: thou spared not them, and
spared not thy Son for us. What admiration and astonishment can answer thy
boundless condeseension? that thou who had married infinitely below thy self,
if with the most spotless, antientest, honourablest House of thy Creatures,
should take polluted dust and ashes into thy bosom! yea thou passest by all
others as Nettles and Thorns, while thy Church is in thy eye as the Rose of
Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valleys.

He loved us when Enemies; not only when we were not at all, incapable of being
a motive in his love, but worthy of his detestation. To have spared our lives
had been an unexpected, undeserved mercy; who finds his enemy and slays him
not; was ever eye enamored on deformity, or love set upon filthiness and
putrefaction? But behold! I running away from him, hating of him; he loving me,
following of me, entreating my return; I undoing, he pitying my soul; finding
his arms open to embrace me, against whom I was lifting up my hand; for when we
were without strength, Christ dyed for the ungodly; and as foul as ugly, as
loathsome, as forlorn as sin could make me, espoused me to himself; opened his
Heart to lodge in it, his professed Enemy that trod him under foot; his Bowels
yearned toward those, who raked into them with their bloody hands; his Heart
burnt with affection to those that cruelly pierced it; when we were fighting he
was dying; when we had the weapons in our hand, he had the spear in his side.
Herein God commended his love to us, in that while we were sinners Christ dyed
for us; showed as great love and kindness to the greatest Enemy, as could be
shown to the greatest Friend; and received me not to mercy only, but to the
Endearment of a Son. That the General should dye for the Soldier; the
Physician for the Patient; the Workman for the Work; the Pastor for the Flock;
the Master for the Servant; the Just for the Unjust; the Innocent for the
Guilty; the Shepherd for the Sheep; the Prince for the Rebel; the Lord of Glory
for the Children of Disobedience; he that was without all sin, for him that was
without all Righteousness; God for Man; to wound a Darling to stanch the Blood
of a Traitor; for the Judge to pardon, and put himself into the Malefactor's
clothes and stead, and suffer for him; to dye for those that killed him? and
bleed to wash his own blood from their hands that spilt it; with the kind
Balsom Tree, whose healing wounds weep sovereign Balsom to cure those that made
them: that he should interpose his own Breast to receive in those arrows of
vengeance aimed at us; and that while professing our selves his Enemies, and
proclaiming War against him; to spare our lives, lose his own; that he should
so love us, as to give himself for us, is such a so loving us, as makes the
highest Hyperbole dwindle into a Meiosis.

He loved us unto death. No sooner born then persecuted, nor circumcised then
designed for the slaughter. Behold the God of Heaven flying in a woman's arms
from the rage of a weak Man: the God of Israel driven to be nursed out of the
bosom of his Church. He that made the Heaven of Heavens, subject to, if not
busily working in the homely trade of a poor Foster-father. The owner of all
possessing nothing, but the punishment due unto our fins. He that commands the
Devils to their chains, transported, and tempted by that presumptuous Spirit.
God all-sufficient exposed to hunger and thirst, weariness and danger, grief
and contempt, reproaches, affronts, and calumnies; blasphemed of those whose
God he had always been in a peculiar manner; straightened in the womb, vexed in
the world, abased from the Cratch to the Cross, rejected by Churls, persecuted
by Wretches, tempted by Reprobates; and yet the Son of Man must suffer many
things, be sold and caught, ^ound and dragged, arraigned and condem^ed, stripped
and scourged, reviled and be^mear'd, pierced and gored, and then it is
^^nished. Thou seem now (O Blessed Re^eemer) to have finished in thy
passion, what thou had continually suffered in the whole course of thy life.
How many slaves under the vassalage of an enemy, fare better ^hen thou, from
ungrateful Man whom ^hou came to save? Thy whole life was but a continual
passion, thy birth and death but one protracted act; Christmas Day and Good
Friday but the evening and morn^ng of thy passion; thou foundest a Golgo^ha
even in Bethlehem; others die Martyrs; but thou born one among beasts, and
^iv'd among worse, as well as died among ^hieves. Blessedness is made not earth
^nely but woe, to bring earth from woe to ^lessedness.

Behold him now (O my soul) hanging upon the Cross (and thy sins putting him
unto that gore) saying, Weep not for me that endures it, but weep for your
selves that causes it: read in me the cruelty of ^our sins; see how barbarously
they have ^sed me, how miserably I am torn and wounded by you: how many thorns
in this Crown of thorns are your sins: how my blood, with my warmest love runs
out to fetch you home to God. Oh my head, my side, my hands, and my feet. Look
through these gaping wounds into my heart; pierced first by love, and then by a
spear for you. Was ever any sorrow or love like unto mine? Can I do more then
die for you? Will you not be persuaded what an evil and bitter thing sin is
unto me? Do you not see how it rakes into my side, and tears my very heart? how
greedily it sucks my blood? Behold the pits it diggeth, the very print of its
nails; see the very place where it has thrust its spear. Can thou hug and
embrace bloody Parricides? show any kindness to so deadly an enemy? harbor
them that have used me thus? You say, You are my friends; will you not take my
part against them? Have not all these wounds, mouths enough to persuade you to
fall out with sin? Would you have me used thus again? Could you find in your
heart to see me once more upon a Gibbet? Will you tear open my wounds (crucify
me) afresh? Else why can you not be prevailed with by this sight? Why do you
not spit in the face of your sins? do all the despite you can unto, revenge me
perfectly upon them? ^ail them unto my Cross, if you would have me embrace you?

O how ought my Adamantine heart to rend in pieces, when all thy tortures and
groans are for, are from us? And yet as if once were not sufficient, how often
do we join with those that crucify thee afresh? By hypocrisy we bend the knee
with ludibrious devotion, saying, Hail King of the Jews. By presumption we put
a Reed in thy hand. We smite and buffet thee with the works of darkness,
saying, Prophecy who smote thee. By Profaneness we spit in thy face the filth
of our rotten hearts. By Sacrilege we cast lots for thy garments. By Schism we
divide thy seamless Coat, (which the rude Soldiers did not.) By popularity we
wash our hands as innocent, and to please men, condemn thee. By unhallowed cups
we give thee gall to drink. By Superstition betray thee with a kiss, and
despise thee with seeming honor. By Apostasy, deny and forswear thee. By
Heresy rack and disjoynt thee. By the roare^ laughs and scoffs, oaths and
blasphemies, tear and rend thee. By any common sin, we prefer Barabba before
thee. O we^^ thy pains so light, that we must every day redouble them? Is this
the kindness, the entertainment thou deservest? the recompense of thine
inestimable love, thus cruelly to vex and wound thee? O how can we hope to find
Redemption by thy Blood, while we continue by our horrid crimes to make new
gashes in thy side, to rub thy. wounds afresh, and cause them to stream anew,
that were even closed up before? an act more Jewish then the Jews. Oh! I sigh
unto thee for want of grief, for thy grievous sufferings: Oh that I could turn
my self into tears, that I might wash the wounds I have made! seeing thou
diedst for my sins, how ought I to despise my self, who have so cruelly
offended and tormented thee? the very party whose offenses have brought those
miserable torments and death upon thee? Oh how must this needs irreconcile and
engage me to pursue them to death, that in the eye of all the world brought so
great shame, and pain, and amazement on the Lord of Life and Glory? Come along
with me, Oh ye vile, ye sinful passions and corrupt affections, into his
presence, (if ye dare live so long) and there receive your mortal wound from
him! Methinks you should begin to die at the very thoughts of a dying Redeemer,
and swoun away at the sight of yonder Blood, and not stay till you come to his
Cross; but give up the Ghost before you see but the image his death: do you not
feel the power of it afar off? does not his pierced side pierce your heart
before you behold it? Oh ye bloody things! what have ye done? what wounds have
you made in the Body of my Lord? lay your necks quietly on the block; prepare
your selves for death which is approaching: nay, never struggle nor resist;
think not to live any longer for I have vowed you in sacrifice to him.

And now what remains, Ends in going.
but that I renew a quick and lively sense of the ends of this Rite, and of
mine in going, and what lies hid under the Ceremony? Oh my Soul! whither art
thou going? What is that Table which I see yonder spread for us? and what is
thy chief design in going to it? what means that broken bread that is provided?
for what end was that body Crucified? do men use to drink a cup of Blood? Oh
let me know the bottom of this mystery; let me enter into this secret, and my
own heart's.

Renouncing my own Righteousness and Preparation; in his name, merits,
mediation, strength and righteousness; in obedience to thy command and thy
followers practice; to renew my Covenant with thee; to commemorate and be
affected with his death; to own and increase my Spiritual Union and Communion
with him and his members; to further my joy in the Holy Ghost, peace of
Conscience, and hopes of Eternal Life; for the nourishment of my Soul; to get
power against my sins to act, and excite, and strengthen my graces; to make
fresh applications of his blood; to have the Covenant of Grace with all its
blessings sealed unto me, I go unto thy Table. O stir up in me thirsting
desires after, strong expectations to receive these blessed ends and benefits;
and do thou make them good unto me.

Oh how weak, To strengthen my Inner man.
how imperfect are my Graces! I see and know but in part, so love, obey,
believe but in part. Oh how many temptations, adversaries, difficulties assault
me! How seldom have I a will to do good? and when I would do good evil is
present with me. All I have, ^an, or am, is from thee, so due unto thee, but
all still unworthy of thee; yet how heart-bound is that little all of service I
do thee? I pray as if afraid to be heard, bear as if unwilling to be saved,
communicate as if loath to receive thee, serve thee as if I would not please
thee. To that end I go to the Lords Supper, suitable and sufficient to nourish
my inner man; where ^re rendered most familiarly and effectually his Flesh and
Blood, meat and drink indeed. Oh that I may have such ^xpectations of Spiritual
life from him, that I have of Temporal life from my ^ood! and so eat his Body
and drink his Blood, receive, digest, and improve, ^eed upon, and Spiritually
apply Christ ^s incarnate and in his sufferings, that (...) may find
refreshment and sweetness, ^uickening, strength, and life from him, and may
live by him, and in him, and he in me. Oh that by the power of thy spirit
accompanying the Ordinance I may partake yet more and more of a new and divine
nature: that I may find strength and vigor diffused through my whole man; and
receive some communication of that light and life which Christ came into the
world that his People might have, and that they might have it more abundantly.
Oh that his Death and Resurrection may have their power and efficacy upon me,
crucifying my lusts and passions, and raising me up to all the acts of the
Spiritual life. Oh that something may be done this day against my pride and
passion, worldliness and carnalitie, hypocrisy and uncharitableness, doubtings
and unbelief, distrustful fears and discontents, backwardness and indisposition
to, listlesness, dullness, and distraction in Duty. Oh that I may find my heart
thereby drawn nearer to, and carried out with more unweariedness and
cheerfulness in thy Service. Let me come from thence with my pardon sealed, my
corruptions subdued, my graces quickened, strengthened, and confirmed; my heart
enlarged, my soul refreshed and encouraged to run the ways of thy
Commandments; and so inseparably united to thee, that no Temptation may be
ever able to dissolve the ^union; but that being begun here in grace, ^it may
be perfected in glory.

How painful and into^^erable is the obscuring and interrupting of our Union
and Communion with Christ (our Heaven upon Earth? To maintain and increase,
evidence and enjoy Union and Communion with Christ and him crucified.
) Therein we enjoy his person and all sweet Relations to it: his death, and all
the saving fruits, privileges, and influences of it. To maintain and increase,
evidence and enjoy it, I receive the Cup of Blessing which we bless, the
Communion of the Blood of Christ; and the Bread which we break, the Communion
of the Body of Christ to my soul, my Faith, yea even to my outward Senses,
signifies, seals, and instrumentally exhibits my Spiritual Communion with
Christ and his Death. Thereby I partake of, and am strengthened in this
Fellowship with him, as really as I partake of that Bread and Cup. Oh that he
being united to me in these holy Mysteries, may comfort, rule, and direct me in
all my ways; and his Spirit turn me into the same quality and likeliness! Oh
that I may there find him whom my soul loves! There are the signs, but where
the body and blood of my Savior, the Lamb for a sacrifice? I go not for the
bread and wine, but to see Jesus. What are the Elements without thy presence?
Oh what wilt tho^ give me if I go from thy Table Christless? Let him kiss me
with the kisses of his mouth, (afford expressions of his tender affection and
reconciliation to my soul,) for thy love is better then wine.

If we forsake Communion with our Fellow Members, To maintain and increase
Spiritual Union and Communion with Christ's Members.
how can we maintain it with ou^ Head? What need the^ have I (especially no^
when so many divisions and disagreements) of, and to that end I come to the
Ordinance, which tends so much to uni^^ and knit together the disjoynted
Members of Christ; for we being many a^^ one Bread and one Body, for we a^^
partakers of that one Bread, and hereby profess to be one, and to walk as
Fellow Members in Christ, with all christian love and tenderness toward one
another. Oh let my heart be enlarged toward them, my delight in them, (for
their relation to thee and thy Image upon them) sympathize with, have a
fellow-feeling of, interest my self in their several states and occasions;
rejoicing with those that rejoice, and weeping with those that weep. Seeing
thou have so loved us, let me be perfectly reconciled to every man; and every
spark of anger, envy, and malice, be utterly extinguished, remembering he that
comes in hatred is a Judas to Christ, and a Cain to his Brother.

Through the death of Christ my sins are pardoned, To Commemorate Christ's death.
my reconciliation with God obtained, his curse removed, the Enemies of my
Salvation subdued, my eternal Salvation and Inheritance, my deliverance from
worse then Egyptian Bondage procured, the new Covenant established, all my
mercies purchased, conveyed and sanctified: yet how unthankful for, insensible,
forgetful of it am I? so greatly ungrateful as to bury in oblivion the
greatest expression of his infinite love: in honor of him to make a solemn
rehearsal of his famous Acts, to speak of the glorious honor o^ His Majesty,
and to talk of his Power: I come unto this lasting Monument and Memorial, to
show forth his death till he come. Oh let me celebrate it with an affectionate,
fiducial, thankful, obediential remembrance; with a ravished heart filled with
a gracious composition of joy and sorrow, love and admiration; with such
resentments as befit so strange an object, that I may desire, and rejoice,
mourn, and tremble; be in such a mixture of passions as may even imitate the
confusion that was in the world at his sufferings; make such deep and lasting
impressions thereof on my soul, as if this was the very day he suffered. Let me
not conclude I have received Christ, till I have remembered him, so as to affect
my heart with love to him, desire after him, faith and joy in him, sorrow for
my sins the cause of his suffering. Let me think of it as an history to beget
my knowledge, as a Gospel to beget my Faith, as an example to provoke my
patience, as a benefit to procure my happiness. Oh that I may so remember him
at his Table on his Cross, that he may not forget me on his Throne in his
Kingdom. Lift up my mind from the contemplation of him as he hung upon the
Tree, to him as he sits now in Glory at thy right hand, making intercession
for me, presenting to thee the invaluable merits of his death, to appease thee
for the sins I commit daily against thee. Oh set me as a seal upon thy heart,
as a seal upon thy arm, that I may be never forgotten, always remembered,
preserved, kept safely by thee: and let me set thee as a seal upon my heart, as
a seal on my arm, receive thy image and impression of thy love, keep it
thankfully, continually on my heart, and testify it in my life.

By reason of my infirmities, carelessness, sins, To have my personal claim and
title to the new Covenant cleared.
how apt am I to doubt the pardon of them, and my interest in thy love? The
streams of corruption rising up in me, interrupt the light and luster of my
future possession, and suggest matter of diffidence and anxietie, that my hopes
hitherto have been ungrounded, my Faith, Presumption, my claim to, and
propriety in Christ uncertain, if not quite desperate. But he has shed his
blood meritoriously to procure it; and I go to the Ordinance as thou have
appointed it, to have my pardon, and interest in his Blood sealed and assured
unto me, and to renew my engagements and resolutions, that I may be tied faster
to thee with new cords of thy love, and that it may be more impossible for me
to unloose my self from thy service. O let me therefore receive it as a sign
and seal from thee to me, representing and exhibiting thy self and benefits;
and from me to thee, a sign to separate me from sinners, a seal to oblige me to
all faithfulness and thankfulness required on my part. Oh make the Ordinance
effectual to all those blessed ends and purposes for which thou have appointed
it. Let it be not only a sign to represent, but an instrument to convey Christ
with the power and virtue of his death unto me, and a seal to assure me of my
Interest in the Covenant; that in those holy Mysteries I may not only
Commemorate, but effectually receive my blessed Savior, (thou may
communicate to me thy self) and all the benefits of his passion; and have not
only a representation, but a participation of him in the Sacrament: to the
outward Administration of it join the inward Seal of thy Spirit.

Thou know all my corruptions and temptations, wants, weaknesses, and
imperfections, poverty and nakedness, troubles and dangers; how often I am
tempted and defiled, grieved and indisposed; what strong corruptions to be
subdued and mortified, languishing graces to be quickened and strengthened,
faint purposes and resolutions to be enlarged and confirmed. In confidence of
thy great goodness, faithfulness, and mercy, I thy creature come unto thee my
Creator, thy son unto thee my Father, thy servant unto thee my Lord; in danger
unto thee my Savior, needy unto thee the Possessor of Heaven and Earth,
diseased unto thee the only Physician, unclean unto thee the Fountain of grace
and mercy, desolate unto the God of all consolation; guilty, blind, lifeless
unto thee the Author, the Father of pardon, light, life, and Salvation. Oh heal
me of the guilt of my sins by the merit of thy blood, of the power and
corruption of my sins by the efficacy of thy Spirit. Inflame my coldness with
the fire of thy love, soften my hardness with the dew of thy grace, enlighten
my blindness with (...) beam of light from heaven, anoint the eye of my soul
with eye salve that I may see, clear up spiritual things to my apprehension,
heal all the distempers, ease all the pains, supply all the necessities of my
soul. Make me more humble, holy, heavenly, confident, and believing: fill thy
house with thy own glory. Stand not at a distance behind the wall, show thy
self through the Lettice of the Ordinance: let me see the outgoings of my God
and my King in his Sanctuary. Let me not come unto thee, nor go from thee
without thee. Oh take this season of coming in upon my soul; bestow more of thy
self upon me. Change me into thy likeness, lift up my heart unto thee in
Heaven, turn all earthly things unto me to bitterness, contempt, and oblivion:
Be thou my meat and drink, my hope and strength, my shield and portion, my
honor and glory, my love and joy, my delight and solace, only sweet unto my
taste from henceforth and for ever.

These are the mercies thou have promised to thy people, have bidden them to
ask, art wont to convey by thy Ordinance. These are the legacies left me by my
Saviors Will, whereof thou art Executor: his prayer, promise, and blessing,
this Institution is engaged to procure them for all believing Receivers: for
these things therefore which thou then granted him, do I come unto, and wait
upon thee this day. With no lower aims go I to thy Table: with such precious
things is the Lord Jesus wont to feast his Guests, and of his infinite fullness
it is, that I hope to participate, through him to be strengthened with might in
the inner man, even to be made strong by the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
Thou have provided for my soul as well as body; shall there be bread enough in
my Fathers house, and I here perish for hunger? Pertains it not to thee to keep
in repair that habitation thou have made so for thy self? Will it tend to thy
Honor who have begun to build, to leave the workmanship of thine own hands, as
if not able to finish? must not the food and Author of our Spiritual life
nourish, and cherish, redress the decays, uphold the frame of it in us? Oh!
will the head let a member perish? shall a branch wither for want of juice? he
is the true vine, we the branches, thou art the husbandman, haft ordained him
to be the root, fountain, and support of all Spiritual furniture, grace and
fruitfulness to those implanted in him* Oh of his fullness of Grace communicate
to me, for without him I can do nothing acceptable to thee! Art not thou as
willing to bestow the fruit, of thy Blood upon us, as to shed it for us? Have
not thou, who once so readily healed diseases, cured all that came unto thee,
as much mercy to Soul as Body? Art thou not as merciful as tender, as able, as
willing to help as ever? If (as I hope) thou will, thou can make me clean and
supply my wants; outward means without thee cannot, yet here thou have bid, I
attend waiting for the descent of thy Holy Spirit: oh say unto me, be it unto
thee even as thou will; yea even as thou will who art ever readily, strongly
inclined to do thy people good. Oh let me be so refresht and strengthened with
that spiritual banquet, that I may cheerfully walk on my way to glory, through
him who is both Sacrifice and Priest, the Feast and Master of it, invites us
to, and feeds us by himself, to whom with thy Blessed Majesty, and Holy Spirit
be ascribed all Honor, Glory and Praise, now and for ever. Amen.

Going to Church.
COme away, my Soul! let us go: (oh that I may) See how he loved us, how dear
we are unto him, how nearly related he is unto us. Let us go die with and for
him, disclaim whatsoever is against him, renew our Covenant with him,
consecrate our selves wholly to him, that we will never leave nor forsake him.
We were unworthy he should speak to us, or look upon us; he comes unto us,
dwells with us in our nature: unworthy of the crumbs that fall from the Table he
has spread for all creatures; and behold he calls us to one furnished with the
richest of his blessings. Oh that I may find him whom my soul loves! oh that
he would speak comfortably, savingly, effectually sensibly unto me! that my
heart may burn within me while he talks with me, and opens unto me his love
and affection, those holy mysteries, and my understanding.

His sweat and blood (oh my soul) drowned not his affections to us; his
Compassion brake through his passion; in the same night, (which was so full of
anguish and dolor to his Soul,) wherein he was betrayed; when death was in
sight, and all those unspeakable fears and sorrows, terrors and sufferings were
ready to invade him, when his Disciples were ready to betray, forsake, deny
him; injuries from men, ready to load him; and the Justice of God upon sin to
be demonstrated on him, he then even forgot his own misereies to remember and
dispense his meries to us, and provide this Banquet for us, continually to
present himself to us; lest after he had endured so much for us we should
forget or distrust his love unto us. Oh how was he burned between two fires,
the fire of his Affections to us, and that of his Afflictions for us! At that
time wherein men were designing the greatest cruelty against him, was he
bestowing the greatest courtesy and gift on us; himself leaving us a Legacy,
a pledge at parting of his dearest love, stronger then death, that held him on
the cross to finish our Salvation, when death could not hold him in the grave.
Before he gave himself to be crucified for us, he provides an ordinance the
means of his communicating himself to us: he gives us in the Sacrament what he
did and gave, prepared and purchased for us on the cross.

Oh the infinite love of God, that he would give his own Son; and of Christ
that he would so graciously come and save us, and leave us those remembrances
and tokens of his love! that he should die for us when he was on earth, be so
mindful of, and nourish us with himself now he is in Heaven! Oh wonderful
mystery, that the Body of Christ now reigning in Heaven, should be laid upon
the Table; that the Author of life should become the Bread of life; that under
the broken form, of bread and wine whole Christ should be conveyed to every
Believer! His Personal Union is with the single nature, but his Mystical with
every Believer. This Sacrament is the representative of the Substance, the sign
of a Covenant, the seal of a Purchase, the figure of a Body, the witness of our
Faith, the earnest of our Hope, the presence of things distant, the sight of
things absent, the taste of things unconceivable, the knowledge of things that
are past knowledge; a seal of our Saviors engraving, whose superscription is
Christ's loving us, whose Image is Christ dying for us, whose deed is Christ's
New Testament confirmed to us: in the sign we have the Image, in the seal the
benefit of Christ's Body; in the sign we see, in the seal we by Faith receive
him. The Bread and Wine are but the dishes in which this Feast (not of the
belly but mind) is served up; not the Feast it self. Faith eats, not the Bread,
but the breaking of it; drinks, not the Wine, but the pouring of it forth. The
eating Christ's flesh, and drinking his blood, is nothing else but an act of
Faith terminated upon him as our Mediator and Redeemer. The participation of
his Body and Blood for strength and refreshment, (sweet to Faith as meat and
drink is to hunger)could not be better shadowed forth then by the staff of
Bread and Wine, comprising all sorts of Spiritual provision for our inner man:
and Faith is to the Soul what Natural hear is to the body, by virtue of which
the Nutritive Faculty turns the food into nourishment. They present and confirm
Christ to us as the most needful, beneficial, and perfect nourishment of the
New man, as Bread and Wine are such unto the Body, i. e. that Christ crucified
preserves us from Eternal death, and is unto us the Fountain of Spiritual and
Eternal life. Believe, and thou have eaten: Christ is present with, but not in
the Bread and Wine, but to the faithful Receiver, not in the Elements, but to
the Communicants; not water, but washing with it is Baptism; not Bread and wine
on the Table are a Sacrament, but eating and drinking them, which if they be
acts of Faith (the hand and mouth of the soul) the Bread and Wine as really
convey and unite whole Christ with the vital influences that proceed from him
to the Soul, as the hand does them to the mouth, or the mouth to the stomach.
Whatsoever we may expect of bodily strength or reparation from Bread and Wine,
we may expect from Christ for our Soul, life maintained, grace quickened,
deadness enlivened, resolutions enabled, hope erected, faith strengthened,
lusts subdued, which is consequent upon our union with Christ and interest in
the Covenant, renewed and ratified to his people by Christ's death, and sealed
to them in the Sacrament. In the Word we have a promise, here a pawn or pledge
of him.

Lift up your heads therefore, O ye gates of my Soul, and be ye lifted up ye
everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall come in. And be assured such
additions of grace as thou art fitted for, and Infinite Wisdom sees meet to
deal out, shall be conferred upon thee.

Fear not, I charge thee do not faint; let not thy weakness, thy poverty, thy
inabilitie discourage thee; all have not Talents alike; a Faith richly
embroidered with love and delight is not given to all, and expected only from
those to whom it is given. Be thy attire whole, sincere, clean, and white, free
from spots of the flesh and Spirit, though not so perfumed with heaven as thy
Brethren; thou will be welcome. Thy God and Savior will not ask, How came
thou hither not having on a Wedding Garment: he knows thy heart, and sees thou
have it. He will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, till
he send forth judgment unto victorys What manner of, guests were those he
commanded to be brought in to the Wedding Supper? but such as were found in the
streets, and lanes, the Hedges and high ways: the poor and the maimed, the
lame, the halt, and the blind; hunger-starved, forlorn, undone lost wretches.

Oh blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to approach unto thee,
that they may dwell in thy Courts! We shall be satisfied with the goodness of
thy House, even of thy holy Temple.

At the Lords Table.
WHat shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits? I will take the cup of
Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto him now
in the presence of all his people.

Come forth, oh my graces! stir up your selves, stand ye lively and active
before the Lord. Awake my Faith, and see the Atonement of my sins in the
broken body of my Savior, the price paying the ransom laid down, the thing in
doing. Awake Repentance, and hear the strong cries, and see the doleful Agonies
of him that bore our chastisements. Awake my Memory and call to mind that Egypt
wherein I was, and the Blood of the Passover, which removed the Destroying
Angel from my Soul. Now let the Altar smoke with the sacrifice of a loving
heart, inflamed with the holy fire of Gods love to me. Flame, oh Love; come ye
warm Desires, and break with longing. Let Fear with all veneration do its
obeisance. Come up, ye Daughters of Music, and all that is within me, bless
his holy Name. Now the wax is warm, Oh let the seal be stamped fair, that I may
see the impression ever after. Now that God shows forth to me the death of his
Son for me, let me show it forth to God again, as that which I stick unto and
abide by for my Righteousness and Peace with him.

Having liberty and access with boldness unto the Throne of Grace by the Blood
of Jesus, the High Priest of our Profession, let us draw near with a true
heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience and our bodies washed with pure water.

O thou that providest food for all creatures and have given all creatures to
be food for Man's body, and for his soul, not only thy holy Word, but the
blessed Body and Blood of thy Son; cause all our hearts to burn with desires
after thee, who art so full of love to us. Prepare every one by a full
digestion of thy heavenly word, to receive likewise this Divine nourishment.
Make it (through the lively operation of thy Holy Spirit) the Bread of
Spiritual life, and Wine of Spritual comfort to all our Souls. Cause us to long
after, relish and savor the things of God. Let this be the constant language
of our Souls, Lord ever more give us this Bread. Call in, compose, and
spiritualize all our thoughts at this solemn Ordinance. Pardon every one that
prepares his heart to seek thee, though he be not cleansed according to the
Purification of the Sanctuary. And, O thou that made us upright, pity the
degeneracy of mankind; despise not the price of thy Sons blood, let it not be
as water spilt upon the ground; convert, direct, unite, provide for, take care
of, support and comfort all of them: let us take a mutual charge of one
another* make us all up more and more into the mystical body of thy Son, that
we may keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. Afford us thy Gospel
in its power and purity, liberty, and efficacy, so long as the Sun and Moon
endures. Let us never want Magistrates and Pastors after thy own heart, which
shall protect, encourage thy people, and feed them with knowledge and
understanding.

See (my Soul) thy Savior set down with what a handful of his Disciples! On
the Communicants separated from the Congregation.
that lay in common with the rest of the world; by nature children of wrath
even as others, born in the same state of distance from thee, and with the same
principles of enmity against thee. Oh! what is this that is come to pass? how
is it that thou manifestest thy self to us, and not unto the world? what moved
thee to make a difference, where thou foundest none? Why ^vere we not made a
Prey of Divine revenge, and perished not in our enmity against thee? Why were
thou not provoked by our obstinacy, malice, and unbelief, beyond the
possibility of an Atonement? Why have thou so long suffered our injurious
disrespects, and unkind repulses of a merciful Savior, and persuaded till thou
overcame and made ^us yield? Why have thou not cut off all our hopes of a
blessed immortality, who have paid so great bounty with contempt, so many
benefits with ingratitude, so inexpressible love with oblivion, neglect, and
hatred? Oh what have thou done? What have thou not done and suffered for us?
why would thou buy sinful dust with thy own blood? Redeem our shame by the
shameful death of Glory and immortality it self? put thy self (that got
nothing by making the world) to more charge then all of it is worth, to redeem
the worst part of it, fallen man? Who can conceive whether we had precipitated
our selves, and to what thou haft exalted us? to be spectacles even grateful to
God, who were monsters of horror; laid in his bosom, who were in the arms of
the Devil; worthy his imbracements, who were unworthy of his eye; crowned Kings
of Heaven, who were slaves condemned to the Prison of Hell. He not only
pardons our sins, but relinquished his Throne, lost his life, to inthrone us in
his Kingdom: bestows on us his greatest mercies, unworthy of the least; sets us
down as sons at his Table with his children, who are unworthy as dogs do creep
under it, courts us to obedience, who might not only command us to it, but
instantly punish our disobedience: promises a reward to such who are so far
from deserving it, that they are still provoking him: glory to such who are
more apt to be ashamed of their duties then offenses.

Oh! how ought we to be transported with love and thankfulness, considering who
has chosen us, when, why, whom, from, and to what, how long, and how few, his
peculiar care of, and kindness unto us! How should the remembrance of this dear
love of our Lord, make us ^urn with ardent affections toward one another! How
shall we offend one of those for whom Christ dyed? or deny ^ur selves to them
to whom he has gi^en himself? Shall we hate, be envious, and uncharitable,
where thou art so lo^ing, so liberal? condemn or despise the ^eanest, when thou
distributest thy self ^o all? Oh, now we see thy love to ^nemies, let all ours
find us friends! Let ^o malice, heart-burning, or uncharitable^ess, enter in,
or any more rancour my ^oul. With all thy prople let me inter^st my self, and
own them in all their conterments, pity them in all their miseries, ^e ready to
relieve them in all their ^ants, to comfort them in all their di^tresses, to
counsel them in all their doubts, to delight in their society, bear their
infirmities, pardon all their miscar^iages, study their welfare, do all the
good (...) can to Soul and Body.

Now I see the Minister at the Table to consecrate the Bread and Wine by Prayer
and the words of Christ's Insti^ution: The Minister at the Table.
with joy and admiration think (my Soul) how Christ was ordained and
accomplished for the Office of a Mediator, whom the Father sanctified and sen^
into the world; and for this cause he sanctified himself as Priest, Altar and
Sacrifice for our Redemption, Spiritual nourishment, and Eternal salvation. The
Eternal Wisdom of God Incarnate t^^ reveal and communicate his Will, hi^ Love,
his Spirit, his Glory, to sinful miserable Man. Oh the immensitie of his Mercy,
and unutterable treasures of hi^ Grace! which neither the provocation of our
sins, nor the infinite exactness o^ his own Justice, could any way overcom^ or
restrain to despise the works of his ow^ hand, or not to compassionate the
wretchedness of his Creatures, though it co^^ the Humiliation and Exinanition
of the Son of God! Oh how great, how amiable appears his Love and goodness, i^
passing by so many offenses, and requirin^ no satisfaction from us for such
insufferable wrongs, but transferring the punishment from us unto his own Son;
who^ love also was so great, that he would bear our iniquities that we might be
saved! Oh how could he choose a mo^^ ^^liging way of Redeeming us, that has ^us
displayed the severest Justice and ^ghest Mercy, the greatest hatred of sin,
^^e greatest love to sinners; since by those ^equalled and unvaluable
sufferings to which he delivered up for us that Son, ^ho is so near unto him,
that he is one ^ith him; at once manifesting both how ^uch he hated sin, which
he so heavily ^nished in the person he most loved; ^^d how much he loved
sinners, by gi^^ng up what he so loved, for a ransom (...) those that were
guilty of what he so ^^ted? And oh the miracle, the amazing ^odigic of this
Love! that Heaven ^ould so condescend to Earth, and that ^an should be so
united to God! that ^^od should dwell in flesh, and that this ^sh should be our
food! That the Son of ^od should love us better then his life, and (...) the
meat of Worms, of Sinners, of Ene^es! that he should make himself pre^nt to our
Faith; and as if he would do ^^re then die for us, desires to live for ^^er in
us, and to be united to us! Was ^^er kindness like unto this? was ever ^^ch a
furnace of love burning in any ^east? can any heart freeze over such a fire?
Oh! who can abide the heat of the love? who can dwell in such flames, a^^ not
be consumed? who can abide in (...) great sense of this love, and abide in the
body? what instances can parallel? wh^ words can be expressive? what
appr^hensions can commemorate? what r^ptures can be sufficient for the
admiration of this so infinite love? Be thou sw^^ lowed up (O my Soul) in this
depth (...) Divine love, and hate to spend thy though any more upon other
things that have su^^ a Savior to take them up.

Oh! I shake, I tremble, am altogether confounded (...) the approach of so
great guest! The Minister coming toward him.
Lord, I am not w^^ thy that thou should come under (...) roof, or to eat
the crumbs that fall from my own, much less thy Table. Oh, w^^ am I that I
should dare with my (orignally, actually) desiled hands, to recei^^ those high,
those holy Mysteries? the thou desire to to come unto me, be e^tertained by
me? what find thou (...) me, that so much delights and invites the to me?
art thou ignorant of my m^^vile beginning and original? I am not ^heruhim,
Seraphim, or of the number of that Celestial Hierarchy; but dust and shes,
polluted dust and ashes. Lord, ^^adst thou rather be at another man's ^cuse with
dishonor, then at thy own ^ith honor? or, if thou have no respect ^o thine
own honor, if thou castest under ^ot all praise and renown, if thou take
unto thee every vile sinner, yet have thou ^o regard to thy Greatness and
Majesty? Thou know my poverty, my need, my ^mpurity: this poor place is a
far un^eet habitation for thee. Whence is this (...) me, that my Maker, my
Redeemer, should come unto me, thus favor, thus ^ignifie me? that thou
should be so ^elow thy self, as to look upon so low, so ^ain, so miserable a
thing as Man, such a ^ead Dog as I am? Why have I found grace in thy sight,
that thou should take knowledge of me, seeing I am a stranger? Lord, what am
I that thou should remember me, be mindful of me, visit me, ^ast thine eye,
set thine heart upon me, ^ome to marry thy self with me? Whence ^omes it that
thou, who art in Heaven amongst them that know so well how to love and serve
thee, should vouchsafe to descend to me, who know little e^^^ but how to
offend thee? Can thou (...) be content to be without me? Did (...) mere love
draw thee from Heaven (...) my sake, and give thy self for me to (...) deem me
from my sins, and do thou s^^ give thy self to me to be the strength an^
health of my Soul? As if thou could^ never give thy self enough, or be ne^^^
enough mine? Oh how am I astonish^^ at this inconceivable love! oh that I we^
able to comprehend it! Oh that I had (...) thousand hearts to correspond with
i^ oh stay (my gracious Lord) for the ^^mcasure of my love, till thou have ma^^
me able to do nothing else but love the^ But since thou art pleased to come an^
offer thy self to me, my soul thirsts (...) thee; I humbly stretch out my
hands unto thee; my longing, gasping, desires a^ after thee: I open my heart
with a^ humble thankfulness to receive thee, never to be separated from thee,
for ever (...) adhere unto thee. Oh enter in and st^^ with me; satisfy my soul
with thy sel^ say, This day is Salvation come unto t^ house. Oh be not now
offended at the loathsome sights in a soul so sick and diea^e^ ^ased, so full of
filth, of rottenness and ^orruption, into which thou art entering. Do not
disdain me for those many Mala^ies, but come and cure me.

The Bread.
SEE (my soul) thy Savior in the Minister, and the benefits that come by ^im
in the Bread and Wine; believing those with himself are given thee by him, ^^s
really as the Elements by his Embassa^our, saying, [Take, eat, this is my Body
which is broken for you:] by Faith re^eive, apply, appropriate me unto thy
^elf. This Bread consecrated by me is ^he Sacrament of my Body, offered as an
Expiatory Sacrifice for you. Hereby I ^mpute my righteousness, impart my lo^ing
kindness, make over and give un^o you my whole self (God and Man as Mediator)
in my Blood and Merits, Gra^es and Spirit, Virtue and Benefits, Obe^ience,
Satisfaction, Expiation, Doings, and Sufferings; in all I have, am, or have
^urchased for you, I make yours by gift, and you by Faith, as truly as if put
into your very hand and mouth. Mine were the pains, the sufferings of Death,
yours the benefit; mine the stripes, yours the balm; mine the thorns, yours the
Crown. These are the holes in my hands and side, the blood that issued from
them yours; the price mine, yours the purchase. See here in my wounds your
safety, in my stripes your healing, in my anguish your peace, in my Cross your
Triumph. I came out of my Fathers bosom that thou might lie in Abraham's. Own
me for thy Lord, who have thus bought thee out of slavery; accept me for thy
Redeemer, who have paid so dearly for thee; follow me in the way I have shown
thee, that I may bring thee to him I have reconciled to thee. [Do this in, and
for a remembrance of me;] who, what, for whom, why, for what end, with what
mind, I suffered; what I have done for yon, and am unto you.

Dear Savior, biddest thou me Remember thee! How should I forget thee? how can
I but remember, but celebrate thee? But oh, that I could more affectionately,
more constantly, more effectually remember thee! With all the passionate
affections of a Heart full of love to, wholly in love with thee, with all
zealous desires to glorify thee, with all fervent longings after thee, always
to remember thee, never to forget thee! Oh that the fire of love would now
kindle and burn in my Soul; boil up, even run over with love unto thee! Oh that
I had the flames of a Seraphim, the voice of an Angel to sing thy praise! Oh
that I could go out of my self when I remember thee, and never think of thee
without an Ecstasy! forget, and quit all the world to live upon thee! The
thoughts of what thou have done is able to break an heart of Marble with love,
to turn a Rock into a Fountain of tears, to unloose the tongue of the dumb,
that they may sound forth thy loving kindness.

Oh, after all his foregoing sufferings feast thou him not (my Soul) fastened
to the Cross, conflicting with his Fathers wrath, groaning under the weight and
burden of our Sins? Look how his whole Body is stretched and tentered, his
Hands and Feet bored through, his precious Blood trickles down; and how
miserably the Thorns pierce his holy Head. See how his Looks are changed, his
Cheeks pale, his Blood going, his Neck too weak to support his Head, which lies
a dying on his bleeding Breast. Look how he shakes and stirs his dying Limbs,
what gasps and sighs he fetches, as if his Soul was struggling to get out. Hear
you not his dying groans, the taunts of the Jews, yea the groans of the Earth,
under the weight of his Cross? See the Sun blushing under a veil of darkness to
behold the Son of Righteousness under an Eclipse? Can, oh can my bosom hold,
now I see the innocent Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world, a
bleeding Victim on the purple Alter of Death? This, this (my Soul) might have
been the day that thou might have been the Malefactor, and have drunk the
cup of the fierceness of Gods wrath; but there is he that has done it for
thee. He harbored no grief of his own, but is acquainted with the just and
deadly griefs of others: he takes our sorrows on him to bestow upon us his joy:
he sorrows for us, that has neither cause nor likelihood to sorrow for
himself. What but Gods implacable vengeance could inflict? What but his
all-sufficient patience could endure? What but man's heinous sins deserve, such
his sad and wrathful dolors? Ah sinful wretches! it is our doings, that he
suffers; our evil, but his smart; our trespass, his punishment. His breast is
made a large receptable for our cares; his back a common prop unto our load; he
was delivered for our offenses; he was slain, but not for himself, he bore our
grief; and carried our sorrows; he was wounded for our trangressions; bruised
for our iniquities; for the transgressions of his people was he smitten. Why
then are we angry with, rail against the Jews, and complain not of, find no
fault with our selves, greatlier guilty? they were the instruments, we the
procurers of his sufferings: their sins practiced ours provoked his death: we
pity his abused innocence, but think not of our unworthiness and desert; bewail
the event, and redress not the cause: we have as great enmity against his
Image, as they against his Person; they grieved him in his Body, we in his
Spirit, and make his wounds bleed afresh: he takes it as heinously we should
despise him now, as that they persecuted him then: they were but our
Executioners, to inflict these punishments our sins deserved, and Gods justice
imposed on him. 'Twas thy Sins (O my Soul) were the associates to crucify him;
thy hypocrisy was the kiss that betrayed him, thy pride and covetousness the
Thorns that crowned him, thy oppression and cruelty the nails that pierced him,
thy unbelief and apostasy the spear that gored him; thy Idolatry, superstition,
Juke warmness, the knee that mocked him; thy contempt of Religion the spittle
that defiled him, thy anger and bitterness the vinegar and gall that distasted
him, thy scarlet sins the crimson that dishonored him: my drinking iniquity
like water made him drink a Cup of wrath, my forsaking my Father made him
forsaken of his: all the members of his body were objects of such cruelty,
because mine, instruments of iniquity. Oh I am the merit of thy sorrow, I am
the stroke of thy grief, I am the fault of thy killing, I am the desert of thy
death, I am the offense of thy revenge, I am the grievousness of thy passion, I
am the cause of thy torment. Oh wonderful condition of censure! Oh ineffable
disposition of the misery! the unjust sins, and the just is punished: the
guilty transgresses, and the guiltless is stricken: the impious offends, and
the pious condemned; what the bad deserves, the good suffers; what the servant
perpetrates; the Lord pays; what man commits, God undergoes. Whither, oh Son of
God? whither descends thy Humility? Whither flameth thy Charity? whither
proceeds thy Pity? whither increases thy Benignity? whither reaches thy
Love? whither comes thy Compass^on? I have been proud, thou have been humbled;
I have done unjustly, thou art punished; I have dealt heinously, thou art
revengefully smitten; I have committed the fault, thou art tortured. How much
do I owe thee, most Blessed Redeemer? how great is the price thou have paid for
me miserable Sinner? Oh I blush to see my Soul so foul and loathsome that
nothing less then thy precious blood serves to wash and cleanse it. I am
confounded to see thee in such a case for us who cared not how vile, how base,
how miserable we were.

Oh how was that justice injured, that could not rest appeased in Punishment,
but rigor? how odious and intolerable is every sin, which required no cheaper
blood for a Sacrifice then that of the Son of God? and which not suffering
only, but extremity must expiate? how heinous was the commission, since even
the remission was so grievous? That made such a breach between God and us, as
required such sufferings of the Lord of Glory? wretch that I am to cost my God
so dear! I am not worthy for which he should have suffered the least care or
trouble, much less the torments of Soul and Body. And yet, what mean I to be so
treacherous unto him? How have I broken his commands and my vows, even since
the last Communion? Oh can I Kiss the nails? hug the spear? desire that which
is the blood of him that lost his life? Can I account that light, which made
his Soul heavy unto death? Can that be my joy which made him a wan of sorrow?
sweet to me, which was so bitter to him? shall those sins not be forsaken by
me, that made him forsaken of God? or live in me, that would not suffer him to
live in the, world? Oh can I endure my Lord should be evermore disgusted and
affronted? oh how is my heart provoked and incensed against ye my sins? oh that
none of you might escape here! that ye may all lie bleeding as so many
Sacrifices at the Altar of my Lord! oh let them now feel the weight and
sharpness of thy Cross! here let them be slain at thy foot, that I may not
carry away one of them alive.

How can my Heart refrain from tears of sorrow and joy, to think of its
unkindness, and of his strange love? what heart can be so hard as without pain
to think we love him no more, who put himself to such pains for us? Oh how am I
troubled that my heart should be so cold, when his was so hot with love, as to
send forth its lifeblood for my Redemption? and yet, when I consider, that in
this stream of blood my sinful Soul is washed, and that by his stripes I am
healed; that instead of sin, and death, and Hell deserved, Righteousness, and
life, and Heaven, is purchased; how can I choose but rejoice in his love, and
hope he will accept of my poor acknowledgement, who so pardons, as might even
melt the hardest heart, and for ever silence and satisfy it by the love of God
and sufficiency of the Sacrifice. Oh how am I ravished therewith? I am
justified by Faith, and at peace with God; the flames of Hell shall never touch
me; Death is swallowed up in victory; I am consigned to a blessed immortality.
But oh my Lord! I take the boldness to complain unto thee, and expostulate with
thee; how say thou that thou love me, if thou discover thy self no more
unto me? if I have no more love unto thee? no more life from thee? if I be so
barren and unfruitful toward thee? so dull and cold in thy service? so
unwilling to execute thy commands? so weak and unable against assaults? if thou
be with me, who can be against me? what can be too hard for me? what cannot be
done by me through thee? O! since it is thy pleasure to be so familiar with me;
if thou love me so much, fulfill in me all the good pleasure of thy will, and
the work of Faith with power. Oh let the merit of Christ's death free me from
the guilt upon me; and his Spirit cleanse me from the stains within me. Let
holiness to the Lord be written upon my whole Soul and Body, that they may be a
delectable habitation for thee; unite my heart unto thee, transform me
altogether in thee.

I put my self out of my own power; I accept of and close with thee as my Maker
and Preserver, Lord and Sovereign, Priest and Prophet, King and Captain, Head
and Husband, to be ordered, disposed, provided for by thee. I give my hearty
consent that thou should dwell within me, as the alone Prince of my soul;
the possession of it I for ever surrender up unto thee. I cease to be my own. I
renounce the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; I profess my acceptance of,
submission to, to place my happiness in, and to resign my self wholly unto
thee, to be provided for, disposed of, led, saved by thee^. Oh how am I pleased
with my choice! that I have parted with my self, and am become thine! How am I
beholden to thee, that I may give my self unto thee, that thou have brought me
into the Bond of the Covenant? Oh come (dear Redeemer) to the price of thy own
blood, cease thine own and save me; assist and strengthen me, feed and preserve
me; never leave me nor forsake me.

The Cup.
COme my beloved, now I have drunk thy Cup of wrath, pledge me in this Cup of
Salvation, for which I pierced my side. I drew this wine on purpose for thee,
when I trod the wine press of my Fathers wrath alone: This Cup is the New
Testament in my blood, is a pledge of, signifies and represents (by
representation is) my blood, in which the New Testament between God and Man is
founded and established, confirmed and ratified; and by which, remission of
sins and all other consequent blessings of the New Covenant are purchased. Its
glorious liberties and immunities I hereby sign and seal unto you; a full
release and discharge from all your debts, from the house of bondage, sin, the
grave, and hell. Here I deliver yon your Protection, from all your Enemies will
I save you; from the Arrests of the Law, from the powers of darkness, from the
victory of the world, from the curse of the Cross; none shall prove too hard
for you, all shall work good unto you. I hereby confer upon and instate you in
all its royal privileges and prerogatives; behold I give my self to you, to be
your God and instead of all relations: I will be a Friend, and Physician, a
Shepherd, Sovereign, and Husband unto you; to espouse your interest, to counsel
and heal you, to feed and comfort you, to watch over and defend you. Lo, I make
over my self to you in all my Essential perfections; mine omnipotency shall be
your guard, my omnisciency your overseer, my omnipresence your companion, my
mercy your store, my wisdom your counselor, my justice your revenger and
rewarder, my holiness a fountain of grace unto you, my sovereignty to be
commanded by you, my infiniteness and all sufficiency the lot and extent of
your inheritance, my Faithfulness and unchangeableness the rock of your rest
and security, my eternity the date of your happiness. I will be yours in all my
personal relations; a Father unto you, what would my Children have? of your
Fathers instruction and probation, protection and provision, care and ear,
bread and rod, heart and house, pity and compassion, I here assure you; my Son
and Spirit I give you; to cloth and teach you, assist and comfort you,
intercede in and for you, sanctify and save you; with my self I give you all
things, mine Angels for your guardians and attendants; my Word, and Ordinances,
Ministers, and providence for your guide and good. Whether Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas, or the World, or life, or death; or things present, or things to come,
all are yours.

And that you may know I am in earnest, lo I establish my Covenant with yon,
ordered in all things and sure; written in the blood, founded in the
all-sufficient merits of your surety, in whom I am well-pleased; whose death
made this Testament unchangeable for ever; so that your name can never be
blotted out, nor your inheritance alienated, nor your legacies diminished,
nothing can be altered. I here solemnly deliver it to you as my Act and Deed,
sealed with the Oath and Blood of God, who engages here his own Body for
security! Come ye blessed, fear not, the donation is free and full, I have
received a ransom, and expect only you believe, know and accept of your own
blessedness. Here are the conveyances, see the seals, take the writings, behold
the blood of the Covenant; receive the instruments of your salvation. This I
give you as a pledge of my love, and of the truth of all I have promised. I
hereby plight you my troth, and set to my hand, ratify and confirm every
Article of these Indentures, and do actually deliver into thy hand this
glorious Charter, with all its Royalties and Privileges as your own for ever.

Amen, Hallelujah. Oh be it unto thy servant according to thy Word. But who am
I? and what is my Fathers house, that thou have brought me hither? What shall
thy servant say unto thee? I am silenced with wonder, and must sit down in
astonishment, for I cannot utter the least tittle of thy praise. Oh what
means the height of this strange love? that the Lord of all should enter into
Covenant with his dust, and take in to his bosom the viperous brood, that have
so often spit their venom in his face? I am not worthy to wash the feet of the
servants of my Lord, how much less to be one with thee, and to be made partaker
of those blessed privileges settled upon thy Sons? but for thy goodness sake,
and according to thine own heart have thou done this; even so Father, because
it seemed good unto thee. Wonder oh Heavens, and be moved oh Earth, at this
great thing! Rejoice oh Angels, shout oh Seraphims, strike up ye Celestial
Quires, help Heaven and Earth, sing unto the Lord oh ye his Saints, prepare an
Epithalamium oh all ye Friends of the Bridegroom, be ready with the Marriage
song, for Heaven and Earth, God and Man, are reconciled, a Covenant of Peace
entered and sealed, Jehovah has betrothed himself to his hopeless Captives,
and owns the Marriage before all the world: he is become one with us, and we
with him; he has bequeathed to us Heaven and Earth, with the fullness thereof,
and kept back, left us nothing to ask at his hands, but what he has already
freely granted. Oh had I the tongues of Men and Angels, all were too little for
my single turn: the whole Quire is not sufficient to utter his praise.

And will the Lord be mine? has he laid aside the controversy, and concluded
a peace? will he receive his Rebel to mercy, and open his door to his Prodigal?
I will bow my self before his footstool, and say, Oh Lord I have heard thy
words, and do here lay hold on thy Covenant; I subscribe to thy Conditions, and
close with my Mediator; I accept thy kindness, I adventure my self upon thy
fidelity, and trust my whole happiness here and hereafter upon thy promises. Oh
my God, I subject my whole Soul unto thee: Oh my Rock in thee will I build all
my hopes and confidence: Oh staff of my life, strength of my Soul, Life of my
Joys, and the joy of my Life, I will sit and sing under thy shadow with great
delight, and glory in thy Salvation.

I here take thee at thy word, thou God of Truth; thou requirest but my consent
and acceptance, and here thou have it; in token whereof I receive this pledge
thou have left me; believing thou will establish for ever thy word unto thy
servant, and do as thou have said. In this blood of thine oh Savior I believe,
I receive it as mine, I thirstily drink down, and heartily apply, with a
comfortable expectation of all those blessed benefits, purchased, secured,
sealed by it. I am more loathsome and abominable, then the croaking Toad, or
most venomous Serpent; but This Blood was shed to make me precious before thee;
which I durst not have thought, but that I hear thee say, since thou wast
precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee. And, oh
how truly may thou call us a dear, e precious people, who are bought with
that Blood, a drop of which is of worth to purchase Heaven and Earth?

I owe the suffering of the penalty due, for breaking thy Law, violating thy
Covenant and wronging thy Justice. But was not this Blood shed for our good,
and in our stead? has not our surety made full satisfaction? undergone the
curse of our sins? born them all in his own Body upon the tree? endured as much
as they deserved, as thy Justice demanded? was he not once offered up to bear
the sins of many? became he not subject to the Law for us (...) our nature, and
representatively in our stead? setting us right with, reconciling us again to
thee? has he not made satisfaction for the injury we had done thee as our
Judge, and performed that service we owed thee as our Maker? Is not ^he
Creditor satisfied, when the debt is said? will thy Justice suffer thee to
de^and the same debt twice of the surety and debtor? is not thy wrath appeased
^ith him, made so miserable a spectable (...) dear unto thee? is not the least
dram ^f this Blood of God, of greater value then

Sea of mine? of value to ransom as ^any worlds of men, as men in this? a
^ufficient satisfaction for all my sins, an ^ll-sufficient price for my
redemption? ^eing justified freely by his Grace through ^he Redemption that is
in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be apropitia^^on through Faith in
his blood; to declare ^^is righteousness for the remission of sins that are
past, through the forbearance of God; to declare I say, his righteousness, that
he might be just, and the justifier of ^im that believes in Jesus. If we
confess ^ur sins, he is faithful and just to forgive ^^s our sins, and to
cleanse us from all un^^gh teousness.

I am guilty of many heinous sins against love and light, mercies and
Judg^ents, my own conscience, and the ^^ght of nature; and without shedding of
^ood is no remission. But here is that which procures it for, and seals the
promise of it to us? to the praise of the glory of thy grace, thou have made us
accepted in the Beloved; once in the end of the world, he has appeared to put
away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, in whom we have Redemption through his
Blood, even the forgiveness of sins. Thy word assures it to all that take him
for their Savior, (which I find my self by thy grace enabled) and thou have
bound thy w^^^ with thy oath, and to both added thy Sacraments as seals; this
threefold cord cannot be broken. At the day of Judgment thou will own thy hand
and seal, an^ solemnly acquit me whom thou no^ pardonest by thy deed of gift,
the Gospel there is no condemnation to them that a^ in Christ Jesus.

I am naturally and by evil works, at (...) distance from, at enmity with thee,
an (...) my unto thee. But God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself; h^^ Blood was given to make an Atoneme^^ for our souls: thy wrath is
turned from (...) thou art become propitious to believer Christ our Passover
is Sacrificed for us the propitiation (Propitiatory Sacrifice^ ^or our sins;
that thou might pass over and look upon us with a pleasing aspect; ^^e
satisfied for sin, and pacified to sinners; ^n expiated, and thou appeased: and
we (...) well ingratiated, brought into favor, ^f enemies made friends, as
pardoned; ^aving made up the breach, and made ^eace through the blood of his
Cross, by ^im, to reconcile all things to himself; we ^^at were sometimes
Aliens and Enemies, ^ow thou have reconril'd in the body of his ^^esh through
death; to present us holy, un^^lameable, unreproveable in thy sight. ^e who
sometimes were far off, are made ^igh, by the blood of Christ; for he is our
^eace (our peacemaker) who has made ^oth one, and broken down the middle wall
^f partition between us; by whom we have ^^so now received the Atonement.

Lord, I am in worse than Egyptian ^ondage, a captive to Satan, a slave (...)
my Lusts, destitute of grace and eve^^ good thing. But is not here a suf^cient
price laid down for my ransom? and all things pertaining to life and godli^ess?
has he not obtained eternal re^emption for us, who came to give, who ^^ve
himself a ransom for many, for all? Has he not delivered, redeemed, and bought
me quite out of the hands-of Justice, out of the power of Sin, and Satan? If
while we were yet sinners Christ died for us, much more then being now
justified by hi^ Blood, shall we be saved from wrat^ through him. For Sin he
condemned si^ in the flesh, overcame death, and destroyed him that had the
power of death, eve^ the Devil. I beg of thee and rely upon the^^for supplies
of my soul-pressing wants grace, and peace, and comfort, more love unt^ thee,
and fear of thee; and. I ask no more then what he has bought for me, who hat^
not only purchased me with his ow^ blood, but all good things by the
redundancy of his Merit, after satisfaction made unto thee for our debt.

I have no righteousness of my own but what is as filthy rags; but thou ha^
made him to be sin for us who knew (...) sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: we are clothed wit^ him, and appear in thy sight
as parts an^ portions of himself, the fullness of him th^^ fills all in all.
Oh! impute not the guilt but the merit of his blood unto m^^ behold me in him,
whom thou have appointed between thee and sinners; whose righteousness in every
point answers thy Justice, and whose sufferings are sufficient to satisfy the
penalty of all my sins: Oh balance them against mine iniquities; and the
excess and proportion of virtue in his obedience, against the malignity and
unpleasingness of my disobedience; they will so far exceed in weight and worth,
that thou will in justice rather pour forth thy mercy upon me, and accept me
into favor for the one, then hold me still in displeasure for the other. And
oh thou who without grudging bore my burden when thou stoodst at the Bar of
Accusation! when thou shall sit in the seat of Judgment, will thou stick to
seal my pardon? Where thy self has paid the debt, thy justice cannot deny to
sign the Acquittance, nor thy tender love suffer thee to condemn or reject a
member of thy body, a part of thy self. Thou that sufferedst for me here, and
pleadest for me now, cannot forget to be gracious to me then.

The Law, Satan, and my sins no only stop my mouth that I cannot plead my own
Cause, but they plead against me, and cry unto thee for vengeance. Bu^ is not
this Blood as a visible prayer i^ every wound, as so many mouths open
interceding to thee for pardon and mercy for me? saying, behold the travel
(...) my Soul, the purchase of my blood, the fruit of my Agonies; for him I
wep^ and sweat, bled and dyed; he has sinned but I have satisfied; he departe^
for a season, that thou should receive him for ever, not as a servant only,
bu^ brother unto me, both in the flesh, and in the Lord; for mine, and thy own
sake, therefore, if thou account me thy beloved Son, receive him as my self, in
whom thou art well-pleased: if he have wronged thee, or owes thee ought, put it
on my account, I will repay it, I will answer for him: I Jesus have ratified
and confirmed it with my own Blood: his surety came not out of Prison, until
he had paid the uttermost farthing. Behold, Oh Lord, the bleeding wounds of thy
own Son; remember how his body was broken; think upon his precious blood shed
for us; let us dye, if he has not made a full satisfaction; we desire not to
be pardoned if he has not paid our debt. But can thou behold him, and not be
well-pleased with us? can thou look upon his body and blood which we present
to thee, and turn thy face from us? Oh let us prevail in the virtue of his
Sacrifice for the Graces and Blessings we need! Take pity, have mercy upon us
for his sake, whom we now desire to hold up between thy anger and our Souls;
and hide not thy self from us, unless thou can from him, whom we bring with
us unto thee. While we are remembering him at his Table, he is remembering us at
his Father's right hand.

I am not only guilty, but polluted; sin has as well defiled, as it would damn
me. But oh remember who loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood;
of virtue and Spirit to purify me, as value and merit to pacify thee. To this
Fountain which thou have set open I bring my polluted Soul; and what hinders
but that I may wash and be clean? be purged from the filth, as well as pardoned
for, and saved from the guilt of all my sins? for the Blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanses us from all sins.

Oh how often is my Soul cast down within me? my omissions and Commissions, my
sins and duties (as I perform them) discomfort me; I am ashamed of, and blush
to see them; my petitions for pardon stand in need of pardon; my tears of
washing, my best performances are provocations, and help to fill up the measure
of my sins; but for the Priest that offers, the Altar that sanctifies all my
services, the sweet incense he offers with our prayers.

His Priesthood is for ever available, and effectual for us. Here is wine
sweetened with the love of God, perfumed with the divine nature; that chears the
heart of God by way of satisfaction, and the heart of Man by way of
pacification; that makes peace in Heaven and within us, and all our Sacrifices
wellpleasing unto thee; who dealst not with us according to our frailties, but
state in our Advocate; who when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on
the Right hand of the Majesty on high, and ever lives to make intercession for
us. If thy grace prevented us before Repentance that we might return, shall it
not much more prevent Repenting sinners that we may not perish? how can thou
but love them that love thee, seeing thou loved us when we hated thee?

Oh my stony, unrelenting heart! how unaffected am I with my own vileness, and
thy goodness, the evil of sin, and excellency of grace, the worth of my Soul,
and death of my Savior! but the blood of Christ is able to soften and mollify
the most obdurate sinner. Oh that I could feel the virtue and power of it
dissolving this rock into a fountain of tears, a relenting frame, a heart of
flesh.

My lusts and Corruptions are many and mighty; too strong for me, but not for
thy self. As in the first Adam's sin, man died legally, so in the second Adam's
death, sin died virtually. He suffered to save his people from their sins, that
himself and not sin should have dominion over us. Shall not that blood mortify
my pride, worldliness, inordinate affections, which shall subdue the whole body
of sin? shall I reproach or make void his death unto my own Soul? or by
continuance in sin, that brought so great a punishment on so great a person, be
a greater enemy to him then the Jews were? How shall we that are dead to sin
live any longer therein, knowing this, that our Old man is crucified with him,
that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve
sin. Oh that I may henceforth find and reckon my self to be dead unto sin, but
alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord!

Oh how am I tempted, and assaulted! that I am sometimes ready to say, I shall
one day fall by my spiritual enemies; but Faith gives us a share in the
victories of Christ: having spoiled all Principalities and Powers, he made a
show of them openly, triumphing over them as our enemies: in, on the Cross, his
triumphant Chariot, took away from them all possibility to hurt: though they
assault us still, we are assured of an absolute victory. The accuser of the
Brethren is cast down, which accused them before God day and night, and they
overcome by the Blood of the Lamb, that has quenched the flames of divine
fury, and all our enemies are reconciled, or subdued.

Ah my Lord! how often does sin and the world deadden my heart, and affections
toward thee? O how dull, how indisposed? that I cannot pray with life, nor be
lively in thy service: but this blood was shed to set Prisoners free; and is
the life of all our duties, graces, and comforts. Oh that its power and
efficacy may quicken and enliven me, may put vivacity, and activity in me! that
I may pray, and hear, receive, meditate, and discourse of spiritual things with
freedom and liberty, liveliness, and cheerfulness.

Oh that I may no more, as I have too too often, disbelieve, or question the
promises of this life, or that to come. For this Blood ratifies and confirms
the Covenant of grace; not only purchased, but assures us of all good things.
Christ's Will and Testament, wherein he has bequeathed such precious legacies
to his people, is now of force; for a Testament, is of force after the Testator
is dead.

Oh how ought it to affect me, for the betraying of innocent Blood! he was
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, in his hands no wickedness,
in his heart no sin, no guile found in his mouth. I and my brethren are guilty,
but for this spotless Lamb, what has he done? and where there is no sin, thou
inflictest no punishment. But he was numbered with the Transgressors; surely
then the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all: for the transgression of
my people was he smitten; by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
many, for he shall bear their iniquities. Oh! I take thee at thy word, and do
believe all my sins, with all thine Elects were imputed to our surety; and the
wages of sin inflicted on him, that we might be fully acquitted and discharged.

I am guilty of many aggravated sins, and am the greatest of sinners; but with
thee is plenteous redemption through Christ Jesus who shed his Blood, not
because we were Righteous, but to make us So: of infinite, virtue and merit; as
sufficient for me, as if none else were justified or saved by it. He is able to
save to the utmost all that come unto thee by him.

Oh how small, how imperfect are my Graces? how cold my Love? how weak my
Faith? How faint my desires after thee? but the least degree of Grace is the
fruit of this Blood: Oh that I may find it is efficacy, perfecting that good
work thou have begun in me, from strengh to strength, till grace be consummated
^n Glory. Through the Blood of the Eternal Covenant, make me perfect in every
good work to do thy will, working in me that which is well-pleasing in thy
sight.

Oh what trifles disturb my charitable affections? how interrupted and
inconstant my love to those, who by one spirit are all baptized into one body?
but Christ has reconciled us in one body by the Cross, having slain the enmity
thereby? Oh that henceforth I may be of one heart with his Disciples, and love
them as he has loved us.

Our God is a Consuming Fire; which I cannot but dread, having so much fuel
about me, and within me; but in thy Son I see flesh of my flesh, and bone of my
bone; who gave himself for us. And shall the sentence of thy judgment disannul
the merit of his sufferings, of his satisfaction? Did thou not punish him
that thou might spare us? is it not as great a necessity of thy Satisfied
Justice to spare the sinner, as it was of thy offended Justice to punish the
sin? Thou art not only reconcilable, but desirous to become our friend. Oh how
comfortable are those words of thine to my guilty Soul, the Father judges no
man, but has committed all judgment to the Son; his first coming was in the
flesh, when he took on him our nature; his second in the spirit, when he
imparted unto us of his spirit; his third will be in power, when he shall
communicate to us his glory: his first was to redeem; his second to comfort;
his third will be to reward us. If we be careful not to offend, he will not be
extreme to mark what we do amiss. He will proceed, not according to the Law,
which requires an absolute obedience without sin, and will condemn all that
have been guilty of any sin; but according to the Gospel, which admits of
repentance for the forgiveness of sin, and will condemn none but the
unbelieving and impenitent sinner. Damnation is denounced, not for breaking the
Law, but rejecting the Gospel. He is faithful because he has promised; and
just, because his Son has purchased forgiveness. The same sentence shall be
pronounced as is past already in the Gospel, Whosoever be-believes in him shall
not perish, but have ever-everlasting life.

Sin has shut us out of paradise; but ^e blood of Christ has opened the
King^om of Heaven to all believers. It gives us ^ere a right, and hereafter an
admission: ^^rough this Red Sea we enter into the ^eavenly Canaan; and for this
cause he (...) the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death, for
the redemption of the transgressions that were under ^he first Testament, they
which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.

And he that has purchased for us a Kingdom, has thrown in, stored up all
necessaries for our passage thither; maintenance for his Heirs while they come
to Age. He will not neglect his members; not starve his own Body: He will
refresh the weary Pilgrim; furnish and supply us with provision to serve us by
the way till we come home to himself. How shall he refuse our prayers for any
thing, now we are united to his person, our souls joined to, and nourished by
his body, sanctified by his blood, and clothed with his robes, marked with his
character, and sealed with his spirit, renewed with his vows, consigned to his
glory, and adopted to his inheritance; when we represent his death, and pray in
virtue of his passion, and imitate his intercession, and do that he commands,
and take Christ along with us in our arms, and offer him, he essentially loves?
He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he
not with him freely give us all things.

The Communion Close.
BUt here is no continuing Banquet! Oh how unwillingly do I rise? How Ioth am I
to go hence? me thinks I could sit here and feast my self for ever. Oh what
running Banquets my Lord affords me! sure he need not fear I should surfeit on
himself, or be weary of his company. Oh! what shall I do in yonder
unsatisfying, Sould-starving World? I have been feeding on my Paschal Lamb, and
now must I to my sower Herbs again! If it be his will, I must obey; but oh take
me by the hand, lead and uphold-me, be still by me, let me see thee always with
me. I know thou have prepared the endless Feast above, where I shall ever lie
in thy bosom, under the uninterrupted beams of thy smiling, and all-cheering
Countenance, and glut my hungry Soul on the Banquet of thy ever blessed self:
In comparison of which I now, rather Fast then Feast; and enjoy but drops, of
the river of pleasure; an antipast of the Eternal Supper, a Vigil of the
Eternal Rest, where my Appetite shall be satisfied, and my thirst quenched in
the Ocean it self: where I shall see thee in thy Glory, and be ravished in the
sight of thy beauty, and drink of those overflowing joys streaming from the
light of thy ever-blessed face. Where Body and Soul shall be subject to no
corruption, imperfection or decay; nor stand in need of such Viaticums to
support us in our way. Where the vail of our mortality shall be rent, our
mud-wall of flesh made spiritual and transparent; the shadows and resemblances
abolished, the glass removed, the riddle of our Salvation unfolded, the vapors
of corruption dispelled, the patience of our expectation rewarded; where from
the power of the Spirit within, and presence of Christ without, there shall be
diffused on the whole man a double luster of that exceeding abundant Glory.
This ordinance is a Type of that Eternal Feast the feeding on his Body, a
pledge of seeing his face; the same company there, and Christ in the midst of
them, when he shall gird himself, and make us to sit down at meat, and come
forth and serve us. Oh the dignity, the comfort of those servants, who have
infinite delight, Majesty it self condescending to serve them at the Table! for
the Guests to have him set himself to solace them; who is infinite in sweetness
and knowledge, to make his sweetness please them whose bosom is the hive and
center of all goodness, in which all the scattered parcels of blessedness are
bundled up.

But alas, as yet I am on Earth, and have my work to do, too too toilsom, and
heavy for me; scarcely should I have lasted out so long, but that at such
seasons as this, he repairs my finking Spirit, by pouring in the Cardials of
his Blood, the comforts of his Spirit. Oh, little did I think to be thus much
made of, or minded by him, who is taken up with the attendance and praises of
his Heavenly Host; my conscience would have kept me away, but he called me to
him, ran to meet me, and took me in his arms, and rebuked my timorous Spirit,
saying, wherefore did thou fear? I called my self Prodigal, a companion of
Swine, a miserable hard-hearted wretch, no more worthy to be called his Son or
Servant; he called me Child, and chid me for questioning his love. He has
readily forgiven me those sins, I thought would have made my Soul the fuel of
Hell. He has put on me the best Robe, his Sons righteousness; a ring on my
hand, honored, adorned me with the riches, the seals, and pleges of his love,
and Shoos on my feet, prepared, armed, firmly fetled me to go throughout all
the difficuties of a rugged way: by enabling me to believe the Gospel of Peace
and Atonement. He has killed the Fatted Calf for me, instead of mingling my
Blood with my Sacrifice; and entertained me with Joy, with music, and with
Feasting; when I better deserved to have been howling among the Dogs without
the door, then a crum at his table. He has embraced me in his sustaining
Consolatory arms, when he might have spurned my guilty Soul to Hell, saying
depart from me, I know you not.

Oh! how shall I mention the loving kindness and praises of the Lord, according
to his mercy, according to the multitude of his loving kindness, according to
all he has bestowed on me, and his great goodness to the house of Israel? Oh
that I could proclaim thy love to all the world, and make the whole earth ring
with thy praises, and awake every creature to do it with me! Oh that I could
laud him with the Celestial Quire, and join my heart and voice with the spirits
of just men made perfect! [To him] who has created a whole world, so large,
beautiful and magnificent to serve us; subjected so fair a Territory to our
Dominion; consigned to our use so numerous a race of goodly Creatures, to be
managed, enjoyed, governed by us. [To him] who has endued our Bodies so
fearfully, wonderfully, curiously made, with Souls resembling his excellent
perfections in Knowledge, Righteousness, and true Holiness, capable or serving
and enjoying him; affording to that end all convenient instructions,
encouragements, and assistances. [To him] that supplies our manifold needs,
protects us from innumberable dangers, gives us whatsoever is necessary,
convenient and pleasant, for our use, sustenance, and delights; accepts our
acknowledgments of former Blessings, as arguments, and opportunities of
conferring fresh ones: who might utterly cast us off when we threw off our
obedience, and long ago have san'd us as chart from off the face of the earth
by the breath of his nostrils into unquenchable fire. [To him] who remembered us
in our low estate, when we had lost his Image and favor, our excellency and
happiness; descended from his imperial throne, took upon him our shape
conversed as it were upon equal terms with us, to assume us into a nearer
affinity; submitting to our choice, Crowns that cannot fade, Scepters that
cannot be extorted from us. [To him] who has saved us and called us with an
Holy Calling; quickened us who were dead in trespasses and sins; opened our
Eyes, bowed our Wills, spiritualized our Affections, changed us from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that we might receive
forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified by Faith
in Jesus Christ. [To him] who forgives our iniquities, covers our sins,
justifies the ungodly, heals all our diseases; imputes not our trespasses,
but his Righteousness unto us: redeemeth our life from death and destruction:
crowns us with loving kindness and tender mercies. [To him] who has adopted
us, and looks upon us, and provides for us, and deals with us as Sons, Heirs of
God, and Coheirs with Christ, Fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God. [To him] who has not lately begun, or will suddenly cease; is
neither inconstant or mutable in his Affections, but from everlasting,
continues, and will to eternity persevere immutable in his intentions to do us
good; that has delivered, does deliver, and will deliver; and never leave us
nor forsake us. [To him] whom no ingratitude, undutifull carriage or
disobedience of ours, could one minute wholly remove or divert from his steady
purpose of caring for us: who regards us though we do not attend to him;
procures our welfare, though we neglect his concerns, imploys his restless
thoughts, extends his watchful eye, exerts his powerful arm, is always
mindful, and busy to do us good: watches over us when we sleep; remembers us
when we forget our selves, in whom it is infinite condescension to think of us,
placed so far beneath his thoughts; to value us dust and dirt, and
inconsiderable nothings; not to despise and hate us, so really despicable and
unworthy. [To him] that is as merciful and gracious, as liberal and munificent,
that not only bestows on us more gifts, but pardons us more debts then we live
minutes; that with infinite patience endures, not only our manifold infirmities
and imperfections, but our petulant follies and obstinate perverseness,
careless neglects, wilful miscarriages, treacherous infidelities; who puts up
the exceeding many outrageous affronts, injuries and contumelies continually
offered to his supreme Majesty, by us, base worms, whom he has always under
his feet, and can crush to nothing at his pleasure. [To him] that has loved us
and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings and
Priests unto God his Father; a note the Angels cannot sing, who have many
strains of praise we are unacquainted with. [To him] that is able to keep us
from falling, and to, present us faultless before the presence of his Glory
with exceeding great joy. [To him] that vouchsafes us hearts and abilities to
wait upon, free access unto, a constant intercourse, and familiar acquaintance
with himself: to esteem and style us his friends and children; to invite us
frequently, and entertain us so kindly with these incomparable delightful
delicacies of spiritual repast, with an affection as great as our fare is
costly: yea, to invite us often at our home, and if we admit, to abide and
dwell with us; indulging us the enjoyment of that presence, wherein the life of
all joy and happiness consists; and to behold the light of his all-chearing
countenance. [To him] who gives freely and upbraideth no man with former
unkindnesses and neglects of his love we are heartily ashamed of; who calls us
neither very frequently, nor over strictly to account; who exacts of us no
impossibity, no difficult burden, or costly return; being satisfied with the
cheerful acceptance of his favors, the hearty acknowledgments of his goodness,
the sincere performance of such duties, to which our own welfare, comfort,
advantage (rightly apprehended) would, otherwise abundantly dispose us [To him]
whose Benefits to acknow^edge is the greatest Benefit of all: to be ^nabled to
thank him who deserves our ^^eatest thanks; to be sensible of whose
^eneficence, to meditate on whose good^ess, to admire whose excellencies, to
^elebrate whose praise, is Heaven it self, ^he life of Angels, the quintessence
of Joy, ^he supreme pitch of Beatitude. [To him] those benefits are immensely
great, innu^^^^ably many, inexpressibly good and ^^recious, be Glory, Majesty,
and Dominion, ^^w and for ever.

And oh thou the blessed Fountain of all ^ercy and goodness! Inspire our hearts
^ith thy Heavenly Grace, and thereby in^ble us rightly to apprehend, diligently
to ^onsider, faithfully to remmeber, worthily (...) esteem, to be thankfully
affected with, (...) render all due acknowledgment, praise, ^^ve, and thankful
obedience, for this, and (...) thy great and manifold favors and ^^nefits
conferred upon us. And blessed (...) the Lord God of Israel from everlast^^g to
everlasting, and blessed be his Glo^^ous name for ever; and let the whole ^arth
be filled with his Glory, and let all (...) People say Amen.

Going Home.
O How great a Lord has my Soul entertained! How glorious a guest do^^ thou
now harbor! How pleasant a Companion, how faithful a Friend have tho^ now
taken in! How dear a Husband do^^ thou now enjoy! Oh the inestimable benefits
received in these high and holy Mysteries! what am I, O Lord, or what is i^ me,
that thou should do this great honor and Glory unto me? and reveal (...)
thy heart and love which is secret unto others? he might have prepared torment
but behold privileges for me! I am unworthy to touch the threshold of the
house, and thou have taken me to the Table; not worthy to stand among the
servants, and thou have made me sit wit^ my Savior; not worthy to fall dow^
before thy footstool, and thou have smil^ upon, come in to me, and made my
hea^^ thy Throne; while others eat the brea^ of violence, and drink the wine of
decei^ what am I that I should eat the body, an^ drink the blood of thy own
Son? I a^ not worthy to eat the bread of men, an^ thou have given me the bread
of Angels. What they admire, I have received; whom they adore, I have
entertained; their mirror is my meat; Christ and they are two, I and my Savior
are one; oh unspeakable mystery! oh incomparable mercy!

This is he who came from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah, whom we have
seen glorious in his apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength;
returning in triumph from the slaughter and conquest of all his and our
enemies? mighty to save us from our sins, that were mighty to condemn. And he
has on his vesture, (the title is conspicuous) and on his thigh, (the place of
strength) King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Wherefore art thou red in thy
apparel, and thy garments like him that treads the wine fat? I have trodden
the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of God, and of the people there was
none with me; I have discomfited my peoples enemies, and trodden them down like
grapes in a wine press: their blood is sprinkled upon my garments, and I have
stained all my garments. Oh, I beheld his blood streaming down through the
holes in his side! Oh what? fight, a fire, a flame of love did I see in his
blessed Heart, and my self portrayed upon it? my name among the rest, oh with
what joy and comfort to my Soul! he has set me as a Seal upon his Heart; love
is strong as death, many waters of affliction cannot quench it, nor the floods
of trouble or persecution drown it; might all the pleasures, profits, honors
of the world be given for it, it would be utterly despised. Oh how easy find I
his yoke! how light his burden! methinks I could watch or pray, do or suffer
more believingly, more courageously than ever. It was the voice of my Beloved
that knocked, saying, open unto me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled:
he put in his hands by the holes of the door, and my bowels were moved for him;
my Soul failed when he spoke, I sought him in every part of the Ordinance, and
he was found of me; I called him, and he gave me answer: I sat under his
shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. He brought me
to the Banqueting house, and his Banner over me was Love. His left hand is
under my head and his right hand does embrace me. A bundle of Myrrh is my
Beloved unto me, he shall lie all night betwixt my Breasts; he shall be still
in my heart by affection and Faith? I will make him my continual joy, comfort,
and refreshment; and solace my self in him in all estates. Oh that his name may
be graven upon my heart! and his Image remain fair and lively upon my Soul! Oh
that I may find a kind of unwillingness to admit of any other company: when I
come to converse with other things, let me still be looking toward him as my
only desire, good, and happiness, let my heart be so filled with him, that
other objects may not come near, or make any strong impression on me. Oh that
some lively coals of that holy fire kindled at the Ordinances, may be still
glowing in my Soul; that the savor and tincture of it may be never done away.
Oh how can any other pleasure seem any more pleasant to me? Can I desire the
husks the Swine do eat, when there is such Bread in my Fathers house? no man
having drunk old wine, straightway desires new, for he says, the old is
better. Sure he has been little affected, nor had any taste of Gods sweetness,
presently to relish worldly things; to wash off his palate the savor of
spiritual with sensual or secular thoughts. Abrupt chopings off from Holy
Duties is such a quenching of the spirit, as tends much to hardening the heart:
such sudden quenchings of spiritual heat got in an Ordinance, cannot be without
much danger to the Soul; motions so quite opposite, are as prejudicial, as
unbecoming. Is it fit or seemly to leave the company of our Lord so soon as we
have let him in, and divert to other occasions? associate our selves to other
persons, now we have newly given him our Faith, and taken him as the Bridegroom
of our Souls? and not rather delight in the presence of our new love; and keep
our heart from cooling by laying on new fuel; turning the remainder of this day
into an after supper, a second Communion. In reviewing and being humbled for
our coldness, distractions, miscarriages. In blessing God for the liberty and
opportunity of a Sacrament, and the privileges thereby conferred upon us; in
ruminating on, and retaining the savor of those pleasant things we have been
entertained with: exceedingly gladded in the sense of that love we have been
tasting and celebrating, in the belief of that pardon we have received in the
hopes of that Grace and Glory that has been assured to us. In considering the
obligations we have laid on our selves. In heavenly discourses with our
beloved; in expressions of our love and affection toward him, acts of desire
after inseparable union with, and greater likeness unto him: in vows and
promises we will always be faithful and loyal to him: in entertaining him with
acts of love and delight, thanks and praise, with the best cheer we are able to
make our new, our beloved guest: in commending his beauty, praising him for his
kindness and favors, extolling his riches, admiring his perfections and
graces; talking with him about the affairs of our Soul; in opening to him every
room in it, leading him into the most private recesses of our heart: showing
him all the secrets of it, acquainting him with all our wants and weaknesses,
spreading before him all our desires and fears, hopes and griefs. In praying
for help and assistance to be steadfast in his Covenant, interceding with him
for all mankind, especial our Fellow Communicants. In telling him again, all
we have is his; in tying a new knot upon the band of the Covenant between us;
craving him pardon for our follies; desiring him not to be offended at the dark
and noisome hole into which we have brought him, and entreating him with all
loves that he will not take exception at his poor entertainment; even charming
him to stay and dwell with us, by all the songs of praise and thankfulness we
can devise.

Subsequent Duties after the Sacrament.
AND now my utmost care and diligence is required to express the power and
efficacy of the Ordinance, in living more fruitfully, religiously, watchfully;
in making good my vows and promises at the Sacrament. That heart and life
therefore may be suitable to my Sacramental obligations, and may witness the
good received in and by it; oh my Soul,

Make a solemn reflection on thy self and entertainment.] How was my heart and
behavior before God, what welcome did he give me? Reflection is necessary after
every duty: what good have I got? what warmth of affection? what more love to,
desire after, delight and confidence in God? what greater ability and love to
discharge duty, to bear affliction, to resist temptation, to walk in Gods ways?
so especially after the Sacrament, was my Heart hard, dull, indisposed? I must
then suspect my miscarriage in preparation or performance; and labor to find
out, be truly sensible of, greatly bewail, and humble, judge, and condemn my
self, and beg pardon for the cause; earnestly importune him that he would now
help me by Prayer and Humiliation, to recover the benefit of the Ordinance,
that I may by an after act do that which I should have done before. Sorrow for,
and sense of our senslesness, is one fruit of Christ's death we undoubtedly
received in the Ordinance. We may not judge of our gain by, and profit in duty
by our present feeling: or that the only evidences of Communion and acceptance
with God, are, our Souls lifted up and ravished with sensible joys: our
uprightness and sincerity in the performance of our duties, and in our
covenanting with God, and continuing steadfast therein, may administer most
ground of comfort when we reflect upon it: for we were then really acceptable
to him that looked down upon us, and received from him a seal to the promise of
pardon and eternal life, though he did not testify it by giving in
extraordinary joys. He looks not so much at fits of passion, as at the steady
bent and tenor of the Soul. The truest Communion with God, is to enjoy the
Communication of his Graces, whereby we are made conformable to him; we may
enjoy the saving influences of his Spirit, when we cannot feel his more
abundant consolations. Though this Ordinance be not at present joyous, yet may
afterward yield the peaceable fruits of righteousness to those that are
conversant therein. It cannot be well known what Grace we have received
(further measures of which are the holy Spirits accompanying those means, being
the great benefit we are apt to expect) till we come to the exercise of it in
duty and against temptation. But oh, how much cause have I to rejoice in his
love and goodness, to render him hearty thanks (who might have left me as well
as others to my self) for his quickening and refreshment, for his satisfying me
so abundantly with the fatness of his house, and making me drink of the river
of his pleasure; especially now I find (and oh that I could more and more) such
real benefit received by it; my soul more deeply broken and humbled under the
sense of sin, and that become more loathsome, hateful, burdensome to me. My heart
truly thankful for what I have enjoyed, and sorrowful I have enjoyed no more;
more strongly engaged and resolved to inward and universal holiness: my Faith
in Christ more increased and settled; my love to him more inflamed; my Soul
strengthened and emboldned to undergo any thing for him: my spiritual delight
and joy in him raised, and lessened to other things: my esteem and valuation of
the Ordinance heightened, my Graces in it exercised; my desires after full
enjoyment of God and Christ in Glory more enlarged. If he were pleased to kill
me, he would not have received a burnt-offering and a Meat Offering at my
hands; neither would he have showed me all these things; nor as at this time,
have given me to experience such things as these. Oh that I may always retain a
thankful sense of all his benefits! Oh how much am I beholden to thee my God? I
have been praising of thee, but nothing to what I ought, or what thou
deserve. Oh, how can I cease to magnify thee? for what I am and have, for
the use of thy creatures, and thy blessing with them; for every crum, much more
for Christ, that foundation mercy, that has all mercies folded up in him, and
entailed unto him; that sweetens and sanctifies every mercy: for this Feast on
his Body and Blood, for the joys of thy house, and the viands of heaven; for
any measure of life and affection, raisedness and comfort, grace and goodness.
Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name. While
I live I will praise thee, I will sing praise unto my God, while I have a
being: and what is here wanting in thy due praise, I will pay hereafter in
everlasting Hallelujahs.

Rest not in the work done,] though done never so well. Beware, lest by
spiritual pride, and future negligence thou lose the things thou have wrought.
Had I done all as well as was commanded me, I would say I am an unprofitable
servant, I had done but my duty, but O how short come I of it? Oh let not the
Lord lay to my charge, my want of due preparation; my coldness, and
indifferency, distraction and unbelief, my so many failings before and at the
Ordinance: that my heart was in no better frame; that I took no more pains
with it to fit it for thy self: that it was no more broken for my sins, when
the Minister broke the Bread: that when I took it, I was so dull, so dead, and
did no better reach forth the hand of Faith to lay hold on, and apply Christ
and his benefits; so played the hypocrite before thee and my fellow
Communicants: that when the Wine was poured forth, and I saw how Christ shed
his Blood for sinners, I scarce dropped a tear for the cause, from a heart
sensible of my sins and his love unto my Soul: when I took and drank the Cup, I
did not remember him as I ought: that my heart was not so seriously intent, and
reverent, so deeply affected, suitable to the importance and excellency of the
duty, and the Majesty of him with whom I had to do.

Spend some time in strengthening and confirming thy holy purposes and
resolutions.] O that some fruit may be seen of this day till the solemnity
return! that the thoughts and meditations I had there may be so strongly, so
deeply fixed and rooted in the bottom of my heart, that nothing may be able to
pluck them up! that I may be so sensibly possessed with the persuasions that
Christ is in, and united to me! that when a Temptation comes and knocks for
entrance, I may readily, naturally say, I am not he that I was before, the
property of the house is quite changed; I live yet not I, but Christ in me; I
was indeed a common Inn to entertain all-Comers, but now I am become the sole
Habitation of the High and Holy One, he expects to be honorably treated like
unto himself, he will have no competitors or unclean thing in his house; I
cannot arise and open to you. Oh how shall I treat him, who has taken up his
abode with me? shall I take the members of Christ and make them the members of
an Harlot? defile that body wherein he has chosen to reside? force him out of
his habitation by any impurity? offend him by any noysom thoughts, or unsavory
breath out of my mouth? shall those hands that have received the sacred
Elements, work deceit? those Eyes that have been filled with tears at the Lords
Table, be filled with envy? those teeth that have eaten Holy Bread, ^grind the
face of the poor? those lips that have touched the Sacramental Cup, salute an
Harlot? the mouth that has drunk consecrated wine, be full of rotten
discourse? shall I be so greedy of the World, as to forget to retire to
converse with my Savior? shall I so perplex my self in business, as to omit to
pray, to meditate, to sing praises unto thee? No, I am not at my own dispose, I
have sworn and I will perform, that I will keep thy righteous judgments; and
often consider how deeply I am obliged to him that has paid my debt. Oh I can
never parallel his love, yet let me show my self thankful; I can do nothing
satisfactory, but let me do something gratulatory. He gave himself a
sin-offering for me, let me give my self a thank-offering to him; offer up my
self a living facrifice unto my Redeemer, who offered up himself a dying
Sacrifice for my Redemption.

Beware of Crucifying Christ afresh.] To them that believe he is precious; now
I have begun to celebrate the Marriage, oh let me never throw off the wedding
Garment, stain it by any pollution, or seek after other lovers? eat his Bread,
and lift up the heel against him; take the Cup, and betray my interest in him;
after I have received him, cast him out of my heart, live in that for which he
died, As the Sacrament is a memorial of Christ Crucified for sin, let it be a
remembrance to me of abhorring, crucifying, abstaining from it. Else, I hold on
Satan's side, seek to keep him on his throne, do those things which Christ is
more unwilling I should, then he was to suffer all the indignities and torments
the Jews inflicted; he was willing to dye by their hands, rather then any
inconveniency should fall upon me, then sin and Satan should reign over, and
keep possession in me: he was not troubled so much to dye, as he was to see me
live in sin; for he dyed that I might cease from sin. And, do I dispute when a
temptation is presented, whether Christ or Barrabbas shall be preferred? my
lusts denied, or my Lord Crucified? that which would murder my Soul deserve to
be spared, or he that suffered to save it? Oh how sad! that he who seems to
deifie Christ in the Eucharist, should vilify him in his members; that such
who pretend to eat and drink Christ's Body and Blood at the Church, should eat
the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence in their own houses:
that they should be so devout at the Sacrament, as if they believed God to be
in the Bread, and in their lives so profane, as if they believed not God to be
in Heaven.

Abandon and Crucify all sin more then ever.] I have put off my coat of
corruption, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet in the blood of the
Lamb, how shall I defile them? the Lord has spoken peace unto me, let me not
return again to folly. Has he taken off my former burden, and cast it on the
back of his dear Son, and shall I lay more load upon him? has he loved me and
washed me from my sins in his own blood, and shall I with the dog return to the
vomit? with the sow that is washed to her wallowing in mire? shall I take
poison after Physic? make the Table of the Lord contemptible? Has he been so
gracious to me, as to vouchsafe and seal me a pardon of all my sins, and shall
I so abuse his goodness, so turn his grace into wantonness, as to run afresh on
his score? is not this to account the blood of the Covenant, wherewith I am
sanctified, an unholy thing; may I not fear his anger will kindle against me,
and that he will no more have mercy on me? Oh let not those hands that were
reached forth to receive Christ, be stretched out to oppression and violence,
but be hence forth sacred, and do no deed that may offend thee: nor those lips
that have touched those holy Mysteries, be defiled with the Devils drivel,
filthy communication, but be hallowed from all words that may displease thee.
Oh let my Soul, which by thy Sacrament is made so happy, as to be so near to,
be never so wretched, as to think any thing too dear for such a Savior. Let
nothing make me leave my first love, who for love of me left his Father and
country, Heaven and glory, to espouse me.

Frequently consider the engagement thou have hereby laid upon thy self.] No
space of time can wear it off, to the same strictness all our days as this,
though we had but this one opportunity to receive. The Bonds my Soul is entered
into, will never be cancelled. God forgets not his promises, nor my breaches,
though I may; the matter is now out of my hands, I cannot revoke this gift of
my self to God (indeed I have given nothing but what was his own before) after
these vows there is no enquiry to be made whether they should be kept, This day
I have avouched the Lord to be my God, to walk in his ways and to keep his
statutes; and he has avouched me to be one of his people: I have taken Christ
for my Lord and Husband, to live in love and obedience to him, as I hope to be
saved by him. Tempt me not therefore from my loyalty and allegiance, the vows
of God are upon me, sealed at the Sacrament, and recorded in Heaven; not one of
my Fellow Communicants but are witnesses with, and to God, that they saw me
personally, publicly own and renew my Covenant with him; for my Oath sake, and
those that sat with me, I will not do this evil and sin against God. Shall I
alienate and pollute the heart so solemnly devoted to him? break those bands
asunder, and fetch the Sacrifice away from the Altar, tied with such strong
cords of Oaths and Covenants? must I not expect to bring fire along with it? to
provoke God to a severe revenge of the mocks and scorns I put upon him? shall I
so horribly profane his name? and make my self such a forsworn perjured
wretch? Is it a light thing to break an Oath made solemnly with God? shall he
escape that does such things? or shall he break the Covenant and be delivered?
As I live, says the Lord, surely my Oath which he has despised, and my
Covenant which he has broken, even it I will recompense on his own head. I am
sure he will be true to his promises, and shall I fall under his threatenings,
by being false to mine? If a good man keep his Oaths and promises with men to
his own hurt, much more ought be those to God for his own good.

Walk on in the strength of this spiritual Food, till thou come to
perfection.] Oh that I may still drink of the Spiritual Rock, find the
efficacy, virtue, and benefit of the Sacrament, follow and stream after me
while I travel in this Wilderness! O that I may be stronger and stronger in all
Graces, more active and exacter in all Spiritual Duties; hear more heedfully,
pray more fervently, receive more believingly, keep the Sabbath more exactly,
watch over my heart and ways more diligently; be more humble and pious toward
God, more just and righteous to man, more sober and temperate toward my self:
that I may walk worthy of Christ, of the Covenant, of the Sacrament, Kingdom,
Gospel, and Grace of God; of my Birth and Breeding, oh that my present
deportment may be answerable to my future preferment; that there may be some
proportion between my frequent receiving and growing in Grace; that I may show
forth his death till he come, in respect of its influence on my Soul.

Delight in Spiritual fellowship with Christ's Members.] Oh that I may now bury
all envy, malice, hatred, uncharitableness; and (as Christ) love my enemies,
but especially those that are partakers of the same benefits with me. O that
that sentence may still run in my mind, If God so loved us, we ought also to
love one another! Oh that I may shake off all ungodly society, have my heart
linked unto, and be a companion of all those that fear the Lord; make the
liveliest of them my most intimates, and upon all occasions improve their
fellowship to the best advantage. O that I may henceforth behave my self as a
stone of the same Building; as a branch of the same Vine; as a servant of the
same Family; as a member of the same Body; as a Son of the same Father; oh
merciful Eternal high Priest, let that Sacrifice thou once offeredst on the
Cross for the sins of the world, which thou do now and ever represent in
Heaven to thy Father by thy never-ceasing intercession, which this day has
been exhibited Sacramentally on hy holy Table, obtain Mercy and Peace, Faith
and Love, Truth and Unity, Safety and establishment, Grace Glory, and all good
things to thy whole Church, and let not the gates of Hell ever prevail against
it.

Cheer up and comfort thy self against all discouragements.] Have I worthily
received the Lords Supper, whatsoever my miseries are, this cannot but be a
reviving cordial, yet my sins are pardoned. How little should I be dismayed at
any inward or outward troubles? let me be fed all my days with the bread and
water of affliction, I have another bread and cup to sweeten both; let her not
say she is sick, her sins are forgiven. I have received an all-sufficient
Savior; and seek for nothing in, but renounce my self having so much in him.
How can I any more walk dejectedly, that am interested in the New Covenant?
which with all its promises and privileges is ratified and confirmed to me?
what ever I need is to be had here, health and recovery from sickness, a
competant maintenance and support, peace and deliverance from our enemies,
content and patience, liberty and joy, sanctified riches, or a cheerful
poverty, and whatsoever is a blessing is purchased for and secured to us. And
oh that this in all my troubles, difficulties addresses to God, may quiet me,
and strengthen my Faith to apprehend him as in Covenant with me, that has
engaged himself to be with me in all estates and conditions, and to order all
things for my advantage: I have resigned up my self to him, let him do with me
what seems him good. He cannot deny himself; all his words are oaths for
their certainty, and all his promises the sure mercies of David. This
Sacrament is that to my particular person which it is in it self, and by design
to all the world: If I receive worthily, I shall receive any of those blessings
according as God shall choose for me, which shall be not only with more wisdom,
but more affection then I can for my self. Let me but be void of all care, but
only to preserve my Fathers love, and I cannot want. He whom Almighty Wisdom
and Goodness takes a Fatherly care of, engages to feed, cannot but have enough.
All things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is God's. Nothing is
excluded where he is included.

Keep up earnest longings after this and the eternal Supper of the Lamb.] Oh
when will the opportunity return? when shall I come again and appear before
God? when shall I see his power and his glory, taste his love and goodness as I
have in the Sacrament? O that I may still be feasting my Soul on those Heavenly
Dainties, those spiritual Viands, those satisfying pleasures at his Table! I
think the time long to that day of gladness and rejoicing. The King of Glory
has now espoused me to himself by Proxy, by his Ambassador; the day is
hastening when the Marriage shall be publicly, triumphantly solemnized, and
completed. Mount up (my Soul) and ever stand wishly looking for his
appearance, never slack thy Watch, nor let thy Expectation cool, till he take
thee to himself, where we shall be gathered together where the Body is, and
his Glory presented without an umbrage; where he shall lay aside his veil, and
his amiable countenance be checkered with no intermingled frowns, intervening
clouds, or obscure mediums; where mysteries shall be turned into revelations,
the translation into the original, commemoration into vision, espousal into
mutual fruition and embraces, sighs and tears into nuptial songs and
festivities, transient glances into the direct beams of the ever radiant Sun of
Righteousness, a moments work into an eternity of rest: where is satiety
without nauseating; perfect happiness without care or encumbrance, envy or
successor, alteration or end; for every chain a ray of light, every tear a
pearl, every prison a palace, every loss the purchase of a Kingdom, every
affront in Gods Service an eternal honor, every hour of sorrow a thousand
years of comfort, multiplied with a never ceasing Numeration. Where Job^ that
sat on the Dunghill, sits among the Angels, Lazarus, that lay among the Dogs,
is lodged in Abraham's bosom; the Saints heretofore among the pots, walk in
white: where are riches and pleasures tru^ and real, adequate and suitable,
solid and satisfying, lasting and durable: where I shall see thee (oh infinite
Sweetness and Delight) without a Veil, and live upon thee without a Figure:
where I shall have, not a Sacramental, but a Beatifical^ Communion; not wear
thy ring, but see thy face; not remember, but behold thee; not in Faith, but
clear and full Fruition.

Come Love! come Lord! and that long day
For which I languish, come away.
When this dry Soul those Eyes shall see,
And drink the unsealed source of thee;
When Glory's Sun Faith's shade shall chase,
Then for thy Veil give me thy Face.
AN APPENDIX TO THE Devout Communicant.
CONTAINING More particular Directions and Meditations for the time of
Receiving, with a Prayer before and after.
A Prayer at home before the Sacrament.
ETernally Blessed, and infinitely Glorious Lord God! Thou art greatly to be
feared in the Assembly of thy Saints, and to be had in reverence of all that
draw nigh unto thee. Look down from Heaven the habitation of thy Holiness and
Glory, in much mercy, pity, and tender compassion upon me, A vile, sinful,
despicable Creature, prostrate at thy Footstool; unworthy to look up unto thy
Throne, or to receive any thing at thy hands, but thy wrath and severe
displeasure. I am less then the least of all thy Mercies, and liable to the
severest of thy Judgments, by reason of the pollution and sinfulness of my
Nature, Heart, and Life. I am of the degenerate Posterity of fallen Adam; and
have all the powers faculties, and members of my Soul and Body defiled with
sin. I have sinned in every Age, in every Relation, in every Condition, in
every employment of my Life. I have distrusted thy Word, disregarded thy Calls;
slighted thy Judgments, abused thy Mercies, turned thy Grace into Wantonness,
rejected the tenders of thy Love, resisted the motions of thy Holy Spirit, the
checks of my own Conscience, and followed the motions of my own evil Heart; I
have dishonored thy Name, profaned thy Sabbaths, polluted thy Ordinances,
been unthankful for thy Benefits, impatient under Afflictions, unfaithful to my
promises; misspent my time, neglected my Duty, walked unanswerable to those
multiplied obligations laid upon me, broken all thy holy Commandments, by many
and great transgressions made and judged my self unworthy of everlasting life;
Here mention your particular failings.
so that nothing might remain unto me, but a fearful looking for of judgment
and fiery indignation to devour me.

But thou delightest in mercy and not in the death of a sinner; art not willing
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. Oh take not counsel
of thy just indignation, but of thy native goodness, thy satisfied justice.
Will thou destroy him that presents himself to be punished, and thy Son to have
satisfied? that desires not to live, unless it be by the benefit of thy mercy
and his sufferings? Will thou not spare me for thy Son, who sparedst not thy
Son for me? Is there not enough in his Merits and Sacrifice to expiate all my
sins, and to justify my person in thy sight? O suffer not thy self to be
deprived of the glory of my forgiveness and salvation, as well as of my
creation and redemption. Save me whom thou have hitherto spared, and forgive me
eternal death, which I have so often merited by my great offenses. Bury them
all in the bottomless Ocean of thy own Mercy and forgetfulness, and my Saviors
Blood; lay them upon him who is able to bear them, and cloth me with his
righteousness that is able to cover me.

Oh free me from the guilt and stain, the power and penalty, the reign and
dominion of sin, that nothing may separate me from thy love nor from the
sensible discoveries of it at thy Table. That I may be a meet and worthy
Receiver, accept me into thy favor; let thy mercy pardon my sins, thy grace
sanctify my soul, thy goodness supply my wants, thy merits enrich my poverty,
thy precious blood wash away all my spots, thy Holy Spirit prepare, and direct,
and assist me. Take away my filthy garments, my spiritual filthiness, and
cloth me with the best robe, the Lord our righteousness. Oh, think me worthy
for his sake, and make me worthy for thy mercysake. Deal not with me according
to my deserts, but thy great goodness and my great necessity. Let me so
remember my sins, that thou may forget them: set them so before my face,
that thou may cast them behind thy back. Give me such a lively steadfast
Faith in Christ for forgiveness, that thou may seal it up unto my soul. Let
me love him, and all his members, with a pure heart, fervently, at thy holy
Communion, and ever after without dissimulation. So enlarge my Soul with
spiritual affections and desires, that it may even break for the longings it
has unto that Ordinance, and unto thy Testimonies at all times. Remove far
from me all blindness of mind, hardness of heart, unrelenting affections,
deadness and indisposedness, earthliness and distraction, irreverence,
unbecoming apprehensions, whatsoever may hinder the blessing and efficacy of
that soul-nourishing refreshing Ordinance, thy gracious presence, my eternal
salvation. Create in me an understanding, heavenly, clean heart, O God; and
renew an humble contrite right spirit within me, prepared for thee, Oh be not
as a stranger unto me; hide not thy self from me; lift up the light of thy
countenance upon me. Let me feel the comfortable breathings of thy Holy Spirit
in my Soul at thy Ordinance; sanctify it to me and me to receive it
acceptably, with due preparation and apprehensions, reverence and humility,
repentance and faith, love and charity, joy and thankfulness, a deep sense of
thy inexpressible love and my own unworthiness.

And oh that all of us, who this day approach thy Table, may so eat his flesh
which he has given for the life of the World, that we may live for ever; and
so drink his blood, that it may be to us for remission of sins. Meet us not in
our selves, in thy justice, as a consuming fire; but a reconciled Father, in
thy righteous and beloved Son, whom thou gave, who gave himself for us when
we were thy enemies. Let us depart thence more under the power of thy love and
grace, and under greater resolutions and abilities to do thee faithful service
all our days, through Jesus Christ, our Sacrifice and Redemption, Hope and
Confidence, Surety and Advocate, the Food and Health, the Life and Salvation of
our Souls; who has taught us when we pray to say,

Our Father, etc.

As soon as ever the Sermon is ended, look toward the Lords Table, and say
within your selves,
THis Sacrament I am going to, is a standing Memorial of my Savior's Passion,
wherein he once offered up Himself to God, and a Sign of that nourishing and
strengthening Grace, which he now offers to me under the notion of Food. It is
the true means and instrument of conveying on me those Blessings, and
signifies that which by its proper Institution it represents.

In the making and ordering of those Elements, see, consider (O my Soul) the
heavy Blows, and Bruises, the Pressures, Piercings, Pains, and Sufferings of
thy Savior, from his Father and wicked men. The malice and violence of his
Murderers, crucified Him as a Malefactor; and the fiery wrath of God made him
a Burnt Sacrifice; and under both these Sufferings He is become to me Meat
indeed, and Drink indeed; the stay and support, the comfort, refreshment, and
life of my Soul, nourishing and preserving it to eternal life.

That Bread and Wine could never sustain and nourish me, if the one had not
fallen into the Earth, under the Sickle, the Flail, the Millstone, and the
Fire; the other under the Hook, and the Press of the Husbandman; nothing less
then the Cross, the Wounds, the Death of my Lord, my God of his dearest Son
made me a Savior; and by this Sacrament assures me I shall be kept up and fed
with a supply of all necessary Blessings, as certainly as he gives me to
taste that Bread and Wine, the ordinary means for preserving my life and
strength.

Whilst we condemned Creatures were passing on to our Execution, the Son of
God looked upon us, and took our Condemnation upon Himself; and under it died
in our stead: Thus, by the death and satisfaction of this Sacrifice, Justice
gave way to my Release; God the Father forgave my Sin, and God the Son procured
my Life.

Then fall upon your Knees with all imaginable Reverence, and say,
LEt the words of my mouth and the meditations of my heart be acceptable in thy
sight, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer.

Most gracious God, who of thy great goodness, have ordained this Ordinance for
a continual Remembrance of^ hat ever prevailing Sacrifice, which thy infinite
Wisdom and Love have appointed, and accepted upon the Cross, for us vile,
helpless, wretched Sinners; make us truly sensible of all our offenses against
thee, and of his Love and Sufferings for us, and accept us in Him to the Praise
of thy Grace. Rebuke all unseasonable thoughts and imaginations; stir up, and
act in us, every grace of thy Holy Spirit; and graciously entertain us, and
grant we may now so behave our selves, that we may not provoke, but glorify
thee; be savingly partakers of the Redemption we now commemorate, and be found
and kept in the number of thy Redeemed Ones for ever.

BLessed Lord, who revivest by this sacred Banquet the memory of thy
inexpressible Love, and of my Savior's Sufferings, enable me by Faith so to
apply his Passion, that healing strength, and saving virtue, may proceed from
it; the strength and sweet odor of whose Oblation is a fragrant, as savingly
efficatious, as when first offered up unto thee. Inlighten my Understanding,
prepare my Heart: Help, O help me, that I may now abate nothing of those
affections that are due unto Thee, and my ever blessed Redeemer. And let me
obtain the fruits and Benefits of his Death and Passion; even the remission of
all my Sins, and the fullness of all thy Graces. O bless me and thine own
institution unto me; and grant that I may not increase my guilt, by abusing of
what thou offerest me, but may receive a blessing from Thee.

HOly, righteous Father, who see nothing in me that is truly mine, but dust
and ashes; and which is worse, sinful Flesh, polluted Blood; O look upon some
few resemblances of thine Image, some rays and beams of thy Spirit, some small
beginnings of thy Grace which are from thee in me; and supply the defects with
thy Mercy, Merits, and Sacrifice of thy Son. Turn thine Eyes, O merciful
Father, to his Satisfaction and Intercession, who now sits at thy right Hand;
to the Seals of thy Covenant, which lie before thee upon thy Table; and to all
the wants and distresses which thou see in my Soul; and take this opportunity
of glorifying thy Mercy, thy Son, and thy Grace toward me and upon me.

BLessed Jesus, so dispose me by thy grace, and Holy Spirit, to feed
spiritually and really upon that Sacrifice which thou offeredst without the
Gate, and which this Sacrament sets before me here in thy Court, that I may be
admitted into that holy place which thy Sacrifice has opened, and this
Sacrament invites me to. And help me so to drink of this fruit of the Vine,
that I may drink it new in my Father's Kingdom, where I shall be delighted and
refreshed, and converse with thee, withou these tipical shadows and
adumbrations.

When the Minister is confessing sin, and praying for the efficacy of the
Ordinance, let your Heart concur with him, and put in your particular failings
with their aggravations, and the mercies you in special need, which he omits.
Prostrate your Souls in the sense of your own vileness, and necessities; join
with all earnestness in his confessions and Petitions, as one that knows the
evil of sin, and the need and worth of the Blessings he Requests.
And let the solemn consecration of the Bread and Wine, mind thee how thy
Savior was consecrated and set apart for thy Salvation; And say,
HOw wonderful is thy wisdom and Love, O God, in our Recovery and Redemption?
How justly might thou have dealt with us, as with the fallen Angels, and
left us to perish without a Remedy? Howstrangely do thou glorify thy Mercy
over those Sins, that gave thee the advantage and occasion to glorify thy
Justice? Even thou our God, whom we have offended and provoked eternally to
ruin us, have, out of thine own Treasure, satisfied thine own Justice; and
given us a Savior, by such a Miracle of Wisdom, Love, and Condescension, as
Men and Angels shall never be able fully to comprehend. So did thou love the
sinful World, as to give thy only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life.

When you see the breaking of the Bread, and pouring out of the Wine, say,
O Hateful Sin! O wonderful Love! O dreadful Justice! O precious Sacrifice! O
merciful Savior! How gracious Lord have thou been to Sinners? How severe unto
thy Son? How cruel have we been unto thee, and our selves? How small a matter
has tempted me to that, which cost so dear before it was forgiven.

I Cannot but here observe something very like the Sacrifice and Passion of my
Dear Redeemer. Thus the Bread of Life was broken; Thus the Lamb of God was
slain; Thus his precious Blood was shed; Thus his Father gave Him once to die,
and gives still the virtue of his Death to bless and save every one that comes
unfeignedly to Him.

While the Minister and others are Receiving before you, say,
WHo can sufficiently admire and adore Thee, most gracious God, for reconciling
us unto thy self? Vile sinners, the Offspring of sinful Parents, thou treatest
as familiar Friends, as dear Children. Thou might have brought us together
hither for a Sacrifice to Thy Justice, and behold one of Thine own making for
us, the Son of Thy Love. We are unworthie of the least crum of our daily
Bread, unworthie to tread upon thy Earth, to breath in thy Air, to lift up our
Eyes to Heaven, and Thou give us Bread from Heaven, liberty to tread thy
Courts; Thy Spirit to breath in our Hearts, leave to breath ou^ our Requests
unto Thee, O compassionate Father. And now Since Love will choose such unworthy
Guests, and Mercy be honored upon such Sin and Misery, let that Mercy that
invites us makes us acceptable, and graciously entertain us.

O Author of my Salvation, and of these Mysteries that express it; Object, and
Truth of what I am now going to receive: Thou art as able to perfect me with
thy Blessings out of thy Throne, as thou were to redeem me by thy Sacrifice on
thy Cross. O perform in me by thy Sufferings, what thou do exhibit and
present. By this thy Body broken, give also nourishment and maintenance unto
eternal life. Look upon a poor Sinner at Thy Table, as Thou did on him that
hung by Thy Cross, and remember me now Thou art in Thy Kingdom.

I Am unworthy that Thou should enter under my Roof; much less come and sup,
and dwell with me: but seeing it is Thy good pleasure to vouchsafe me this
favor, cleanse me from all my Sins, that I may entertain Thee in a pure and
Sanctified Heart. Make this unclean Habitation, that is so unfit to receive
Thee, a Temple for thy Self to dwell in. Strengthen my Faith, assist me by Thy
Grace and Spirit, that I may fully rely upon Thee, apply Thy Sufferings unto
me, worthily receive Thee.

When the Minister gives you the Bread, Think you hear Christ say to you in
particular,
[Take, eat, this is my Body, which is broken for Thee, this do in remembrance
of me.]
MY Lord, and my God? did Thou offer up thy Self for me, despicable, forlorn,
wretched Sinner, as well as for any other? and do Thou now give Thy Self unto
me, and bid me remember Thee, the Redeemer of my Soul, the Author, the Object,
and Truth of this Sacrament? I humbly and thankfully receive Thee, with a
troubled Heart that I can no better receive Thee, entertain Thee, love Thee,
remember Thee, serve Thee, express my gratitude toward Thee, and that I have
so often offended Thee.

Now I know thou love me, seeing thou have not withheld thy Son thine only
Son from me. By his Merits and bloody Sacrifice, I hope to be received into the
Communion of his Sufferings here, and hereafter into the Communion of his
Glory.

THis is the Sacrifice, the Righteousness in which I trust, and by which I am
justified and saved from the Curse of Thy violated Law. As Thou have accepted
it O Father, for the World upon the Cross, behold it still, on the behalf of
Sinners; and hear his Blood that cries unto Thee for mercy to the miserable;
and for his sake pardon us, and accept us (...) thy reconciled Children.

This was my doing: It was I, and such other Sinners, that deserved to bear the
punishment, who were guilty of the Sin. And can a Murderer of Christ be a small
Offender? Shall I ever have a dull, a lifeless apprehension of Thy Love, or a
favorable thought of Sin more? O that I may sufficiently detest and never more
commit those Offenses that delivered my Redeemer to Death, that pierced my
Saviors Hand^ and side, that Crowned his Head with Thorns, and filled his Sou^
with Grief.

O Thou, who in thine anger revenged our Sins upon thy Son, in thy merce
correct and destroy them also in me. And besto^ upon me such a measure of the
Spirit, through which He offere^ Himself without Spot unto Thee as may
sanctify for ever the Bod^ and Soul which now I offer u^ unto Thee, and help
me to discharge the Service I promise unto Thee.

O Blessed Lord Jesus, who have ordained this mystery for a communion of thy
Body, for a means of advancement and proficiency in Holiness, and for an
infallible Pledge of eternal Salvation, which Thou have purchased by thy
Sufferings, and preparest Thy people for by Thy Grace; make this Ordinance of a
true sign, an effectual means of the same, that it may be efficatious to settle
me in the communion of Thy Sufferings, which it shows forth, to feed me with
that living Bread which it presents, and to sanctify me for that eternal
happiness which it promises and secures.

Take the Cup from the Minister, as from Christ, saying,
[This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for Thee, for the
remission of Thy Sins.]
O The depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
unsearchable is his Goodness, and his Love past finding out! How have Thou
surpassed all Humane Apprehensions? What a matchless Gift is this, and unto
what unworthy Sinners. Will God stoop so low to Man? And come so near him? and
thus reconcile his provoking Enemy? Will He freely pardon all I have done? and
take me into His Family and Love? and feed me with the Flesh and Blood of his
Son? Such a guilty Soul might expect the destroying Angel; that Thou would
have charged upon me all my Sin and Folly. But while I condemned my self, Thou
have justified me, and given me the Seal of my Pardon, in the blood of Thy
gracious Covenant; and surprised me with the surest Tokens and Pledges, the
sweetest Embracements of Thy Love.

O The unmerited, the distinguishing goodness of the great and holy God of
Heaven and Earth! in making me a reasonable Creature, his Servant, his Son; In
providing so plentifully for my Body and my Soul; temporal and spiritual bread
to eat, and Raiment to put on; In giving me a heart in any measure to discharge
my Duty unto Thee, whilst others are neglecting Thee, or expressing their
enmity against Thee. Innumerable are thy Creatures, that cannot take notice of
thy Benefits. Yea, how great a part of mankind, made at first after thine
Image, live and die in Darkness, and perish for want of Vision? That cannot or
will not enjoy these happy Opportunities? are unavoidably kept from them, or
wilfully, sinfully separate and exclude themselves? How few of those that draw
near to Thee, sincerely wait upon Thee, faithfully serve Thee, are graciously
accepted by Thee. With what an unvaluable price have Thou Redeemed a worthless
Sinner, that deserved Thy everlasting Vengeance? with how precious a Feast
entertainest Thou me, that deserves to be cast out with the Workers of
Iniquity into the ever-flaming Pit, in that I have been so careless of serving
Thee, so wilfully offended Thee, so often preferred things displeasing unto
Thee before Thee; and provoked Thee to call back thy goodness and mercy from
me?

HOw dearly have Thou purchased my Love? How strangely have Thou deserved and
sought it? O what shall I say unto Thee? or do or suffer for thee? which way
shall I express my gratitude toward thee? O, what an addition an answerable
Heart would be to thy Love, and Mercy, and Invitation? Make, O make such deep
and lasting Impressions upon my Soul of Thy care and kindness, and
condescension toward me, that I may always affectionatelie remember Thee,
faithfully serve Thee, never offend Thee, eternally enjoy Thee

O That I could love thee as much as I should as I would, as I shall love Thee,
when I shall do nothing else but praise Thee, and serve Thee, and love Thee,
without ever offending Thee, or doubting of thy Love unto me. In the mean time,
O that it may be the delight of my Soul to think of Thee and thy
loving kindness, to reverence and worship Thee, to pray unto Thee, and praise
Thee; to wait upon Thee in Thine Ordinances, at Thy Table, to be ordered and
guided by Thee.

I Offer up unto Thee my Soul and Body, all I am and have, to he ruled and
disposed of by thee. O that I may be full of zeal to follow Thee, and rejoice
in being loved of Thee, and humbly confide in Thee, and absolutely resign my
self unto Thee, and be filled with constant devotion toward Thee, and earnest
breathings after Thee.

O Father of everlasting compassion, forsake not in this Wilderness a feeble
Israelite, whom Thou have brought thus far out of Egypt: and let not the Soul
Thou have blessed with some desires, and helped thus far with some tendency
toward eternal happiness, ever faint or fall from the right way.

O Son of God, and Life of those that believe; quench not, but cherish and
inflame the smoking Flax; break not, but support and strengthen the bruised
Reed. Feed with thy Divine Influences this tender Branch, this weak Member of
Thine, which without thee cannot but wither, cannot but die, cannot but perish.
Despise not the slender beginnings of Grace in me, but carry it on with power,
until Thou have made me meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Life.

Blessed Spirit of all Grace, cleanse me from all my Sins; keep and set forward
in me, notwithstanding all my Infirmities, Thine own Work, and carry it on unto
Perfection. Seal up unto me the Covenant of Pardon, which is sealed and
delivered to me in this Ordinance.

FIll our Hearts (most gracious God) with love and kindness toward one
another; Let there be no strife or differences between us or any of Thy people,
for we are Brethren. Supply all the necessities of our Souls and Bodies:
Provide for us, as Thou know best for us. Let us be still fully satisfied
and delighted under all thy Dispensations toward us; and let all be in love
and mercy unto us. Mortify all our inordinate affections and desires: Draw
thine Image more and more lively upon our Souls. Let our chiefest pleasure
consist in serving and pleasing of Thee. Let nothing disturb or displease us,
but Thy dishonor.

Send Thy Gospel where it is not preached; make it very successful where it is:
Let all who enjoy it, walk worthy of it, and let them be taken care of,
preserved, and defended by Thee.

Forgive unto us whatever Thou have seen amiss in us: what is ours, graciously
pardon; what is Thine own, graciously accept. Bless this Ordinance Thou have
ordained for Thy Church; accompany it with the Influences of that Spirit, which
Thou have promised to power upon all Flesh; That thereby the World, Thy Church,
our Souls and Bodies may glorify Thee, now and ever, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. Amen.

A Thanksgiving and Prayer at home after the Sacrament.
I Adore and magnify thee (most gracious God and merciful Father) for what
thou art in thy self and unto all thy Creatures, for thy infinite Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness, and for any discoveries of the same in and by thy Word and
Works; that thou have so wonderfully made, so plentifully provided for every
Creature, especially Man, their Lord, thy Image and Glory. But how can we
sufficiently admire thy inexpressible Condescension and Love, in taking notice
of us, (except to punish us) in becoming so nigh unto us when we lay in our
blood, and had made our selves worse then the Beasts that perish? And do thou
open thine eye upon such an one? and bring me into fellowship with thee? Is
it pleasing to thee to look upon abominable filthy Man? or gain unto thee to
serve me? to give thy self to and for me? to purchase such a clod of Earth and
Sin with thy own Blood? Oh, when I consider the Rock whence I was hewn, and
that on which thou have set me; from what I was fallen, and to what thou have
exalted me; where I had been, and where I shall be; I am amazed at thy Love, I
am confounded at my ingratitude! What shall I return unto thee (that humblest
thy self to behold the things that are in Heaven and Earth) for the innumerable
instances of thy peculiar care and special love; for choosing me out of the
World, that I might not be condemned with it; for making a Child of Wrath the
Object of thy Love; for opening to me a door of Mercy, whilst I was shutting it
against my self; thinking toward me thoughts of peace, whilst mine were only
evil, and enmity against Thee; for so many occasions and opportunities of
praising thee, and that I have not sinned away all into an incapacity of
praising thee; for striking a Conjugal Covenant with me, whose Person is
ugliness and deformity, whose Parentage base and beggarly, whose portion
nothing but Diseases and Misery; for feeding me this day with thy Word and
Sacrament, with thy own Flesh and Blood, who might long ago shook off the
hand of thy Providence such a Viper as I into fire unquenchable, and made me
there sadly experience what it is to abuse Grace by the loss of Glory; for any
heart, endeavors, or assistance, any signs of thy acceptance, any liveliness
of affection in commemorating the All-sufficient Sacrifice of my
ever-prevailing Mediator, in stead of being made a Sacrifice to thy Justice for
ever and ever: That I have been pledging thee in a Cup of Love, while others
drink the Dregs of thy Wrath; in any measure discharging my duty, whilst
others are suffering the insupportable punishment of their neglects: that thou
have assured me of forgiveness, and all other benefits purchased by thy
Passion, while so many millions are sealed up under wrath in the prison of thy
Fury: Not unto me (O Lord) not unto me, but unto thy Name be the praise. O my
God, to these and all thy mercies deny not this, A thankful heart for all thy
mercies, and grace to make them incentives to more cheerful and sincere
Obedience. Mind me always of, and enable me faithfully to perform the Vows and
Promises now upon me; confirm and strengthen them, that they may stand as fast
as thy everlasting Covenant. Let me not falsify with thee, or depart from
thee, or defile that place thou have chosen for thy Temple, but dedicate it
wholly to thee. Let the fruit of the Ordinance be found to the praise of thy
Grace, the support and encouragement, comfort and advantage of my own Soul. Let
me always remember thee, and my duty unto thee: let nothing separate me from
the love of thee; let me rather die then deny, or dishonor thee. Make me
sensible how much my Savior loved me, by his ardent desire to be an offering
for me, and remembered by me. Let me not spare my darling sins for thy sake, who
sparedst not thy beloved Son for mine. Let me always look upon that with
horror and hatred, which procured to him so much ignominy and torment. Let not
those lusts please and delight my Fancy, which were nails and thorns in his
hands and side. Seeing I now profess to abide in him, enable me to walk even as
he walked, in lowliness and humility, meekness and patience, contempt of the
World, heavenliness, and zeal for thy Glory; temperance and moderation,
tenderness and compassion, love and charity, innocence and usefulness,
obedience, resignation and submission to thee. Charge not upon me, my
unpreparedness for, unaffectedness, wanderings, unbelief, at that solemn
ordinance, this days iniquity of my holy things, but upon our great high
Priest, who offered up himself to hear our sins.

And Oh that we who have now been celebrating his Love and Passion, may with
all thy people love one another as he has loved us; have strength to resist
and overcome, constancy to suffer and persevere, may breath earnestly after
thee, be pardoned and accepted, supplied, owned, blessed by thee, keep close
unto thee, and reign with thee to all eternity, through our ever blessed
Redeemer, who was delivered for our Offenses, and raised again for our
Justification; in whose holy Name and words I further pray unto thee, saying,

Our Father etc

FINIS.

