THE DEVILS Cabinet-Councell. DISCOVERED, OR THE MYSTERY and INIQUITY OF THE
Good old Cause.

Laying open all the Plots and Contrivances of O. CROMWELL, and the Long
PARLIAMENT, In order to the taking away the Life of his late Sacred MAJESTY of
Blessed Memory.

LONDON, Printed by H. Brugis for Hen. Marsh at the Princes Arms in
Chancery Lane near Fleet Street. 1660.

THE DEVILS Cabinet-Counsell. DISCOVERED.
THe Lord Lisle a very godly Person, yet led away now and then by the Spirit to
cool his Reins in Bloomsbury, where he was twice discovered to be very civilly
used in regard of his Authority; he had given the Masterships of St. Crosses,
valued at 800 l. per annum.

I Gourdon a Lunatic, and bitter-tongu'd Schismatic.

Lord Gray of Grooby, a Saint, who had nothing but Holmby Mannor-house and
Parks for his share.

Humphrey Edwards one that waited on the King when he demanded the five
Members, and whose election was voted void by a Committee.

Nich. Love one of the six Clerks in Mr. Penruddock's place.

Ben. Valentine five thousand pound the better for the times.

Gil. Millington the Church Snuffers, one that desires no better trade then
scandalous Ministers.

Sir Hardress Waller, once a Cavalier, then a Presbyterian, and afterward any
thing.

Temperate Mr. Chaloner.

Skippon once a poor Waggoner, now in a better condition.

Saloway a smart prating Grocer's Apprentice, newly set up for himself.

Okey a good sturdy Drayman.

Ludlow a Leveller.

Smiling Sir James Harrington.

Wait, one that thrived so well while he was Governor of Burleigh, that he
bought 500 l. per annum, that was not able to buy 5 l. before.

Sir Henry Mildmay, the Mirror of Gratitude, once the Kings Ieweller,
afterward his Judge.

Heveningham a slabbering Epicure.

Scot a Brewers Clerk, Master Pursuivant to the Commom-wealth.

Martin, a beastly, profuse, and extravagant Whoremaster.

Disborow a Clown without fear or wit.

Coll. Downs, a mere cipher.

Coll. Moore Coll. of the Parliaments Guards, he had the benefit of the passes
out of London.

Will Say, a famous Lawyer.

Isaak Penington twice broke, and therefore the Parliament gave him 7000 l. to
recruit him.

Lord Mounson, a pitiful drivelling henpeckt Lord.

Philip Lord Lisle, famous for his silence; men wonder what he did among them,
unless it were because his Father kept him short.

Blackston a poor Shopkeeper in Newcastle, made Executor to Sir John Fenner,
trusted with 6000 l. for charitable uses, and was sued in Chancery to perform
the Will, but got himself returned Burges for Newcastle; had 3000 l. given out
of another Gentleman's estate, and as much as made it up 12000 l. out of the
estate of another Gentleman.

Dixwell, once better known in Kent then trusted.

Greg. Clements rich in Bishops Lands, once poor enough.

Sir Will. Brereton, a good Trencher-man, and Bishop of Croyden.

Coll. Berkstead, the merciful Lieutenant of the Tower.

Coll. Hewson, the Committee of Safety's Apprentice killer.

Cornel. Holland, once a Linkboy, preferred by the King to the Green-cloth, a
great Knave.

Tichborn, a man well known in the City.

Coll. Will. Purefoy, he hid himself in a barley field when he should have been
fighting, for which a Water-man, that had been his Soldier, refused to carry
him.

Sir Will. Constable, he sold his Lands to Sir Marmaduke Langdale for 15000 l.
but the Parliament gave them him again.

Sir Miles Levesey, Plunder Master General of Kent.

Henry Smith, made one of the six Clerks.

Frantic Sir Harry Vane.

Hair-brained Hesllerig.

Dan. Blagrave, well known at Reading.

Miles Corbet, once 3000 l. in debt more then he was worth; he got well by
scandalous Ministers.

Harvey Bishop of Fulham, though not so by inheritance.

Illegally elected by color of the New Seal.
Coll. Norton. Roll. Wilson. Coll. I. Hutchinson.
Coll. Rigby Governor of Bolton.

Anthony Stapely.

Valentine Walton a Knave and a Cuckold, or a Cuckoldly Knave which you please.

Coll. Boswell, Sir Arthur Hesllerig's Friend by his Daughters means.

Augustine Garland, Peters's Pot-companion.

Bradshaw, the impudent brazen-faced President.

Cromwell, Bell-wether to the Flock.

Ireton, his bosom fellow worker in iniquity.

Maj. Genesis Harison, chief Holder forth to the fifth Monarchy-men.

Ven, the broken Silk-man, that governed Windsor Castle.

Coll. Hammond, he had a thousand pounds and five hundred pounds per annum
given him for his good service.

THE DEVILS Cabinet-Counsell. DISCOVERED.
THe Independent Faction being become considerable, their first design was to
monopolize all power into their hands.

This was effected first by dashing the Earl of Essex and Sir William Waller
one against another; which was easily done by taking hold of their several
misfortunes, the one at Lislethiel in Cornwall, the other at the Devises in
Wiltshire. My Lord of Manchester also being a Lord, and therefore not to be
confided in, was undermined and accused by Cromwell of high Crimes, and so
discarded.

Then was the Army new modeled, and under Sir Thomas Fairfax Cromwell got the
sole command of the Army. He was no sooner in power, but by his own diligence
and the help of his Faction, he endeavors to make himself famous and popular,
by taking to himself the honor of other men's achievements. To this purpose
the News books are taught to speak no language but Cromwell and his party, and
to be silent in such actions wherein he could claim no share. That the Army
might be suitable to him and his designs, carried on without interruption, all
pretenses of scandals and crimes are laid hold of at the Councels of War to
remove the Presbyterian party, that the Independents and Sectaries might be let
into their rooms.

The next study of Cromwell was how to make this Army become his creatures;
which he thus contrived: The two Houses, in a full and free Parliament had
ordained the disbanding of the Army, Cromwell knowing how much this would be
against the Armies will, put the Houses again upon passing this Ordinance,
Protesting in the presence of Almighty God, before whom he stood, that he knew
the Army would disband, and lay down their Arms at their door whenever they
should command: when at the same time he had his Agitators animating the Army
against the major part of the House, under the notion of men that sought their
ruin, and making traitorous comments upon the Ordinance. He knew the Army
hated nothing more then disbanding, and therefore would not be a little enraged
against the promoters thereof: and thus by causing fears and jealousies in the
Army, he easily provoked them to mutiny against the Parliament: By this mutiny
having made them sure to his own interest, Cromwell leaves the Parliament, not
daring to trust himself among them, where now both he and his Son Ireton
publicly join with the Army at New Market in traiterous Engagements,
Declarations, Remonstrances and Petitions, pend by Cromwell himself, tending
altogether to nothing but sedition, whereby the Army and the Parliament were
easily rendered odious to one another.

Having thus debauched the Army, he plotted in his own Chamber how to secure
the Garrison, Magazine, and train of Artillery at Oxford, and surprise the
Kings person at Holmby, which was done by his Instrument Cornet Joyce, with a
commanded party of Horse: by which action Cromwell now thought himself so
secure, that when Joyce, giving him an account of what he had done, told him,
that he had now the King in his power; Cromwell replied, Then have I the
Parliament in my pocket. It was not for him publicly to own so impudent an
act, therefore he had recourse to his wonted dissimulation, protesting in the
sight of God his ignorance in that business both to the King and Parliament,
adding to his Protestation an Execration upon his Wife and Children.

Having so far prosper'd in his design, as to get the King into his clutches,
the next contrivance was to get the Parliament into his power.

This was to be effected by purging both Houses, so that there might be no
Members here, but what should be absolutely of Cromwels Faction; to which
purpose they send first a confused impeachment against eleven of the Members,
who thereupon modestly withdrew, to free the Parliament from such danger as
they should incur by protecting them.

But while these things were acting, Cromwell finding he could not compass
what he intended against the Parliament, but that he must make the City his
enemies, casts about how to cheat the Country, it being dangerous to have both
City and Country his enemies at that time. Agents are therefore employed to
spread Books and Pamphlets about the Kingdom wherein particular notice is taken
of the pressures and grievances of the Nation, courting them to neglect the
King, and the Parliament, as unable to relieve them, and to make their
addresses to the Army, who had it in their hands only to restore the King,
uphold the Parliament, and give them their Freedoms and Liberties, and to take
away from them all Taxes and Excises: by these and the like pretenses they
deceived the people so far, as to make them patiently bear the burden of free
quarter, and to make Addresses to the Army for free quarter.

Having Iull'd the people into a sleep, they now seek how to quarrel with the
City. They had withdrawn their quarters some thirty miles from London, in a
pretended obedience to the Parliament (of which pretended example of their
submission, they made singular use against all objections) but finding their
designs retarded both in City and Parliament, by the remainder of that party
which they had left; they must therefore find a quarrel to march against the
City, to give the Houses a stronger purge then they had formerly done. Hereupon
the Army demands the City Militia, and had it granted by a packt company of the
lower House, when most of the Members were absent. The City petition for their
former Militia; and to second their Masters, many of the Apprentices came down
with another of theirs: it was not long ere Cromwell, who watched for this
opportunity, had his Agents among them, to keep up the Riot, and increase it as
much as in them lay, particularly one Highland was observed more active then
all the rest. This was cunningly contrived to increase the sdandall upon the
City.

The Army was now upon their march to London, whereupon the speaker and about
forty Members more, having left about one hundred and forty sitting in the
House, sled to the Army. It is thought that what the Speaker did, proceeded
from certain strong Threats and Menaces of Cromwell and Ireton, for that he had
solemnly professed a day or two before to Sir Ralph Ashton and others, that he
scorned to do such a base unjust and dishonorable act, and that he would
rather die in his chair.

Hereupon, the remaining Members choose a new speaker, and proceed to act one
way, while the Army with both the fugitive Speakers, and the sugitive Members
vote another, signing engagements to live and die with the Army.

The Army were so overleavend with this engagement, that they send out Warrants
to the Trained Bands to march with them against the City. The City hearing of
their approach, sent Commissioners sundry times to mediate an accord; but the
Army would give them no better terms then these, that they should yield to
desert both Houses and the impeached Members, that they should call in their
Declarations, relinquish the Militia, deliver up their forts to the Army, with
the Tower of London, and the Magazines there; disband all their Forces, and
turn the Reformadoes out of the line, receive such guards of horse and foot as
the Army should appoint, demolish their works, and suffer the Army to march in
triumph through the City. All which was suddenly and dishonourably yielded to,
so great was the undermining strength of Cromwels party to weaken the hands of
all his opponents.

This being effected, the fugitive Members were brought agin into the House.
And now we must look upon the Army and Parliament acting and consulting
together. They put into employments none but men of their own faction, that
they may have all in their own hands; they alter and divide the Militia of
London, setting up particular Militia's at Westminster, Southwark, and the
Hamlets, to make them weaker by such a division, and demolish the lines of
Communication and fright many more members from the House partly by threats,
and partly by false impeachments. Then they declare all void which the
Parliament had done in their absence; and when many of the Commons were
refractory, and denied to pass this ordinance, they were either urged to it
with threats, or forced to depart the house, Sir Arthur Haslerig telling them
some heads must fly off, and that he feared the Parliament of England could not
save the Kingdom, but they must look another way for safety: That they could
not satisfy the Army but by declaring all void from the beginning. In which
words he was seconded by Vane, Prideaux, Gourdon, Mildmay, Scott and Holland,
whom we must henceforward look upon as the Protectors greatest instruments. And
because this did not wholly effect the design, they produce a scandalous letter
from the Army, wherein the members that sat while the two Speakers were
absent, were called pretended Members, and threatened that if they would not
give their assents topass the ordinance, they should sit in the House at their
peril, for the Army would take them as Prisoners of war, and try them at a
Counsel. Thus the Members being frighted away, the next day in a very thin
assembly of Olivers creatures the ordinance passed: and thus had Cromwell and
his few conspirators what so far they sought for, (that is to say) the whole
power of the Parliament and Army.

This being done several accusations of high Treasons were brought against the
Earls of Suffolk, Lincoln, Middlesex, the Lords Berkley, Willoughby, Hunsdon
and Maynard, they were committed to the Tower, that so those Lords that had
engaged with the Army might have their house to themselves: Several Petitions
were likewise exhibited to the Houses, bearing these titles, to the Lords and
Commons in Parliament assembled, distinct from the Lords and Commons that sat
in the absence of the two Speakers, and others which Petitioned against diverse
Members sitting pretended to be enemies to godliness, usurpers of Parliamentary
authority, and such as endeavored to bring in the King upon his own terms.
These Petitions were all penned by the Cromwellian faction, to put the two
parties that yet remaind in the House into heights the one against the other,
to make the lesser party in the House, viz. the engaged party of fifty nine, to
expel the other consisting of 140. that the House might below, and base in the
opinion of the people, and all things come into the power of the sword.

Then were the Lord Mayor, and several Aldermen, and Citizens impeached also of
high Treason, and sent likewise to the Tower, and their own creatures placed in
their steads.

And now Cromwell annimated by these successes, begins to think of contriving
that horrid murder which he afterward brought to pass. First, that he may not
want strength, the Army is daily recruted without any authority; then is the
Parliament put upon it to send the four dethroaning bills to the King, of which
that of settling the Militia in the hands of the Army-party, and the bill for
adjourning both Houses to any other place, were the chief. When the Kings
answer to the said bills came to be debated, Sir Thomas Wroth had his one to
speak high, and feel the pulse of the House, who did it to this effect. That
Bedlam was appointed for madmen, and Tophet for Kings, that our Kings of late
had carried themselves as if they were fit for no place but Bedlam, and that
therefore his humble motion should consist of three parts. To secure the King
and keep him close within some inland Garrison with sure guards. To draw up
Articles of impeachment against him. And lastly, to lay by and settle the
Kingdom without him, for that he cared not what form of Government they set
up, so it were not by Kings and Devils.

Ireton seconds this speech, pretending to speak the sense of the Godly party,
telling he House That the King had denied safety and protection to his people,
by denying the four bills, that subjection to him, was in lieu of his
protection, which being denied they might well deny any more subjection to him,
and settle the Kingdom without him; that it was now expected after so long
patience, that they should show their resolution, and not desert those valient
men that had engaged for them beyond all possibility of retreat, and would
never forsake the Parliament, unless the Parliament forsook them first. After
some debate, Cromwell seeing his time brings up the rear, and giving an ample
character of the valor and godliness of the Army, argued. That 'twas expected
that now the Parliament should govern and defend the Parliament by their own
power and resolution, and not teach the people any longer, to expect safety and
government from an obstinate man, whom God had hardened, and that those men that
had defended them hitherto, would defend them in whatever they should do in
relation to such a resolution. Teach them not by neglecting your own and the
Kingdoms safety, in which their own is involved to think themselves betrayed
and left hereafter to the rage and malice of an irreconciliable enemy, whom
they have subdued for your sake; and are therefore likely to find his future
government of them insupportable and fuller of revenge then Justice, lest
despair teach them to seek their safety by some other means then by adhearing
to you who will not stick to your selves, and how destructive such a resolution
will be I tremble to think, and leave you to judge.

These words seem to have something of meance in them, and therefore the Houses
pass the Votes for Non-addresses and to show the people the reasons thereof;
the Independent Grandees appoint a Committee to search into the Kings
conversation, and the errors of his Government, and to publish them in a
Declaration to the world. Whereupon they form many high crimes against him, as
the loss of Rochel his fathes death, and the masacre and rebellion in Ireland.

These desperate courses to dishonor the King and make him incapable of
Government, to ruin his person, Crown and dignity, and to exterpate Monarchy,
root and branch, were taken up in order to the usurping the Kingly power into
the hands of the Grandees of the Parliament and Army.

The next thing they do is to compel the Countries to give thanks to the Houses
for their Votes against the King; Pine and Prideaux get subscriptions in the
West, Mildmay in Essex, Purefoy in Warwickshire, Haslerig in the parts about
Newcastle, making the world believe that the subscriptions of a few
inconsiderable persons, or of such as they had put a force upon, had spoke the
language of the whole Nation. But the City being not so fully satisfied, a
greater force is to be put upon them; and that the Grandees might have the
better excuse to do it, they stir up the apprentises by their own agents to a
tumult, which being easily quelled, they presently order for future security,
that more Soldiers be put into the Mews and White Hall, that Barges capable of
fifty Musketeres, to conveigh the Soldiers to any place where any Insurrection
might be, and that the chains and posts be taken out of the streets.

While these things were a doing, Cromwell, finding the King to be a great stop
to his affairs, resolves to take him privately away, and therefore writes to
Hammond to remove him out of the way, either by poison or by any other means.

Mr. Osborn informs the Houses of this by a Letter to the Speaker, wherein he
tells them that Rolfe should say, That Hammond had received several Letters
from the Army to remove the King, by poison, or by any other means, out of the
way. He further wrote, That Rolfe should tell him, that Hammond had a good
allowance for keeping the King, and therefore he would not do it, as being loath
to lose the profit: but said Rolfe, If you will join with me, we will endeavor
to conveigh the King to some private place, and we may then do what we will
with him. And further; Mr. Osburn offered in his said Letter, to appear and
make it good upon oath, if he might be permitted to come and go with freedom
and safety. The Clerk had no sooner done this, but with a slight neglect, and
the laughter of some of the Members, the business was passed over without
debate; and Mr. Scowen stood up to propound new business. When presently
another Gentleman interrupting him urged, That such an Information coming to
the House ought not to be neglected, whether true or false, but to be examined
and sifted to the bottom, and therefore moved, that a Committee might be named
to examine Rolfe, Osborn, and Hammond: This was seconded by Sir Simon D'ewes,
Mr. H. Hungerford and Mr. Ed. Stevens; but they received a slight answer, That
Osborn was not to be found, and that he was a Malignant, and had attempted to
set the King at liberty. To which it was replied, That a Committee could be
named to examine the business concerning the Footboy that struck Sir H.
Mildmay, though no man knew where to find the Footboy; that it was strange
there should be such a difference between beating a Subject and killing a King;
that though Mr. Osborn were a Malignant, yet unless he were also a Nullifidian,
convicted of perjury, his oath was valid and good. But Scot stood up and said,
That this pressing to examine this business, was but to draw C. Hammond to
Town, that the King might the easier make an escape: and Sir John Evelin of
Wilts alleged, That this was an invention of Mr. Osborn, to bring the King to
Town with freedom, honor, and safety. And though other motions were made for
the said Committee, yet either Mr. Scowen, or Skippon, stood up and offered to
divert the business by new matter concerning the Army, which bears all business
down before it; and so the business was buried in silence for that time.
Afterward the Lords propounded, that he might have forty days allowed him,
which was with much ado granted: He comes and avouches it: and one Doucet
further affirmed a design of Rolfe's to pistol the King. Rolfe presents
himself at the Commons Bar, with a Letter from Hammond, who denies the design,
and pleads Rolfe's cause for him. Rolfe denied it at the Bar with a very
trembling voice; yet afterward hid out of the way. Hammond was neither sent
for nor questioned. Thus was this business quite hushed up, which only served
to show what the Gentlemen at Westminster solely aimed at; and indeed their
rancour was now at that height against the King, that Skippon thought it just
cause of complaint, that some persons had printed a Book, called, A motive to
loyal Subjects to endeavor the preservation of his Majesty's person.

Many Petitions now also come for a Personal Treaty, and among the rest the
Surrey men petition for a Personal Treaty: But Scot standing up in the House
argued, That it was a design to ruin the Godly: That he was of opinion, that
there could be no time seasonable for a Personal Treaty, or a Peace, with so
perfidious a Pince, but that it would be always either too soon, or too late;
that he that draws his sword against the King must throw away the scabbord,
that all peace with him would prove the spoil of the Godly.

Thus by him, and by the assistance of the Worthies, Ven, Miles, Corbet, Hill,
and Harvey, Cromwell had his design in part, for that the Petition had no
success.

The King was now a prisoner in the Isle of Wight, when Cromwell had overthrown
Duke Hamilton at Preston, and there by cut off the greatest hopes which the
King had of being releived: The Victory was great, and swelled the Grandees,
that were then sitting at Westminster, to such a height of pride, of whom the
chief were, Thom. Scot, Cornelius Holland, and Sir. Harry Mildmay, that though
before there were fair hopes of a Personal Treaty, now began to show an utter
disdain and malice against it, and to threaten and insult over all that had
petitioned for it abroad, or spoken for it in the House.

But the wise sort, or rather the more crafty to do mischief, knowing how weary
the people were of their Texes and the Army, and how covetous to purchase
peace, though at the price of a new war; and further considering that the
Scots were not wholly reduced, that the people were not yet quieted in many
parts of England; and finding the Prince with a considerable Fleet at Sea,
ready to raise new tempests at Land, thought it better to dally on the Treaty,
till Oliver had quite finished his Northern Expedition, and were marched nearer
London, and that all things were quiet in England, and then to break off the
Treaty, and purge the House of those that sought to agree with the King, under
pretense of being the Kings corrupt Party.

Therefore to blind the peoples eyes, it was debated in the House, whether a
Treaty should be had with the King upon the Propositions of Hampton Court; the
question being put, the Yeas and Noes were even fifty seven to fifty seven,
insomuch that the Speakers voice was put to turn the scales; who, though at
this time he foreman of Oliver's shop, gives his voice in the affirmative,
following then his conscience against his interest; andmy Lord Say openly in
the House of Lords said, God forbid that any man should take advantage of this
victory to break off the Treaty. However Cromwell having got a full conquest
over his enemies, marches for London upon his design, though the Parliament
forbid his approach. And to show his contempt of them, he prints a Declaration,
accusing them of lightness, breach of trust, inconstancy, and indiscretion, and
threatening presently to advance toward Westminster, to do what God should
enable them: The same night he came to Hide-Park corner: The next thing he did
was to take possession of White Hall for his Quarters: He brought to town with
him four Regiments of Foot, and six of Horse, which he quartered in the Mews by
his own order.

The next news frequent in the Town was that of the Kings being seized in his
bedchamber, and hurried away prisoner to Hurst Castle, a Block-house in the
Isle of Wight, standing out a mile and a half in the Sea, so noisome, that the
Guards could not endure to be there long without often shifting their quarters.

This insolent action satisfied only the Independent and Monarchical party,
but the others, who were yet more numerous, seeing so heinous a fact committed
against the life of the King, and the faith and honor of the Parliament,
resolve once more to try their power; whereupon it was moved that it might be
declared, That his Majesty was removed by the Generals Warrant, without the
consent or privity of the House.

The Army Members to slop this, argue that the word (Declare) would be
construed a declaring against the General and Army, and that the word
(Consent) argued a disagreement in opinion and practice between the Parliament
and the House, as if the Houses dissented from it; hereupon it was barely voted
without the privity of the House.

Nevertheless the other Members proceed to the Kings Answers to the
Propositions of both Houses, whether they were satisfactions or no; which after
a long and tedious debate was carried in the affirmative; and to keep a good
correspondence with the Army, a Committee of six Members was appointed to
confer with the General and his Officers, but could receive no other answer
from them then this, that the way to correspond was to comply with the Armies
Remonstrance.

And now the Saints militant being enraged that the House had recovered so much
courage and honesty to vote according to their consciences, after some proud
conference between Pride, Hewson, and other Officers, and the Speaker, in
Westminster Hall, with the doors shut, Cromwell sends a paper to the House of
Commons, requiring that the impeached Members and M. G. Brown might be secured
and brought to justice, and that the 90. and odd Members that refused to vote
against the Scotch Engagement, and voted to recall the Votes for non-addresses,
and for a treaty, might be suspended the House; and that all faithful Members
who were innocent of those Votes would acquit themselves by protestation from
any such concurrence, that there might be a distinction made between um. The
Paper was delivered in, but they scorning to sta for an answer, sent several
guards to the House under the command of Pride, Hewson and Hardres Waller, and
violently seized all those Members that they found two honest for their
purposes.

The House being thus purged, and brought to so small a number in so much that
an Officer of the Army having secured some of the Members in the Lobby as they
were going into the House, the Speaker having not enough within to make up a
House, was forced to send to the said Officer to lend him his prisoners to make
up a free Parliament, in comes Cromwell out of the Country, and brings Harry
Martin that sanctified Members along with him to make up his numbers, and to
awe the City Garrisons, Blackfriers and Paul's.

The secluded Members protest against their seclusion, but the Cromwellian
faction Vote their Protestation seditious, scandalous, and tending to destroy
the visible and fundamental Government of the Kingdom. Then like Cromwels good
boys, they vote all the votes of the secluded Members for a personal treaty
null and void; and to try whether all were their trusty friends that voted for
them: Gourdon moved that a protestation be forthwith drawn up, and that every
Member set his hand to it in detestation of those repealed Votes which was
drawn up afterward, and within a few days after subscribed by

The Lord Lisle, Colonel Boswel, Lord Gray, Per. Pelham, Colo. Jones, Colonel
Temple, Colo. Ven. Sir Thomas Maleverer, Sir Tho. Wroth, Sir Io. Bourchier,
Col. Pet. Temple, Tho. Chaloner, Sir, Gregory Norton, Oldsworth, Garland, Sir
Io. Danvers, Dove, Smith, Fry, Searle, Nic. Love, Io. Lisle, Col. Rigby,
Holland, Ludlow, Greg. Clement, Col. Purefoy, Col. Stapely, Dunch, Cawley,
Downs, Io. Carey, Blackstone, Scot. Hutchinson, Mildmay, Sir James Harrington,
Col. Harvey, Penington, Atkins, Dan. Blackgrave, Moor, Millington, Prideaux,
Roger Hill, Denis Bond, Col. Harrington, Hodges, Valentine. The design being
thus pretty well ripened, the Counsel of War who managed the business in
relation to the King, ordered that all state and ceremony should be forborne,
the King and his attendants lessend, which was done to mortify him by degrees.

Now was it thought fit to have it moved in the House, to proceed capitally
against the King.

Cromwell after it was once proposed sinding it then his cue to speak, stoop up
and told them, That if any moved this out of design he should think him the
greatest Traitor in the World, but since providence and necessity had cast them
upon it, he should pray to God to bless their Counsels, though he were not
provided on the sudden to give them Counsel. The White Boys thus animated went
on furiously, and Scot with an unheard of impudence now dares to bring in the
ordinance for trial of the King; it was read and recommitted three several
times, and Commissioners names inserted, consisting of diverse Lords, Commons,
Aldermen, Citizens, Country Gentlemen and Soldiers; that the more persons of
all sorts might be engaged in so damnable and treasonable a design, and because
this Ordinance and the proceedings thereupon had no foundation in Divinity, Law
nor Reason. The Cromwellian Faction to give it a foundation and ground from the
authority of their Votes, declare that by the Laws of the Land it is treason
in the King to levy war against the Parliament and Kingdom of England. This
Vote together with the ordinance was carried up to the Lords by the Lords Gray
of Groby. The first debate was upon the Vote. The Earl of Manchester told them,
That the Parliament of England by the fundamenttal laws of England consisted
of three Estates, King, Lords and Commons. The King is the first and chiefest
estate, He calls and dissolves the House, and confirms all their Acts, and
without him there can be no Parliament, and therefore it is absurd to say, The
King can be a Traitor against the Parliament. The Earl of Northumberland said,
That the greatest part of the people of England were not yet satisfied whether
the King levied War first against the Houses, or the Houses against him; and
therefore it was very unreasonable to declare Treason by an Ordinance, when the
matter of fact is not yet proved, nor any Law extant to judge it by. Whereupon
the Lords cast off the debate, and cast our the Ordinance.

Hereupon the Zealots of the House, that is to say, that Protestors, were very
angry at the Lords, and therefore intend to rid their hands of them, and the
King, both together, and thereupon they presently passed a Vote, should be
empowered to act, notwithstanding the Lords did not concur with them; and many
of the most famous hot-spurs were so high, as to insist, that the Lords, who
would not give their concurrence to the Votes and Ordinance, should be
impeached for favoring the grand Delinquent.

Having thrown by the Lords, they proceed to make themselves to have the show
of a legal power by passing these three Votes.

1. That the people, that is to say, their own Faction, are the original of all
just power under God. 2. That the Commons of England, being chosen by, and
representing the people, are the supreme Power of this Nation. 3. That
whatsoever is enacted by Law by the House of Commons assembled in Parliament,
has the force of a Law.
This was Cromwels Chain-shot, whereby he swept a King and Lords, putting all
the Liberties of this Nation under his own and the power of fifty or sixty of
his own covetous Saints.

By their former contrivances having now brought themselves to such a height of
power, and that power to a boldness that durst go so far, there was a
necessity for them now to proceed, and therefore the next thing they did was,
to pass the Ordinance for trial of the King, which was carried on without one
negative voice.

There was one rub in the way, that they could not use his own Great Seal
against him, and a new one was long a making: But after consultation, they
agreed upon a new way; for what need ceremonies when men are resolved upon the
substance? They therefore proceed without any Commission under Seal, upon the
Ordinance, and every Commissioners set his own hand and seal to the public
instrument of their transactions.

At the same time great endeavors are made to stop the mouths of the
Ministers, giving them threatening admonitions not to preach against the actings
of the Parliament and the Army; and the Council of War finding it difficult
to stop the Ministers mouths, did sundry times debate to shut up the Church
doors, to which purpose they imprisoned Mr. Canton for praying for the King,
and threatened to try him at the Upper Bench for his life.

And to set a greater gloss upon their actions, Tichbourn their own creature,
by their command, presents a schismatical Petition, directed to the Supreme
Authority the Commons in Parliament, demanding justice upon the capital
offenders from the highest to the lowest.

The like Petitions were invited by them from the Countries, where a dozen
schismatics and two or three cloaks represented a whole family.

After this Hammond presents them with a scandalous Libell, called, The
Agreement of the People, demanding nothing else but the total subversions of
the Fundamental Laws and Government of the Nation, which they ordered to be
forthwith printed, as if it had been the general sense of the whole Nation.

When the Commissioners come to sit in the Painted Chamber, the Witnesses were
not far off, a company of the most contemptible persons in the world,
suborned for the purpose, men rather told what they should say, then examined
what they knew, for that the Grandees might do things legally, they made the
examinations and caused the others to put their names to them.

The names of the Witnesses were as follows, persons next to professed
beggary, the meanest that could be.

Henry Hartford of Stratford upon Avon. Edward Roberts of Bishop Castle,
Ironmonger. Will. Brains of Wrynxhall, Gent. Robert Lacy of Nottingham,
Painter. Rob. Load of Cottam in Com. Nottingh. Tyler. Samuel Morgan of
Wellington in Com. Salop Feltmaker. James Williams of Ross in Com. Hartford,
Shoemaker. Richard Potts of Shaepreton in Com. Northumb. Vintner. Giles Price
of Wellington, Gent. Will Arnop of John Hudson of John Winston of Dornorham in
Com. Wilts. George Seely of London, Cordwainer. John Moore of Cork in Ireland,
Gent. Thom. Ives of Bosset in Com. Northampton, Husbandman. James Iresby of
Dublin, Barber. Thom. Rawlins of Hanslop in Com. Buck. Gent. Richard Blomfeild
of London, Weaver. John Thomas of Kangallan in Com. Denby. Will. Lawson of
Nottingham, Malster. John Pinegar of Damer in Com. Darby, Shoemaker. Humphrey
Brown of Whitsundine in Com. Rutl. Yeoman. David Evans of Neathe in Com.
Clamorg. Gent. Robert Holmes of Robert Williams of Hillary in Com. Glamorgan,
Attorney. Samuel Worden of Limeham in Com. Wilts, Gent. Thomas Read of
Maidstone in Com. Kent, Gent. George Cornwall of Aston in Com. Hereford,
Forgeman. Will. Jones of Usk in Com. Monmouth, Husbandman. Arthur Young Citizen
and Barber Surgeon of London. Diogenes Edwards of Caston in Com. Salop.
Butcher. John Bennet of Huewood in Com. Ebor, Glover. Will. Sutbert of
Patrington in Holderness in Com. Ebor, Gent. Richard Price of London,
Scrivener. Henry Gracye, styled of Greys Inn,
Gent. But the Book being examined, the name of no such person was there to be
found, nor was he ever known there: He soon spent the reward he had, and lived
miserably afterward, and was taken in a very low and despicable condition; by
which it is easy to guess at the gentility of the rest, who style themselves
Gentlemen, yet were hired to mix with the basest of Mechanics to perpetrate so
great a villainy.

Thus instead of bringing the King to his Parliament, instead of bringing an
end to the Treaty, they bring him to a public Trial in Westminster Hall.

The first day they urged him to acknowledge the Jurisdiction of the Court: a
most unheard of piece of tyranny, which had neither law, president, rational
debate or argument to prove it. But the King with a magnanimous resolution
denies it: so they adjourn for that day. As the King was conducted back, they
had so contrived it, that diverse schismatical soldiers and fellows were placed
round about the Court to cry justice, justice, thinking all the rest would have
bleated to the same tune; but they almost all cried, God bless Him, and were
some of them well cudgelled by the Army, for not saying their prayers
handsomely after the Army mode, and one of the barbarous Soldiers spit in the
Kings face; the King only saying, Christ suffered more for my sake, and wiped
it off with his handkerchief: Yet the Court took no notice of this affront, so
far already had they condemned him to sufferings.

The second day they urge the same thing again. The King demands that he may
put in his Demurrer. But they overrule his Demurrer without an Argument; a
thing never heard of before, and against all reason: But they did as good as
tell him, that reason was not to be heard against the remaining Faction of the
Commons of England.

Being brought the thirdday, Cook presses for judgment, telling the Court,
among other things, that the House of Commons, the Supreme Authority and
Jurisdiction of the Nation, as he named them, had declared, that it was
notorious, that the matter of the Charge was true; whereby it appears, that
Cromwell and his Faction had fore-judged the King before they erected their new
Court to sentence him, claiming a Jurisdiction as well as a supreme Authority.

The fourth and last day, Sentence was pronounced against him. The King however
before Sentence urged to have them hear the reasons why he could not submit to
their tyranny, but could not be heard: Which reasons, because they are not
common, we have thought fit to set down as they were taken from his own
original writing, as follows.

Having already made my protestations not only against the illegallity of this
pretended Court, but also that no earthly power can justly call me (who am your
King) in question as a Delinquent; I would not more open my mouth upon this
occasion, more then to refer my self to what I have spoken, were I alone in
this case concerned. But the duty I owe to God, in the preservation of the true
Liberty of my people, will not suffer me at this time to be silent. For how can
any freeborn Subject of England, call life or any thing that he professes his
own, if power without right daily make new, and abrogate the old fundamental
Law of the Land, which I now take to be the present case.

There is no proceeding against any man, but what is warranted either by Gods
Laws, or by the Municipall Laws of the Country where he lives. Now I am most
confident, that this days proceeding cannot be warranted by Gods Law; for on
the contrary, the Authority of obedience to Kings is clearly warranted by Gods
Law, and strictly commanded both in the old and new Testament; which if denied,
I am ready instantly to prove; And for the question now in hand, there it is
said, That where the word of a King is there is power, and who may say unto
him, what do thou?

Then for the Laws of the Land, I am no less confident, that no learned Lawyer
will affirm, that an Impeachment can lie against the King, they all going in
his name, and one of their Maxims is That the King can do no wrong. Besides,
the Law upon which you ground your proceedings, must be either new or old; if
old show it; if new, tell what Authority, warranted by the Fundamental Laws of
the Land, has made it, and when.

But how the House of Commons can erect a Court of Judicature, which was never
one it self, as is well known to all Lawyers. I leave God and the world to
judge: And it were full as strange, that they should pretend to make Laws
without King or Lords House, to any that have heard speak of the Laws of
England.

And admitting, but not granting, that the people of Englands Commission could
grant your pretended power, I see nothing you can show for that; for certainly
you never asked the question of the tenth man of the Kingdom; and in this way
you manifestly wrong, even the poorest Ploughman, if you demand not his free
consent; nor can you pretend any color for this your pretended Commission,
without the consent, at least, of the major part of every man in England, of
whatsoever quality or condition, which I am sure you never went about to seek,
so far are you from having it.

Thus you see I speak not for my own right alone; as I am your King, but also
for the true Liberty of all my Subjects, which consists not in sharing the
power of Government, but in living under such laws such a Government, as may
give them the best assurance of their lives, and the propriety of their goods.

And for the House of Commons, that the major part of them are detained or
deterred from sitting, so as if I had no other, this were sufficient for me to
protest against the lawfulness of your pretended Court.

Besides all this, the peace of the Kingdom is not the least in my thoughts,
and what hopes of settlement are there, so long as power rules without Law,
changing the whole frame of that Government, under which this Kingdom has
flourished for many hundred years; and believe it, the Commons of England will
not thank you for this change, for they will remember how happy they have been
of late years under the reign of Queen Elizabeth, the King my Father, and my
self, until the beginning of these unhappy troubles, and will have cause to
doubt that they shall never be so happy under any new.

These were the Reasons which the King intended to have delivered before
sentence, but they were utterly rejected, by those who knew it was not their
business to hear reason in a Court that was erected contrary to reason; and
therefore they hasten to give judgment, which was brief, That the King for
sundry Crimes and Misdemeanors (which he was never guilty of) should be put to
death.

During the intervall between his Sentence and Execution, the House ordered
upon moton, that Doctor Iuxon, Bishop of London, should be permitted to be
private with the King in his chamber, to preach and administer the Sacrament
and other spiritual comforts to him.

But nevertheless the Masters of the Council of War appointed John Goodwin of
Coleman-street, the Balaam of the Army, to be Superintendent both over the
Bishop and the King, so that they could hardly speak a word together without
being overheard by the long schismatic ears of black-mouthed John: And
besides all this, the Guard of Soldiers that was kept within his chamber, what
with talking, what with clinking the pots, and opening and shutting the doors,
and taking Tobacco, a thing very offensive to the Kings nature, they kept him
waking, thereby distempering and amazing him with want of sleep, that they
might the more easily bring him to their terms.

Upon the twenty eighth of January, being the last Sabbath the King kept in
this life, some of the Grandees of the Parliament and Army tendered to the King
a paper book, with promise of life, and some shadow of regality if he
subscribed it. It contained many particulars destructive to the fundamental
Government, Religion, Laws and property of the People; one among the rest was
this,

(That the King should pass an Act of Parliament for keeping on foot the
Militia of this Army, during the pleasure of the Grandees, who should be
trusted with that Militia, with power to recruit from time to time, and
continue them to the number of forty thousand Horse and Foot, under the same
General and Officers, with power notwithstanding in the Council of War to
choose new Officers and Generals from time to time, as occasion shall happen,
and they think fit; and to settle a very great Tax upon the people by a Land
rate, for an established pay for the Army, to be levied and collected by the
Army themselves; and a Court-Martiall of an exorbitant extent and latitude.

But his Majesty having read some of the Propositions threw them aside, telling
them, He would rather become a Sacrifice for his People, then betray their
Lives, Laws, Liberties, and Estates, together with the Church and
Commonwealth, and the honor of his Crown to so intolerable a bondage of an
armed faction.

Saturday night and Sunday night the King lay in White Hall, so near the place
appointed for the separation of his soul and body, that he might hear every
stroke the workmen gave upon the scaffold where they wrought all night; this
was a new device to mortify him, but it would not do.

Tuesday the thirtieth of January was the day appointed for the Kings death.
His Majesty coming upon the scaffold, showed all the while an extraordinary
magnanimity and Christian patience. He had his head severed from his body at
one stroke, the Schismatics showting presently after. His Executioners, though
then concealed, are now found to be Joyce, that bloody instrument of Cromwell's
designs, and Peter's, who lay not with a Butchers Wife so long, to be ignorant
of her Trade. And therefore the Parliament have now sent for them to receive
the condign punishment of their villainy.

This is the relation of his Majesty's Trial by a mixed Court of Justice,
erected by fifty or sixty confederate Members, after all the rest of the
Members, above two hundred and fifty, had been violently secluded, secured, and
frighted. And thus this noble Prince, a Person sanctified by many afflictions,
after he had escaped Pistol, Poison, and pestilent Air, could not escape the
malice of Cromwell, nor the impudence of Cook, Bradshaw, Steel, Ask,
Doristaus. Thus was the Shepherd smitten, and the Sheep were scattered.

But Heaven not willing longer to endure the wickedness of such insolent
Tyrants, nor to see the innocent longer in affliction, has been pleased at
length to restore the King to his Throne, putting his Enemies to shame and
confusion; and herein we must admire the justice of the Parliament, to whom the
King, unwilling to be Judge in his own cause, has referred himself. What they
have done their Acts declare.

The last week they excepted eleven of the grand Delinquents from mercy.

M. G. Harrison. Mr. Say. Mr. Scot. Coll. Berkstead. M. Lisle. Cornel. Holland.
Jones. Cook. Broughton. Sar. Dandy. M. Hulit.
After this in further prosecution of their intentions, to bring these horrid
murderers to condign punishment, they made a Proclamation in the Kings Name,
that all the Kings Judges should render themselves within forty days, or else
they should be excepted for life and estate, whether they were of the twenty
named or no.

Hereupon Alderman Tichborn, Charles Fleetwood, Coll. Temple, Coll. Wait,
Peter Temple, Simon Maine, Bourchier, Owen Roe, Coll. Rob. Lilburn, Coll.
Downs, Isaak Penington, Sir Henry Mildmay, Coll. Dixwell, Adrian Scroop,
Augustine Garland, Coll. Harvey, Mr. Smith, Sir Hardress Waller, Henry Martin,
Heveningham, John Carew, M. G. Ludlow, M. Corbet, did surrender themselves, and
are now in custody under the Sergeant at Arms attending the House.

From Ireland were sent Coll. Hunck, Coll. Pheire, to whom the Warrant for
execution was directed, and one Hulet, suspected to be the Executioner, and
upon examination excepted out of the Act of Pardon, and Cook Solicitor to the
High Court of Justice.

They have also ordered, that twenty of the most engaged persons be excepted
out of the general Act of Pardon and Oblivion, not extending to life, to
suffer such penalties, and forfeitures as shall be specified in an Act to that
purpose.

Whose names are;

Will. Lenthall Speaker. Sir Harry Vane. Will. Burton Bailiff of Yarmouth. Sir
Arthur Heslerig. Coll. Sydenham. Coll. Desborow. Alderm. Ireton. Coll. Axtell.
Mr. Keeble. Capt. Blackwell. Maj. Creed. Charles Fleetwood Lieut. General.
Coll. John Lambert. Alderm. Pack. Coll. Pine. Coll. Cobbet. Capt. Deane. Oliver
St. John late one of the Justices of the Common Pleas. Mr. Philip Nigh. and Mr.
John Goodwin. Ministers.
Thus we see Divine Vengeance prosecuting these Sons of Massacre, who having by
treachery, dissimulation, and breach of oaths, as we have shown you, gotten
into power, by their extravagant tyranny had almost ruined the Nation. Let God
arise, and let his enemies be scattered.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books lately printed, and in the Press a printing for
Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane near Fleet Street.
1. THe Sovereigns Prerogative, and Subjects Privilege, comprised in several
Speeches, Cases, and Arguments, Historical and Political, discussed between
the Kings sacred Majesty, and the most eminent Persons of both Houses of
Parliament, together with the grand Mysteries of State then in agitation,
faithfully collected by Thomas Fuller, B. D. in folio, second edition, 1660. 2
A complete History of the Wars of the Greeks, written by the learned
Polibuis, and translated by Edward Grimston Esquire, Sergeant at Arms to his
late Majesty, in folio. 3 The faithful Lapidary, or the nature and qualities
of all precious Stones, very useful for Merchants and others to avoid deceit,
by Thomas Nichols, in quarto. 4 A Treple Reconciler stating the Controversies,
1 whether Ministers have an Exclusive power of Communicants from the Sacrament,
2 if any person unordained may lawfully preach, 3 if the Lords Prayer ought not
to be used by all Christians; to which is added, a Sermon preached at his late
Majesty's Inauguration, by Thomas Fuller B. D. in octavo. at 1 s. 6 d. 5 A
description of the several Counties and Shires of England, by Ed. Leigh Esquire;
Mr. of Arts of both Universities, very useful for Travelers. 6 The Complete
Attorney, fifth and last Edition, in octavo. 7 The baptized Turk, showing his
happy conversion from the delusion of that great Imposter Mahomet unto the
Christian Religion, by Mr. Gunning at Exeter House Chapel the fifth of
November, published by Tho. Warmstrey D. D. in octavo. 8 John quarls's last
Poems, in octavo. 9 The Crafty Whore, or the mystery and iniquity of Bawdy
houses laid open, with dehorracions from Lust, drawn from the sad and
lamentable consequences it produces, published for the good of young Men, by
R. H. Esquire; in Octavo. 10 That excellent piece, Scutum Regale, the Royal
Buckler, or Vox Legis, A Lecture to Traitors, who most wickedly murdered
Charles the I. and contrary to all Law and Religion, banished Charles the II.
third Monarch of Great Britain, by Giles Duncomb of the Middle Temple, Gent. 11
The complete History of the Wars in Scotland, under the conduct of the
illustrious and truly valiant James Marquess of Montross, General for his
Majesty Charles the I. in that Kingdom: as also a true relation of his
foreign Negotiations, Landing, Defeat, Apprehension, Trial, and deplorable
Death, for being faithful to his Sacred Majesty Charles the II. 1660. 12
Shimei's Curses on King David lighting on himself; or Experimental
Observations of Gods severe and just Judgments upon Murderers and Traitors,
being comparative meditations of the sufferings of King David, and his late
Sacred Majesty, by R. H. Esquire; in octavo. 13 The Fathers Blessing and last
Legacy to his Son, containing many excellent Instructions for Age and Youth,
first written for the instruction of his Son, and now made public for the
benefit of others, by Edward Burton Esquire; in twelves. 14 The High Court of
Justice erected and detected by Tho. Baker Parson sequestered, in twelves. 15
The RUMP, or a Collection of such Songs and Ballads as were made upon those who
would be a Parliament, and were but the Rump of a House of Commons, five times
dissolved, and now published, bp J. B. 1660. in octavo. 16 A short View of the
Life and Actions of the most Illustrious James Duke of York; together with his
Character. 17 History completed or the Life of his Sacred Majesty Charles the
II. in three Books; wherein is interwoven a short view of the Life and Actions
of the Illustrious Dukes of York and Gloucester, in large octavo, price 1 s. 6
d.

