A DESCRIPTION OF THE RHINOCEROS, Lately brought from the East Indies, And sold
the 25th. of this Instant August, to Mr. L. for 2320 l.
THE Rhinoceros is accounted the second wonder in Nature; being a Beast every
way admirable for its outward shape and greatness, as also for its inward
courage, disposition, and mildness. For as the Elephant is the first wonder, so
is this Beast next to the Elephant, being every way as much to be admired as
he, if he do not exceed him, except in bulk and height.

First of all, that this Beast was not unknown to the Ancients, Pliny, Solinus,
Diodorus, Lampridius, Aelianus, Strabo and others, are most undeniable
Testimonies. Suetonius makes mention of one which was publicly shown to the
People of Rome by Augustus. Holiogabolus had another, and before either of them
Pomey produced a Rhinoceros in his public Spectacles; as Seneca witnesses. And
Antonius Pius, amongst the Gifts that he bestowed upon the People, is said to
have given them for their public pastimes, Tigers, Rhinoserusses and other
wild Beasts. And Martial in one of his Epigrams, confirms it to us, That in the
Reign of Domitian, there was a Rhinoceros, which in the Emperors presence
tossed up a wild Bull into the Air, as if he had been a mere Tennis Ball. And
of latter days there was a Rhinoceros brought alive to Lisbon in Portugal,
whose Picture was taken by Gesner, and inserted into his History of Animals,
nothing varying from the shape and figure of the Beast which is now to be seen:
From whence it is apparent that this is the same Beast, to which the Ancients
gave the Name of Rhinoceros.

It was called Rhinoceros by the Greeks, from Rhin, which signifies a Nose, and
Keras, a Horn; as much as to say the Nosehorn'd Beast. Nor have the Latins
altered the name, in regard, that although there are several Beasts that have
but one Horn, yet there is not any that has a Horn growing out of the Nose, but
this alone.

This Beast is also thought to be the same, which in the Hebrew is called Reem;
and therefore Munster so translates the place, Deuteronomy. 33. His Beauty shall be
like the beauty of a Bull, and his Horns like the Horn of a Rhinoceros, etc.
And Tertullian writing against the Heretic Praxeas, translates it after the
same manner, which being so, it appears to have been a Beast well known in the
World long before the times of the Romans already mentioned.

But now to come to the Descriptions of this Beast (as Pliny describes) it is
equal in length, if not longer, than an Elephant, but withal somewhat lower and
with shorter Legs; his outward form and proportion being like a wild Boars,
especially in his Mouth, except, that out of his Nose grows a Horn harder then
any Bone, which he makes use of instead of Offensive Arms, as a Boar does of
his Tushes; and that he has two kind of scaly Aprons, on each side, like the
Wings of a Dragon, reaching from his Back down to his Belly, and spreading one
way toward his Neck, and the other way toward his hinder parts; his color is
like the Bark of a Box-tree, which is not much unlike that of the Elephants,
and upon his Forehead there grows Hairs that seems a little red; his Skin is so
hard that a dart cannot penetrate it; upon which there appears many divisions
like the shells of a Tortoise, set over with Scales, without any Hair. In like
manner the legs are scaled down to the very hoofs, which are parted with four
distinct Claws. Upon his Nose there grows a hard and sharp Horn, bending a
little toward the Head, but not so high; flat and not round; and therefore the
more sharp and strong. Whatever is set to it, it either throws up into the Air,
or else bores it through, whether Iron or Stones.

By the way, we are not so nicely to consider the bulk and color of the
Elephant, in regard it is but rational to believe, that as among all other
Beasts there is a difference in bigness and color, so there may be the same
variety among these Rhinocerosses.

As to their Nature and Disposition, Martial makes 'em slow to Anger, but
fierce when they are engaged; and therefore he says, that the Rhinoceros was
provoked and vexed by his Master, before he tossed up the Bull like a Tennis
Ball into the Air before Domitian. But it is farther said of 'em, that when
they are to fight, they whet their Horn upon a Stone, and fight with the
Elephant, not only for their food but out of a Natural Antipathy, and overcomes
the Elephant by fastening their Horns in the lower part of his Belly, and so
ripping open his Gutts; insomuch that when the Rhinoceros that was at Lisbon
was brought into the presence of an Elephant, the Elephant ran away from him.

They are taken as the Unicorn is taken, for Authors of good credit affirms,
that above all Creatures they love Virgins, and that be they never so wild,
they will lie down and fall a sleep before a true Maid; and so being asleep are
easily taken.

London, Printed for S. Libourn. 1684.


