THE DEPLORABLE CERTIFICATES OF Mrs. Wandesford AND OTHERS.
The Original of these to be Produced if Required.
THESE are to Certify all whom it may concern, that Lieutenant James Mallory,
and Mary his Wife, and Elizabeth Mallory, and James Holmes, all of the Kingdom
of Ireland, came voluntary before me one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace
for the City of Westminster, and made Oath, that Garret Foulks, Esquire; late
Husband of the Pititioner Elizabeth Wandesford, dyed of the Wounds he received
in his Nephew Colonel Foulks's Regiment, at the Battle of Aghrim in Ireland,
after his releasement from the Prison of Gallaway, where he before lay sixteen
Months under sentence of Death, for taking up Arms in defense of this
Government: And they farther make Oath, that Anthony Mallory, brother to the
said Elizabeth Wandesford, was Killed in the same Regiment at the Battle of
Aghrim, and another Brother Paul Mallory was also Killed in the same Regiment,
at the Castle of Ballengarry, and another Brother Killed upon a party that was
going with Relief to the Castle of Ballihooly, which was held out by her Uncle
Sr. Richard Aldworth till he dyed, and Elizabeth Wandesford made Oath, that her
Brother Richard Mallory a Clergyman dyed through the means, as he in his
sickness still told her, of a Fall which he got from his Horse going to meet
His Majesty, at his first Landing in the West; by the Bruise of which he lay a
considerable time in a very Languishing condition, spitting Blood, and at last
dyed: An^ Elizabeth Mallory, Mother to the above mentioned unfortunate
Gentlemen, farther makes O^^^ That she and her Sister with several Children
were Fired out of their Houses, and Plundr^^ of all their Worldly substance,
and after stripped Naked; with the Terror and Could of which, her Sister and
Child dyed in the Fields, and that she and several poor Orphans which she
lately brought with her here, has no Earthly support, besides what her Daughter
Wandesford, out of her Natural affection, and beyond Her ability, having a
Charge of Children of her own, does for then all; which besides the Loss of
several Brothers in Law, and other near Relations together with their whole
Fortunes, they make Affidavid to be true. Given under my Hand,

Jur' die tertio Martij Cor' me, 1697. T. Railton.
Elizabeth Mallory. Elizabeth Wandesford. James Holmes. Mary Mallory. James
Mallory.


WE do hereby Certify, that upon Mrs. Foulks applying her self to Her Majesty,
after the Loss of her Husband and five Brothers in Their Majesty's service; it
was Her Majesty's Desire and particular Order to us, at our first coming into
this Kingdom, That notwithstanding any stop put to other Pentions, hers of two
hundred Pounds a Year should be well paid, and continued to her, till Their
Majesty's see fit to give her something in liew of it, in considerations of her
sufferings: Incompliance thereof with Her Majesty's Commands, and to prevent
any Scruples, or Dificulty, she should for the future meet with on that
account. We Certify this to be Her Majesty's Pleasure, and express Commands to
us.

Given at Their Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 30th of June, 1693. Sydney.

THE Deplorable Certificates OF Mrs. WANDSFORD and others.


