THE QUAKER NO PAPIST, in Answer to The Quaker Disarmed.

OR, A brief Reply and Censure of Mr. Thomas Smith's frivolous Relation of a
Dispute held betwixt himself and certain Quakers at Cambridge.

By HEN. DEN.

Ephesians. 5.8, 9. Walk as Children of light; For the fruit of the Spirit is in
all GOODNESS, and RIGHTEOUSNESS, and TRUTH.

LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by Francis Smith, at the Sign of the
Elephant and Castle without Temple Bar, 1659.

To my learned Friend Mr. Thomas Smith, Batchelour in Divinity, Reader of the
Rhetoric Lecture in Christ-Colledge in Cambridge, Keeper of the University
Library, Rector of Cawcat in the same County, Antagonist to George Whitehead
the Quaker, and the preaching Tinker.
SIR, When your Book came to my hands, I resolved to give you a larger answer
to your Letter sent to Mr. E. of Taft; But I found it so confused, that I have
desisted to prosecute that resolution; you seem to be angry with the Tinker
because he strives to mend Souls as well as Kettles and Pans: and you are so
angry, that your passion clouded your reason, and made you forget what you had
to do: the main drift of your Letter is to prove that none may preach except
they be sent (and you do that also lamely.) Sir I think him unworthy the name
of a Tinker that affirms that any one is sufficient to preach the Gospel
without sending. By your confession the Tinker thinks otherwise, and does not
deny what you labor to prove; and so you contend with a shadow: he pleads his
Mission and Commission from the Church at Bedford; it behooves you to prove
either that this is false, and that the Church at Bedford never gave such a
Commission, or else that the Church is not in a capacity to give such a
Commission. You should also have proved that Mr. Thomas Smith has a better
Commission from some other Church, then the Tinker either has or can have from
the Church at Bedford. This would have drawn the acceptance of your friends.
And it is a task worthy your labor, to send forth your determinations
concerning the questions which are thus stated, by many of your friends.

The Tinker of Bedford may have from the Church at Bedford as good a Commission
as Mr. Thomas Smith has from his Church.

Mr. Thomas Smith has as yet no better Commission to preach, then the Tinker
of Bedford.

This if you do, justify your own Commission, and make the Tinkers invalid,
you will force your adversary to seek a better Commission, or to give over his
trade. You must give me leave to propound something to your consideration: some
shipwrackt men swimming to an Island, find there many inhabitants, to whom
they preach: the heathen hearing are converted, and walk together in love,
praising the Lord: whether the preaching of these shipwrackt men were a sin?
Secondly whether it be not lawful for this Congregation to choose to themselves
Pastors, and Governors, Teachers? etc. Thirdly, whether this Congregation may
not find some fitting men, full of Faith, and of the Holy Ghost to preach to
other unbelieving heathen? These things rightly determined will abundantly
satisfy the expectation of your friends; who pray, that as God has given you
a common gift of Learning in an eminent measure, so he would be pleased to
sanctify you with his Spirit, that your talent received may be employed
toward the advancement of Apostolical Faith. Farewell, and read with patience
the following Reply to your Disputation.

The Quaker no Papist, in Answer to The QUAKER Disarmed, etc.
I Have seen a fresh Encounter, which happened betwixt Thomas Smith, Master of
Arts of Christ's College, and keeper of the University Library in Cambridge,
and George Whitehead whom they call Quaker, a person wholly unverst in all
manner of Learning, as appears by the whole process of the Dispute: wherein for
T. S. even to have overcome was to lose the victory; and to encounter, was to
incur disgrace; but to publish in print so disgraceful a Combat, and to fill
the world with a victory so ignoble, what is it for him but to glory in his own
shame? And yet this is not all. For had Thomas Smith, though encountering such
an under-match, pressed such Arguments, and insisted upon such Answers, as
might have given satisfaction to learned men, his proceedings (possibly) might
have been held pardonable; but his Reasons and Answers being such, for the most
part, as are clearly unworthy of a man of his repute, (for the world, you must
know, takes him for a great Scholar, and he himself seems not altogether
unwilling that it should do so; witness that impertinent passage of his own, in
the first page of his Preface, where he tells you he had been, August 25. 1659.
all the afternoon at St. JOHN'S COLL. LIBRARY turning over ARABIC and other
MSS, etc.) I say his Reasons and Arguments being so much unworthy of a man of
that esteem, which the world may be thought to have of him, the publication he
has made of the Action, and that with such a height of Triumph and pretense of
victory on his part, seems not a little ridiculous. For to give you a small
taste of his acuteness at first. He proves there are three persons in the B.
Trinity, because there are three He Is. Now this Argument, I think, would prove
as well that three Horses are three persons; for they are three He Is: and if to
be a He be the definition of a Person, then three She Is cannot be three
Persons.

2. Secondly, He would prove Whitehead to be a Papist, (a disguized Papist,
forsooth; according to that Bedlam-fancy which Pryn, and Baxter, and the Father
of lies, and this vain man with the rest, go daily sowing in the heads of such
people, as they find apt and willing to be deceived by tales.) He will prove,
I say, that Whitehead is a Papist; and how think you? Because he refuses to
take the Oath of Abjuration. But does George Whitehead refuse the Oath, because
it abjures Popery? no such matter. For he plainly and presently, upon
mentioning the Oath to him, professes, I deny all Popery: which although it
does not satisfy T. S. who is not ashamed to reply upon him, That a Papist
will say so too; yet I make no doubt, but it will satisfy any indifferent man
till T. S. brings some better argument to prove Whiteheads being a Papist, then
his bare refusing the Oath of Abjuration. For Whitehead refuses that Oath, not
because it abjures Popery, but because it is an Oath, and because he thinks it
unlawful to swear at all. And by such another Argument he might as easily (if
he had pleased) have proved him to be a good Protestant. For if instead of the
Oath of Abjuration he had offered him the Oath of Pius Quartus, which is
proposed to all such as take degrees in the Popish Universities beyond Seas, he
would hazard to have refused that too. Yea the Argument, were there any force
in it, would prove the poor Quakers to be very Mahumetans, and Atheists; which
I hope no man is yet so mad as to conceive of them. For were there an Oath
exacted of them, to swear that Mahomets Religion is false, (which none but
Mahumetans for the precise matter of it would refuse) or to swear that there is
a God, which none but Atheists, (if they) would scruple at, yet Quakers would
refuse both the one and the other, standing to their principles. So that T. S.
may make what he will of a Quaker, if it were honesty to circumvent him in this
manner.

3. After this he tells Whitehead a story of twelve men going in Embassage. The
one shows his Commission, the other eleven can show none: and then adds, every
one of them exclaiming against this man who shows his Commission, and against
the other for Counterfeits. In the mean time I could wish that T. S. would
remember whence he had his Commission. But to the purpose. Is not this pure
sense, think you, that he speaks here? do these eleven both complain against
the true Ambassador and themselves against one another also, as Counterfeits?
crying (says he) aloud, that he himself, and he alone, is the true
Ambassador, though he have nothing to prove it by, more then the other ten
false. Who can make sense of this? just now there was eleven, who had no true
Commission to show; and now they are shrunk up into ten? What Is become of the
eleventh? who is that he himself, and he alone, who says he is the true
Ambassador? is there any mention of such a He? Are such matters as these fit
to pass the print from such a public University? well; this is but a Minutia,
a petty oversight, in comparison of what follows. He is again at the mystery of
the B. Trinity, and not only grants, but makes show to prove that the three
Persons in the Trinity were in different places at once, that is, (if he
understands the terms he uses in the sense of his adversary, as he must do if
he will dispute fairly, and not be counted an Equivocatour and Shifter) so as
that one Person was, where the other was not. The one went down, (says he) the
other came up, etc. God the Father in Heaven, God the Son coming out of the
water, God the Holy Ghost descending on this side heaven, like a Dove. What
stuff is here to come from an University man, a Master of Arts, a turner over
of Arabic and other Manuscripts? For if he thinks as he speaks, (and who knows
his meaning in this case, but by what he speaks?) whilst he labors to prove
the poor Quakers to be introducers of Heresies, he himself introduces a most
damnable Heresy, namely in denying the Vbiquity of the three Divine Persons:
for by the supposition of his argument he plainly ties God the Father to
heaven; and the Holy Ghost, with the second Person, he shuts quite out of it:
which is blasphemy to assert. For the holy Ghost is God equal with the Father;
and our Savior, although according to his humane nature he be not every where,
yet according to his divine nature he is: so that it is not only false and
impious, but impossible for a Christian to conceive, that any one of the Divine
Persons should be, where the other are not, as he labors to prove; because I
say, they are (all of them) every where.

4. This only has been to give you a taste of T. S. his abilities in point of
Scolarship and reasoning; guess hereby if you please, how great a Divine, and
what a good Christian you may expect to find him. I shall enter now a little
further with him into the pith and substance of his Arguments. His craft and
cunning, I see, goes much beyond his learning. For the truth is, he presses
most especially such kind of Arguments against George Whitehead and them of
his way, which with far greater reason might have been urged against him and
his. His artifice is this, and it is but too common and familiar with those of
his Gang. When he disputes against Papists, he sticks close to the principles
common to him and those who have separated themselves from the Church of Rome,
under what notion soever they pass: then their Judgment, and their Arguments,
and their Principles are good with him. But let him dispute with any of those
who divide themselves from the Church of England, his late flourishing, but now
fading Mistress, (not to say Idol, which perhaps were more proper) to convince
any of them either of Heresy or Schism, he assumes the very same Arguments,
and urges the same Reasons which Papists do, both against the Episcopal and
Presbyterial Congregations. Who is so ignorant, as not to know, how often and
how vehemently Popish Authors have ever, and yet do urge all sorts of
Separatists from them to show their Commission, and by what Authority they took
upon them to preach their new Doctrine, contrary to that which was then
publicly believed and preached; to enter in others Charges, Jurisdictions, and
Cures, to make themselves Pastors and Doctors of their own accord, without any
lawful Call and Ordination thereto? It cannot be denied, but this is the chief
Argument, which he presses against Whitehead in this dispute. But was not
Luther pressed with the like by King Henry the eighth, by Sir Thomas Moor, by
the Popish Doctor Eckius, and others? It is too manifest to be denied. And did
not Sales Bishop of Geneva urge the same against Calvin and Beza, for usurping
upon his Episcopal Chair and Authority, by their preaching without his leave,
and contrary to the Doctrine of all the Popish Bishops of Christendom? Was it
not the Plea of all the Bishops and Parish Priests in Germany, Swethland,
Denmark, France, Switzerland, and Holland, against the first Ministers of the
Reformation, when they entered into their several Parishes and Diocesses, and by
force of their preaching took away a great part of their people and their
children from them. Did not those Bishops and Priests here in England, who were
cast into prison in the first of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, complain in the same
manner, when they saw their Episcopal Sees and Benefices possessed by others, who
had been formerly subject to their Authority? did they not call upon them, as
T. S. does now upon George Whitehead and his friends, show your Commission? Are
not all the Books of Papists in those times, and all their Histories, filled
with the same complaints? Or was there ever any other answer generally given by
Protestants to them, save only that which George Whitehead and those of his
way do give now to T. S. namely, that the first Preachers of the Reformation
had, and they now have, an extraordinary calling from God; that they were sent
by God, and not by man, to reform the errors and abuses that were in the
Church? When Luther and Calvin, Zuinglius, Bucer, Peter Martyr and the rest
were demanded to show their Commission, did they, or could they with truth,
make any other answer then what George Whitehead makes to T. S. that they had a
Commission, but could not show it under hand and Seal? so that indeed it was
George Whiteheads memory that failed, or perhaps his want of experience in the
History of former times, that he did not retort upon T. S. his own Argument;
which if he had done, he had made T. S. stand as mute, as by his own report he
so often made the Quakers to stand.

5. If he will give me leave, I shall in a word or two try the issue with him
here upon that point. Suppose then that G. W. had aborded his adversary thus.
T. S. what Commission have thou to teach me and this good company here
concerning matters of our soul? perhaps T. S. would reply, I come not here as a
Minister to preach, but only as a Christian friend to dispute and argue with
you concerning your errors, and to reduce, if I be able, both your self, and
those whom you pervert, into the right way. Well be it so. But by what
Commission then, says G. W. do thou T. S. preach to thy parish at Caucat?
who gave thee thy Commission for that? T. S. replies, some of the late English
Bishops, (for I suppose he is an ordained Minister, as well as a Master of
Arts:) G. W. demands further, but who gave the Protestant Bishops their
Commission? who made them Bishops at first in Queen Elizabeth's Reign? some say,
that T. S. ought of right to stand mute here; the first Protestants Bishops
having no other Ordination, but what they mutually gave to themselves; I will
not say at the Tavern in Cheapside, but grant, it might possibly be at some
other more seemly place. But if upon that account he will not be silent, but
pretend, that the first Protestant Bishops, to wit, Matthew Parker and the rest
were ordained by other Protestant Bishops, before them, viz. by Will. Barlow,
Miles Coverdale, John Scory, etc. Who were all Bishops in King Edward the
sixths time, G.W. will not yet give over the pursuit, but demand of him, who
gave William Barlow, Miles Coverdale, and Scory their Commissions; who gave
them a Commission to make Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury? And here T.
S. will be mute again: For certainly, whatsoever he may think, and also allow
in his private judgment, he would not be so hardy, as to profess openly in
that Assembly where he was, that they received their Commission from the Popish
Bishops of King Harry the eighths time; nor could he in truth affirm it. For,
to the making of a lawful Bishop of a particular Diocese, its well known, that
according to Popish and Prelatical principles, (not to say Presbyterian also)
there is a double power ordinarily to be given, viz. the power of Order, and
the power of Jurisdiction. Bare Episcopal Ordination gives no more power of
Jurisdiction, that is to be Bishop of such a Diocese, then bare Ministerial
Ordination makes a man to be Pastor, or Minister, of such a Parish; but that
power, viz. of Jurisdiction, (say both the Popish, Prelatical, and Presbyterian
Doctors) must be had from the lawful Ecclesiastical Superior. Now G. W.
demands of T. S. what lawful Ecclesiastical Superior gave William Barlow, and
Miles Coverdale Authority to make Bishops in the Diocese of London, or in the
Province of Canterbury? Pool the Popish Archbishop and Cardinal was dead, and
Boner Bishop of London was coop't up in the Marshal-sea, and consented to
nothing that was done in that kind. Nay he plainly and positively forbad the
same under pain of Excommunication. If he answer, they had Authority from the
Queen, then will G. W. reply again, the Queen was a Lay-person, and a woman,
the Queen was no part of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, or Hierarchy, and
therefore could give no spiritual, or Ecclesiastical power, (nor the Kings that
succeeded her) to any one properly to be Bishop of such a Diocese, or Pastor
of such a Parish, no more then my people here can give me Commission to be
their Preacher; which thou, T. S. (I am sure) wilt not allow them to do. And if
it be granted, says G. W. that Laymen, or Lay-persons, (as you call them) may
grant Commissions to others to be Bishops and Pastors of Souls, what rule will
you prescribe from Scripture, or how will you determine, to how many, and to
what sorts of Lay-persons and people you will extend that power? If to the King
in his Kingdom, why not to a Prince, a Duke, an Earl, etc. in their respective
Principalities, Dukedoms, Countyes, etc. why not to every Judge in his
Circuit, to every Sheriff in his Shire, to every Justice of Peace in his
District, to every Lord in his Manor, lastly, why not to every Master in his
Family? why may not, I say, every Master of a Family, upon the like grounds,
either be himself, or constitute some other to be Pastor and Preacher to his
family? And if thus, why may not any Congregation, or company of people, either
elect and constitute their own Preacher over them? or such as have an inward
Call to it, take that office upon them, by and with the consent of such as are
willing to be instructed by them? and when they do so, who in reason shall
quarrel with them for want of Commission?

6. Now I cannot sufficiently wonder, why those of the English Ministry glory
so much in their Succession, even from Popish Bishops, seeing that beside the
ridiculous absurdity of it, they are in this perfectly singular, and divided in
sense and judgment, from all other reformed Churches in the world. So that if
this Succession be the glory of the English Clergy, as they pretend, it must be
the shame and confusion of all the rest of their brethren to want it: and if it
be not the shame, but glory of others to want it, yea to cry shame upon it, and
to reject it as a Superstitious relic of Popery, and mark of Antichrist, as
others think (no less wise and learned then themselves) it must be the shame of
our Clergy to have it, and a greater ignomy to glory in their shame. Let them
rather look upon that Evangelical example, which the Protestant Ministers of
France, (their Brethren, if they will acknowledge them for such) have given
them in their Assembly at Poysie, not only in renouncing and abjuring
whatsoever any of them had received of Ordination from Rome, but as much as in
them lay, blotting it quite out, and washing away all such impurity from them,
and so ordering their whole Ministry, that it might not seem to have any the
least dependence of the Babylonish Ordination.

7. But indeed that which deserves to be most reflected upon in this trifling
dispute, is that Major of his first Syllogism, viz. Whosoever refuses to take
the Oath of Abjuration is a Papist: a Proposition, wherein there is as much
spite as there is little wit. What had the man to do with Papists, when he
disputed with a Quaker? whom he had reason to think, hated the Papists, as
much, and even more (perhaps) then did T. S. himself: but it is the fashion,
Papists and Popery must be brought in by head and shoulders, whatsoever the
difference be, to exasperate men's spirits, and to make odious, or suspected,
those whom we cannot better confute. Whosoever, says he, refuses to take the
Oath of Abjuration is a Papist. I answer it is noised abroad, (how truly I
cannot say, let them look to that, who either make, or give credit to lies)
that Popery increases in this Nation. I dare say, could T. S. maintain the
truth of this proposition, he would make it increase with a witness. Were this
true, we might look to find one half of our Nation (probably) Papists; who
unless they would swear in some degree or other against their Consciences,
would discover themselves to be Papists by the refusal of this Oath. We should
find no small numbers, even of Episcopal men, Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists, Quakers, and all professors beside Papists, and even whilst they
remain at deadly feude and hatred against Popery, to show themselves to be
Papists this way: nay all sorts of men, and all conditions, Nobility, Gentry,
Citizens, Countrymen, Officers of the Army, Magistrates, Soldiers, (and what
not?) would by the Logique of T. S. fall under suspicion of Popery. If any man
thinks I speak that which is incredible, I desire him but seriously to consider
the form and words of the Oath, and then tell me, whether it contains nothing
that may be a strain and matter of scruple to a good Conscience, in all sorts
of persons, and of what party soever in this Nation, that do make Conscience,
or (to use the Preachers words, Eccles. 9.2.) that fears an Oath.

8. First, whosoever takes this Oath must swear, and take the Almighty and
All-knowing God to witness, and that as he shall answer to that great God at
the day of Judgment, That he BELIEVES there is no Purgatory, no
Transubstantiation, etc. Now this word believe, being in a matof Religion, and
the profession of the same, can signify nothing but a Christian Belief, or
Faith, and imports thus much, I N. N. do swear in the presence of Almighty God,
that I believe as certainly, that there is no Purgatory, etc. as I believe that
there is a God, a Heaven, a Hell, a Judgment to come, or any other Article of
the Christian Faith; and I swear to believe this so certainly, that I am ready
to lose my fortunes, liberty, and life it self, rather then ever to be
persuaded there is any such thing, as Purgatory, Transubstantiation, etc. yea I
swear also, that I believe most certainly, that I can never go to heaven, if I
did not as much believe there is no Purgatory, as I do believe there is a God,
a Heaven, or Hell. All this, I say, is virtually and really comprehended, (in
this case) in the word Believe. Now what man of Conscience amongst us of the
reformed Religion will venture his soul so far, as to swear to all this? we
have all separated from Rome, and clearly renounced all Romish error; but is
any of us (I say not all, but any of us) so certain, that there is no
Purgatory, as he is certain that there is a God, a Heaven, and Hell? are we all
of us so certain, that the Body of Christ is not in the Sacrament, as we are
certain, that it is in Heaven? The Scriptures teach us, that there is a Hell,
and that Christ is in Heaven, so expressly and clearly, that no Christian ever
did, or can deny it: but where do the Scriptures teach us expressly and plainly
that there is no Purgatory? no Transubstantiation, etc? If indeed the Oath had
only obliged those who take it, to swear that they are not certain that there
is any Purgatory, as they are certain that there is a Hell; that they doubt of
Purgatory; but they do not doubt of Hell; that they have no persuasion that
there is a Purgatory, and are fully persuaded that there is a Hell; that they
really think there is no Purgatory, and do not believe there is any, or any
such like expressions, it might easily have been, that those of our reformed
Churches should bear with their Consciences to take it upon occasion: but for
any of them to swear that he BELIEVES there is none, that is, makes it a part
and Article of his Faith to BELIEVE there is no Purgatory, as much as he does
to believe there is a God a Heaven, or Hell, this I think should not easily
down with all Protestants. Nay, what do I know whether it be revealed in
Scripture, or no? it is not any Fundamental matter of Belief; and whatsoever is
not Fundamental to Belief, nor absolutely necessary to salvation, we our selves
teach, that it may be so ambiguously and obscurely delivered in Scripture, that
at least the unlearned shall not be able clearly to discover it. And how then
shall unlearned men dare to swear, as in effect they do swear when they take
the Oath, that it is not revealed of God in Scripture, or not contained in
Scripture; when I say, by reason of the unnecessariness and obscurity of the
thing it self, they are not certain whether it be revealed there or no? Is it
not a just matter of scruple and fear, think you, to any timorous conscience,
to swear a thing not to be, which he is not certain, but that it may be,
contrary to what he swears? Again, seeing points not necessary to salvation
are, or may be so obscurely and ambiguously delivered in Scripture, will any
man, that makes conscience of an Oath, though otherwise not unlearned, venture
to swear, that such and such a thing is not contained in Scripture, only
because himself conceives it is not there? may not he, or any one, for all his
learning, be deceived in matters doubtful and obscure? will he make his own
humane learning, and private judgment, the rule of his Faith and Conscience,
as he must do, whosoever makes this proposition, There is no Purgatory, an
Article of his Faith? can it be denied, but that many men, otherwise no less
learned and judicious then our selves, think they find it there? and though we
think they err, yet is it reasonable, that any of us should swear that they
err? The Scripture contains it not expressly, or in terms, one way or other,
whether that there is a Purgatory, or that there is none: but say the Papist,
it contains it implicitly and in certain general principles, that there is a
Purgatory; from whence learned men, both of ancient and latter times have
sufficiently proved it: we Protestants think the contrary, that it is not
sufficiently proved; well. Is it now reasonable, or according to good
conscience, that every private man should be made to determine that by his
Oath, which is in controversy and dispute betwixt so many learned, and for
ought we know, or can in charity think, conscientious men? Add hereunto, that
supposing as we Protestants hold, there were no place of Scripture, neither
clear nor obscure, neither in general nor particular, proving Purgatory; nor
any Tradition at all for it; in a word let us suppose, that God has not at all
revealed it, which is the utmost that can be supposed by us, yet I think no man
can rightly swear with a good Conscience, that there is no such matter, or that
the opinion which asserts such a thing is absolutely false. For how many
Mysteries and and Things known to God may there be most true in themselves,
which God never revealed, nor happily ever will reveal; and which therefore,
duly considering the matter, we can neither swear to be, or not to be; because
we have no sufficient certainty pro or con concerning them? This Abjuration
therefore, or forswearing, of Purgatory, or any other of the points contained
in the Oath, and required to be abjured, for ought I yet conceive of them, is a
most rash and temerarious swearing; it is a swearing a thing to be false, which
for ought he knows may be true; it is exposing a man's self to evident peril of
taking a false oath, and thereby of committing a most grievous and heinous sin
in the sight of God.

9. Another consideration that may be against the oath, and reflecting upon all
persons as well as Papists, is this, that a man is required to swear, that no
power whatsoever can absolve him from this Oath; this is couched in these
words, No power derived from the Pope, or Churchof Rome, nor ANY OTHER PERSON;
can absolve me from this Oath. For though neither the Pope nor Church of Rome
can do it, yet to swear, that no other person has power to do it, is to swear
a thing manifestly false. For seeing one lawful Parliament can dissolve and
annul what any former Parliament has enacted, yea, the self same Parliament
can annul those Acts which it self has made; Suppose that either this present,
or some succeeding Parliament, should abolish this Oath, and declare it to be
no longer of force to oblige any, should not all that have taken it be absolved
from the obligation of it? And is it not clear, that whosoever takes it in this
form, does, as much as in him lies, forswear and abjure the very privileges
and authority of the Parliament it self, which are due to it, and inseparable
from it by the Fundamental Laws of the Nation? Whosoever, I say, takes this
Oath, swears as much indeed against the known power of the chief Magistracy of
this Nation, as against the pretended power of the Pope, or Church of Rome. For
though it should be answered, that the Oath expresses power derived from any
other person, and not from any other persons; yet it is as easily replied, that
it having said immediately before, the Pope or Church of Rome, which latter
signifies a collection of many together, as much as the Parliament does, the
words any other person may be understood either of any one single person, as is
the Pope, or of many single persons collected and united together, as is that
of the Church and Parliament. So that the meaning is of any other person, such
as the Pope or Church of Rome is, that is either considered separate and alone,
or joined with others. For in Church and Parliament both, the power is derived
from every one; every one is a Parliament Man, and has Parliament power
partially in himself: So that whatsoever is voted or done in Parliament, may
truly enough be said to be derived from a person, as being either expressly or
virtually the Act and Suffrage of every single person in Parliament. Whence
follows my inference, That to swear that no person whatsoever can absolve me
from this Oath, is to swear, that the Parliament it self cannot do it.

10. To be short, Suppose some Protestant, Native of this Nation, should have
lived long within the Popes Dominions in Italy, with his House and Family, and
should there have natularized himself, and made himself a subject of the Pope,
and after that returning hither again upon his occasions, should at his
entrance, being pressed to take the Oath, refuse it, because he thereby swears
that the Pope has no Jurisdiction nor Authority over him in particular, which
in this particular case is contrary unto truth: would it not be ridiculous now
to use T. S. his argument against him, and pretend he is not a Protestant, but
a Papist, because he refuses the Oath of Abjuration? Not to urge, that in
justice the Oath could not be urged upon him, nor any advantage taken against
him for refusing it, though he were indeed a Papist, by reason of the said
clause, which renders the Oath unlawful for him to take, abstracting from
Religion, because the Pope in this case has, de jure at least, Authority over
such a person in particular.

11. But the Prelatical malice objects yet further, that the urging of this
Oath of Abjuration is absolutely necessary for the peace of the Nation:
Papists, say they, are a people whose principles are incompatible with all
Governments and Governors, who are not of their own persuasion; their Religion
teaches them, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, and they esteem all
as such, who are not members of their Catholic Church. Therefore they ought
not to be permitted to grow rich by enjoying and improving their estates, as
other men; but the Oath of Abjuration was well advised, in that respect, by the
Presbyterians, the better to find them out, that the Laws might be put in
execution against them.

12. To this I answer first, That this is rather the result of their malice who
make the objection. They will never be drawn to take notice, that Papists
universally disown that Tenet which is objected to them as theirs; and in
charity we are bound to believe the best of others, and also to think that they
speak true, where we cannot prove the contrary; as in this case they will, I
presume, hardly be able to do. For is not the Imputation proved manifestly to
be false, by continual experience of Protestants treating, commercing, and
dealing with Papists as confidently and constantly, as with those of their own
profession? And find they not as much honest proceeding and credit in them, as
in their own? They will never look upon the just obedience which those Papists
subjects of the United Netherlands do pay unto their Superiors, the States of
those Provinces; and the security which that Commonwealth enjoys by granting
some kind of liberty to them in the exercise of their Religion. But the malice
of these objectors is inherent in them. Before the Scortish war they urged the
same Argument (almost) against the Presbyterians; they were people incompatible
with Government and Governors too: To this end they proclaimed, that
Calvinisme was not brought into any Country, but with the deposition of the
then Governors, and change or ruin of the Government, instancing in Geneva,
Scotland, the Netherlands, etc. not taking notice of the peaceable demeanor
and obedience which the Duke of Savoy finds from those of Piedmont and others
of the same Religion. After the Scottish war they urged (together with the
Presbyterians, who were easily enough infected with such leaven) the
Incompatibility of Anabaptists and other Sectaries, (as they called them)
producing to this purpose the story of Munster, without taking notice of our
peaceable submissions to the State of Holland, our present obedience to our
Governors at home, and our disowning the principles which occasioned those
Munster Riots. Nor do they, while they fall thus upon others, take any notice
of, or endeavor to answer those things which are standing objections against
themselves; to wit, in relation to their rebellion, disobedience, and Apostasy
from the Government of the Church of Rome; which in good earnest I think they
will never be able to answer, upon their own principles, that is, supposing
their Ordination, for which they so much contend, to be of necessity and of
Divine Right, and that they had it (as most certainly they had) from the Church
of Rome. And if they can, they would do very well to give the world, and their
own party too, some satisfaction concerning those Arguments in form against
them, which are published at the end of the Conference lately held betwixt Mr.
Gunning and Mr. Peirson, Ministers of the Prelatical party, and two Romanists,
who undertook to prove them Schismatics. The Conference is public, and the
not answering to what is objected therein against them is by some counted a
prejudice to their cause, and a scandal, equal to that which Mr. Gunning gives
by his like silence, to what has been long since printed against him, in
relation to the public Conference at Clements Church without Temple Bar.

13. Secondly, I answer to the main objection, if Papists are therefore only
punished because of the forementioned doctrine, seeing it cannot with any truth
be charged upon the Papists in general, but only upon some few (if any) why do
we torment their consciences, by requiring them to abjure so many other
opinions, which are neither relative to this that is objected, nor such, as the
maintaining of them can be dangerous to the State? what is the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and Worshipping of the Sacrament, (which they verily
believe is the Body and whole Person of Christ) of Merits, of Purgatory above
mentioned, etc. in relation to Government? May not a man be a good Subject,
because he thinks that Christ is in the Sacrament, and that Good Works merit
salvation? who will maintain it, but only those whose passion has wholly
blinded their judgment, and their interest extinguish't all considerations of
equity and charity toward their suffering and oppressed Brethren? So that, if
the present proceeding against them be not a mere persecution, and a mere State
trick to get money from these people, (whose condition verily is such, as every
one may abuse them, even in the streets, without offense to others, nay with
satisfaction enough unto many) some better way might be found to try the
Papists fidelity to the State, then an Oath of Abjuration; unless we be so
wise, as to think we are then most secure of men's fidelity, when we have forced
them to abjure their religion and conscience toward God. Let there be an Oath
of Abjuration framed, wherein Papists shall be required only to abjure that
Doctrine imputed to them, viz. That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics or
the like, and then, if any refuse such an Oath, let them be dealt with as men
not fit to live in a Commonwealth; let them be banished. But for such as give
security of themselves by taking such an Oath, let us not be such public
Denyers and Contradictors of our own declared Principles, (whereby we disclaim
and profess against all persecution for Conscience) as to continue
Sequestrations, or to inflict any other Mulcts and Penalties upon these men; of
whose honesty and conscience, I conceive, we may be reasonably well assured, by
their long and so patient enduring all manner of prejudice (almost) and hard
dealing, rather then they would renounce their conscience toward God, or make
profession of any thing pertaining to Religion, contrary to the light that is
in them, and which doubtless they believe to be of God. No doubt those who
framed the Oath of Abjuration, took it to be a very effectual means to
impoverish Papists, and by keeping them low to disable them from working harm
against the Commonwealth. But what is policy, when contrary to Religion? if it
be iniquity, injustice, and oppression to treat men so without cause, or
without their particular demerit and fault, it is not any feigned and imaginary
reason, or necessity, of State that will excuse those who either Act, or give
consent, countenance, or Authority to such unchristian Actings. We should
rather remember what the Apostle tells us, Romans 3.8. That such who say, Let us
do evil that good may come, their damnation is just. Neither can I see any such
great reason of fear, and danger from them. For having once abjured what is
objected to them as only dangerous in their Religion, and sworn obedience to
the present Government and Governors, they have given us some evidence
already, that they will perform those oaths, and that they cannot be absolved
from them, by the scruple which they have, and the much difficulty that they
make against the Oath of Abjuration: which certainly they would swallow, if
they had no conscience at all of an oath, or did believe, that the Pope or any
other had power to allow them to commit a perjury, or to absolve them from
their lawful Oaths. The Lord send us, who preach and declare against
persecution, to follow that equal and golden rule of our Lord Jesus Christ;
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do that unto them also: for
this is the Law and the Prophets, Matthew. 7.12.

14. I shall take notice of one only Objection more, and then leave our
Disputant and Scholar T. S. to go turn over his Arabique and other manuscripts
in St. John's College Library. It is to say something concerning those common
Bruits which are raised against Popish Priests and Jesuits, as if they did
secretly insinuate themselves into the Congregations of different professions
in Religion that are now amongst us, covering themselves sometimes under one
form, and sometimes under another; sometimes seeming Anabaptists, sometimes
Presbyterians, sometimes Independents, sometimes Quakers, Seekers,
Antiscripturists, what not? all to carry on their design of working divisions
and confusions amongst us both in Church and Commonwealth, that so in time they
may bring both to ruin, and upon the ruins build their own Babel again, that
is, introduce and establish their own Religion and Government over us. I
answer, It cannot be denied, but that such reports are spread; but does it
follow therefore that they are true? It ought rather to be examined by whom
they are spread, and to what ends. Before the Government that now is, was
established, and Liberty of Conscience either owned, or at least publicly
countenanced and favored by the State, I do not remember that any such reports
were. But as soon as the Prelatists saw themselves quite unhorst, and the
Presbyterians found that they were not like to get up into the saddle, then
presently our Councels, and Armies, and all were transformed into masqued
Jesuits and Priests; and ever since the tale has held current, to the great
dishonor of the State, and scandal of the whole Government, both Military and
Civil: who, if they had not been extremely patient toward a froward people,
would have made some of the spreaders of those reports to have made better
proof of them, then I am sure they ever yet did, or I believe, ever will be
able to do. For I ask, was there ever any such thing duly proved? was there
ever any Jesuit or Priest taken under such masque, or disguize? There was an
idle fellow (one Ramsey) many years since brought from New Castle upon a slight
suspicion: they that sent the information, why did they not prosecute the
business? what hindered them from making a full discovery of that pretended,
and most villainous Imposture, if it had been true? They had him here many years
in prison; why did they not procure his further examination and trial? Did any
man hinder them? They are challenged to it; let them declare the truth: but let
any man of honesty and conscience mark the proceedings of these men, I mean the
authors and spreaders of these stories. All the while they had him in prison,
they were as silent and mute as fishes; there was not a word spoken of Ramsey.
As soon as they understand, that the man, after a long imprisonment upon bare
information and suspicion of I know not what, had procured his liberty, out
comes a fresh information against him by Prynne, that he was got to Cambridge,
and was so bold there, as to offer Dispute or Conference with the Hebrew
Professor, and to profess himself Body and Soul for the Roman Church. Truly
how far they of the Roman Church think themselves concerned in what this fellow
professes, I know not; but certainly that Book-maker ( Prynne's) proceeding
against him, is just as honest, as if, having my neighbor face to face, I
should not dare to speak a word against him; but as soon as his back were
turned, or that I knew he were far enough for making me an answer, I should
call him Thief, and Felon, and all the naught that can be. There is such
another story published by him upon an information (as he pretends) from
Bristol: but that also was after the party was gone, who should be the
disguized Priest. But truly if such groundless and unproved calumnies can be
thought to deserve credit, ere it be long no man's innocence will be able to
protect him against suspicion and slander. The Papists disclaim the Imputation
as a most injurious slander, suggested against them merely by the malice of
their enemies of the Prelatical and Presbyterian party. Insomuch, that I for my
part do very confidently assure my self, that if an oath were tendered to all
the Papists in this Nation, they would willingly swear, that neither they
themselves, nor any that they know, did ever use any such practice, or ever
thought it lawful to dissemble their Religion in such manner; or to make
profession (for what ends soever) to be of any religion, save only their own,
yea (as I have heard some say) though they might gain the whole world thereby
to be of their Religion, or that they might subvert and destroy all the
Heresies, Sects, and false Religions that are in the world by doing so.

15. We all know it is a fallacious way of arguing to proceed a posse ad esse,
(as they speak at Cambridge) viz. to prove that a thing really is, because it
is possiible that it may be: and yet no better is the argument of the Papists
Adversaries in this case. They know the Popish Priests and Jesuits are men,
that have a zeal for their Religion, no less then other, and that it is likely
they are not asleep all this while, but are using endeavors to bring their
designs of gaining Proselytes about: whence they conclude, that seeing
divisions among our selves, and dissentions in matters concerning Religion,
seem to be one great advantage for them, that therefore (questionless) they set
themselves by all ways and means whatsoever to foment and improve them. But
certainly, till the thing be more evident, Christian Charity, (if that be a
thing that signifies any thing with us) should teach us another lesson: and
that seeing such manner of dissembling in Religion is a most heinous crime and
sin against God, (and that even according to their principles and professions
as well as our own) we ought not to charge them with it upon light grounds, but
rather be inclined to think the contrary, and that there is no such matter: for
that doubtless is the property of true Charity, and the sense of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 13.7. where he says, Charity Believes all things, Hops all things,
that is, (if you will hear it Brethren) the best of all things. Where we do not
too too evidently see evil, we must believe good. Not to urge, that if this way
of reasoning were good, such a thing is conducible to Papists ends, therefore
Papists practice it, why should not the Presbyterian, for the like reason,
accuse the Prelatical men, that they secretly insinuate themselves, and work
underhand the rising of New Sects, to weaken thereby the Presbyterian party, to
disgrace, yea and displace too, where they can, their Ministry, to the end
that in time way may be made for them to reinduce their Prelatical Government?
And for the like reason why may not the Independent, (if he will) suspect and
accuse the Presbyterians, that they send privately their Emissaries amongst
them, to put new opinions into peoples heads, that so in time, divisions and
dissentions growing, they may bring the yoke of their Discipline over the necks
of the whole Nation? Thus may they mutually accuse one another, and frame what
suspicions they please against each other, if mere conjectures, likelyhoods,
and possibilities might serve the turn. In the beginning of the Scottish War
what was more rife in the mouths of the Prelatical Clergy, then that the
Papists concurred underhand with the Presbyterians, and the Presbyterians made
use of Papists, to advance the Geneva Government against Bishops, thereby to
destroy Order in their Church and Monarchy in their Government? no sooner was
that War ended, and the Bishops pulled down, but both Prelatist and
Presbyterian frame the like accusation against the Anabaptists and other
Sectaties, (as they call them) That they concurred and plotted with Papists,
and Papists with them, to hinder Reformation, and to introduce Popery under the
notion of Liberty of Conscience. But the suspicion not so well fastening upon
them, it is at length derived upon the Quakers; and there it may probably rest
and thrive, inasmuch as the Quakers are a people, as to matter of conversation,
most estranged from the fashions of the world, and as to matter of interest, I
think so unprovided of all humane help, that they are as little able to
vindicate themselves as the Papists, and consequently must be content to be
both abused alike.

16. But I had almost forgot my Opponent T. S. I have only to desire him (at
parting) to consider how much an over acting zeal oftentimes obstructeth sound
judgment. This is not the first time, that it has betrayed him to censure.
His passionate expression, (so I may call it rather then a proposition,) viz.
that all who refuse the Oath of Abjuration are Papists, would prove himself, if
he rightly considers it, as much a Papist, as it would prove George Whitehead
one; yea, and more too; inasmuch as George Whitehead refuses it only, because
it is an Oath, and not as it contains this or that matter: but its more then
probable, that T. S. if he be a true Protestant Divine of the English
Hierarchy, out of his declared respects to Antiquity, and a good conscience
also, would not willingly abjure, that is, deny upon his Oath, some of the
particulars contained in the Oath. But I will not contest with him about that.
I wish him often to remember the counsel of the wise man, Prove. 24.28.
especially when he enters such disputes as these. Be not witness, says he,
against thy neighbor without cause, and deceive not with thy lips. To be a
witness without cause, is to speak any thing to the prejudice of our neighbor
rashly and unadvisedly, and otherwise then the due order of Justice and Charity
does require. This I think T. S. has not so well observed as he ought to have
done, both in the dispute it self and in the publication of it. However I
remain his servant in all good offices.

H. D.

A Postscript.
YOu (Mr. Tho. Smith) are very earnest to fasten the suspicion of Popery upon
your Adversaries, especially George Whitehead: but it is a wonder to me, that
(being Rhetoric Professor) you remember no better that honest advice of the
Orator, given you in your Grammar, Qui alterum incusat probri, etc. He that
accuses his neighbor of any crime, ought to examine himself well, and take
heed, that he be not found guilty of it himself. I will not say you are a
Papist; it should be too much contrary to Charity, considering what you
profess. But this I do say, that you give more cause of suspicion that way,
then any thing you have yet objected against George Whitehead. I shall give two
Instances of this, and leave you then to your private Meditations.

First, At the end of your Letter to Mr. E. of Taft, you talk of a pure Spouse
of Christ, the Church in all ages. Now, Sir, is not this in effect to justify
the Church of Rome to be a pure Church? What other Church, I pray you, was
there in all ages, but the Roman Church, and those which agreed, and agree with
her in all, or at least in the most and grossest of those corruptions and
errors, for which Protestants (when time was) separated themselves from the
Roman Church, and for which they do still at this day abandon her Communion.

Secondly, you say, That merely upon the Authority of this Church, we receive
the Canon of Scriptures. And what is this (good Sir) but to say, that either
the Authority of the Church is Divine and Infallible, (which none but Papists
will say) or that we have no Divine and Infallible Assurance, which Books of
Scripture are Canonical, and which are not? For as concerning the Inward
Assurance of the Spirit, it is too notorious how much you reject it, with the
Papists. Ex ungue Leonem. From these two Capital Assertions of Popery let any
indifferent man judge, whether Mr. T. S. (netwithstanding his vehement
pretendings to the contrary) may not be justly thought to favor the Doctrine
of the present Church of Rome, a little more then a man of his Profession
should do.

But I have done. The Grace of God, a due knowledge of your self, with a spirit
of true Charity toward your Brethren, (which are all, that profess the Blessed
Gospel of Jesus Christ in sincerity) be ever with you. Amen.

FINIS.

