THE TRUE SPEECH Delivered on the SCAFFOLD BY James Earl of Derby, IN The
Marketplace at Boulton in LANCASHIRE, on wednesday last, being the 15. of
this instant October, 1651.

WITH The manner of his deportment and Carrage on the Scaffold: his Speech
concerning the King of Scots. And his prayer immediately before his Head was
severed from his Body. As also his Declaration and Desires to the People.

Likewise, the manner how the King of Scots took shipping at Graves-end, on the
fourth of this instant October, with Captain Hind, disguised in Sea-mens
Apparel, and safely arrived at the Hague in Holland.

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY.

London, Printed for Robert Eles, for general satisfaction to the People.

A Speech delivered on the Scaffold in the Market place at Boulton in
Lancashire by JAMES Earl of DERBY, on Wednesday last, being the fifteenth of
this instant October, 1651.
ON Wednesday last being the fifteenth of this instant October, the Earl of
Derby was brought to the place of execution, (the Scaffold being erected and
set up in the place where the Cross formerly stood) attended by diverse
Gentlemen and others; And where were present many hundreds of People, who came
from several parts adjacent to behold this Object of compassion. As soon as
his Lordship came upon the Scaffold, he took up the Block, and kissed it,
saying; I hope there is no more but this Block between Me and Heaven; and I
hope I shall never tire in my way, nor go out of it. Then turning to the
People, and putting off his hat, he spoke as follows:

Christian Gentlemen, and People;

YOur business hither to day, is to see a sad Spectacle, a Peer of the Land to
be in a moment unmanned, and cut off by an untimely-end: And though truly, if my
general course of life were but inquired into, I may modestly say, there is
such a moral honesty upon it, as some may be so peremptory as to expostulate
why this great judgment is fallen upon me: But know, that I am able to give
them and my self an answer, and out of this breast (laying his hand upon his
heart) to give a better account of my Judgment and Execution then my Judgers
themselves or you are able to give; It is Gods wrath upon me for sins long
unrepented, of many judgments withstood and mercies flighted; therefore God
has whipped me by his severe rod of correction, that he might not loose me; I
pray join with me in prayer, that it may not be a fruitless rod, that when by
this rod I have laid down my life, by this staff I may be comforted, and
received into glory.

As for my accusers, I am sorry for them, they have committed Judas his crime;
but I wish and pray for them Peter's tears, that by Peter's repentance they may
escape Judas his punishment, and I wish other people so happy, they may be
taken up betimes, before they have drunk more blood of Christian men, possibly
less deserving then my self

It is true, there have been several addresses made for mercy, and I will put
the obstruction of it upon nothing more then upon my own sin, and seeing God
sees it not fit (I having not glorified him in my life) I might do it in my
death, which I am content to do. I profess in the face of God, no particular
malice to any one of the State or Parliament, to do them a bodily injury I had
none.

For the cause in which I had a great while waded, I must needs say, my
engagement or continuance in it has laid ho scruple upon my Conscience, it was
on principles of Law, the knowledgment whereof I embrace, and on principalls of
Religion, my judgment satisfied, and Conscience rectified, that I have pursued
those ways for which I bless God I find no blackness upon my Conscinnce, nor
have I put it into the bead-roll of my sins.

I will not presume to d^side controversies; I desire God to honor himself in
prospering that side that has right with it, and that you may enjoy peace and
plenty, when I shall enjoy peace and plenty, beyond all you possess here: in my
conversation in the world, I do not know where I have an enemy with cause, or
that there is such a person to whom I have a regret; but it there be any whom I
cannot recollect, under the notion of Christian men I pardon them, as freely as
if I had named them by name, I freely forgive them, being in free peace with
all the world, as I desire God for Christ's sake, to be at peace with me. For
the business of death, it is a sad sentence in it self, if men consult with
flesh and blood: But truly without boasting, I say it, or if I do boast, I
boast in the Lord, I have not to this minute, had one consultaton with the
flesh about the blow of the Ax, or one thought of the Ax, more then as my
Passe-port to glory.

I take it for an honor, and I owe thankfulness to those under whose power I
am, that they have sent me hither to a place however of punishment, yet of some
honor to die a death, exceeding worthy of my blood, answerable to my birth and
qualification, and this courtesy of theirs, has much helped toward the
pacification of my mind.

I shall desire God that those Gentlemen in that sad bedroll to be tried by the
high Court of Justice, that they may find that really (...) nominall in the
Act: An high Court of Justice, a Court of high Justice, high in its
righteousness, though not in its severity, Father forgive them, and forgive me
as I forgive them.

I desire you that you would pray for me, and not give over praying till the
hour of death, nor till the minute of death, for the hour is come already, that
as I have a very great load of sins; so I may have the wings of your prayers,
to help those Angels that are to convey my soul to Heaven, hoping this day to
see Christ in the presence of the Father, and my self there to rejoice with all
other Saints and Angels for evermore.

One thing more I desire to be clear in. There lies a common imputation upon
the Kings party, that they are Papists, and under that name we are made odious
to those of the contrary opinion. I am not a Papist, but renounce the Pope with
all his dependencies; when the distractions in Religion first sprang up, I
might have been thought apt to to turn from this Church to the Roman, but was
utterly unsatisfied in their Doctrine, in point of faith, and very much, as to
their Dissipline. The Religion which I profess is that which passes under the
name of Protestant, though that be rather a name of distinction, then properly
essential to Religion. But the Rellgion which was found out in the Reformation
purged from all the errors of Rome, in the Reign of Edward the 6. practiced in
the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles, that blessed
Prince deceased, that Religion before it was defaced. I am of which I take to
be Christ's Catholic, though not the Roman Catholic Religion: in the
profession and practice whereof, I will live and die, that for my Religion.
Then he turned himself unto the Executioner, I have no reason to quarrel with
thee, thou art not the hand that throws the stone, -- (...) there is 3 l. for
thee, (...) Now tell me what I lack. Executioner. Yo^^ ^air to be ^urned up my
Lord, Show me how to fit my self upon the block. After which his doublet being
of, and hair turned up, he turned again to the People, and prayed a good while.
Before he laid down upon the block, he spoke again to the People, viz: There is
not one face that looks upon me, though many faces, and perhaps different from
me in opinion and practice, but (me thinks) has something of pity in it, and
may that mercy which is in your hearts, fall into your own bosoms when you
have need of it; and may you never find such blocks of sin to stand in the way
of your mercy, as I have met with. I beseech you join with me in prayer. Then
he prayed (leaning on the Scaffold) with an audible voice for about a quarter
of an hour; having done, he had some private conference with Dr Green, then
taking his leave of his friends, --, and acquaintance, saluting them all with a
courteous valediction, he prepared himself for the block, kneeling down said,
let me try the block, which he did, after casting his eyes up, and fixing them
very intentively upon Heaven, he said, when I say Lord Jesus receive me,
Executioner do thine Office, then kissing the Ax he laid down, and with as much
undaunted, yet Christian courage as possibly could be in man, did he expose his
threat to the fatal Ax, his life to the Executioner, and commended his soul
into the hands of God, as into the hands of a faithful and merciful Creator,
through the meritorious passion of a ^^acious Redeemer, saying the
forementioned words; his head was smitten off at one blow.

The Earl of Derby his Funeral Sermon: Preached by Doctor Green, on Tuesday in
the Afternoon before his Lordship was executed.
Beloved, when we come to die, we shall be stripped naked of three things,

1. We shall be stripped naked of all our worldly honor, riches and greatness.
2. We shall be stripped naked of our bodies. And 3. Which is above all, we shall
be stripped naked of our sins. And that is the happiness of a child of God, he
shall put off, not only his mortal body, but the body of sin.

4. In the fourth place observe, As no man knows the time when he falls
asleep, a man falls asleep before he is aware: So no man can tell the certain
time when he must die. There is nothing so certain as that we must die, nothing
so uncertain as the time when we shall die; Death comes suddenly even as sleep
comes upon a man before he is aware.

4. When a man goes to sleep, he goes to sleep but for a certain time, in the
morning he awakes out of sleep. So it is with the sleep of death; and therefore
death is called a sleep, because we must all awake in the morning of the
resurrection. We are in the grave, as in our beds and when the trumpet of God,
and the voice of the Archangel shall sound, we shall all rise out of our grave,
as out of our beds. Death is but a sleep for a certain time.

5. Sleep is a great refreshing to those that are weary and sick, and when the
sick man awakes, he is more lively and cheerful then he was when he fell
asleep; and therefore sleep is called Medicus laborum, redinte gratio virium,
recreator corporum, The great Physician of the sick body, the redinte-gration
of man's spirits, the reviver of the weary body. And so it is with death, when
Gods people awake out of the sleep of death, they shall be made active for God,
then ever they were before; when you lie down in the grave, you lie down with
mortal bodies; It it sown a morta body, but it shall rise up an immortal body,
it is sown in dishonor, but it shall rise up in honor; it is sown a natural
body, but it shall rise up a spiritual body.

6 When we rise out of our beds, we then put on our Clothes So in the morning
of the resurrection, we shall put on a a glorious body, like to the glorious
body of Jesus Christ, we shall put on Stolam immortalitatis, the garment of
immortality.

7 As no man when he lays him down to sleep, knows the direct time when he
shall awake. So no man can tell when the resurrection shall be. They do but
cousen you, who say, that the general resurrection shall be such or such a
year; for, as no man can know the minute when he shall awake out of his natural
sleep, no more can any man know when we shall arise from the sleep of death.

8. It is a very easy thing to awake a man out of sleep, it is but jogging of
him and you will quickly awake him.

9 As when a man arises in the morning, though he has slept many hours; nay,
suppose he could sleep 20 years together, yet notwithstanding, when he awakes,
these 20 years will seem to be but as one hour unto him. So it will be at the
day of Judgment, all those that are in their graves, when they awake, it will
be tanquam somnus unius horae, but as the sleep of an hour unto them.

Lastly, and most especially, As sleep seizes only upon the body, and the
outward senses, but does not seiz upon the soul, the soul of man is many times
most busy, when the man is asleep; And God has heretofore revealed most
glorious things to his children in dreams, when they have bin asleep; God
appeared unto Abraham and many others in dreams, the body sleeps, but the soul
awakes. So it is with the sleep of death, the body that dies, but the soul does
not die. There are some men that are not afraid to teach you, That the soul
sleeps as well as the body and that when the body dies and falls asleep, the
soul likewise continues in a dull Lethorgy veterno^o s^mno correptus, neither
capable of joy nor sorrow, until the resurrection. Beloved, This is a very
uncomfortable, and a very false Doctrine. They endeavor to prove it from my
Text, they say, That Stephen when he died fell asleep; It is true in regard of
his body, he sell asleep, but his soul did not fall asleep, that which was
stoned fell asleep, which was his body only; for when he was stoning, he saw
Jesus Christ standing ready to receive his soul into heaven: Lord Jesus, says
he, receive my Spirit Stephens soul could not be stoned, though his body was
stoned. So when Jesus Christ was crucified, his soul was not crucified. I mean,
when his body was killed, his soul was not killed: indeed he did endure
torments in his soul, which made him cry out, My God, my God why have thou
forsaken me? But yet his soul did not die. So when Stephen died, his soul went
to Christ. It is true, when a child of God dies, the soul goes to sleep; How is
that? The soul goes to sleep in a Scripture-sense, that is, it goes to rest in
Abraham's bosom (O blessed sleep) it goes to rest in the embraces of God, it
goes into the arms of its Redeemer, it goes to the heavenly Paradise, it goes
to be always present with the Lord But take heed of that wicked opinion, to
say, that the soul sleeps in an Anabaptistical sense; that is, That it lies in
a strange kind of Lethargy, neither dead, nor alive; neither capable of joy nor
sorrow, until the resurrection. Though Stephens body fell asleep, yet his soul
did not fall asleep, but immediately went unto Jesus Christ in Heaven. Thus I
have given the Explication of the words.

Now give me leave to make some Application of all unto our selve.

If the death of Gods children be nothing else but a falling asleep, then let
this comfort us against the deaths of our godly friends though they die
unnatural and violent deaths, though they be stoned to death, though they be
burnt to asbes, though they be sawn asunder, etc Here is a message of rich
consolation, which as a Minister of Christ I hold out unto you this day, viz.
That the death of a child of God, let it be after what manner soveer it will,
it is nothing else but a falling asleep; he goes to his grave as to his bed;
and therefore our burying places are called ^oimeteria, do^mitoria, our
sleeping-houses. A child of God when he dies he lies down in peace, and enters
into his rest.

Dr. Green (he being upon the Sea fold) spoke as follows to the Earl of Derby.

You have this morning in the presence of a few, given some account of your
Religion, and under general notions or words, have given an account of your
faith, charity, and repentance.

To those on the Scaffold, If you please to hear the same questions asked here,
you shall find that it may be a general testimony to you all, that he died in
the favor of God.

Now Sir, I degin to deal with you: you do acknowledge that this stroke you are
by and by to suffer, is a just punishment laid upon you by God, for your former
sins?

Derby, I dare not only not deny it, but dare not but confess it, I have no
opportunity of glorifying God more, then by taking shame to my self, and I have
a reason of the Justice of God in my own bosom, which I have put to your
bosom.


Doctor. You acknowledge you deserve more then this stroke hf the Ax, and that a
far greater misery is due to you, even the pains and torments of Hell that the
damned there endure?


Derby. I know it is due in righteous judgment, but I knw again, I have a
satisfaction made by my elder Brother Christ Jesus, and then I say it is not
due, it is due from me, but quitted by his righteousness.


Doctor. Do you believe to be saved by that Mediatot and none others?


Derby, By that and that only, renouncing all secondary causes whatsoever.


Doct. Are you truly and unfainedly sorry before God, as you appear to us, for
all those sins that have brought you hither?


Derby. I am sorry, and can never be sorrowful enough, and am sorry I can be
no more sorty.


On Satturday last came intelligence of the King of Scots arrival at the Hague
in Holland: And of his taking Shipping at Graves-end on the fourth of this
instant October, being disguised in a Sea-mans Apparel.

FINIS.

