To the Supreme Authority of England, the Commons Assembled in Parliament.
The Humble Address of Thomas Devenish.
Showing,
THat after the setting of this Parliament; troubles arising in this Nation in
most places; and he living at that time in the County of Dorset, near the house
of a great Recusant, was in great danger of his life, by that family, and those
ill affected, who frequently resorted to the said house (they knowing him well
to be faithful to the Parliament) which being by a great providence discovered
to your suppliant, he was necessitated for the preservation of his life, to fly
to London for refuge, and having lived there but a short time, some of this
Honorable House, who knew your suppliant and his condition, proffered him
Winchester house to keep the Parliaments Prisoners in, as an employment that
might be and was thought beneficial, and thereupon got an Ordinance of
Parliament dated 14. Novem. 1642. to that purpose; which when one M. Nicholas
Young heard of, he appeared and laid claim to the said house, as having in law
an unquestionable title for his life, to the profits and benefits of the said
house, by Patent from the Bishop, confirmed by the Dean and Chapter of
Winchester, whereupon the Committee for prisoners, sent for the said Young, to
produce his title, and upon their perusal of his Evidence they judged his
title good in Law, and thought it reasonable, if he would consent that the
House should be employed as a Prison for the Parliaments use: That the said M.
Young should have 52 l. per annum for the use thereof, besides his sallary and
all other benefits of allowance of diet, Liveries etc. mentioned in his letters
Patent, he should keep to himself; which Agreement being made with the said M.
Young, the said Committee prevailed with the Parliament to pass another
Ordinance dated 3. December. 1642. to that purpose; so that your Suppliant, who
was to have had the house freely by the former Ordinance, was now to pay out of
his own purse 52 l. per annum for the same, to keep the Parliaments prisoners
in notwithstanding he never had a penny sallary for all his pains and expenses,
but was to expect to have it by way of fees from such prisoners as should be
sent to the said house, which proved little worth; for this Honorable House
then sent few of any ability to that place, but disposed most commonly of such
prisoners to Sir John Lenthall and M. Warcop etc and did fill up Winchester
house with poor Soldiers, in all near a thousand, which made the house
altogether unprofitable, noisome, and brought the plague into it, in which
miserable condition, your suppliants wife, and diverse other of his family were
swept away by death, and his friends stood afar off from him, and durst not
come nigh him, to comfort or help him: But besides all this there was yet more
that added abundantly to his misery and sorrow, which was that this Honorable
House having appointed so many hundreds of the N^zeby poor prisoners, to his
custody, voted them allowance for their maintenance, so that the proportion did
not exceed six pence per diem for a man; and the Committee for prisoners, by
virtue of that Order, appointing him to allow them threepence a day a man;
faithfully promising weekly to pay him, that which so he should lay out for
them, accordingly your suppliant did honestly and constantly allow them the
said allowance, expecting his money weekly according to faith and promise,
neither of which has been kept with him; he being at this day out of purse
three hundred and odd pounds for such poor Soldiers, as had threepence per
diem, besides poor Officers which had also allowance, besides all which, he
further provided them straw, and meat, etc. for the sick, and buried their dead
at his own charge. Moreover he has laid out a 100 l. in repairing the house,
which reparations are appointed by the forementioned Ordinance to be allowed
out of the Bishops Rents, but yet there was never penny paid; all which things
laid together rendered your suppliants condition most miserable and sad, and the
rather because that which was pretended by the Parliament for his good, was
apparently turned to his mischief and hurt, and not knowing how to help
himself; his frequent and daily addresses to the Committee for prisoners,
proving altogether fruitless, and a mere expense of time and money, at last he
was necessitated to treat with the said M. Young for the buying his Patent, and
all his interest and title in the said house, that he might no longer sit at so
great a Rent as 52 l. per annum to do the Parliament service, and no profit at
all arising to himself: whereupon the said M. Young and your suppliant did
agree (the writings and conveyances being drawn up by your Solicitor General
M. John Cook, who then did affirm, and still does declare, that your suppliants
purchase of the premises of the hands of the said M. Young, is as valid and
good in law for his life to the whole house, as can be in law made unto a man)
so that the entire interest right and title of Master Young to the said house,
and all the benefits, and profits, and arrears of profits of the said patent
being legally your suppliants, he may well, and he hopes conscionably reckon
the 52 l. rent per annum, with the other arrears of profits of the said patent
at 100 pound per annum, which for six years amounts to 600 pound; of all which
he your suppliant, never from you, or any for you received a penny, and he is
clear out of purse for relieving the poor soldiers; and repairing the house
above 400 pound (besides his buying and legally purchasing the patent) which
with the forementioned 600 pound, makes above 1000 l. and has no rational
nor visible way in his apprehension left him to get his money, which is his due
and right, but only his legal and just interest he has in the said Bishops
house by virtue of his patent. But now so it is at last, as if there were a
determinate resolution utterly to undo your suppliant, and all that belongs to
him, for his faithfulness to you, it is strongly endeavored by the Trustees
of Bishops Lands violently to put him out of possession of his legal right of
the same house, not making him any allowance in the world for the great sums
of money due to him, nor showing him any probable way how to obtain his just
right and due, but have made complaint against him to the Committee of
Parliament for removing of obstructions in the sale of Bishops Lands, who have
sent for him several times, and dealt worse with him, then wicked Abab was
willing to have dealt with poor Naboth for his vineyard; who was willing to
give him a better vineyard then it, for it, or as much money as it was worth, 1
King. 21.2. but they command him to deliver up to the Trustees his legal
possession and title, without the proffer of any valuable consideration at all,
using him with much reproach, and scorn, and threatening language; and though
the last week, as at other times he waited upon them, and could have no
audience, there being not a Committee, and being but newly gone out of Town
into Essex, the said Committee upon the 14. of March last sent the servants of
the Serjant at Arms, attending your house thither to apprehend him, as a
prisoner, and keep him in safe custody to his exceeding reproach, loss and
charge, though at that time he was busily employed in the Parliaments service,
about Tilbury block-house by Colonel Temple, a Member of your House, for which
service he receives no salary from you or other profit.

Now your suppliant humbly beseeches you to judge impartially how sadly he is
dealt withal, who has faithfully adhered to you from the beginning and sent
out his three sons in your service, one of which was slain therein, and a son
in law of his lost his life in your service also, and left behind him your
suppliants poor daughter, a widow with four small children without relief,
pity, or help from you; and now he himself, who has laid out his all for you,
must be thus therefore destroyed in his helples old age, as also the rest of
his children by a forcible taking from him and them their just right, which
should purchase them bread, to keep them alive in these starving times; he not
in the least desiring to keep and preserve his possession in his house for that
single life he has in it any longer, then till you will audite his Accounts,
and pay him what you justly owe him, and give him a valuable consideration for
his legally purchased interest in it, or else set him some reasonable price
upon your future right in the premises, that so he may endeavor to procure
some friend of his to pay you ready money for it, allowing him in the price
thereof, what is justly his due and right. In the mean time he humbly
beseeches you, that he may have his liberty granted him, that thereby he may
be the better enabled to do you further service.

Thomas Devenish.

FINIS.

