THE DESCRIPTION, Causes, and Discovery, or Symptoms of a Church Papist, or
Popish Protestant, which may stand in stead this Year, 1642.

Which by Reason that this searching Parliament, and wonderful Conjunction of
happy Planets, has proved so Sickly and Crazy unto the Romish Constitutions,
That it is to be suspected that some of them will fly into Churches, for
Remedy though not for Conversion.

London, Printed for J. T. 1642.

The Description, Causes, and Means of Discoveries or Symptoms of a Church
Papist or Popish Protestant.
THe Kingdom being lately (praised be God) reasonable well purged and
cleansed from the open and public profession, and almost uncontrollable
Remediless spreading, Contagion of Idolatry, by the wholesome, Sage, Mature,
and prevalent Remedies of that never sufficiently Renowned College of able
Physicians now sitting im Parliament, who by purging some from the Putrefaction
of their inveiglement, vomitting up from others their ill conceived rotten
humors of inbred indisposednesse toward the welfare of this Church and State,
dyetting these with the Supersedeas of Employment in any nature whatsoever,
That so the force of natural vigor (J mean Jnrellectuall parts) if any were
left untainted and not yet turned unto the malignant corruption (as is the
nature of that superstitious infection) first, to seize the understanding, and
to bleare, if not utterly put out reason, shutting up those from coming to
Court, or such a distance of, where, for their own parts it is too manifest
what pestilentiall Venom of Superstition by them was wrought any occasioned,
by words, by Smells, by Breath, yea by Letters, Collections, ^^^aths, Gifts,
Embracings, by placing, fear of displacing, so that not only the Carbuncles,
and Ulcers of Superstition rose upon persons of great Note in Court, whereby it
appeared that they were struck with the disease (openly inclining to
superstition) and the tokens came forth in great numbers, declaring that they
were desperately, and irrecoverably gone in it, debarring these from the City,
whose hopeless depth in the malady had made them senceles of their sickness,
yea had cast them into such a Lethargic, that they took themselves to be the
only sound People, and all the world beside infected, yea to the height of
predominacie (within these few years) mounted this almost Epidemicall disease,
that in not only seemed stronger them all remedies, but rose against,
resisted, contrived the ruin and destruction of this wise and Honorable
Assembly, and now being mad with a Melancholicke malice (whereof that disease
is very guilty) and posest with an unsatiable desire of tainting others,
whereunto all infectious distempers are very subject (thinking all that differ
from them, condemn them) that they became very dangerous, yea more perilous
to others then to themselves, threatening subversion to those that would nor
permit, but refulsed to proPogate, maintain, cherish, and foment their Romish
Calenture, with Diet, Air, Company, and Garments thereto conducing as now no
malady forfooth, because general as well for places where it was, as for
persons of quallity taken with it.

But the perfect soundness and firm sanctity, which this great and honorable
College, taking into their deepest consideration, seeing that lenitive and
gentle medicines would not take that wished effect, that they all desired it
might, and that either the sound and clear Members must infallibly be drawn
into sensible damage, or these peccant humors immediately, taken order with,
and so were forced contrary to the mildness of their disposition to proceed
unto sharper remedies; letting some blood with the Lances of their Justice, by
the public Surgeon, and notable Phlebotomizer Mr. Grigorie Brandon, a man
very well experienced in that practice, or by applying their cupping Glasses
(...) diligent search and inquisitiue Jntelligence, for the drawing forth the
active designs and mischievous plots of others, whereby at the least no
dangers might come to others, if no cures could be acquired to them, depriving
a third sort of their means and Jnstruments (to wit) their store of Arms
plenty of Ammunition, superfluity of Revennues the many props and supporters of
that disease, by the help whereof they were not only upon terms to have
kept up that malady even after its Cricis, but to have allured others into a
partnership of it

This course (thanks be first to God and then to the s^ill of those never
enough worthily praised Artists) has in a short time, wrought such a Pappy
abatement of that plague, that as far as we can learn by the weekly Bills
of intelligence, it is to outward view of the world, as touching the rage of
it, and any fear of suddayne grows or spreading thereof, clean ceased, yet
the better to compass the uttter extirpation of it; and be no more annoyed
with (...) knowing that it is the nature of the most viprous disease^ ^lthough
the head be taken off, and do not appear to the Eye) for dread of of the
Remedies which are so contrary to it, and which she has found for prevalent
against it, it may, nay and does notwithstanding leave some Rellique and some
smatch in the Patient, which out of the quallity of that rotten corruption,
desires to reside in the body til the next Spring, when perhaps some Plannet
may reign more propitious unto it, the party thus infected, may be detected,
that so either torally cured (which is very hard) by reason of it is Morbus a
Traduce, most commonly an hereditary infirmity taken from Father or Mother,
Grandmother, and sometime a pin or two higher, and therefore beloved of the
child who in an humble blind obedient manner embraces it because theirs, not
because true, or openly descerned and rejected, I have though it necessary to
give the description of him in this following discourse.

A Church Papist, or a close popish Protestant, or if you will an
Hippocritticall temporizing festered Romanist, is a Papist lately scared
(though not out of that Jdolatry) yet out of the use, and free exercise of it,
by the Weekly Diurnals of the proceedings of this Parliament, which he reads
and observes more out of reason then affection, which having well pondered, and
how near he may justly fear they will come up to him, remaining in statu Quo,
he presently alters his Coppie, but not his tenure, his profession, but not
his resolution, he leapes into our Church for protection, but not for
instruction, for safeguard not salvation, like Cattle that in the heat of
Summer betake themselves under Trees for shade, not for pasture, Camelion like
he declares no natural color of his own, but borrows it of the standing
whereon he is mounted, he comes to the Church to Act, not learn, to be seen
that sometimes he is there, not to be Catachized what he had proffited there,
he makes and accounts the Church his Stage, not his Temple, the Preacher his
spectator, nor his informer, much less his reformer, A Gentleman he (...) be
at the least, for if he have not a Roman nose, you may be sure if ever occasion
serve, he will make show, and proof of a Roman heart, and reasons be has for
what he does, some whereof may be known, some may not, some of which respect
Rome, some Westminster, the Pope has granted him a Bull of dispensation upon
these conditions, to hear Mass every day fasting next his heart, securely in
his Closset, to maintain a Priest or Jesuit upon his own cost, if he be
able, if not to contribute so much unto it (according to his Assessement) in
his holinesses Vicar Generals Book, he shall be found in ability to be
constantly the Popes obedient Son, in all awefull obsequiousness and mental
reservation, Rebus sit stantibus, the Kings loyal Subject, and seeing it would
be inconvenient if no disadvantagious unto him; to to show himself otherwise,
and not only to favor, but to further all Stratagems, not in person alone but
by Proxy, that he may by the benediction of the Tripled Crown, the assistance
of the Devil and the indefatigablenesse of the Jesuits (those dextorous
unmatchable Engineers of Plors, and Hellish practizes) be set a foot again,
for the rearing and repayring of this weather beaten Ship of superstition, in
the Climaterical year of Papacy and Episcopacie.

These are the Reasons and Arguments from Rome, that induce him to try what the
Jnside of our Church may be made of, upon the conditions rehearsed, provided,
he be well kept, and in points thus Armed and forestalled, why the good Lady
advises him to yield to the times for a season until God shall send better
days, and he is contented to hearken to them, But as the above mentioned
causes of dispensetion, and indulgency, persuade and incline, so the reasons
from Westminster drive him thither, The World God be thanked is come to that
good pass that they must needs go, whom the Parliament drives, his estate is
at stake, pared and shared already by the continual fostering of the Roman
Horse-Leeches, whose voice is still give, give, to whom there not only goes a
continual Annuity for their proper maintenance here at home, but a large share
to Doway and St. Omare abroad.

But now to pay the King for his Recusancy, his 20. l per month, of which, as
squares are likely to go, he hopes for little abatements to pay all Subsidies
fifteens, and other Tapes double considering the reason of the great occasions
the King has for money how thick they come, alas it would make a great hole,
(if not clean dig through) his estate: Therefore he must venture now to
Church, he has occasion likewise unto London, pethaps unto the Queens Court, I
do not say unto her Chapel, The Proclamation for the deparaure of all
convict Recusants that refuse to come to Church, at least 15. miles from
London; is strict, and the penalty certain, Therefore he will first go to
Church to satisfy the Proclamation, and afterward about his business to
London, to Court, or where else, he is none of them the Proclamation mentions,
he is excepted.

A third cause is by going to Church somewhat perhaps more ordinarily then he
needs to do, he brings himself into some confidence with his neighbors in
the Country, and takes away all suspicion and heedfull eyes off from him, no
man now so taking notice or observing who they be that comes to him by which
means he may carry businesses more cleanly and improve the Catholic cause
more coveatly and securely, These be the causes of his admittance into our
Church, though hardly into the Congregation.

The causes unknown, it is not fit we should understand but leave them to
himself and his Ghostly Father.

The Symptoms of such an infected person having nothing about him of
soundness, but a mere painted species, which are these.

You shall be sure to have him constantly at Church upon Holidayes, but seldom
or never upon the Sabbath day, he loves a life to hear out all the service,
read out by the Curate at large, and highly commends him for his devout
reading, he thinks it has some Assinity with the Mass, and likes it never
the worse for that, when that is ended, he begins to be ill, he has sat so
long in the cold, or bareheaded, and must be excused for not staying the
Sermon, he will receive the Communion at the most but once a year, and be sure
at such a time that the most and best of the Parish shall take notice of him,
at what time he will be content (ye with much show of Infirmity) to hear the
Sermon, he likes well of the Protestation, but dares not take it, because there
is mention made of the maintaining of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
but not of the Discipline which he esteems, equal if not transcendent to the
book of Articles, guessing as he conceives whence it had its Original.

FINIS.

