DIRECTIONS Given by Anthony Daffey, For taking the Safe, Innocent, and
Successful CORDIAL DRINK, CALLED ELIXIR SALVTIS, Truly Prepared by me Ellen.
Daffey, now Living in the Square in Salisbury-Court, in the House that was
formerly Dr. Brown's, near Fleetstreet, a large Golden Ball being over the Gate.
The First general Observation.
FOR such Persons as are oppressed with Chronical Distempers, whether the Gout,
Stone, Colic, Ptisick, Dropsy, etc. and have diverse years been tortured and
bowed down under the burden of them: I say, for Distempers habitual to, and
radicated in the body, it cannot be rationally expected, that this or any means
under Heaven may on a sudden effect their Cure, any more, than that a small
shower of rain (after a long season of Summers Drought) should presently revive
the parched and dying Flowers and Herbs of the Field, and restore them to their
lively verdure and greenness: To Persons therefore infected with these
Chronical Distempers, and disposed to use the means of this my Drink, I give
this advice, that they take the same according to the ensuing particular
Directions, and patiently wait upon the Almighty Physician of Soul and Body for
his Blessing, and I doubt not, but they (as well as others have) will find very
much relief, at least by ease of their pains, if not the perfect cure of their
disease; which some aged Persons have happily experienced. Moreover, let not
the Patients (having taken this Drink) impatiently expect its operation of
working with them on a sudden; for Experience has found that on some Bodies it
is 6 hours, some 8, and on some 12 hours, before it works; and in most
Distempers, its operation is so gentle and moderate, that the Patients may
(with safety) follow their business and occasions, either at home or abroad.

The second general Observation.
LEt the Patient (afflicted with any of the Distempers, in the Book of my
Cordial Virtues mentioned) have a due regard to the state and condition of his
or her Body: If the Body be Costive, (as most generally persons under such
distempers are) the first dose (if the age, and strength of nature will permit)
to be three spoonfuls at the Patients going to bed, and the like dose at the
up-rising in the Morning: But in case the Body be Laxative, then let the first
dose overnight be one spoonful, and another at the up-rising in the Morning,
and so let the Dose be increased by one spoonful each time, if the Patient's
strength may admit, till it comes to three spoonfuls, (which without good
advice) none is to exceed. In taking the same, let the Patient use as much
exercise and stirring as strength of Body may admit. Here likewise observe, the
Patient ought to avoid Melancholy, and keep a good diet; and it is convenient
to make a mess of Broth, or something warm an hour after the morning Dose,
which is found more proper than Posset-Ale.

The third general Observation.
THis Drink has been many Years experienced of so innocen^ and sure operation,
that it may be safely taken at any season of the year; for neither heat nor
cold can obstruct its influence or operation on the Body. Moreover, this Drink
will retain its Virtue though kept two years together (as diverse persons have
found) but I suppose it may be kept much longer. Another Virtue and innate
Property of this Drink (distinguishing it from all other Physic whatsoever)
is, that at the Patients leaving off the same the Patients Body remains not
Costive, but in a very good healthful temper and lightsome condition.

The GOVT
LEt the Patient (having competent strength of Nature) take Three Spoonfulls of
this Elixir in the Morning fasting, and the like Dose last at Night; the which
course let be followed so long as the Patients strength of Body will bear it,
and especially if the pains be found to move from one joint to another: I
advise the Patient to be active, and use as much stirring exercise as
conveniently may be. Here Note, that after four Doses, or twelve Spoonfulls
taking, the Patient may (if the same be found to work five or six times a day)
intermit a day, and then return to the Drink, taking then two Spoonfulls in the
Morning, one spoonful an hour before dinner, and two Spoonfulls last at Night;
but let not the Patient, finding not his expectation answered, on a sudden lay
aside the further use of this Choice Remedy; for although some have been Cured
of this torturing malady in taking but of one half-pint Bottle of this Drink,
yet some require a pint, and others more, according as the Disease has more or
less seated and riveted it self in the Body.

The Stone or Gravel in the Kidneys.
IF the Patient's pain lie most either in the Reins or the Flank, it is an
indication, whereby he or she may conclude, the Malady is the Stone or Gravel
in the Kidneys; then the Patient's Body and strength of Nature admitting, let
him or her take the Dose Dose, or three spoonfuls last at Night and first in
the Morning and presently after it, use as much stirring exercise as may be;
and although Riding may at that time be burdensome, yet it would prove very
profitable and advantageous; for by using extraordinary exercises and
agitaitons of the Body diverse have been the sooner discharged of this torturing
Distemper, as has been experienced by Mr. Crawley (in the printed Sheet of
this Drinks Virtues mentioned) by taking but three Spoonfuls of this Drink, and
riding ten miles upon it, voided three Stones, each as big as a Horse-bean, (as
he himself testified.)

STONE in the Bladder.
LEt the Patient afflicted with the Stone in the Bladder consider the bigness
of it, and take the full Dose of three Spoonfuls last at Night, and the like
first in the Morning continuing the same for three days; then intermit two days
and return to it, then taking only two Spoonfuls last at Night, and the like
Dose first in the Morning* which course let the Patient observe, and by the
Lord's Blessing the Stone will be found to wast gradually, and in conclusion,
to come away; but Patience is to be exercised, for although Thomas Hind voided
away the Stone in nine Spoonfuls, or three Doses taking, yet that great Stone
voided by the said Mr. Crawley was high twelve Months in wasting before it
could come away, and was then rendered so soft that it crumbled away between the
singers.

Exulcerations of the Kidneys.
FOr the Exulceration of the Kidneys, rendering the patients Urine like Blood,
let the Patient keep the Direction of the Second General Observation, and so
first open and clean the Body for two days, and then for two days Night and
Morning, take one spoonful or two, (according to the Measure of strength) and
then intermit two days, and after take one Spoonful at night and one in the
Morning, and one an hour before dinner: this method in taking the same has, by
the Lords Blessing, been found eminently successful in the healing and
cleansing any Exulceration in the Reins or Bladder.

Colic, and Griping in the GVTS.
LEt the Patient (at any time of pain) take three spoonfuls, which may ease or
mitigate the pain; and if he or she be not discharged of the Pains, let him or
her take three spoonfuls more five hours after; but if the Patient be of a
costive or corpulent Body, let such a one take a Dose of four spoonfuls in the
Pain-fit, and (if the pain continue) four spoonfuls more six hours after; for
this Distemper is usually sadly violent, and must be followed close: And this
means (thus taken) fails not, by the Blessing of Almighty God, to become Master
of this sad Malady. Afterward (for cleansing the Body of the dregs of it) let
the Patient lessen the Dose according to the Directions of the Second general
Observation.

PHTHISICK.
LEt the Patient weigh and consider the Three general Observations, and
(according to direction thereof) open and cleanse the Body for four days,; and
after that, take only half a spoonful when the Cough is perceived coming upon
him or her, and one spoonful an hour before Dinner; and this course (followed)
will by degrees gain power over, and waste the Distemper, yea, and strengthen
Nature against it: And this course may be taken even in Winter, when the
Distemper is predominant and strongest upon the Patient; by which means he or
she will (by the Lord's Blessing) find their breath free, and the Cough
exceedingly abated, if not taken away: but as to youthful persons that are not
far gone in this sad Malady, a Pint of this Drink in the Spring, and as much in
the Fall, taken as before directed, will, by God's blessing, not fail of a
perfect Cure. And unto aged People afflicted with this Distemper, it does so
far aid Nature, and strengthen them, as in the following Winter to render their
Lives pleasant to them, provided always that the Patient be moderate in
drinking, and have a care to prevent taking cold, and keep a good Diet.

DROPSY.
IF it be predominant upon the Patient, (known by the bigness of the Belly,
swelling of the Limbs and Face) let the Patient take four spoonfuls first in
the Morning, and the like Dose last at Night, for four days together, then
intermit two days, and afterward keep to three spoonfuls at Night, and the
like Dose in the Morning.

SCVRVEY.
THe ^curvey, known by knots in the flesh, and blue spots in the skin. Let the
Patient keep to the Directions in the third general Observation, having due
regard to the strength of their bodies, and take the drink two days,
intermitting two days for the space of a month, and then take only one
spoonful in the morning and another an hour before dinner.

SVRFEITS.
LEt the Patient take the ordinary Dose of three Spoonfuls at night, and three
in the morning, for six times without intermission, and doubt not but (by the
Lord's blessing) the same will be found successful to his or her Relief and
Cure, though the height of the distemper had brought the Patient very low, and
nigh the gates of death: And I would advise others, and particularly such as
are apt to drink much Wine (bad and sophisticated Wines being very frequent and
fatal in this City and elsewhere) that they do upon the least illness and
indisposition of Body apply themselves unto this choice Remedy, either the same
night or the next morning, or both; for this Drink is experienced a choice
Antidote for preventing of Surseits (insensibly stealing upon men) and
expelling out of the Body that malignant Matter which is the occasion and rise
thereof.

PESTILENCE.
LEt the Patient, when first smitten with this Visitation or with illness,
accompanied with any symptom of the Distemper (regard being had to the
direction of the three general Observations) take three spoonfuls, or less, of
this Drink (according to the Patients strength or weakness of Body) and so
proceed as occasion shall require; and I question not, but (through mercy) the
same will be found an effectual means, as well for overcoming the Distemper, as
for strengthening Nature, and restoring Health (unless the Patient's Visitation
be the Messenger of Death) as has been happily experienced, and will be
attested by diverse persons in my own and other Families, which staid in the
City in the time of the last great Visitation, and were Visited, and yet
through God's goodness do still remain in the Land of the Living.

Fits of the Mother, and Vapors from the Spleen.
LEt the Patient (having regard to the direction of the general Observations)
begin with one, or with two Spoonfuls of this Drink, and so continue and raise
the Dose, according to what the Patients strength may admit, remembering that
the greatest Dose prescribed does not exceed three Spoonfuls, and let the
proper Dose be taken at any time whatsoever, when the fit is found to be coming
upon him or her.

GREEN SICKNESS.
LEt the Patient duly observe the direction of the three general Observations,
using as much stirring Exercise, as strength will permit; and in four days
time, she will, by the blessing of God, find her Distemper diminish, and in
taking of an half pint Bottle, the Cheeks and Lips will return to their former
Rose-colour.

CHILDRENS Distempers.
FOr CHILDRENS DISTEMPERS, whether the Worms* Rickets, the Stone, Convulsions,
Gripes, King's Evil, Joynt-Evil, or any Distemper proceeding from Wind or
Crudities, gendred by means of undigested Matter, (the effect of their cold and
weak Stomachs) which is the granted and original cause of these their
Distempers: The way of administering this drink must be on this manner; to a
Babe of a month old, give (in time of its affliction) half a Child's spoonful
thereof, mixed with double the quantity of small Ale, not exceeding this dose,
nor oftener ^han once in 12 hours time. To a Babe of half a year old, let the
dose be half a middling spoonful of the drink, with double the quantity of
small Ale. To one of a year old, one spoonful, with the like quantity of small
Ale. To a Child of four years, one spoonful of the drink alone. To one of seven
years old, two spoonfuls, and to one of 12 years old, two spoonfuls and an
half; in any of these Distempers, not exceeding one Dose in twelve hours,
except only in the Gripes, and then one Dose every five hours; where observe,
that in most of these Distempers it has pleased God so to bless this Means,
that two Doses have been found successful to Babes and Childrens cure. Here
note, That the strength of the Child and its Distemper will be a surer Guide
for apportioning a proper Dose, than the Child's Age.

The Stone in Babes and Children.
ANd if the Distemper be the Stone, observe the same Directions in administering
this Drink to Babes and Children (of all Ages) as is above prescribed for those
under other Distempers, except only that Distemper of the Gripes; and this
Drink gradually wastes the Stone, and turns Stones to Gravel, bringing them
away as soft as Meal, and brings away Worms as Skins; it also brings away a
slimy Substance, some black, some green, (the cause of these Distempers) which
manifold Experience has fully confirmed.

Convulsion-Fits.
MOreover it has also been experienced, that unto a Child of seven years old
(afflicted with the Gripes or Convulsion-Fits in extremity) there has been
found necessary the same dose, as for a Man, being three spoonfuls; and five
hours after the like Dose.

Consumptions, bad Digestions.
LET Consumptive Persons of either Sex take one spoonful of this drink an hour
before dinner, and another such Dose an hour after dinner; for many weak
Consumptive persons have, through the Lord's blessing, experienced the same
very successful in strengthening weak Nature; converting their food into good
nourishment* and instrumental in restoring their strength.

Agues.
LET the Patient (an hour before the expected time of the Fit) take three
spoonfuls, being at what time soever; and two Spoonfuls six hours after: which
done, let the patient observe the Directions of the second general Observation.

Piles.
LET the Person afflicted diligently follow the Direction in the second general
Observation; it having been lately found to be successful.

FINIS.

