A DETECTION OF THE Falsehood in a Pamphlet entitled, A Message from the Isle
of VVight, brought by Major Cromwell; Falsely Relating the chief heads of
Bishop Usher's Sermon.

PSALM. 4.2. How long will ye love vanity; and seek after leasing.

REV. 22, 15. Without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and
Murderers, and Idolaters; And whosoever loves and makes a lie.

Dec. 6th Printed in the Year, 1648.

A Declaration of the falsehood in a Pamphlet entitled, A Message from the Isle
of Wight, etc.
TO confute the many Lying and scandalous Pamphlets wherewith this age abounds,
(to the prejudice of truth and continuance of our divisions, and so to the
provoking of the wrath of God upon a lying, and lye-believing generation) would
be a busy and hard task, because the Devil, the father of lies is
maliciously industrious, and his children numerous. Yet I cannot but take
notice of one most eminently falsehood, so as to contradict it by my knowledge:
and I do it not so much to rebuke the informer as to undeceive the so simple
people that are more ready to blieve such falsehoods, then to endeavor to know
the truth: as for those who are knowing and sober, I mistrust them not; because
wise enough to discern not only falsehoods, but improbabilities also.

The Pamphlet wherein this monster lie is couched, bears the Title of A Message
from the Isle of Wight, brought by Major Cromwell: wherein I find the pretended
heads of Bishop Usher's Sermon at the Isle of Wight.

Now though I have more then a probable conjecture, That the Bishops integrity
so well known is a sufficient confutation of so ignorant and malignant an
intelligencer as he that communicates those untruths: yet certainly those that
live more remote, and have not the Cognizance of men by experience, but by
reports, had need be informed of the truth and falsehood of such reports, lest
our charity be overprest, and, not hearing those reports contradicted, may
suspect, and at length believe what is not true; and therefore, being
experimentally assured of the falsnesse of this report, I dare say he was
neither Scholar, nor good Christian, that gave that information: or if he had
been truly a Gentleman or clearly rational, he would have been ashamed of his
traducements. Sure it is he had malignity enough; and the Devil his master in
this trade of lying ought him a shame, and could pay him no better, then to
stir him up against the so well known truth and integrity of that pious man.

The first untruth is (That the Bishop of Armaugh has much prejudiced the
present Treaty.) The falsehood of this may justly call all the rest in question;
For it is very well known, that no man has been more faithful in what he
undertook then the good man accused; nor would have hazarded more in procuring
a well-grounded Peace, then himself; and to then end improved his best
interest; though this maligner has thus reported.

2. The Informer says, He sawned upon the King, flattering his Majesty?

Good Reader, judge whether the King were in a condition to be flattered? or
whether the Bishop of Armaugh expected any preferment from the King? It Is well
known by them which know the Bishop, that he neither hopes for, nor cares for
much in this world of what man can confer on him; and sure if he would be a
flatterer, he took an ill aim, and a wrong person, to slatter the King is not
now the thriving way; yet this accuser would feign make you forfeit your
judgments, and charity to this belief.

3. That the Bishop being asked (by some of the Court) why he preached so to
highten the King, at such a time as this? This is a mere fiction: none at
Court asked this question; But that which makes this altogether improbable is
the Bishops answer, as he reports, That the Bishop excused it thus: That 'twas
not premeditated what he preached; and that if anything gave offense, it was to
be imputed to the distemper of his brain after his journey. Truly if the Bishop
had made this excuse, I should have suspected indeed the distemper of his
brain, and judge you whether ten days after he came into the Island were not
sufficient to rest himself after his journey; and so long he was there ere he
preached. Besides, the Bishop does not preach nonsense, nor without
premeditation at any time: sure he would not choose to do it at such a time as
that was: and, good reader, can you be drawn to imagine that the Bishop of
Armaugh would preach so fillily on that text as those inferences are which this
maligner sets down with as much boldness as ignorance? I am at a blush for his
folly.

Yet Imust confess this much of what he writes is true, That the Bishop
preached on that text cited by him, and the former part of his fourth
inference, that it was his Majesty's 49 year, the year of Jubilie, and he hoped
'twould prove so to his Majest: but the last clause is most false, viz. (that
he said, His Majesty was more strictly dealt withal.)

So that of seven inferences which he notes, six of them are utterly false,
and the seventh but half true. And thus much he avoucheth, who himself was
a more faithful and indifferent hearer then he who has labored to defile the
reputation of him whose Innocence will one day plead for him, when such a man
as this informer shall not be able to stand in the judgment.

Now concerning his whole carriage at the Isle of Wight, nothing but envy can
asperse his integrity and zeal for an happy accommodation 'twixt the King and
his people. and to this, besides the Testimony of his own conscience, he has
good witnesses, if they will speak but what they know of him. And as for such
as are of none, or of small reputation, it is not much to the purpose what they
say. And therefore I presume I need say no more to satisfy any sober and
unbiased in this point: though I might have said more to the informers
refutations. But the folly of his madness is and will be sufficiently made
known. And in the mean time I have a word of advice to him for his good; First,
to repent for the falsehoods he has uttered; and confess and be sorry that he
has wronged a servant of Christ, and lest in stead of such a rebuke as this,
the wrath of God come upon him, if after this time he sin wilfully again in
this kind, for no liar shall enter into the kingdom of God. I have a word
likewise to the over credulous people; be not you deceived, nor believe every
report, for he that receives, and he that tells lies, are both in the same
transgression. To backbite, and to take up a reproach against another, are the
symptoms of such as have no dwelling in the holy hill, Psalm. 15.3. And as for
the Bishop of Armaugh, I need say nothing to him, he knows how to bear with
patience all reproaches, and stripes of invenomed tongues, and to contemn them
(as things far beneath him:) and if any of you will yet be more vile, more
malicious against him, his return would be, not to bring railing for railing,
but blessing for cursing; and at the extremity, but, The Lord rebuke thee, Jude
v. 9.

Thus much I could not but say to so bitter an accusation and unjust, untrue, I
commit all to he knower of hearts, who will one day discover, Hypocrisies and
lies, and render proportionably to their deservings.

FINIS.

