A DESCRIPTION of the Sect called the Family of Love: With their common place
of residence.

Being discovered by one Mrs Susanna Snow of Pirford near Chersey in the County
of Surrey, who was vainly led away for a time through their base allurements,
and at length fell mad, till by a great miracle shown from God, she was
delivered.

O Israel trust in the Lord, for in the Lord there is mercy, and with him is
plenteous Redemption,

Psalm. 130. London printed. 1641.

A Description of the Sect called the Family of Love, with their common place
of Residence.
IT was in the County of Surrey, at a Village called Pirford, three miles from
Chersey, there dwelt a Gentleman by name Snow, who had to his daughter a very
beautiful and religious Gentlewoman, who was not only a joy to the father,
but also an exceeding joy to the mother; she had not long gladded the hearts of
her Parents with a virtuous and dut full behavior, when the devil, arch enemy
to mankind, sought to subvert and eradicate this well planted virtue, and thus
it happened:

This Gentlewoman (Mistress Susan Snow) for so was she called, bolding prattle
with one of her fathers men, one day began to question with him about the new
Sects of Religion which now were so much talked of, enquiring what news he
heard of any of them.

He answered that it was his chance to be at a little Village called Bagshot,
not six miles from thence, where he heard of a Company that got residence
there, and every day had a meeting in a private place, which was mistrusted to
be about the sign of the Bucke, and they called themselves The Family of Love,
and most have a great suspicion that they came from London, and their number is
about an hundred; but he told her it was the talk of the whole Country. This
Mistress Susan heard with patience, and marked with diligence every particular,
she gave the servant but little answer, but she vowed in her heart to see the
fashions of this Sect, well, night grew on, and to bed they went, but she
prevented the early Sun in being up before him, so great a desire she had poor
Gentlewoman to thrust her self into danger. After she had broke her fast, and
caused her man to set a side-saddle on a Gelding, alone she took her journey,
vowing not to return till she had seen some of their behaviors which were of
the Family of Love.

Thus she rode along undisturbed by meeting any Passengers till she came with
in half a mile of the Village of Bagshot, but then she saw at the least an
hundred persons men and women crossing over the Heath, bending their course
toward a Wood called Birch wood, to them-wards she rides, and overtaking a
sister which laggred behind the rest, she cried, well overtaken sister; the
sister of the Family bid her welcome, Sister (quoth Mistress Susan) is your
habitation here about Bagshot? the sister answered, that she sojourned in
Banwage, then quoth she, sure you can resolve me one question, which is this,
Do you know of any that came from London lately, there were about the number of
an hundred, I was of the Company, but they came away unknown unto me: and I
hear that they sojourne here about this Coast. The silly sister was not aware
of the guile which she spoke, but answered her, that this was the Company she
meant sure. Ms Susan asked again, Are these of the Family? she answered, Yes.
Then Mistress Susan rode after and overtook them, where this woman revealed the
conference she had with Mistress Susan, and how that she thought her to be very
zealously affected to the Family: on these words, although she were unknown,
yet she was entertained into their Society, and went along with them.

Now you must understand that they have certain days which are dedicated unto
Saints as they call them, as to Ovid, who wrote the Art of Loving, to Priapus,
the first bawdy Butcher that ever did stick pricks in flesh, and make it
swell, and to many others which they used to spend in poetizing in the woods:
thither they come, and after many pastimes there enacted, the Poet desired them
to sit down on the Green, and then he began to speak most strong language, as
this or the like, let not us persuade our selves although that many would have
us to believe it, that our great god Cupid is obcaecated, for he penetrateth
the intrals of the most magnanimous; after these or the like words, he recited
part of a verse from forth Virgils Epigrams, -- Non stat been mentula crassa.
Which to English I forbear, because it is obscene; on this he built his whole
discourse, venting very strange obscene passages, after this was done, they go
to dinner, where they had exceeding delicates, and after this repast they
provided to return. Now here you must note that the Poet viewing this new
sister of the Family, was mightily enflamed with her, that either he must enjoy
her or perish, when they were walking home therefore, he singled her out from
the rest of the Company, and spoke to her as follows.

Fair sister, hard is that task, where I must either die in silence, or else
present unto you an unseemly suit, but so irksome is death, and so pleasant the
enjoyments of my wishes, that I rather desire to be counted unmannerly than not
amorous to your beauteous self. With these and such like words he courted her,
till at length time and opportunity both favored him so much that she played a
man's part indeed, she said nay, and yet took it. This novice having had his
desire, conducted her to the Company, and there left her among the rest of the
sisters, where she stayed for the space of a whole week, viewing their
fashions, as the manner of their prayers, of their preaching, of their
Christening and Burying, with many more things which will be too long for this
little Pamphlet to bear.

Now when she had seen as she thought enough, she stole away from them not
ceasing to think of the wrong she had sustained by her consenting to the lust
of the poetical brother; well, discontentedly she passed the way till she came
in the presence of her father, he asked her with very mild and loving terms
where she had been, she answered him, at her aunts at Okingham, with which
answer her father was satisfied, but her mother was not, because she had sent
thither before to see if she had been there, yet her mother could get no other
answer from her than that she had been there; but seeing that she was come home
again, they questioned the matter no more where she had been; but she had not
been at home long when she began to delight to be by her self, and to make
much of melancholy, taking delight in nothing wherein she did heretofore; this
her loving parents took notice of, but would not speak of it, and thus she
continued for the space of ten or fourteen days, at last she began to be very
untowardly, and they could not rule her, for she would break glasses and
earthen ware, and throw any thing at the heads of the servants, and incontinent
she fell stark mad; I cannot express her fathers grief, when he saw his only
beloved daughter in this plight, but I will leave you to judge of it who have
children of your own, how it would grieve you to see your children in such a
plight. Her father although he were almost destracted with grief to see his
child thus lie on the wrack of misfortune, summons p his senses together, and
at length he thought upon one Master Ybder a very honest man, and a most
reverend Divine, living in Oxford, to him he sent, requesting him of all loves
that he would come, and visit him in this his great distress, he presently
dispatched horse and man, for Oxford they were bound, the man coming to Master
Ybders chamber, which is in Magdalon Hall, he found him within, to whom he
delivered his message: Master Ybder came along with him, he was no sooner
arrived at Master Snows house, but the poor Gentleman almost frantic for his
daughters distemperature, with tears in his eyes, began and related (what you
have here before read) to Master Ybder, who presently desired that he might but
see her, this good old man with all diligence being still in hope of her
recovery, conducted him into the chamber where his daughter was, she had no
sooner fixed her eyes upon them entering, but she shreeked out, and cried, The
devil, the devil, I am damned, I am damned, I am damned, with many such like
horrid horrible exclamations: then stepped forwards Master Ybder, and told her
that she was deceived, God surely would not leave her soul so, if she would
but endeavor as she had done heretofore, for said he, Christ came not into the
world to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, and again, Seek and ye
shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto thee, and although thou have
played the harlot with many lovers, yet return again unto me says the Lord,
at the third Chapter of Jeremy, and the first Verse.

She hearkened unto Master Ybder very patiently, for the space of half an hour
but then she began to be very troublesome, and sometimes outrageous, at last
she called for some wine, for she was very thirsty, she said: wine was brought
unto her in a Venice-glasse, her father (good old man) spoke to her to drink
to Master Ybder, for he had taken great pains with her, she looked very
wildely on him, and threw the glass to the ground, with these words, That it
was (...) impossible for her to be saved, as for that glass to rebound into
her hand unbroken, which contrary to the expectation of all, this glass did;
Well, said this Gentlewoman, I will yet trust in the Lord my Redeemer, for he
is merciful and long-suffering, with these words she praised God and began (as
from the beginning) to relate the cause of her distemperature, desiring Master
Ybder that he would pray with her, and for her; and thus by the mercy of God
was this Gentlewoman delivered.

FINIS.

