portrait of Edward Dering

A Collection of Speeches MADE BY Sir EDWARD DERING KNIGHT and BARONET, in
matter of RELIGION. Some formerly printed, and diverse more now added: All of
them revised, For the VINDICATION Of His NAME, From weak and wilful calumny:
And by the same Sir EDWARD DERING now subjected to public VIEW and CENSURE,
Upon the urgent importunity of many, both Gentlemen and Divines.

Ovid. Dat veniam Corvis, vexat censura Columbas.

Aristoph. in Avib. (...).

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for F. Eglesfield, and Jo. Stafford. 1642.

To the Reader.
LET them who are in a fault ransom themselves with excusatory defenses. I have
no such work in hand. A short Narration will be my just Vindication.

Apologies are ever read with Jealousy: and they are indeed but after-games at
Reputation. These sheets do not wear that livery: I have no need to Apologize.

Nothing in my self has moved me to open these Papers abroad; and what need I
regard the empty opinion of such as do either weakly or wilfully traduce? But
they do traduce! it is said that I do (...) yet none can justly say, where,
when, to whom, or what, I ever said that I do since recede from.

Reader, if thou either be a Scholar or a Gentleman read and censure freely, I
fear no blot from thy hand: if thou be neither, cast what dirt thou will, none
will stick on me. And indeed I had rather (if thou be such) bear the scourge
of thy tongue, then have the kisses of thy lips: The latter would make me
suspect my self; the former would beget a hope of some merit in me.

A welfare to my Reader if, he be, either of birth or breeding: A farewell
to the rest.

Edward Dering.

Section I.
WHy am I thus unhappily, and thus publicly engaged? If my head and my heart
have always gone even pace together, if my conscience and my tongue have ever
kept one tune, how is it that I hear my self changed? If any thing I have
said or done be contrariant, nay if dissonant or retardant to a most severe
Reformation, (the utmost of my constant wish and profession) nay if upon any
occasion I have therein been remiss and tepid, if upon all occasions I have
not given my active and my hearty endeavors thereunto, some good friend be a
true glass unto me, and reflect that bypast error to my sight again. I will
own the fault (if it be mine) and thank him.

But if some passengers (in I know not what Ship) sail by, until their own
heads be giddy, they may as well say, that the Hills and Trees upon the shore,
as that I am moved. Whilst they are floating, I stand steady, wondering to what
coast they are bound.

The question is, whether ever I professed my self for Root and Branch: that
is the Shibboleth whereby some try whether you are for Ruin or for Reforming.
Every one is not catechized in plain terms as I was, Josh. 5. 13 Mr. F.
Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? So said one of the usual black
walkers in Westminster Hall. T. C.
Another of our Parliament-pressing Ministers, after I had delivered my sense
upon Episcopacy in the House, came to me and told me plainly, That my
conscience was not so good as in the beginning of the Parliament. Yet I may
(and do) challenge him, or any man, to instance where, when, and what I have
said to deserve this opinion of change.

I press not this, as fondly glorying in a pertinacy. No, I profess my self
ready and willing, at any time to embrace a corrected understanding, let any of
them (who has temper, discretion and charity) come and try me. I have no end,
no aim to lead me, but fair truth, I have no byas but a conscience warmed
with zeal, and therefore when I change, (if I change) it shall be the conquest
and victory of truth upon me. And I then shall never be ashamed of being won,
but will glory in the change.

But I delivered in the Bill for abolition of Episcopacy. S A. H.
True, my friend (then next me) urged me with importunacy that I would receive
it, and plainly said it should go in how ever: and so (I am assured) it had,
but not with so faint commendations as I bestowed on it, which (I dare say)
gave no weight unto the work. The Bill was then less then two sheets of
Paper, and by subjoyning two more might have given us the old original
Episcopacy, even with the same hand that abrogated the present. Beside, the
chief end then was to expedite the progress of another Bill against the
secular jurisdiction of the Bishops (at that very time) laboring in the House
of Lords. So that this Bill did in my sense iniquum Petere, ut aequum ferret.

Little did I (or any man there) imagine, that those two sheets should be
multiplied with addition of above forty more, and yet unfinished.

The only color, or rather shadow whereupon some thought me as fierce for
ruin as themselves, was my fortune or misfortune, to strike first, (and
shortly after, secondly) at the tallest Cedar on the Churches Lebanon. It Is true
I did so, and am nothing sorry for the blow. His crimes were many: the
complaints were fresh with me, and my self (entrusted by that County where his
Diocese is seated) as fit as any to strike that stroke.

This was at that time received and applauded as an act of justice, but by the
same men of late traduced, as relishing of personal malignity. Non sic didici
Christum. I thank God, my heart has never yet known the swelling of a
personal malice. And for the Bishop, I profess, I did (and do) bear a good
degree of personal love unto him, a love unto some parts and qualities, which
I think him master of.

His intent of public uniformity was a good purpose, though in the way of his
pursuit there of he was extremely faulty.

His book lately set forth (especially for the latter half thereof) has
muzled the Jesuit, and shall strike the Papists under the fifth ribbe when he
is dead and gone. And being dead, wheresoever his grave shall be, Paul's will
be his perpetual monument, and his own book his lasting Epitaph.

It is true, the roughness of his uncourtly nature sent most men discontented
from him: yet would he often (of himself) find ways and means to sweeten
many of them again, when they least looked for it.

Lastly, he was always one and the same man, begin with him at Oxford, and so
go on to Canterbury, he is un-mov'd, unchanged: he never complied with the
times, but kept his own stand, until the times came up to him.

He is not now in a condition to be flattered, nor was I ever so low, to use
it. I did not accuse him for these. I struck another string, and that of so
right a tune to them that are stung with the Tarantula, that I was instantly
voyced, more as they would have me, then I was. For (the truth is) I did not
dream, at that time of extirpation and abolition of any more then his
Archiepiscopacy: our professed rooters themselves (many of them) at that hour
had I persuade my self, more moderate hopes then since are entertained. A
severe reformation was a sweet song then. I am and ever was for that, and for
no more.

It is objected that I go counter to what I have publikly asserted in the
House: Dr. W.
have patience, and take a copy of what I have spoken in matter of Religion.

Section II.
November. 10. 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
YEsterday the great affairs of this House did borrow all the time allotted to
the great Committee for Religion. I am sorry that having but half a day in a
whole week, we have lost that.

Mr. Speaker, It has pleased God to put into the heart of his Majesty (for the
Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord) once more to asseble us into a Senate,
to consult upon the unhappy distractions, the sad dangers, and the much feared
ruins of this late flourishing Church and Kingdom. God be praised both for his
goodness, and for his severity whereby he has impelled this meeting; and
humble thanks unto his Majesty, whose parentall care of us his Subjects, is
willing to relieve us.

The sufferances that we have undergone are reducible to two heads. The first
concerning the Church: the second belonging to the Commonwealth. The first of
these must have the first fruits of this Parliament, as being the first in
weight and worth, and more immediate to the honor of God and his glory, every
dram whereof is worth the whole weight of a Kingdom.

The Commonwealth (it is true) is full of apparent dangers. The sword is come
home unto us, and the two twin-Nations united together under one royal head,
brethren together in the bowels and the bosom of the same Island, and which is
above all, imbanded together with the same Religion (I say the same Religion)
by a devilish machination, like to be fatally imbrued in each others blood,
ready to dig each others grave, Quantillum ab^uit!

For other grievances also, the poor disheartened subject, sadly groans, not
able to distinguish betwixt Power and Law. And with a weeping heart (no
question) has prayed for this hour, in hope to be relieved, and to know
hereafter, whether any thing he has, besides his poor part and portion of the
Common air he breathes, may be truly called his own.

These (Mr. Speaker) and many other do deserve and must shortly have our deep
regard, but Suo gradu, not in the first place: There is a unum necessarium
above all our worldly sufferances and dangers, Religion, the immediate service
due unto the honor of Almighty God. And herein let us all be confident, that
all our consultations will prove unprosperous, if we put any determination
before that of Religion.

For my part, Let the Sword reach from the North to the South, and a general
perdition of all our remaining right and safety, threaten us in open view, it
shall be so far from making me to decline the first settling of Religion, that
I shall ever argue, and rather conclude it thus. The more great, the more
imminent our perils of this world are, the stronger and quicker ought our care
to be for the glory of God and the pure Law of our souls.

If then (M. Speaker) it may pass with full allowance, that all our cares may
give way unto the treaty of Religion, I will reduce that also to be considered
under two heads: first of Ecclesiasticke persons, then of Ecclesiasticke
causes. Let no man start or be affrighted at the imagined length of this
consultation, it will not, it cannot take up so much time as it is worth. --
This, it is God and the King; this, is God and the Kingdom, nay, this, is God
and the two Kingdoms cause.

And therefore (M. Speaker) my humble motion is, that we may all of us
seriously, speedily, and heartily enter upon this, the best, the greatest, the
most important cause we can treat of.

Now (M. Speaker) in pursuit of my own motion, and to make a little entrance
into this great affair, I will present unto you the petition of a poor
oppressed Minister in the County of Kent: A man Orthodox in his doctrine,
conformable in his life, laborious in the Ministry as any we have, or I do
know.

He is now a sufferer (as all good men are) under the general obloquy of a
Puritan; (as with other things was excellently delivered by that silver trumpet
at the Bar.) Sir Ben. Rudyer.
The Pursivant watches his door, and divides him and his Cure asunder, to both
their griefs: For it is not with him as (perhaps) with some that set the
Pursivant at work, gladded of an excuse to be out of their pulpit, It is his
delight to Preach.

About a week since I went over to Lambeth, to move that great Bishop (too
great indeed) to take this danger off from this Minister, and to recall the
Pursivant. And withal I did undertake for Master Wilson (for so your
Petitioner is called) that he should answer his accusers in any of the Kings
Courts at Westminster.

The Bishop made me answer (as near as I can remember) in haec verba, I am
sure that he will not be absent from his Cure a twelve-moneth together, and then
(I doubt not) but once in a year we shall have him.

This was all I could obtain, but I hope, (by the help of this house) before
this year of threats run round, His Grace will either have more Grace, or no
Grace at all. For our manifold griefs do fill a mighty and a vast
circumference, yet so that from every part our lines of sorrow, do lead unto
him, and point at him the Center, from whence our miseries in this Church, and
many of them in the Commonwealth do flow.

Let the Petition be read, and let us enter upon the work.
WHat is here for Root and Branch? I can not find a line that I can wish
unsaid: nor do I read a letter, that I would go less in. It is replied, that
the petitioner M. Wilson, is a man for Root and Branch; if he be, that was no
part of his petition; nor indeed any part of my knowledge then: I am no more
obliged to answer herein, then I am bound to own and defend M. Wilson, if he
should hereafter cast aside the common prayer, what were that to me, or to what
I then did say? sure I am, that I was well assured, that he did not allow of
separation then: and that he had been a powerful perswader of others, not to
withdraw from our public Service. And I think so well of his goodness,
temper and conscience, that he will not easily be led away to these mistaking
excesses.

Section III.
THE next is that which I spoke in the grand Committee of the whole House for
Religion, M. White holding that Chair: whereof this is a copy.

23. Novem. 1640. M. White,
YOu have many private Petitions, give me leave (by word of mouth) to interpose
one more general, which thus you may receive.

Gods true Religion is violently invaded by two seeming enemies: but indeed
they are (like Herod and Pilate) fast friends for the destruction of truth. I
mean the Papists for one party, and our Prelating faction for the other.
Between these two in their several progress, I observe the concurrence of
some few Parallels, fit (as I conceive) to be represented to this Honorable
House.

First with the Papists, there is a severe Inquisition: and with us (as it is
used) there is a bitter high Commission; both these (contra fas and jus) are
Judges in their own cause: yet herein their Inquisitors are better then our
High Commissioners -- They (for ought I ever heard) do not saevire in suos)
punish for delinquents and offenders, such as profess and practice, according
to the Religion established by the Laws of the Land where they live.

But with us how many poor distressed Ministers? nay how many scores of them,
in a few years past, have been suspended, degraded, deprived, excommunicated,
not guilty of the breach of any our established Laws. The petitions of many
are here with us, more are coming: all their prayers are in Heaven for
redress.

Secondly, with the Papists, there is a Mysterious artifice, I mean their Index
expurgatorius whereby they clip the tongues of such witnesses, whose evidence
they do not like. -- To this I parallel our late Imprimatur's: Licenses for
the Press: so handled that Truth is suppressed, and popish pamphlets fly abroad
cum privilegio: witness the audacious and Libelling Pamphlets against true
Religion, written by Pocklington, Heylin, Dow, Cosins, Shelford, Swan, Reeves,
Yates, Hausted, Studley, Sparow, Brown, Roberts. -- Many more: I name no
Bishops, but I add, etc.

Nay they are already grown so bold in this new trade, that the most learned
labors of our ancient and best Divines, must be now corrected and defaced with
a Deleatur by the supercilious pen of my Lords young Chaplain; (fit perhaps) for
the technicall arts, but unfit to hold the Chair for Divinity.

But herein the Roman Index is better then are our English Licenses: They
thereby do preserve the current of their own established doctrine: a point of
wisdom. But with us our Innovators by this artifice do alter our settled
Doctrines; Nay they do subinduce points repugnant and contrariant. And this I
dare assume upon my self to prove.

One Parallel more I have, and that is this. Among the Papists, there is one
acknowledged supreme Pope, supreme in honor, in order, and in power: from
whose judgment there is no appeal. -- I confess (M. Speaker) I cannot
altogether match a Pope with a Pope: (yet one of the ancient titles of our
English Primate was Alterius orbis Papa.) But thus far I can go, Ex ore suo. It
is in Print, -- He pleads fair for a Patriarchate: And for such an one, whose
judgment, he (beforehand) professes ought to be final: and then (I am sure)
it ought to be un-erring.

Put these together, and you shall find that the final determination of a
Patriarch will want very little of a Pope, -- and then we may say -- Mutato
nomine de te
Fabula narratur --


He pleads Popeship under the name of a Patriarch. And I much fear least the
end and top of his Patriarchall plea may be as that of Cardinal Pole (his
predecessor) who would have two heads, one Caput Regale, another Caput
Sacerdotale: a proud parallel, to set up the Miter as high as the Crown.

But herein I shall be free and clear, if one there must be (be it a Pope, be
it a Patriarch; this I resolve upon for my own choice (Procul a Jove procul a
fulnime.) I had rather serve one as far off as Tyber, then to have him come so
near me as the Thames. A Pope at Rome will do me less hurt then a Patriarch
may do at Lambeth.

I have done, and for this third Parallel I submit it to the wisdom and
consideration of this grand Committee for Religion, in the mean time I do
ground my motion, upon the former two, and it is this in brief.

That you would please to select a subcommittee of a few, and to empower them
for the discovery of the numbers of oppress Ministers under the Bishops
tyranny for these ten years last past. We have the complaint of some, but more
are silent: some are patient and will not complain, others are fearful and
dare not, many are beyond Sea and cannot complain.

And in the second place, that the sub-Committee may examine the Printers what
books by bad Licenses have been corruptly issued forth: and what good books
have been (like good Ministers) silenced, clipped or cropped.

The work I conceive will not be difficult, but will quickly return into your
hand full of weight.

And this is my motion.
What is here for Root and Branch? But I must search farther, although for
that, which (I am sure) cannot be found.

Section IV.
I Come now the likeliest trial wherein to find my self guilty. A petition was
brought unto me out of Kent in terminis terminantibus, as that from many
Citizens of London) which is in print. My L. G. D.
This indeed if it were not the Spawne of the London petition, yet finding it a
Parrat taught to speak the syllables of that, and by roate calling for Root
and Branch, I dealt with the presenters thereof, and with other parties
thereunto, until (with their consents) I reduced it to less then a quarter of
it former length, and taught it a new and more modest language. Upon delivery
of this petition thus I prefaced.

January 13. 1640. M. Speaker,
YEsterday we did regulate the most important business before us, and gave
them motion, so that our weighty affairs, are now on their feet in their
progress, journying on toward their several periods, where some I hope will
shortly find their latest home.

Yet among all these I observe one, a very main one, to sleep sine die: give me
leave to awaken it; It is a business of an immense weight, and worth; such as
deserves our best care, and most severe circumspection. I mean the Grand
Petition long since given in by many thousand Citizens against the domineering
of the Clergy.

Wherein (for my part) although I cannot approve of all that is presented unto
you, yet I do clearly profess, that a great part of it, nay the greatest part
thereof, is so well grounded, that my heart goes cheerfully along therewith.

It seems that my Country (for which I have the honor to serve) is of the same
mind, and least that you should think that all faults are included within the
walls of Troy, they will show you Iliacos intra muros peccatur and extra.

The same grievances which the City groans under, are provincial unto us, and I
much fear they are national among us all.

The Pride, the Avarice, the Ambition and oppression, by our ill ruling Clergy
is Epidemicall, it has infected them all. There is not any, or scarce any of
them, who is not practical in their own great cause in hand, which they
impiously do mis-call, the piety of the times, but in truth, so wrong a Piety
that I am bold to say, In facinus jurasse putes. --

Here in this Petition is the Disease represented, here is the Cure entreated.

The number of your Petitioners is considerable, being above five and twenty
hundred names, and would have been four times as many, if that were thought
material.

The matter in the Petition is of high import: but your Petitioners themselves
are all of them quiet and silent at their own houses, humbly expecting and
praying the resolution of this great Senate, upon these their earnest and their
hearty desires.

Here is no noise, no numbers at your door: they will be neither your trouble
nor your jealousy; for I do not know of any one of them this day in the Town:
So much they do affie in the goodness of their petition, and in the justice of
this House.

If now you want any of them here, to make avowance of their Petition, I am
their servant. I do appear for them and for my self, and am ready to avow
this petition, in their names, and in my own.

Nothing doubting, but fully confident, that I may justly say of the present
usage of the Hierarchy in the Church of England, as once the Pope (Pope Adrian
as I remember) said of the Clergy in his time: A vertice capitis ad plantam
pedis, nihil est sanum in toto ordine ecclesiastico.

I beseech you read the Petition, regard us, and relieve us.
The petition it self speaks thus:

To the Honorable the Commons House of Parliament.
The humble Petition of many the Inhabitants within His Majesty's County of
Kent,
MOst humbly showing, That by sad experience we do daily find the government
in the Church of England, by Archbishops, Lordbishops, Deanes, and Archdeacons,
with their Courts, Jurisdictions, and Administrations, by them and their
inferior Officers, to be very dangerous, both to Church and Commonwealth, and
to be the occasion of manifold grievances unto his Majesty's Subjects, in their
consciences, liberties, and estates, And likely to be fatal unto us in the
continuance thereof. The dangerous effects of which Lordly power in them, have
appeared in these particulars following

1. They do with a hard hand overruled all other Ministers, subjecting them to
their cruel authority.

2. They do suspend, punish, and deprive many godly, religious, and painful
Ministers, upon slight and upon no grounds: whilst in the mean time, few of
them do preach the Word of God themselves, and that but seldom. But they do
restrain the painful preaching of others, both for Lectures, and for
afternoon Sermons on the Sabbath day.

3. They do countenance and have of late encouraged Papists, Priests, and
Arminian both Books and persons.

4. They hinder good and godly books to be printed: yet they do license to be
published, many popish, Arminian, and other dangerous tenants.

5. They have deformed our Churches, with popish pictures, and suited them with
Romish Altars.

6. They have of late extolled and commended much the Church of Rome, denying
the Pope to be Antichrist: affirming the Church of Rome to be a true Church in
fundamentals.

7. They have practiced and enforced antiquated and obsolete ceremonies, as
standing at the Hymns at Gloria patri, and turning to the East at several
parts of the Divine Service, bowing to the Altar, which they term the place of
Gods residence upon earth: the reading of a second service at the Altar, and
denying the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist to such as have not come up to a
new set Rail before the Altar.

8. They have made and contrived illegal Canons and Constitutions, and framed
a most pernicious and desperate oath: an oath of covenant and confederacy for
their own Hierarchicall greatness beside many other dangerous and pernicious
passages in the said Canons.

9. They do dispense with plurality of Benefices: they do both prohibit and
grant marriages, neither of them by the rule of Law or conscience, but do
prohibit that they may grant, and grant that they may have money.

10. They have procured a licencious liberty for the Lords day, but have
pressed the strict observation of Saints holidaies, and do punish, suspend,
degrade, deprive godly Ministers for not publishing a Book for liberty of
sports on the Sabbath day.

11. They do generally abuse the great ordinance of excommunication, making
sometimes a gain of it, to the great discomfort of many poor souls, who for
want of money can get no absolution.

12. They claim their Office and jurisdiction to be jure divino, and do
exercise the same (contrary to law) in their own names, and under their own
Seals.

13. They receive and take upon them temporal honors, dignities, places, and
offices in the Comonwealth, as if it were lawful for them to use both Swords.

14. They take cognizance in their Courts and elsewhere of matters determinable
at the Common law.

15. They put Ministers upon Parishes, without the patron, and without the
peoples consent.

16. They do yearly impose oaths upon Churchwardens, to the most apparent
danger of filling the Land with perjury.

17. They do exercise oaths ex officio in the nature of an Inquisition even
into the thoughts of men.

18. They have apprehended men by Pursivants, without citation or missives
first sent: they break up men's houses and studies taking away what they please.

19. They do awe the Judges of the Land with their greatness, to the
inhibiting of prohibitions, and hindering of habeas Corpus when it is due.

20. They are strongly suspected to be confederate with the Roman party in this
Land, and with them to be authors, contrivers or consenters to the present
commotions in the North, and the rather because of a contribution by the
Clergy, and by the Papists in the last year, 1639. and because of an ill named
benevolence of six Subsidies granted or intended to be granted this present
year 1640. thereby and with these moneys to engage (as much as in them lay)
the two Nations into blood.

It is therefore humbly and earnestly prayed, that this Hierarchicall power may
be totally abrogated, if the wisdom of this Honorable House, shall find that
it cannot be maintained by Gods Word, and to his glory.

And we your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
Section V.
Upon occasion of what I said of the late Canons, I might easily have pressed
the abolition of the founders, and of the whole order of prelacy: And surely,
if it had been my wish, I would (as others) have so expressed my self. Here
follows my argument against these Canons, and that chiefly aimed against the
founders of them: yet nothing of Root and Branch therein.

14. December. 1640. M. Speaker,
THat the late Canons are invalidous, it will easily appear, and that they are
so originally in the foundation, or rather in the founders of them, I will
assume upon my self to demonstrate, having first intimated my sense by way of
preparative.

The Pope (as they say) has a triple Crown, answerable thereunto, and to
support that, he pretends to have a threefold Law. The first is, jus divinum,
Episcopacy by divine right; and this he would have you think to be the Coronet
next his head, that which does circle and secure his power. Our Bishops have
(in an unlucky time) entered their plea and pretended title to this Crown,
Episcopacy by Divine right.

The second is Jus huntanum, Constantins donation, the gift of indulgent
Princes; temporal power. This Law belongs to his second, or his middle Crown;
already also pleaded for by our Prelates in print.

These two Crowns being obtained, he (the Pope) does frame and make his third
Crown himself, and sets that upmost, upon the top -- This Crown also has its
Law, and that is Jus canonicum, the Canon law, of more use unto his Popeship
then both the other -- Just so our Prelates from the pretended divinity of
their Episcopacy, and from the temporal power granted by our Princes they
would now obtrude a new Canon Law upon us.

They have charged their Canons at us to the full, and never fearing that ever
they would recoyle back into a Parliament they have rammed a prodigious ungodly
oath into them.

The illegality and invalidity of these Canons (as I conceive) is easily
discoverable by one short question, viz. what do you call the meeting wherein
they were made? give it a name to know it by: who can frame his argument
aright, unless he can first tell against what he is to argue? would you
confute the Convocation? they were a holy Synod: would you argue against the
Synod? why they were Commissioners: would you dispute the Commission? they will
mingle all powers together, and answer that they were some fourth thing, that
we neither know nor imagine.

Quo teneam nodo mutantem Protea? unless they will unriddle themselves, and
own what they were, we may prosecute, but hardly with concludent arguments.
Yet I venture.

I have conferred with some of the founders of these new Canons, but I profess
clearly, that I could never yet meet with any one of that assembly, who could
(in behalf of their meeting) well answer me the first question in the
Catechism, what is your name? Alas, they are parted before they know what they
were when they were together.

The sum of the several answers, that I have received, does amount to this.
They were a Convocationall -- Synodicall -- Assembly of Commissioners, indeed a
threefold Chimaera, a monster to our Laws, a Cerberus to our Religion.

A strange Commission wherein no one Commissioners name is to be found. A
strange Convocation that lived when the Parliament was dead: A strange Holy
Synod where one part never saw, never conferred with the other. -- But indeed
what use or need of conference, if that be true of these Canons, which I read
of the former ones, Parker Polit.
Notum est Canones formari Lambethae, priusquam in Synodo ventilentur.

Thus far preparatory; I proceed to my argument, whereby to manifest the
invalidity of these Canons, not borrowing but avoiding what has formerly been
instanded by others.

I will neither inveigh upon them as unnamed Commissioners, nor infirm them as
the work of a dead Convocation; But will take them in the capacity of their own
affected title of a Synod. Such they bragged themselves to be whilst they
sat: such they style themselves in the Title Page of these (never to be
Canonized) Canons -- The words are -- Canons treated upon in Convocation --
agreed upon in Synod.

This treating in one capacity and agreeing in another; is a new mould to cast
Canons in, never used before. Canons bred in a Convocation, born in a Synod.
Thus although we find not one good father, here are yet two mothers to one
illfavoured child; never known before, nor imagined but of Bacchus, whom the
Poets calls among other attributes -- Solumque bimatrem.

I proceed: if their meeting be a Synod, either it is so by Donation, by
Election, or only by Usurpation.

Donation from the King: is this title and authority, indulged to them by his
Majesty? Look through all his Highness Letters Patent, and they are not once
saluted with the ambitious title of a Synod. Yet in the Canons they have
assumed it seventeen times, it is their own pride, their own presumption.

The King has not done it, (pardon me) no Prince ever did it or can do it; no
power Regal, Imperial, or Papal did ever attempt it, to ordain that
William, and Richard, Matthew and John, etc. and I know not who more, being met
and assembled upon other summons shall by a Commission be on a sudden
translated from what they were, into an unthought-of National Synod, without
voice or choice of any man to be concerned: this never was done, this never can
be well done.

As for due election for such meetings, this indeed is or ought to be of the
true esse to a Legitimate Synod. But due election made up by voices is so much
a stranger to this Synod, that their fatherhoods will confess that they were
never trusted to this Synod, as a Synod by any, either of the Clergy or of the
Laity.

Concerning the choice of a few of them, and but a few (about 50. as I guess)
chosen to the Convocation house, that choice will never render them a lawful
Synod, until they can prove metamorphosis and Transubstantiation. -- For the
votes of all their choosers upon expiration of the Convocation house returned
back home to every man's bosom from whence they breathed. So that if you will
en-live the same men to be now Synodall, who were before but Convocationall,
you must renew the old Pythagorean Transmigration, for they want the breath and
life of an election. A new one you have not, and the old one is not to be had
but by (...).

Besides I do affirm and shall approve, that the electors to a Convocation and
to a Synod are not all one. The Clergy only do, and of right only ought to
choose unto the Convocation house. The reason; we of the Laity (so they will
call us) have our House of Commons where our Trustees by virtue of our voices
do sit at the same time. But in the choice unto a Synod; we who must be bound
by the determinations of the Synod, ought also to be interested in the parties
determining. This is clear enough in reason, and will be better oleared
presently.

Of Synods I find five several sorts, first a general or universal Synod;
secondly, Patriarchicall; thirdly, National; fourthly, Provincial; fifthly, a
Diocesan Synod. I pass by the two first and last, as not pertinent to this
time and affair. Concerning Provincial and National Synods a word or two; if
I know which to call their late meeting. They run on riddles: and I want an
Oedipus at every turn.

These Canons, were they forged in one Synod National, or in two Provincial?
were they two Provincial Synods? how then come their Acts and Canons to be
imbodyed together? how comes it to pass that all the Canons speak in the
singular number? The Synod; The holy Synod; The sacred Synod. Sacred will now
be hardly granted, unless as the Poet does, -- Auri sacra fames.

Was it then but one? was it a National Synod? why the Provinces (we all know)
never did convene, they never met together. Look on the representative body of
the Commons of this whole Land: every one within the same walls hearing every
ones argument, and thereupon mending, altering, and (as occasion is) correcting
his own judgment, and afterward ((...)) joining in unanimous consent. And if
the able members of the North beyond Trent were divided from the rest, there
would be quickly found a want of their worth and weight, nor could their
sitting at the same time at York, make the rest a House of Commons here, for
the whole Kingdom must be represented entire.

But as we have done the Title Synod, so let us give them the attribute
National, a National Synod, and yet see how inconsistent and invalidous they
are!

The very esse of every Synod does subsist in a double foundation. Fundamentum
materiale and fundamentum formale. -- The due materials of a Synod are the
interior qualities and indowments of the persons whereof the Synod consists,
not their external dignities and promotions. And therefore every man thus
qualified is as capable to be of the Synod, as any Deane or Archdeacon of them
all.

The fundamentum formale, is Delegatio ab ecclesia and debita electio. A due
choice to be made by all that are or shall be concerned in the determinations
of the Synod: and this trust of choice may fall upon another man, as well and
as soon as upon Dean or Archdeacon.

I will not quarrel the want of able parts in any members of that late
doubtful dangerous meeting: I grant them the materials of a true Synod, but
will insist only upon the second, want of form, want of due election: which if
they want, the most virtuall and most obliging tie, and the most binding part
is wanting.

That they had no such election, we need not go forth to prove; No one man in
the Kingdom can say that he gave a voice to the election of any one Dean or
Archdeacon to sit for him in that Synod, nor were the Clarks chosen by all who
were to be bound. So then there remains only to be proved this: That such
election of persons, by all persons to be concerned in the Decrees, and Canons,
is necessary to the constituting of a lawful Synod; which is all one as to
say, that the elections to a Synod ought to be, both by the Clergy and the
Laity.

M. Speaker, I will trouble you but with one reason, and a very few instances,
all briefly.

The Acts and Canons of every Lawful National Council or Synod, ought to
bind the whole Nation, both Laity and Clergy: But this cannot be reasonable and
just, if the Laity be excluded both from consultation and from choice of
consulters. The reason is plain. It is a ground in nature, and so confessed
upon this very case by D. Field, who has it out of Occam -- quod omnes tangit,
ab omnibus tractari debet. And this is so clear a maxim, that in this very
sense also; for the Laity to be present at Councels, this very Aphorism is
used by the Pope in his own gloss upon the Canonist Gratian. Quod omnes
tangit, ab omnibus tractari debet. Surely our Clergy are much too high, if
herein they would outgo the very Canons of the Papal Synods, and conclude that
which shall bind all, where all are not admitted to treat, neither by
themselves nor by proxy.

Now the benefit of this Law of nature and of reason (as Dr. Field calls it)
we claim. The present Canons do concern us. I may be a Churchwarden, my son
may be a Master of Art; then must I present upon their yet unborn articles, and
he must swear their oath of Covenant -- well, they were never trusted by us
unto a Synod; and therefore ought not to tie us up un-heard, it is against
Nature and Reason.

To second this Argument by instance in proof of practice, I shall produce a
few, and but a few of many examples and authorities: the originals I cannot now
command, but must be content to name a few extracts, which by way of transcript
do walk along with my vade mecum.

The point that I would establish is this, that in Synods and Councels where
Lay men are concerned in the Decrees, there the Laity may be present to
consult, if not also to decide the conclusions. I will but point, I will not
enlarge to the vouching every place verbatim; Dr. Field, Dr. Fulke, Goulartius,
are clear and positive in this point.

Our Statutes for correcting and gathering together the former Canons into a
new body, do clearly evidence this unto us; in all which there is an equal
proportion mixed, sixteen of the Clergy, and as many of the Laity.

The Author of the History of Trent is frequent in this point, adding this for
a reason, that in a general Council, the universal Church cannot be
represented, if the Laity be excluded. So by the rule a paribus, The reason
holds the same, a National Council cannot represent a Nation, if but one
degree of men, men of one quality and capacity be only present, and the rest
altogether excluded.

Gratian, the Canonist, does allow the Laity to be present, especially in such
Councels as do treat of faith, and for proof does vouch Pope Nicholas.

I will omit many proofs of many Emperors being personally present and
president in many Councels, by themselves and sometimes by their Vicegerents,
as Marcellinus, Candidianus, Martianus, etc. yet even this is argumentative for
us, and a preservative of our right, for the Laity to be present.

The Greek Historians are so plentiful, that I will only name them.

Theodoret. -- l. 5. c. 9. Eusebius de vita Constantin. -- l. 3. c. 9. and 10.
Sozomen. -- l. 1. c. 16. and 17. Niceph. Callistus. -- l. 8. c. 15. Socrates.
-- l. 1. c. 5. and l. 6. c. 2. Euagrius Scholast. -- l. 2. c. 4. c. 27.
Among the Latin Fathers Cyprian is very plentiful.

As for Councels, look,

Nice. 1. vouched by Eusebius de vita Constantini -- 4. conc. Carthag. cited by
Gratian. -- The Council of Eliberis in Spain. Council of Constantinople in
Theodoret. -- Council of Constance; And the second of Nice. -- where it is
said of the Imperial Lady the famous Pulcheria Augusta, that ipsa per
semetipsam in sancta quarta Synodo sedit: which fourth Synod was with Martianus
the Emperor.

To these I add the very Ordo celebrandi concilia written by Isidor, and like
unto the Modus tenendi Parliamentum.

Thus much for humane testimony. I have done with my hasty notes, only I add
this, and I beseech you to intend it.

Whilst we of the Laity had our power and voices to choose our own Ministers,
and our own Bishops, (which was our ancient right, constantly allowed and
practiced in the best Primitive times, whereof the proofs are yet evident
enough) so long (I say) we might trust them in a Synod, whom we first had
trusted to direct and guide our souls in all the ministerial function. -- But
to conclude us up now, and shut us our contrary to the Law of Nature and
Reason, contrary to ancient usages: not to admit us to determination, nay to
exclude us from consultation, and after all to take from us all assent both in
choice and in refusal of Pastors to be set over us, and yet to bind us by
decrees so made, may prove (I fear) no less then soule-tyranny. I do not
press the deserved right of our choice of Pastors: but one thing more, lend me
patience to add as a supreme Coronis to all that I have said for right of
Laity in Synods.

Look I beseech you in the first Synod that ever was held in the Christian
Church, and that for so great and singular a cause, as never was occasion for
the like in the world before or since: you have it in the first of the Acts of
the holy Apostles, and it is for the choice of a new Apostle. There were in
this Synod and of this Synod, the eleven Apostles, Act. 1. 13. With the
brethren of the Lord, verse. 14. There were the Disciples, there was Turba (...)
a multitude, of about a 120 names, verse. 15. Saint Peter tells them that out of
that number one must be ordained to be a witness of the resurrection of our
Savior; thereupon what does the multitude of Disciples there present? (...)
verse. 23. they place or set two before the Apostles: And the same men viz. all
the Disciples verse. 26. (...) they give forth their lots, and thereupon, the
lot falling upon Matthias, he was numbered (says our translation) with the
eleven Apostles; but the Original is more, (...) communibus calculis
annumeratus est, he was by common assent or by common voices reckoned with the
eleven. Now who were these common voices? who were these 120. men? Evangelists,
Bishops, Deacons, and Presbyters or Elders, as yet there was not one in all the
world, the Apostles were but eleven, perhaps not numbered in this 120. The
Disciples if you will say, that they were there, yet they were but 70. So that
here is no evasion: the Laity were present, and not passive only, they were
active in this original, so weighty a Synod.

My second instance in this kind, is out of the second Council that ever we
read was held, and this is Acts 6. where the Apostles call a Council for the
choice of seven Deacons. Then the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples
to them, Verse. 2. (...). They being assembled do not say, we have decreed, we
have ordered and ordained, and enjoined, but their language is Verse. 3. (...),
brethren look ye out, the word is the same as (...), both from (...) to
oversee, do you oversee among you, seven men of honest report. And the saying
(as it is verse 5.) pleased (...) the whole multitude, there is a consent of
theirs; more plain in (...) they the multitude chose seven, Steven and Philip,
etc. (...), whom they (still the multitude (...)) verse. 6. did set or place
before the Apostles.

The third and the last shall be the (...) the great and general Council held
by the Apostles upon the dissension of the Church in point of Circumcision (and
that is Acts 15.) there you shall again find present, (...), Verse 12. All the
multitude: but you will say and object that the next word is (...) the
multitude kept silence. True, ergo what? Therefore they speak not at all in
this Council? nothing less. But ergo they had spoken before: for it is plain
by the word, THEN, Then all the multitude kept silence. If they had nothing
there to do but to be always silent, this particle of time, Then, might well
have been spared. This may perhaps be objected, and therefore ought to be
prevented, for the further clearing whereof, observe (I pray) the next verse.
13. where in like manner, it is said of Paul and Barnabas (...). And after they
held their peace, Ergo they had spoken. And therefore the Friar who collected
together a body of Councels (Peter Crabbe the German) does even from this place
infer a consent of the people saying, Tacuit omnis multitudo Consentiens Petro.

But if you would have this more clearly evidenced beyond all exceptions, I
pray take notice of the resolution of this Synod, verse. 22. Then pleased it the
Apostles and Elders with the whole Church. With the whole Church, what is that?
The blessed Apostles and their fellow laborers did not engrosse, and (as our
Churchmen affect to do) usurp and monopolize the word Church, as proper only
to Churchmen. -- No you shall find it even in the Epigraphe of the Canons and
Decrees of this true, holy, and facted Synod, that the despised Laity are in
these Canons conjoined with the blessed Apostles, although Pope and Patriarch,
Primate and Metropolitan, Archbishop and Bishops, yea even down to Dean and
Archdeacon, (I have heard it) do despise the thought of admitting the Laity: I
do not say to decision, but even to Consultation, nay to the very choice of
consulters in Religion: nay lower even so much as to have a negative power,
when a man of inability, and of ill life is obtruded upon them; I proceed, for
I would not orare, but probare, look verse. 23. They that were present had
voice, they who voyced the Canons, joined in the decree, and sending the decree
unto Antioch. The words are thus, The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren send
greeting to the Brethren which are in Antioch, etc. Here the Brethren at
Jerusalem are (with the Apostles and the Elders) actors in, and authors of the
Canons in this Council agreed. There is no evasion, no elusion to be had,
unless you can prove that all the Brethren in Antioch to whom these Brethren
in Jerusalem did write, were only Clergymen.

Which if you should affirm, our Clergy will hardly be pleased with you, for
they must then be of the multitude (not a special lot) for Barnabas and Paul
did deliver this Epistle (being the decree of this Synod) to the multitude
(...) as it is found in the 30 verse. And when they had gathered the multitude
together, they delivered the Epistle.

Thus much in way of pursuit for this one argument, that no Canons can bind the
Laity where we have no voice of our own, nor choice of the Clergy persons who
do found them, nor assent in the susception of them after they are framed. Quod
omnes tangit, ab omnibus tractari debet.

M. Speaker, It remains as a wish, that every member of that meeting, who
voted these exorbitant Canons, should come severally to the Bar of the
Parliament House, with a Canon book in his hand, and there unless he can
answer his Catechism (as I called it) and show what is the name of their
meeting, and (unless he can manifest that the Laity are no part of the Church)
Conceptis verbis in such express terms as that House should think fit, to
abjure his own ill-begotten issue, or else be commanded to give fire to his own
Canons.

Section VI.
UPon my motion November 23. it pleased the grand Committee for Religion, to
appoint a Subcommittee, to receive complaints from oppressed Ministers, which
Subcommittee was shortly after made a Committee by order of the House. It
pleased the Gentlemen of this Committee to put the honor and the burden of the
chair upon me: from hence several Reports have been delivered in, I shall
only trouble the Reader with the first of them.

18 December. 1640. Mr. White,
This grand Committee for Religion did authorize a Sub-committee (among other
things) to take into consideration, the unjust sufferings of good Ministers
oppressed by the cruell-used authority of Hierarchicall Rulers.

In this (and in other points) we have entered upon many particulars, we have
matured and perfected but one. If we had less work, you should (before this
time) have had more: but complaints crowd in so fast upon us, that the very
plenty of them retards their issue.

The present Report which I am to make unto you is concerning M. Wilkinson, a
Batchellor in Divinity, and a man in whose character do concur, Learning,
Piety, Industry, Modesty.

Two hardships have been put upon him: one at the time when he presented
himself to receive Orders: and that was thus.

The Bishop of Oxfords Chaplen (M Fulham) being the examiner (for Bishops now
do scorn to do Bishops work: B. Bancroft.
it belongs to himself) he propounds four questions to M. Wilkinson, not
taken out of the depth of Divinity, but fitly chosen to discover how affections
do stand to be novellized by the mutability of the present times.

The questions were these.
1. Whether has the Church authority in matters of faith? 2. May the Kings
book of sports, (so some impious Bishops have abused our pious King, to call
their contrivance His Majesty's book) may this be read in the Church without
offense? 3. Is bowing to or before the Altar lawful? 4. Is bowing at the Name
of Jesus lawful?
The doctrine of the first affirmed, will bring a dangerous influence upon our
belief by subjecting our faith to humane resolutions. The other three are
disciplinarian in the present way of Novellisme.

As soon as M. Wilkinson heard these questions, Lupum auribus, he had a Wolf
by the ears. And because unto these captious interrogatories, he could not
make a peremptory answer, M. Fulham would not present your petitioner to the
Bishop for ordination.

Thus you see (Mr. White) a new way of Simony: Imposition of hands is to be
sold, if not for money, yet to make a side, a party, a faction. They will not
confer Orders, but upon such as will come in and make party with them in their
new practices, as is evident by these questions. Take this, in this kind, as a
leading case, a first complaint, more are coming: and M. Wilkinson shall have
the poor common comfort Solamen miseris socios habuisse. --

I proceed to his second sufferance, which was by the Vice Chancellor of
Oxford, for a Sermon preached in his course at S. Marys in Oxford. Short to
make, he preached better, then they were willing to hear: the Sermon fell into
the ears of a captious Auditour. For this Sermon, he stands now suspended by
the Vice Chancellor from all the spiritual promotion that he had, which was
only the reading of a Divinity lecture in Magdalen-hall.

The Committee required the Vice Chancellor to send unto us the Sermon with his
exceptions in writing. They were brought, and being received, they are three in
number: great, and weighty in the accusation: none at all in proof. Nay (M.
White) there is nothing presented unto us, wherein to find a color or a
shadow, whereby to make the accusation semblable, and consequently the
suspension just. Ecquis innocens erit, si accusare suffecerit?

The particulars insisted upon, picked and chosen out of that Sermon by the
Vice Chancellor are three: every one a heinous charge, and the first sounding
little less then treason. Give me leave to read them, as Mr. Vicechancellor
has sent them in writing.

1. Our religious Sovereign, and his pious government, is seditiously defamed,
as if his Majesty were little better then the old pagan persecutors or then
Queen Mary. 2. The government of the Church and University is unjustly
traduced. 3. Men of learning and piety, conformable to the public government,
are uncharitably slandered.
The least of these being duly proved, will make him worthy of suspension: but
if M. Wilkinson be guilty of the first, he is not worthy to live. The truth is,
the Vice Chancellor has learned audacter criminare: and failing in proof;
has only fowled himself. Your Subcommittee, upon due consideration of the
cause and circumstance, have hereupon unanimously voted, that M. Wilkinson is
free from all and every of these exceptions, made against his Sermon by the
Vicechancellor. We are all of opinion that there is nothing therein, that
deserves Notam censoris, nedum lituram judicis.

If (M. White) there be in a Sermon (as there ought to be) aliquid mordacis
veritatis, shall the Preacher be for this suspended? His mouth shut up for
preaching truth boldly? It is contrary to their commission, for (Sir) they have
a great charter to speak freely: it is warranted unto them Jure divino. Saint
Paul does own it, in his instruction of Timothy. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3.
The words are, I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, preach the
word, be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort -- For the
time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine. Here is our case
exactly. Here was reproof; here was exhortation: here was preaching out of
season, to unwilling or to unprepared hearers: and yet in season, the Theme
was necessary and fitted to their want of zeal: But the only fault was, that
the time is come when sound doctrine will not be endured.

Thus the Committee found it: thus have I faithfully, but imperfectly, reported
it, and do now subjoyn the opinion and request of your trustees, to this grand
Committee.

Mr. Wilkinson is innocent and free from this accusation. He had just cause to
petition. The Vice Chancellor has been without cause, nay against cause rigid
and oppressive. The Sermon deserved thanks. The preacher received injuries. His
suspension to be taken of: The retracting and dissolving whereof ought to be as
public as was the inflicting thereof.

One word more I ask leave to add, and I hope I shall not therein err from
the sense of the Committee, though indeed I received it not in command to be
joined to the Report. This business (M. White) is spread into a wide and ample
notice. Two great Primats have appeared in it, and that with different, perhaps
contrariant senses, senses as distant as Lambeth and Armagh. The
Vice Chancellor says, that the Preacher was censured by the most Reverend Lord
Primate of Ireland, who heard him, to be a bold or rash fellow for it. Hereupon
I attended that learned, pious, and painful Primate, and did read these words
of the Vice Chancellor unto him. His answer was, that he takes it as an
Aspersion upon him. He remembers the Sermon, and commends it.

This is an additionall to the Report, and with this I leave M.
Vice Chancellor, and the Bishops Chaplen (Fulham) to the wisdom and
consideration of this grand Committee.

Section VII.
MY next walk was in a hazardous way: and although it was not so lodged in my
memory, as that in due season I could make use of it (as I intended) publicly
in the House; yet being since gone forth without my appointment into print, I
do now own it for my sense, until I be better instructed, Mr. D. of C.
as I was promised long since, by a Cathedral friend of mine, but do now
despair to see performed.

The Theme is, that secular jurisdiction ought not to be held by such as are of
the Clergy function. Hos. 8. 4.
(...), etc. They reigned to themselves (says the Lord) and not by me: they
have been Princes, and I knew it not.

The words of that short passage were these:

OUR Lord and Savior (blessed for ever being indeed a King, Pilate (his Judge)
seems to start, and be in fear at that great title: Although our Savior had
told him saying, Ioh. 18. 36.
My Kingdom is not of this world: Pilate (still in fear) Joh. 19. 12.
sought to release him, but more in fear of Caesar (the King at that time of
this world) he adjudged the Lord of life to death, yet honorably writes his
Title, Mat. 27. 37.
This is Jesus the King of the Jews. This title he then was crowned withal,
when life and death divided his soul and body asunder; that in a manner it may
be said, he never was King indeed, until he was out of this world.

If he who was our Joh. 13. 13.
Lord and Master, had not this worlds royalty, whence comes that the Pope is
Crowned? and his Cardinals in Purple? whence have our Bishops their Lordships?
and as themselves call it B. Hall. Episcop. part 2. p. 106.
Jura regalia, their royalty and rites of Baronage?

It may prove a disquisition deep and dangerous, yet I desire (without envy to
their pomp or persons) to wade so far as may satisfy a mind that loves
truth, and desires to be led by it: and this with all possible brevity. There
has been a happy and blessed reformation of our Church, God send a better, and
a more severe reformation of our Churchmen, or else our Church is now in
danger to be deformed again.

The state of this inquiry may be this, viz. whether the Ministers of Christ's
Kingdom may receive worldly titles, and execute worldly Offices and powers? or
more generally thus: Whether a Clergyman may semel and simul, be both a
Clergyman and a Layman, in power, office and authority over other men in both
kinds?

Go we to the fountain head, Luke 22 24.
There was a strife among them (the Apostles) which of them should be accounted
the greatest; which of the twelve soever began this emulation of power.
Certain it is, that the two sons of Zebedee, Mat. 20 20.
James and John with their mother, first presumed to come and ask the highest
places of honor (next to the very Throne) in the Kingdom of Christ; which
Kingdom was conceited by them shortly after to be raised in the splendor of
this world: This is genuinely gathered from this very story, generally
confessed, and clearly confirmed in the History of the Acts, where the Apostles
do ask our Savior, even after his resurrection, saying, Act. 1. 6
Lord will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? Therefore to
these two brethren and their mother, so much mistaken in the nature of his
Kingdom he makes answer, Mat. 20 22.
Ye know not what you ask. He presently shows the entertainment of his
Kingdom, A cup to drink of, that many were like to pray might pass from
them; but they answer they are able to drink thereof. This their answer as it
proved true in all the twelve Apostles, so by the providence of God, one of
these two brothers, Act. 12. 2.
James was the first of the rest (as some do gather) who drank the cup of
martyrdom, and as some think, John was the last of the Apostles.

Equals look awry on the ambition of their fellows. These two were vain in
their high request, and the other ten murmured at their presumption, Mat. 20.
24.
They were moved with indignation, says Saint Matthew. Mar. 10 41.
They began to be much displeased, says Saint Mark. But by this happy error
of these two Apostles, our Savior takes occasion to instruct them, and the
other ten, and in them all other Ministers belonging unto him, how far
different the pastoral care of his Church, is from the power which governs
in Commonwealths.

Hereupon the Son of God calls unto him all the twelve Apostles, saying,
Mat. 20 25.
Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion, etc. Mar. 10. 24.
Yet know that they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles, exercise
Lordships, etc. Luke 22 25.
The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordships, etc. (...). But it shall not be
so among you. This is a statute not to be repealed. This is spoken
authoritative and definitive, it is the determinate Law of a just authority. A
Canon ordained and irrevocably fixed by the wisdom of God. Confirmed by an
example above all argument. Mat. 20 28. Mark 10 45.
For the son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to Minister. Luke 22.
22.
I am among you as he that serves. And before this he had taught them, that
the Mark 10. 24.
Disciple is not above his Master. Joh. 13. 15, 16.
I have given you an example, that you shall do as I have done to you, verily,
verily, the servant is not greater then the Lord.

This ministry being thus performed in humility, and without worldly titles,
The Ministers shall be then exalted. Our blessed Savior in express words
following, says unto them, Luc. 22 29.
I appoint unto you a Kingdom (but adds) as my Father has appointed me. Now
his own Kingdom is spiritual, or as himself said unto Pilate, not of this
world. Let them then renounce temporal, and they shall have spiritual honor.
But some of the Clergy would (it seems) confound both Kingdoms, being
ambitious to inherit Glory in the Kingdom of Grace. I fear that there are
some Bishops do not know how sublime a virtue Christian humility is; how full
of Honor.

Every (...) must be (...), Luc. 22. 26.
Let the greatest be as the youngest, that is the way to be a right Elder, he
must be (...), Luc. 22. 27.
as he that serves, that is the way to be ministered unto. He must be (...)
Mat. 20 27. Mark. 10 44.
a servant, that he may be (...) a prime or chief. He must be (...) Mat. 20 26.
a Minister, that he may be (...) a great one. These antitheses our Savior
has placed in the text upon the former occasion.

From hence, may well be argued as a Corollary, to these undoubted premises,
that no Minister of the Gospel can lawfully assume, hold, or exercise that
power which by the Lord of the Gospel is inhibited to his Ministers. But our
Savior Jesus Christ (Lord and only head of his Church) has inhibited all
temporal Lordship, Magistracy and Dominion unto his servants, in the lot of
his Clergy. Therefore no Minister of this Gospel may hold or exercise
temporal Lordship or Dominion.

These words (...), etc. It shall not be so among you, do so streighten the
Bishops Miters, that they sit uneasy on their heads: to soften and as it were
to line them for their ease; the Bishops that are and would be all the papal,
and some of the Protestant do quilt a gentler sense into these words then can
bear analogy with the text. They search the original and pretend to find
another sense in our Saviors sentence.

The Text says that the Lords of the Gentiles are called gracious Lords and
(...) (not tyrants but) benefactors, a title fit for the best Princes. And yet
this Text (say they) forbids not unto Clergy men, the use and exercise of
worldly titles, power, offices, dignities, Commands, dominion Lordships, etc.
but the abuse of them: domineering and tyrannizing with them, not exercising
and holding. This they pretend to make firm out of the Greek word (...);
which they would have taken in the worst sense of exorbitant power, even for
Tyrannizing. So then, they would teach us, that, Lord it they may, and Lord it
they may not: Lord it they may with all pomp, state, power; Lord it they may
not, with pride, vanity, and oppression. But I shall easily prove this
interpretation to be inconstant with the scope and analogy of the Context.

Will they frame their argument from the verb (...) to be a Lord, or to rule?
or from the preposition (...), added and united thereunto? neither will serve.
And if the pomp of our Prelates cannot avoid the power of this text, they are
down for ever. Let me therefore scan it to the full.

First, (...) to be a Lord, or to have rule or Lordship, is never properly
taken in that ill sense which they would here create, as having unjust, and
oppressive power. It is derived from the usual and most frequent title of our
Lord and Savior, whom the holy Scripture so often saluteth (...) Lord. Here is
no shadow for Tyranny.

The true sense of (...) is authoritatem habens one that has authority: being
derived from (...) authority which is known to be approved and ordained by God
himself from whom all lawful authority is derived. Mark how well this word
is sensed through all Authors: Demosthenes calls the heads and chief of the
City (...). A law in force and principal authority is called by Aeschines
(...). Galen calls the chief and principal members of a man's body (...) yet
one member does not tyrannize over another. Gal. de usu partium.
Aristotle has Ethi. l. 6
(...) propria virtus, (that is) a virtue properly or principally so called.
(...) is one that is Lord or master of himself, not one that domineers over
himself. (...) Apoc. 1. 10.
The Lords day. (...) The Lords Supper. 1 Cor. 11. 21.
Saint Paul says that To. 1. 7
The law has dominion over a man so long as he lives, he does not mean that
the Law is a Tyrant, yet the word is (...) Romans 14. 9.
Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might Romans 14. 9.
be Lord both of the living and the dead: (...). From (...) Lord, comes (...)
Lordship, four times mentioned by the holy Apostles, but never taxed as a
power tending to Tyranny, but to be obeyed in them who duly are therewith
invested, as may be seen. (Ephesians. 1. 21. Coloss. 1. 16. 2 Pet. 2. 10. and Jude
8.) Clearly then in (...) there is no print of usurpation or of oppressive and
tyrannical power. If there be, we are then well warned to beware of our
Bishops, who not only own the title (...), but expressly plead for it, as
the Part 2. p. 104.
Bishop of Exeter in his late Episcopacy.

Secondly, (...) the very word (used by Saint Matthew and Saint Mark, in these
before alleged Texts) whereby our Savior forbids his Apostles, to exercise
Dominion or Lordship is a compounded word of two, (...) and (...). That is, to
rule as one that has authority. I may render it to be, or to behave ones self
((...) juxta, Secundum) according as one that has authority.

This preposition in words compounded has sometimes a signification of his
own, sometimes none at all, as in (...), etc. clearly it has no special
signification in this (...), much less a force so exegeticall as to draw the
lawful power of (...) into the exorbitancy of a Tyranny. That it has no force
here, is by this apparent, for that the speech of our Savior recorded by the
holy Ghost in S. Matthew and S. Mark by (...) and by (...) are rendered by the
same spirit in Saint Luke, (...) and (...) So that plainly you must not
pretend tyrannizing to be meant in the sense of one place, except you can find
it also in both, unless you will come to this, that he forbids tyranny in
one place, and worldly power in the other, which if you do, you grant the
question.

This is enough alone: yet for a further interpretation of (...), look in
Genesis 1. 28. where God gives unto man in the time of man's innocence, the
rule and dominion over all his creatures, even whilst they all were Genesis 1. 31.
very good. The name and word of power in that great Charter granted is (...).
Now the time of this power granted, the person to whom it is granted, the
creatures all good on whom it was to be exercised, and above all the goodness
of Amighty God who granted it, do exclude all imagination of a Tyrannical
power, and admit only of a fatherly mastership over the new creatures of God.

The same word is used again (Psalm. 110. 2.) and there applied to our blessed
Savior (...). Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. Aquila has (...)
Invalesce, prevail over thine enemies. Symmachus, (...), do thou correct or
instruct thine enemies.

If then the frequent and constant sense of both (...) and (...), be only to
have power and authority, civil, temporal, and ordinary dominion, and that
all such authority is forbidden them, how poor and weak is that evasion for
our Bishops, who would have this speech of our Savior taken in a forced sense
different from all these other places? and would forge a new meaning, as if our
Savior did not here forbid (...) but only (...), not a commanding
Lordlinesse, but a Tyrannous use of it; when as it is hereby evident, that
Christ having ordained the Aristocracy of twelve, did therein and in his
reprehension here take away those several benches of honor, and that proud
imparity of temporal power which our Bishops do swell withal.

That the former speeches of our Savior, do destroy the Lordlinesse of our
Prelates, let us confirm it with a farther consideration, which is thus. Our
Savior Christ being 1 Cor. 1. 24.
the wisdom of God, must be thought to fit and suit his answer to the question
and request made unto him by the two Apostles. But what Bishop in defense of
his usurped power, dares affirm that two such admirable Gal. 2. 9
Pillars, as James and John, should ask of such a Master iniquam dominationem,
a cruel dominion over their fellows, as if the meaning of their request were
thus. Master, give us two leave to tyrannize over the other ten! He had taught
them before, Mat. 5. 5.
Blessed are the meek, and Mat. 11. 29.
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart: Can it then be thought that
the beloved Disciple and his brother, shall ask of the master of all humility,
a Tyrannical power to oppress their partners? No man has such a heart of
Lead to think, yet there have not wanted foreheads of Brass to affirm so:
Certainly, in that Kingdom of Christ, by them as then supposed to be
temporal, they desired the honor to shine in civil dignity, and eminency of
power and authority, which (no question) they intended to have exercised with
all brotherly moderation, yet are they (and I wish our Bishops also were)
answered with his reprehension, first Mat. 20 22.
Ye know not what ye ask, next with his absolute denial and forbiddance,
(...), etc. It shall not be so among you.

Will the practice of Saint Paul, and the counsel of S. Peter serve for
comment to this text? Saint Paul says (...), 2 Cor. 1. 2, 4.
We Lord it not. S. Peter himself an Elder to other Elders, exhorts them to
feed the flock, (...) overseeing it: and that not by constraint, (...), 1 Pet.
5.
nor as being Lords.

Therefore my resolution stands clear upon this vote; That it may be declared
that true and right Episcopacy is incompatible and inconstant with the
authority of a secular jurisdiction.

They who give in their names to be laborers in Gods Vineyard must not go out
of the door, and think to return at pleasure: their whole time they have
vowed to the great Master of the Vineyard, and I find no wages promised but to
them who enter and continue there to the last hour. Luke 9. 62.
No man putting his hand to the plough and looking back, is fit for the
Kingdom of God.

Let therefore this inhibitory Statute against Bishops holding the secular
jurisdiction of temporal Lordships, stand (as it must stand, irrepealeable
(...). It shall not be so among you.

Thus by vouching a divine Statute that Bishops should not be Lords, I do
plainly involve my self in this conclusion, that Bishops are and ought to be.
Such is, such ever was my sense, so far am I from the Rooters.

God forbid that we should destroy the function of Episcopacy, but God grant we
may (with his Majesty's leave) un-Lord them from a domineering power: P. 347.
For to my sense, Synesius does very well deliver himself, (...). To conjoyne
the principality with the Priesthood, is to close together things inconsistent.
Ep. 57.
And again, (...). Why do you endeavor to join those things that are
separated by God?

In this opinion I may receive as little thanks from the Prelates, as I find
full satisfaction in my own bosom.

Section VIII.
UPon thursday May 21. I subjected my self to the obloquy I suffer. The Bill
for Abolition of our present Episcopacy was pressed into my hand by S. A. H.
(being then brought unto him by S. H. V. and O. C.)

He told me he was resolved that it should go in, but was earnestly urgent
that I would present it. The Bill did hardly stay in my hand so long as to make
a hasty perusal. Whilst I was overviewing it, Sir Edward Aiscough delivered in
a Petition out of Lincolnshire, which was seconded by M. Strode in such a sort
as that I had a fair invitement to issue forth the Bill then in my hand.
Hereupon I stood up and said this, which immediately after I reduced into
writing.

Mr. Speaker,
THe Gentleman that spoke last taking notice of the multitude of complaints and
complaynants against the present government of the Church, does somewhat seem
to wonder that we have no more pursuit ready against the persons offending.
Sir, the time is present, and the work is ready, perhaps beyond his expectation.

Sir, I am now the instrument, to present unto you, a very short (but a very
sharp) Bill: such as these times and their sad necessities have brought forth.
It speaks a free language, and makes a bold request. It is a purging Bill.

I give it you, as I take Physic, not for delight, but for a cure. A cure now,
the last and only cure, if (as I hope) all other remedies have first been
tried. Then -- Immedicabile vulnus, etc. But Cuncta prius tentanda --

I never was for Ruin, so long as I could hold any hope of Reforming. My hopes
that way, are even almost withered.

This Bill is entitled: An Act for the utter abolishing and taking away of all
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, and Commissaries, Deanes, Deans and
Chapters, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, Chanters, and Chanons, and all other
their Underofficers.

Sir, you see, their demerits have exposed them Publici odii piaculares
victimas. I am sorry they are so ill, I am more sorry that they will not be
content to be bettered, which I did hope would have been effected by our last
Bill.

When this Bill is perfected, I shall give a sad I unto it. And at the delivery
in thereof, I do now profess before hand, that if my former hopes of a full
Reformation may yet revive and prosper; I will again divide my sense upon this
Bill, and yield my shoulders to underprop the primitive, lawful, and just
Episcopacy: yet so, as that I will never be wanting with my utmost pains and
prayers to Root out all the undue adjuncts to it, and superstructures on it.

I beseech you read the Bill, and weigh well the work.
This is the nearest Act that ever I have done for Abolition: and if I suffer
for this, it is (...) altogether undeservedly: (...) my profession here is to
Root out all undue adjuncts and superstructures, but to underprop the Primitive
Episcopacy. And (as before I said) a little addition to this Bill might have
given us a good Reformation: Take away the present Dioceses, but state forth
the future, in the same Bill. The heads of which form shall anon be presented
to you.

Section IX.
THe next passage of this nature was upon the same Bill, whilst it stood (as
yet it stands) in Commitment to the whole House, Mr. Hide excellent well
discharging that Chair. And this was the first which was distasted abroad.
Many have importuned me for copies, but I have yet issued none out of my hand,
though it were spoken above seven months since.

21. Jun. 1641. M. Hide,
YOu have here a Bill, but such a one as is likely to be short-lived and not to
grow into a perfect Act, unless you please to add thereunto some very
important, very significant proviso's, such wherein we may have, or whereby we
may be assured in another Bill to have, a future government, in room of this
that goes out. I am confident the Lords will otherwise debate and dispute your
Bil quite out of doors.

Sir, we are all bound unto the goodness of his sacred Majesty (God preserve
him and his for it) none of all our Bills, none of our petitions (this
Parliament) have miscarried in his royal hand, but have been all completed
with the Royal assent.

But the Ambition of some of our Prelates, will not let them see how
incompatible two several contradistinguished functions are in one and the same
person: And therefore there is left you neither Root nor Branch of that so
good, so necessary a Bill, which lately we did send up; and consequently no
hope of such a Reformation, as we all do aim at.

What spark of hope can we then have, that this Bill, which strikes at Root
and Branch, both of their Seats of Justice there, and of their Episcopal
Chaires in the Church will pass (as it is, and without tender of some other
government in lieu of this) since the voices are still the same, which outed
your former Bill.

Truly (I profess) my hopes are sad in this: never had one Parliament so many
great affairs, never had any Parliament any affair so great as this which we
call the Bill of Episcopacy. Certain (Sir,) it is the great Hope, or the
exceeding Fear of every man here, and of all men abroad.

Many a time this Parliament I have heard (and not unjustly) that the business
then in hand was of as great consequence as any had been agitated within these
walls.

But in truth, (Sir,) to my apprehension, neither Star Chamber, nor High
Commission, nor Shipmoney, nor Straffords death, nor Canterburies life, are
(with me) equivalent, to the settling or unsetling of the whole national Church
of this Kingdom.

We cannot answer to God or man, if we do not use our best and most vigorous
endeavors for the peace of the Church we live in.

I should think this a happy day, if we could so temper this Bill, that it
might walk fairly on through the house of Lords unto the King.

To this end, (and that we may not lose all, by asking more then all,) I will
be bold to offer to your consideration, a provisionall addition or two. Such as
(I hope) may both satisfy us and secure our Bill, by fit amendments.

Here was a little interception, and then a long additionall to the Bill
presented in writing, for putting all Church Government into the hands of
Commissioners in every Diocese. I proceeded.

Sir, This was so at first, though afterward it was resolved that no Clergy man
but only Lay men should be Commissioners.
there is now offered unto you, a large addition to your Bill, longer (indeed)
by far, then the Bill it self. It seems to desire, that a proportional
number of Clergy and Laity, may be commissionated together, for all
ecclesiasticke jurisdiction, until a future government be resolved on.

I must confess, I am not satisfied with this way of Commissioners; it would
joy me much, and satisfy me more, if as one government goes out, I could see
another come in, and that without an Inter-regnum of Commissioners.

We are resolved that the present way of government is unsufferable, let it
go, but let us have another. This I conceive to be feisible, and that in fewer
lines, fewer words, then this additionall increment now offered to your Bill;
which in truth will make me like your Bill worse then I did before.

To this purpose, I do lay this ground: A Church government we must have. This
is (within these walls for ought I hear) on all hands agreed upon: and then
(by unavoydable necessity) this government must be distributed into parts, into
certain limits, circuits and divisions of places, wherein it is to be
exercised.

Unto this being granted, I do subjoyn three propositions, and they are these:

First, our present Dioceses are (for the most part) much too large, too vast;
I desire therefore, that the circuit for future Church government, may be
reduced to the common boundaries and limits of our several shires. The
disproportion from thence objected shall be easily answered.

2. Next, in every of these divisions, I desire that some choice, able, grave
Divines (twelve or more in a shire) may be by the Parliament appointed, to be
in the nature of an old primitive constant Presbytery among us.

Thirdly, and lastly, because all meetings of many must be disorderly, and the
rule of many cannot be without confusion, unless there be one to guide and to
direct the rest. I shall desire that in every shire, over every Presbytery, we
may establish one President.

A President (I say) more to satisfy others then my self. The name of Bishop
disturbs not me; let him be a Bishop, or an Over-seer, or a President, or a
Moderator, or a Super-intendent, or a Ruling-elder; call him what you will, so
as you provide me one in every shire, over every Presbytery, to guide and to
direct the rest.

The different sense (to be easily observed) and I hope not past our strength
to be reconciled, in this House, concerning our present Church Government is
twofold. One is for Ruin thereof, the other for Reforming: both are nearer
together in heart (I persuade my self) then we are yet aware of. The nearer
the better, and more easy composure both of our own selves here, and of the
Churches peace throughout the Land abroad. God send that we may find the way to
peace.

If the right form of primitive Episcopacy were truly stated forth unto us, it
would (questionless) take and lead our judgments along therewith.

This Bishop was not so much a Lord as a Father over his charge, ruling with
love and tender bowels: whosoever did institute this Episcopacy, sure I am this
Bishop has and ever had, a precedence before, and a presidency over others of
his own order.

He was one man chosen out among the rest, and by the rest put into a several
degree (not into a distinct superior Order) above the rest: (...) ad
Episcopandum to oversee the rest: and this only in matters spiritual, nothing
at all in affairs temporal, or secular employments.

If this Bishop were not of Apostolical institution yet it is undeniable that
he was of Apostolical permission. For, of and in the Apostolical times all
stories, all Fathers, all ages have a greed, that such Bishops there were.

His rule indeed was with consent of his Senate, his Presbytery: Direction was
his, Coercion was still their own.

He had (...), yea and (...), both the first place of sitting, and the chiefest
part of power: I say the chiefest part, I do not say, the greatest part of
power. The power, it was more eminent in him, but it was virtually residing and
domesticant in the plurality of his Assessors.

These Assessors were the Presbyters, the Elders of the Church, of whom holy
Ignatius (a Father so primitive, that he was Disciple to Saint John the
Apostle, and by some thought to be that very child (whilst he was a child) whom
our blessed Savior took and set before his disciples, whereof you read in
three of the Evangelists. Mat. 18. 2.
This Ignatius (I say) in his Epistle to the Trallians does call these Elders,
Mar. 9. 26
(...), Luke 9. 27
The Counselors and coassessors of the Bishop.

Here was in this age (and yet this father died a Bishop and a martyr before
the last Apostle went to Heaven) here was a fellowship, If Simon Zelotes were
the last as some affirm.
yet such a fellowship as destroyed not presidency: and in another Epistle
(that to the Magnesians) you have such a presidency as does admit also of a
fellowship. The words are, (...). The Bishop being President (the very name and
office there) as in the place of God, and the Presbyters as a Senate of
Apostles.

I forbear to dilate upon this Episcopacy. But I will be bold Ponere ab oculos
to set him before your eyes. I will give him you, even by way of demonstration.

M. Hide, your self are now in this great Committee, M. Speaker is in the
house, The Bishop of our Congregation.

You are in your selves but fellow members of the same house with us, returned
hither (as we also are) to sit on these benches with us: until by our election
and by common suffrage you are Incathedrated: then you have (and it is fit and
necessary that you should have) a precedence before us, and a Presidency over
us.

Notwithstanding this, you are not diversified into a several distinct order
from us (you must not swell with that conceit) you are still the same member of
the same house you were, though raised to a painful and a careful degree
among us, and above us.

This Bishop had (as your self have here) potestatem directivam, but not
Correctivam. Correction in our house does dwell in the General Vote.

You know the power you have is limited, and circumscribed by them who gave
it; you are no Dictator to prescribe us our Laws; but must gather our Votes:
and then your pronouncing does fix our (not your own single) Orders.

Neither you here, (nor Mr. Speaker in the House) can Degrade any one of us
from these Seats, nor can you silence us in the due liberty of our Speech.

Truly (Sir) as yet advised, I do heartily wish we had in every Shire of
England, a Bishop such and so regulated for Church Government within that
Sphere, as Mr. Speaker is bounded in and limited, by the rules and cancels of
this House.

That were (indeed) a well tempered and a blessed Reformation, whereby our
times might be approximant, and conformant to the Apostolical and pure
primitive Church.

But this (I fear) is magis optandum quam sperandum: yet it being the cause of
God, who can then despair?

This happiness (I mean living under Episcopal Presidency, not under a
domineering Prelacy) this is too high above our reach, yet strong prayers, and
hearty endeavors may pull the blessing down upon us: In the mean time woe is
our Churches portion, for our Bishop President is lost, and grown a stranger to
us, and in his room is crept in and stepped up a Lordly Prelate made proud with
pomp and ease, who neglecting the best part of his office in Gods Vineyard,
instead of supporting the weak, and binding up the broken, forrageth the
Vines, and drives away other laborers. The Vines indeed have both Grapes and
Leaves, and Religious acts both substance and circumstance, but the Gardener is
much too blame, who gives more charge to the workmen of the leaves then of the
fruit.

This rough enforcement (of late) to that which is not the better part: is an
Episcopacy that turns all our melody into a Threnody: This makes many poor,
pious, Christian souls to sing the songs of Sion in a strange Land. Ps. 137.
3. and 4. ^


This Bishop will have no Assessors (or if any, so formally admitted, and so
awed, as good have none) no Senate, no Consultation, no Presbytery or common
Suffrage: but elates himself up into usurped titles, and incompatible power,
and sublimes ti self by assuming a soleship both in Orders and in Censures.

Religion and reason, and Primitive example are all loud against this
Episcopacy.

This too elate subliming of one can not stand without a too mean demission (I
may say debasing) of many other of the same order. Nay this Bishop not content
with Ecclesiastic pride alone, will swell also, with ambition and Offices
secular.

Truly (Sir) you have done exceeding well to Vote away this Bishop; for of this
Bishop (and of this alone) I must understand the Vote you have passed, until I
be better instructed: for your Vote is against the present Episcopacy, and for
the present: you can hardly find any other Episcopacy but this: an authority
how ever by some of them better exercised, yet too solely entrusted to them all.

Away then with this Lordly domineerer who plays the Monarch (perhaps the
Tyrant) in a Diocese: of him it is of whom I read, Episcopalis dignitas
papalem fastum redolet. This kind of Episcopacy it smells rank of the Papacy:
nor shall you ever be able, utterly and absolutely to extirpate Popery, unless
you root out this soleship of Episcopacy.

To conclude in short and plain English, I am for abolishing of our present
Episcopacy. Both Diocesses and Diocesan as now they are. But I am withal (at
the same time) for restoration of the pure Primitive Episcopal Presidency.
Cut off the usurped adjuncts of our present Episcopacy, reduce the ancient
Episcopacy, such as it was, in puris spiritualibus. Both may be done with the
same hand, and I think in a shorter Bill then is offered now by way of
addition.

Down then with our Prelaticall Hierarchy, or Hierarchicall Prelacy (such as
now we have) most of it consisting in temporal adjuncts only; the Diana and
the Idol of proud and lazy Churchmen. This do, but ea lege, on this
condition, that with the same hand, in the same Bill, we do gently raise
again (even from under the ruins of that Babel) such an Episcopacy, such a
Presidency, as is venerable in its antiquity and purity, and most behoovefull
for the peace of our Christendom.

This is the way of Reforming: and thus by yielding to the present storm, and
throwing that overboard which is adventitious, borrowed, and undue; Peace may
be brought home unto our Church again, the best of that building and the truth
of ancient Episcopacy may be preserved: otherwise we hazard all.

This would be glorious for us and for our Religion: and the glory thereof will
be the greater, because it redounds unto the God of glory.

My motion is, that those sheets last presented to you, may be laid by, and
that we may proceed to reduce again the old original Episcopacy.

This being thus delivered, and upon report being mis-resented abroad, a
stranger came to me the next day, and with much show of love and sorrow, told
me, that I had lost (by this speech) the prayers of thousands in the City. Very
many others have since been with me to try my temper, but I have found in them
all (all that are absolutely Anti-Episcopall) so much more of entreaty then of
argument, that indeed they have proved themselves as Bishops unto me, for I
have received Confirmation from them.

Section X.
SInce the late Recesse, some endeavors of mine have been reported more
distastive then before: insomuch as that, a lying generation gave it forth,
some that I was expelled the house, others that I was in the Tower, for what I
had spoken.

The first passage was next morning after our meeting, upon occasion then
offered by way of complaint, for not obeying the late Order of the 8 of
September. The complaint came from some Parishioners of Criplegate. And thus I
did on the sudden then deliver my self, which presently I reduced into writing.

21 October. 1641. M. Speaker,
It is very true (as is instanced unto you) that your late order and
declaration of the 8 and 9 of September, are much debated and disputed abroad:
perhaps it may be a good occasion for us to re-dispute them here.

The intent of your Order, to me, seems doubtful, and therefore I am bold, for
my own instruction, humbly to propound two quaeres.

1. How far an Order of this House is binding?

2. Whether this particular Order be continuant or expired?

Your Orders (I am out of doubt) are powerful, if they be grounded upon the
laws of the Land. Upon that warranty, we may by an Order, enforce any thing
that is undoubtedly so grounded: and by the same rule we may abrogate
whatsoever is introduced contrary to the undoubted foundation of our Laws.

But Sir, this Order is of another nature, another temper: especially in one
part of it. Of which (in particular) at some other time.

Sir, There want not some abroad, men of birth, quality, and Fortunes; such as
know the strength of our Votes here as well as some of us (I speak my own
infirmities) men of the best worth, and of good affyance in us, and no way
obnoxious to us: They know they sent us hither as their Trustees, to make and
unmake Laws. They know they did not send us hither to rule and govern them by
arbitrary, revocable and disputable Orders: especially in Religion: No time is
fit for that: and this time as unfit as any. I desire to be instructed herein.

M. Speaker, in the second place, there is a question whether this Order
(whereupon your present complaint is grounded) be permanent and binding, or
else expired, and by our selves deserted.

I observe, that your Order being made 8. September, in hope then of
concurrence therein by the Lords; that failing, you did issue forth your last
resolution by way of declaration 9. September, wherein thus you express your
self. -- That it may well be hoped, when both Houses shall meet again, that
the good propositions and preparations in the House of Commons, for preventing
the like grievances, and reforming the disorders and abuses in matter of
Religion, may be brought to perfection: wherefore you do expect that the
commons of this Realm do in the mean time -- (what? obey and perform your
Order made the day before? no such thing: but in the mean time) -- quietly
attend the Reformation intended.

These are your words, and this my doubt upon them: whether by these words you
have not superseded your own Order. Sure I am, the words do bear this sense,
and good men may think and hope it was your meaning.

My humble motion therefore is this: I beseech you to declare, that upon this
our Re-convention, your order of the eighth of September is out of date: And
that the Commons of England must (as you say) quietly attend the Reformation
intended, which certainly is intended to be perfected up into Acts of
Parliament. And in the mean time that they must patiently endure the present
Laws, until you can make new, or mend the old.

Section XI.
THe promise made (in my last) has not been performed in the House, nor is
now like to be. The reason is, there is now no probability that we shall debate
the validity of our order of the eighth of September. A day indeed (Saturday
the sixth of November) was by order fixed for that theme, but other affairs
diverted it. To discharge my promise aforesaid, I was then ready with freedom
to have unbosomed my self, as in this following discourse: but that order
being expired and not revived, though moved for; I ask pardon if I do
interpose here that which was prepared for that day. Excuse me Reader if I be
willing fully to expose my self to the utmost: The truth of my heart desires
some friendly help to set me right, if I be in any error. I am sorry that I am
prevented of publishing this in the house.

Master Speaker.
ME thinks I am now going to walk upon the ridge of a house, a dangerous
praecipice on either hand. On the one side I must take heed that I speak
neither more nor less then the inward dictate of my own conscience: on the
other hand I shall be afraid to presume above your better judgments. My path
is narrow: I must look to my footing: Dixi custodiam vias meas, Psa. 38. 1.
etc. I said I will look to my ways that I offend not in my tongue. Thus I
preface, because I foreknow that I shall speak to the dislike of some worthy
members of this honorable House.

Sir: Two questions are before us: First in general, how far an order of
this House is binding deforis, not upon our own members here, but upon the
people, the Kings subject abroad. Secondly, the validity and invalidity of your
particular order of the eighth, and declaration of the ninth of September last.

For the first I am clear in this opinion, that we may enforce any thing that
is undoubtedly grounded upon the law of the land: Show me that foundation, and
I will concur with you in any resolution. We may also declare against any
thing that is introduced contrary to our laws. Farther then this I know no
way, unless it be by Bill: and then I know no limitation, no bound. Thus in
brief for the general, I come now to your particular order.

Master Speaker, I shall be afraid to arraigne your orders: I have already
been controlled, (not for doing so, but as if I had done so) yet (Sir) I have
often heard it in this House, that we are masters of our own orders: and then
(I think) we may in this place arraigne them, that is, question them, try
them, approve, alter, reject, or condemn them. Was not our Protestation more
sacred then an Order? yet that was revised, and (to stop some objections) new
senced by us. And I take it lawful in this place to arraigne (if that be the
word) even an act of Parliament, and then (a fortiori) an order of this House.

Surely (Sir) I shall speak reverently of all your Orders when I am abroad: I
have done so of this. I am resolved that my obedience shall therein be found
good, although my particular reason be rebellant to your conclusions. This is
my duty abroad: but here in this House, within these walls, freedom is my
inheritance, and give me leave (I pray) at this time to use a part of my
birthright.

The seasonablenesse, and the equity of your order, both are controverted. You
all know this is a dangerous time to make any determinations in matter of
Religion: whether it be in the doctrinall, or in the practical part of Gods
worship. Men are (now a days) many of them more wise, and some of them more
wilful then in former times. The use and caution is this: Let us take care
that what we do, we do with due and full authority, I would have nothing new
(in this kind) but by authority of the three Estates: and even then let us be
wary that we suit the times with applications proper and seasonable.

Hear me with patience, and refute me with reason. Your command is, that all
corporal bowing at the Name Jesus -- be henceforth forborne.

I have often wished that we might decline these dogmaticall resolutions in
Divinity: I say it again and again, that we are not Idonei and competentes
judices in doctrinall determinations: The theme we are now upon is a sad
point, I pray consider severely on it.

You know there is Acts 4. 12.
no other Name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved. You know
that this is Phil. 2. 9.
a Name above every name. Cantic. 1. 3
Oleum effusum nomen ejus, it is the Carroll of his own Spouse. This Name is by
a Father styled Mel in ore, melos in aure, jubilum in cord. This, it is the
sweetest and the fullest of comfort of all the Names and Attributes of God, God
my Savior. If Christ were not our JESUS, Heaven were then our envy, which is
now our blessed hope.

And must I Sir, hereafter do no exterior reverence, none at all, to God my
Savior, at the mention of his saving Name Jesus? why Sir, not to do it, to
omit it, and to leave it undone, it is questionable; it is controvertible: it
is at least a moote point in divinity. But to deny it, to forbid it to be done:
take heed (sir) God will never own you, if you forbid his honor. Truly (Sir)
it horrors me to think of this.

For my part, I do humbly ask pardon of this House, and thereupon I take leave
and liberty to give you my resolute resolution. I may, I must, I will do
bodily reverence unto my Savior, and that upon occasion taken at the mention
of his saving Name JESUS. And if I should do it also as often as the Name of
God, or Jehovah, or Christ is named in our solemn devotions, I do not know
any argument in Divinity to control me.

M. Speaker, I shall never be frighted from this, with that fond, shallow
argument: Oh you make an Idol of a Name. I beseech you Sir, paint me a voice,
make a sound visible if you can: when you have taught mine ears to see, and
mine eyes to hear, I may then perhaps understand this subtle argument. In the
mean time reduce this dainty species of new Idolatry, under its proper head,
(the second Commandment) if you can. And if I find it there, I will fly from
it ultra Sauromatas any whither with you.

The words are there, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, or any
likeness of any thing (ullius rei) that is in Heaven -- or in Earth -- Can you
here find the Name of God in this description of Idolizing? Surely sir, my
Savior is neither (...) nor (...) of any thing there forbidden, nor (...)
neither Sculptile, nor Simulachrum, nor Idolum. All these are here, and none
but these, and every of these does signify Spectrum aliquod some visible
object. And must do so, for to speak properly, an Idol invisible, is but
imaginary Non sense. When you can bring the object of one sense, to fall under
the notion and dishinguishment of another sense; so that the eye may as well
see a Name, or sound, as the ear can hear it: then a name may be the object
of Idolatry: till then this argument will be too sublime for my understanding.

God was neither in the strong and mighty Wind, 1 Kin. 19 12.
nor in the Earthquake: yet these hardly (if possibly) can be figured, but a
still small voice, this certainly is beyond the curious Art of man to express,
and consequently free from all possible peril of Idolatry. And therefore thus
in Deuteronomy God does character himself. Deuteronomy. 4. 12.
Ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude, only ye heard a
voice. As if he should say, I know you prone unto Idolatry: but now commit
Idolatry to a voice, to a sound, to a name if you can.

I am grieved to see that wretched, unlearned, and ungodly Pamphlet ascribed to
Master Burton, with that daring impious title Jesu-worship confuted: where by
way of a Scornful Sarcasme, he is not afraid (as with a nickname) to call
Christians Jesu-worshippers.

I return (M. Speaker) this (as I said) is a sad point in Divinity, to forbid
exterior worship unto God. Was it ever heard before, that any men of any
Religion, in any age, did ever cut short and abridge any worship, upon any
occasion to their God? Take heed sir, and let us all take heed whither we are
going. If Christ be JESUS, if JESUS be God, all reverence (exterior as well as
interior) is too little for him. I hope we are not going up the backstaires to
Socinianisme.

In a word, certainly sir, I shall never obey your Order, so long as I have a
hand to lift up to Heaven, so long as I have an eye to lift up to Heaven. For
these are corporal bowings, and my Savior shall have them at his Name JESUS.

Yet sir, before I end, give me leave (I beseech you) to take off that, which,
by mistake may else stick still upon me. I never liked the Bishoply injuctions
in the late novell practices, nor the severe Inquisition upon the bare omission
of this posture. The Bishops did rigorously exact it: upon their own heads the
crime of that enforcement lies. But (I beseech you) let not us be guilty in the
other extreme. Truly to my sense it will savor less of Piety, and more of
Tyranny.

In the last place, consider (I pray) that it is a point dogmaticall, not yet
fully resolved by Divines; let us then be wary in it. And let this (with many
other points) be referred to a National Synod. For one we must have, or else we
shall break our Religion into a thousand pieces.

For this present, my motion is (as formerly) that this Order be superseded, by
declaring to the Commons (as your words in the Order are) that they do quietly
attend the Reformation intended, and that in the mean time they do (as they
ought) obey the Laws that are.

Section XII.
ON Friday the 22 October. some debate there was upon a new short Bill for taking
away the Bishops Votes in Parliament. It was languaged that they ought not to
intromit themselves into secular jurisdictions; which I received willingly. For
if it be found inexpedient, certainly they ought not: if it be made unlawful
de futuro, they ought not: if it be inconsistent with their Function, still
they ought not; as was then argued by a worthy member of the House. M. S. S.


But when it was presently urged by a Gentleman my neighbor there, that unto
the words ought not, should be subjoyned, and that it is inconsistent with
their function, which was pressed and urged by a general voucher of Scripture,
Fathers, and Councels: Yet I know that Gentleman will not in matter of opinion,
scarce in an Historical point, allow me proof of what I can prove out of the
two latter. Occasionally then, I thus expressed my self.

M. Speaker,
HOwever I am resolved in my private opinion of the inexpediency and
unlawfulness for Clergy men to hold secular jurisdiction (Duo gladii non sunt
in unum conflandi and conferruminandi) yet sir, my inward resolution does not
presently make me a Judge in a Dogmaticall point, nor do I know that this
place does enable me with that capacity: if it be my private opinion, yet I
desire not to bind the judgment of the Land herein by an act of Parliament,
although determining to my own sense.

Certainly sir, this point of inconsistency will lead this house (much more
that of the Lords, where the Bishops are) into a debate which may more safely
and more prudently be avoided. I have formerly, and again I pray you, that we
may not engage our selves into the determination of doctrinall points in
Divinity, perhaps it is not proper for us; and for my part, I do think we are
not herein Idonei and compet^ntes judices.

Was it ever heard or seen, that a set of Laymen, Gentlemen, Soldiers,
Lawyers, Merchants; all professions admitted, but the profession of professions
for this work, Divines alone excluded, that we should determine upon
doctrinall points in Divinity? Theology is not so low, so facile a trade. Let
us maintain the doctrines that are established; to declare new, is not fit for
our assembly. And for my part, I do think I have found daily cause to wish
these resolutions recommended unto other resolvers.

M. Speaker, Divines are herein (in dogmatick resolutions of Religion)
concerned as much, as well as we: They are a considerable party, and ought not
to be bound up un-heard. It was a prevailing argument with me against the late
Canons, that they could not bind us of the Laity, being a distinct several
body, no way involved in their Votes. Our plea was that we neither had a
decisive voice to determine with them; not a deliberative voice to consult with
them: nor an elective voice, in choice of their persons, to make them our
Trustees to determine for us. Nor lastly, (as at least we should have) a
susceptive voice, in a body of our own to receive their resolutions, and of our
selves to submit unto them. These things are of a nature fit to be discussed by
grave Divines, in a free Synod of Divines, to be chosen by Divines. In the mean
time, let not us be guilty of the same which we have condemned in them: we
ought not to pay injury with wrong. They cannot be bound where they are no way
parties: For it is a rule in Nature, Reason, and Religion, Quod omnes tangit,
ab omnibus tractari debet. I am so good a friend to your Bill, that for the
better expediting thereof, I desire the word Inconsistant may not stand therein.

Section XIII.
HAvind before professed that we are incompetent resolvers of doubtful points
in doctrine; and finding how much of our precious time, every motion, petition,
and occasional passage in Religion did take up, I thought it not inconvenient,
next day to renew my motion for a Synod.

Saturday 23 October. Mr. Speaker.
YOu have entered an Order, that nothing be treated of but affairs of general
concernement: I will present you one as general, as universal as any can be.

The sad miseries of our distracted Church, and consequently the hazard of Gods
true Religion with us, does even cut my very heart with grief and fear.

If we let forth the government into a loose liberty for all religions, we
shall have none. Libertinisme will beget Atheism. And truly (Sir) at present
between Papisme on the one hand, and Brownisme on the other, Narrow is the
way, and few there be do find it, to right good Protestantisme.

Many mournful sad complaints I have of late received from Ministers the
ablest, and every way the worthiest that I know. I could willingly name you
two, Mr. Reading.
one at Dover, the other at Cranebroke in Kent: Mr. Abbot:
Men upon whose merit, let my credit stand or fall in this house. He that has
preached least of these, has preached several thousands of excellent Sermons
to his people.

These are in no better condition then many other deserving men, who do
generally complain with grief of hearts, to see their now infected sheep,
after long pastoral vigilance, and faithful ministry, to run and straggle
from them more in these last ten months, then in twenty years before.

Give us (I beseech you, give us) a remedy, a speedy remedy to this growing
evil: or else our scholars are like to turn Papist, Arminian, or Socinian:
and all the ignorant party will either turn Atheist, or else (which is the
next degree) make to themselves a Religion of their own, as themselves best
please.

Sir: we may sit here (for ought I see) and debate our selves, and the world
abroad into more and more distances of opinion: we are not likely to work our
selves (much less others) into unity.

What is then to be thought on? (Sir) the usual, ancient, the best, and (I
think) the only way of cure is by a Council. A free, learned, grave, religious
Synod.

There is in some hand of this House (and long has been) a Bill for a
National Synod ready drawn. S. R. H.
With it we are curable; without it, I look for no peace.

My humble motion is this in a word. If you love the peace of our Jerusalem;
command forth that Bill to be forthwith read: or if that Bill be not to be had,
appoint a Committee to draw up another.

This is my motion, and it is founded in a hope of piety and peace.

Section XIV.
UPon occasion of a Remonstrance 19 November. wherein diverse passages then were,
concerning Religion and the Church Government, and some in particular (as I
conceived) very aspersive to our Religion in the solemn practice of it by our
public Liturgy: This charge (upon this occasion) was afterward expunged the
Declaration.
charging it (in hypothesi) with vain repetition, and with savor of
Superstition: I did humbly move, that some of that Committee who framed up that
Remonstrance for us, would please to assign what those vain Repetitions are
in our Liturgy, and what passages of Superstition.

Nothing was at all said (as I remember) to that point of Superstition. But at
length a Gentleman did adventure, to name that which he seemed to think to be
vain Repetition.

He said that the Lords Prayer is eight, nine or ten times repeated. I did
(with leave of the House) reply that such repetition toties quoties, how often
soever was (if heart and words did go together) far from vain. That (in my
book) the Lords Prayer was but twice in the whole morning Service, unless the
additionals of Baptism, Churching, Communion, Burial, etc. did occur. That
then in every several act of Divine Service it was once, and but once
repeated, as the high compleature of all devout expressions: That this
repetition in it self was warrantable, as by our Saviors example, who
(although he had not the Spirit by measure) yet in the Garden he prayed three
times using the same words. Jo. 3. 34.
The further debate of this was ofted to the next day, Mat. 26. 44.
and then it did grow toward a question, whether all exceptions against the
Liturgy should be totally laid by, or further debated. I did not hold our
selves the proper determinators of this point. I did think that from hence
occasion might again be taken inductive to renew my motion for a free
National Synod; which I desired to enforce the best I could: especially there
being now obtained a general promise of a Synod in this very part of that
Declaration or Remonstrance.

Hereupon thus I adventured. A copy whereof being stolen from me issued lately
forth, both unknown to me and misprinted also: which has been entertained
abroad both with Applause and Exception.

Saturday. November. 20. M. Speaker,
THe question is whether these clauses, concerning some pretended erroneous
passages in our Liturgy shall be laid by or not. I am of opinion to decline
them here: but not to bury them in a perpetual silence.

In this very period you give us (in general terms) a promise of a National
Synod: I do still wish the presency thereof: it being (to my understanding)
the only proper cure and remedy for all our Church-distractions: and may be
proved (if proof be needful) to have been practiced in the book of God. Acts
1.


This promised Synod is too far off: Acts 6.
let me have better assurance then a promise, Acts 15.
which that I may obtain, I will be bold to give you some reasons to induce
that assembly, and to speed it also.

M. Speaker, Much has been said, and something attempted to be done to
regulate the exterior part of our Religion: but Sir, we bleed inwardly. Much
endeavor has been to amend the deformed forms we were in, and to new govern
the government.

Yet Sir, this is but the Leaves of good Religion, fit (I confess)
notwithstanding, to be taken care of, for beauty and for ornament. Nay some
Leaves are fit and necessary to be preserved for shadow and for shelter to the
blossoms and the fruit.

The fruit of all is good life: which you must never expect to see, unless the
blossoms be pure and good, that is, unless your doctrines be sound and true.

Sir, sir, I speak it with full grief of heart, whilst we are thus long
proyning and composing of the leaves, or rather whilst some would pluck all
leaves away, our blossoms are blasted. And whilst we sit here in cure of
government and ceremonials, we are poisoned in our doctrinals. And at whose
door will the guilt and sin of all this lie?

Qui non vetat peccare, Seneca.
cum potest, jubet. It is true, that this mischief grows not by our consent:
and yet I know not by what unhappy fate, there is at present, such an
all-daring liberty, such a lewd licentiousness, for all men's venting their
several senses (senseless senses) in matter of Religion, as never was in any
age, in any Nation, until this Parliament was met together.

Sir, It belongs to us, to take heed that our countenance (the countenance of
this honorable House) be not prostituted to sinister ends by bold offenders.
If it be in our power to give a remedy, a timely and a seasonable remedy to
these great and growing evils, and that we (being also put in mind) shall
neglect to do it, we then do pluck then sins upon our own heads, Alienum qui
fert scelus, Sen.
facit suum.

Shall I be bold to give you a very few instances? one for a hundred, wherewith
our Pulpits, and our Presses do groan?

M. Speaker, There is a certain, newborn, Independency; Are we Sir, for this
independent way? Nay (Sir) are we for the elder brother of it, the
Presbyteriall form? I have not yet heard any one Gentleman within these walls
stand up and assert his thoughts here for either of these ways: and yet (Sir)
we are made the Patrons, and Protectors of these so different, so repugnant
Innovations: witness the several dedications to us.

Nay both these ways, together with the Episcopal, come all rushing in upon
us, every one pretending a forehead of Divinity.

1. Episcopacy says it is by divine right; and certainly Sir, it comes much
nearer to its claym then any other.

2. Presbytery, that says it is by Divine right.

3. Nay, this illegitimate thing: this newborn Independency, that dares to say
it is by Divine right also.

Thus the Church of England (not long since the glory of the Reformed Religion)
is miserably torn and distracted. You can hardly now say, which is the Church
of England. Whither shall we turn for cure?

Articles they are contested against: your public solemn Liturgy that is
detested: Protestation protested denies the Church of England to have the 3.
marks of a true Church.
And which is more then both these, the three essential, proper, and only
Marks of a true Church, they are protested against: what Religion would you
persuade me to? where may I find, and know, and see, and read the Religion you
profess? I beseech you (Sir) help me an answer to the Papist.

Nay Sir, the Papist herein has assistance even among ourselves, and does get
the tongue of some men whose hearts are far from him. For at one of your
Committees, I heard it publicly asserted, by one of that Committee, that some
of our Articles, do contain some things contrary to holy Scripture.

Speaker, Sunday is a Sabbath: Sunday is no Sabbath: Both true, both untrue, in
several acceptance, and the knot (I think) too hard for our Teeth. Shall I
give you an easier instance?

Sir, I am confident you cannot so state this easy question to pass among us,
but that there will be many contradicentes.

Peter is now newly denied to be the Apostles. Our Creed, the holy Apostles
Creed, is now disputed, denied, inverted and exploded, The Ministers in their
Remonstrance do complain that the Creed is often rehearsed; but they blotted
out (what they had put in) that it is over-short, and (in one place)
dangerously obscure.
by some who would be thought the best Christian among us. I started with
wonder, and with anger to hear a bold Mechanike tell me that my Creed is not
my Creed. He wondered at my wonder and said, I hope, your worship is too wise to
believe that which you call your Creed.

O Deus bone in quae tempora reservasti nos! Polycar.
Thus (...). Arist.
One absurdity leads in a thousand, and when you are down the Hill of error,
there is no bottom, but in Hell, and that is bottomless too.

against our public Liturgy, though hallowed with the blood of some of the
first composers thereof. And surely Sir, some parts of it may be very well
corrected. But the clamors now go very high. Impudence or ignorance is now
grown so frontlesse, that it is loudly expected by many that you should utterly
abrogate all forms of public worship; As for them who admit a form to be
lawful, yet do declaime against authority for commanding and imposing the use
of it, it is to me a wonder and absurdity, that a just authority may not bind
that to be done by a law, which is (as they confess) lawful in it self both
to have and use.
and at least if you have a short form, yet not to impose the use of it.
Extirpation of Episcopacy, that hope is already swallowed, and now the same men
are as greedy for abolition of the Liturgy: that so the Church of England in
her public prayers, In the false copy abroad, instead of may hereafter, the
silly Transcriber put in Nay, her offerture, which has been some displeasure
to me.
may hereafter turn a babbler at all adventure. A brainlesse, stupid, and an
ignorant conceit of some.

M. Speaker, The wisdom of this House will (I am confident) never sink so
low: never fall into such a deliquium of judgment and of piety. When you do, I
shall humbly submit my self: -- unto the stake and faggot (I mean) for
certainly (Sir) I shall then be a Parliament heretic.

Thus much, for a taste of that, whereof there is too much abroad, Judge. 5. 15.
For the divisions of Ruben, there are great thoughts of heart abroad.

(Sir) Thus are we engaged into sad points of Divinity, and with the favor of
that Gentleman, who did last time disgust it, I must again propound my
doubtful quaere, to be resolved by the wisdom of this House: whether we be
Idonei and competentes judices in doctrinall resolutions?

In my opinion we are not. Let us maintain the Doctrine established in the
Church of England, it will be neither safety nor wisdom, for us to determine
new.

(Sir) I do again repeat and avow my former words: And do confidently affirm,
that it was never seen, nor known in any age, in any Nation throughout the
whole world, that a set of Laymen, Gentlemen, Soldiers, Lawyers of both
gowns, Physicians, Merchants, Citizens, all professions admitted, or at least
admittable, but the professors of Religion alone excluded, that we should
determine upon doctrines in Divinity.

Shall the Clergy hold different doctrines from us? or shall our determinations
bind them also? They are a considerable body in this Kingdom; they are
(herein surely) concerned as much as we: and ought not to be bound up unheard,
and unpartied.

Farther (Sir) if Clergy men, among us be thought fit for no other then for
spiritual employment; How shall we answer it to God and to a good conscience,
if we shut them out from that which we our selves pretend to be their only and
their proper work?

Mr. Speaker, We cannot brag of an unerring spirit: infallibility is no more
tied to your Chair, then it is unto the Popes. And if I may speak Truth, as I
love truth with clearness, and with plainness, I do here ingenuously profess
unto you, that I shall not acquiesse, and sit down upon the doctrinall
resolutions of this House: unless it be where my own Genius does lead and
prompt me to the same conclusions.

Mr. Speaker, We are here convened by his Majesty's Writ to treat Super arduis
negotiis regni and Ecclesiae, I beseech you let us not turn negotia Ecclesiae
into dogmata fidei. There is a great difference in objecto between the Agends
and the Credends of a Christian. Let us so take care to settle the government,
that we do not unsettle the doctrines.

The Short close of all with a motion is but this: we are poisoned in many
points of doctrine: And I know no Antidote, no Recipe for cure but one: a well
chosen and well tempered National Synod, and Gods blessing thereon: this may
cure us: without this (in my poor opinion) England is like to turn it self
into a great Amsterdam. And unless this Council be very speedy, the disease
will be above the cure.

Therefore, that we may have a full fruition of what is here but promised: I
do humbly move that you will command forth the Bill for a National Synod, to
be read the next morning. I saw the Bill above five months since in the hand
of a worthy member of this House. If that Bill be not to be had, then my humble
motion is (as formerly) that you would name a Committee to draw up another.

This being once resolved, I would then desire that all motions of Religion,
(this about the Liturgy especially) may be transferred thither, and you will
find it to be the way of peace and unity among us here.

I might have added in due place above, a mention of (1) frequent schismatic
conventicles. (2) That Taylers, Shoomakers, Braziers, Feltmakers, do climb our
public Pulpits. (3) That several odd irregular fasts have been held, for
partial venting of private flatteries of some; slanders of other members of
this House. (4) That the distinction of Clergy and Laity is popish and
Antichristian, and ought no longer to remain. (5) That the Lords Prayer was
not taught us to be used. (6) That no National Church can be a true Church of
God. (7) That the visible Church of Antichrist did make the King Head of the
Church. (8) That supreme power in Church affairs, is in every several
Congregation. (9) That a Presbytery without a Bishop was in the world before it
was at Geneva. (10) That it is a heinous sin to be present when prayers are
read out of a book. (11) That to communicate in presence of a profane person,
is to partake of his profaneness. (12) That Christ's kingdom has been a
Candle under a bushel, whilst Antichrist has out-raigned him for 1600 years
together.

Many, many more instances at little leisure I can gather, which together have
begotten a general increase of open Libertinisme, secret Atheism, bold
Arminianisme, desperate Socinianisme, stupid Anabaptisme, and with these the
new Chiliastes, and the wilfulness of Papists strangely and strongly confirmed
by these distractions.

Good God! look down and direct our consultations. The best issue whereof (I
think) would be to debate the whole debate of Relgion out of our doors: by
putting it into a free Synod, whereupon I doubt not but we should grow
unanimous in all our other works.

Section XV.
THe Remonstrance or great Declaration went out of the House much better then
it came in. When it was engrossed and presented to the last vote with us, I
gave in my exceptions thus.

22 November. 1641. Mr. Speaker,
THis Remonstrance is now in progress upon its last foot in this House: I must
give a vote unto it, one way or other: my conscience bids me not to dare to be
affirmative: So sings the bird in my breast, and I do cheerfully believe the
tune to be good.

This Remonstrance whenever it passes, will make such an impression and
leave such a character behind, both of his Majesty, the People, the
Parliament, and of this present Church and State, as no Time shall ever eat it
out, whilst Histories are written, and men have eyes to read them. -- How
curious then ought we to be, both in the matter and the form? Herein is a
severe point of conscience to be tried: Let us be sure that every particular
substance be a Truth: and let us cloathe that Truth with a free language, yet a
modest and a sober language.

Mr. Speaker, This Remonstrance is in some kind greater and more extensive
then an act of Parliament: that reaches only to England and Wales; but in this
the three Kingdoms will be your immediate supervisors: and the greatest part
of Christendom will quickly borrow the glass to see our deformities therein.
They will scanne this work at leisure, which (I hope) we shall not shut up in
haste.

Some pieces here are of excellent use and worth: but what is that to me, if I
may not have them, without other parts that are both doubtful and dangerous.

The matter, form, and final end of this Remonstrance, all of them do argue
with me, not to remonstrate thus.

The end: to what end do we decline thus to them that look not for it?
Wherefore is this descension from a Parliament to a People? they look not up
for this so extraordinary courtesy? The better sort think best of us: And why
are we told that the people are expectant for a Declaration?

I did never look for it of my predecessors in this place, nor shall do from
my successors. I do here profess that I do not know any one soul in all that
Country (for which I have the honor to serve) who looks for this at your
hands. They do humbly and heartily thank you for many good laws and statutes
already enacted, and pray for more. That is the language best understood of
them, and most welcome to them. They do not expect to hear any other stories
of what you have done, much less promises of what you will do.

Mr. Speaker. When I first heard of a Remonstrance, I presently imagined that
like faithful Counselors, we should hold up a glass unto his Majesty: I
thought to represent unto the King the wicked counsels of pernicious
Counselors: The restless turbulency of practical Papists. The treachery of
salse Judges: The bold innovations and some superstition brought in by some
pragmaticall BB: and the rotten part of the Clergy.

I did not dream that we should remonstrate downward, tell stories to the
people, and talk of the King as of a third person.

The use and end of such Remonstrance I understand not: at least, I hope, I do
not.

Mr. Speaker, In the form of this Remonstrance, if it were presented to you
from a full Committee, yet I am bold to make this Quaere, whether that
Committee have presented to us any heads in this Remonstrance which were not
first agitated here, and recommended to them from this House: if they have,
there wants then (for so much) the formal power that should actuate and
enlive the work so brought unto us: as may be well observed by perusing the
order (now above a twelvemoneth old) for constituting that Committee. 10
November. 1640.


In the matter of this Remonstrance I except against several particulars, but
upon the transient reading of it, (not having any view thereof) I will gather up
two instances only, very obvious, very easy to be observed.

First, Lo. Viscount Falkland
(as was also observed by a learned Noble Lord who spoke last) here is a charge
of a high crime against all the BB. in the land, and that above all proof that
yet I have heard.

Your words are. Idolatry introduced by command of the BB.

What? plain, flat, formal Idolatry? name the species of this idolatry, that
is introduced by the BB. that is (for indefinite propositions are aequipollent
to universal) by all the BB. and by a command of theirs.

Certainly Sir, Idolatry (in the practice of it) is a very visible sin; and the
command of the Bishops was either legible or audible. Who has read this
command? who has heard this command? who has seen this all-commanded
Idolatry? and can assign wherein it is?

Some superstition in doctrines, and in practices, by some Bishops; this is not
the question: But the odious apostasy of Idolatry. Give me leave to say.

No man in this House can charge and prove all the Bishops, no nor half of
them, I dare say, not any three among them: perhaps (and truly I think so) not
one among them all, to have issued forth any one command for Idolatry. If any
man can, let him speak and convince me, I love to be reformed. In the mean time
I desire to offer you some particulars in bar, and by way of opposall to this
charge.

The learned, D. Morton.
pious, and painful B. of Durham has fought in front against Roman
superstition and Idolatry.

The B. of Lincoln was the first of note, D. Williams.
that gave check unto our Papal misleaders and Altarian innovators. He stood
in gap of that inundation, and was a sufferer for us.

The B. D. Hall,
of Exeter (however mistaken in the Divinity of Episcopacy) has ever had the
repute both of a good man, and a good Bishop. He has not only held and
maintained his station, but advanced also, and made good impression upon the
Idolaters of Rome.

M. Speaker, This has been a very accusative age: yet have I not heard any
superstition (much less Idolatry) charged (much less proved) upon the
several Bishops of London, D. Iuxton.
Winchester, D. Curle.
Chester, Carlisle, Chichester.

Parcite paucorum crimen diffundere in omnes. D. Bridgman.
Not for love unto the persons of these Bishops, D. Potter.
but for honor to our Religion, D. Duppa
although the times of late have been somewhat darkened; yet, let not us make
the day blacker in report then it is in truth.

In the last place I observe a promise in general words, that Learning shall
be rather advanced then discouraged: Sed quid verba audio, cum facta videam?

Great rewards do beget great endeavors: and certainly (Sir) when the great
Basin and Ewer are taken out of the Lottery, you shall have few adventurers for
small Plate and Spoons only.

If any man could cut the Moon out all into little Stars: although we might
still have the same Moon or as much in small pieces; yet we shall want both
light and influence.

To hold out the Golden ball of Honor and of profit, is both policy and
honesty; and will be operative upon the best natures, and the most pious minds.

But (M. Speaker) if I observe aright, learning (I mean Religious learning) in
this Remonstrance is for one half thereof utterly unthought on. And because I
hear often speech of one half, but seldom mention of the other, give me
leave (I beseech you) in this Theme a little to enlarge my self: if your
Remonstrance once pass, it will be too late (I fear) to enter this plea.

It is I dare say, the unanimous wish, the concurrent sense, of this whole
House, to go such a-way, as may best settle and secure an able, learned, and
fully sufficient ministry among us. This ability, this sufficiency must be of
two several sorts.

It is one thing to be able to preach and to fill the Pulpit well; it is
another ability to consute the perverse adversaries of Truth, and to stand in
that breach. The first of these, gives you the wholesome food of sound Doctrine;
Tit. 1. 9.
the other maintains it for you, and defends it from such Harpys as would
devour or else pollute it. Both of these are supremely necessary for us, and
for our Religion.

Both are of divine institution. The holy Apostle requires both. Both (...)
and (...). First to preach, 1 Tit. 9. 10.
That he be able with sound Doctrine to exhort: Verse. 11.
and then, (...), and to convince the gainsayers. For (says he) there are many
deceivers whose mouths must be stopped.

Now Sir, to my purpose: these double abilities, these several sufficiencies,
may perhaps sometime meet together in one and the same man. but seldom, very
seldom, so seldom that you scarce can find a very few among thousands rightly
qualified in both.

Nor is this so much the infelicity of our, or any times, as it is generally
the incapacity of man, who can not easily raise himself up to double
excellencies.

Knowledge in Religion does extend it self into so large, so vast a Sphere,
that many (for have) do cut cross the diameter, and find weight enough in
half their work: very few do or can travel the whole circle round.

Some one in an age (perhaps) may be found, who as Sir Francis Dark about the
terrestrial Globe, may have traveled the celestial Orb of Theological
learning, both for controversall, and for instructive Divinity.

The incomparable Primate of Ireland deserves first to be named. Bishop Morton
(whom I mentioned before) is another reverend worthy, and has highly deserved
of our Church in both capacities. Jewel (of pious memory) another Bishop never
to be forgotten. As Mr. Reading.
Some few others I could name, able and active both for Pulpet and the Pen. M.
Abbot
But Sir, these be Raraeaves, there are very few of them.

The reason is evident. For whilst one man does chiefly intend the Pulpit
exercises, he is thereby disabled for Polemick discourses: and whilst another
indulgeth to himself the faculty of his Pen, he thereby renders himself the
weaker for the Pulpit. Some men aiming at eminency in both have proved but mean
proficients in either. For it is a rule and a sure one, Pluribus intentus minor
est ad singula --

Now Sir, such a way, such a temper of Church Government and of Church-revenue,
I must wish, as may best secure unto us both: both for preaching to us at home,
and for convincing such as are abroad.

Let me be always sure of some Champions in our Israel, such as may be ready and
able to fight the Lords battle against the Philistims of Rome, the Socinians
of the North, the Arminians and Semi-Pelagians of the West: and generally
against heretics and Atheists every where. God increase the number of his
laborers within his Vineyard: such as may plentifully and powerfully preach
faith and good life among us. But never let us want some of these watchmen also
about our Israel, such as may from the everlasting hills (so the Scriptures are
called) watch for us, and descry the common enemy, which way soever he shall
approach. Let us maintain both Pen and Pulpit. 1 Samuel 2.
Let no Ammonite persuade the Gileadite, to fool out his right eye, unless we
be willing to make a league with destruction; and to wink at ruin whilst it
comes upon us.

Learning (Sir) it is invaluable: the loss of learning, it is not in one age
recoverable. You may have observed, that there has been a continual spring, a
perpetual growth of learning ever since it pleased God, first to light Luthers
Candle: I might have said Wicklifes, and justly so I do: for even from that
time unto this day, and night and hour, this light has increased: and all
this while our better cause has gained by this light: which does convince our
Miso-musists, and does evict that Learning and Religion, by their mutual
support, are like Hippocrates twins, they laugh and mourn together.

But Sir, notwithstanding all this so long increase (...) learning, there is a
Terra incognita, a great Land of learning not yet discovered: our adversaries
are daily trading, and we must not sit down and give over, but must encourage
and maintain, and increase the number of our painful adventurers for the
Golden fleece: and except the fleece be of Gold, you shall have no adventurers.

Sir, we all do look that our cause should be defended: if the fee be poor,
the plea will be but faint. Our cause is good, our defense is just: let us take
care that it be strong; which for my part, I do clearly and ingenuously
profess, I cannot expect should be performed by the Parish Minister, no not so
well as hitherto it has been. For from whom the more you do now expect of the
Pulpit, the less (I am sure) you must look for of the Pen.

How shall he with one hundred pound, (perhaps two hundred pound) per annum,
with a family, and with constant preaching, be able, either in purse for
charge, or in leisure for time, or in Art for skill, to this so chargeable, so
different, so difficult a work? I speak it (M. Speaker) and pardon my want of
modesty if I say, I speak it not unknowingly: Six hundred pound is but a mean
expense in books, and will advance but a moderate Library. Pains and learning
must have a reward of Ho^^^ and Profit proportional: and so long as our
adversaries will contend, we must maintain the charge, or else lay down the
cause.

In conclusion, I do beseech you all with the fervor of an earnest heart; a
heart almost divided between hopes and fears: never to suffer diversion or
diminution of the rents we have for Learning and Religion: but beside the
Pulpit, let us be sure to maintain (...) an universal Militia of Theology,
whereby we may be always ready and able (even by strength of our own, within our
own happy Island at home) (...) to stop the mouth of all errors and heresies
that can arise.

Never Sir, never let it be said that sacred Learning (for such is that I plead
for) shall in one essential half thereof, be quite unprovided for in England.
Sir, I have reason to be earnest in this, I see, I know great designs drawing
another way: and my fears are increased, not cured by this declaration.

Thus I have done: and because I shall want champions for true Religion.
Because I neither look for cure of our complaints from the common people, nor
do desire to be cured by them. Because this house (as under favor I conceive)
has not recommended all the heads of this Remonstrance to the Committee which
brought it in: Because it is not true that the Bishops have commanded Idolatry.
Because I do not know any necessary good end and use of this declaration, but
do fear a bad one. And because we pass his Majesty and do Remonstrate to the
People. I do here discharge my Vote with a clear conscience and must say NO to
this strange Remonstrance.

Section XVI.
THus far I go clear the same man unchanged: and that I may fully expose my
self unto a right Character, and a true esteem, beside the laying open how I
have already expressed my self in matter of Religion, I shall now be bold to
give you a composure fitted and framed for the House, on the same subject, and
ready to have been presented above half a year since.

The Bill for Root and Branch (commonly called the Bishops Bill) having long
been agitated, and in the Commitment grown from two sheets to above forty; I
did think it would at least have been brought to question for the engrossing:
This that follows was ready to have been interposed upon that question. The
Bill is since laid down (I hope) to its perpetual rest. This was prepared as
an endeavor to lay that asleep: And because it does most fully represent my
utmost end and aim for Reformation, I am willing to subjoyne it here unto the
rest.

(...).
Mr. Speaker.
THis Bill is now in question for its further progress: I must give a vote
unto it one way or other. The inward dictate of my conscience will not suffer
me to be affirmative. We may now debate this Bill super totam materiam, and I
will then (with your leave and patience) give you some account why I am so
fixed negative. This I shall do as briefly as this cause can bear.

You had from my hand a very short Bill,

-- Non hos quaesitum munus in usus.
I am willing (with many more) to abrogate that which is: provided that I may
at that very time, in the same Bill know and constitute what shall be; such an
addition to this Bill I did at first expect: Such an addition I shall anon be
bold to present, but it will not now suit this Bil, as it is now mistemper'd to
that purpose.

This Bill when it was but a short one, it did contain a great sum, An Act
for the utter abolishing of all Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Deanes and
Chapters, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, Chaunters, Chanons, and all other their
underofficers. These may be Legion for ought I know, they are so many, and
many of them instruments and officers of vexation only. Ep. l. 4. c. 92.
Pope Gregory the first gave a true prediction when he said, that Antichrist
should come Cum exercitu Sacerdotum, with an army of Priests; it has proved
so. True on the other side, where the numberless numbers of Monks, Friars, and
Secular Priests, with his Janizary Jesuits, do match the greatest army that
ever the Grand Signior has led. True in proportion with us, if the
underofficers among us do reach near the thousands they have been (of late)
computed at. But letting pass the army of all their under officers, the
substance and body of our present work is reducible to two heads.

1 Episcopal Government. 2 Cathedral Societies.
All the rest are unto these, but Phaleratae nugae, their idle trappings and
additionall impertinencies.

In the discussion and resolution of all this (I am confident) if we be but
candid, temperate, and respectfull hearers of one another: we shall find that
(all this while) we are farther of, in words, in language and expressions, then
we are in matter, in truth, and in purposes.

In the first place therefore, lest we should beat the air in a mistaken sense
of words, I will be bold in a word or two, to give you the different sense of
the word Episcopacy.

Sir, It will be maintained upon good ground that Episcopacy is of divine
right: it will be maintained upon grounds as good, that Episcopacy is not of
divine right. The ambiguity lies in the word Episcopacy, and it must be put
into a certainty, or else we shall run our selves into a certain Labyrinth
of words, and lose the matter.

Three sorts of Episcopacy I have observed, and no more: pardon me if I use
expressions which you have received before: They were his, they are mine, and
Beza taught us both: who gives them thus,

1 Episcopatus Divinus. 2 Episcopatus Humanus. 3 Episcopatus Satanicus.
Others in milder language do keep the same sense: So you may please to say
there is,

1 Episcopus Pastor. 2 Episcopus Praeses. 3 Episcopus Princeps.
Noli me tangere upon that: you have the holy text to warrant you. Psa. 105. 15.
Noli tangere Christos meos.

1 Pet. 2. 13.
You have another Text for this also. Submit your selves to every ordinance of
man for the Lords sake. So then the first is the ordinance of God, to be obeyed
for God: The second, although the ordinance of man, yet (whilst it stands so
ordained) is to be obeyed for God also.

Root and Branch.

If you will give me leave and patience, I will (as briefly as I can) touch
them over and explain my self.

Episcopus Pastor. This I say is of divine right. Every Spiritual Shepherd is
to have a flock: and every congregation must have a Pastor to oversee that
flock. This is original, and of no less then Divine institution. I need not
prove this Bishop. If there be any doubt of this Episcopacy, Verse. 28.
look S. Paul in the twentieth of the Acts, there he gives this charge. Take
heed (says he) to the flock over which the holy Ghost has made you Bishops. I
know well that this text is by some Expositors construed of other Bishops. But
how ever here are Bishops by divine right. And (mark you!) the holy Ghost (God
for ever to be blessed) he first made Bishops. The Original is plain (...)*

S. Peter speaks by the same spirit. 1 Pet. 5. 2
Feed the flock of God (says he) which is among you: taking the Bishopric
thereof. Our english reading is the oversight thereof, both the same. Overseers
and Bishops differ no more then a Greek name and an English: several sounds,
but the same sense. The original is (...) being Bishops thereof, nothing can
be more plain.

Now (Sir) this Episcopacy, we shall not, we must not, we dare not remove. This
is that Bishop of whom the most ancient Ignatius, Ep. ad T^al.
thus, Episcopo subjecti estote, velut Domino, ipse enim vigilat pro animabus
vestris.

Away then with their impertinent objection, who say, that there is a malady in
the very name of Bishop: that the name is odious: you see the holy Ghost has
honored this name and title, with approbation. Nay this name and title must
never sink into obloquy, it being one of the attributes of our blessed
Savior. He is the Bishop of our souls. 1 Pet. 2. 25.


Episcopus praeses. If this be but Humanus Episcopatus (for I do not determine
the point already warm between a reverend and worthy Bishop and his
Anti-pent-agonists) if it be not founded upon Divine institution, yet certainly
it stands on good grounds, and pleads its own right by a good title, and that
either jure Apostolico, or jure Ecclestastico: or jure civili and constitutivo:
or jure rationis and convenientiae. All or any of these do entitle it jure
bono. And that by so good, so approved a right, that Mr. Speaker) I am bold to
stand up, and to forbid any man from this hour for 1600 years upward, to name
any one age, nay any one year, wherein this Episcopacy was out of date in the
best part of Christendom. By the word Bishop I do here understand, a man of
the Clergy eminent in honor and power, by virtue of a superior degree, above
other men both Ministers and people within a certain circuit or territory
allotted and subjected to his particular care and survey in matters spiritual
and affairs Ecclesiastical.

I will not trouble you to repeat the character of this Bishop: I have formerly
been bold with you in that kind. He had a precedence. He had a presidency: He
had a power, potestatem directivam, it cannot be denied. I gave you an
instance, very accommodate to my sense: (Master Speaker) your self are our
Bishop, we are your Presbyters.

It is true, that we have made you our Bishop, our Overseer, our President: and
now it is as true, that neither we without you, nor you without us, can
establish any one order. Not you without us, we must be your Assistants. So
Ignatius of old, Epist. ad Tral.
The Presbyters are (says he) (...), as the Senate of God, and the band of
Apostles. Nor we without you, for so the same Ignatius (give me leave to press
his venerable authority, although Ignorance and Arrogance have of late decryed
both him and all Antiquity.) Epist. ad Magnes.
They (says he) who do all things (...) without a Bishop, to such men Christ
will say -- Why do you call me Lord, Lord, and do not the works I bid you?
Such men do seem to me (...) not to be of good conscience, but to be
counterfeiters and dissemblers. Mark his judgment on such as would do all
things without a Bishop.

Of this Bishop, the Bishop President (and I plead for no other) it must be
meant, which I read in the same Ignatius (I will not trouble you with any
younger, or any weaker authority, and I will hold my self within those Epistles
that are indubiously his) the words are these, Epist. ad Tral.
(...) -- (...). It is necessary (necessary he says) that you do nothing
without the Bishop.

Clearly then, the Bishop President in the best and purest age, was of the
Quorum in all Ecclesiastical affairs. And for this last age, Reverend Calvin,
Beza, Bucer, Zanchy, Danaeus, learned Chamier, all admit, none reject this kind
of Episcopacy.

They who deny that ever any such Bishops were in the best, the purest times, I
entreat some one of them (if any such be here) to stand up, and to show me,
teach me, how I may prove, that ever there was an Alexander of Macedon, or a
Julius Caesar, or a William the Conqueror in the world. For Sir, to me as
plain, as evident it is, that Bishops President, have been the constant,
permanent and perpetual governors, and moderators of the Church of God in all
ages. And this being matter of fact, I do hope that historical proof will be
sufficient adequate proof in that which in its fact is matter of History. But
proofs herein are so manifold and so clear, Sir Tho, Aston, review of
Episcopacy, p. 1*
that I borrow the free and true assertion of a worthy and a learned Gentleman:
It may be thought want of will rather then want of light, which makes men deny
the antiquity of Bishops in the Primitive times.

Therefore answer not me, but answer Ignatius, answer Clemens, Tertullian and
Irenaeus. Nay, answer the whole indisputed concurrence of the Asian, the
Europaean, and the African Churches, All ages, All places, All persons: Answer
(I say) all these or (do as I do) yield to the sufficient evidence of a truth.
Deque fide certa, sit tibi certa fides. But do not think to bring me into a
dream of a new born, or new to be born Church Government, never known, never
seen in Christendom before this Age.

As for them, who say that all Episcopacy is Antichristian: Truly Sir, they may
(if they please) with as sound reason, and with as much knowledge say that all
Church Government is Antichristian, and I doubt there are some abroad ripe for
such a sense.

Sir, Let us be wiser than to cosen our selves with words, and through a
mistaken Logomachy run our selves into a Church Anarchy. If you talk with a
Papist, in point of Religion, presently he is up with the word Catholic;
Catholic he tells you he is, of the Catholic Roman Church. This go's off Ore
rotundo: but require him to speak plain English -- The Universal Roman Church,
and then you may laugh him into silence. Just so: some cry, away with Bishops,
no Bishops: no, not of any kind. I desire one of that sense to stand up, and
tell me sadly, would you have an Overseer in the Church or not?

Ancient S. Clement (whom S. Paul calls his Fellow-workman) in his undoubted
Epistle to the Corinthians, Phil. 4. 3.
does foretell that a time should come, when there would be (...) Contention
about the very name of Bishop. I think the time is now. For my part, I will not
make that my contention: But for the government by an Episcopal presidency,
show me any thing more agreeable to the holy word: Show me any thing more
honored by the holy Martyrs of the first and the latter times: Show me any
more rational and prudentiall way of government, and I yield unto you.

Some against all Episcopacy do plead unto us, the fresh example, and late
practice of our neighbor Churches. But I beseech you Sir, are not we herein as
fit to give them our, as to take their example? I am ashamed to hear
yesterdays example pressed as an argument by some, and the all-seeing
providence through all ages to the contrary turned aside, by the same men, as
not worth an answer. Or if an answer you get, it is but this dead one, wherein
(as in a mare mortuum) they would drown all reply. Oh (say they) the mystery of
Iniquity began to work in the Apostles time. Ergo, what? Therefore (say they)
this Episcopacy is that mystery of iniquity: And so they do desperately
conclude with themselves, that Christ did never support his Church with a good
government till Farell and Frumentius did drive their Bishop out of Geneva: or
since then, until Presbytery begat independency. But their Syllogism is as
true Logic and as Consequentiall, as our Kentish Proverb, that Tenterden
Steeple is the cause of Goodwin sands. Both Arguments are in one and the same
mood and figure. But I return and proceed.

I have not asserted this kind of Episcopacy as Divine, yet I profess that it
soars aloft, -- Et caput inter nubila condit.

It has been strongly received, that Presbyters succeed to the seventy
Disciples, and Bishops to the Apostles. S. Peter honors Episcopacy, by
entitling the holy Apostles thereunto, for Matthias is chosen to take a
Bishopric (the very word there) which Judas lost by going to his own place.
Act. 1. 20


S. Paul tells you, 1 Timothy 3. 1.
This is a faithful saying, (...), If any man desire a Bishopric, he
desires a good work. And this S. Paul, writes not at large in an Epistle to
the body of a whole Church, as to Rome or Corinth, but this is in directed unto
Timothy, then designed to be the particular Bishop, that is the President and
Overseer of Ephesus.

Two things are (or may be) here objected. First, that neither of these Texts,
nor any other can be found, expressly mandatory, requiring the Office of
Episcopacy in the Church. Next that the name of Bishop is in some places
plainly given unto Presbyters. I answer.

If you put me upon this, that you will not yield unto Episcopacy* until you
have a Text expressly positive therein, consider if by the same rule you do not
let loose many other points as well as this. Show me an express for the Lords
day to be weekly celebrated. It will be hard to find diverse Articles of our
Creed in the holy Scripture terminis terminantibus. What have you there for
Paedo-baptisme? What precept or example have you from our Savior, that women
shall receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? Why should women be baptized,
since the covenant (to which baptism does succeed) Circumcision, was a seal
between God and men only? what have you there express, why I may not believe
the Trinity to be three Almighties, as well as three persons, and but one
Almighty?

But Sir, the golden rule of Vincentius Lirinensis, is an unfailing guide. Quod
ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus, look what among Christians, has been
every where at all times, by all men universally received, Atque id quidem vere
est Catholicum, and there you may rest secured. So (I say) that for right sense
of these Texts, and for warrant of this Episcopacy, the universal practice of
the whole Church of God, especially in the Apostles times, and immediately
succeeding the Apostles, is a most undeniable co^mentary to clear unto us,
that this kind of Episcopacy is and was of Apostolical allowance, if not of
Apostolical institution. And thus in other points does Tertullian argue
against Marcion, and S. Augustine against the Donatists.

The second exception is thus. These Bishops may well be thought to be but
Presbyters, for (say they) the name of Bishop is given to Presbyters also in
holy writ. Ergo, Episcopacy is not a several degree from Presbytery.

Surely Sir, if this argument be a sound one, then Apostleship it self, was
not a several order and degree from the 70. Disciples, and from Presbyters,
and then it had been a vain thing to take Matthias from a Disciple into the
lot and fellowship of an Apostolate. S. Peter does not degrade himself of his
Apostleship, when he entitleth himself (...) a fellow Presbyter. 1 Pet. 5. 1.
That very Office which is called a Bishopric, Act. 1. 20. 25
is within 4. or 5. verses following, called the Ministry of an Apostleship.
And if you will argue from community of names to identity of Office (so is done
in the titles of Bishop and Presbyter) surely then we shall find, many more
Apostles then they who saw the Lord in the flesh. Act. 9. 27
So Barnabas is called an Apostle. 2 Cor. 5. 16.
So Andronicus and Junius are among the Apostles. S. Paul calls Epaphroditus,
The Apostle of the Philippians, Acts 14. 14.
(...). Romans 16 7.
So speaking to Titus and others, they are styled (...), The Apostles of the
Churches. Shall I conclude that all these who are thus called Apostles, Phi. 2.
25
were indeed, and in proper acceptance very Apostles? No man will say so.

By the same argument, (from community of name to identity of Office, which
argument by Antiprelatical men, is much enforced) I may prove an Apostle and a
Deacon to be the same Office. S. Paul calls his Apostleship but a Deaconry,
(...) And again, Acts 20. 24.
(...), I was made a Deacon. Ephesians. 3. 7.
I conclude, that if Apostles be called Deacons, Col. 1. 23
and Deacons be called Apostles, and yet the Offices are, and are reputed to be
distinct and several: So may the same men be called sometime Bishops, sometime
Elders or Presbyters, and yet the two different degrees remain different and
unconfounded. Take heed of enforcing such argument, to prove a parity in degree
by the community of Appellation, since you may read of our blessed Savior
himself, that he is a To. 15. 8.
Deacon, an Esa. 41. 27.
Evangelist, an Heb. 3. 1.
Apostle, a 1 Pet. 2 25.
Bishop. But forbearing this, I proceed.

M. Speaker, I come now in brief to my third Episcopacy, Episcopus Princeps.
This, this third age, is the burden of our song, -- De duro est ultima ferro.
Gold was the first: the second was bright and glistering, a silver age at
least. But this, this where we now are, it is Iron, I and rusty too.

This is that Clergy Monarch whom we would avoid. This ambition of a sole
power, it is a very old sin, it began in Diotrephes, of who^ the Apostle
complains that he was (...), Primatum dilexit, he loved to be a Primate, the
first, the sole in authority. He (Diotrephes alone) did cast the brethren out
of the Church: and therefore the Apostle does threaten that when he comes, 3
Jo. 9.
He will bring the deeds of Diotrephes to remembrance.

This dangerous soleship is a fault in our Church indeed; and this I take to be
Pestilentia Cathedrae, the very pest and poison of Episcopacy; this is that
which must away, and this being gone, I shall not fear their tyranny.

If it were not for this, they could neither oppress good Ministers, nor
prefer dull droanes, scandalous persons, nor pragmaticall innovators. If they
had not been so sole in power, our many several chaires for Religion had not
groned with such number and weight of complaints. But by this, they have bin
able to do mischief above belief.

Et ipse miror, Sen.
vixque jam facto malo
Potuisse fieri credo. --
The exemplar piety, the ardent love, and sweet humility of holy Bishops in the
first four centuries, did work so far upon the credulous hopes of both
Clergy and Laity, that presuming to find in the same Chair a succession of
the same goodness, they became guilty of a desperate submission to a sole
power of one man, before they knew what changes, and what consequences they
should feel.

Ignatius the great Bishop of Antioch, does discriminate his own Episcopacy,
from an Apostleship, even by this, that he had not a soleship of power and
authority as they, and therefore he says, (...), I do not command you as an
Apostle.

This Bishop keeps a dangerous distance between his own Pharisaicall worship,
and the Plebeian Clergy, who yet are, all in order as good, and many of them in
merit better then his Lordship.

To draw this to a point: The first Episcopacy we all are vowed unto. The
second, none will dissent from, but a lover of Novellisme: The third, none can
submit unto, but such as are content to be passive in a Tyranny. Away then with
that, and with that alone, and then away with their needless question who say:
show us another government, before you take this away.

Away with that interregnum of Lay-Commissioners, the high road way, or the
next degree to Anarchy. Renovation is not Innovation, to Reform is not to
bring in a new form, but to purge the present form, by reducing it unto the
old. Quaerite antiquas semitas, Jer. 6.
and state super eas. State* stay there: we may keep our places, though we
change our postures. Away with our present Episcopacy, but give us the ancient
Presidency. Both may be done at once.

Mr. Speaker, This way of Commissioners, wherein five Lay men shall have the
control of all that is or was of Clergy cognizance and function: mirabile
dictu, I want words. -- I much fear that this may prove, a dangerous new way,
to let in other new ways hereafter. In the mean time what view, what show,
what face of a Church shall poor England have? England of late the glory and
the pride of Christendom reformed! My heart aches to think, that when
Christendom was ready to come over unto us, we are now ready to run away from
our selves: And to see that we labor so much for Ruin and Eradication, that
we are like to lose (by a not seasonable laying hold thereon) the most glorious
hopes of a full and blessed Reformation that ever lay before a Parliament. The
issue will be, if we will have Ruin, we shall have Ruin. If at present we
have that active Ruin so much pursued, we shall shortly have a passive Ruin
undesired. Let us not be fond of this ill sounding Proverb: Mal. 4. 1.
Take away both Root and Branch: it is threatened as a curse, I never read it
any whereas the language of a blessing.

But (Sir) Vsquequo? How long shall we be in this wilderness of Anarchy? No
time, no bound set, no period fixed to our confusion of government? How dare
we thus discompose, disfigure, and deforme the beauty of our Church? will your
commissionated Church be comely as the tents of Kedar, Cant. 1. 4
and as the curtains of Solomon? Where is that Acies ordinata, the Church that
was prophesied to be terrible as an army with banners?

In the Prophet Zachary the Lord does threaten it as a curse, Zach. 11.
to break both his Staves: both that of Beauty (which is interpreted the
beautiful order of government) and that of Bands (which is construed brotherly
unity:) and surely I think order and unity, if one be broken, neither is
firm. Let this then happen to other nations, to our enemies, but with us let
the hands of unity, and the beauty of order be our double support: otherwise we
shall have cause to bemoan our selves in the words of the same Prophet, Zach.
11. 2.
Howl ye fur trees, for the Cedar is fallen: Because all the mighty are
destroyed -- for the defenced forest is cut down. There is the voice of
howling of Shepherds, for their glory is destroyed.

For my part, I do here freely and heartily profess, that I am none of those
men, that 1600 yea after my Savior came to plant his Church, will consent to
give a new rule, a new invented government to his Church never known until
this age. I dare not think (who can think it salva pietate?) that the Son
of God, the wisdom of the Father, came down from Heaven, to plant a Church,
to erect a Kingdom, and that he did erect this kingdom, that he did plant
this Church, many hundred years since, and this with the dear price of his
precious blood but either never would or never could (...) government, till we
were (...) of such assertions that (...) consequences (...) impiety, and may
lead on a new path to Atheism. Believe it (Sir) believe this: Col. 2. 3.
The Wisdom of the Wisdom of God, cannot be guilty (I speak with zeal and
reverence) of such an improvidence, to erect his kingdom then, and to give it
his rule but now. Join with me (I beseech you Sir) in this Faith, that our
blessed Savior on whose shoulder the government did rest, Esaias 9. 6
did not immediately, and for so many ages after forsake his Church, and
abandon it to Antichristianisme, Mat. 28. 20.
with whom at first he promised to be always unto the end of the world.

In a word (Sir) we are all quick sented, we are all on fire to hear of an
arbitrary rule in the civil State: I beseech you, let us all be equally or
more zealous for the Lord of Hosts: Let us not be guilty of bringing in an
arbitrary rule into his House. Take heed (Sir) let us all take heed of such a
dangerous parity, as some would bring in among us: and the rather because they
presume to set the stamp of divine authority upon that counterfeit metal.

Parity of degrees in Church Government has no foundation in holy Scripture,
and is as absonous to reason, as parity in a State or family. Indeed it is a
fancy, a dream, a mere non entity, it neither has nor ever had a being. If it
be any thing, it is absolute Anarchisme, and that is nothing, for privation of
government is not a government.

But on the contrary imparity is from Divine authority: our Savior did plant
it, and then I am sure it is a plant that should grow and continue. By the way
I press you not with instances of Gods Church under the law, though that, and
this under the Gospel were both planted by the same All-knowing wisdom. From
the equity of which law there, and from the imparity of governors therein, a
most solid and unfailing argument may be deduced for the lawfulness of an
imparity also under the Gospel. For that which is good in it self, is ever
so. And without all peradventure, if Church imparity did (in its own being) lie
cross unto the will of God, or to the law of his Church, God never would,
never could have commanded it. But that our Savior also so in the Evangelicall
Church did plant imparity is most clear. First, he chose his Lu. 6. 13
12. Apostles. Afterward he appointed Luke 10 1.
70. Disciples: yet no man can affirm that these were all of the same Order,
Dignity, and Degree. If they had been so, what needed so curious Acts ^.
supplement when once the number was reduced to eleven? After our Saviors
ascension, the holy Apostles did ordain another imparity, and that was of Act.
6. 6
Deacons.

Phil. 3. 17.
S. Paul bids some (...) to watch and observe; He commends others if they
desire 1 Timothy 3. 1.
(...) to Oversee. So are there 1 These. 5. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 17.
(...) laborers in the word, and you know who was (...) 1 Cor. 3. 10.
a wise masterbuilder, which is more then others were, though all be called
(...) and (...) Romans 16 3. 21. Phi. 2. 25 Philem. 24.
fellow-workmen, fellow laborers in the spiritual building. Farther Sir, as
you read 2 Timothy 2. 3.
(...) soldiers, and Phil. 2. 25. Philem. 1. 2.
(...) fellow soldiers: so you may read also that there were (...) Heb. 13 17,
24.
Leaders and Governors, such as had oversight and must be obeyed. The Elder or
Presbyter is frequent in the Apostolical Epistles, and there are in power and
honor above these (not as our novellists do fondly construe under these) 1 Timothy 5. 17.
(...), the ruling Presbyters. One of which number S. Paul does call Romans 12. 8.
(...), The Ruler. As in ad Tral.
Ignatius there are (...), The Leaders or Rulers of Churches.

Is there no imparity in all this? Then the Rulers and the ruled are the same
in Logic. But for my part, I am clear and confident in this that imparity in
power among persons officed in the Church, is both lawful and expedient, and
ought to be preserved, if order, decency, Necessity, Universal practice,
Apostolical example, and Divine authority can altogether make but one
concludent argument.

M. Speaker, I do humbly and earnestly entreat, and beg of every member of this
House, seriously and sadly to examine his own soul (never more cause then in
this present vote) what end and what ultimate aim he has in this dreadful
Bill. What is the government his heart does wish for? Three ways of
Church Government I have heard of, and no more; the Episcopal, the
Presbyteriall, and that new born bastard Independency: Non datur quartum. The
last of these is nothing but a confounding Ataxy, rent upon rent, and a schism
of schisms, until all Church community be torn into Atoms, every three men,
( As may be collected by Spensers wretched Pamphlet.
nay every three women) dissociating themselves into an (...), a wilworship of
their own devising, which fondly and madly they would call a Church. Where and
in what corner of the world has this aerie Independency been asleep until
these days? Quo consule? under what Kings reign was it born? where may I
hear that it has a being? where may I read (below the world in the Moon)
that ever it had a being? I will be bold to brand it with the name of a
new-minted Seminary for all self-pride, heresy, schism, sedition, and for all
libertinisme, except an outward seeming saintship. A pestilence to all
government, a traitorous and a clouted Anarchy. If this way have any favorers
in this House, let them own their Religion and speak for it.

The next is the Presbyteriall way, a more orderly, and a better tempered
novelty then the other, but a novelty, and indeed but elder brother to
Independency: upon this you had my sense at midsomer last. It is enough for me
that I can point out when it began: since my father was born, or I am sure at
most in my grandfathers days: and it is my fixed resolution that since (by Gods
blessing) I am of the oldest Religion, I will never consent to any but to the
oldest government.

The third way is Episcopal: the original whereof is high, and beyond my
search to define: yet this I am bold to affirm: it had a Being, and that an
allowed Being in the best, the first, the purest age, and (as I said before) if
it be not of Apostolical institution, yet clear enough it is of Apostolical
permission. It will be said that our Bishops are nothing such: yet (Sir, I pray
you) may not they be easier made such, then the Dutch or Scottish Presbytery,
or a New England Independency can be? what is our work but to reform? I would
the question were put whether our Episcopacy shall be reformed or not.

But (Mr. Speaker) it is true, there are degrees in Episcopacie it self: and to
this point also, give me leave to express my self, and it may be necessary
for me so to do, although I am confident, you are herein prae-resolved as I
wish. Sir, the stairs are so easy, and ambition (that first made Devils) is so
apt to climb, that so long as the ladder is not taken away; The (1) Priest
would be a (2) rural Deane. He an (3) Archdeacon. Then (4) a Bishop. An (5)
Archbishop. A (6) Metropolitan. A (7) Primate. The Primate would be a (8)
Patriarch (his own book breathed that hope) and once a Patriarch, why not a
(9) Pope? Thus have you nine degrees of a terrestrial Hierarchy, suitable to
the invented nine orders of a Celestial Hierarchy among the Angels. It was a
fond fancy to invent them in the world above, and it will prove a dangerous
folly in us to suffer these in the world below. One of the links of this chain
is almost burst asunder: There was then but one Archbishop and he impeached
for his life.
never let that be sodered again. Sir, In uno Sylla multi Marii: Cut off but
one Archiepiscopacie, and you shall at once destroy with it, both Metropolitan,
Primate and Patriarch, and in time the Pope also. Archiepiscopie! why, who ever
voted that to be divine? nay, who can give a good moral and prudentiall reason
for the subsistence of Archiepiscopie? This indeed is a Prince among the Lordly
Prelates, and they all do swear Canonical fealty and allegiance to his
sovereign Miter. But I forbear, being confident there is a concurrency enough
in this House to vote the Abolition of that needless and that dangerous degree.

So then my sense is thus in brief. Away with Archiepiscopacy both root and
branch. Away with my Lord Bishop both root and branch. Touch not our Pastor
Bishop. Reform, reduce, replant our Bishop President, and with him his
Presbytery. Give him his ancient, due, and proper power. Let him ordain and
censure, but with due assistancie, and not otherwise. Reason and necessity, and
all exemplar government require this Episcopacy: Show me a College without a
Master: A City without a Governor: A ship without a Pylot: An Army without a
General: Do the States thrive without an Excellency? or does Venice prosper
without a Duke? or can you secure our own House in order without a Speaker?

But Sir, I have heard some among us say, if then we must have a Bishop, let
him be like a Pylot, only for a voyage: let him be like your self, a Speaker
only for a Parliament. I answer, if but so, yet is it better then any other
way that I see yet propounded to you; far better then the hazardous way of
Commissioners, that shall begin now, and end no man knows when. But Sir, I come
in again upon my own ground, and do affirm that ab initio non fuit sic; your
Bishop of old was not occasional pro re nata, and immediately degraded,
nothing so: but continued a fixed constant, perpetual moderator and president
for life, unless outed for his own demerits. I am for the old way, Reason and
Religion have allowed it, and the constant practice of the best and most
ancient times has honored it.

Take this also farther to approve it. If your Bishop President be not
constant, the encouragement to Piety and Learning will not be so constant. Let
desert in the Church have in its own sphaere (as desert in the civil State
has) a constant reward of Honor and of Profit. For Sir, Honor and Profit
must invite forth Learning and industry, or you shall have none.

Thus have you (with my imperfections) my sense upon Episcopal government, the
first part of your Bill, I pass in brief unto their Cathedral Covents, my
second distribution. Mr. Speaker. I have been diligent and attentive to the
whole procedure of all debates of this nature, yet am I, just where I ever was,
nothing moved, not at all changed, unless this be a change; that by hearing my
own sense better argued for by others, then I could do for my self, it is now
deeper fortifyed within me.

One main exception to the quite voting away our Cathedrals, ever was and does
yet remain with me. That which sticks with me is this: what certainty, what
security shall I have that Learning and Religion shall have a perpetual
maintenance, and a sure reward of Honor and of Profit proportional you will
say, that your Vote already passed will secure me; nothing so: You have indeed
voted that all the Lands of the Deans and Chapters shall be employed to the
advancement of Learning and Piety. But in the mean time what becomes of the
Bishops Lands? They are Cathedral also: if you take away the present
proprietor, what shall become of the Land? we shall not rifle for it; Shall we
make a gift of what is none of our own? or shall we cure the Commonwealth at
the cost of the Church? I hear little said in the house, I hear too much in
private.

But I proceed. This Vote (I say) does not secure me: It is too general. My
reason why I am not herewith satisfied is this, because for ought this Vote
expresses, you may give all the Land to any one use only, and perform your
Vote; as for instance, if all the wealth of Deaneries be distributed among the
Parish Ministers only, your Vote is fulfilled; But all the Learning and the
Piety, that we are bound to take care of, is not thereby provided for.

This (I say) does therefore stick with me, and notwithstanding your general
Vote so inwardly, that until I do see and know, how and in what manner the
use and the particular disposal of this great revenue (both Episcopal and
conventuall) shall be, I cannot concur to vote away the present possessours
thereof: No, nor the future successors thereunto. Our Deans and Prebends as
now they stand, or rather, as they have of late abused themselves, are both
burdensome and scandalous to us, and to our Religion. Yet I must look upon
their revenue, as the great reward, and powerful encouragement of Religion and
of Learning.

Some would alter and amend these cloisters, others would root them out; some
would transfer their wealth, but do not tell me whether. Some would annexe
all to the Crown, to enlarge the royal revenue; Some reputing them
incendiaries, would out of their forfeited estates, pay our debt of promise to
the Scots; Some would distribute all that wealth among Parish Ministers only;
Others have mixed and different designs. And there want not some who upon all
these Lands do write, Coloss. 2. 21.
Touch not, taste not, handle not; you know it was urged by a worthy learned Dr.
Dr. Hacket.
at the bar, Romans 2. 22.
that of Saint Paul, Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou sacrilege?
This theme I shall decline, and whatsoever my opinion be, whether man can give
unto God a special property in a piece of Land or not; yet am I fully resolved
never to alienate any of these revenues, but to mend the uses in the way of
piety, so that this supposed danger of being sacrilegious shall be certainly
out of my doors.

In the next place, my humble and my earnest desire is, that you will maintain
the Pen as well as the Pulpit; Polemie as well as persuasive learning. If our
Cathedrals were rightly tempered, we might hope for admirable fruit of their
revenues. Young Students in Divinity wander for want of manuduction. Poor
Christians among us want a godly, sober, plain and pithy english Paraphrase
upon the whole Bible. Our Nation, our Religion, and all Christendom want the
just volumns of a large Latin Commentary. The body of Divinity should be
reduced into a solid Catechism. Every heresy might be choked in its first
breath. All the Fathers might be revised and briefly animadversed. I cannot
think of half the happiness we might hope for, so long as the rewards of
Wisdom are held forth to invite and encourage Industry. Prove. 8. 18.
Riches and honor are with me, says Wisdom, that knew how to invite. Take
then none of the reward away, either of Profit, or of Honor; So much reward as
you abate, so much industry you loose. Who ever went unto the Hesperides only
to fight with the Dragon? only for that? for victory, and for nothing else?
No, Sir, but there was the fruit of Gold (Profit as well as Honor) to be
gained, to be achieved, and for that the Dragon shall be fought withal. --
Quis enim doctrinam amplectitur ipsam,
Praemia si tollas? --


The Lawyer, the Physician, the Merchant, through cheaper pains do usually
arrive at richer fortunes; And but that it pleases God to work inwardly, I
should wonder that so many able heads, ingenious spirits, and industrious
souls, should joy in the continual life long pains, and care of a Parish cure,
about 100. l. per annum stipend for life, when with easier brows, fewer
watchings, and lesser charge, they might in another profession (as every day we
see it done) fasten a steady inheritance to them and their Children, of a far
larger income.

In this place there was composure of that which was (on a like occasion)
spoken 22. November. and is entered page And this place is half imperfect for want
of those lines here.

Let me here by way of anticipation, prevent that which will else come in
objectively upon me. The Universities (it will be said) are amply furnished
with able disputants: what need other care, other provision?

Truly Mr. Speaker, excepting some of our public Professors there, and some
few of the heads of our houses there, who has descended into this Areopagus?
There is indeed good training, good preparatory exercisings of raw soldiers
there; and much valor in counterfeit skirmishes among them: But for perfect
Polemy in letters, you may guess what our Universities can yield, by observing
our trained bands at common musters: Your graduate in the school of war will
tell you, that good Artillery men, though quick at a dry muster, and nimble
with false fires, are not immediately completed into true and full soldiers:
So every Syllogizer is not presently a match to cope with Bellarmine, Baronius,
Stapleton, etc. Mr. Speaker, you see my heart; I move not, I plead not for the
Deans, nor for the Prebends. If they will not prove, if they cannot be turned
to be champions in this holy warfare; then the rich revenue detur digniori: Let
it be given to them that will bring forth better fruit. But if there may be had
such a reduction of them, such a retrenching of them, nay, such a new forming
of them, that we may be always sure in all Polemicke learning, to have some men
of valor, to go in and out before us: Surely Sir, let them be so reduced, so
retrenched, so new formed; if not, if this cannot be, then let others have the
wealth, that will do the work.

After all this (I beseech you) let me not be misconstrued, as if I intended
an Apology for these Cathedral societies: it is neither in my wish nor power.
These Covents are still the same with me they ever were: and the short
character of a Cathedral Corporation (as now it stands abused) is still the
same it was. A nest of non-residents. An Epicurean College of riot and
voluptuousness. A school for complements in Religion: but a scourge upon the
life and practice thereof. They have been the Asylum for superstition: but the
Scalae Gemoniae for true Piety. Of late they have been the shame of our Clergy:
and are now almost become the scorn of our Laity. Yet Sir, for all this (all
this so bad, so true) I am still where I was. Though the Channel be foul and
muddy, where these waters (I mean their wealth) does run, yet I cannot wish it
dried up; but rather purged and cleansed, or else a new channel cut, wherein
the current of all their wealth may run on, pure and clean to the holy uses of
Religion and of Learning. Sir, many great and excellent uses (all for Piety
and Learning) may be presented to you: I beseech you let us consider sadly on
it. For if this wealth be but once like water powered abroad, no time, no age to
come will ever give us such a stock again. And thus I end the second of my two
general heads.

To sum up all; you see I am for the old original Episcopacie, with
Presbyteries subjoyned thereunto: and I am for an explicit disposal of all
manner of Church revenues: your bill denies me both. It denies me my strong
wishes, and forces upon me the terror of confusion. This Bill indeed does seem
to me an uncouth wilderness, a dismal vastness, and a solitude wherein to
wander, and to loose our selves and our Church, never to be found again; me
thinks we are come to the brink of a fatal praecipice, and here we stand
ready to dare one another, who shall first leap down. And that which
increases my horror and amazement to the height, is to hear men confidently
affirm, that we go safe upon an even ground, and that all this while the
government is not changed. Surely Sir, either my head is giddy, or else I see
in this Bill our English Church turn round, or rather tossed upside down.

Persuade the King to commit all his Regal authority into nine Commissioners,
and tell him, that he is still a Monarch. Beside the change of governors, do
you not give us new rules? do you not take away the old? and is the government
still the same? I will instance in one. What is become of the divine Ordinance
of Excommunication? must there be none? there is none in all your Bill. Five
Laymen shall require five Ministers to ordain: is not this new? was this
government with us? nay was it ever in the world before? Five Lay-Commissioners
must judge and pronounce in matter of heresy: yet still our Church government
is unchanged. I know not what to say in so dull, so flat a cause. Truly Sir,
for my part I do look upon this Bill as upon the gasping period of all good
order: it will prove the mother of absolute Anarchisme: it is with me as the
passing bell to toll on the funeral of our Religion, which when it goes will
leave this dismal shreek behind.

(...)
When Religion dies, let the world be made a bonefire.
In short Sir, this Bill has so little of my Hopes, so nothing of my Reason,
so all of my Fears, that if it must pass, I do most humbly pray, and do
earnestly beseech this Honorable House to grant me this favor, that I may be
admitted to my Protestation against this Bill, and so recorded. And (although
some worthy members of this House are troubled, as they have cause, to have
their names set on a poast) yet it is my ambition that I may as negative to
this bill, be poasted up from Westminster to the Tower, and from Dover to
Barwick, as one that dares not hazard a whole National Church at blind man
buffe.

To conclude all: so great a variety of matter: so total a mutation, of so
vast and so hazardous a consequence: it does amaze me and distract me so, that
although I must say No to your Bill, yet I hardly know with what motion to
conclude. But thus I adventure.

Let the intent and scope of Reformation be divided into two Bills.

Let the subject of the first be Church government.

Let the subject of the second be the disposal of Church revenues.

Let both these bills go pari passu, hand in hand together.

And because I cannot so well by word of mouth and memory present them, I do
humbly beg leave either to read unto you such heads, for the first of these
bills, as I conceive will well stand both with our Religion, and with the
present Laws of the Commonwealth: Or else that you will please to take in a
new Bill ready formed to that sense, and I doubt not, but you will quickly find
it the best and nearest way to Piety, Peace, the honor of our Religion, and
the glory of God.

Church Government. Reduced into a few heads, fit (as I conceive) to be formed
into a Bill to be presented to the Commons House in Parliament.
Memorandum, An imperfect Copy of these, without my knowledge or consent has
been three times printed before.
I.
Imprimis.
EVery several Shire of England to be a several Circuit or Diocese for
Ecclesiasticke jurisdiction: excepting the little Country of Rutland, which may
be joined to Lecester. And Yorkshire which may be well divided into three.

II.
The Dioceses in Wales to remain in Circuit as at present.

III.
Twelve learned Divines of irreproveable life and Doctrine, to be selected in
every Diocese, as a constant Presbytery, and they to give necessary assistance
to the Bishop.

IIII.
A pious, and painful Divine of exemplar life and Learning to be established
the Bishop and constant President over this Presbytery, and throughout the
several Diocesses aforesaid respectively.

V.
This Bishop in each Diocese to ordain, suspend, deprive, degrade,
excommunicate, by and with consent and assistance of seven Divines of his
Presbytery then present, and not otherwise.

VI.
This Bishop to actuate and perform all those services and employments trusted
unto, and expected from the present Bishops of the Land, by virtue of the
present Laws of the Land.

VII.
The times of Ordination throughout the Land to be four times every year,
viz. the first Sunday in every month of May, August, November and February
yearly.

VIII.
Every Bishop constantly to reside within his Diocese, and to keep his
especial residence in some one prime or chief City or town within his
Diocese: as in particular the Bishop of Kent at Canterbury. The Bp. of Sussex
at Chichester, etc.

IX.
Every Bishop to have one especial particular Congregation within his cure,
the most convenient for neernesse to his chief residence, and the richest in
value that may be had, where he shall duly preach, unless he be lawfully
hindered, and then shall take care that his cure be well supplied by another.

X.
No Bishop shall remove, or be translated from the Bishopric which he shall
first undertake; unless it be done by the King, with consent of a National
Synod, or consent of Parliament.

XI.
Upon death or other avoydance of a Bishop, the King to grant a Conge d'eslier
to the whole Clergy of that Diocese, and they to present three of the
Presbyters aforesaid, and the King to appoint which of the three his Majesty
shall please.

XII.
The first Presbyters in every Diocese to be named in this present Parliament.

XIII.
Upon the death or any other avoydance of a Presbyter, the Ministers of that
Diocese to present three: and the Bishop with the rest of the Presbyters to
make election out of that three: and if votes be equal, then the Bishops vote
to sway the Election.

XIIII.
The Conge d'eslier for election of a Bishop shall issue forth within two
months after the death, or other avoydance of a Bishop. The choice of another
Presbyter to be within one month after the death or avoidance of a former
Presbyter.

XV.
No Bishop or other Clergy man to have the constant manage of any Temporal
office, or secular jurisdiction, but only for the present to hold and keep the
probate of Wills in the usual places, until the Parliament shall otherwise
resolve. Yet I conceive it fit that twelve Bishops, (by the rest of the Bishops
to be chosen) be every Parliament called to sit there assistant, to give advice
in matter of Religion, and in cases of Conscience, when the House of Lords
shall please to require it of them.

XVI.
Parochial Ministers to be entrusted and endued with more power then formerly:
the manner and extent whereof to be determined in the next National Synod:

XVII.
The Parish Minister to hold weekly Vestries there with the Parishioners, to
consider and take notice of all manner of scandal within the Parish.

XVIII.
The Parish Ministers to meet in every rural Deanerie once every quarter,
there to prepare, and make up (by joint assent) such presentiments of scandal,
as may be fit to be transmitted to the Bishop and Presbytery.

XIX.
The Bishop once a year (at Midsummer) to summon a Diocesan Synod, there to
hear, and by general vote to determine all such matter of scandal in life and
doctrine as shall be presented to them.

XX.
Every three years (at the same day the trienniall Parliament shall begin) a
National Synod to be (whereby there will be no need of Archbishops) which
Synod shall for persons consist of all the Bishops in the Land, and of two
Presbyters to be chosen by the rest out of each Presbytery: and of two Clarks
to be chosen out of every Diocese by the Clergy thereof.

XXI.
At the first day of their convention the Bishops out of their own number to
choose a moderator or President of the Synod.

XXII.
From the Vestry, appeal may be to the rural Deanery, from thence to the
Diocesan Synod, and from the Diocesan to the National Synod.

XXIII.
This National Synod to make and ordain Canons for the government of the
Church, but they not to bind, until confirmed by the King in Parliament.

XXIIII.
Every Bishop to have over and above the Benefice aforesaid, a convenient
dwelling in the chief Town of his residence, a certain profit of a constant
rent allowed and allotted proportional to the Diocese wherein he is to
officiate.

XXV.
That certain choice Benefices of the best value, and most convenient
situation, that can be had, may be allotted to the Presbyters, one to each, and
that they also may have each of them a constant yearly profit over and above
his Benefice.

XXVI.
As for the Revenue of the Bishops, Deanes, Chapters, etc. a strict survay to
be taken of all their rents and profits, by choice Commissioners in every
several County, and the same at an appointed time to be represented to the
Parliament, and in the mean time no timber to be felled. Afterward some of the
profits may be laid by to make a stock, wherewith to purchase in the first
fruits and Tenths, by ascertaining a more steady rent to the Crown.
Impropriations may be bought in. Ministers Widows and Orphans may not with
husband and father loose all support. Libraries (at the public charge) to be
provided for every Bishop. And some Colleges erected, and by degrees endowed
for Divines therein to exercise themselves, through all the latitude of
Theology.

POSTSCRIPT.
THus have you a faithful and a clear exposure of my self in matter of
Religion, both in what I have said, and what I wish may be done. Let the candid
and ingenuous Reader judge me. Such of the Prelaticke party as are in love with
present pomp and power will be averse unto me, because I pare so deep: The
Rooters, the Antiprelaticke party declaim against me, because I will not take
all away. At last Midsummer a new Moon did take these men, I did begin to find
a different greeting, a change of salutation. Some expostulate: others
condemn: some advise: others would seem to condole: all upon occasion of my
speech 21. June; although I find not there (or in any thing else that I have
said) any cause to make me the object either of their anger, their council, or
their pity.

The plain truth (as I touched before) is that immediately upon my approach
unto this Parliament, some circumstances did concur to lead my language on
upon the Archbishop, not any personal passages (God and my soul do witness
for me, I have not such a temper) But being servitor for that Shire, and in
that Diocese where some of his hardship then fresh and new was brought by
complaint unto me; The accident of presenting that complaint did beget me
almost as many new friends as he had old enemies: and I know not what
misconception did thereupon (untruly) entitle me an enemy to the very function
of Episcopacie. I never gave my name in to take away both root and branch. I
love not the sound of a curse so well. If by the Rooters I have been so
mistaken, their credulity is not my crime. And their foul language shall
neither be my shame nor sorrow, I will repeat some of their salutations,

A. G.
One tells me that I would only have new Bishops in room of old ones: Cuius
contrarium verum est. W. P.
Another that I have a Pope in my belly. S. W. B.
A third that he was never more sorry for any speech in the House, meaning that
21. Jun. M. S.
Another that strange things were said of me. W. C.
A fifth and Mr. S. S
sixth that I go the way to spoil all their work, so I hope I do. Dr. B.
from others.
A seventh that it is said I am fallen from Grace: so some men seem desperately
to look into the Ark of God. Dr. W.
An eighth that I have contraried all that I said before: let the Dr. show me
that now. R. L. B.
A ninth is told that I am apostated; I doubt his Religion (in quantum it
differs from that of the Church of England) is an Apostasy. Mr. F.
A tenth that I am gone over to their adversaries. S. A. H.
An eleventh and T. W.
twelfth that the Primate of Ireland, and Dr. Brownrig have infected me, I dare
drink their poison. G. H.
That the two learned and painful equals without match, Mr. Reading, and Mr.
Abbot, abusing my trust in them, and good opinion of them do misleade me; a
slander upon three at once. S. E. P.
That Dr. Burges and I have conferred notes; I wish we had. Mr. K.
That I am for Bishops, for crosses and for Images; true and false. I. K.
That if I had held where I was, there had not been a Bishop in the Land before
August last; a false wizard, I did hold where I was, and yet the Bishops are
where they were. Civis igno^tus.
That I have lost the prayers of many thousands. T. C.
That I have lost the honor I had, and that my conscience is not so good as it
was in the beginning of this Parliament. Good (Mr. C.) you who would have
Bishops out of their chairs, come you out of the chair of the scornful. You
are one of them who jog our elbowes, and boar our Parliament ears with
Babylon, Antichrist, and the mystery of Iniquity, which I dare say is grossly
misunderstood by your self and many others of your rooting Tribe.

Before this Parliament was convened, you would have joyed upon that day, when
the sting of ill executed Episcopie (the high Commission) had been taken away;
and (the pest of the chair) soleship of power retrenched. One is done, and both
had been effected, if you and such as you had not overheated a furnace that was
burning hot before; and with pressing for Ruin have betrayed the time of a
blessed Reforming. Take it unto you, for upon you, and the blind ignorant
wilfulness of such as you, I do here charge the sad account of the loss of
such a glorious Reformation, as being the revived image of the best and purest
ages, would with its Beauty and Piety have drawn the eye and heart of all
Christendom unto us. Pro. 30. 15.
The Horse-leaches daughters do cry, Give, give. And you that might have had
enough, do still cry more, more. The greedy Vulture of an insatiate appetite
is incurable. To reform Episcopacy it is in your esteem too faint, too cold a
work, it is labor ill bestowed and unthankfully accepted, nay one of you (said
in my hearing) it is a sin to labor in the dressing and proining of that
plant, Mr. F.
which (say you) is not of God, and must be dug up. And with Episcopacy,
away with the burden of our Liturgy. S. M.
If you take not off this burden also, it will be girded upon us closer and
stronger then ever. Away with the thought of a National Church also,
Protestation protested. p. 20.
It has no pattern in the Scripture. Mich. Qnintin. p. 4.
It is impossible for a National Church to be the true Church of Christ. Let
us have no Church but Congregations, Eatons sermon vouched by Sir Th. Aston. p.
4.
and let them be without all superintendency: as much to say, as let every
family be a Church, and have Religion as they please. A way with all Assertion
of Scottish government p. 3. and 5.
distinction of Clergy and Laity, it is popish and Antichristian. Let us then
banish from us such popish names, and send them home to Rome. Quintin. p. 9.
The Church is a body of parity, whose members are all Kings and Priests.
Sp^n^^rs Pamphlet.
And every man must exercise his gifts in common. So also the learned (but
herein absurd and gross) thought to be Salmasius against Petavius p. 397. 398.
Walo Messalinus, Omnes olim Presbyterierant Latci; and again, Waldensis and
Lutherus crediderunt tustos ac fideles Laicos posse omnes, quae in Ecclesia Dei
agi necesse est, agere, and omnibus muneribus Ecclesiasticis defungi. These
things thus pressed, and pursued, I do not see but on that rise of the
Kingship and Priestship of every particular man, the wicked sweetness of a
popular parity may hereafter labor to bring the Kingdown to be but as the
first among the Lords, and then if (as a Gentleman of the House professed his
desire to me) we can but bring the Lords down into our House among us again,
(...). All Is done. No rather, all is undone, by breaking asunder that well
ordered chain of government, which from the chair of Jupiter reaches down by
several golden links, even to the protection of the poorest creature that now
lives among us.

What will the issue be, when hopes grow still on hopes? and one aim still
rises upon another, as one wave follows another? I cannot divine. In the mean
time you of that party have made the work of Reformation far more difficult
then it was at the day of our meeting, and the vulgar mind now fond with
imaginary hopes, is more greedy of new achievements then thankful for what
they have received. Satisfaction will not now be satisfactory. They and you are
just in De Benef. l. 2. c. 27.
Seneca's description. Non patitur aviditas quenquam esse gratum. Nunquam enim
improbae spei, quod datur, satis est. Eo maiora cupimus, quo maiora venerunt.
-- Aeque ambitio non patitur quenquam in ea mensura conquiescere, quae quondam
fuit ejus impudens votum. -- Vltra se cupiditas porrigit, and foelicitatem suam
non intelligit. Learn moderation (Mr. C.) unless (as J. H. H. M.
some of you Rooters do seem to hold) you do think moderation it self a vice.
The Stoic was in that point more pious then such Christians: Epictetus.
his Motto was, and your lesson is, (...).

FINIS.

