THE Devil in his Dumps: Or a sad COMPLAINT OF MALIGNANT SPIRITS, At the
settling of PEACE and TRVTH In a late CONVENTICLE held near the TOWER for the
better influence of John Lilburns Counsels*

ALSO A full and true Relation of the Sectaries desperate Conclusions
concerning their last and present Design for the utter Ruin of Church and
State.

Aug. 3d London, Printed in the Year 1647.

The Devil in his dumps, or a sad complaint of Malignant spirits etc.
ALthough the Liberty of this age (wherein your Curranto's, Pasquils and lying
Pamphlets swarm so abundantly) has made all News (how serious and substantial
soever) liable to the jealous imputation of falsehood; yet I assure you, this
present Relation, though presented unto you in a borrowed form, yet for the
substance or matter is as near allied to truth, as light to the Sun.

To hold you then in no further suspense, know, that about the beginning of
this present Summer, the Prince of darkness, called a general Assembly of all
the infernal spirits, who with winged have attended his summons, and being met
and the grand Diabolo mounted on a throne of sulphur, accompanied with his
Cabinet Council the seven deadly sins, he began a very passionate complaint of
the great decay and imminent ruin of his Kingdom, if some speedy course were
not taken to prevent it, for which he had called them together requiring their
devilish advice. He recounted unto them, how they were altogether cast out of
heaven by the Almighty Power, for which common wrong although their confederate
malice did oblige them all to seek revenge, yet himself had done it by a most
subtle insinuation, withdrawing the first Adam.
man that ever was from's obedience to his Maker. And this first achievement
(quoth he, my friends and fellow fiends) was by your assistance so happily
prosecuted, that in a short space I got the sovereignty of all the world, and
the whole race of mankind became my vassals. Hearheuism.
I had my Temples and Statues, my Oracles and Altars whereat I was sought with
that devotion, and all my hests observed with that singular obedience, that I
accounted my self the god of this world, for whom they thought not themselves
and the children of their own bodies too dear a sacrifice. In the pride of this
universal Monarchy I sat Lord Paramount without control above 3000. years,
but then you know a Christ.
child was born, in whom was all the fullness of the eternal godhead, by whose
divine power and wisdom my Oracles were silenced, my Temples slighted, my
Worship cast out, my Altars cast down, my Statues overthrown, and indeed my
whole Kingdom so shattered, that all my Diabolical stratagems were little
erough to keep together the pieces of a broken State. I must confess that the
true Christian State was nothing in comparison of my vast Empire, but yet the
greatness of our pride and malice that could not endure a rival in this
inferior world, or that a creature so inferior to us should enjoy those blessed
seats, from whence we our selves were with so much indignation detruded, after
it had in vain attempted the person of this heavenly King Persecution.
endeavored with as ill success the extirpation of his subjects and Kingdom.
Many were the ways and projects I used for the effecting hereof, but all in
vain, till at last my devilish invention found out a device, being assisted in
it, I acknowledge, with all your hellish councels, that I thought all the power
and policy under heaven could never frustrate: I broke my brains and cracked my
mischievous pate so about it, that I doubt I shall never do the like again. And
indeed for a long time it answered my expectation to the full, for I built a
gorgeous palace upon one of the seven hills Rome.
in Italy, wherein I placed my own dear sister The Pope.
Jezabel (a notable cunning whore) who acted her part so well, with her Popery.
paintings, dressings, counterfeit beauties and shows of holiness, that in
short time she was courted by all the Princes and Gallants of Christendom, whom
she intoxicated so with a philtre that I gave her in a cup of gold compounded
of all the damnable impostures, lies, heresies and blasphemies, that my
bottomless wit could possibly devise or afford, that by her means, in the very
midst of that temple that was built to the name and honor of God, my own image
was set up and visited from all parts of the earth. But these happy days had
their end at last; all my impostures were discovered by one of my own Luther.
votaries, and such a The Gospel.
light of everlasting truth set up, that I shall never be able to extinguish
again; and yet my devilish pate did not quite fail me at this pinch, but at
that very instant hatched another brood of Anabaptists and other Sectaries.
Crocodiles, who by their fained tears, counterfeit humilty and shows of
holiness, enticed thousands to run after them, and by new lights or ignes fatui
of their own giddy heads, lead them about such vagaries, that they brought 'em
at last to a grosser darkness then that they escaped and to the midst of that
Babel that they thought they were clean got out of: What sweet villainies they
acted by virtue of their dreams and revelations, as seditions, rebelions,
murders, rapes, robberies, sacrilege, crying down Ministers, Churches,
Sabbaths, Sacraments Scriptures, even Christ himself, till they had left in
most places scarce any face of Religion, I cannot without much contentment
remember. In most places they found a strong opposition, but especially in
England, by means of 26. Bishops.
Elders that then governed there, but that was not much to my loss, for indeed
as the game then went, it was all one to me who won. But now the case is
altered there, my sun is quire set, and now I am like to end my days in
everlasting sorrow; for in that poor despised Country there is a Parliament
called that will give Laws, I doubt, to all the world, they are to strongly
assisted with counsel and strength; and Assembly of Divines and a potent City,
that -- he had surely gone on but his troubled thoughts knew not which ways to
render themselves, and so his speech failing, he began to swel With cuvy
as though he would have burst. The damned crew then and there present, seeing
their sovereign so disconsolate, began to cheer him up with comfortable
speeches, and the seven deadly sins supported him, or else he had sunk down in
a fwoon.

Dear sovereign (quoth they) why are you troubled so at a trifling matter? What
if that pedling Kingdom were quite lost, have you not still a world of vast
Signiories besides? You have more reason to rejoice at that you have left, then
grieve at a little that is fort; and yet it is not lost neither.

For if you please to take a view of that Kingdom, or if that be too much
labor, of their chief London.
City, (and by that you may judge of the rest) you shall find (we speak within
compass) three parts of four are yours still. At that word the envious man began
to smile and look up a little. If you will but consider (quoth they) their
beastly drunkenness, their horrible swearing, whoring, lying, couzening,
cheating, envy, malice, slandering, open and secret murder, covetousness,
oppression; how devoutly they worship God upon their elbows and outface him in
his own house, with their pride, painting, perfuming, curling. How they fast to
save a dinner, and humble themselves upon their cushions, in tissue, silk,
satin, and strange apparel, beauty spots, naked breasts, and breeches about
their heels, as if they were offering some sacrifice to Venus; besides their
unspeakable epicurism, gluttony, riot, and all excess. If you did but know all
your secret friends and see all your professed servants that wear your Livery in
their locks and badg in their faces: Do but mark how our scholars outdo us
that taught them, and reckon what millions we poor seven have multiplied unto,
and then you will say we have done our parts, and not lost but gained you a
Kingdom. And of those that escape our claws, we believe that Heresy and
Hypocrisy can give you a reasonable account. The grand Diabolo gave them all
thanks for their faithful services, but heard their discourse with small
contentment, for still (he told them) they mist the mark he shot at. For quoth
he, if this Par^ment Assem^^^
Triumvirate hold together, what will become of all us? No, No, I know too well,
the commanding power of that divine word, they are now setting up, what an
alteration it makes in men's minds; If that design go forward, you shall quickly
find a general revolt of men's affections from you, and then what will become of
all you, when every man shall become a Constable to apprehend, a Judge to condemn
you, and his own conscience, a tribunal to arraign you at? No, No, if this go
forward, we may bid farewell to these upper regions, and confine our selves to
the Land of darkness eternally. For besides the loss of that pretty place,
which perhaps I might brook with some degree of forced patience, it will be
such a president for all the world to follow, that I am at my wits end to think
of it? No, No, if ever we hope for happy days again, we must defeat the
purposes of this Triumvirate: and that by Stix I know not how to do, they go on
with such unanimity and undaunted resolution. Divide them, and so I shall master
them, and now I think on it I have a fit instrument for that purpose; and that
is my cosen Ignatius, Provincial of the Jes^
order of the Spanish Loyo^
rogue? I think you all know him; when they heard him but named, there was a
great shout, as if their dying hopes were in him revived again, that he should
be sent for: Indeed quoth Diabolo, he is the only staff of my old age, and stay
of my tottering state; and in brief, such dispatches were made, that the
Jesuit was with them that night. To pass by the entertainment, being sat at
his right hand, the father of lies communicated to him their former
consultations, in a word desiring his advice. The Friar reployed, a threefold
cord is not easily broken, unless it be first untwisted, for the doing whereof
he offered his best service. The old Serpent accepted it very thankfully,
considing much in the Friars malice and mischevous wit, and the rather, because
he was one of his own brood. But the red Dragon out of tender affection to his
vassals, by reason of a cruel Law in England, was much troubled at one thing,
how he should escape the gallows if he came there. The Jesuit smiling at the
Devils simplicity, and foolish pity; Good Sir (quoth he) take you no care of
that; For if there were a pure necessity of my personal service, I can carry
two faces under one hood, and yet I have more hoods then one too; I have so
many tricks to delude all laws that indeed I fear none: I can swear, ly,
dissemble, aequivocate, swagger, and look demure, I can play fast, and loose,
Ruffian or Roundhead, Puritan or Protestant, Separatist, Atheist, Independent,
or any thing, and change my shape a thousand times a day. I can use the matter
so, that they which hate me most, use me best, banish me the Country by a
Public Law, and open their very bosoms to me through a private mistake. By
this means I have a key to every lock, that neither councels of Princes, nor
closets of great men, nor press, nor pulpit, nor Church, nor conventicle, can
shut me out of doors. Having so many advantages and such opportunities, what
end so difficult that I cannot compass? Or what mischief so horrid and
desparate that I dare not attempt, having so many disguises to escape and fly
away in? The old Serpent stood amazed at the transcendent villainy of this
whoreson, and to see himself outdone so by such a youngster, was half ashamed;
some think jealous and afraid too, least in time he might depose him, and usurp
his Kingdom of darkness.

But Sir, to be short, (quoth the friar) you are more afraid then hurt; and I
much admire your intelligence fails you so much. For Pride and Coveteousness,
lying and slandering have made such divisions already, that I hope there is no
more for us to do, but fall upon the spoil: And one thing puts me almost clear
out of doubt, that all will be ours, we have such an Army of friends there, that
are very active, and indeed stout Champions for you: you have Anabaptists,
Brownists, Seperatists, Familists, Antinomians, Arminians, Socinians, Arrians,
Antiscripturists, Antisabbatarians, soul-sleepers, self-seekers, Adamites,
Familists, Independents, and Millions more; but that I am loath to puzzle your
memory with such a Catalogue of hard names. That little Country is grown
Afric yields yearly as many Monsters in Religion, as all that quarter of the
world does in nature.

The old Devil with a filthy shrug and an ugly look, showed some discontent for
all this, for (quoth he) they are most of them suchgrand dissemblers, that I
dare not trust them my self; and their daily railings on me what ever your
opinion is, makes my jealous of them.

What the devil ailes you, quoth the Friar? cannot you tell when you are well? if
they speak against you and do for you; if they put down one sin, and set up
three; pull down one Pope, and set up many thousands; cannot bear with an idle
word, and yet belch out a thousand horrid Blasphemies: I think you are never
the worse, if you can be content, you have more friends then ever you did hope
for; and those that will do more for you, then you can in modesty request, or
ever had the confidence to ask of any reasonable men. For they reject the
Scriptures, refuse the Sacraments, deface, profane, and pull down temples, deny
the Church, supplant the Ministry, damn tithes, though Gods own portion, speak
evil of Dignities, and not only despise, but ovgerthrow all government, and so
lay all level, and common for all comers. Indeed they deny Christ, blaspheme
the holy Trinity, whereat we all tremble, and even curse God to his face: and
now what could you devise to ask more, if you were to be your own chooser? And
now because perhaps another doubt or fear may trouble you, that sure such
horrid things should never find admittance, in any Commonwealth of Christians
or civil men; To resolve you further, I can tell you what pretty engines they
have to screw them in. first, (though tithes be Gods own portion which all the
world knows, he gave to his Ministers for their labors in the Church, and no
man can tell when they were taken away again) yet they have damned tithes, and
all enforced maintenance (as they call it) as Antichristian, when as indeed it
is the only way to set up Antichrist or any thing else, what your self can
devise to possess the many and giddy-headed people withal to require. And so
whereas heretofore it was, like Priests, like people; now it will be a great
deal worse, like people, like Priest: all makes for you still. And this engine
the silly people themselves tug at for a small advantage, though it may prove
their eternal ruin; for when the shepards that watch over the flock are
scattered for want of a livelihood, we may worry the flock at our pleafure. A
second engine, whereby they work in all these abominations, is a Toleration of
Religion, and Liberty of Conscience; for if that be once granted for the ease
of all their tender Consciences; then why not for Papists, Jews, Turks, and
Pagans: for they may have as tender Consciences to plead for, as any of the
other? And if these things be once effected, what profaneness, heresy or
villainy under heaven will not easily be acted? I might add, how they persuade
the people, it is contrary to the freedom of a Gospel-people, to be fettered
with any Laws or Government. And that you may see how well the Laws of man are
like to escape, they have begun with the Law of God, and abrogated that already.
To be brief, Sir; heretofore all the burden of Christendom lay upon my neck,
but now these good souls, have eased me of a great deal of labor, and you of a
great deal of care: The distempers of that Kingdom you shall see ascend to the
head or chief place, and cause a phrensy of confusion; The Aflembly make their
will, and the Parliament by speechless for a time; and if it recovers not beyond
expectation, Iron-sides shall do you such a piece of service, shall make you a
glorious Prince again. The Rogue was heard with the general applause, and good
likeing of all the Assembly, and so the old Devil between hope and fear,
adjourned the Assembly until their next meeting.

We are warned hereby, what a sweet puddle, our false Apostles suck their
principles from: and what black ends their fair pretenses so furiously drive
at, that are so zealous for toleration, and so maliciously mad against all
Church maintenance and Government. They have begun with the Church, and the
vermin lay ferretting at the Common wealth too, and will never leave til they
gnaw out the very bowels of it. And therefore honest Country men, take heed of
those that to please you, and pleasure themselves, plead so hotly against
Tithes. Many there be that plead for the ease of the beast til they get into
the sadle themselves, and then who ride harder then they? Take heed of those
that plead so hard for toleration; those almost Christians, half-Turks,
semi-Jewes; take heed how you hear them, or what you grant them, for they know
not what to ask, or when to make an end: Would their desires were as harmless,
as boundless; but if some speedy course be not taken to stop their farther
progress, we shall have Mahomet the second start up at last, with new
revelations, and in stead of holy Scriptures already condemned, thrust upon us
another Alcaron, patcht up of all the damned Heresies since the beginning. When
their outcries for liberty have silenced all your Laws, then begins your
slavery, not only of Conscience, but of body and goods too; for they can
pillage your goods and cut your throats, and justify it when they have done,
with some new dream or revelation, as their fathers did in Germany; and the
practice whereof themselves have justified in diverse expressions, that their
mad Pamphlets bear the records of. Rub your eyes, be wise, and see in time whom
you trust.

FINIS.

