SOME REASONS Humbly Offered to the Honorable House of Commons, To Hear the
Petitioner John Dennis, when the Report of the Q's and R's shall be Read.
I. THE Report was made or at least composed without hearing the Petitioner's
Complaints.

II. The Petitioner hopes to prove the Report is not so much in the Seamen's
Favor as the Merits of their Case would bear.

III. Three Hardships only, as the Cause of the Seamen's Miseries are
cautiously confessed, ( viz. Turning them over, Lending them, and Want of Pay)
but many more and weighty ones are omitted.

IV. The Petitioner doubts not but to make it appear that the Discipline of the
Navy has greatly differed from the said Report.

V. The Petitioner's Complaint was not against Q's and R's only, or
principally, but the Intent of his Petition was, That this Honorable House
would be pleased to consider whether it is not necessary to establish (by good
and wholesome Laws) the Discipline of the Navy, that the Strength, Wealth and
Honor of the Nation may be preserved thereby.

VI. The Petitioner believes it may be worthy the Consideration of this
Honorable House, whether the Q's as described in the Report are not great
Hardships: It being acknowledged, That all Men set on Shore sick before the 23d
of March 1690, were thereby discharged from the Service, and Tickets were
principally intended for that purpose ( Vide Article 16. of the Lord High
Admirals Instructions to Captains) but by this new Order, when they are set
Sick on Shore, unless they return to the Ships from whence they came, or to
some other of His Majesty's Ships, immediately after they are discharged from
sick Quarters, they are and (as the Report expresses it) have been esteemed as
Deserters, and as such by the Act of Parliament mentioned in the said Report,
are liable to be punished with Death, which Act has several times been put in
Execution against Deserters during the late War.

VII. The Report of the Petitioners having bought the Money of several that are
Queried and Run, and his encouraging the Women to attend this Honorable House,
are equally groundless; he never having bought, or is now interested one Penny
in the one, nor did ever associate himself with, or encourage the others: But
on the contrary has advised them to be moderate, and assured them that their
Clamorous Proceedings would prejudice their Cause.

J. D.

The ADDRESS presented to the Lords of the Admiralty in Feb. School/9.
Sect. I.
My Lords,
BEing employed by diverse Seamen, their Wives, Widows, and others to receive
their Wages, meeting with many unexpected Objections to the Payment of the
same, am obliged to address your Lordships, as well for those I serve, as
others under the like Circumstances; whose Cases in some Particulars shall
humbly lay before your Lordships, and pray Relief therein.

I. Objection. Is Querying those that are set Sick on Shore.

As for such Queries, however His Majesty's Service, and the Nations Safety
might require it in time of War (to keep Mariners to their Duty;) an honorable
Peace being now concluded, although by the strict Rules of the Navy, such Wages
may be denied; yet there are several Motives and Reasons for the taking off
those Queries.

1. The Indigency, Poverty and Misery of those distressed Seamen, and their
Families, were there no other Reason, seems no small Motive to it; especially
considering it is the Labourer's Hire, and his Families Bread.

2. There were no such Queries until the Year 1690, before which time every Man
put on Shore sick, was thereby discharged from the Service, and his Wages duly
paid.

3. The great Sickness which at, and since that time happened in the Fleet,
was, and is the Foundation of those Queries; the which indeed, considering also
the great Mortality that has likewise attended His Majesty's Service, should
rather be Motives for the removing of them.

4. Many of the Persons that have been put on Shore sick, being ignorant of
those new Rules of the Navy, believed themselves discharged as formerly.

5. Many of them have been set on Shore sick several times, and returned to
such Ships, as ordered, but continuing weak and indisposed, have at last
repaired to their own Homes for Recovery.

6. Others having been long Voyages and sick on Board for many Months (seeing
the Major part of their Associates buried;) to such, after they were set sick
on Shore, the thoughts of returning on Board have been dreadful, and deemed the
only means to hasten their ends; which accordingly happened to many that did
return.

7. It could not be expected that those that have contracted Indispositions and
Distempers, by unwholson Provision, or malignant Air, should (after a Months
Refreshment in sick Quarters, or laboring 6 or 12 Months under their Maladies
in an Hospita) be fit to return, or capable of doing His Majesty Service; but
the contrary is evident by the Multitude that died soon after their return on
Board, and others that were again set sick on Shore.

Lastly, Such having faithfully served His Majesty to the imparing of their
Healths, and hazard of their Lives; it seems not only just, but also for His
Majesty's Interest, and the Credit of his Service to grant them the Wages so
hardly earned.

I hope what has been said, with such other Motives, as in Wisdom, Justice and
Charity, Your Lordships find in your own Breasts, may prevail for the taking
off all Queries.

But whatever Your Lordships shall please to direct as to the Queries in
general, the Circumstances of ome are such, that a speedy and general Order
seems absolutely necessary to remove the same.

1. All those that have been set on Shore sick since the Peace concluded. 2.
Such as after Recovery entered on Board any of His Majesty's Ships. 3. Such as
died in sick Quarters, Hospitals, or Hospital-Ships. 4. Such as have been
wounded or hurt, and received Pensions, or Smart-Money for the same. 5. Such as
continued Six Months or upwards in sick Quarters or Hospitals, or have been
discharged thence incurable. 6. Such as the Captains have discharged by Ticket,
Sick, Lame, Blind, Infirm, or otherwise unfit for His Majesty's Service, they
alone being proper Judges of the same.
It may be objected, That Application being made with good Proof of the last
mentioned Circumstance, such Queries may be removed.

May it please your Lordships to consider,

The great Inconveniences that attend such particular Orders, which creates
Tumult and Clamor at both Offices, gives advantage to many that solicit to
exact great part of the Wages for their Assistance, puts the Poor to great
Fatigue and Expense in Attendance, but principally the loss of the opportunity
of the Ships Payment; which may and have caused many to stay 2 or 3 Years for
their Money, or sell it for half the value.

And indeed many of those Queries might be prevented in making up the Pay-Books
of each Ships, and of every Person under the Circumstances aforesaid, notice
might be taken on the said Books; the sick Accounts being in the same Office.

I shall say no more touching Queries, only that every DS should be so
accounted, seems contrary to the first intent of the same; which as I humbly
conceive, were for Commanders to put on such as did not return, and not on
those whom they see cause to discharge.

Sect. II. Another Objection is, Persons being made Run, some of whose
Circumstances may also claim your Lordships Consideration.
1. Such as never designed to desert the Service, but being returned from long
Voyages, and the Ships to which they belong being either in Port or Dock, have
adventured to stray from them, either to see their Friends in parts adjacent,
or provide themselves Apparel, but meeting with other Ships Companies have been
Impressed, and served in such Ships till discharged: Such therefore not deserting
the Service, should not be punished as Deserters, but their R's taken off, and
their Wages paid.

2. Those that have served in His Majesty's Ships, and have been turned over
from one Ship to another, and after having served some time in the later, their
Tickets for the former have been delivered them, which Tickets by the Parties
being set Sick or Shore, or leaving that, or some other suc^^ling Ship, perhaps
a Third or Fourth, and two or three Years after such Tickets delivered, those
Tickets have been Q'd or Run, and the Wages ^^^reby forfeited; with many other
Circumstances of the like nature too tedious to insert.

As Motives to take off the same I shall humbly offer,
Such as have Tickets delivered them, seems in the Eye of Justice to have a
good Title to their Wage.

Those Tickets are and have been esteemed as the King's Bonds or Bills of
Exchange, and formerly paid at sight.

Many well affected People for promoting His Majesty's Service and Interest,
and in Charity to their dstressed Neighbors, have supplied them Value of their
Tickets,

The Querying such Tickets has unspeakably reduced the Credit of the Navy, with
respect to Wages; insomuch that Tickets formerly sold at 2 s. (...) Pound loss,
have of late beed sold at 7 s. and some at 10 or 12 s.

The Miseries and distressed Condition of Seamens Families, whose Husbands and
Relations are serving His Majesty and the Nation, at Sea, being to perish for
want of Credit during their absence; and those who formerly relieved them,
suffering great loss and damage by those Q's and R's, ^olly discouraged from
continuing the same: The Poor therefore must inevitably perish, unless relieved
by the Alms of the Parish, whose burdens (...) are almost intolerable, the
charge of the Poor being now three times more than before the War, and the
major part of those that receive are the (...), Widows, and Families of such as
have served His Majesty during the late War: Much more might be said for the
taking off those R's, yet shall ^^^dd, that it is not inconsistent with
Justice, but very agreeable to the Laws of God, Charity, Mercy, and Pity, and
would not a little contribute (...) Majesty's Interest, the Glory of the
Nation, a more cheerful Contribution to Taxes, the Honor of your Lordships,
the Relief of the Poor, ^^evention of those clamorous Tumults that attend this
Honorable Board.

that has been said may not prevail for the taking off those R's for time past,
my humble Request is, That the like may be prevented for the future, (...)
seems easy, just and reasonable, for those Tickets may be kept by the
Commanders, or in the Office, until the Party have such a Right as not to (...)
the same, by serving such reasonable time as your Lordships shall direct, and
those Tickets when delivered to the Parties, or any other by their (...), to be
good and valid to such Persons as have a Title to the same, which would reduce
those exorbitant Losses, and give good credit to Tick^^^ formerly; and whatever
other Punishment shall be judged meet to be inflicted on the Deserter, besides
forfeiture of Wages due in the Ship he (...); the same may be corporal and not
forfeitue of former Pay, by this the Transgressors will receive their Reward;
by the other their Fami^^ ^ist perish unless relieved, and those that supply
them on the Credit of such Tickets be great Sufferers; and indeed the
delivering of such Tick^^^ ^^ilst they are liable to be forfeited, do but
empower the Party to impose on, and defraud the Innocent,

^^^rposed something touching the Pay, but fearing I have already transgressed
by Prolixity; for which with whatever else may render me obmoxi^^ (...) your
Lordships Censure, I humbly beg your Pardon: the design hereof being for the
relief of the Poor, and free from all thought of Reflec^^^ shall therefore only
add, that the People were never better served, His Majesty's Affairs
dispatched, and Frauds prevented, than by the Clerks ^^^^ing the Pay, when they
had liberty to receive Wages. And subscribe, with all Dutiful Respects,

Your Lordships most Humble and Obedient Servant, John Dennis.


