The CASE of your Hmmble Petitioner, Anne Dennis.
YEt as a free born Subject of England claim the Privilidge of being heard, and
having my Petition presented, and as the Daughter of a Magestrate humbly hope
all in this House being so Peculierly Chosen by, therefore in behalf of the
People will also have that Respect to (Children of the Magestracy who have a
place in this Honorable House, and not being Placed with the Commonalty in
their Fathers life time) will also Mantain them in their Right and Privilige of
Birth, therefore allow my just Complaint and answer me to my Content.

That my Father Alderman Thomas Dennis was Mayor of the City of Oxford in the
year 1643, who with a Loyal and true heart served his Majesty King Charles the
first in the Public and also furnished with some Clothing for his own Royal
Person as Velvet Cloth, Silk, Gold and silver lace, etc and his Highness
Prince Charles and Royal Duke of York all the time of their Residence in
Oxford, who as Heir Presumptive and King in the Throne in 86 when I Petitioned,
Conscience and Honer oblige paments of to prove which Debt appear an account
stated by his Majestes order as by Reference on the Petition to the Lord
Treasurer appears who caused an Auditor to state the same in March 46 who
certifies, that there was then owing 1900 which mean use comes to 6000 (my Just
due) that he was under sequestration by order of both Houses of Parliament in
46 so that by charges and losses sustain by Crediting the Court he was utterly
Ruind that your Petitioners Father in conscience is not indebted since the Year
1666, or supposing he were Honor and pity would have preferred my interest and
bestowd a favor upon me that have lost a fortune of 10000 by the Court,

That the abovesaid Premices disabled my Father from making any other Provision
for my Portion so livelihood which acation my so lawful Solicitiog at Court
for hope a Fathers Estate will never be to old for a Child to manage nor that
a child should be put of from what a Father is able to Leave, for not being in
the Grand Seignors dominions who when the Bashaw dies takes all and gives the
Child what he thinks fit but in a Christian Country so Civilized Court as
should be, tho far from, as I may say, whose Honor should not return it as
almesgivers but apear as Guardian to the Child so left by the Parent who has
served the King, and with the Child's Portion.

Tho it is rather a Heathenish Custom also then fitting an English Court that
Petitions shall not be ansewerd if to none but acquaintance Kindred or
servants, then where is the doing of Justice which ought to be indifferantly
ad-Ministred to all, not regarding acquaintance else how should Loyal Citizens
or persons remote be paid Debts that have no Interest with Lords, and if by any
Accident or tedious Court waiting the persons consern'd are dead the hands of
such as received the money or wares and those that state Debts should be
sufficent testimony, else why (...) hands put to sign any thing to attest the
truth if of no Validity,

That your Petitioner Soliciting at Treasury, in pursuance of her abovesaid
Portion, has been disgraced this (...) last Years beyond all president, and
ranked in disgrace to the Magistracy as the meanest of Persons, defamed in
words, and when I complained, all the Redress was to bid me fly from it, which
I despise as an Innocent. and go home to my own Country, therefore I make my
Application to the Honorable House of Commons to constler my Grievances, and
pay this Debt of the Crown to me.

For I have not been quietly permitted to prefent a Petition to King William,
and when I have had no Redress, and often thrust out by the Yeomen for a
Mad-body, on the 17th of June last our of the House on the Lords Day, that I
was forced to give my Petition on the Highway in the Coach, nor suffer to
attend: but contrary to all common Civility or Morality, Honor from the Court,
or Conscience to me, cause their Door-keepers to af^ront me daily, and using
such Speeches that surely Sodom and Gomorrah would come short of, and 6 times
imprisoned, dragged through the two Courts in White Hall from the Treasury, by
Mr. John Taylor's Order, the 30th of July 98 coming from the Chapel, but that
respect I will show to Children of Mahistrates, if pulled in pieces, not to go
to a Prison appointed for Porters and Footmen, if that be a place for a
Magistrate's Daughter and civil Maiden, indebted to none, about her business,
or coming from Church, let all vindicate or intail that disgrace upon their
Posterity, but I was provoked to swear, I would not eat till I had
satisfaction, as had not in 2 Years only Bread, and since on the 30th of June
last was halled from the Treasury in the Name of the Bishop of Canterbury also,
as on the 30th of July, to my disgrace, and so great hurt; but had they gone a
little father I had sounded, and to spit in my Face, endeavored to break my
Arms, tear my Head-cloths, fling me about to dash my Head to the Wall is sport,
etc. that I go in danger of my Life.

All upon the Account of a private Person, the abovesaid Mr. Tailor, Clark and
the Treasury, but the Lords appearing against me, in countenancing, so causing
Affronts to spoil my Marriage, which true Honor and Piety would have promoted,
considered my Father's Services, but I was denied the Freedom of an Irishwoman,
Pe^sioner, whose pretensions could not stand in competition with mine, nor
would Conscience put me off in that rude manoer without payment to my utter
Ruin, and it is as lawful and proper for a Maiden to go a woing as to do any
other business abroad that have neither Fathers, or Brothers to do it for them.
And I have a privilege which I must stand upon my Honor as a Maiden, which no
Law, Divine or Humane allows infringment of, and which what could repair but
that satisfaction I did, as had so much Reason to petition K. William
concerning, as being his Servant that had so disgraced me in the House, to
cause him to marry your Petitioner so ruined, who sit^ing on the Royal Seat of
K. Charles the First, the 2d. and K James, all 3 my Debtors, but having the
abovesaid Us^ge at Court, therefore present my Case here, your selves also
appointing, and keeping a day of remembrance for the Royal Martyr, which
Civility you will contradict, not paying a piece of such particular service to
him, or any Majesty, the Use of which principal comes to 100 l per Anum
therefore not to be put in a List of disgrace as uncertainty, Not are the
Children of the Kingdom to be thrust out and introduce Strange, Therefore as
Gentlemen afford your help* and appoint some Member to receive my Petition as
one friendless though born in the Kingdom, whose Piety, if Citizens of Heaven
will not desert, but effectually consider the Grievances, and pay the Debt to
me a Treasury Martyr, Therefere your Humble Petitioner.


