THE Desires, and Resolutions OF THE CLVB-MEN OF THE COUNTIES OF Dorset and
Wilts.

WITH The Articles of their Covenant, and certain Directions for the present
behavior, made, and agreed on at a Meeting of the Inhabitants (of the said
Counties) at Gorehedge-corner, May, 25. 1645.

AND Read at Badburie in Dorsetshire, by Mr. YOUNG a Lawyer; where there were
present near 4000 armed, with Clubs, Swords, Bills, Pitch-forkes, and other
several weapons, etc.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by THO. FORCET, 1645.

The Desires and Resolutions of the CLUB-MEN, of the Counties of Dorset and
Wilts.
We the miserable Inhabitants of the said Counties being too too deeply
touched with the apprehension, and sense of our past, and present sufferings,
occasioned only by these Civil, and unnatural Wars within this Kingdom: And
finding by sad experience, that by means thereof, the true worship of Almighty
God, and our Religion are almost forgotten, and that our ancient Laws, and
Liberties, contrary to the great Charter of England, and the Petition of Right,
are altogether swallowed up in the Arbitrary power of the Sword. And
foreseeing that Destruction; F^mine, and utter Desolation will inevitably fall
upon us, our wives, and children (unless God of his infinite mercy shall upon
our true humiliation be graciously pleased to impose a period to these sad
distractions) are unanimously resolved, wherein we desire the concurrence of
all the Garrisons of this County to join in Petitioning His Majesty, and the
two Houses of Parliament for an happy Peace, and accommodation of the present
differences, without further effusion of Christian blood. Without which
accommodation, we cannot expect the enjoyment of our Religion, Liberties, or
properties. And lest any false aspersion of indevouring, or desiring to
introduce Popery, or Arbitrary government should be cast on all, or any of us,
we do al with one heart and mind, profess before God, and the world, our
selves enemies to both. And that we aim at nothing herein, save only the glory
of God, and the good of the Church and State. And for that purpose we do here
declare, that we really intend to the utmost hazard of our lives, and fortunes.

First, To maintain, and defend the true reformed Protestant Religion, and the
Inheritance of the Crown.

Secondly, To join with, and assist one another in the mutual defense of our
Liberties, and Properties against all Plunderers, and all other unlawful
violence whatsoever.

Thirdly, We do hereby resolve, and faithfully promise each to other, that if
any person or persons whatsoever, who shall concur with, and assist us in
these our Resolutions, happen to suffer in his person or estate in the
execution of the premises, that shall be accounted as the suffering of the
generality, and reparation shall be made to the party suffering, according to
his damages; and in case loss of life, provision shall be made for his wife
and children, and that at the Countries charge.

Fourthly, We do hereby declare all such unworthy of our assistance, as shall
refuse to join with us in the prosecution of these our Just intentions

Certain Directions for present behavior, made, and agreed on at a meeting of
the Inhabitants of Dorset, and Wilts at Gore-hedge-corner. May 25. 1645.
WHEREAS by the Articles of our Association, we challenge unto our selves no
other freedom for the present from the burden of wars, then to preserve our
selves from Plunder, and all other unlawful violence: It is therefore advised
by the generality, that until such time as we receive answer to our Petitions
from His Majesty, and the Houses of Parliament. First,

1 That every Town, Tything, and Parish, and great Hamlet, make present choice
of Three, or more, of the ablest men for wisdom, valor, and estate,
inhabitants of the same, unto whom at all times they may repair for
assistance, and direction.

2 That the Constables, Tythingmen, or any other Officers of the Town,
Tything, Parish or Liberty, in pursuance of the Statute in that case provided,
set a constant watch of two men, at the least, every night well armed, and by
day also if need require: And the number of the Watch men to be increased
according to the direction of the said able men, and Officers.

3 That the Watchmen be charged not to stop or examine any Soldier in his
march, nor any other Passenger that passes peaceably, but if they be friendly
spoken unto by the Passenger, to return a friendly answer to him again, to
encourage him in his peaceable behavior.

4 That the Watchmen keep walking in their Precincts, in as much secrecy as
conveniently they may, to avoid a sudden surprisall; and as soon as they, or
either of them descrie any violence offered to any person, house or goods, (if
they are not of sufficient strength themselves to suppress or stop the said
violence) then one of them presently repairing to one or more of the said able
men, by his or their advise, to raise the Parish, Town, or Hamlet into Arms to
assist the distressed, and the other Watchman with all speed to repair to the
next neighboring Watch or Watches, if need so require, and there in like
manner raising the same into Arms. To bring presently with him half of the
men there Armed to releeve the distressed, the other half to remain there
ready Armed in their own Precincts, to protect the same, and apprehend the
Plunderers in their retreat.

5 That all such as pretend themselves to be Soldiers, and are taken
Plundring, or doing any other unlawful violence, be presently dis-armed, and
after examination, (having confessed unto which Army he does belong) to be
safely guarded thither, (together with sufficient witness to prove the
offense) from Tithing to Tithing, until they be brought to the next Garrison
belonging to the said Army, and there to be delivered unto the Commander in
Chief, with tender of witnesses to prove the crime. But in case they say,
they belong to an Army which does Quarter near the place where the offense was
committed, then in the like manner, to convey them to the Commander in chief of
the said Army.

6 That to avoid false Alarmes, no men rise into Arms, but such as are so
summoned by the Watchmen, unless they see apparent violence, or in case the
watchmen be defective, or surprised, or to be called by a very probable out cry.

7 That all men furnish themselves with as much, and good Arms, Weapons. and
Ammunition, as they can procure, and the rich out of a good conscience to
relieve the poor herein, as also in their labors of Watching, and other
assistance, in some proportionable measure.

8 That the Contribution-money, and all provision, and necessary maintenance
for the Armies, if it be demanded by a lawful Warrant, directed to the Officer
of the place, be not denied, but every man as he is able, in some reasonable
proportion forthwith to contribute; and for those that are truly unable,
certificate of their inability to be made by the said Officer, with advice of
the said chosen able men of the place, unto their Commander in Chief, from
whom the Warrant issued, with Petition for respite, and mitigation of the
proportion of the said Warrant required, until they shall be better enabled.

9 If Quarter be demanded according to Order Martial, the Soldier to be
friendly entertained, behaving himself fairly in his Quarters. But if they
Plunder, or offer any other violence, then to be restrained, and delivered
unto his Commander in chief to be by him corrected.

If any inconvenience shall be found to ensue on the observation of these
Directions. It is desired to be made known at the next general Randevouz, that
upon consultation had, it may be amended.

Vera Copia.

FINIS.

