A DIALOGUE, BETWEEN George Keith, AND AN Eminent Quaker, ^elating to his
coming over to the Church of England.

With some modest Reflections on Mr. Keith's Two first Sermons, Preached at St.
Georges Buttolphs Church on Sunday May the 12th. 1700.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1700.

A DIALOGUE, BETWEEN George Keith, and an Eminent Quaker, etc.
GEorge Keith. Well Friend; what does my Quandum Brethren say of me since I
left their Society.


Quaker. Say of thee, marry, no more than what (...) and most good People think
of thee.


G. K. Prithee what is that?


Q. Why, to be plain with thee, thou are a me^^^ Weathercock and a Friend to
nothing, but the Mamon o^ Unrighteousness; and having left the Truth and the
Light for the Wages of Sin; therefore consequently thou ar^ in the Gaul of
Bitterness and in the Bond of Iniquity.


G. K. Nay, this is no more than what I expected from a Quaker, but Spleen and
ill Nature, for I have experinced to my cost, that nothing but Nonsense and
Contradiction will be Relished among you: Its well known I left you for no
other cause, but for your Erroneous and Vile Principals, in appearing to the
World to be Peaceable Humble, Hon^^^, True, and Sincere, when in Reality, your
Society is made up of little else, but Envy secret Malice, Bitterness, Pride,
Deceit, and Fraud. Though covered over with the notion of Sainctty, and this is
the real Fundamentals of your Hocus Pocus, or Art of Ledgerdmain, and is at
this Day very finely Acted and Humored among you.


Q. Well George I am not inclind to Quarrel with thee neither am I prepared to
enter into a Dispute with thee at this time, by reason Satan has not only
puffed thee up, but furnished thee with railing accusation against us: But
leaving the Lord to rebuke thee, I shall only ask thee some Questions, and so
proceed moderatly in serious Discourse.


G. K. You may ask me what Questions you please (provided they be not
Impertinent ones) I will endeavor to Answer them, as well as I can.


Q. Pray George tell me, why thou lefts the Religion thou weret brought up in,
and join thy self to our Profession, if thou did not see something in it,
that invited thee to it? And if thou saw any thing amongst us, (especially
in the Doctrinal part) that was so very Wicked, Vile and Erronous, as thou
seem to Insinuate, it is strange, being so cuning as thou art, thou did not
find it out till now, having been so long amongst us.


G. K. As to your first Question, its true, I was at first mightily taken with
your modest Apparel, Behavior, abstenace from Oaths, and abundance of other
pretended Virtues, these were the delusive Bates that caught me, and many
others, and was so cunningly Supported with that new invented Prattle, ( I wont
say Doctrine) of the Light within, that your Villainy and Deceit, were so Dark
without that, I could not quickly descern it: And to the other Question it is
well known both in Pensilvania and other places, I long ago openly Protested
against many of your Errors, and notorious Impieties, and by Gods blessings
Convinced many of their Wickedness, who are now ready to Confess that
presumptious notion of the Light within was nothing but the Spirit of Error and
Delusion.


Q. Well I see thy carnal Thoughts begins to prompt thee to Passon and Heat,
but it being no new thing in thee I pass it by: But I must tell thee, thy
hopping from Perk to Perk, after this rate makes thee in my opinion smell very
Rank of a late Salamanca Dr. tho in Charity to thy aged Carcass, I wish thee
better Success, than he had, and leave thy deserts to thy self.


G. K. I see nothing but Sense comes amiss to a Quaker; here is a Comparison with
a Contradiction in the Belly of it, the Docter you speak of revolted from the
Church to the Baptist, and I from the Baptist to the Church, so that here is a
down right Contrarity in stead of a Parralle.


Q. Pray George been't so Angrey, the Comparison is not so Wide as its Odious,
for you both hopp'd, and both to one Church too, tho not both at a time, nor
both one way, for now I think on it the Baptist and Church of England made an
Exchange, for Two turn Coats, but which has got the best Bargain is hard to
Determine.


G. K. Well, well for all your Reflections it is well known I am highly esteemed
of and I am satisfied that I am Changed for the Better, and as for others who
have changed their Opinions in Religion (which you are pleased to call Hopping)
if they keep out from herding among the Quakers there may be some hopes of
them, but if once deluded and decoyed with your pretended Light within, it
proves such a Cloak for Deceit and Knavery that very few, without a Miracle are
reclam'd; it being little less than bewitching.


Q. Nay I have promised, I will not engage in a Quarrel, with thee therefore
for bare these tart Arguments, and tell me what an Auditory thou hadest at
Billings-gate Steeple-house Sermons.


G. K. I assure you a very numerous Company, came both fore, and afternoon, of
all Ages and Quallities, which is an infailible argument of their approving my
Doctrine.


Q. Not at all George in my Opinion, for I have seen almost as great a Crowd at
Bedlam, to hear and see the mad Folks there, and indeed its no strange thing
to see the Multitude run after Novelties, an instance of which we had not long
since of the White Parson, who Preached against Hirlings, and tho a Docterin
quite contrary to thine, he drew more numerous Multitudes after him than came
to thy Sermon.


G. K. Here Is another fine comparison again, but you mistake the place, its
Grace-church street Meeting House, that is a more nearer Type of Bedlam, it
being thronged always so full of Fools and Mad Men, both Speakers and Hearers
being little better; and to render the Emblem more exact, the Holders Forth are
not only gifted with the motions, actions, and postures of Lunaticks, but they
humor their very Tone too to a Miracle.


Q. Truly George thy Tongue's no slander otherwise perhaps I might frame an
answer suitable enough to thy railery; But to let thee see my good nature, I
can as easily forgive thee for what thou have done, as some Charitable People,
Cherrish Old Lame Defective and Foundred Horses, for the strength they had
formerly. Yet before we part I must tell thee that the White Parson 's Doctrine
and thine in some measure agrees for though he Preached down hire because he had
lost it, thou Preached it up in hopes to obtain it.


G. K. You talk of good Nature, when it is well known, you are altogether
strangers to it, else what means your Tribe by calling me Liar, False,
Treacherous, and Deceitful Man, Wicked and Malicious, and for no other cause
but by exposing their ernonious and false Principals; therefore knowing my
Innocence, and their odious Clamours, and false Accusations, the Crime will ly
at their Doors in calling Names; and I shall bear Revilings with the greater
Patience.


Q. But George those things, which thou now call, Vile, Errovr, and
Herisies, thou for some Years preached up and Applauded, and did affirm,
that in so doing thou hadest a divine Sense and Acceptance, and that thou very
zealously Labored to defend them, by many cuning Arguments.


G. K. I deny that I ever so much as Endeavored to defend those vile Errors,
which oppose the four great Fundamental Doctrine of the Christian Religion,
which I have since charged them with, or indeed any other Article of the
Christian Faith, prorerly so called: But suppose I did endeaver to mantain,
your Heritical Notions (while under a mistaken zeal) is that an Argument of my
doing so always: Must Paul be thought an unsound Christian, because he was once
a Persecuting Jew, and continue a Persecuter, and a blind Leader of the Blind,
for fear of being called an Apostate, from the Principles he retained in the
Days of his Ignorance; If this be the sense of your Arguments, you may with as
much reason Exclaim against the Man, who used for several Years last past, to
walk willfuly about the Streets without Clothes, and be angey with him for
Clothing himself, because he used to go Naked, as to rail at me for leaving
that Society, which my Conscence as well as Reason tells me is most notoriously
Misled, but no wonder to hear Quakers Argue at this rate, when they themselves
are constant in nothing, but Contradiction and Nonsense; for if any one should
ask what Religion you profess, I am sure no better Answer could be made than
that no body knows, nor your selves neither; therefore its great Pity, this
Inscription is not set over all the Doors of your Meeting Houses, viz. This
Place is Dedicated to the unknown God.


Q. Away with this Sophistry, and Critical Reflections; I plainly perceive that
thy Back is Risen in a great measure against me; prithee George abate thy
carnal passion, and lay aside all prejudice and ill Will: For to be plain with
thee if thy separation from us be purely for Conscience sake, I am so far from
blaming thee that I highly commend thee, but if this change proceeds from the
hopes of worldly Gain or self Interest thou are in a most sad and deplorable
Pickle, and consequently, will add but little Credit to the Church of England,
or solid satisfaction to thy self, in the long run.


G. K. It Is but lost Labor to discourse with such an Iliterate Cox-com as a
Quaker; have not I sufficiently informed the World in my two Sermons lately
published, that it was the Quakers vile Errors base Principals, wild Frentick,
and abominable Delusions, which you so much cry up for the true Light and
movements of the Spirit, the caused me to Relinquish their Society, and no any
Interest of Worldly advantage as many o^ you so falsely, as well as foolishly
Imagine.


Q. Well George if it prove so 'twill be thy own another Day. But it is a Riddle
to me, to see thee play Fas. and Loose at this strange rate, and to tell thee
freel my thoughts, thy Black Gown don't at all become thee however thou thinks
of thy self, I mean as to thy outward Tabernacle, for inwardly the Light has
been long Extinguished: Therefore I leave thee as a lost and undone Vessel: For
thy very Sermons bespeaks thee no less.


G. K. I vallue not what the Quakers say of me I am sure my Sermons has gained
a general approbation and kind reception, and had been much esteemed had not an
Ignorant and Illiterate Person of your Society thrown out a sham one to
disgrace me, it being stuffed with nothing but impertinence, trash and rediculous
Nonsense from one end to the other, which plainly shows the Malice, Envy
Govetousness and Fraud of those sort of People, notwithstanding, their
pretended Light purity, honesty and plain dealing, so at present Farewell.


FINIS.

