Look to it London, Threatened to be fired by Wilde-fire-zeal,
Schismatical-faction, and Militant-mammon.
Discovered July 15. 1648. in a Discourse with one Croply and Hide, by one John
Dias, one of Captain Whaleys Regiment: Extant in a printed Schedule, here
verbatim Inserted and Commented.

The Preface to the Premonition.
AT my first approach to this City out of the Country, I was saluted with this
which Dias has vented against the King, Kingdom and City; which perusing, I
was in a great suspense, and my thoughts cast in dubious scales what to think
of it: Charity that is candid, and not rashly credulous, caused me to conceit
that it was but some mere fiction or chymera, invented like many idle
Pamphlets, coined news, feigned Passages and Declarations, like beggars
passports made under a hedge, and as the Piae frauds, the lying legends of
Monks and Friars, divulged by our vulgar Mercuries, to squeaze moneys from the
gulled credulities of Plebeians: withal, when I heard that some Catilinarians,
Church and State-firebrands, did employ their Agents, as the devils
working-tools, to coin and mint out of Pluto's forge lewd and loud lies,
scandals and satirical invectives, only to sow the seeds of division, and cast
their Atae's brands and balls betwixt King and Parliament, camp and city, to
render them still in a further distance, I conjectured this pay-squib to be of
that nature: so giving no more credit to it then to AEsops Fables, or a
Canterbury tale, I slighted it

But two days after discoursing with one, what he thought of the truth of it,
he gave this hint, that one accidentally meeting with the Copy, printed and
published it; and that there came two men, [which in probability were Croply
and Hide, the subscribers to it] who were very inquisitive after the said
Publisher, being in some passion that it was divulged without their consent;
adding withal, that he need not to have printed it in corners, nor to have
vented it in hugger-mugger; since all the passages in it were true, as they
would confirm by their oaths: This passage gave me some light into the reallity
of it, and was some inducement unto me, to think it was not altogether
fabulous. Yet, notwithstanding all this, my charity was of so large a size,
that I thought it was but one Doctor Dulmans opinion, the Ignis Fatuus, or
Brutum Fulmen of one Bragadochian soldier; the fools bolt soon shot, of one
John Dias, whose tongue ran wrong Bias. Hence I thought it as unworthy of my
genius to answer it, as for an Eagle to stoop to a Fly, or an Elephant to a
Mouse: but besides the urgings and sollicitings of some judicious friends, who
spurred me on to give some critical observations of the fiery and factious
passages in this spleenitive and zeal-drunk discourse: hoping the best, that
the most and the best in the Army had neither head, hand, nor heart in these
destructive Menaces sprinkled now in Print: yet fearing the worst, that this
Di-ass in presenti, had some birds in the Army of his own bloody feather, who
sung his notes; (in which I was the more grounded by paralelling the
particulars here with some things in this nature which (...) Martialists vented
even to my self not many (...) As also knowing that often a man may know by the
Market-folk how the Market rules; and that the nature of many wolves may be
seen in one: since also abundans cautela non nocet, abundant circumspection
never did hurt; no more then preventing physic against a feared disease: I
thought good by a warning piece with powder, ere the threatened bullet be felt,
or the match, fire and saltpeter unsavorily finelt, to awaken secure
Troynovant to a cautelous watching of their own Sinons within them, confederate
with armed Greeks without, ere the flames be kindled in their houses, which
here break as a sulphurous Aetna out of the mouth of this Mounsier Malignant,
whose tongue, fired by Hell, is a world of wickedness. Hereupon, ex tempore, as
the Printer can depose, without any other book or manuscript then a naked room,
in a declarative descant on this plain and vain song, I porcupined my pen to
run at Tilt with this Junior Donquixot, this City-firing orlando furioso,
acting the parts here on a paper-stage of an Hercules surens, and mad Ajax, or
at least of Sir Henry Hotspur, and Sir Ferdinando Flash, who here vents his
mind with his wind: which windy bladder I thus pen-prick in this subsequent
synopsis, and survey of every black and bloody word in his mouths shop, from
the warehouse of his Canniballized heart.

First, he declared, The Resolution of the Army was to fight for themselves.

[The Resolution.] Its an excellent spirit to be resolute in a good cause: as
Daniel resolved not to pollute himself with the Kings meat; Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego, not to bow to the Kings image, more then some ex moliori luto;
that would not so much as bow to an English Baal, an Altar. So Luther is
resolute to go to Worms, if every tile on their houses were a devil; though he
should suffer as much as Jerome of Prague and John Huss at the inconstant
Counsel at Constance. But to be resolute in a bad cause, like some Popish
Pseudomartyrs, and the French Byron, whose great spirit would not submit to the
mercy of the French King, no more then Cato of Vtica to Caesar's pardon; or
Cleopatra to grace Augustus his triumph: this savors either of swollen pride, or
perverse self-will, or main folly, and childish simplicity to hold a candle in
the hand till it burn the singers; or a hardy wasp till she sting.

[To fight for themselves:] In which though many acute and nasuted Critics are
not deceived, thinking no better of it at the first then Noah of his son, nec
de eo melius speravi; yet many that did conside more in them, that they had
fought like second Joshuahs, and Gideons, and David's, and Jonathans, the Lords
battles, and not their own, at least like the best Paganish Patriots, pro aris
and focis, for Religion and the peace and safety of the Kingdom, reading now
that all their streams run homeward for themselves and their own ends, they cry
quant a de spe, de re decidi, we are souly deceived in them: if it be true (as
perhaps it is not) which this soul mouth blatters, but I hope they do not, dare
verba (et verbera,) feed us as fools and children with fair words, and delude
us as Zeuxis deluded hungry birds with painted grapes; or as Faustus and
Apollonius their guests with painted dishes: if it proves thus, all is not gold
that glisters: and in men's hearts are many odd corners (against all that should
oppose them) whether King, Parliament, Church, State, Senate, Synod, or
God-himself. I scarce believe they be such Junior Caesar's with Romanized
Resolves, and their Facta est alea, to hoyst fails against all surging waves:
or second Hannibals, to cut the ways to their own ends through Flints and Rocks
with fire and vinegar; yea to cut with Alexanders sword all Gordian knots of
difficulties and dangers; though I know withal how virulent and violent
self-love is, and self-will, how headstrong boiling passions and
perturbations, like Bellerophons horses unbridled with Minerva's bit, of sollid
wisdom.

[They resolved not to be governed by a King:] No more did those sons of Belial
who despised Saul, and brought him no presents, 1 Samuel 11. nor those that said,
To your Tents, O Israel, what have we to do with the son of Jesse, 2 Samuel 20.
Nor those in the Psalmist, who said, Let us break their bonds and cast their
cords from us, whom the King of Sion threatens to crush as a potters vessel,
Psa. 2.

[Not to be governed] Kit after kind, its natural for all, both birds, bruites
and beasts, as well as wild men, to desire licentious liberty; (like Popery
and frenzy) it runs in a blood: 2. withal they sympathize with their
predecessors in Saint Peter and Jude; these makers of Sects speak evil of
dignities and despise government. The devil is semper idem, no changeling in
his ways and ends, he acts still the same parts in all ages, only the sceans,
stage, and persons being changed: he has had always his Levellers, who made no
difference betwixt high and low, superior and inferior in Church and State, who
have villified, yea nulled both Moses and Aaron, Magistracy and Ministry, and
have pleaded for, and practiced an Anarchy, an Ataxy, a Platonical and an
Anabaptistical community. Oh this government! how degenerate and unregenerate
Nature snuffs at it, as the wild Onager in Job snuffs up the wind! how every
mad colt wrathfully champs the curbing bit, and would cast his rider! how glad
would the frogs be rid of their storks, that theymight croak what poysond stuff
they pleased, in every corner

[Not to be governed by a King,] But like the Arabians and Tartars, and the
Nomades, and the Troglodites, and those about Mount Caucasus, to wander, and
rave, and rake, and ramble, and scramble at pleasure without controu: for had
they a King they could not lick their fingers, nor feather their silver wings,
nor build their nests on high, nor set up a Dagon, a morstrum horrendum, a
hotch-potch of all Religions, called Liberty of Conscience, for the Turks
Alcaron, the Jewish Thalmud, the Papal Miter and Mass, yea for Simon Magus and
his Hellena, Montanus and his Priscilla; for Bohemian naked Adamites, Belgic
Familists and Enthusiasts, Germane David Georgians, Arminians, Photinians, and
who not, even quicunque vult, as likely to agree together in one Land, as so
many cocks in one pit, or the heads of the serpent Amphisbena, one fighting
against another.

[No King,] But an Aristocracy, or Democracy of that beast with many heads, the
multitude, (ruling at best by their Tribunes:) no Monarchy, no King, which all
Nations, as well as the Israclites, have ever desired; yea, which the bees
subject themselves unto in their Amazonian and Platonical Commonwealth.

[No King,] Oh quam multos Dominos habet qui unum non habet: how many Kings
shall we have, if not one King! In a Turkish Tyranny, every lust will be a Lord
Dane; every Sect, Schism and Heresy, a domineering King: as when there was no
King in Israel: every man will believe, say, and do, ad libitum and placitum,
what he pleases: the strongest, like birds and beasts of prey, feed on the
weakest; as Pikes in a pond on the lesser Fry: But if their Resolution be (as
the present acts of their Leaders and Governors now speak their intentions)
that they will have no evil-counselled King, spurd on at this instant, without
any modification, by his Junior Achitophels and Court-Hamans; as a Lion grated,
batted, and incensed, with a wrathful paw, to tear his best Patriots, and all
that have opposed, not him, but his illcounselled late postures and passages:
If they desire the Lion spurred on to be rampant, to be piously patient and
passant: and so making an Act of Oblivion of real or imaginary affronts, writ
in dust, or drowned in Leth, to rule merely for and not against the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah; in this we shall be still more beholden to the (formerly well
improved) prudence, prowess, and piety of the General, and his worthiest
Commilitones, not regarding the brayings of this dull Ass, and of some other
lesser blatrant Beasts of the Forest, who would have the Lion still in his
grate, and to be no King: as if the Heavens and our Horizon should have no sun,
and the body should be Cyclopical, and Polyphemiz'd without eyes, yea without a
head.

And that nothing vexed them more then the Parl'aments recalling their
Declarations of making no more Addresses to the King.

Vexed them more.] Good men are vexed with the sins and sufferings of
themselves, and of others, as was David, Psalm 119. Lot, 2 Pet. 2. Jeremiah,
Chap. 9. 1. and others: but to be vexed for well doing, and to be enraged, as
Unicorns and Turkicocks, at the fight of red Stammels, at what is legal, or
will admit of a good construction, is, for men to fight with their own shadows,
or as Donquixot with Rams, and windmils for Giants, or as enraged Ajax with
herds of sheep, for Ulisses: Vexation and sorrow be good for nothing but sin.

The Parliaments recalling their Declarations.] Is not he well studied in the
Statutes, that knows not how many Parliamentary Acts have been repealed in
every Kings Reign? 2. Are their acts like the decrees of the Medes and
Persians; yea, as Gods decree, not to be recalled. 3. Have not the learnedest
Synods and Councels erred? As that of Lateran, of Calcedon, and lately at
Trent, with many more? are all Councels with these four which S. Gregory so
honored, to be equalized with the four Evangelists? 4. Are our Patritians Gods
or Angels? are they not men? and so subjected, errare, decipi, to humane
frailties, like Elias, lames 5? may they not humani aliquld pati, as well as
the best of mere men, be in some things erroneous, as the clear Sun and Moon
are subjected to their cloudings and eclipsings? 5. Is not an inconvenience
better then a mischief? better to recall an Error, then to persist in it: better
to be Epimetheus, afterwise, then not wise, since errare humanum, preserverare
diabolicum, at all? as its said of the English and French, that they are wise
afterward; and of the Spaniards and Italians, wise before: yet beg him for a
fool that is wise, neither before nor after, that like him who has bad cards,
and bad casting at dice, (which is now a high Courts Case,) does not help it as
he may in after-play.

Sixthly, Though Inconstancy, to weave and unweave, like Penelope, to act and
react, and recall, be a brand or a blot in many men of great parts and great
spirits, changing their minds every day, as Nero his suits, as though they were
naught but changeable taffaty; yet may not wise men change their Resolutions,
as David did, resolving to march against Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. as Hares and
Hedghogs change their forms, as the winds of cross occasions blow? If I resolve
a journey, yet being informed, that there is Leo in via, a Lion in the way, a
French Assassinate, Italian Bandetties, or a plundering Nimrodian, to cut my
throat for my purse, may I not recall my resolves for traveling that way?

Seventhly, Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas, Can the wisest man
foresee the issues and events of all good causes? Whether preaching will soften
a Josiah like wax, or Sunlike obdurate a Pharaoh like clay, for breaking; as ex
malis moribus bonae leges, good Laws proceed from evil manners: so who knows
what evil consequences may come of good acts, like bad stomachs, which turn
good meat into evil humors?

Eighthly, As David himself said, he was in a great strait, 2 Samuel, 24. the best
and wisest of men may sometimes be in such straits, so sail betwixt a Scylla
and Caribdis, two contrary Rocks, that all their wit and policy cannot evade
their dashing, if not splitting, yea often shipwracking, of credit, conscience,
or both: The body Political, (like the body natural, laboring of a dropsy,
and a yellow or black Jaundice both at once, from contrary causes,) may be so
diversifiedly diseased, that the best state-Physitian knows not how to cure the
one, but he indangers killing, by increasing the other, the salve proving also
often more dangerous then the fore; as to him who cut off his toes to cure the
raging Gout: All these may be applied to Parliamentary Actings, and reactings,
and repealings, so often; like Mariners, now hoisting up sails in calms, present
or hoped, now pulling them down, yea cutting down the main mast, and every man
pumping for life, in tempestuous storms.

And being asked, why they did not declare, he answered, that yet it was no
time.

No time,] Omne tempus habet, Every thing has a time for mirth, or for
mourning, for solace, or sorrow, Eccles. 3. only there is no time for sinning;
which like snow in June, and rain in Harvest, is still out of time, and as
harsh music out of tune too; though every time is not fit for every truth to
be brosched, (as pearls unfit for swine, and holy things for dogs,) yet there
is not time for Gusmans cheats, and Jesuitical Equivocations, or for Judas his
treacherous kiss, or Joabs embracing stab; no time to be watched for mischief,
as Wolves and Lions for their preys: And indeed this wrtching a time, for base
or bloody ends, favors strongly of an Esaus spirit, who plumps and fats his
spleen with the hoped time of his Fathers death, and then he will wreak his
wrath on his supplanting Brother, Genesis 27. and on Cain, the murderers spirit,
1 John 3. 13. who watched his time to butcher innocent Abell, Genesis 4. Yea, it
sympathizeth with all wicked ones, who watch their times (as the Adulterer the
twilight, the silent Serpent his opportunity to sting, and the birding Cat the
bushed sparrow,) how to execute their pestilent devises: as the Papist s hoped
a time, after the death of Queen Elizabeth, that all would be their own; then
up Moah, and to the spoil: In the mean time, rebus sic stantibus, as the case
stood, they have liberty of conscience from the Pope (the only Monopolizer of
that Mungril,) to be religious Hermaphrodites, Papists, Protestants, either, or
neither, as stood best for their own ends, by pens, pikes, fires, or faggots:
See your faces in the glass of that Tyrant, that lies lutking, and couchant
for a time, to be rampant. Psalm 10.

Shortly, he did not doubt but all would be their own.

Shortly.] This short-lye may prove a short or a long lie: as some sluggish
servants presently, often proves a present lie; as Christ's Flesh held really in
the Sacrament by Papists, is a reall-lye.

Shortly.] How his lips water at the golden prey, which he, and such as he,
have gulpht down and devoured in their hopes, as the Foxes lips water at the
grapes and pullein, and the Cats at the fish, which they have not yet caught;
and indeed (as when the Pope gave Ireland to Tyrone,) if he could conquer it,
all the craft is in the catching; win gold and wear it: But as a long man said
of a short cloak which he borrwoed, he would make it long enough ere he
restored it; so this fellow, that is one of the Hastings, in his hot desires,
may perhaps dance attendance long enough, and cool his toes, like the
schriech-owl, ere he see them effected; his music with silver strings may be
so long in tuning, as may turn him all into frets, for all his shortly.

He did not doubt.] Indeed the strongest faith, even of an Abraham, a Sarah,
Genesis 17. a Zachariah, Luke 1. a David, when he dissembled a madness, 1 Samuel 21.
a Thomas Didimus, John 20. and of the Apostles themselves, has been mixed with
doubtings; as cold with heat in lukewarm water, and darkness with light, in
the twilight; which doubting is like sore lips in a sickness; a bad thing in
it self, yet a good sign of health; and its the strongest faith that rests and
confides in God, in the greatest exigents, as did Abraham, hoping against hope,
Romans 4. and Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16. and Iehosophat, 2 Chronicles. 20. and David, 1 Samuel
30. 6. But to be confident in evil, as Witches, Conjuerers, and Necromancers,
give the Devil a faith, who, is Gods Ape, promises them his assistance; and as
the Collier was wished to give the Romish Church an implicit faith, and to pin
his soul on the Popes sleeve, to carry it to Heaven or to Hell: This bold and
brazen-faced folly and presumption builds but as on an Irish Bog, and ditcheth
the soul in the lowest Hell.

He did not doubt but all would be their own.] But, festina lent, he may first
fast all the turkish Lents, ere he feast in Apollos with a Lucullus. Cursed Cows
have short horns: Iezabel did not doubt but to take off the head of Elias, 1
Kings 21. but the dogs shall first eat her for Carrion: Benhadab in his drink
doubts not but to take the forces of Israel alive, but his hopes were strangled
in these Halters, which his Courtiers wore about their necks, as their best
Tiffany. 1 Kings 20. Saul doubts not but to take David intrentcht, as in a
trap, 1 Samuel 23. And that railing Rabshekah, and blasphemous Senacherib, doubt
not but to swallow up Hezekiah and his people, as the Whale did Jonas; but God
had a hook in both their noses, 2 Kings 19. Goliath doubts not but to give
David's flesh to the fowls of the air, but David, with a slinged stone, dasheth
all these hopes, with his brains out of his foolish head, 1 Samuel 17. So the
Spanish Armado, in the year 88, christened invincible, by the Nun of Lisbon,
(the Devil being the Godfather, and Pride the God-mother,) hoped to make
England a Chaos of confusion; and Fernesius the Prince of Perma doubted not but
to ride his horse up to the saddle in the blood of the Lutherans; but God so
sought for the Protestants, yea the winds and the waves, as once for Honorius,
as the Red Sea once against Pharaoh, the Stars, and the River Kishon against
Sisera, halistones from Heaven against the Amalakites, and Hornets against the
Canaanites, that all these felt and found what it was to fight against God, to
kick against the prick, and to reckon without their Host, as this fond
Braggadocheo sells the Fox skin before he be caught, and reckons his chickens
before they be harcht.

All would be their own.] All their own? What will not part serve? as some
Gentleman pay their debts, by a kind of Synecdoche, called pars pro toto, a part
for the whole; will he and his outstrip the Pope, that great Participle, who
takes part from the Clergy, part from the Secular, and part from both? Will
these Harpies play sweep-stake, and take all, both stock and thwatch, harvest
and gleanings; all from Courts, Carts, and Crown; from City and Country, from
Church and State? All? both Gold and Government, Power and Pelf; Will they as
Cormorants devour all before them? as the Goths and Vandals, when they over
ran Italy and Lumbardy; will they swallow up all as flap Dragons? Gods part and
all? Will they rob Altars make with Pompey Temples Stables for Horses? shave
off Esculapius golden beard: reave the Tholous gold: rake not only (as the
Spaniards with the Indians, and the Romans with the Jews) into the guts of the
living; but as Darius, once, into the sepulchers of the dead for gold: Oh will
these Catepillers eat all the green things of the Land, as the Egyptian
Locusts, called Monks and Friars often in this our Albion, our Terra florida:
Will they monopolize all? and leave neither the Clergies part, the tenth; nor
the widows part, the thirds. Will they rob the spittle and shear the Ape? Will
they make a mad medley of the dogs hair and the wool of a Baboon? Oh, sure,
however such as are the botts and glaunders in the Army, the Achans in the
Camp, seed on such base and sordid projects, as Scarabean fleas on dunghils;
who mayfor all their gaping jaws miss their fat morsels, as Aesops dog mist the
substance for a snatched shadow; and as Ixion embraced a Cloud for Juno; their
brag being a good dog, yet catching nothing: yet I am persuaded, the noble and
generous spirits in the Army, yea still in my old phrase the best and the most,
are as far from such dunghill thoughts, and from stooping to such base Lures,
that if Satan or his organs did but dart them into their hearts, they would
pump them out again, as Mariners waters out of their ships; yea cast them out
as new wines poison out of the barrels, and the seas their froth to the shores:
God forbid we should condemn all the Disciples for some Iudasses: or all
professors for some Anani-asses and Sapphiraes.

But still to follow them and to overtake them as the Hound the Fox in slow
running: Commeating further; [That if the Army should thus declare, the City
and Kingdom would rise] as Dias was told.

[Would rise,] Else they had an asinine patience; a sleepish simplicity without
any mixture of serpentine calidity, to lie still in a ditch til the ravens pluck
their pelts, and pulld out their eyes; yea their right eyes, as Naash the
Ammonite projected to those of Iabes Gilead, 1 Samuel 11. since nature teaches
the worm turn again if she be trod on, the crows to chatter, and wrens to
wrangle if their nests be pulld down; else where were the old English valor, if
cowed and overawed (as the Britains once) with a Danish, a Popish, an
Egyptian yoke: some being fit to be abused, yea to sleep to Mecanas, like a
sawning Courtier, a timorous Traveller, and a Coriatized odcomb, to receive
injuries and give thanks; but an Englishman, rightly bred, is not fit to be
abused: though a grated Lion may perhaps be plucked by the beard, yet its
dangerous to anger his whelps abroad, and to provoke them too far, if by any
fair and square way of Truce or Treaty they may be appeased. [He answered,]
Anser is Latin for a Goose.

[They regarded not the City,] But the City has both regarded and rewarded
them; and is she now shaken off, as the spaniel shakes off the water when he
has used it to swim to his desired duck? Have they climbed their own ends by
her, and will they now throw her by like broken Ladders? Have they no more need
of her men, nor of her moneys? (the nerves and sinews of War.) Nor of her
Ammunition which they carry away in Cartloads full of kindness? even many a man
that makes Matrimony a matter of money, regards the silver feathers, if not the
flesh of the bird which he takes into his nest: but this is not commune malum.

[But could fire it at pleasure,] At pleasure: Oh Gunpowder spirits, Jesuited
Ignatians, who would conclude all in ferio, in ferro and flamma: as the Spanish
inquisition, and Bonner once, and Gardner (all are not guilty of this: those
who are gracious in the Army are also grateful,) in their invincible arguments
of fire and faggot: When James and John would have fetched fire from heaven to
burn the Samaritans, Christ told them they knew not of what spirit they were,
Luke 9. But without being at cost with a. Herald, we may derive some spirits
from the torrid Zone; from the pedigree and hot line of Thais, that hot
harlotrcausing Alexander to burn Persepolis; of the mad Greeks firing Troy
(fired first by the lust of Paris;) of Nero firing Rome, and singing funeral
Elegies to it, as to second Troy; of the Tartars firing the great city Mosco;
of Faux the firebrand (in his devilish intention and invention) of a
Parliament. But to proceed where they exceed, [Fire the City,] Alas its fired
already! First, by wild fire Sects and Schisms, flaming like a sulphurous
Aetna, unquenchable as the coals of Jumper, yea well nigh as hellfire, either
by the milk of the Word, or the waters of the sanctuary, still fuellized by
zealous ignorance and arrogance: the divisions of Reuben being great thoughts
of heart, Judges 5. Most blinded Sectaries, rather breaking like Oaks (chiefly
Heretics, like Arrius, Nestorius, Anastasius, Valens, Marcion, Manes, and
others, who all came to tragical ends,) then bowing like Reeds, shutting their
eyes against the Sun of truth. Secondly, fired by wilde-fire wrath and spleen,
burning and raging inwardly, like fire close smothered, in divided hearts,
breaking out into fiery factions and fractions in houses and families amongst
those that are nearest united in the bonds of blood, marriage, nature,
consanguinity and affinity.

Withal the phrase of firing the City, makes me start back, as Moses from his
rod turned serpent, makes my hand stupid, et vox faucibus haret, and my tongue
speechless, as if I had seen a fiery-eyed Wolf, and it speaks demonstratively
to me, that there is no sin so gross, so grievous, so heinous, so horrible, but
a graceless and godless man, an unregenerate man out of Christ may commit it.
The murdering not only of a brother, with Cain and Absalom, but of a mother as
Nero did Agrippina: the killing of a father perpetrated by the two sons of
Senacherib, 2 King. 19. the imprisoning of a father, as the Duke of Geldria his
aged Sire: Rebellion against a father as Absalom against David; murdering of
their own children, as did Manlius Brutus, Progne and Medea: Firing of Temples,
as Erostratus the Temple of Diana: Assassinating Kings, as Ravillack and Jaques
Clemens, the two French Henry's: ripping up the bowels of women with child, as
Hazael, 2 King. 8. and our Irish Rebels: yea rosting some at lingering fires, as
the same Rebels did Mr Watson a Preacher: and here, as you see, some threatening
to fire one of the most glorious Cities in Christendom: what worse acts could
the Sodomites do if they were here on earth: yea what worse could the devil
himself do, if he were visibly in the shape of man?

Withal see this surious sin of Firing aggravated, cui bono, to what end, what
good does it but only to fuellize revenge, which the Italians make the sweetest
thing tinder the Sun, as in that fiery faction in Jerusalem betwixt Simeon and
Jehochonan, in damnable spleen they fired a magazine of 20 years provision of
corn, only to plague the City and themselves, conquered by this means by the
belly more then the blade: so homo homini lupus and demon, one man so is a
wolf, yea a devil to another, in doing mischief only, and doing themselves no
good, against the dictate both of Reason and Religion.

Moreover consider this fellows phrase, in firing the City at pleasure.

[At pleasure,] Oh the further aggravation of sin! its pleasure to a carnal
heart, as carrion to a dog or vulture, mire to a swine, and filthy mud to a
frog: that which is the sorrow and vexation of a gracious heart, to a combating
Paul, Romans 7. to a mournful Jeremy throughout his Lamentations, yea to a
tenderhearted David, Psa. 6. and 38. is a pleasure and a pastime to a graceless
wretch; even as Sampson a holy Nuzarite is a mocking-stock to the Philistines,
Judge. 16 Isaac to Hagar and Ismael, Genesis 21. Holy David to Michal, 2 Samuel 6.
Lot to the Sodomites, Genesis 19. Paul as a babbler to the Athenians, Act. 19. and
Christ himself both in his Sermons and Sufferings to the carnal Jews, Mat. 19.
etc. 27. Yea here you see is a pasquil mad-cap that joins the firing of a City
and pleasure both in oneline: as if he would warm his hands in the flaming, as
now his heart in the conceited kindling of such a fire. But its a pastime to a
fool to do mischief, and the seat of the scorner being height of sin, Psa. 1.
1. there wants nothing but a cushion to that seat, which is damnation, unless
speedy conversion prevent subversion. Lastly, premoniti premuniti, forewarned,
let Troynovant be forearmed, to be cautelous, to take heed how she entertains
or retains any such brands into her City as would burn her: any such hotspurs
(though blind and bloody Zealots) as would fire her: any such snakes into her
bosom as would deadly sting her: any such mice into her bowels as would destroy
her: in plain terms, if she discover let her discard any such spirit or spirits
as would betray her, as Zopirus did Babylon, Sinon Troy, York Devoutree to the
Spaniards: for my part had I but a suspicion of such a sojourner in my house as
would cut my throat or my child's, or any way by treachery abuse me, as Paris
did Menalaus; or by cruelty, as the two young Lacedaemonians the daughter of
Schedasus, they should not nestle under my roose one night longer: But in this
case I prescribe nothing, for that were to teach Eagles to fly and Dolphins to
swim; the City is so punctually wise, even by experiments. I need not light my
candle to their sun: withal far be it from me to put any jealousies and panick
fears into their heads and hearts, either of the fame-worthy General, whose
actions have hitherto spoke him both just and noble, or of the Army in general,
who were fair-conditioned even when the ball was at their foot to have pludered
with more opportunity then perhaps they may have again; yea and with more power
too as possessors of the Tower. But when I consider again the fearful Tragedies
in Antioch, Gaza, Alexandria, Olyscopon, and else where, yea in Belgia, in the
Rustic Wars of Munstsr, and John a Leiden, which have been acted and writ by
Historians rather with blood then ink, by blind zeal, bloody superstition, and
factious Schism and Herefie, paraleling our new Seekers, Shakers,
Lay-preachers, Leaveners, Enthusiasts, Familists, Anabaptists, with their
predecessors, their Cozen-Germanes in now ruinated Germany, and with our
Norfolk Ket, Hacket, Jack Cade, Tiler, Straw, and other firebrands of Rebellion
at home: I cannot but dicere and praedicere, prophecy truly (though perhaps
like Chelcas and Cassandra, not believed) if ever London be passive in blood or
goods in this age, it will be, not by foreign power (for Seleuchus his rods
cannot be broken so long as they are fast tied and bundled together) but by the
factions and fractions of her own homebred, inbred Heresies (like a diamond
cut in its own dust) by her present regnant sins, ripening her ruin with other
Nations, chiefly her present distractions, hastening and hurrying on her
destructions, Quod omen avertat Deus! Meliora spero, pejora timeo: Et sero
sapiunt Phryges: sero medicina paratur: which to prevent what you may after
repent, though I may be thought in politicals to be out of my element, even
piscis in arido, and as unfit to council you, as once Phorimo Hannibal, Yet, si
quid mea carmina possun^, if my wishes were not in vain, I could desire, that
as you have a care in electing and selecting of your Majors, much more the
Rectors of your Militia, lest Militia turn into Malitia: (plus in duce quam in
exercitu.) The Athenians had a great care to trust none with the keys of the
City but Solon, a wise and just man, for a Pagan: Oh for a Solon to this City ^
Si non Sinon: all is not gold that glisters: many a nut with a fair shell is
deaf, rotten and worm-eaten: for my part, give me the nut called the brown
leamin, as most sollid, massy, and ponderous, found in the kernel, and hardest
to be cracked in the shell. If any be suspected, much more detected, in place
and grace, with you to be loose in the have, to shrink like some Western cloth
in the wetting, to side with Sectaries, to list whom he list, even Church and
State-firing Schismatics; admit not such a rash phaeton to sit as regent: such
withal as the sons of Brutus, who would keep in, or bring in, any proud and
pernicious Tarquins, are to be expulsed: The very Geese and Ganders are not so
unwise as to choose the Fox for their Governor, pereat unus; non unitas: Its
better many Gangreend or rotten Members to be cut off, then the whole City
infected: In this case, above any of Merlins or mother Shiptons Prophesies, the
Proverb may be verified, foolish pity spoils the City.

[It was likewise inquired how the General had performed his word with the King
and Kingdom, in re-establishing the King, and restoring the Kingdom to Peace;
he answered, the General never intended any such thing.

Did he never intend it? Did he ever acquaint this Dias with his intentions?
Sure if he had, after the courtesy of the French King to Scoggan, he had been
fitter to be of his Privy, then of his Cabinet Council; for you see he is
rimarum plenus, a leaking vessel full of holes; he keeps Council as well as
Scoggans wise, or Fabius once the divulged secrets of Augustus Coesar; he
reveals what he knows of the Army, and of his General, and perhaps ten times
more: (it being the Devils Arithmetic to make lies by addition, as un just
plunderers steal by substraction; and the family of Love or Lust spawn bastards
by multiplication:) Sure though this Soldier be no Ephestion, yet a seal had
need be set on his lips.

He did never intend it.] Into his secrets let not my soul enter; perhaps,
primum in intention ultimum in executione, what was first in intention, may be
at last in ex cution: He that reads Shepards Jubilee in his encomium, were he
as snakishly envious against his wel-deservings, as ever any emulating Serpen s
against the famous Themist ocles, Alcibiad s, Miltiades, the two Scipioes, or
any other renowned Martialists, cannot but say, that he has done much fame
worthy, and that God has done much by him; yet pace tanti viti, to interpose
my opinion, if not judgment, had be brought his King to an interview and
personal Treaty with his Parliament, which was so projected, and so strongly
still expected, as the most probable means of a settled Peace, (as Discussions
bring forth truth and unity, as the repercussions of the steel and flint bring
forth fire:) I say, when the ball was at his foot (as perhaps it may be again,
or is) to have brought his Prince to his Peers, and as a moderate Cassander, to
set the strings that were out of tune, to those that were in tune, in an
Harmonious diapason; he had then, as wise men think, joined Ulisses his head
to. Ajax hand, policy to prowess, as a pearl in gold, and for ever aeternized
his name, like Augustus, the late famous Sweed; yea he had been held to
England, as Camillus and Fabius to Rome, the restorer of her to a new life; yea
the Atlas mainly propping a declining state.

Both says Dias, he did never intend it.] His General is much beholden to him,
to brand him, to blow hot and cold, as the Satyrs Host with one breath, yea to
sympathize with Pope Alexander, and his good son Coesar Borgias, the one of
them never speaking as he thought, the other never thinking as he spoke, (their
words and works like Germans lips, as the phrase is, being nine mile a sunder,)
these two, the old Fox, and the young Cub, being Matchavils, perfect patterns,
and Ideas of his right molded politic Prince; which Matchavil many
Polypragmatests have studied, more then Moses.

And that for the Personal Treaty, the Army would not suffer it.] More is the
pity, that now Gowns must give place to Guns; that cedant arma togae, is held
no true Syntaxis, at least a Pseudodox, not an Orthodox Tenet; that Achilles
armor is judged from Ulysses to rash Ajax, though less worthy; yea, that any
free Parliament should be limited, bounded and obstructed, like those that are
in a ship, or in a Coach, who must go either as the wooden Seahorse, and the
Land Chariot carries them them, or if they leap out of the first, they
endanger drowning, or out of the second, a neck or a leg breaking, or bruising.
Can the Council of Trent be held a free Council, or rather a Conventicle, who
(as learned and judicious Doctor Brent, in his worthy book in folio, has
turned the inside of it outward,) did not, nay durst not decree any thing, but
what they had from their Popes? as the moon her borrowed light from the Sun;
from whence the Sarcasm was, that the Holy Ghost was ever brought to them from
Rome, as a Be in a box: But why would not, or will not, the Army suffer this
Treaty?

[Because the City would think they gained the honor of it.]

Would think.] Has this Momus any windows to look into the hearts of the
Citizens, what they think? Will he enter into a praemunire against God, to be
Cardiognoses, the searcher of hearts? Must any Joseph be above Pharaoh in the
throne? He measures the City by his own Last, and makes conclusions, yea
confusions from the delusions of his own thoughts; as we say in Yorkshire, just
as the fool thinks, so the Bell clinketh, Come again Whittington; as for the
City, as there be many things, que non nisi per acta landantur, which are not
praiseworthy till finished: So I persuade my self, the City would be glad at
their hearts, of such a Treaty to be the husband as would marry with Peace, as
once the white Rose with the red, in a blessed Union, after many bloody
Combustions; yea, there be millions of Mephibosheths, who prefer the Kings safe
reducing to his Crown, Peers and People, above their own lives and liberties,
and would bless God for any one that should be that happy Instrument to effect
it; even as a sincere Preacher with Paul's spirit is glad howsoever that the
Gospel is preached, without emulation of the Organ of the conversion of souls:
as if a man be pulled out of the pit as Joseph, or out of the dungeon with
Jeremiah; or as a brand out of the fire, what makes matter who he be, whether
friend or foe, that does the good work? Let the Army do the great work, the
great duty, and let them on Gods Name receive the great Dignity, the City will
yield them the Bucklers the great Honors of Patres Patria, the Patriots of
their Country: Onus et bonos, officium et beneficium shall both be theirs: But
let us trace him further.

He would not have the City to have the honor of bringing the King to a Treaty,
but the Army.

Oh what a contesting is here about Honor? as the seven Cities once about
Homer: the Lady Honora, and that pale-faced Pecunia, like the Corinthian Lais,
is Courted of all in Cities, Courts and Camps; all would shine in the Orb of
Honor; most in any place or office, would like Coesar have no equals; or like
Pompey no Superiors; all would be aut Casares, ant nihil Casars or nothing,
Kings even of molehils: How innate it is to the nature of all, especially of
Artists and Martialists, to emulate rather the Honors and Dignities, then
imitate the deserts of others! as Themistocles cannot sleep for the envied
Trophies of Miltiades, and Alexander weeps at the Tomb of Achilles, so famoused
by the Muse of a Homer. O doxa, doxa, oh glory, glory, cries the Orator, how
do thou boil in the hearts of men? Oh how the honor of men has been, and is
aimed at by such Soldiers as Dias, and his camped fellows, more then the Glory
of God? Immensum gloria calcar babet: Oh what a spur has this vainglory, to
be the subject of a story! This is the whetstone to the Decians, Horatians,
Scipioes, Codrus, Timoleon, Anstogiton, Scevola, and millions more of all other
Heriock acts, not so much undergone for the love of their Country, as for the
lust of vainglory: For this purchase Hannibal makes his way through the Alps,
Caesar pitcheth so main battails, the three Herod's, our Richard the third, and
thousand more, swim to Crowns through Hecatombs and Seas of blood: the Egyptian
Kings build their Pyramides, Absolon rears a Pillar, and every man does
something, from the Court to the Cart, for this aerie bubble, this windy
blather, this vulgar vote, this Plebeian puff, called honor. Some in the Army
you see (if Dias be not Monsieur Mendax,) will cross the public good of a
Kingdom in reducing the King, rather then the City should monopolize this poor
Punctillio of honor from them, on which they stand so much; as on their
tiptoes; as many Victories have been obstructed, many Battails lost, many
Armies routed, yea often Expeditions of Christian Princes against the Turk
annihilated, (as I could bring in a Cloud of Histories,) merely by the
wildfire Emulations of commanders about the Honors of several services: Oh
that as Jordan was turned bickward, we could turn the stream of our boundless
ambitions after humane Honors, merely to the Honor and Glory of God: then in a
good Cause should the swords of our Martialists, like the swords of Jonathan
and Saul. return gloriously with the blood of the slain, if, with David and
Jashuah, they sought the Lords battles and not their own, sought his honor, not
their own.

[And that the Parliament did vote the Personal Treaty only to delude the
people.] But how knows he this? has he some Mephistophiles like Faustus, some
familiar spirit, as some Italian, in a ring; some devil, like Cornelius Agrippa
in the form of a dog: or some lylng spirits like Ahabs prophets, to acquaint
him with this; or is it his own mad imagination (or, as the Countryman mis.
called it, madg-mason;) but till he prove this, what slit deserves the
scandalizing tongue of this reviling Shimei, this railing Rabshekah: if
scandalum magnatum, in slandering one noble man, be so poenal, what is it for
this whelp of Cerberus, to bite with his Theonine teeth a whole Parliament; for
this malevolent to cast his soul aspersions on so many selected Senators
throughout the Kingdom? but men's tongues are now more then ever their own: what
Law, yea what Lord can control them, Psa. 12. this were to tame Panthers, and
to shackle the Hellespont

[He likewise said, He should (or hoped) to see the City on fire shortly.]

Yet more fire, more ire: still the same Arminian Dragon spitting fire! At
dabit Deus his quoque funem: God will cast on such a spirit lightening and
thunder, storm and tempest, fire and hail, Psa. II. Satia te sanguine quem
satisti. Nestorius tongue that fired that world was scorched in his mouth:
Valens that fired so many Christians, was at last fired by the Goths.

[But he hopes to see it fired.] His is such a hope as will never help him to
heaven; it will melt as snow to dirt, and perish with himself, as an embrio, or
the grass on the house top, which withers. Oh the poor hopes of the wicked
(like the Romanized Religion) founded in blood and watered with blood!

[He further said, That if the Kings revenue were ten times so much the more,
in were the better for them, for the Crown Land would make many of the
Soldiers Gentlemen.] And so indeed it would make not only Jack, but Jackie
too, a Gentleman, if he had the conscience to purse it.

Lastly, this windy-bags venting, That if they conquer us, we shall be their
slaves, even slaves to such as he, as Sicilian Lords once were opposed by their
servants, Soepe bilem, soepeque risum vestri movere tumultus: the humor of this
fellow personating that bragging Thraso in Terence, and Peripolinices in
Plautias, and of Bragauacheo in Spencers Fairy Queen; I know not whether I
should laugh at him, pity him, or be angry with him. Thus having in this
Rapsody gathered some grapes of political observances from his thorns, and some
gold of good counsels from his dross, I sheath my pen from running any further
Tilt with the pike of his tongue, having unhorssed (though not un-assed) him
enough already, for abusing, as a bold Buffoon, even his own Army, as well as
King, Kingdom and Parliament.

Imprimatur,

John Downame;
July. the 26. 1648.
FINIS.

