A DIALOGUE UPON THE Burning of the Pope AND PRESBYTER, IN EFFIGY AT
WESTMINSTER, Novem. 5. 1681.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
1682.

A DIALOGUE upon the burning of the POPE, etc.
Pope JEsu, Maria! What Monster is this! of all the Hobgoblins in Purgatory,
certainly there is none like this. Well, in nomine Sancti Petri, I conjure thee
to tell me Who or What thou art?


Presb. Thou great Apollyon, profound Mystery of iniquity! I am unwilling to
tell thee, knowing my Name and Office will be more frightful than my aspect. --


Pope. It can never be, what are they?


Presbyt. My name is Catholic, and my Office to gain Souls.


Pope. O my dear Son! I hug thee -- I embrace thee.


Presb. Nay not too fast (Holy Father) lest you repent of your favors, and
turn your Blessings into Curses. --


Pope. I give thee a plenary Pardon -- free thee from Purgatory, and pronounce
thee Saint and Martyr for thy courage and constancy in the Cause, even at the
very Stake. --


Presb. You will retract all this, when you understand me aright, and so
forfeit your Infallibility before all these Heretics, who have condemned you
to that visible Purgatory, from which I fear, you will not be able to deliver
your self, much less me. --


Pope. You mistake me, I call not this material Fire, Purgatory, but the flames
of another World; where Souls, etc --


Pres. And I believe no Purgatory in your sense, hereafter.


Pope. How? and yet call your self Catholic! what do you mean?


Pres. I mean not Roman Catholic, but Christian Catholic, or a Reformed
Christian, or Protestant. And my Office is to gain Souls, not to Antichrist,
but to Jesus Christ; who shed his precious Blood to redeem Souls. And this I do
by fervent Prayers, seasonable Admonitions, sincere Preaching of the Gospel in
season and out of season, and a due Administration of the Sacraments.


Pope. I begin to smell him -- and shall find him out by my next Question, --
How many Sacraments are there?


Pres. Two only instituted by Christ, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.


Pope. What then becomes of Marriage, Ordination, Extreme Unction, and the rest?


Pres. They are where they were intended, and where I wish they may always
remain, at Rome, and among the Roman Catholics, whose Faith is Faction, whose
Promises are Equivocations, whose Worship is Idolatry, whose Principles are
High Treason, whose Mercies are Cruelties, whose practices are Stabbing and
Poisoning of Kings, whose frame of Government is a Politic Design to bring the
necks of Princes and Nobles under their i^on Yoke and whose God is a pretty,
little, tiney thing which the ^^^^est first creates with a Charm of four words
long then worships it, and afterward chops him up at a hit, and makes no bones
of him. -- Now your blessing, Lucifer Junior.


Pope. Bless thee! All the Curses of Ashwednesday and of the 69. Psalm light
upon thee. And may all the tortures of my Inquisition, and torments of
Purgatory, overtake thee in this Life and that to come, -- Thou worst of
Heretics: The German Bull never roared so loud as thou do.


Presb. Yet so loud, that (thanks be to God) he has spoiled the roaring of
your Bulls amongst us.


Pope. Not quite tho; There are some amongst you regard them as much as they do
an Act of P -- And tho the rude Multitude make themselves sport with me in
puppet, yet I have some true hearts amongst you, who are troubled to see it,
and wish an opportunity to revenge it.


Presb. All this I can believe without Swearing, being convinced of the truth
of it by your Design in your late Plot against our King, his Government and
Religion (graciously and seasonably discovered by Divine Providence) which if
it had taken effect, the Heretics, by this time, might have gone to pot in
England, as fast as they have done in France, Spain, Italy and Germany, (not to
mention Ireland) in all which places, since the first rise of the Jesuits, to
the year 1580, almost Nine hundred thousand Protestants were put to death. And
we believe you are no Changelings.


Pope. Nor you neither, for you are the stiffest Heretic I ever talked with.
Pray of which stamp of Heretics are you? For there are two sorts, Conforming
and Nonconforming, or Consenting and Dissenting Heretics.


Presb. So then I perceive, neither Barrel is better Herring in your account?


Pope. By St. Stafford, not much difference, if any: but answer me, of which
sort are you?


Presb. Of no sort of Heretics. But if it may do you any good to know it, I am
a Nonconforming, or dissenting Protestant.


Pope. And the Devilishest one I ever met with Let me suffer a 1000 years in
Purgatory, if I did not think as much by your Garb. Your tipped Cap, long Cloak,
and short Jerkin bespeak you as rank an Heretic, as inveterate an Enemy to
holy Mother the Church, and to my self the Head of it, as any in the Nation.
Let the Curse of my own Bulls light upon me, if I don't believe you are that
Heretical Rogue that put out the Protestant Almanacks, wherein you have raked
together all the enormities men or Devils can commit, and charged them upon us,
to render me and my whole body Ecclesiastical hateful and odious to the world.


Presbyt. I don't tell you I writ them: But I tell you to your Tooth I have
read them, and find nothing but truth in them.


Pope. Truth! burn ye -- nothing but truth in all those Packets of Heretical
Forgeries? burning is too good for you; And the very Circumstance of time
confers too great an Honor upon you, as if you died a Martyr for having an
hand in that glorious undertaking of the Powder Plot. Whereas you are a
stubborn Heretic and rejoice upon this day, that that Design was detected and
frustrated.


Presbyt. I do so, and so do all true Protestants, and give thanks to God with
our Hearts, who this day Infatuated your Counsels and confounded your Hellish
Devices.


Pope. I am not able to bear the thoughts of being burnt the same day with this
Fellow. I would give a whole years Revenue by my public Stews, his Execution
might be suspended till the 30th of January next, a proper Season for his
Suffering.


Presbyt. That Is well hinted, O Abaddon! I remember it with regret and
abhorrency, a day of Blood, of Royal Blood, from the Guilt of which all your
Holy Water will never be able to cleanse you. Who somented the differences in
Church and State, that were the Prologue to that Black Tragedy? Who mingled so
many Priests and Jesuits in the Army, that fought the Battles against his
Majesty of Blessed Memory? Who incircled the Stage, and made the Palace of our
Murdered Prince Echo with Shouts and Acclamations at the fall of that Head of
Three Kingdoms, and Sung Te Deums when the News arrived at Rome, but you and
your Babylonish Crew? -- And notwithstanding your boasting against Heretics
(as you miscall them) for this you know, and all sincere Protestants believe,
that we owe the contrivance and management of that Horrid Design to Rome, as
much as any before or since.


Pope. You provoke me at that rate, that I must pass Sentence against you.


Presbyt. And no more then I expected -- O glorious Infallibility! to bless and
curse the same Person in the same Breath! Fallible Muggleton could do no more.


Pope. I was mistaken in you, you seemed to be what you are not.


Presbyt. But I am not mistaken in thee, -- Thou very Strumbolo and Etna of all
Civil and Ecclesiastical Erruptions, Commotions and Plots.


Pope. Nay, I know you Heretics confer the honor of all Evil of this kind
upon my self and my faithful Adherents. -- It Is ten to one but you will say we
laid this Plot against you, to have you represented (and in you all your Gang)
as Persons more worthy of Flames than Favor?


Presbyt. In my Conscience, Beelzebub, thou art a Witch or a Conjurer, you
guess so shrewdly. For though a Company of inconsiderate Boys appeared on the
Stage, yet your Actors stood behind the Curtain, prompting them on, and
glorying in it, to see the Seen on that day so altered, as to burn true
Protestants in Effigy, instead of Popes and Cardinals. I doubt not but the
Grave and Learned Master of some of those Youths, has since taught them more
Wit and better Manners, than to Confront Authority, at or near the very place
where so many good Laws have been made to extirpate Popery, and establish the
Protestant Religion; and where they lately repealed the Act de Heret. Comb.
never intending, I presume, that the burning (no not in Effigy) of true
Protestants should come in the room of it -- But who shall correct your Agents?
Or call to account that Bell-Weather to the Tories, N. T. who in his
Scurrillous Pamphlet, approved and made sport with it, calling it a sign of
Loyalty? That you may discern how much he is tickled with the Fancy, take the
relation of it in his own Words, in his Mercury November the 8th Instant. --
Although (faith he) the Scholars of the Society of St. Peter's College,
Westminsler, have been backward in addressing, yet they thought themselves
obliged to give some signal of their Loyalty; wherefore on Saturday last, they
having dressed up Jack Presbyter in his proper habit, they set him in a Tub,
having in his right hand a Seditious Pamphlet, called Vox Patriae, and in his
left a broad Scroll of Parchment, on which was written the Solemn League and
Covenant: On his Cloak there was pinned another piece of Parchment, upon which
was written Ignoramus; and for a Pulpit Cloth there was nailed on the foreside
of the Tub the Atchievments of Jack Presbyter. In this manner the Effigies was
brought in procession from the Bowling Ally to the Deans Yard, where he was set
aloft in the middle of the Yard (the Tub being underpropped with Three very
high Legs) so when the Loyal Youths had discharged some dozens of Squibs at
him, they brought him to the Fire, which was prepared for their purpose, and
setting about Ten Faggots more under the Tub, they burnt him down with this
Elegy -- Magnae nec invidio Tu Presbyter ibis in ignem. At which a great Shout
was given, every one expressing Loyalty to His Majesty, and wishing that the
real Person whom the Image represented, and all his Followers, had been burnt
with it. Believe it, such a public Action, and public Vindication, deserves a
public Censure. Take it with all its Circumstances of person, time, place and
manner, and I think the Age past cannot parallel it, and the Age to come will
wonder at it, and scarce believe it. I know we have often been represented,
droll'd, and ridiculed (in the most opprobrious manner and Language) on the
Stage. But for a Protestant, a Protestant Divine, well known to be such, by
some thousands, both in this and other Kingdoms, to be dressed up in a most
ridiculous manner, hung round with Libels, and represented as a Malefactor or
Heretic, conjoined with the Pope, (that red Dragon) and sacrificed in the same
flames, on the Fifth of November, as if that Plot were as much the Protestants
as the Papists, or as if the Pope and he were equally guilty of the same
Treasons and Rebellions. And this too, at such a time, when God had so lately
detected such an Hellish Design of the Papists (and which, no doubt, they are
yet vigorously carrying on) to the ruin of our King, our Religion, and all that
is, or can be dear to us. This, I say, was an action heinous, and such as
scarce any Instance can be given of the like. Therefore I must first lay it at
your door, then at the Boys.


Pope. I confess this burning of Poppets is but Boys play.


Presbyt. I care not if there were none of it, but the Reason why you dislike
it, is because it was first begun against you, the Protestants being provoked
by your continual bloody Designs against them. But if it be against Heretics,
and to reproach them, it is manly and commendable; witness your annual
Processions of this nature, and burning of Heretics in show at Rome. In which
we have once or twice endeavored to imitate you, upon your Old Friend Queen
Besses Day. Now the truth is, the one you decry as puerile and childish, but
the other you publicly allow and approve.


Pope. Yes, and hope to see other guess Bonefires made for you Heretics, than
these, as we have had formerly; such as shall not make sport for Boys, but
affright Men.


Presbyt. You must stay till our Gracious King (whom God long preserve) is gone
off the Stage, and till you have a Prince, and a P -- that will re-establish
that abolished Act, de Heret. Comb.


Pope. Well, we hope the best.


Presbyt. And so do we too; that is, that our King may live to the time when
Popes shall be no more; till that Armageddon Battle be begun, which shall end
in Antichrists Ruin; and till that Fire be kindled (not of your nor the Devils
kindling, but Gods) into which shall be cast the Devil, the Beast, (with all
that receive his Mark) and the false Prophet, and shall be tormented day and
night, for ever and ever. Rev. 20.9, 10.


Pope. But why do you say it is of Gods kindling?


Presbyt. For two Reasons. First, That you may not think it is Purgatory, a
Fiction of your own framing, to deceive the Ignorant, and to replenish your own
Coffers. Secondly, because the Holy Ghost (who is truly infallible) says so in
the forementioned Text; and so Antichrist, or the Beast, and all that receive
his Mark, shall find it; not an imaginary punishment (like yours) but real and
terrible, When your Judgments shall come in one day, Death and mourning, and
you shall be burnt with Fire; for strong is the Lord that judges you, Rev.
18.8. In which burning while you and your Adherents shall eternally lament your
Idolatry and Witchcrafts, your Cheats and Delusions, your Profaness and
Blasphemies, your Fopperies and Fooleries; many of those you now call and
condemn for Heretics shall sing Triumphant Halleluiahs to the Lamb in Glory,
and partake of that fullness of Joy, and those Rivers of Pleasures, which are at
Gods Right hand for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.


FINIS.

