A DIALOGVE BETWEEN A DISSENTER AND A CHURCHMAN Touching General and Particular
POINTS.

General, Viz. Of Common Prayer, Surplice, Cross in Baptizm, Kneeling at
Sacrament, Godfathers and Mothers, Baptism it self.


Particular. Of Original Sin, General Redemption


Contend earnestly for the Faith, once delivered to the Saints,

London, Printed in the Year, 1689.

A DIALOGUE Between a DISSENTER And a CHURCHMAN, etc.
Dissenter, Well met Brother Protestant, in this day when there is so many
Fears and Jealousies abroad in the World, one cries one thing, another cries
another thing, but none of them can tell what to say.


Churchman, Why, what do they say, if I may ask you, for I am a Man that do
not much enquire after News?


Dissen. Why some say the Bishops will have the Dissenters down, and will not
allow Liberty of Conscience; others say they will be all upon even ground, but
it is certain nothing can be before the Parliament settle it: But what think
you?


Church-m. I think and hope the Dissenters will not have that Liberty that you
think they will, for they are a Factious People, and such as will sow Sedition
amongst us; and what have been the effect of their having their Liberty but
Trouble and unhappy Wars.


Dissen. Well, but why so fast upon the Dissenters, you make as if they were
the worst People in the World, you Run upon them; but pray instance in what
they are so bad?


Church-m. Why, they will not comply with the Laws of the Land, and Government
of the Church, they will not allow of the Common Prayer, and Latteny of the
Church; with the Surplice, and other Ceremonies of it Established by Law.


Dissen. First you say, they will not comply with the Laws of the Land; pray
what Law is it that they break? Do not they pay all manner of Taxes, and Excise
and Custom as others do? All that you can charge them with, is in matters of
the Church, and that of their Conscience; and in that Cause whether it be
lawful to obey God or Man; judge you: and I hope before we have done, I shall
find you of a more Charitable temper, and do hope we shall better agree, for I
delight not in the heats of Passion, but had rather do all things in Love; I am
persuaded, were there a right understanding of our Principles, you would not
have so hard thoughts of us: And you ought to put on (if you be the Elect of
God) Bowels of Mercy, and yet let us co^ntend earnestly for the Faith delivered
to the Saints, and that Faith let us stick and stand by; it is but some hot
spirits that will not come to the Touch, that have made all those Differences
among us that are. Secondly, in matters of the Church, you say they disagree;
well, this is a Point of Conscience, and we cannot agree with your Church in
this, for they hold a Form of Prayer, and we a Spirit of Prayer, and this is a
Point to be cleared.


Church-m. Why, it is clear enough, the Apostle commands that Prayers and
Supplications be made for all Men (Mark the Word he made) and if made, who
shall they be made by, but by the holy Men of the Church?


Dissen. Well, I grant the Apostle does say so; but what does the same Apostle
say, Pray in the Spirit, and pray with Understanding; now if by the Spirit, not
by a Form, for if you go by Form, you tie up the Spirit to that Form; beside,
the Apostle bid us walk as you have us for an Example; now if he had intended a
Form of Prayer, would not he have given us the Example; now if I must follow a
Form, I must have the Example of the Apostles for it, and also the same that
they had; if any Man receive any thing in the Woship of God, more then God has
Instituted, and Commanded by the Apostle, let him be accursed, And do not your
Church make the Common Paryer a Tradition in the Church, and teach it for a
Doctrine; nay, do not they say it is more Sin to neglect that, then it is to
neglect a Sermon from the Word of God, and they show it plainly; for if a Man
come to the Sermon, and not to the Prayer, they will nevertheless Excommunicate
them from Communion.


Church-m. You require an Example of the Apostles, well, I will give you the
Example of their Lord and Master, when you pray, say, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc. I hope this will convince you that a Form is lawful, and so end
the Controversy shortly.


Dissen. Now you say well, and here I must fall, if I cannot stand; I
acknowledge Christ did give this Form, but we must consider two things, first
the Reason why this Prayer was given; secondly, the time when it was given; and
first the Reason why, because they should not be like the Heathen, which in a
Form used long Prayers to be seen of Men, and therefore our Savior tells thom,
when you pray, let it be in secret; another Reason was, because as yet they had
not the knowledge of Prayer according to the Will of God: Secondly, the time
when the Prayer was given, it was when the Apostles were Young, and they had
not received the holy Spirit, which our Savior told them, should lead them
into all Truth; so that then it was very necessary, that they might know what
to pray for; but as in the Type of the Law, when the Antitype appeared, the
Type vanished; so now when the Spirit of Truth appeared, to lead into a Spirit
of Prayer, the Form of Prayer must cease; now Christ tells them, as though he
should have said, I give you now a Form of Prayer, that you may know how to
pray, that so you may be found in your Duty till I go, and then I will send you
the Spirit of Truth, and that shall direct you into Truth, without a Form; and
besides, when the Holy Ghost came down like cloven Tongues in the days of
Penticost, do you think it came with a Form? Besides, if our Savior had
intended Forms, would he not have given more, and seeing he has given no more,
how dare you use more? if it were law full seeing the Apostle says, Let him be
accursed that add or diminish; besides, you make the Spirit of no effect, for
if Christ has said he will give his Spirit to them that ask, and that that
Spirit shall lead into all Truth, and yet you will not trust to that Spirit to
lead you; do not you tell our Lord, that you will not believe him nor his
Spirit, but will rather pray by the Example of Men then by that Spirit, and so
you make it of no effect; tell you, or your Ministers of a Spirit of Prayer,
and do not they make a Laugh and a Scoff at it? Oh, for shame, away with this
Spirit.


Church-m. Well, I see you think your self wiser then all the Fathers of our
Church, but a Man in his own wisdom may fall; what then do you say that our
Prayers were not Penned by the Inspiration of the holy Spirit? this is hard
judging; but suppose they were writ by Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, what then
can you say against it, but that it is good, and ought to be used? but I see
you will grow hot upon it, and so we had as good leave of while we are Friends.


Dissen. No no, I am resolved not to go into any heat, but to go on in Love,
for we must contend for the Faith: First you say, I think my self wise, and my
Wisdom may fall; I do not think my self wise, but that Wisdom I have, I hope it
is from God, and if God does suffer that to fall, his Word shall not fall; you
say it might be Penned by the Holy Ghost, well, we will grant it that it was,
tho I cannot tell; but do your Bishops and the Docters of your Church, that
Penned it, pretend to Infalibility yea or no?


Church-m. No, our Church holds no Infalibility.


Dissen. Well, then there is no Church that can claim Superiority (over the
Consciences of Men in matter of Religion) but that Church that can claim
Infalibility; and if your Church could claim Infalibility, she could not force
all Men to believe it, for by that Consequence all that decent from the Church
of Rome, must be Heretics indeed, as she calls them, for she claims to her
self Infalibility; but if you have no Infalibility, why then do you compel Men
to come to that which may be subject to errors as well as themselves? So that
make the best of them, you cannot make more of them then the Tradition of Men,
and what does our Savior say of them that teach for Truth the Traditions of
Men.


Church-m. Come come, with all your ado, I do not believe that you can make
better Prayers then the Prayers of our Church; and therefore do not despife
them (they are good.)


Dissen. Stay Friend, the excellency of a Prayer does not consist in the
multitude of Words, and eloquence of Speeches, for then the Pharisees would a
had Heaven for their Prayers; besides, we have a precept from our Lord, Use not
long Prayers, and vain Repetitions, but my Son give me thy Heart; and God
accepts of the broken in Heart; and the Lord says, If their Prayers be as the
Chattering of a Crane, or a Swallow, if it be in sincerity, he will accept it,
and he will not despise the day of small things; and the bruised Reed he will
not break, but he will bring forth Judgment unto Victory, and many such like
places of Scripture, all to show that it is not the Mouth but the Heart that
God asks; and beside, there is nothing acceptable to God but what comes from
him; now, can another make a Prayer that may suit my Condition; No, none can
tell my wants so well as my self.


Church-m. Why, is there not a Prayer for all Conditions that you can name?


Dissen. But I tell you, God accepts of nothing but what comes immediately from
himself, and how can that matter come from his Spirit, which must be limited
in a Form?


Church-m. By having a Form we know what to pray for, before we come to God,
and so we come with a sense of what we go to beg for.


Dissen. But still this does but strengthen the Argument, that you will not
trust the Spirit of God, to indite the matter in you, but you will rather trust
to Man, when as God has said, I will give my Spirit to them that ask it; and
our Savior said, when you come before Men, Take no thought what you shall say,
for it shall be given you in that same hour: And do you think that he who has
said he will do so for you, when you appear before Man, (and in the Cause at
the most of but a natural Life, for the Body) will leave you, and not give you
what you shall say when you come before God, and for such high things as are
Spiritual eternal, and that which concerns the Soul: Oh, do not think it, what
do you think Christ dyed for but for to be a Mediator? now if you come to go in
such exact Forms, and they be holy, what need is there of him to wash your
Prayers, he must stand by for nothing.


Church-m. Well, I wonder how you can speak against them, being they are most
of them taken out of the Scripture, sure then you must over-turn the Scripture.


Dissen. You think you have done well now, but hear what the Scripture says,
He that adds to it, let him be accursed; now here is the Scripture, and the
Traditions of the Fathers put together, and that which makes it the Sin, is the
teaching of it for Truth, and making it the bounds of Communing; for let a Man
be of what Principle he will, if he will but come to Church, and hear the
Common Prayer, he may Commune; where as on the other hand, let a Man be never
so sound Principled, if he do not come to hear the Common Prayer, he is no
Communicant; so that it is the Composing by Men, and the Imposing upon Men,
which makes it the Sin; and beside all this, as the New Testament was put to
the Old, the Common Prayer was put to both; now of these things judge you where
the error is, and if you have any more to speak as to this Point, say on, or
else let us pass to something else, what you please.


Church-m. Say, what shall I say? say what I will, you will have it your way,
and therefore I had as good hold my Tongue, and if you will go further, you
shall propound what.


Dissen. No, I will not have my way no further then the Scripture will judge
and try it, but since you have put it to me to state the question, pray let it
be about the Surplice, why have you that Ceremony in your Church; and also the
Cross in Baptism; and Kneeling at the Sacrament? what mean all these Ceremonies
in your Church; and after we have cleared these we will come to particular
Points.


Church-m. First, You say the Surplice, does that offend you? I will tell you
in all Ages, the Priests were to have Garments to distinguish them from other
People; as in Aaron's time the Priests were to ware a Linning Ephod, and his
Garments were to have Bells upon them, and so the Priests Garments were
appointed by God, and they must do as God commanded them; and if so, why in
this time may not the Priests go in such Garments as may distinguish them? for
what did God do so for, but to distinguish them from the common People?

Secondly; You say the Cross in Baptism does also offend you, tho I am sorry it
should, for our Church do declare, when they do it, that it is in sign of
bearing the Cross of Christ; and to show that they should not be ashamed of the
Christianity into which they were Baptized.

Thirdly; You say Kneeling at the Sacrament, I confess these are Ceremonies of
the Church, but yet they are good in their places, and as to this in
particular, Can you come into Gods Presence with too much Reverence? do not the
Psalmist say, Come, bow down and kneel before the Lord your Maker? and can
there be too much Reverence in coming before the Lord in such an holy Ordinance?


Dissen. You say in Aaron's time, you go a great way back, and that into the
Law too, but Christ was the end of the Law, and of Righteousness to all that
believe: [Mark] its to all that believe in him, its not to all that observe
this and that Ceremony: Now when Christ and his Disciples went into the Temple
to Pray and to Preach, do we read of their putting on the Priests Garments? no,
and do you think when Christ Preached in the Mount, and in the Ship, and such
places, that he had this and that Garment on? no, we read it not.


Church-m. You talk of Preaching, we do not use the Surplice in Preaching, it
is only in Prayer?


Dissen. Well, in Prayer, do we read of the Apostles Praying in this or that
Garment, or that when they Prayed in any place among a Congregation of People,
that there was any Garments brought them to put on? No, but let me tell you,
this was a Ceremony in the Church of Rome, and though (...) our Church did
desent from her, yet not from this and the other Ceremonies which we have now
in hand.


Secondly, You say the Cross in Baptism is a sign of their not denying the
Christian Faith, but still it is more then you have Rule for in Scripture; for
as I said before, the Apostle bid us walk as ye have us for example; now of all
that they Baptized, we read of none that they Crossed.


Church-m. No, I do not know how they should, when they did not know the Cross,
for Christ had not then Suffered upon the Cross.


Dissen. Pray, after Christ had Suffered we read of none of the Three Thousand
that they crossed, but only in the Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost they
were Baptized; and you heard of no more; and why then will you go beyond the
Scripture Rule?


Thirdly, You say, can there be too much Reverence in so holy an Ordinance; I
answer, no, there cannot; but yet in the Temple there was not to be a Ring, a
Bowl, a Pin more then God had appointed, and that was by a pattern shown to
Moses in the Mount, and God will have nothing in his Worship more then he has
appointed; you would think it was a small matter for Nadab and a Abihud, when
God had Commanded the Fire should not go out upon the Altar, and because they
did let it go out, it may be it was through negligence: well, what must they
do, the Fire which was upon the Altar, was holy Fire, and there was the Command
it must not be let out? Well, but its out, must it not be lighted again, when
God commanded it should be kept in? but you see for the doing of it they both
of them lost their Lives; And yet here seemed to be a Command. Now if God will
not have a Pin in the Temple, more then was in the Pattern, sure in his Gospel
Temple he will have no more then his Son, and his Apostles set for an Example;
and if for but lighting of the Fire without a Command, when a Command seemed to
be employed, there was Death for them that did it, how dare you enjoin any to
Gods Worship, when you have no Command, for fear of the same Judgment to come
upon you? Now our Savior when he was sat with his Disciples, he took the
Bread and blessed it, and gave it to his Disciples; neither do we read that the
Disciples Received it Kneeling; and would you go to pretend to be more Holy
then they, and more Reverent then they were; this shows you to be like Saul
when God commanded him to spare none, yet contrary to God's Command, he out of
his pretended Zeal, took of the best of the Flock; nay, and he did it for a
good end, it was to Offer up Sacrifice to the Lord God, yet you see how God
threatened Saul for doing it; and its possible Saul might do it in Zeal for God,
but yet because it was not according to Gods Command he threatened them with
sore Judgment: So that tho you pretend Reverence to God in his Worship, yet if
you do more then God commands, it is Superstition and Idolatry, and so come
under the Sentance of God's Judgments, which he has pronounced in such a
Cause. And as we have begun with these Subjects, Baptism and the Lord's Supper,
there is more to be discoursed on both of them; and that is in Baptism the
Ceremony of Godfathers and Godmothers; and in the Lord's Supper, who is the
Subject of it; but first, why do you use Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism?


Church-m. Why, our Church is so tender of the good Youth, and for the bringing
of them up in the Nurture of the Gospel, that they would have that care taken
for them, that if their Parents should Die, they might not be lost for want of
care or looking after, and I think it is a good use.


Dissen. But who is sufficient for these things, do not we see that many do
promise and enter into this engagement, that take no further care, and so we
may consequently conclude, that there are more Ruined by breach of Promise then
there is Saved by having of them? beside, we do not hear any Command for it,
and I think its a piece of presumption in Parents that if they should Die
before their Children be of years of Maturity, they then will commit them
sooner to an earthly Friend, rather then to that God that has promised he will
be a Father to the Fatherless.


Church-m. Hold, hold, no, we do not think that any Friend can do for them as
God can, this is your mistake.


Dissen. How do you mean my mistake; suppose you was upon your Deathbed, and
you were to send for me, and commit to my care an only Child, saying, you are
the only Friend I can trnst this Child with; well, I give you my Hand and
Seal, that I will be as a Father to it: But notwathstanding when it comes to
the pinch you will not believe me, but set another to watch over me, to see
that I discharge my Duty; Will not this show some distrust of my Fainfulness?
you say you leave your Children to God, and I say, he has promised to be a
Father to the Fatherless; and he has all Heaven and Earth to Rule and dispose
of as he please; but yet notwithstanding this Promise, you will not put your
trust in him, but must have a Godfather to come in for a share, and in their
coming on they Promise and Vow that they shall do these things, forsake the
Devil and his Works, the Pomps of this World; alas! a thing out of the reach of
Man, for they cannot do it in themselves, and much more in another; besides,
you distrust the Providence of God in preserving of them, when he has by the
same Providence taken you away from them; but if you had a Command for it, it
were lawful for you to do it; if you had example from the Apostles, you had
some ground for it.


Church-m. I wonder you should be so Ignorant, a Man so well verst in the
Scripture as you pretend to be, that you should not know that the Apostles were
in the first Age of the Church, and that where ever they come it was their Work
to Preach and Convert, and Baptize such as they did bring into the Church by
their Preaching, and this was the Foundation of the Church, and adult persons
had no need of Godfathers and Godmothers; and you know the Apostle bid us
watch over one another, and strengthen one another, also to see that no Root of
bitterness to spring up amongst us, and trouble us.


Dissen. Well, I know the Apostle does say so, but it is to the congregated
Churches that he had gathered together, that they should not let any Root of
bitterness spring up amongst them, and that they should watch over one another.


Church-m. You speak you know not what, if you oppose this; for as the Church
was then made up of adult Believers, only so the Apostle speaking to the
Beleivers that should not join with Heathenism or Jewdism, said he, The Promise
is to you, and to your Seed; and if so, is not the Seed of Believers in the
Pale of the Church, and consequenly such as should be watched over, as well as
grown persons, nay more, for they are not of Years of Discretion to watch over
themselves, and so Love and Duty, both oblige us to the great Work, I think
this is a plain Cmmand.


Dissen. I must confess you have given such an Argument as I believe some
Thousands of your Church could not have given, and I will take some time to
clear it, and therefore I must beg your patience, and to that end I shall clear
these Points in our particular Discourse, because we would not discourse of
General and Particular together.


Church-m. Don't you think to put me off and to baffle the Discourse, if we
discourse we will have things carried on as they go, we will not leave things
behind, to come over again; for what concerns me in particular, concerns the
Church in general; and so clear it to me, if I be not in the right of it, if it
be not too much for you.


Dissen. Well, but I tell you, there is some things in our Discourse that must
be particular, but I will Answer you and your Church in these things in
general, because you desire it; and first you say, the Church was made up of
adult persons, which is true, but what was the sign of their Church-ship?


Church-m. Why, it was Baptism, they were Baptized into the Church, and so
became Members of the Church; and the Apostle tells them, the Promise is to you
and your Seed.


Dissen. Well, then you make a Church by Succession, and so make it National;
but why do not you bring in the next Words; And as many as the Lord your God
shall call? So that here must be a calling, before a Churchmember, and
consequently before Baptism, for they were not to be Churched before Baptized,
nor Baptized before they Believe; and if so, how are Infants capable of being
Church Members?


Church-m. Its true, the Words run so, but yet it does not Exclude Believers
Children: and the Apostle said the other to comfort them, that they should not
be all, but that God would plant and call more Churches to believe in him, and
so the number should be increased; and further, it was to comfort the suce
eding Churches, that it should be (viz.) the Promise to them and their Seed, as
well as to the then present Believers and their Seed, so that I think there
need no further clearing of this Point, that Children are Church Members.


Dissen. Yes, there wants a great deal of clearing, for you say, the Promise is
to a Church Members Seed. Pray let me ask you, How did God make his Covenant
with Abraham, when God said unto him, I will make my Covenant with thee, and
with thy Seed, and thy Seeds Seed, and I will multiply it as the Stars of
Heaven?


Church-m. Well, here you comply with me, that the Covenant is to Seeds Seed,
and if so in the Law, why not in the time of the Gospel?


Dissen. Well, I asked you how this Covenant run, you know that God said to
Abraham, But tho thy Seed be as the Stars of Heaven, yet in Isaac shall it be
Blessed: Was not Ishmael the Son of Abraham, and did not he pray for Ishmael?
Well, said the Lord, I have heard thee for Ishmael, I will make him a great
Nation; but nevertheless my Covenant will I establish with Isaac, and in Isaac
shall thy Seed be Blessed: So that we see out of Believing Abraham, there came
a Seed that was out of the Covenant, as well as a Seed in Covenant; and when
Rebeccah had Conceived by one (Mark, here could be no Objection that these was
two Seeds in her Womb, but by one) and that by one of the Promised Seed, our
Father Isaac: nay, and the Children having not done Good or Evil; it was said,
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated; What then shall we say to these
things? Is there Unrighteousness with God, God forbid? Read the 9th Chapter of
Romans. Now will you allow Isaac to be a tipe of Christ or not?


Church-m. Yes, certainly Isaac was a Tipe of Christ, and the Covenant that was
made with Isaac and his Seed, is a Tipe of the Covenant made with Believers and
their Seed in Christ.


Dissen. Well then, as the Covenant was established with Abraham's Children in
Isaac his Son: So the Covenant that God made with Believers and their Seed, is
in Christ his Son: Now they that are not in Christ by Faith, are not in the
Covenant, and so have no right to the Privileges of it.


Church-m. Well, but can we tell how is this in the Covenant, is it a secret
Decree of God? And suppose my Child should die (as many do) before they come to
Years of Understanding, Must I shut my Child out of my Covenant for want of
using the means? I should think my self much out of my Duty.


Dissen. Pray, in the time of the Law, what time was set for Circumcision of
the Children.


Church-m. The eighth day was appointed of God.


Dissen. Was the Law to be observed very strictly, might not they go beyond the
bounds of it?


Church-m. Yes, it was very strict, they must not fail in one Point, they must
not put a Pin in the Temple more then God had ordered.


Dissen. Well then, if they might not let the time pass; might they do it
before the time come?


Church-m. No, God was to have his Law strictly observed.


Dissen. Well then, do you think there was no Children died before the eighth
day? and if they did, might not Abraham say as well as you, What shall become
of this Child that is dead and is not circumcised, and I must not go beyond the
Law? No, no, ye do not hear Abraham in any place thus reason with himself; for
if God is pleased to take them away before they come within the reach of the
command, he must leave them to God and not search into his Counsel, nor strain
his Command: Now as the time appointed by God in the Law was the eighth day, so
the time appointed in the Gospel is when they believe; Believe and be baptized.
We do not rend of one that was baptized before their Confession of Faith in
Christ. Now if they did before they have Faith in Christ, it is not their
Baptism will save them; for it is believing, and not baptizing that will save
them.


Church-m. Why? do you think that when those holy Families were baptized there
was no Children among them?


Dissen. I cannot tell, but if there was, the Scripture tells us they all
believed, and were baptized; besides, Baptism and the Lords Supper are the two
Ordinances of the Lord, and they that are not capable of the one, are not of
the other; for he that eats and drinks unworthily, there is damnation for their
Pains; and for Baptism, it is the sign of being buried and ingrafted into
Christ. Now for you to ingraft those in Christ, which he has not, is
Persumption.


Church-m. Why, say you? Did not our Lord take little Children in his Arms, and
say of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, and except ye become like them, ye shall
in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, etc? Why should you exclude them
which Christ has included?


Dissen. You say true, Christ did take little Children, and blessed them; but
did he call for Water, or Baptize, or did he order his Disciples to do it? No,
he said, except you become as Innocent as these; that is, except by
Righteousness you become as clear of Original, as this Child is of Actual Sin,
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.


Church-m. Nay, now you talk like a Man that does not know the Scripture;
Indeed you say Original Sin, and that in Gospel time does not the Apostle say,
As in Adam all died, so in Christ shall all be made alive, so that Original Sin
as to its damning nature is taken away by Christ: And it is cleared by the
Words of our Savior, Exept you become as this Child, you shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven; which implies they must be innocent, and if innocent,
Original as well as Actual Sin must be done away.


Dissen. I think you speak as if you did not know Original Sin is done away by
Christ: This is a great Arminian Point, and this brings in our particular
Points, in which we must leave the Church, because I know not whether it be the
general opinion of it, yea or nay; you say Original Sin in the Gospel; Pray why
does the Apostle say, And by nature ye were Children of Wrath, even as others;
now these were such as lived in a Gospel time. Now what say you, do you think
the Apostle had not as great a light into the Privileges of Christ's Death, as
you have? and yet he tells them, Ye are by nature Children of wrath, and if
Children of wrath, then Original Sin is not done away; for God cannot be wrath
with those which have no Sin; for if Original Sin be done away, then Actual Sin
must cease, for take away the Root, and the Branch dies, and so take away
Original Sin, and Actual must cease, for its by the Fall of Adam that we become
guilty; now if Christ takes away that Fall, then we are innocent as Adam. was.
Now I do confer where and whom Christ redeems he washes away all Sin, Original
and Actual; but yet we in Gods own Elect, from Original Sin, Actuals do break
forth and run till God comes by his restraining Grace to work upon them, and
make their Election sure: Now if there were no Root, from whence should all
these Branches proceed; besides, there may be many Arguments laid down to prove
this Point, but you say the Word of our Savior clears this Point to you,
Except you become like this Child, mark, it is like it: that is, except by my
Righteousness, and Death, and Merits, you become of Original and of Actual Sin,
as innocent as this Child is of the Acts of Sin, you shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. And now I will prove it, that Christ did not die for all, as
you say, As in Adam all died, so in Christ shall all be made alive; the Apostle
knew what he said, in Adam it is certain all mankind did die, and so by the
Fall forfited all his Mercies, and did not only forfit all his Mercies, but
brought temporal Death, and not only so, but spiritual Death also; and when Man
was in this state he could no way help himself, but there he must lie, if God
did not find out a way, and perish to all eternity. Thus we leave Man and go to
God, from his Foreknowledge, who knowing all the Transactions of Man in the
World, and before Man was made, in his Foreknowledge saw the state in which he
was in; and that his Mercies might have a name upon the Earth, as well as his
Justice, for 'twas said In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall die; he
provied a Savior to pay the Price, and lay down Satisfaction, to Justice for a
number of poor Souls, which he was willing to make the Vessels of Glory, to
show forth the Praise of his Mercies, in his redeeming Love: And now as in Adam
all dies, so in Christ all are made alive, that is, all that are made alive: or
thus, as in Adam he and his all fell; so by the Death of Christ, the second
Adam, he and his all are made alive.


Church-m. Why, was Christ dead in Sin, that he must be made alive as you say,
he and his all was made alive, which imploys that he was dead with the Sinner?


Dissen. Yes, it does imply a kind of Death, for as the Sinner had Sinned, and
Christ took upon him their Sins, he become the greater Sinner by imputation,
and so he having engaged to God for the Elect. God's Justice did no longer look
upon the Sinner for Satisfaction, but upon Christ, he having taken upon him the
Debt which they were to have paid; he could not sit down at the right Hand of
God, in the Throne of his Glory of Redeeming Work, till he had satisfied
Justice, and that must be by his Death, and thereby his overcoming of Death, he
purchased his Life, and with him the Life of all his Elect, and then he
ascended with boldness, to the glorious Throne of his Father, in the face of
Justice to take to himself the glory of Mediating and Redeeming works; and
these, and none but these, which are the Redeemed, and are of his Elect, and
are called by his Grace, are fit Subjects of the Lords Supper; for he that
Eats and Drinks unworthily, Eats and Drinks Damnation to himself: So
that the Ordinances of Christ's Baptism and the Lords Supper which is
inseparable as I have showed you before, is of Right to none but Believers.

We may meet again, if God permits, to Discourse further, but now I must bid
you Farewell, for it is late.


Church-m. I shall be glad of the Opportunity, and so for this time, Farewell.


FINIS.

