A DIALOGUE Between the French King, And the LATE King JAMES.

A DIALOGUE Between the French King, And the LATE King JAMES, At St. Germains
en Lay: Occasioned by the Signing of the PEACE.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
1697.

A DIALOGUE Between the French King, And the Late King JAMES.
F. K. BON jour Mon Cousin.


K. J. I hope your Majesty will excuse my want of Breeding. To tell you the
Truth, Sir, I am quite out of love with any thing of French.


F. K. Why so out of humor, Sir?


K. J. Not without Cause, Sir, if I may be a Judge in my own Case; I presume
your Majesty cannot but know the Occasion.


F. K. Upon my Honor, not I; Madam de Maintenon and I have been Solacing our
selves, congratulating each other upon the good News of a Peace.


K. J. And I upon the same Account have been Cursing my Cruel Fate, and False
Friends.


F. K. Sir, I hope you are not come to affront me. But that I am in an extreme
good Humor, I might have resented such an Expression.


K. J. Your Majesty may do with me as you please; I have lost Three Kingdoms
already, and I have nothing left now worth losing.


F. K. Come, Sir, let me desire you to curb your Passion, and guide your self
by Reason.


K. J. Is this a time to talk of Reason, when Experience tells me I am in a
fair way to beg my Bread?


F. K. What would you have me do?


K. J. As you promised me, Sir, and as I promised my dear Friends soon after I
came here, That you would not put up your Sword, till you had revenged my
Quarrel, and replaced me on the Throne from whence the Heretical Crew expelled
me.


F. K. It Is true, Sir, I drew my Sword, and will not put it up my self; yet
upon a second Consideration, the Dauphin shall; and really it is not just he
should inherit a wasted Kingdom, nor that I should entail upon him a perpetual
War with his Neighbors; therefore I have advised him to take your
Grandfather's Motto, Beati Pacifici; knowing by my own Experience the fatal
Mischiefs of War.


K. J. Truly, Sir, I think you cannot in Honor make a Peace with the Prince of
Orange, so long as he keeps me out of my Throne.


F. K. Put Interest in one Scale, and Honor in the other, you will find it a
mere Trifle. -- Necessity has no Law. -- You have been my Pensioner these Nine
Years, and not only your self and Bedfellow, but the little Prince, as you call
him, and a Gallimaufrey of Highlanders, Rapparees, and Renegado's, have been
fed and clothed at my Charge. Is all this nothing?


K. J. Worse than nothing, Sir, except you had completed that meritorious Work
of Re-enthroning me. But if I had had the least thoughts how I should have been
served, I would long ere now have come to Composition with my Subjects: The
English are naturally Honest and Good natured, and I am persuaded would have
allowed me the Interest, though not the Principal. -- But now, Sir, I have no
hopes. --


F. K. Recollect your Memory, and you may remember that I lent you an Army in
Ireland, which with your own Courage, and the Assistance of some able Friends
in England and Scotland, might have enabled you to regain your Post; but no
sooner did the King of England offer you Battle, but away you run, and left my
Men to be knocked of the Head at the Boyne.


K. J. Natural Infirmities, Sir, you know are unavoidable. 'Twas nothing but
what I derived from my peaceable Grandfather; my Brother Charles had a little
of his Hypocrisy, and I too much of his Courage; yet, Sir, I can remember how I
swing'd the Dutch bravely, when I peept out of my Fortification of Cable-Ropes,
and cried Halloo Boys, halloo. Oh! how I made the Rogues scamper! -- but now I
grow old and unfit for Martial Exercise. --


F. K. Luis d'ores you have squandred away without number, under pretense of
Secret Service, for supplying the Necessities of the Loyal Clergy, for
Correspondence with Great Men at Court; providing Arms and Ammunition to beat
up the Prince of Orange's Quarters, and a round Sum for Pamphleteers,
New-writers, Ballad-makers, Private Presses, and Wagerers. -- But where is the
Fruit of all this?


K. J. Sir, you are too hasty; I had as fine a Plot on the Stocks as any Jesuit
in Europe could invent, and would have Launcht it in two or three Months, if
this damned Peace had not prevented it.


F. K. Well remembered; This brings to mind your fertile Inventions and Abortive
Executions. I suppose you have not forgot the Chevalier Granvil's good Success;
That was a rare Contrivance of yours, of my word, had it been well effected!


K. J. Success is not in the Hands of Man, Sir; if it were, I had had as good
Success with the Prince of Orange, as you had with the Duke of Loraine.


F. K. Your Son Berwick offered to bring the Prince of Orange Dead or Alive,
upon Condition that I would give him a Marshals Staff; but that Project failed.


K. J. It Is true, Sir; the Duke took the Sacrament on it, but forgot Ned Petres
Benediction. I Am sure I did my endeavor on my bare Knees; and if Ave-Mary's
and Pater-Noster's would have effected it, I had carried the Day. For my part,
I believe the Virgin was asleep, and St. Loyala thick of hearing, else why
should I be thus disappointed?


F. K. I Will tell you why, Sir; your Faith has not been well-grounded; you have
expected Mountains, and are fain to content your self with Mole-hills; Could
you ever think to reassume your Abdicated Throne, by the help of a pack of
desperate forlorn Fellows, who have lived upon the Odd Pence you could spare
out of my Allowance? And whilst they pretended a Tenderness of Conscience,
would have cut your own Throat with as little Remorse as Rookwood or Cranbourn
would have Assassinated your Son-in-Law.


K. J. I am persuaded, Sir, That Glorious Work had been done by my Faithful
Servants and Martyrs, had not those Two Traitors, De La Rue, and Pendergrass
told Tales. I say, Sir, A man can do no more than he can do; and if such
Enterprises fail, we are the less beholden to Heaven.


F. K. I am sorry, Sir, you are Born under so Malevolent a Planet; If my Stars
had been so unkind to me, I should scarce have been Louis Le Grand now, and
weathered the Point through so many Campaigns as I have done. But now I grow in
years, it is high time to be quiet, for I Would fain go to Heaven in Peace.


K. J. It Is True, you have had better success than I, Sir; but you may thank
your Ammunition, Sir, it is that has done you many a good piece of Service. You
Charged your Cannon with Luid'ores, and filled your Bombs with Pistoles, which
upon the first Discharge made the Gates fly open, and the Governors your Humble
Servants.


F. K. Not always neither; you may remember how Ashby put a Trick upon me, and
was the occasion of my losing the Royal-Sun, and put the Chevalier de Tourville
in such a Disorder, that I could never since get him to look the English Fleet
in the Face, though between you and I, I never intended he should.


K. J. That was a Disappointment, Sir; But how was I served at Salisbury! but
I Will say that for my self, if my Nose had not bled, I Would have spoiled the Dutch
having Trade for ever; but such things are ominous.


F. K. To none but Cowards, Sir; you might have kept your Kingdoms till now,
had you shuffled your Cards well; but you Drove too fast to keep your self in the
Box.


K. J. I did all for the best, Sir, out of a tender regard to Mother Church. It
was upon that account, Sir, That I sent my Brother Charles to Heaven a little
before his Time. He was too sluggish to promote the Catholic Interest, and
therefore I sent him packing. In requital for this, and some other little
Tricks I put upon my Subjects, they sent me to take the Air at St. Germains;
but I Will remember 'em, if ever I make 'em another Visit.


F. K. None but a Madman would hope for such a thing. However, Sir, I beseech
you don't rely upon me for any Assistance; for to tell you the truth, I have
done the utmost that lay in my power; I have Exhausted my Kingdom to that
degree, both of Men and Money, that it is even heart sick, and I am afraid I
shall hardly live to see it recover again. I have flung away Million after
Million to gain the Universal Monarchy, but am farther from it now than ever.
Had it not been for some Trusty Correspondents in England, who now and then
presented me with a Brace or two of East India Men, or a Virginia Fleet, I had
been quite Unhinged long ago.


K. J. I hope your Majesty forgets the Service my Privateers have done
sometimes.


F. K. Now and then, Sir, they have brought me in a Collier, or a
Mackeril-Boat, but that will not pay my Armies. As for my Fleet, I have made but
little use of them since the Surfeit they got at La Hogue, which made 'em keep
a long Quarrantain at Thoulon to my Cost, I Am sure, whilst the Confederates
very bountifully flung their Fireworks into my Seaport Towns for joy. But if
you had had no other Allowance than the Purchase of your Privateers, you might
have drank Small Beer and Beverage, instead of Champain and Burgundy.


K. J. My Men are afraid the Prince of Orange will put 'em to the squeak, if he
gets 'em; and they are naturally averse to the smell of English Hemp. But if I
live to see England again, I Will make your Majesty amends.


F. K. Pray don't let the thoughts of a Kingdom disturb you: I had great hopes
once of being King of Great Britain my Self, and that would have made me Amends
sufficient: But now neither you nor I are like to be the better for it.


K. J. Truly, Sir, to speak like a Philosopher, Crowns are but Encumbrances;
yet it goes a little against the grain, to see my Son-in-Law take up my Crown,
before I think fit to lay it down.


F. K. You know the English Proverb, What cannot be cured, must be ^ndur'd. I
have told you more than once, I have done to the utmost of my Ability; and I
had better make a Peace with Honor, than be compelled to it by Force. Heaven
runs counter to all my Designs, and instead of giving Peace, I shall in a
little time be glad to beg it: For Money I have none, and Men grow scarce; last
Year I was in great hopes to have broke the League, and then I Would have picked
the Bones of the Confederates one after another, but that failed. This Year I
made sure of the Spanish Flota that would have filled my Bags bravely, but was
fain to content my self with the Plunder of Carthagena, and glad I got off so:
The English Fleet have made themselves amends by Sacking Petit Guaves, and
Snapping the Buccaniers. So that when all these things are considered, I shall
hardly be Twopence the better for the Expedition. I thought Pointi's Cargo
would have been Gold Dust and Diamonds; but instead of that, he has brought me
home the Twelve Apostles and the Virgin Mary, which for fear of displeasing the
Clergy, I dare not melt. -- You cannot be ignorant what Showers of Gold I rained
in Poland, to get the Crown for Conti, but there the Rogues have shamm'd me,
and chose the Elector of Saxony. My good Friends and Allies at the Port are put
to the Rout by the Imperialists: I wish I had Cheteau-Neuf in my Cabinet at
Marli, he will be torn a-pieces for telling such a pack of Lies. I made 'em
believe I was strong enough to raise Contributions as far as the Gates of
Vienna, but instead of that, Monsieur Choiseul is fain to content himself with
passing and repassing the Rhine, and has the satisfaction of seeing Eberenbourg
taken before his Face. It Is true, I took Barcelona and Aeth, but had it not
been to gain the Grand Point, I had rather have let it alone; however it has
saved the Hangman a labor, and me the trouble of Disbanding a great many, who
for want of Employment have turned Free-booters. And in Flanders, do what I
can, your Son-in-Law is too cunning for me.


K. J. Then your Majesty is resolved to sign Peace.


F. K. It is already done, Sir.


K. J. And has your Majesty acknowledged the Prince of Orange King of England
whilst I live?


F. K. Upon the Word of a King I have.


K. J. I hope your Majesty has observed the Distinction between a King de Facto
and de Jure.


F. K. Truly, Sir, it is too late now to mind Distinctions; I have done it, and
cannot undo it if I would; I must be a Slave to my Word now; and to confirm the
Sincerity of my Intentions, have given him his Principality of Orange into the
Bargain.


K. J. Then I Am undone indeed, for I designed to have begged that for my share,
and he should have been a Titular Prince as well as my self. But what Provision
for my Son, the Prince of Wales?


F. K. None at all, Sir; if you are willing to take my Advice, send him to his
Mother, if you know where to find her; or if you had rather, I Will prefer him to
be a Valet de Chamber to the Duchess of Burgundy.


K. J. No, Sir, I Will make him a Clergyman, he is a forward Child. But, pray
Sir, what separate Article for the Relief of those faithful, tho unfortunate
Fools, the afflicted and distressed Cavaliers in England? I expect the first
Fleet from thence will bring over some Thousands to implore your Majesty's
Protection. I have nothing left to Succor or Support them my self, but I hope
your most Christian Majesty will not forget their Service.


F. K. No, Sir, by no means, I design to present them to the King of Morocco;
he is a dull Fellow, yet has done me some little Service against the Spaniards,
and I ought to make him amends; but if he has no occasion for them, they will
serve to stock my Plantations; they have been Sick of the Scurvy a long time,
course Fare, and hard Labor will be good for the Health of their Bodies.


K. J. Now it comes into my head, What does your Majesty think of a Descent
upon Jerusalem, and the Holy Land? That would be a glorious Conquest.


F. K. Pray, Sir, trouble me no more with your Projects; I Will persuade the Old
Gentleman to send you a Cardinal's Cap to strengthen your Whimsical Brain; and
for your Spouse, when an Abbessship is vacant, I will not forget her. And so, Sir,
adieu.


K. J. I Will bear my Cross with Patience if I can;
Ah! Coleman, Coleman, there is no Faith in Man.

FINIS.

