DICTATED THOVGHTS Upon the Presbyterians late petitions for complete and
universal power (in Divine Ordinances) to be conferred upon the PRESBYTERS by
Humane Authority.
SUrely if these Presbyterians did but know indeed what the true Religion is,
and did account it the life and crown of all their I berties and privileges
(as they pretend) they would not so endeavor to infringe the outward (much
less the inward) liberties and privileges of the professors thereof, as they
have done and do. If the manner of a pure and perfect reformation in all
Christ's ordinances were not hidden from their eyes, which they pretend to
account the beauty of Religion, they would never seek, thus to compel by civil
sanction, uncivil persons to divine obedience, but hate the casting of holy
things to dogs, and pearls before swine, and not torment those by constraint to
worship God, whose worship is abhorred by God. A mind well informed, knows
that Gods true worship must proceed from the mind: The mind must be moved by
reason, not by rigor. To constrain men to the positive duties of the first
Table of Gods Law, is not man's, but Gods. It Is the devine unction of the word
(not the civil sanction of the world) that frames men in a spiritual posture
pleasing to God. Those persons that go this way to work, and whom God has so
much honored to promote and accomplish such a reformation lay the foundation
of the Lords house upon the rock, and are to be accounted as those famous
witnesses were in the days of King Edward, and Queen Elizabeth of happy memory.
Those that do otherwise, are sandy foundation-layers, friends to the midnight
of Popery, and enemies to the sweet dawning day of reformation. What double
honor, divine providence has devolved upon this age, by causing the light of
the truth of Jesus Christ to shine in the world exhibiting wholesome directions
according to the perfect directory of the word of God, we desire to accept from
the directers with all thankfulness. But in this work of such high
concernment, all the axes, hammers, and tools of men's inventions, we utterly
reject, knowing that such polishers are no good reformers, but great poluters
of the sanctuary of the most High.

Spiritual minded men (not persecuting spirits) know that Jesus Christ is the
Lord of all administrations, and that he has established the government and
discipline of his Church, sufficiently and firmly in his Word, and has cursed
those that add thereunto, or detract therefrom. To it all persons must yield
subjection, and not dance about the golden calfe of their own invention, much
less desire it to be established by a civil sanction, for that will not ease
the extremity of their perplexed and amazed spirits, nor heal the distempers of
our distressed Nation. Neither can the Parliament, though excelling former
Parliaments, preserve Christ's precious ordinances (and in particular the Lords
Supper) from all contempt and profanation (as these Presbyterians speak) for
that cannot be in this world: If they do their utmost endeavor to keep all
ignorant and scandalous persons therefrom, are we to desire (or does God
require) any more of them in that particular? But surely, if it be true as
these petitioners say, that English Parliaments never had such a learned,
pious, and faithful Synod, to hold forth sincerely the mind of Christ, and the
model of Church government agreeable to his will, as this Parliament has, and
yet Church government and discipline to this very day does remain
unestablished. Then by this it may appear that the Synod has been either very
negligent, and would not, or deficient, and could not establish it, and so have
not held forth sincerely the mind of Christ agreeable to his will, as is
pretended: and these Presbyterians themselves affirm, that their confession of
Faith, and public Catechism, must necessarily take up a far longer time then
can possibly be spared from settling of government, without many unavoydable and
desparate mischiefs: And whereas they would have it brought to pass by civil
sanction, that is Temporal power, to constrain all men of and in the Nation,
both high and low, rich and poor, bound and free (under pain of corporal
punishment) to do according to their determinations, in matters of worship; And
therefore do they in their petition, call out for a complete power to be
established upon the Presbyters; It appears they conceive that the government
of their Church will not be established without it, at least in their way, and
according to their mind; for without the Temporal sword, their Kingdom; Power,
Glory, Pre-eminence, and Maintenance, which they stand for, falls to the ground.
But their pressing argument is, that no Parliament ever had such, and so many
forcible engagements upon them from God, and unto God, as are upon this And I
wish the Lord would engage them to him and his more abundantly. And whereas
these say, that the City of London did never so flourish with such a
conscionable and painful ministry, as at this day: I desire they were all more
conscionable and painful in good, and then the City of London would flourish
indeed But whereas these question whence then should it be that the children
being come so near to the birth, there is yet no strength to bring forth? If
they mean their two children, viz. power and maintenance; it is because the Man
child Jesus Christ with his rod of Iron, is about to crush the Priestly power
and maintenance, which they have conceived in their minds, and so much cry out
for with their mouths.

But these men who will not be content to bear with others in Religion, call
out for others to bear with them; saying, Bear with us a little in this fervor
of our spirits (it is for our Religion, Reformation, and the House of our God,
and we cannot hold our peace) They cannot hold their peace! and why? because
they have not temporal power, to stop the mouths of those who stand for their
Religion, and the House of their God, and cannot hold their peace, more then
they; though not in craving for temporal power against the Presbyterians, as
the Presbyterians call out for it against them. What way soever we cast our
eyes (say they) we cannot but see most sad fruits of the not settling of Church
government to this day: Here they still lay their old creeping accusation, as
if Church government were not established! Surely, If the Angels of the Lord
had not smitten them with spiritual blindness, they would before this, have
found the door of the visible Church; And if their hearts had not been hardened
by the deceitfulnes of sin, they would ere this have entered into it: for
Church government was established by Jesus Christ, and put in execution by his
Saints long ago, though contrary to the minds of the common multitude, and
their blind guides; yea, they waited not for the power or command of civil
Magistrates, [for Queen Mary, and such as she, would never assent unto the
true Religion] but the Saints did set themselves to do the work which Christ
had sent them about, and do remain, through the power of God, unto this present
day, executing the Ecclesiastical and Ministerial power of the Gospel, though
contrary to the decrees of men. And it is not the want of settling Church
government, which causes so many herisies, which they speak of. Herisies do
arise, that those who are approved, may be made manifest amongst us: 1 Cor. 11.
19 convincing the sinful sects with sound positions, and not with satanicall
persecutions, which will neither provoke them to good, nor deter them from
evil, peoples persecuting them with the sword, and not convincing them by the
word, has hardened their hearts, and made them to bless themselves in their
own seducing ways, supposing them to be the persecuted ways of God, and all
men as they do perceive this Presbyterian way to be a persecuting way, do
endeavor to draw back their shoulders, and stand a far off, and beware of such
an envious monster, that will suffer no man to dwell peaceably by him in the
world, unless they be of the same Religion with him, yea, by this means some
precious truths of Christ, taught by the Presbyterians, are by some (not
credited, but) suspected, by othersome exceedingly contemned as falsehood,
because handed by persecuting sensual spirits, whereas, if these would content
themselves with the gift of God, not tormenting, but admonishing such (by the
Scriptures) in the spirit of meeknes, without ranker, malice, envy, evil
speeches, or rigorous actions, the deceived would be undeceived, Heriticks may
be converted, and herisies suppressed, though as damnable and dangerous as
these their positions are false and scandalous: But these Presbyterians taking
it for granted that Church government is not settled to this day; They conclude
saying, that hence many abominable errors, and damnable herisies are broached
amongst us without control, without control! (say they) Hereby it appears
they would have power from the civil magistrate to control, as if the word
were not a sufficient weapon, but suppose the blind Presbyters were all made
controulers, they had need of good spectacles to discern who to control, least
they control truth instead of error, and control their betters, who excel
them in wisdom, piety, and honesty; Their arms must be long and strong, lest
they in controuling of others, are controuled themselves, and their own weapons
fly in their own faces. O old malice! the feeder of faction, and breeder of
division, that do so eye and envy the sweet unity, harmony, fidelity, and
victory of the English Armies under the command of the Parliament, when will thou come to an end? Thy forefathers the blood-thirsty Bishops, and their
sharking shavelings, would never be quiet, till they were ensnared (as they
are) in the vain works of their own hands, surely as they did, so do thou;
and as they are, so shall thou be; The precious truths which Jesus Christ has
sealed with his blood, are trampled under foot by thy children, thy servants
profane the pure and holy ordinances of Christ. Is there any of these
presbyters that do not polute, profane, and trample under foot Christ's
precious truths? are they not their own witnesses against themselves? who have
cast down the Bishops, and are set in their seats, build up superstitiously,
what before they pulled down; cast down the Prelates callings as Antichristian,
yet from them do they derive their ordination, who have it from the Pope of
Rome, that second beast, mentioned Rev. 13. 11. which rose up out of the earth,
having 2. horns like the Lamb, but speaking as the dragon And hence I believe
the ordinances of Christ are woefully profaned by persons grossly ignorant and
scandalous, and also by persons of knowledge, that do not walk up to their
light: for the Presbyterians have had time enough, and have not yet
excomunicated their profane comunicants, nor separated themselves from them,
but have their children baptized by, and receive the Supper from, such who are
scandalous in their callings, time-serving popelings, wandering stars,
Antichristian Priests, who have no calling to the work of the ministry, more
then Ieroboams priests; They say multitudes of unstable souls have fallen off,
But from whence? not from the Church of Christ, but from the Church of England,
in which they were before unstable, but not the more for falling off therefrom.
And if any one maintain strange Sects, (as they speak) It is not the Separates;
for they withstand them all, and particularly the sect of blasphemous
persecuting treacherous Presbyterians, and will not pray with them, much less
suffer them to be incorporated into their separated Assemblies, unless they
renounce their erroneous opinions; and therefore these Presbyterians charge the
separates falsely: neither do they set up illirerate persons to be their
Pastors, but such, that the meanest of them is able to confound the greatest
popish Presbyter in the world, and that by sound arguments from Scripture,
without carnal weapons. And though thy manage their meetings with boldness,
because they are righteous, and confide in those who are called Gods, and
children of the most High, (Psalm. 86. 2.) yet they are far from insolency (as
these insolent Presbyterians lyingly speak) and furthest of all from contempt
of all authority: for they acknowledge authority, knowing it is the ordinance
of God, and therefore they will not resist the higher powers, but protect them
with their lives and estates, as is apparent to this day; but the Pope
conceives that all power is given unto him, and that therefore whosoever he
be, whether magistrate or other, that contemns his authority, he contemns all
authority, even so say the Presbyterians, in contempt of all authority, to the
disturbance of the City, every one doing that which is right in his own eyes,
and there is no course to reclaim them; all which accusations are notorious
false: for the separates bring not the least disturbance in the City, but it is
Demetrius and his craftsmen, who incite the rude multitude to disturb them at
their meetings, to the danger of their lives; And if any transgress the second
table of Gods law, it being made known to the magistrate, he has power
immediately to punish him as it is meet according to the law And those that
transgress the first table of Gods law, means is used by the ministers of the
Gospel to reclaim them also (by the spiritual sword of Gods word, which is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness) 1 Timothy 3. 16. whether they be none-Churchers, omni Churchers,
Anabaptists, the sect of the Libertines, profane Presbyterians, Heathens,
Jews, Turks, Papists, or any sect under heaven; And if any of all these rebel
against the rules of morality, the magistrate (without the minister) has power
to punish him according to his offense: and the minister without the magistrate
may (and does) use the spiritual power which the Lord has given him, to
persuade the Conscience; and therefore these Presbyterians in saying that every
one does that which is right in his own eyes, and there is no course to reclaim
them, do thereby cast an aspersion not only upon the people in general, but on
the magistrates and ministers in special. And such firebrarnds as these
Presbyterians, cause the unnatural stames of division (especially about Church
government) In the same kingdom betwixt people and people, In the same City,
betwixt minister and minister, in the same congregation, betwixt Pastor and
flock, yea, in the same family betwixt master and servant, betwixt Parents and
children, betwixt husbands and wives: And it appears thus, because when some
differ from othersome, and walk up to their light, then do the Presbyters,
teach the Presbyterians to persecute them diverse ways, seeking to draw them
back by carnal compulsion, and the tender consciences not being willing to be
forced, further then the light of reason in them: immediately the fire of
contention, proceeding from the Presbyterians secred consciences, breaks forth
into a flame, as it is spread over Kingdoms, betwixt people and people, in the
same City one minister vilifieth another, in the same congregation (or parish)
the minister and the people are at it, yea, in families, the Presbyters set the
master to persecute the servant, and encourage the servant to despise the
master, who is not of their mind, hence arises persecution against the
children by the father, and against the father by their children, yea the
husbands are taught by the antichristian Presbyters, to lord it over the
consciences of the wives, and wives to persecute their husbands: insomuch as
when any one declares himself to be a separate, or an independent, immediately
their nearest Presbyterian friends alienate their affection, because he differs
from them in judgment, and break out into many bitter and reproach full
contentions, and open persecutions, no marvel then that God has of late
manifested diverse sad and remarkable tokens of his displeasure against England
and Scotland, both by sword and pestilence, and destroyed many thousands, what
may the impenitent remnant then expect, who are not killed by these plagues,
Rev. 9. 20. but the cup of the wine of Gods wrath, to be powered out without
mixture, Rev. 14 10 judgment without mercy, upon them who show no mercy; Iam.
2 13. Surely it is laid up in store with God, and sealed up among his
treasures: To him belongs vengeance and recompense, their foot shall slide in
due time, for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall
come upon them make have, Deuteronomy. 32. 34. 35. And surely the divisions between
minister and minister, pastor and flock, is not amongst the separates but
rather in the Church of England: neither do the separates despise Orthodox
ministers, nor discourage them in their ministry, nor disharten or deter
hopeful plants from the ministry: But it is the monopolizing Presbyters, who
seek to bind all preaching in their own hands, as if none had the spirit of God
to divide the word aright, but they, and such as are authorized by their
patentee-licencers for preaching, even like unto those 4. Angels which John
saw, standing upon the four corners of the earth, to hold the 4 winds of the
earth, that the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on the Sea, nor on any
trees, Rev 7. 1. Therefore if it were tried and examined the Orthodox all
ministers would prove to be the independent preachers, and not the Presbyterian
praters, that think when they have got up in the pulpit, they may crow without
control, And instead of godly ruling, fall to ungosple like railing, at the
people of God, to the sadding of the hearts of their own hearers, and causing
the best affected amongst them, to forsake their public assemblies of England,
and go where they may be better edified, even amongst those who are by the
Presbyterians pretended to be teachers of new Gospel, but as the Presbyterians
do by the separates, so the Epicurian Athenians did by Paul, some said, what
will this babbler say? othersome, he seems to be a setter forth of strange
Gods,? because he preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection; Acts 17. 18.
But Paul was not so as they would have had him to be, but reproved their
superstition, even so the separates are not as the Presbyterians would have men
think them to be, they plead not for the universal toleration of all religions
and opinions, but would have all to profess and practice the true Religion
(not that any religion is to be persecuted) but all rebellions prosecuted,
neither do they wilfully contemn the sabbath, and month-daies of humiliation,
backed by the authority of Parliament, much less do they open a wide door to
all profaneness and licentiousness, as these Presbyterians maliciously speak,
if that were true, the hearts of the truly godly, would groan more then they
do, and our brethren of Scotland would have more cause of astonishment then
they have: And as for the enemies scorning and insulting, we are not to regard
it, but walk so in offensively, that they may be convinced, and acknowledge the
Spirit of God in us, and not aspirit of giddines, which (if these speak true)
they say the Presbyterians are given up to: And whereas these say, those look
at this City as a stage of faction and herifie; that is a slander put upon this
honorable City (for no better end (as may be well conceived) then to breed a
combustion amongst the Citizens, by rasing persecution against honest well
affected men, under the notion of independants) merely out of spite, to
mischief the City, which has been so active in defense of the Kingdom, against
those rebels and traitors, and their assistants, who irriligiously scorn and
inhumanly fight against both Church and State, the true Religion, and
professors thereof, But herein the proverb is verified, he that walks
uprightly in his way, is an abomination to the wicked, And yet, though their
distempers should grow more incurable, and the reformation of the generality of
the people, every day more difficult and improbable, yet no doubt but God will
have his number, in spite of all malignant opposers, the remnant shall return
to the mighty God of Jacob, and he will save them, The consumation decreed
shall overflow with righteousness, from God to them, which people he has formed
for himself, and they shall show forth his praise, and hastily, according to
their holy Covenant (when the great mountainis become a plain) complete the
reformation in all the desirable perfections of it, not by might, nor by
power, but by the Spirit of the Lord.

Surely if these Presbyterians did but seriously consider these things they
would (do, what they say they could do) even pour out their very souls in them,
and be in bitterness for their sweet Savior, the crimson blood of whose
tender heart, they have spilt, by their piercing spear of persecution, and in
this concerning cause of God and Religion, they would join peaceably and
unanimously with the Parliaments cordial friends, against their mortal
enemies, and spare neither their prayers, nor tears, nor outward estate, nor
limbs, nor blood, nor their dearest lives, for the public, But endeavor in
the way of holiness, highly to pro^rte a speedy and perfect reformation in all
matters of Religion, and value it above their worldly comforts, and cast out
fear of all worldly crosses, and resolve rather to suffer persecution, with
Gods people, then persecute them, and behave themselves meckly, lovingly, and
moderately toward all men. Then may they justly expect to have the favor and
countenance of heaven, and to be accounted by the holy inhabitants of TSion, of
that celestial number, whom God shall fully bless with complete deliverance.

Wherefore they might do well to importune the Parliament, not for persecution,
but for a public toleration.

1 That as they tender the happiness of the miserable members of the Church of
England (which these term a miserable Church) the true prosperity of this
afflicted City, and distracted Kingdom, the timely comfort of all their real
friends, the seasonable cure of all their deep distempers, before they grow
remediless, the hastening of the Kingdoms enlargement from all its pressing
distresses, its enjoyment of all contrary blessings from the Lord, the
exaltation of the name of God, whose glory is now by the members of the Church
of England, profaned to the dust, and their Faithful performing of Covenant
and promises, they would make all possible have forthwith to suppress by their
civil sanction, all such persons, who violently break the bounds of civillity,
and morality, by oppressing tender consciences compulsively, against the very
light and law of nature, and right reason, which being done, will be more
forcible for bringing a speedy reformation, then a thousand such Synodian
models these Presbyterians boast of, and say the Synod according to their
wisdom have presented. And let them cause a confession of Faith [according to
the word of God] to be produced forthwith, and a Catechism, according to it,
that so ignorant persons may be rightly informed in their minds, and persuaded
to enter into aright spiritual order, which is the readiest way to establish
Church government, and not seek to settle Church government first, and make a
belief and Catechize afterward, which disorderly manner of proceeding, it
seems these Presbyterians can patiently endure, yea, greedily swallow down,
approve of, and justify. But away with all tenets that make way for this
popish maxim, that men must believe as the Church believes, surely they are
happy who are far enough from such a Church, that cannot spare time to produce
a confession of Faith, lest unavoydable and desparate mischiefs should (as
these say) come unto them Ye Presbyterians, take heed what ye do, enter not
into the fellowship, before you are in the faith, lest your latter end be worse
then your beginning, examine, try and prove your selves, come not into the holy
assembly, sit not down in the Lords Sanctuary, without the wedding garment,
least the wrath of God fiercely sieze upon your poor souls, and make you as
miserable in punishment, as you are in sin, and bind you hand and foot, and
cast you into the dark dungeon of everlasting perdition, to be tormented
evermore in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb,
where the victory of the Saints, shall not be the glory of sinners. Then that
harlot Tire shall sing no more melodious songs of remembrance, but shall be
utterly forgotten. And all the sermons of her false prophets (which preach for
hire) shall be as sentences of condemnation unto them, when the mountains and
hills of magisteriall power and authority shall not be able to hide or cover
them from the wrath of the Lamb.

2. These Presbyterians should not have petitioned unto men for power and
authority, to confer upon the Presbyters, that which is only in the power of
God. Divine right must be sought for only from God, Humane power from men in
authority. The greatest men on earth can give no more then what themselves
have; but these would have the Parliament to give them such a complete measure
of power and authority, as may fully enable the Presbyters to maintain all
Christ's sacred ordinances, in their highest splendour and purity, held forth in
the word, etc. This is Gods gift, and none other, -- and he will give it to his
Church and Presbytery, and to none else in the world. Its an inheritance which
cannot be purchased by the temporal sword, all the carnal weapons in the
world will not procure it: for the Lord will fight against such fighters, who
instead of a holy and glorious reformation, bring a sinful and shameful
defamation, adding to these distractions, more destructions, and ruinations, in
whose secrets, let not the souls of the Saints enter, their glory let them not
unite unto them in their impure, imperfect, and impious ways: for though the
path of the just, is as the shining light, which shines more and more unto the
perfect day, yet the way of the wicked is as darkness, they know not at what
they stumble. Prove. 4. 18. 19.

O that the Lord would open the eyes of these Presbyterians, that they may see
their sin, and turn unto him, and behold that holy mount Zion, which the Lord
will more and more establish upon the top of the mountains, and exalt above
the hills, that they may discern the light of God, and walk uprightly
therein, then they may with holy resolution say, that though they repent of
their former sin, yet they shall not repine at their future doings, or
sufferings, in reference to the posession and practice of the glorious truths
of God, But expect constancy from God to continue triumphing in his praise, for
crowning his spouse with spiritual glory, and for lifting up the hearts of his
Saints in these sacred things to do worthily.




