THE Emperor Augustus HIS TWO SPEECHES, IN THE SENATE HOUSE at ROME; The First
addressed to the MARRIED ROMANS, The other to the UNMARRIED.

Translated out of DION CASSIUS, an Ancient Greek Historian.

LONDON, Printed for J. B. at the Sign of the Three Pigeons in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1675.

The Occasion of these Speeches.
AFter a Civil War (which though it is often begun upon Religious Pretenses,
always contributes to the growth of loose Principles) many of the Gentlemen of
Rome satisfied the World quickly, how ill they had been educated in the noise
of War, when neither Humane nor Divine Laws are heard, Marriage (which was
recommended to them by experience of the World) became a subject of their
Satyrs; in their pleasures, they would not consult (as their Forefathers did)
the conveniences of humane Society: If they became married men, it was for
money; and for money, as ready to become Adulterers: Love, though the most
generous of Passions, was nothing else but brutishness; for the old Blades,
many of them, in the times of licentiousness, had debauched so many Women, that
they durst not trust any; for the Young Men, they thought a rambling lust the
greatest freedom, and had not had sorrow enough to make them wise. The Ladies
would not be unadored, but enslave themselves to be called Mistresses, or
Keepers of the Liberty to the Gallants. The Council of the Nation begun to be
sensible of a retinue of ill consequents that waited on this modish Gallantry;
it is like, they thought sometimes of the Health of their People, those Vices
infallibly propagating rottenness through a Nation, sometimes of the private
felicity of those Delinquents themselves, who in vain were in chase of Humane
Happiness, inspight of the Author of Humane Society; but principally, they
considered, that in Families were laid the foundations of Kingdoms, and
promiscuous Lust would take away,

First, all the Nobility of Families: Secondly, all Industry; for who would
labor for a spurious Issue. Thirdly, there would indeed be left none but the
Relations betwixt Master and Servant, with which alone no Philosopher ever
thought a Family could be constituted; and without Families, no man could ever
frame an Idea of any such thing as a Nation. In the ensuing Speeches will be
suggested other things they were not unacquainted with; but the History tells
us, That out of their concern for their Country, they made a Law which gave
several Immunities, as particularly, Exemption of Taxes, to all that had three
Children, and laid several burdens upon them that refused (as they call it) the
yoke of Marriage: Against this Law a strong Faction is made by the Roman
Equites, or the Young Gentry of Rome. The Emperor Aug. ((...)says the
Historian) being grieved in his mind, calls before him the whole body of the
Gentry; the greatest part of them he finds unmarried, and particularly the two
Consuls for that year; this provoked him to two Orations, now extant in the
fifty sixth Book of Dion Cassius, p. 573. Edit. Hanouiae, 1606.

The first Speech to the Married Men.
Gentlemen,
I See it, and not without trouble, how small your number; whether I consider
the greatness of this City, or this swarm of careless sparks, that would enjoy
all the pleasures, but contribute nothing to the security of the place they
live in: I heartily thank you that you would withstand this Torrent of
Debauchery, I thank you as a public Governor, I thank you as Augustus, you
endeavor to secure my Honor, that posterity may not say the ruin of Rome
begun in the days of Augustus. Others take the way to leave our Italy a Desert,
void of warlike Hands, and obnoxious to every multitude that shall invade it:
To such as you, Rome of old owed her valiant People, and thereby her greatness;
to the Marriage Bed we owe those great spirits that put their yoke upon the
world, and yet submitted themselves to the yoke of Marriage. These men are
dead, and without your example, not only their memory, but the whole Roman name
were endangered; men are in this inferior to Spirits, that they must owe to
children a vicarious kind of Immortality. Let me turn your eyes from your
Fathers, to the Father of us all, the first and most high God; he has divided
humane nature into two Sexes, the Male and Female; he has hid in our very make
and frame a secret sympathy, a natural kindness, nay, a little necessity to
join, to contribute to the felicity of each others life. He has strangely
blessed these mutual approaches, with a miracle which astonisheth all
Philosophy, for man's original shall last a wonder to the worlds end. You (my
married friends) have followed the Law of nature, as well as the example of our
Predecessors, to whose virtue it is those Young Men ow their titles and their
security too. You glory in being their offspring, may others glory as much in
being descended from you; it is a wise care to leave riches behind you, but a
wiser, to leave them to some, whom Rome and you may own for Children.

As for your Ladies, your own experience has satisfied you, how happy a thing
it is, to have a faithful Companion of your life, interested in your Weal or
Woe, a mauger of the fruits of your Industry, and with unexpressible affection,
a nourisher of the fruits of your body, one that manageth your House to your
honor; is pleased when you are merry, attends on you with tenderness in your
sickness, in prosperity doubles your happiness by sharing in it, and in
adversity takes half of the burden, in youth pleases you, and in old age
assists you. Is it not beyond expression, sweet to behold your children, those
pledges of your mutual love, those little Models of your selves, the Epitomes
of your souls and bodies, in whom when you are decaying, you flourish and grow
young again. What satisfaction is it, when you leave the world, that not a
stranger, but a part of your selves enjoy your substance; that you lose not
life (as in a battle) all in a lump, but live when you are dead, in little
parcels of your selves.

My Friends, I speak at ease to you, as Roman Citizens, by whom the welfare of
their Country was never thought a matter fit for Drolery: What Roman of old
would not have lost life, much more have crossed his vicious inclinations, for
the benefit of Rome? And is it not convenient, nay absolutely necessary, to
Marry, if such a name as the Roman must not be extinguished, if there must be
any such thing as Roman Armies and Commanders, that Rome abound in Inhabitants,
to improve the Land, and serve at Sea, to follow Trades, practice Manufactures,
and when Wars come, to fight, and fight with greater resolution, because they
have Wives and Children? You therefore, O men, (for you only the Roman Emperor
owns by that name) you therefore, O fathers (for you only deserve to wear that
title) you I love and honor, and shall place all the marks of my favor upon
you; I am sure it is best the riches of Rome should be in your hands, that have
young Romans to bestow them on; you have given pledges to your Country of your
fidelity, and your concern for her felicity.

The Second Speech to the Unmarried Gallants, p. 574. AUGUSTUS CAESAR.
I Am at a stand how to address my self to you; shall I call you Citizens? You
have done your part for the ruining of the City; shall I call you men? will you
own you deserve the name? Shall I call you Romans? you blush not to take the
ready way to blot that name from under Heaven: I confess my self in some
confusion, when I consider how ye are endeavoring to frustrate all the designs
that I have managed on the most mature deliberation, for the peopling of Rome;
I am sorry I have so many to speak to, that are like to bring a multitude to a
few. You regard not the care the higher Powers have taken to plant the Roman
name, you value not the blood of your Fathers shed to preserve it, and postpone
all things to a humor, which one age would confute by sad experience. Were the
Commonalty infected with this, as with many other of your Vices, what would
become of Rome, nay, of the world of men? You are some of our principal
branches, and voluntary barrenness can be none of your glories; the People
imitate you, and Posterity may deservedly brand you, if you show them the way
to ruin; either all will do as you do, if not, your vicious singularity renders
you justly odious; you deserve to be hist off the stage of the world, that will
alone act such unbecoming parts; nay, you deserve their rage, that will trample
on what is so sacred in the eyes of all men else; but if you find a crowd of
followers, the next age will follow your memory with millions of Curses.

You Will say, it will be no hurt for us to live as we list; so may the Robbers
plead, their number is not great; the Serpent in the egg deserves to die: But
what is theft, nay, a cluster of the greatest crimes to yours? You are
murderers, wilfully smothering the vital flame; you are unnatural to Parents,
not perpetuating their name and honor, and all for a Miss, to whom you give
for your pleasure, what she spends on others that please her better. You are
unjust to the higher Powers, robbing them of their most pleasing offering, a
succession of rational creatures to adore them; if your way take, their Temples
as well as our Houses will be empty; our Romulus and his followers stole
foreign Virgins for their Wives, and you neglect our own. Wives were the cause
of, and Wives obtained, made the Peace in the famous Sabine War. Those old
things you despise, but so you cast contempt on the actions of your Fathers.

And for what is this Confusion? Will you profess Chastity as vestal Virgins?
then with them you should die if you offend; but I know, none of you live
without your Woman, both at bed and board; all this you propose to your selves,
is to range wildly, it is an ungoverned brutishness you plead for, or rather to
have liberty to fill the City with jealousy and murders: if these bounds you
will not be contained in, Why may not the Thief break over all hedges of the
Law, that keep him from your Riches? No man's propriety in his Estate, has a
more rational foundation, than that in his Wife.

Gentlemen, if my words wound you, think how much deeper your deeds have
wounded me; those ancient Laws of Wedlock I found when I first took up this
Scepter, and will as soon suffer that, as them, to fall to the ground. Remember
you live in a Society, and are not lawless, and your Obedience I expect to this
of all my Laws; enforce not the State to employ your slaves to get children for
you, and continue the name of Romans.

But I blush for you, I have spoke nothing out of hatred to you, but as your
Emperor, that would have (you grow good, and) thousands like you. Go home, take
Wives, and with joint prayers adore the God of Families, try the ways of
virtue, and you will need no more Speeches from Augustus.

FINIS.

