A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Riches, Poverty, Godliness, Gravity, Labor, AND Content:
Fit for the Perusal of all that are Sober-minded, in this time of
Unsetledness, and Dis-Satisfaction. By a Friend to the Public.

LONDON, Printed for Nehemiah Bradford, MDCLIX.

A DIALOGUE.
THere dwelt once, as has been said, two Inhabitants in one Town, the one
called Riches, the other Poverty. These two could not long agree; for Riches
would be insulting over Poverty, either wronging and oppressing him, or
scoffing at him, and abusing him; and became so stately, that after a while he
disdained to look upon or speak to him though his next neighbor. Poverty was as
much to blame too, for he was as stout as Riches, for the heart of him; and
very foul mouthed, and could never afford Riches a good word behind his back,
and grew full of envy and bitterness against him. Upon these continual jars,
one of them must be gone. Riches would not stir, Poverty must, and gets him to
the further end of all the Town, and dwelt a while there, in a sorry ruinous
Cottage; which shortly after fell to the ground, and he was never able to
repair it.

There happened to come into those parts a stranger nobly born, and of a far
better descent then either of the former two; his name was Godliness, of a most
ancient family; he is said to have bin before the fall of Adam. His means were
not great for his family was much decayed by many said calamities they had
undergone in some evil and troublous times; yet was he of so quiet, peaceable,
and sweet a disposition, that he thought he could agree with any reasonable
neighbor in the world, if the fault were not his own. He came and took a house
near Riches first; they long thus agreed, and had not so much as an unkind word
passed between them, till Riches gave the first occasion. Godliness was very
industrious in his Calling, meddled with no man's business but his own: Besides,
was very patient, pitiful, and charitable; and, next to his constant care to
please God, his desire was to live without giving any just offense to any man
living, for he would not wrong the least child. But Riches grew every day more
high and stately, as was not by Godliness to be endured; yet must he not be
told of it neither. Godliness had born long: at length taking just offense at
some of the ill ways of Riches, told him mildly of it. But Riches said he
would not be controlled nor so affronted by the greatest Godliness in the world:
But brake out to him in the words the Sodemites used to Lot: This fellow came
into sojourn here a while ago, and he must needs become a Judge and a Lord: But
I will not take it at thy hands.

Besides, Riches had a many lewd and loose servants, all bitter enemies to
Godliness. Their names were Pride, Oppression, Covetousness, Luxury, Riot,
Prodigality, Malice, Flattery, Calumny, and Laziness; every one had his Office
but Laziness, who said he would wait on his Master at all turns, but he would
undertake no other employment. Oppression was his chief servant, and steward of
his house, a cruel enemy to the Poor. Covetousness was his Bailiff, Pride was
his Tailor, yet no good workman neither; for let him take his measure how he
would, and make his garment with all the skill he had, the making, or the
stuff, or the color, or the fashion, or the trimming, or the putting on, did
not please, at least if they did one day, did not two days together, neither
him nor his wife (her name was Jezabel, so was her mother's befere her, who
learnt her to paint and to patch; and to powder; and her Waiting Woman Mistress
Lightskirt Curiosity.) Prodigality was upper Butler, and under him Riot; and
the cup they all drank in was called Excess, a foul great cup it was: and
looking on it, to see what mark it had, I observed 3 letters, but all 3 D's;
but yet not standing together, but the one near ye brim, the 2d in the middle,
the 3d in the bottom. Many would ghess what these 3 letters might mean some
said it was Donum Domini Divitiarum the name of the Donour. But they of the
house said the first D. was Delight, the 2d Drunkenness, and the 3d was
Drowziness. But there dwelt an old man not far off, whose name was Gravity, a
comely old man, of much learning, and great experience; upon whose counsel all
the Neighbors did much rely; yea, I have known when Labor and Godliness and
Content too, have gone to advise with him; but he had bin discharged from
looking into Riches his house, he told me these 3 letters were set on by the
same hand that wrote the 3 words on Belshazzars wall, and that the first D. did
signify Disease, the 2d D. Death, and the 3d he was sure was Damnation. And
were it not too long a digression, I could tell you what children Riches had,
and what Grandchildren; and since I hear what is become of all. Riches was now
an old man; he had 2 Sons and 2 Daughters. Both his Sons died without issue in
their Fathers life, so that he saw his name was like to perish, what ever
became of the estate. The elder son was called Honor, the Fathers darling, and
the hopes of all the family; but a weak child he was, and never like to be long
lived: he died young, and put all the house into mourning, they lament the loss
of Honor to this day. The younger son was called Ambition, one of an haughty and
aspiring mind, and of a working restless spirit; he was one still in every
desperate and mischievous plot; was betrayed, and came to an untimely and
shameful end, and no man pitied him. The 2 Daughters were Delicacy the elder
(more like the mother) and Avarice the younger (more like the father.) The elder
was always an unruly and wanton Girl, never like to come to good; and when her
mother had provided a great match for her preferment, she had cast her self
away upon one of her fathers Serving men called Prodigality (they agreed like
dogs and cats) and they had an only daughter whose name was Infamy. Avarice was
resolved to be ruled by her father; and by his persuasion, she was bestowed on
his Steward Oppression, his chief servant, whom he said he loved as dearly as
if he had bin his own child: he told his daughter Avarice he would make the
best husband for her in the world; that they were sure never to want, they nor
theirs, for if she could but save, the husband would be sure to get. But they
had not a good day together neither, but lived quite besides what they had; and
they had an only daughter, whose name was Misery. These 2 Grandchildren,
Infamy and Misery, is all that at present are left of Riches race they are yet
living, and like to live many a day. But to return to his servants again:
Luxury was his Cook Gluttony his Carver, Malice was his Secretary: But he made
most of two above all the rest: Flattery the one, his greatest Favorite; and
Calumny the other: these 2 had the length of his foot; the one could make him
angry, and the other pleased with whom they would, and whenever they listed.
I had like to have forgot his Chaplain; for he would be thought to be religious
too; his name was Sir John Reader. He was no Scholar at all, though he said he
had taken a degree in the University. But he had 2 properties which gave
general content to all the house: he could mumble them over a few short prayers
out of the Book, and when he had done, he could bowl and drink, and swear with
the best of 'em, all the day after. Now the house being stored with such
servants, there was nothing but disorder to be seen: they could none of them
endure Godliness, but made songs of him, scoffed and jeered at him and all his
actions; yea, made themselves merry with his very gestures, and quarreled with
his children and servants. Nor did they well agree among themselves, for
Prodigality and Covetousness could never agree, though Covetousness and
Oppression held together. Malice, Calumny and Flattery often jarred and
differed. And as for Riot, he could agree with never a one, but only Pride.
Godliness comes to Riches in a courteous way, and tells him privately of their
miscarriages; and withal tells him, if he keep these servants longer, they will
undo him for ever; persuades him to reform his family and to turn away these
old servants, and he would commend better to him, which should be more for his
credit and profit too. But Riches grew very hot, and would not hear him speak;
but fell foul on Godliness calling his Servants to help him: and first of all,
his Chaplain, who was no ways able to hold argument with Godliness; but he
could out-rail Godliness and Gravity both: he would needs bring Scripture to
confute Godliness; and he had one place very ready, being all he was acquainted
with Eccles. 7.16. Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise:
for why should thou destroy thy self? Here he had thought he had knocked
Godliness down. But Godliness had his answer ready, and bad him read the next
words: Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou fool sh: why should thou die
before the time? Sir John was presently nonplust, that he had not a word of
Scripture more, but fell to downright railing. Then did Riches call for his
other servants to second his Chaplain, and bade Pride, Malice and Calumny pay
him soundly, and if they 4 were not able to do it, he would send for Oppression
to set him further off; for next his old mortal enemy Poverty, whom he had sent
packing, he protested to hate Godliness more then any creature alive; yea, he
swore to it too, that he hated him more then he did the very Devil. And old
Jezabel looking out of her Window, cried, spare him not, knock him down, or
send him packing; for I cannot abide the very looks of him.

Now Godliness had a few Servants of his own training up, well bred, fit to
serve the best Nobleman in the Land; but he had not many to spare: he had
tried to breed up more, but he could do no good on many of them, or they would
not tarry with him. Such a one was Ignorance, but he resolved not to be taught,
and he said he never came thither to be Catechized. Error would have dwelt with
Godliness too, as he said; but he must have the Liberty of his Conscience, as
he called it. Singularity made offer of his Service; but he would indent with
him to go hear when and where he pleased. Hypocrisy was more importunate then
any one, to be his chief Servant, and companion too; and with his fair language
and Scripture-expressions, he had wrought himself for a while into a fair
Opinion with Godliness; Oh! he had such a Tongue, that he was able to deceive
any man alive: and indeed he began so well, that had his deed been as good as
his word, and had he held out as he began, he had been an extraordinary good
servant: yea, Hypocrisy would fain have been exercising his gifts; and said he
had spoken often in private meetings, with great applause; but he never cared
for joining in prayer with others; and they could never perceive that he used
any private prayer by himself; therefore his Master fell into suspicion of him,
first for his much talk, and his many brags; and having set two of his old
tried servants to observe him, Humility and Sincerity, they informed their
Master, they found him out to be a very cheat, a notorious liar, and such a
cunning dissembler, that ye could not tell when to believe him; yea, they set
him out to be such a dangerous fellow, that he was enough to spoil the whole
Family, at least to bring up an ill report against them all; therefore they
desired their Master to rid the house speedily of him, or there was no staying
for them. Godliness presently calls for him, and admonishes him to mend his
manners, and in a great passion (for it was said, he was never so much moved
with any one in all his life) he charged him to be presently put out of doors,
and never to come near his house, unless he brought Repentance and Experience
along to pass their word for him, that he was now another man; Nay, Godliness
was so passionate, that for his sake he said he would never have any one of
that name come into his family again.

And would you think it? Idleness had a mind to the Service: but he asked
great wages, and yet would do nothing; nor would he so much as promise to mend.
But he had a few faithful Servants, whose names were Faith, Hope, Charity,
Repentance, Experience, Humility, Sincerity, Temperance, Sobriety, etc. He had
also many good friends; all the old Patriarks, and holy Apostles and Prophets,
were his near kinsmen, and intimate acquaintance; and he is said to derive his
pedigree from the second Adam, from whom he is lineally descended; and his
Wives name was Philadelphia. But his Servants he keeps all hard to work, and
among them is not the least difference or discord in the World; but they lived
in the greatest peace and quietness that could be; till Riches servants, and
those meeting, there would be old falling out presently; for the disordered
company that Riches kept, would be still offering some abuse or other to them;
and upon complaint made to their Master, he said he would maintain them in it,
and had set them on of purpose to weary out Godliness; and that he was at the
charge of a Chaplain only to oppose the Power of Godliness.

Godliness thus driven away by Riches means, and his servant Oppression;
removes to the very end of all the Town, where Poverty dwelt, in an old ruinous
shed, without either door or Window, or sire, or Chimney, or so much as a bed
to lie upon; yet extreme stout, often boasting of his Family, and what his
Ancestors had been, as good as Riches; and I think no less; for whereas Riches
could pretend to no higher pedigree then Nabal, of whom he was begotten when he
lay sick of the Stone in his Heart, and died a few days after, whence all the
Posterity have had that disease hereditarily cleaving to them more or less;
Poverty would vaunt often that he could derive his Pedigree from Noah; for Cham
his Son was his Great Grandfather; and his Motto he keeps to this day, A
servant of servants. But I rather think he may carry his Pedigree beyond Noah,
and spring from the loins of Cain; who after he was driven from the presence of
the Lord, had this Legacy given him, that he and all his posterity should be
Vagabonds and Runnagates. Godliness expecting more quietness, intending not
to wrong Poverty of one farthing, but to do him all the good he could; Poverty
was stout and scornful, and his Wife a nasty Slut, poor children they had, all
in rags. He had never a Servant, nor had he had many a day. This Poverty was an
ill Husband; if he got a penny, he must to the (...)

Godliness being thus unkindly dealt with, and driven out of Town both by
Riches and Poverty, was a while much perplexed whither he should remove to find
a resting place, and where to meet Content his best friend on earth, which was
his first Design. He was once wished by a Friend, that had observed his lovely
aspect and his sweet behavior, to go to the Court, whither all men go to seek
preferment; and if any did rise, it were pity but such a one as he should be
promoteed: How much good might he do his friends and himself, if he were in
place? But Godliness replied, he had bin bred up in a plain and private way; he
had not much means, nor many friends; without which what is to be expected at
Court? nor could he skill of the Court-Language and Complements, neither was he
at all acquainted with these Arts of Simulation and Dissimulation, which are
said to be all in all in a perfect Courtier: Therefore he resolved all the
preferments in the world should not entice him to do any thing against his
Conscience. Next he was by some friends wished to go and list himself in the
Army: he answered, Of all lives he liked that least, yet for his part, he said,
besides the hazard such run in the Wars, he was not well satisfied in the
justice of the Cause, either on the one side or other. And he judged the
Soldiers Calling to be only warrantable when the Cause was plain and clear,
and so long as Necessity puts them into Arms, and no longer. He professed, for
his part, he loved the Soldiers so well, that he did wish with all his heart,
that all the Soldiers would turn Godly; but he loved Godliness so well, that
he could not wish all Godly men to turn Soldiers. Then he was by some
persuaded to go abroad into the World and travel, then might he observe the
diverse manners and fashions of other Countries, and grow acquainted with their
several Religions and Languages: That he was not a Gentleman who had not
traveled, nor was any a complete man without this. He presently replied, he
had been a Traveller already a long time, toward Heaven, and his own Country
was as near or nearer a way thither then any other. His design was to grow in
Grace, and that he feared was not to be promoted by going into foreign Parts:
and for their Languages, let others affect them; if he could learn the old
Language of Canaan, it was enough for him; and though he would judge no man, he
had observed few returned better by Travels, as to their Religion: yea, he
remembered of the 12 chosen men of Israel, that were sent out to view other
Countries, there were but two who returned the same men they went out; the rest
had cast often God, were corrupt in their Principles, and did much mischief to
their Countrymen. He was once set upon by a Friar, who tempted him to go into
a Cloister, and to induce him thereunto, he was urgent for him to go see their
Chapel how it was adorned, and to hear their Music: and fain would have
persuaded him to believe, if any where in the World, there was to be seen
Devotion and Sanstity. He presently replied with indignation, Away with your
Devotion and Sanctity: Sanctity so utterly opposite to Sincerity, and Devotion
totally destructive to the power of Godliness. At last, he sequestered himself
in some nook, in a solitary manner, out of all commerce with others. There
might he hope quietly to retire himself be free from Persecutions, which he saw
did every where attend him; there might he be out of the sight of open
Profaneness (more grievous to a godly mind then Persecution it self) there might
he enjoy God, the liberty of his Conscience, and pour out his Soul in incessant
Prayers, and enjoy communion with his Soul-beloved Savior. This was mighty
pleasing: But he remembered that man was made for Society; and he had those
Scriptures came to his mind: None of us live to our selves, We are members one
of another, None of us are to seek our own things only, but every one for the
good of others. And he called to mind how prejudicial Solitude had ever been to
the best of men. That God had said, it was not good for the first-Adam, no not
in innocence, to be alone; nor was it safe for the first-woman to be alone,
even in Paradise; nor was it safe for the second-Adam, the first begotten of
the whole Creation, and the only Conqueror of the Devil, to be alone in a
Wilderness: He concluded therefore, That it was excess of Passion and Zeal,
which transported David and Jeremy, to wish themselves into a Wilderness; and
doubtless that it was unavoidable Persecutions which drove Elias and others,
into their Caves and Solitudes: for his part, he thought he was bound to honor
God, as much as was possible, by doing good to Humane Society.

After sometime spent in this unsettled condition, it pleased God to bring
Godliness acquainted with father Gravity, of whom I made mention before; a true
friend and faithful. Counselor, to all who advised with him. A comely old man,
and of much experience: he knew both Court and Country; and there was scarcely
any passage of note in his time, or long before, but he was well acquainted
with it.

Godliness was much cheared, when he saw his amiable and lovely countenance,
and his long gray hairs; Discourses much with him, and receives the best
satisfaction from him, that he had met with many a day: after much good and
serious conference, he enquireth of him, it he could inform him where a
convenient House might be had for money, Town or Country. He tells, he was
glad he asked, that he might both help a Neighbor to so good a Tenant; and him
(though a stranger as yet) to so good accommodations. He bids him return to the
Town again, and about the middle of it, turn aside a little out of the Road;
there dwelt just midway, as he could guess, between Riches and Poverty, old
Labor, a good honest Neighbor, and the best House keeper in all the Parish;
He had a convenient House to let, and would be glad of a good Tenant: for he
was loath any thing should lie dead upon his hand.

Thither then he goes, as he was directed; and when he came to knock at his
door, he found him within; he was seldom abroad; and he had been hard at work,
with his Wife Prudence (a comely Woman, and a very cleanly Houswife) sitting
close to her Wheel; and the Children all of them doing somewhat. They were all
in a handsome habit of good Broad-cloth; no Lace or Trimming that was costly,
but whole and handsome. The house without well built, and in good repair; within
very near, every room well furnished. Besides, Labors pedigree was very ancient;
he came of Adam's second Son, innocent Abel, who learnt him first to keep
sheep, then to spin the wool; and Labor was all the issue he left behind
him, when he died. This Labor said moreover, That his Ancestors had done the
greatest exploits that the World had ever seen: That they had built all those
great and ancient Cities in the World, all Towns, Forts, Castles, and Bridges:
That Ninive, Babylon, Rome, Constantinople, Jerusalem, were all built by Labors
own hands: That Labor had fought many a sore Battle, gained many famous
Victories, conquered most Nations, gained the greatest Dominions, stablished
the wholsomest Laws and Rules of Government; had traveled all Countries, had
been at tho Indies, and thence brought and transported all their richest
Pearls, Spices and Commodities, and traffiqued with them into all other
Countries: That the Pyramides of Egypt, and all the other Wonders of the World,
were of Labors own handiwork and foundation: That he had invented Tillage,
improved Lands, levelled Mountains, drained Fens, invented all Arts and
Sciences; bred the best Scholars; and the most excellent Books extant, were of
his composing. Godliness tells him, he had heard much good of him, and that his
Ancestors, and Labor's, were old acquaintance, and had loved dearly, living
neighborly together; and therefore he desired to take that House he had to let,
and that he would be as good a Tenant as he could let it to; and promised h m,
he should lose nothing by him. He told him moreover, it was Godliness which
learnt Labor the first way of thriving; and that it was their two Fathers
together, who had performed the most renowned undertakings. Labor indeed had
done very much, but by Godliness's directions and expense. The most pious and
beneficial Acts, witness Noahs-Ark, and Solomon's Temple, The one built by
Labor hands, but at the sole charge and by the Divine direction of Godliness;
and the other, though every stone and piece of Timber was hewed and made ready,
and joined together by Labors pains; yet it was Godliness's purse that paid for
all, and maintained the service, and found the daily sacrifice: It was Labor
indeed that fetched the stone and timber from Lebanon; but it was only
Godliness, without Labor, that fetched the fire from Heaven. And if the
Commonwealth was upheld by Labor, it was only Godliness the Church was
raised, supported, and preserved by. It was Godliness that spread the Gospel,
converted Infidels, continually assisted all the famous Prophets and Apostles;
and does to this day enable the faithful Ministers in the happy employment and
success in their Ministry. And if Labor had at any time put forth any useful
Writings, yet the best Books which were in the World, were all of Godliness's
putting forth.

They were soon agreed, and agreed most lovingly together, and resolved never
to part. Labors House stood in a very wholesome air, near the Church; which made
Godliness like it the better: the whole House very healthful; seldom was any
sick there, not did they die till full of days. The Children looked all with
ruddy and live y countenances: you might know whose Children they were, by
their very faces. A few servants there were, called Forecast, Diligence,
Expedition, Cheerfulness, Perseverance; good risers all, and tough workmen: But
Labor set many poor people a work, and paid them duly; and by that means
enabled many, poor before, to pay their debts, and to provide comfortably for
themselves and their Families, and to relieve the poor; yea, Labor provided
Stocks and Pensions for their Widows and Children of such, who had been honest
and careful in their business.

Labor had lived well before; but when Goodness became his Neighbor, you
would wonder how he came on and increased, as if Jacob had been come again into
Laban's fields, or Joseph into Potiphers house, or the Ark into Obed-Edom. For
Godliness taught him how to seek, and get a blessing for him and his; brought
him to pray in his Family, to instruct his children and servants in
Catechizing, to call upon God, as duly as to rise out of their beds; and to
fly-lying, swearing, profaneness, and irreligiousness, as much as idleness. And
he told him withal, there was a friend of his was shortly to come that way
(for he had a good promise for it) who would make them both happy: his name was
Content.

I should have told you also, That though there was an old Church hard by
Labor's house, when Godliness came thither, yet it was much gone to decay; and,
which was more trouble to Godliness, there was no Minister: there had been one
it seems some years before (a Godly ancient man, and very painful:) Labor told
him, he preached, Catechized, and expounded constantly; he did not think there
was a Parish in a good way, better ordered: It would have done you good, to
see how people loved the Church, kept the Sabbath, and what love was among
the Neighbors. But that good old man was dead, and now Nobody cared whether
they had a Minister or no: They thought any body that could speak, might
preach; and as for Prayer, and reading the Scripture, singing of Psalms, and
the Sacraments, he saw there were few did regard them now a days; and if the
Church should fall down to the ground, he knew none would take care to repair
it. There were many sufficient men in the Parish, he said; but they loved
their money too well: and there was one above all the rest, called Riches,
vvorth thousands; but he was neither friend to the poor, nor the Church; but
would rather spend 100 l. on his Pride, Luxury, and Riot, then allow 40 s.
toward the maintenance of a good Minister. But as for me, said Labor, as poor
a man as I am, if my Neighbors would be ruled by me, we would not for shame
let the Church fall, and live like Heathens, without one to guide us: whosoever
will be at the cost, I would bestow my pains; and it should go hard, but I
would find somewhat for such a good work. Gods blessing on thy heart, said
Godliness; I shall love thee the better for it, while I know thee: we will
between us, see to get the Church fitted, and then look out for a Minister; and
if thou vvilt be at the pains, I will bear all the charges, whatsoever it
cost, though I leave the less to my Children.

My Ancestors have always been great friends to the Church and a godly
Ministry; They have at heir own charge, built many Churches from the ground,
and richly endowed them for the comfortable maintaining of the Minister, when
they had done. One of my Progenitors, called Obadiah, had alone p ovided an
hundred Prophets in a time of a famine, fed them with bread and water by fifty
in a Cave, which was as good fare as he had himself; and he believed, none of
his friends were ever the poorer for such good works; but still God had
blessed them the more abundantly. He for his part were not worthy to be
called by the name of Godliness, if he should be backward in such a business:
and his Wife Philadelphia, he was sure, would put her helping hand; for she
was once Sister to Dorcas, that was so full of good works, and alms deeds
which she did, and was so much lamented, when she was dead and gone. To be
short, they concluded between them to fall upon the work; and the Church was
but newly repaired in a plain and decent manner, and a good Minister settled in
the place, when Content came.

This Content is not of earthly extraction, never came out of the loins of Adam
at all; But I suppose might be that Melchizedeck, who had neither Father or
Mother recorded on earth: and sure I am, it was Melchizedeck which blessed
Abraham, and his Posterity. Certain I am, he was with Adam in Paradise, before
his fall; and before his Creation, among the Angels; and before their Creation,
had been with the blessed Trinity from all eternity. He was not often seen on
earth, since Adams exile out of Paradise; yet now and then has he given a vi t
to some of Labors friends, and Godliness acquaintance.

He is always attended with many gallant followers: his chief friends, I well
remember, of whom he made most account, were called Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification, and Assurance; and one above all the rest, called Peace of
Conscience. He was wont also often to speak of a great Benefactor, long since
deceased, to whom he was infinitely obliged, who had been the maker of him: he
would say, how dearly he had loved him; he still called him his Lord and
Savior at every word (sure then it could be no other, then the Son of God) how
he had done and suffered much for his sake, who had never deserved the least
favor from him; that had it not been for his singular bounty, and extreme
sufferings, his name had never been Content; but sin, misery, and despair; for
he had been in great destresse and danger, having many great enemies to deal
with, and many unconceiveable calamities lay upon him, But by flying to him,
acquaintance with him, and submission to his yoke, he had found this
unexpressible rest to his Soul. He related also, how he had bestowed on him a
Coat of diverse colors; one so pure white, as no Fuller on Earth could whiten;
which is the clear Linen and white, the righteousness of Saints, called the
righteousness of Sanctification: The other so red, as the purest blood on
Earth, not the blood of Abel, could make so pure red.

This is the righteousness of believers, known by the name of the righteousness
of Justification before the Throne of God. And that he had, besides much grace
already bestowed, promised him a rich Robe, and Crown of Glory.

He and his retinue, make that place and family happy, wheresoever they do but
lodge. This noble Content, in his return homewards, called in at Poverty's shed,
enquiring if there were any room for such guests; they said no, but likely at
the end of the Town, where Riches dwelt, there they might find entertainment.
Thither they went, and desired entrance, but were answered, That none neither
knew him or any of his company, nor ever heard of such names, unless at a
house Midway between this and Poverties, called Godlinesses, next door to
Labors. There they had heard of some such unusual and outlandish names, as
Sobriety, Temperance, etc. so shut the door upon him. Thither this noble man
comes, and knocks: Godliness opens the door, and knew him so soon as he see
him. He told him he had long expected him, and had room enough for him and his
company. Content said, A little room is enough for thee and me, We have not
long to stay here, away we must, and at our fathers house is that will make
amends for all. Now did Labor think himself happy, that ever Godliness came to
be his neighbor, and teach him his Mystery; and a better Art, the way of
thriving, Godliness himself was much happier also, Content dwelling with him,
who joined with him in prayer and other duties. Reader, I thou would know
Contentments Lodgings, it is in an inner room of Godlinesses, called Sincerity,
hung round with Purity of heart, the next door to Labors; there I desire thee
to rest, promising to come to thee, where (I am sure) we shall be happy: for
what can make a man so happy on earth, as Godliness with Content, which is the
greatest gain; having not only the promises of the life which now is, but of
that which is to come; through Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the Crown of
Crowns to Content, as Content is the Crown of Godliness, and Godliness the
Crown of Labor, where there shall be no

END.

