DIGITVS DEI.

A FAITHFUL RELATION and COLLECTION OF Seven wonderful and remarkable,
Judgments, lately inflicted by God on several persons using Execrations and
wicked Wishes to themselves; which suddenly came dreadfully to pass: VIZ. 1. A
woman at Atherbury in Oxfordshire burnt to ashes all on one side, when there
was no fire near her, in May 1677. 2. John Duncalf, who denying a Bible that he
had stolen, and wishing that he might Rot if he had it, did by degrees Rot away
till he died, in July 1677. at King-Swinford in Staffordshire. 3. A woman in
Newgate struck deaf, blind and dumb, according to her wish, on Saturday the 14
of July 1677. 4. A man Cursing at Cards in the Marshalseys in Southwark, and
wishing he might never stir, immediately fell down dead. 5. A woman near the
Minories, who having forsworn 2 s. was (as it is conceived) actually possessed
with a Devil, and destroyed in the presence of hundreds of people, October
1675. 6. A woman great with child near Exeter, asserting a Lie, with a Wish
that otherwise she might never be delivered; both she and her child miserably
perished. 7. A man in Suffolk that used to wish he might Rot if he wronged
people, before his death perished away in a strange manner, perfect Chalk-stones
dropping out of the calves of his legs.


With an Account of the Circumstances of each Judgment; and a most Notable
Speech of a person of Quality on the Ladder about to be hanged.

Is not destruction to the wicked, and a STRANGE Punishment to the workers of
iniquity?

Job 31.3. All these things happened unto them for Ensamples, and are written
for our admonition,

1 Cor. 10.11. That all Israel may hear and fear; and do no more any such
wickedness,

Deuteronomy. 13.11. With Allowance.

To L'Estrange.



LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1677.

Seven remarkable Judgments, etc.
It Is observed by Physicians, that every Country extraordinarily liable to a
Disease, does likewise yield some particular Herb or Remedy against that
Distemper. In this Age, abounding with Fools that say, not only in their
hearts, but with their blasphemous lips, That there is no God, wherein so many
positively deny an Omnipotent Providence, and almost all live as if they did
not regard it, it has pleased the Divine Majesty to manifest his power by more
frequent and immediate Examples amongst us: For (as the Royal Psalmist says)
The Lord is known by his judgments that he executes, Psalm. 9.16. Of which
late dreadful Instances I have thought it a seasonable service to make this
Collection, consisting of such as have been most notorious and remarkable; not
doubting but many more might be added, if Ministers and others would but be at
the pains to observe and communicate them, than which I know not any work can
be more necessary and useful in a profane and unbelieving Generation.

I shall begin with a woman at Atherbury in Oxfordshire; who keeping a small
Alehouse, had too much addicted her self to lewd Speeches, sometimes Oaths,
and frequently Curses, as well on her self as others. It happened about the
beginning of May this present year 1677, being all-alone in her house, a
Neighbour-woman came thither for some strong drink, which she having drawn and
received Twelve pence or some such piece of money, instead of justly returning
the full Change, stopped and abated Two pence or Three pence out of it, besides
what the present drink came to, pretending there was formerly so much owing to
her; which the other resolutely denying, the Hostess began to swear, and use
several abominable Wishes, saying, God damn me, and the Devil burn me, if it be
not so; which last words she often repeated: However, the other confident
perhaps in the certainty of her knowledge to the contrary, still persisting to
deny it, and refusing to be gone without the rest of her money, the Ale-wife at
last violently thrust her out of her house, and to prevent her coming in again,
shut the door and locked it against her. Thus with many horrid sinful
Expressions (if not downright Perjuries) this poor wretch made shift to
wrangle her Neighbor out of this inconsiderable sum, but paid lamentably dear
for the same: For behold! by a stupendous and terrible Jubgement from Heaven,
as we cannot but suppose, she was immediately called to an Account, and Burnt
to death, as she had foolishly and wickedly wished, in a wonderful and
unheard of manner. For having so shut and locked the door, the same was not
opened, nor any further news heard of her, till several hours after, her
Husband chanced to come home, and wondering to find his door fast shut in the
middle of the day, without being able to make any body answer within, after
much inquiry forced open the door, and entering with one or two of his
Neighbors, their eyes encountered one of the most sad and dismal Spectacles
that ever Mortal beheld: for in the midst of the floot lay the Relics of his
Wife; one side of her Body, and the Clothes thereupon, from the soal of her
foot to the crown of her head, being Consumed and Burnt to Ashes, and nothing
left but the Skeleton or Bones; whereas the other side remained whole, and the
Clothes thereon not so much as touched or sindg'd, though it was observed, that
the flesh and skin there was all turned black, as if it had been blasted with
Lightning; but no visible fire near her, nor indeed had there been any in the
house that day. Consider this, all you that forget God, Psalm. 50.22. and
remember that to the wicked, Our God is a consuming fire.

The next Judgment is yet more astonishing, happening on the person of one
John Duncalfe, born in the Parish of Codsole near Wolver-hampton, but lately
living in the Parish of Kings-Swinford in the County of Stafford, by Trade bred
up a Wheelwright, but of late leading an idle pilfering kind of life; So that
in March this present year 1677, he did steal a Bible from one Goodwife Bays,
and sold it to one Norton of Wombern, and being questioned for it, he
positively denied it, and wished He might Rot alive, and his hands Rot off, etc.
if he had meddled with it: But there is a God that recompenceth the ungodly,
and that sometimes according to their own wicked Wishes: For as soon as he had
sold this Bible, he was taken with a Trembling as it were an Ague, and
immediately his Hands began to Rot, and then he looked on it as the hand of God
for his Lying Imprecations. The remarkableness of his Punishment drew many from
all parts to behold him; and being poor and unable, by reason of this rotting
of his hands, to do any work, and yet seeming otherwise in health and very good
stomach, he was laid in a Barn, a Tender appointed to look after him, and
Victuals provided for him. On April 26, being visited by a Minister of that
County, he observed his Condition to be thus: One hand so rotted off that it
hung only by the Muscles, no skin nor flesh on the wrist for four inches, the
whole hand drawn up together; so that both for figure and color it resembled a
Beasthoof, which did all soon after drop off: and so he continued consuming by
degrees till the middle of June; at which time he had neither Hand nor Leg, but
all rotted and dropped off from his wrists and knees, through which the bones
appeared, but compassed with corrupt and ulcerous flesh filled with Maggots;
and to prevent flye-blowing, usually covered with Dock-leaves. The first Hand
and his two Legs were buried May the 13th, and five days afterward the other
Hand came off. During all this time he could Eat, Drink, and Sleep, and as far
as could be perceived had none or very little pain. At first he desired people
to pray for him, but afterward became more surly and morose, refusing to
discourse with Ministers or other godly Visitants; and not showing that
Repentance as all good men hoped so terrible a Visitation might have wrought in
him: But rotting on thus by degrees, about the later end of June he gave up the
Ghost. A Spectacle so sad, that we may apply that Saying of Holy Writ, though
spoken on another occasion; Eye has not seen, nor ear heard the like
long-continuing Monument of Judgment, as we verily believe, in any Age.

It Is within these two years last past, that one that was prisoner in the
Marshalseys for Debt being playing at Cards, upon some difference about their
Game, fell a swearing and cursing in a lamentable manner; and amongst other
lewd speeches, often wished he might never stir more if it were not as he
pretended: when behold! scarce were the words out of his mouth, but he falls
down dead in the place without speaking a word, or stirring either hand or
foot. Which Example we the rather press to your consideration, because many men
that would be thought sober, and of good conversation, have got an ill habit of
saying Never stir, on every trivial occasion; which we hope this sad Instance
will warn them to leave off: Nor are those less to be blamed who hope to escape
the punishment of Swearers, etc. by mincing their Oaths, as I'gad, Vddsbudd,
etc. which indeed are no less than swearing by the Holy Name, and precious
Blood of God: And therefore be not deceived, God will not be mocked, Gal. 6.7.

In the month of October in the year 1675, a woman living near Well-close, and
not far from East-smithfield* having wronged a woman of Two-shillings, by
taking the same away from a little child to whom it was given to play with,
being charged therewith before the Justice, fell down upon her knees, wished
that God would Damn her, and the Dveil forthwith take possession of her, and
many other the like vile Imprecations, if she had the Money; yet in truth, as
she afterward confessed, had pilfer'd the same: And Divine Justice dealt with
her according to her Wish, by giving permission to the Devil; who suddenly
thereupon (as she related, and most that saw her believe) really possessed her,
and would several times have choked her; insomuch that coming on the Lords day
into a public Congregation, not far from the place aforesaid, she was before
them all lifted up above the ground, and exceedingly tormented, with prodigious
swelling in her throat and danger of being choked, and then she would desire
them to pray for her, and seem to strive with the Devil in a strange Agony,
crying out, Be gone, be gone, Satan! I will serve God, I will serve God, etc.
But at last, as the Minister was in his Prayer, was lifted up by invisible
means, and flung down headlong to the ground, whence she was taken up dead. The
truth hereof is sufficiently known to hundreds about this City, who with
Terror were Eyewitnesses.

It Is not four years since a woman near Exeter being great with Child, and
having used her self to a wicked custom of saying, when any thing was denied
or questioned, Let me never be delivered, or Let me perish with what I go with
if it be not so: When her pains come upon her at the Expiration of her
Reckoning, though there appeared no natural Impediments, but rather all the
signs of a happy Chide-birth, yet could she not by any Art be delivered; but
after much languishing Torture both she and her unborn Infant perished
according to her Wishes.

Though diverse years since, yet it is still within the memory of man, and can be
attested by several still living, how a Gentleman living at St. Edmunds in
Suffolk, being an Usurer and great Oppressor and Grinder of the Poor, under
pretense of kindness, the better to color his Ill designs, was frequently
wont to wish that he might Rot, if he wronged them: But God made him an Example
of Vengeance: For in his later years he perished away in a strange manner,
perfect Chalk-stones being generated in and dropping out of the Calves of his
Legs; of which at length he miserably died.

I shall conclude with a remarkable Speech and Confession of a Person of
Quality, who was hanged the 20th of Nov. 1615, on Tower Hill, for being
Accessory to the horrid Murder of the Ingenious Sir Tho. Overbury. This
Gentleman in an excellent and penitent Speech made immediately before his Death
upon the Ladder, has this passage verbatim, taken out of the exact Copy then
printed, p. 153. Viz. I had almost forgotten to show you a strange thing which
God brought to my memory the last night, which was this: I confess I have been
a great Gamester, and especially on the other side have wasted and played many
sums of money, which exhausted a great part of my Means; which I perceiving,
vowed speriously (not slightly or unadvisedly) to the Lord in my Vow and
Prayers, Lord, let me be hanged, if ever I play any more: Which not long after
is most justly come upon me, whereof you are all Eyewitnesses, because a
thousand times since I have broken this my Vow.

Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: but they shall see, and
be ashamed. For they shall not live: thou have visited and destroyed them, and
their memory shall perish, Isai. 26.11. and 14. verse.
FINIS.

