A DIARY OF THE Siege of ATHLONE.

GIVING A Perfect ACCOUNT Of the TAKING the Castle, Forts, and Irish-Town.

By Storm, On the 30th. of JUNE, last past.

WITH A Particular Relation of Their Majesty's Army Passing the SHANNON; and of
Their farther Progress.

By an Engineer of the Army, an Eyewitness of the Action.

LICENSED,

July the 11 th. 1691. J. FRAISER



LONDON: Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1691.

A DIARY OF THE Siege, and Taking by Storm, THE Castle, Forts, and Irish-Town
of Athlone, etc.
WE having Possessed our Selves of the English Town, by driving the Irish over
the Shannon, on the 20th. of June, as you have already heard.

The next day being the 21st. by Four in the Morning, we began to Work on our
Batteries, against the Irish Town, and by Eight that Night we we had finished
two Batteries, one of 6 Twenty Four Pounders, and the other of 8 Eighteen
Pounders, and immediately after we began to batter the Castle, and the new
Additional Works of the Town, on the other side of the River.

On the 22d. Our Guns continued to play incessantly, from our two Batteries, on
the Enemies Works, and that with very good success.

The 23d. This Day about Ten in the Morning, our Tin-Boats, or Pontons, arrived
in the Camp, some of our Soldiers going among the Enemies Dead, in search for
Plunder, heard a Voice, crying, boire, boire, that is in English, Drink,
Drink, and making toward the place, they found it to be a French Lieutenant
Colonel, who having his Back broak, and being wounded in several other places,
had lain there ever since the late Action on the 20th.

This Evening a Drum came to the General, from the Enemies Quarters, with an
Answer to a Message sent by the General, about Exchange of Prisoners.

The 24th. This Morning about the Hour Six, our own Drum returned from the
Enemies Quarters, being kept by them till this time; all our hands (that could
any ways possibly be spared from other Duty,) were employed in mending the
Tin-Boats; others of our Men were working with all diligence in raising three
New Batteries, one below the Bridge, another above it, and the third without
the Town-Wall, by the Riverside, opposite to a large Bastion, the Enemy had
erected, on the other side the River Shannon.

About 7 this Evening, one of the Granadeers belonging to the Lord Lisburn's
Regiment, perceiving a Colors of the Enemies floating on the River, just under
one of the Arches of the Bridge, immediately stripped and swam thither, and
though, I believe, above an hundred Shot were made at him, yet the Fellow
brought it off flying, and presented it to the General, who generously Rewarded
him with Five Guineas.

The 25th. Yesterday, the Enemy were very hard at work, in raising three New
Batteries above the Castle; the one of 4 Guns, on a rising Ground, at a small
distance from the Castle, and the other two of 3 Six Pounders each, near the
River, but the Annoyance they gave us was very inconsiderable, notwithstanding,
with one of them they played very briskly on the Old Walls of the Town where
our Men were, (but without Killings, or Wounding any;) with another, they Shot
into some of our Regiments of Foot, who lay Encamped on the Bank of the River,
which obliged our Men to Decamp, and remove farther off.

About Four this Morning, our own Battery (below the Bridge) was finished, and
6 Twenty Four Pounders planted thereon, which began to play about Six, on the
Enemies Breast-Work, on the other side, we continued to play incessantly all
this Day, from our several Batteries; with the last mentioned, we beat down
most of the Enemies Breast-Work and levelled it with the ground; as also, most
of the Houses that stood in the Irish-Town; and with the help of Six Mortars,
we battered down the greatest part of the Castle, and laid the Enemy so open,
that a great part of them retired to Sarsefield's Camp, others got behind the
Castle, and other of their Ruined Works.

The 26th. Four Deserters that came into our Camp this Morning, gave an
Account, That the Enemies Army, hourly expected our going over the Shannon; but
they seeming verry silly Fellows, we gave little Credit to them. Our Cannon and
Mortars continued to play all this Day without intermission. This Day we could
plainly Discover the Irish Army, as they lay Encamped on the other side of the
Town. Our Men worked very hard this Day in repairing the two Arches, of the
Athlone Bridge, and made up one of them in the Evening.

The 27th. This Evening we raised a Battery in the Meadow below the Town, and
planted Five Guns thereon, to stop the way the Enemy had on that side, coming
into the Town.

This Evening our Granadeers Burnt the Enemies Breast-work, on the other side
of the broken Arch, with their Grenades, which in the Night (notwithstanding
our great and small Shot flying like Hail) the Enemy very resolutely and
industriously repaired.

The 28th. Last Night and this Morning, we wrought so hard on the last broken
Arch, in the Enemies Possession, that our Beams were laid over it, and partly
planked, which the Enemy perceiving, before we could make any Lodgment on the
other side, detatched a Sergeant, and Ten Men, to run over their Works, with
Design to ruin ours, but were all immediately Killed by our Men; and soon
after a Lieutenant and Twenty more were sent upon the same Design, who all but
two were Killed, who threw our Planks, and some of our Beams, into the River,
and escaped amongst the Fire and Smoke.

All last Night, and this Morning the Enemy were hard at work, in Repairing
some Old, and in making some New Trenches in the Meadow opposite to our
Batteries. All this Day our Guns continued to play furiously on a place called
Connaught Tower, a solid Wall on the North-side of the Castle, that it took up
more time to bring down, than any part of the Castle.

This Afternoon a Council of War was held, wherein, after great deliberation,
and long Debates, it was concluded, We should by Six next Morning, attempt
passing the Shannon on the Bridge, and a Float to be laid above the Bridge,
opposite to the Castle, without Boats below the Bridge, 1000 Granadeers were to
be Detatched for the Forlorn-Hope on this Service, who were to be sustained by
15 out of every Troop of Dragoons in the Army, and those seconded by several
Regiments of Foot, our Horse to pass close below the Bridge, over the Ford,
where a large and open breach was made for their Entrance, and accordingly
Orders were given for every thing to be in readiness against the next Morning.

Monday the 29th. Before Six this Morning, our Men were ready marched to the
Town, showing all imaginable desire to Engage where they stood at their Arms.

Our Boats, Floats, and their Appurtenances, were drawn into the Town, by which
time it was 10 of the Clock; all this Morning we plainly observed greater
Numbers of the Enemy to flock into the Town, than formerly, but our Gunners
plied them so well, that great Numbers of them were killed with our Canon Ball;
their coming so made us believe they had an Account of our Resolutions the
Evening before: A little after 10 of the Clock, the Granadeers of both Parties
that defended the Breach, throwing Hand-Granadoes one at aother, the Enemies
Grenades set fire to our Fasheens that lay close on the broken Arch, which
suddenly flamed so violently, that our Men could not endure the Flame and
Smoke that blew directly in their Faces, and though they labored very hard to
extinguish it, and did all that was possible for Men to do in their Condition,
could not prevent that part of the Breast-Work from being thus ruined by the
Enemy, but they preserved all the rest entire; and immediately after, all Hands
possible were employed in throwing up another Breast-Work, just behind the
former, which was raised in a very few hours, and made much stronger than the
former, by this time it was somewhat after Twelve of the Clock, and the General
finding the Attack upon the Town that way, was like to cost the Lives of great
Numbers of our Men, they deferred proceeding further therein, till another
Council of War was called: All this Afternoon our Guns continued Firing.

The 30th. All this Morning till near Twelve at Noon, our Guns and Mortors have
played continually from their several Batteries, and not without good Success;
they Destroying great Numbers of the Enemy. About One a Clock, the General held
a Council of War, with most of the Great Officers, wherein it was Resolved,
that this day we should Attempt passing the River, and accordingly all things
were Disposed against Four in the Afternoon, pursuance to the Orders given out
by the General; about half an hour past Four the Attack was made by 1500
Granadiers, who were Chosen Men drawn out of the whole Army, who had Each a
Guiney given them for their Encouragement, in so hardy an Enterprise, for all
things were brought to that Extremity, that the Enemy rendered our Pontons
useless, and broke the two Arches of the Bridge which we had with so much
Difficulty repaired, and would have cost us Ten Days time to have refitted, so
that nothing could be done without Wading the River. The Signal for our Men's
taking the River, was the Ringing a great Bell, upon which the Granadiers
entered the Ford.

Captain Sands, Cmmanded a Party of 30 Granadeers, having two Lieutenants to
assist him, in the first Attack, (the Brave Major General Talmash, who did not
Command that Day, going with them as a Volunteer, and was the fifth Man that
entered the Breach.) The Enemy at first made considerable Opposition, by firing
very smartly, but nothing could withstand the Courage and Bravery of our Men;
who, notwithstanding they Marched up to their Cravats in Water; yet with
continual Huzzaing, advanced under the Shelter of our Cannon, and throwing
their Grenades, forced the Enemy from their Posts; and God be thanked,
succeeded so well, that they entered the Town, and in less than an Hour, made
themselves entirely Masters of it, and the River, in sight of the Enemies whole
Camp, who durst not Attempt the Succor of their most Important Pass, but run
away, leaving behind them near Eleven Hundred of their Number Dead on the Spot,
and about Three Hundred and Fifty that were taken Prisoners, of which number is
their Famous Major General Maxwel, one Colonel, two Lieutenant Colonels, six
Captains, and great Numbers of Subalterian Offices; on our side we had not
above Forty Men killed, and some few Wounded.

We found in the Place, six Pieces of large Brass Canon, and two Mortars, with
other small Pieces; Twenty Barrels of Powder, Twelve Hogsheads of Meal, etc.
with other good Plunder.

This great Action was performed both by the Officers and Soldiers, with all
the Courage and Resolution Imaginable; the Major Generals Tettar, and Mackay,
and Brigadier General de la Meloniere, and the Prince of Hesse, Darmstadt,
conducted the Attack with great Vigor, and the Duke of Wirtemberg, Lieutenant
General, who was carried over the River upon the Shouldiers of his Granadiers,
together with Major General Talmash, Count Nassau, and Brigadier Belasis,
greatly contributed by their Conduct and Bravery to the good Success of it.

July the 2d. Our Men have been busied in Lining the Works of the Town, which
remain Entire toward the Enemies Camp, and Repairing some other Fortifications.

Yesterday the General sent a Trumpet to the Enemy, about the Exchange of
Prisoners, who came back this Day, and brought with him Major General Maxwel's
Equipage, which he sent for by him. There Arrived an Express this Day to the
General, from one of Colonel Woolsly's Captains, giving an Account that the
Enemy had Deserted Streams-Town, and that he and his Party is therein.
Deserters come in daily from the Enemies Quarters, of Horse, Foot, and
Dragoons, who gives us an Account of the great Confusion the Enemy are in.

POSTSCRIPT.
OUR sudden Storming the Town, was a great surprise to the Enemy, for as their
Camp was sending their Recruits to the Town, they met with the Garrison flying,
Rallied them, and came back; the Dispute continued near half an hour; some of
the most forward of our Men, who pursued them out of the Town, was driven back
under the shelter of the Walls, who being reinforced, drove the Enemy back to
some Intrenchments, 300 Yards from the Town, where they still continued firing;
and now have set fire to some Cabbins, near the Town: They have another Pass,
about half a Mile off, and another three Miles farther, called Mill-town Pass;
it is thought they will Dispute them both. Notwithstanding the Enemy have Decampt,
at this Instant we see a Body of Horse, as we suppose facilitating the
Recreating of the Foot: Their Horse hovers about the Hills, near the Town.

As to the Number Killed, we cannot yet learn an exact Account; though I think,
there never was a more Tragical Spectacle in so short a time, and small a
place: One could not set down his Foot at the end of the Bridge, or Castle, but
on Dead Bodies; many lay half buried under the Rubbish, and more under Faggots,
and many not to be seen under the Ruins, whereby the Stink is unsufferable; but
Orders are given for their immediate Burial: What occasioned the greater number
to be slain, was that after our Army had entered the Town, the Irish Retreated
to Redoubt^, and disputed every Inch before the Town, was quite clear of them:
The Danes found many of them under Tubs, and in dark Corners, most of which
they put to the Sword: Our Horse, and several Battalions of Foot, were drawn up
on this side the Water, and strong Guards put on every Ford, least the Enemy,
from the Hills, should attempt any thing against our Camp.

ADVERTISEMENT.
An Impartial Journal of all the Transactions, of Their Majesty's Forces, and
Those of the Irish Rebels, both Regular Troops, and Rapparees, in this last
Winters Campaign, in Ireland: Beginning from the 14th. of November. 1691,
(immediately after the Taking of Cork, and the two Forts of Kinsale,) the Time
of the Royal Army's going into Quarters* and ending with the Army's Taking the
Field at Ballimore, June 1691. To which is added, An Exact LIST of all the
Irish Rebels, that have been Killed, or Taken Prisoners in each Action; with
the Names of the English Officers that Commanded, the Day When, and Place Where
each Action was performed.

Printed by Authority in Ireland, and Reprinted at London. Sold by most
Booksellers, 1691.

FINIS.

