DR Dorislaws Ghost, Presented by Time to unmask the Vizards of the Hollanders;
And discover the Lions Paw in the Face of the Sun, in this juncture of Time:
Or, A List of XXVII Barbarous and bloody Cruelties and Murders, Massacres and
base Treacheries of the Hollanders against England and English men: With the
particulars of the Noble Usages of England to them in their necessities, which
might have taught them better Manners; And would have engaged some savage
Nations to have given a better return from bare Principles of Nature.
Camelion.

Fox F

HyAENA

Crocodilus

(...) Stultus non occultus Fool thou art unfolded

Truth Premor Sed non Pereo I am pressed but not perished

TIME Omnia edo Veritatem edo I Consume all thinngs and set foort the Truth



A. The murders, massacres, and cruelties of the Dutch upon the English at
Amboyna. B. The Hollanders wretched consultations and actings against the
English in the Indies. C. The Dutch after help sent from England, seek to
devour the English. D. The Dutch while they seemed to bemoane the English,
sent supplies to their enemies, which was in part cause of the loss at
Rochell. E. The Eggs laid to hatch by the Dutch, in their matching the
Palsgrave with King James his Daughter. F. The craftiness of the Dutch to get
away the English Gold. G. The dissembling of the Dutch in their transactions in
the English wars between the King and Parliament.

H. The baseness of the Dutch in suffering the English Ambassadors to be so
highly affronted and openly assaulted. I. The Dutch Ambassador. K. The Dutch
Visard: of the three Treaties with the English in 1613. 1615. and 1619. L. The
Dutch designs in the present Treaty, represented by the Lions Paw in the face
of the Sun. M. The treacherous assault of Van Trump upon the English Ships. N.
Time discovering the Dutch designs. O. Dr. Dorislaw's Ghost representing
Truth, brought forth of the Grave by Time, to set forth this Scene.


