A DISCOURSE Unto His ROYAL HIGHNESS JAMES, DUKE of ALBANY and YORK: When
Intending from SCOTLAND.

Presented by a Loyal Hand

EDINBURGH, Printed by William Caron, and are to be sold by John Calderwood
Stationer, over against the Main Guard. Anno Dom. 1680.

Most High Born, and Gracious Prince,
WELL may Mortals and the lower World concelebrate by, Anthems, so Heroic in
all things, and Illustrious a Potentate; You, Royal Sir, being by Providence
and Birth only acquainted with Greatness and Virtue: the Lineal Descendant of
an Hundredth and Nine Monarchs: Thrice Happy and Princely Child of a most
Glorious Saint, and Incomparable Martyr: the Son and Brother of the best of
Kings: and Royal Heir apparent of three Dominions, and the British Crown. Which
Quaternio and fair Contexture of Glory, evincing Grandour beyond example,
impregnat with Matchless Goodness and Hereditary by a Right Filial and
Fraternal, does (therefore) farther also securely Prognosticate both Completion
and Reward; as the appointment of obliged Fate, and by you deserved from all
your Stars. For, as to the Series and Pompous Line of all those unparale'd and
Regal Contingencies, the Prerogative certainly and more individual interest of
an Excellent Merit (entirely, Sir, your own) do most powerfully confirm Nature
to have been in her Courtisy egregiously Wise, and the Disposals of Heaven
admirably just; their remaining Engagements must therefore in accomplishment,
be uniform: Diadems being for you disposed down in an undoubted Successive
Right from your Great Progenitor Fergus, and that Royal Centurie of His Sons.
The circled Glories of whose Virgin Crown, have through Ages been kept
intemerate, and never touched by a Foreign Brow. That, Sir, you ( Caledonia's
Chiefest Hopes and second Joy) may in an untainted native Honor, together with
the happy Investure of its Conjugate and Sister Royalties, the more Augustly be
inornate with that her most Ancient and uncontaminate Wreath of Kings. Whereof
the Sparkling Gemms and Gold are but the mean and darkest things; Diamonds,
though therein checkered by richest files, being the last and least of the
Conspicuities of its Honor. Seeing that for a Chilead of years again repeated,
the Regal Watchmen of our Country, completing now one Decad, beyond the number
of Argus Eyes: most of them by genius bravely Warlick, and through signal
Success Renowned Victors: of all the then known Princes of the Earth, they only
free, and checking the Power of the Awful Caesar's: but with the first of Kings,
yielding up their Glory and early gathered unto Shiloh; They (attended with the
millions of their People) being soon after the Displaying of the Cross,
reckoned among the Honorarie Incomes of the Nations: four score and four
Christians; many of whom for Sanctity admirable: A part, by Choice, persisting
long in purest Celibat and dying Virgins: Some Martyrs; severals Enrolled
Saints: the plurality most Nursing Fathers of the Church; Munificent by Pious
Erogations, even to Proverb and a Wonder: By Providence therefore (in Reward
and Peace) enjoying to day the entire Patrimony, and United Royalties of fiften
distinct, of old, and coetaneous entitled Kings; besides the British Interest
in the more late discovered Occidental Isles, and other Lands: Again,
respectively at the birth of them the Cheerful and Teeming Sky also bringing
forth, to Salute their blessed Ingress to the World, by an embassy of Recent
Lights: Others, when Babes renunciat Monarchs, and inthronized from the Cradle:
eleven from Parent to Child, immediate of one Cognomination: alll of one Family:
The improven Dignity of the whole concentred in the Hopes of your Succession,
are the more precious, being matchless, Jewels of that Unconquered Royal Apex.
Sir, the Arbitration like ways of Martial Fortune has, by Sea and Land
equally, conferred its happy Symbol to advance the Trophies of your Renown. So
that had Natures Just and Peaceful Titles all been silent in the Anthem of your
Glory, yet, through Conduct of auspicious and approven Fates, could the
Princely Valor of your Highness have Scepters, and a Regal Dowry unto you
quickly propin'd, by the uncontrollable Hand of Conquest: You, Mighty Sir,
being (personally also) Victorious often, and in Arms Famous by many Triumphs,
and a Frequent Laurel; While wonderfully, amidst a thousand Chances, declared
the Friend of Destiny, and sacredly preserved. Moreover, by Character of a
twofold Honor, to avouch the Great Regalitie of your Charter, Sir, in you
Magnanimous and Princely Features, highly argues Pregnancy of Soul, and a true
Cognation to all the Heroes. Whence Spears, Wind, and Flying Cherubs, halt ye
in your interrupted Courses, to admire so Glorious a Concatenation and Train of
all Royal Perfections: Wherein exemplar and a Mighty Probitie, being matched
with Regal Honor, becomes exceeding beneficial unto Mankind; white in its
instructive powerful Influences, that great regular and accomplished Idea, Sir,
of your most Princely and untainted Converse, stands ready to be transcribed,
as the public Standard of Morality, and a Rectifying Mean for all the World.
that so the prevailing Integrity of your Highness, refining every where, and
enamouring men into a speedy and universal practice of what is upright, may (in
this incurvat State and Senior evening of Mortality) regain Astrea and her Age
of Gold. Then full happy Nation, guarded by such ample Power and Skill, whose
amiable Center is only Goodness: and when, Sir, your great Will shall think fit
thence to divert their more immediate watchful Beams; Yet seeing a kind of
Royal Ubiquitie is due to Princes, may we then (at least) enjoy by Icon, and
not wholly be benighted. Beseeching therefore, and most zealous always to
entertain some residing Aspect of your presence; were it only through a certain
Apostrophie of its Proxy Rays, still direct and vertical to our Nation, by a
constant Solstice of Princely Favor; graciously vouchsafed as an unitenerant
delegat of your self, to make us Happy; and perpetuating from all Eclipse, the
Wearmth and Vigorous Lusters, of the Kingdom its present Oecumenick Joy, in all
ranks of people, deeply rooted and imparted by the powerful reflexes and
Condescendencie of your Higness visit, Exorient to our northern Clime: Which,
as by the numerous and public Congratulations of all Estates therein solemnly
welcomed and received, has most dutifully also been resented by this loyal and
ancient Metropolis of the Land. Sir, upon your Royal Entry, the Noble Consul
of the City, (accompanied with all the Honorable Fathers of that Senate,
orderly appointed in their Robes) having in submissive Alacrity and Oblation,
joyfully delivered up the Keys and security of her Gates, into the Safe
Protection of your Highness Princely Hand; as the Tutelar Genius of the Place.
Then in most costly Viands and the richest Blood of Grapes, (much like the
Ambrosial Repasts of Jove, and Weet of Nectar, filld in Gemms) they sumptuously
entertaining, Sir, you their High Ahasuerus, and your Royal Esther (as) with
the Banquet of a King; profusely also, in purpured Floods, and a Tide of
Bacchus, the Conduits overflowing in the street. Those rich Alluviums again
drunk up by the Hilarous Passion (Sir, thus carousing to your welcome) of an
innocent but mighty flame. The innumerous and most raging ardent piles being,
by contiguity of their Structures, and the Omen of your peaceful Name, gladly
disarmed and accumulate into one great Rosy Volume of Harmless and United
Fires plenteously, thus as a Thicket of inoffensive Aetna's, flourishing through
all the Lanes; thence by interveen and the crimson Aids of a powerful
artificial Day, dislodging Vesper and the Night. Thus, and by all other
Festival Indications have, Sir, for You (in profoundest Veneration) their
Indelible Respects, signally been attested by the Loyal City. With whom no less
obsequious at Your intended progress hence, Sir, the whole Nation does, unto
Your Royal Highness (with bowed Knee, and Loyal Minds) chearfuly at once repay
and offer a Debit and most willing Tribute of the sincerest affections of us
all, from Southern Tweed, to the utmost Thule, knit together as one man. And
for Certificat of Obysance (Sir, at the Call and Whispers of Your Imperial Eye)
lo, ready Armed by Faithful Hearts, with bravest Courage, in a Thick and
Flaming Cloud of many Thousands brandisht Swords, to do You Service: most
Resolute also, thereby keenly (through the Heart and Bowels of Opposition) to
cut, for You, the Way and Ingress to a Throne; if Affairs did so require. But
through a more Serene and Happy Juncture, the Divine Goodness, great in the
Privilege of Your Birth, Humane Equity exemplified by the Law of Nations and
Constitution of these Realms, together also the indispensible Precepts of
Christianity, ratified by Severe and Holy Sanctions have (joyntlie all to
remunerate the Innate Excellencies of Your person) Sir, for You most
powerfullie preingaged a Triad of Kingdoms, on a most Righteous, Amiablie
quiet, and Indisputable Claim. It rests therefore only the peaceful Task (as
it is the Practiced Duty) of every Loyal Subject and all truly Christian
(though perhaps otherwise, about an Umbrage of a few Opinions and little
things, they somewhat distinguish among themselves; yet altogether unanimous
and passionatly cordial to promove all the Hopes and Honor of Your Highness)
within this most Ancient Dominion of that Kingly Hundredth of Your Fathers, by a
Ready and Universal Harmony of all our Votes, earnestly to supplicat and
uncessantly implore that Almighty Stay of Jacob and the GOD of Princes, that
Your Highness may continually, against all the Attempts and Nocive Power of
Sinistrous Fate, be secured by Heaven and Crowned with Felicity, in a constant
Tenor: The prosperous Glory of Your Princely Name, being, in the lowdest joyful
Call and Voice of Fame, resounded by Aquilo, and the Bounds of the World. Thus
still Gilded with Tranquillity, may Perpetuity be Your years; Or when of old
(here satiate with Durance and Happy Days) from out such Royal Dust, the Soul,
journying through the Sun, shall enter these Thrones of Absolute Fortune, be
ever Your Actions encircled with Stars. Yea, through out the State and Interval
of Separation, may there be allowed some bright Locality and more select Orb
to Treasure up, Sir, Your Ashes, all uncommon. Which sure, are also then to be
illustrate from the Applausive Quire of all the Echoed Reports of perfected
Virtue: by Allision (as it were) and the sporting Accents of their Breath and
Song, dexterously conflicting, till so begetting they do enkindle, into an
immarcessible Radiance, a Live Memorial of Your Name: That so, together with
the sumptuous Splendour and Vicinage of the Meridau Day, there the Body being
Lodged and Trimmed (in a kind of Elementar Apotheosis) cheerfully may await the
Return and Fellowship of Your all Divine and better half. In sum, may all the
Matter of Kingly Things be rescued from the Lot of Vulgar Dust, and still
conspicuous. And seeing, Sir, the Seraphick constitution of Your
inextinguishable heavenly part is also fairly Legible and Displayed, in that
brave and sweet composure of all its corporary outward Vail; at Divesture
therefore, may so princely a casket, as the Transcript of Your Mind, (whence
ennobled by a kind of consanguinity with Deathless and Intellectual Beeings)
powerfully be secured from the bosom of a humble Grave: While suitably
enshryn'd in a Lucide Repose among the Orbs. And that the Bounty of this Royal
Phasis, may ever dignifie our Horizon, who are exceeding emulous, by whatsoever
imaginable way, still over us to affix You the Desired Object of our Heart and
Eyes; let it then splendidly be contrived where sits Arcturus, and his
neighboring Charle-wain: the Equivocal Notice, and somewhat Nominal twin of
one and an other of Your Ancestors, being in the Beauty and number of the
stars, there effigiat and interwoven, as a goodly fore-obsignature of Your own
fairer appointed Constellation, to exceed whatsoever Astral Hierogliphick does
already shine depicted both on the South and Borean side of Phoebus Walls. By
all these premises stands now colligible an Energie and power of Virtue, to
make a Monarch, and Immortal; The goodly Efficient then of both, seeing your
Highness does so marveilously own by candid possession, and a tenor of
Increase, we therefore, in the Hopes and Wish of each these its glorious, and
by You already promerited Events, do by supernumerary Votes, and a Mighty
Loyalty, again, unto all what is sacred and irresistibly powerful, most
fervently present and reiterat our Devotions, that Your Highness (most Royal
Sir) having (for a circuit of years long and prosperous, like to a patriarchal
Age, or the stay of Nestor) in this earthly state, and humane schene of
affairs, still purely tasted of Felicity in its deepest prelibations, and
attainable symbols, may hereafter, through out the whole course and line of
Beatitude, eternally reap the full and most Happy Retributions of an
unparalleled and excellent Virtue. Mean while, may the Benediction and Strength
of him, who prospered Jacob in his Journey, most graciously still attend Your
Royal Highness, and make You a prevailing prince.

FINIS.

