A DIRGE FOR THE Directory.

Written By one of King JAMES ancient PROTESTANTS.

printer's or publisher's device

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University of Oxford.
1645.

A DIRGE FOR THE DIRECTORIE.
I Cannot but admire to see so many learned Divines so much of late
metamorphosed, that have so many years professed the Protestant Religion in
the purity of it, and now had their eye sight more clear then any in queen
Elizabeth and King James his reign, and sixteen years of King Charles, and
never writ against it till now: and I am persuaded there are very few that are
good Protestants that gave their consent for the utter abolishing the Service
Book, till they had made some good provision for the weaker sort of
Protestants: for in many hundred of Churches in England that have not means to
maintain a Preacher to instruct the people in the knowledge of Gods laws,
there is not a Sermon in half a year: and this Idol, as many call it, being
taken away, what gross ignorance will these poor souls fall into? For if you
tell them of praying by the spirit, you may as well tell them a tale of the man
in the Moon. I am persuaded in my heart, that many of the ancient Fathers that
had a hand in the composing and contriving of that worthy Book, were endued
with Gods Spirit; witness their godly and learned Books they writ, their holy
lives they led in godly conversation and doctrine; nay, and have they not laid
down their lives, and rid in chariots of fire to maintain that very same
Book that now many giddie-headed fellows which have scarce any religion at
all in them, but mere time-servers, blown about with every blast of light
doctrine, that will be Anabaptist to day, a Brownist to morrow, and in a word
any thing the next day. O lamentable! what times do we live in? when the
Church is without true discipline, Gods Laws quite taken from us, no Lords
Prayer, no Greed, no Common Prayer allowed, but Master Presbyter to do as his
fickle brain serves him, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper not administered
once in half a year, and when it is delivered wonderful out of order it is;
the Sacrament of Baptism celebrated as any would have it that is in fee with
Master Parson; the dead body buried with five or six words at the most; no
decency in the Churches, no manners no ^^der, forgeting that God is the God of
order. I do not speak, against praying by the Spirit, for I know that Gods
peoplle prays prayed as they felt their wants; but for poor ignorant people,
who have not the spirit of prayer, what provision have, you made for them? the
answer is, lust none. What shall become of them? Your, answer must be, you
must leave them to Gods mercy, But I and many more would have thought you had
some charity in you, but in leaving poor ignorant people quite without any way
to know God or his will, I think you have done worse then the superstitious
Papist ever did to the Heathen where they conquered. Was there ever any
Kingdom in the Christian world that flourished more for a most fourscore
years, then this Kingdom did all the reign of queen Elizabeth, King James,
and sixteen years of King Charles his reign? surely God has great plagues
for this ungrateful Nation. You of the Synod, sle^pe not upon this thing
called 4. shillings a day, ^ill you have done some service for the poor
ignorant people of this distressed Nation, that Gods name may be known on
earth, and his saving health to all Israel. We are not ignorant that when any
came to be buried with decency, and the Minister showed that man was mortal,
it did the party deceased neither good nor harm* but the slanders by might
know what a flourishing estate man was to day, and in a moment cut off by the
hand of death. For the receiving the Sacraments, which are the seals and
pledges of Gods love to his Church til he does come, and to receive him often
till he comes, now how often is it wonderfully neglected? So for the Sacrament
of Baptism, the reading of Gods Commandments, and in a word Gods whole manner
of decency in his true service wholly neglected. Nay it is spoken openly, that
a stable is as good as any church whatsoever, forgetting that the Jews which
were the chosen people of God, had their Synagogues to hear the Laws of God
read and expounded to them; and the Temple where the Priests did offer
sacrifice to God for appeasing of his anger against his people. I do not
intend to make two or three years work to give direction by way of a
Directory, and wrangle and braule with my (...) for it; but I had rather spend
my life in instructing the poor people in the true knowledge of Gods Laws and
command-ments; then to take part of any thing whatsoever to hinder Gods people
from his known will. For in has been an ancient thing which the church of Rome
used to keep the common people ignorant, that the better they might work their
ends by their simplicity: and if you take these courses, the further you go
from Popery, the higher you come to them.

When the Christians in the Primitive church had their private meetings, the
church was hidden, and it was death for any to profess Christ openly, then
cellars, garrets, and woods were their places of assembly: but who reigned
then? Nero. But blessed be the name of God for evermore, we have the Word of
God preached among us plentifully, we need not go in corners and holes to
hear Christ taught. I do wonder that so many learned able Divines do not
gain some order against this New England b^ood but I am persuaded in my heart
that many are partakers with them, and will not or dare not write or once open
the mouths against then. Blame me not though I urge this again and again,
for I verily believe Ananias the Button maker, Flash the cobbler, Nondependants,
do more harm to poor souls, specially to poor women, by one of their
tongue Sermons, then many of your Presbyterian Sermons do good in half a
year: for come into the Church, who preaches there? non-decency, all without
order or form. For your Prelaticall government, go to all the Churches in
Europe, you shall be sure to come short of this that was in these latter
times. Go to all the Reformed Churches in the Christian world, they did stand
amazed at the government of the Church of England. But now what is become of
it? truly the height of our glory is laid in the dust, and we made a mock and
a wonder at. The Lord in his mercy open the hearts of those who are in
authority, to reform these things, that these civil combustions in Church and
Kingdoms may cease, that God may have his Word settled in peace and quiet and
his people may come to his Temple with joy and gladness; that God may be
praised here in peace among his people for evermore I verily believe that if
every Presbyterian Priest or Independent be left to do what they will, we
shall have more domineering and disturbance in the Church then ever there was
since the Church was first built up in England. What would you have then? would
you have Bishop, which have bred all this broile among us? ye^, provided that
their Lordly dignities may be eclipsed, and preaching Bishops put in their
rooms: not to have a High Commission court little inferior to the inquisition
of Spain, nor meddle with temporal affairs, but to preach the Word of God
soundly, plainly, and powerfully; to root out heresy and error out of the
Church of God, like a man of knowledge: who shall choose these good men? nor
their rich kindred, nor the King, nor his money but their learning, godly
lives, and conversation, etc.

For prayer and confession, we have them in the Book of common Prayer
excellently set down; and also humiliation, with some amendments: but to take
them quite away, I am humbly of opinion you greatly sin against God and this
poor Island of England; and I think as long as you keep the Ark of God from
us, I mean the Service Book, you will ever have swellings and Emrods among
you. I am no Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet, but I pray God in his mercy
keep you from these plagues which hang over your heads, for leaving so many
poor distressed souls in want, not having the known will of God taught among
them, who lie and languish for his known Laws, and are kept short of them by
force. For the Letany, I should have rejoiced greatly if I could have seen but
half such good matter proceeded from you of the Synod; though I am not ignorant
that there are some things that might have been amended in some passages of
them, but not utterly to have them rooted out: for those that give their voices
to put them quite out of the church, I pray God of his mercy that he one day
put them nor quite out of the Kingdom of his mercy.

As for the order of reading the Old and New Testament once a year, what a
comfort must it needs be to those who can not read? What an excellent order is
that of reading David's Psalms once a month, indue place and order, which is
not to be paralleled by any Reformed church in the Christian world, with many
other excellent passages of great note and worth. Bu^ now that a company of
shuttle-brain'd fellows, who for their understanding and knowledge can scarce
hold argument with a Schoole-boy, that these I say must have that godly Book
quite taken away as a great Idol in the church, what a kind of madness is it
let all wise men judge. I do not write so much in the applause of the Book of
common Prayer, so to magnify it as to put down preaching, and to ease your
lazy Priests of their pains in studying, no, my earnest desire is that there
may be praying with the whole congregation together, and preaching too, that
the Word may be taught plentifully among the poor people; and that we which
are the inhabitants of England may go hand in hand, that God may have his due
praise and glory among us; and then we with you, and you with us may give God
his due praise and honor both together which God in his mercy grant; and that
we may sit together every man under his own Vine and Figtree. And to you the
Brethren of the Separation, which have the spirit so much at command, and know
Gods Word so well that you need no teacher, take from you the exposition of the
ancient Fathers, and other good men's works, which you so much despise, and
then take the bare Bible and fall to expounding the Scriptures, and I dare
pawn my life for six pence you shall have as good nonsense as you would desire
to hear. Go back, go back, thou foolish man or woman, whatsoever thou art,
and return to thy mother the church of England, who first brought thee up to
know God in Christ, and come out of these puddles, and lightheaded fooleries,
and know he that takes hold of the Plough* and looks back, is unmeet for the
Kingdom of God.

FINIS.

