The Dispersed United: Or, Twelve Healing QVESTIONS PROPOUNDED To Persons of
ingenious Principles and Tempers.

TENDING To stop the mouth of frowardness, Scandals, and Reproaches cast upon
those that submitted unto, and acted under the several Governments and
Governors [propter commune bonum] that have been exercised over this
Commonwealth, since the Interruption of this present Parliament on the 20th of
April, 1653.

By a Friend to Friends of the Civil and Religious Interest of all Good Men.

Si variasse vocas crimen, variavimus omnes. Gall. 5.15. If ye bite and devour
one another, take heed ye be not consumed one of another.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

The Dispersed United. OR, Twelve Healing Questions, etc.
I. WHether the truth and measure of men's good affections unto this present
Parliament, be to be estimated by their ancient and constant adherence unto
them; with their lives and fortunes without the least defection, from first to
last during the whole time of their former sitting, under all the hazards,
Expenses, and ^harges of a long, dangerous, and doubtful War, having neither
heart nor hand in their interruption, but were most passionately grieved and
troubled thereat? or by their vain and fruitless declamations, dishonorable
reflections, vile reproaches, and bitter invectives against him, or them, that
by force and violence, did interrupt the said present Parliament, assuming the
Supreme Authority into his, or their own hands?

II. Whether many (if not most) of those persons that sharpened their tongues
like a Serpent, against the late Single Persons (dignified with the Titles of
Protector) were not the very self-same persons that did whet their tongues like
swords, and shot out their arrows, even bitter words, against this very
Parliament, before their said interruption and either were personally active
therein, or abetting the same; or signified their apprrobation thereof, by
their great joy and rejoicing thereat? and wheth^r it be not most probable,
that (if their importune desires, and impatient expectations, be not soon
satisfied, though with public damage in the Judgment of the Parliament) they
will gather up their old stones of scandalous reproaches, calumnies, and
falsehoods, and cast them against the same men of their quarrel?

^II. Whether that Thing, called the Little Parliament, did not assume unto
themselves the highest dignity, power, and authority of this Nation? as much as
the pre^ent Parliament can do? and whether they ^ad the least show of right
thereunto, but the power of the sword, to assert and secure them therein? and
whether the said late Protectours had not the same? and whether many of those
very persons who now seem to be eaten up with the zeal of this House, were not
the self-same persons that were then so zealous to pull down this House, and to
build up that other in the room thereof? and whether some of them were not
chief Pillars in that building, and many others great Votaries for, and
Benefactors unto the same? and whether it was not as lawful to submit unto,
and to act under the late Protectors, as to submit unto, and to act under the
said Little Parliament? how passionately partial are some men in this age, as
if John an-Oake did deserve an Euge boneserve, for that which John a-Stiles
must have an ito maledicte.

IV. Whether the quiet submission of the Old assertors of this present
Parliament, and their peaceable subjection to the said Little Parliament,
during their reign; and afterward unto the said Protectors, whilst they were
in power (there being no other visible authority among the people) can
rationally argue any defection in heart, good will and affections unto the
present Parliament? The necessity of their submission might be their
affliction, but not their sin; but their submission under that necessity could
not possibly be their sin.

V. Whether the said known well-affected to this present Parliament, acting
under the said Little Parliament or Protectours, in their several capacities of
Justices for the Peace, Commissioners for the Militia, etc. for the
preservation of the public peace, and the interest of their own well-affected
party, the punishment of Vice, the encouragement of virtue, etc. without any
subscription or other testimony of their owning that Act of Violence in
interrupting the Parliament, and assuming the power of Government unto
themselves, but leaving that to the decsion of the great Judge of all Men,
Whether (I say) such persons so acting, may therefore be justly accused of
defection, in their respects to the present Parliament; or in the least to be
disrespected for their so acting? whether it was not their duty so to act, and
whether they ought to be sorry for it, and to repent of it? And whether this
present Parliament ought not to bless God and them for the preservation both of
them and their friends, and the Good Old Cause, viz. the Civil and Religious
Rights and Liberties of the known well-affected party, so far as they could by
their so acting?

VI. Whether, If all the Gentlemen of the present Parliament, that did act
under the several powers and forms of Government, set up since their
interruption 20th of April, 53, either as Members of the said little Parlimaent
or as Commissioners for the Peace or for Assesments, made since that time, or
as Parliament men, chosen by virtue of the Protector's Writs issued out to
summon Parliaments, or as voting for others in that case, or in some other
capacity, were excluded this Parl. there would be a sufficient number left
legally capable of the name of a Parliament? And if not, Whether Justice and
equity, as well as goodness and charity do not provoke and invite, yea, obl ge
them to indulge others as well as themselves for so acting.

VII. Whether, That by the Laws of true Religion, or right Reason, the people
of this Nation are obliged, or ought to oblige themselves, so to own, assert,
and adhere unto the present Government, in the way of a Commonwealth, as it is
now established, as (not only) to have no hand in the alceration thereof, in
any case, under what circumstances soever; but also never to submit unto; or
act under any other Government whatsoever, which either by God's providence, or
permission, might be brought upon them?

VIII. Whether those Counties, Cities, Towns corporate, Magistrates, Ministers,
or others that made their respective addresses unto the late Protector, owning
him as the lawful Successor to his late Father, in the Office of Protector,
according to an Act of Parliament, supposed then to be authentic; desiring him
to protect those that are good, to punish those that are bad, to maintain the
just Rights and privileges of the people of God, and the whole Nation,
engaging to assist him in so doing, with their lives and fortunes, and
imploring the assistance and blessing of God upon his endeavors herein, and
furthermore being induced hereunto by an honest and innocent policy, viz. The
procurement of his favor and assistance in their public occasions, as they
may stand in need thereof; as also for the disheartning of ill affected
persons, waiting for commotions, tumults, and insurrections, upon such changes
of the chief Governor; as also for the discouragement of the known enemy in
foreign parts, in Flanders, and else where, full of expectations of risings of
the people at that time, etc. Whether (I say) the said persons might not make
their said Addresses, for the said honest and public ends, with an ingenious
retention of their first principles of real affection unto that cause wherein
they engaged themselves at first with the present Parliament? And whether,
having no hand in their interruption, nor approving thereof, their said
Addresses can rationally argue against their most cordial rejoicing at the
return of the present Parliament unto the free exercise of their authority, and
the finishing the work of a happy Reformation that lies upon their hands? And
whether that the undue reflections, and unchristian scoffs, cast upon the said
persons, for their said Addresses, do not argue rather the ventosity of their
brains; and the vanity of their minds, than the so^idity of their judgments and
the becoming gravity of their Spirits and behavior that use the the same?

IX. Whether the present Parliament, indulging those of the Army upon their
acknowledgment of their misprisions mistakes, and misdoings in interrupting
them on the 20th of April 1653. and in their setting up or at least assisting,
aiding, defending, and securing them that have set up other Governments and
Governors since that time, have not much more reason to indulge those that had
no hand at all in their said interruption, did never justify or own the same,
were heartily afflicted at it, did only submit unto and act under the said
Governments and Governors since that time for public peace sake? And whether
such indulgence, countenance, and favor unto their old friends renewed and
continued, may not be a very good pledge unto the said Army, that there is a
true and real oblivion of their said interrupting them? But etc.

X. Whether that even the present Parliament, Army, with all the distributed,
divided, and subdivided parties, Peresbyterians, Independants, Anabaptists, and
others, that at first made one single party (united together against the common
enemy) have not had their mistakes, miscarriages, weaknesses, and infirmities?
Whether they have not sometimes been in the dark, and walked in untroden paths,
and sometimes stumbled and fallen therein? Yea, whether in some ca^es or other
they have not made some detection or other, little or much from that good cause
wherein they were engaged at first? and if so, whether it be not Christian
Policy, as well as true Piety, to bear one another burdens, to be
tender-hea^ted toward one another, to consider of one another temptations and
snares, and with the Spirit of love, meekness, and compassion, to endeavor to
reduce one another to that primitive zeal and unity in the common cause against
the common enemy, wherein they were all engaged; to take heed of devouring one
another, lest they be d^voured one of another, and of the common enemy that
would devour them all: That sithence God is judge, who pulls down one and
sets up another, builds and throws down kills and makes alive, scatters in
his displeasure, and gathers together ag^in in his favor sithence he judges
men for their sins, and then in judgment remembers mercy, whether (these things
considered) Piety and Policy, Religion and Reason do not invite them all to
fear and tremble before God, not to snatch at advantages one against another,
but to imitate their Heavenly Father, who (passing by the infirmities of his
people) endeavors hy mercy, kindness and goodness, to gather them up unto
himse^f, and to make them all one in him? If every of them that has been
faulty should be ^^oned to death, which of them could live? but if only the
innocent amongst them should cast the first stone at the guilty, which of them
could be hurt?

XI. Whether that the appearance of this Parliament again at Westminster in the
7th year after their seeming dissolution, death and burial, be not Gods work
and his strange work? his Act and his strange Act? beyond the wisdom of the
wise, and the understanding of the prudent, that Sarah should give suck, and
the barren bring forth; that Nebuchadnezzar driven from his Kingdom, turned a
grazing for 7 years together, should again be restored to his Dominion, Power
and Majesty; that the rejected stones should be made the chief corner stones,
are not these things the Lords doing and mavelous in our eyes? And is not
this a Vision of fear, dread and terror unto the old adverse party, like the
coming of the Ark of God among the Philistines, causing them to say, Woe unto us
for there has not been such a thing heretofore; woe unto us, who shall deliver
us ou^ of their hands? these are they that smote the Egyptians with all the
plagues in the Wilderness: do not their faces gather blackness, and their
countenances look pale? do not their hands hang down, and their joints wax
feeble; their knees knock together, and their hearts sink like stones, dye and
fall within them? Are not their hopes like the Spiders web and the giving up of
the Ghost? Can any thing imagin^ble be an anchor of hope unto them, to quiet
their troubled minds in this day of their fear? except it be the divisions of
their adversaries amongst themselves? were they united, who could hurt them?
but if continually divided how can they stand? when one party shall divide into
many, and spend their respective opportunities, powers and advantages, to
suppress and weaken one another, will not this (in time) prove ruinous unto
them all? if these prove goads in the sides, and thorns in the eyes one of
another, in matters Civil or Religious; if the Praelatical Presbyterian, the
Presbyterian Independent, the Independent Anabaptist, or any others shall
assume unto themselves the s^irit of infallability in matters disputable,
branding others differing from them, with the odious names of Schismatics,
heretics, etc. and not only throw the fireballs and thunder-holts of
excommunication against one another, but incense, and stir up the Civil
Magistrate for their imprisonment, corporal punishment, banishment, or death,
because of these differences, if upon advantages and opportunities some of the
same party get up into the Seat of Civil Government, and cast down others, as
cordial to the old well-affected party, and public interest as themselves,
shall gore one another with the horns of their power and greatness, will not
this prove destructive at last unto them all?

XII. Whether the great ends of Government (public peace and liberty, the
Civil and Religious Rights of the People) be not more to be regarded, then the
forms thereof, whether by Kings, Protectors, Parliaments, or others? And did
not all the Vows, Covenants, Engagements, Prote^^ations and Oaths, made unto
Kings, Protectors, Parli^ments, pretend un^o these ends, and not unto the
Persons, Powers and Places of any of these, but with reference hereunto? what
are any or all those unto the people, but for the sake of their peace and
liberty? when greatness of place, power, and authority make men forget
themselves, and the ends of their advancements, (which is no new thing under
the Sun) when, because they are above every one, therefore they judge
themselves above all, and unto the foresaid ends they prove Physicians of no
value; but when the people look for peace, no good comes; for a time of
healing, and behold nothing but trouble; their yoaks are still made heavy,
rods, whips, and Scorpions are still upon their backs, and that without remedy;
will they not argue in this case, (let it respect Kings, Protectors,
Parliaments, or whomsoever else, all is one) as the Israelites against Rehoboam,
What portion have we in David? or inheritance in the son of Jesse? To your
Tents, O Israel, and let David see to his own house. And although it is sad,
and dangerous, that instead of Crowns and Scepters, the People should be under
the power of Swords and Pistols; and instead of Kings and Princes, Servants
should bear rule; yet is Protection by the sword more desirable than
destruction by a Law, safety by a Servant, than ruin by Lords and Masters: Can
the Parliament be safe except (under God) by the protection of the Army? Can
the Army, regularly, legally, and honorably, secure themselves and friends, but
by the authority of the Parliament? Has not either need of the other for the
good of both and their whole party? If henceforth this Parl. and Army be knit
together like David and Jonathan, if each be friends to each others friends,
and adversaries to each others adversaries; if each be to other as their own
soul, resolving (as friends) to stick closer to each other then brothers, will
not their adversaries melt like snails before them? their hearts fail them? the
stout-hearted amongst them be discouraged and their men of might be weak as
water? and all their late great boastings, and expectations pine away, and come
to nothing in.

The End?

