THE DISCIPLINE AND ORDER Of Particular CHURCHES, NO NOVELTY.

Proved from Scripture, Reason, Antiquity, and the most Eminent Modern DIVINES.

OR, A Discourse of the Church, in a Scripture Notion, with her Extent, Power
and Practice, tending to Moderate the Minds of Men, toward Dissenters in
Matters Ecclesiastical, and to acquit such from the Charge of Innovation,
Faction, Separation, Schism, and Breach of Union and Peace in the Church, who
cannot conform in many things to the Rules, Canons, and Practices of others.

By a Lover of Truth, Peace, Unity, and Order.

London, Printed Anno Dom. M.DC.LXXV.

THE DISCIPLINE AND ORDER OF Particular CHURCHES no Novelty, etc.
THE Church of God, since the days of the Gospel, was, and is (according to
Scripture-expressions) either, first, the whole Body of Christ, consisting of
all the Elect, See the disputation against Campion at the Tower, Sep. 18. 1581.
in the Morn. by Tulk. and Goad.
as Ephesians. 5.23. Christ the head of the Church, the Savior of the Body, ver. 27.
That he might present to himself a Glorious Church, ver. 25. Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it. So Heb. 12.22, 23. To the General Assembly and
Church of the First born written in Heaven, etc. Col. 1.18. He is the Head of
the Body, the Church, etc. Dr. Carleton, sometime Bishop of Chichester, in his
little Piece, Called, A Direction to know the true Church, p. 3. says, That
the Saints before the Law, under the Law, and under Grace, make up the Body of
Christ, or Members of the Church; and that this is the Catholic Church.

Or, Secondly, the Universal Visible Church, or whole Visible Body of Believers
upon the whole Earth, at the same time, as Acts 2.42. The Lord added to the
Church daily, Mr. Baxter Cure of Church-Divisions. p. 82. Ho^ke^ Eccl. Polity,
third Book. p. 88.
etc. So Ephesians. 3.21. Unto him be Glory in the Church by Christ Jesus throughout
all Ages. -- Or,

Thirdly, a particular Congregation, Society, or Company of Professors of the
Faith of Jesus Christ, usually meeting together in one place, as one Body, for
the participation of the same Ordinances, and Exercising the same Duty, as a
Church, in Edifying one another, Reynolds in his Conference with Heart, Cap. 6.
p. 218. says, That a Bishop in our sense is him to whom the Over-fight and
charge of a particular Church is committed, such as Ephesus, Philippi, and the
seven Churches.
Prayer, etc. Such as was the Church in Jerusalem, Acts 11.22. Tidings came to
the Ears of the Church, which was in Jerusalem, and they sent forth Barnabas
and others, etc. That this was but one Congregation, is evident from Act. 15.
where Paul and Barnabas and others coming from Antioch to this Church; they
were received by the Church first, and then the Apostles and Elders. The
Apostles, Elders, and Brethren, the whole Multitude were present at the
Discourse of the Matter, and the Epistle wrote in the name of the whole,
Apostles, Elders, and Brethren met together with one accord, ver. 25. Such was
the Church of Antioch which was gathered together, Acts 14.27. when Paul and
Barnabas came, and with whom they had Assembled before a whole year, Acts
11.26. And were afterward gathered together to receive and hear the Epistle,
Acts 15.30. Such were the Churches which the Apostles visited, and ordained
Elders in, Acts 14.23. for they did it by suffrage. Likewise the Church in
Corinth, 1 Cor. 1, 2. Unto the Church of God in Corinth: These met in one
place, 1 Cor. 5. 1 Cor. 11.18.20.23. Cap. 14.23. So the Church at Cenchrea,
near Corinth. See Smect. p. 40, 41. 47 58, 59. Bishop Jewels Reply to Harding.
p. 230.
And Mr. Stillingfleet quotes Pareus in Romans 16. for this, that the Church of
Corinth did meet sometimes at Cenchrea, because of the violence of their
Enemies in Corinth. Therefore also when the Apostles spoke any where of the
Assemblies, or Societies of Believers in any one Country, they call them not a
Church, in the singular Number or the Church of such a Country or Isle, but
Churches, as of many in the same Country; as in Judea, Macedonia, Galatia,
Asia, 1 These. 2.14. 2 Cor. 8.1.18.23, 24. Gal. 1.2.22. The Holy Ghost mentions
seven Churches by name in Asia, Rev. 1.4. Chapter 2. Chapter 3. -- And as to this, the
same Bishop Carleton, in the same Book, p. 2. says, That particular Churches
are visible Assemblies, etc. and Governed by diverse visible heads, and proves
it by Gregory, Lib. 4. Epist. 3. --

A fourth Church, in Scripture Phrase, cannot be found (since the time that all
in every Nation which fear God are accepted, as the Apostle said, Acts 10.34,
35.) Such as National, Provincial, Synodical, etc. We read not in Scripture,
nor in any Church History for many years after Christ, of any Church, distinct
from these Descriptions before given.

Now, it is to be presumed, that there are none who will affirm, that the first
of these three Churches could possibly meet together, or do any Act, as a
Church, either in choosing Officers, determining Controversies, Ordering things
indifferent to Edification, giving Interpretations of Scriptures, partaking of
Ordinances, and casting out of Offenders, etc. Or that ever any such Power was
derived down from Christ upon them, as a Church so to do; or that he ever
intended this Church, when he directs any thing to be done by the Church as
such; because of the utter impossibility of their performance thereof, as a
Church, part of which being already fallen asleep, and part not yet born.

Also it may be concluded, as to the second Church above described, that it is
utterly impossible they should at any time meet together as a Church in one
Body, to agree upon, consent unto, Act, or Order any thing (according to the
power given to the Churches, as above) jointly as such a Church; or partake of
Ordinances jointly as such. Nay, it is improbable, if not impossible, that in
their Representative, this Church should meet, and put themselves into a
capacity, to Act as a Church in any of the things to be done by a Church as
such. Nay, was there ever any such meeting of this Church? None as can be found
in Story. Or, if this were possible, where have we Authority of Scripture or
Primitive Practice, to justify such a Company of Representatives, to call
themselves a Church in this sense, and to take to themselves the Power of the
whole Church given to her by Jesus Christ, and to call their Acts the Acts of
the Church? And it would be strange for any to affirm, that Christ has put the
Power (as to the Execution of it) into the hands of a Body that can never
possibly be able to Execute the Power derived upon.

If any number of Men would colourably make themselves the Churches
Representative: It is necessary they should be chosen by the whole, and some
one at least for every particular Church, Body, Society, or Congregation
throughout the World; as the Messengers of the Churches were chosen by the
Churches, or else how in any tolerable sense, can they be said to be the
Church, in either of the two first Descriptions?

And then surely it will follow, That all the Power that by the Scripture is
placed in the Church of God, as such, (as to the Execution thereof) is derived
upon the particular Churches, Societies, or Congregations for the management of
Church Matters within themselves, as to Meeting, the Ordering of Circumstances
of Worship, casting out of Offenders, choosing Officers, Ordering things
indifferent, etc. according to the Laws of Christ given us in Precept, or
Example of Scripture, and practice of purest times; and the determination of
these things is given to each Church, the same Power by the same Rule. The
Magdeburg Divines, Singulae Ecclesiae parem habebant, etc.
Cent. 2. Cap. 7. Col. 134, 135. Says, That every Church has a like Power of
Teaching Gods Word, Administering Sacraments, Excommunicating and absolving
Sinners, of calling and choosing her Ministers, and for just cause again to
depose them, to Exercise the Ceremonies received from the Apostles; and also
(for the cause of Edification) appoint New ones, this they prove by many
Authors. And Bishop Jewel, in his Epistle to the Council of Trent, agrees to
this in these words; We know (says he there) that the Spirit of God is not
tied to places, nor to numbers of Men; tell it to the Church, says Christ; not
to the whole Church spread over the whole Earth (says the Bishop) but to a
particular Church, which may easily meet in one place. Wheresoever (says
Christ) two or three are gathered together in my Name, Mr. Vines upon the
Sacrament, p. 166. agrees this.
there I am in the midst of them. When Paul (says the Bishop) would Reform the
Church of Corinth and the Galatians, he did not command them to expect a
general Council, but only wrote to them, That what error soever, or Vice was
amongst them, themselves should presently cut it off. Hist. Council. Trident. p.
860. English Translation. And in the same Council it was alleged against
Episcopal Assemblies, Naz. ad Procop. Epist. 42.
out of Gregory Nazianz. That Contention has been always increased by
Episcopal Assemblies. The same Hist. Lib. 7. p. 706.

That these particular Churches or Societies were made up of Professing
Believers, Voluntarily joining themselves together, and that it was each
Believers Liberty to join himself to what Society, Church, or Number of
Christians he pleased, or was most convenient for him: And that it was the
Churches power to admit such who desired so to join unto them: And that this
Liberty continued to particular Churches and Christians many hundred years, See
Justice Hubbard in the Case between Colt. and the Bish. of Coventry and
Litchfield.
we think none can deny; if they do, let them show a President Authoritative
against it. Thus it was in the beginning; The Disciples were all together in
Solomon's Porch, and of the rest durst no man to join himself to them, but the
People magnified them, Acts 5.12, 13. So Acts 9.26. Saul assayed to join
himself with the Church in Jerusalem, who being satisfied about him, received
him. Nothing of any Law of God, or the Church in those days, nor in some Ages
after, to confine Men to join themselves to, or continue with this or that
particular Church or Society, or to this or that Church so and so formed and
Governed. No, nor can we find any such Law made by any of the first Christian
Emperors, but still left free. It was thus alleged at the Council of Trent,
That the Division of Parishes was first made by the People, when a certain
number of Inhabitants, having received the Faith, built a Temple for the
Exercise of their Religion, hired a Priest, and did constitute a Church; which
by the Neighbors was called a Parish; and when the Numbers were increased, if
one Church and Priest were not sufficient, those who were most remote did build
a Church beside, and fit themselves better. Hist. Conc. Trident. Lib. 6. p. 498.

And Mr. Stillingfleet, in his Irenicum affirms, That Men are not bound by the
Law of Nature to associate themselves with any but whom they shall think fit:
And that every one entering into a Society, should consent and submit unto the
Rules of it; which (says he) at men's first entering into the Society of a
Church, was requisite to be done by the express and explicit consent of the
parties themselves, being capable, etc. And for Children, he says, That it is
highly rational, that when they come to Age, they should explicitly declare
their own voluntary consent to submit to the Laws of Christ, and conform
themselves to the Profession of Christianity; which, says he, might be a
probable way, and certainly most agreeable both to Reason and Scripture, to
advance the Credit of Christianity once more in the World, etc. That one great
cause of the flourishing of Religion in the Primitive times, was certainly the
strictness used by them in their admission of Members into their
Church-Societies. These are Mr. Stillingfleets own words, see them in p. 132.
134. And as to the Churches admittance of Members, and of such as join
themselves; the same Stillingfleet says, in the same Book, p. 134, 135. That
none were admitted but such, into whose Lives and Carriages they had enquired,
to discern their seriousness in their professions of Christianity, and find
true Repentance and Reformation of Life, a profession of Faith, and answerable
Life to the Gospel, without which it was not Lawful to admit them; and this he
proves there by Origin, Justin Martyr, etc. And as to an explicit Covenant, by
such, he says, That if by an Explicit Covenant be meant a real consideration
between those who join themselves together in Gospel Ordinances in Order to
their being a Church, he koweth none will question it, that knows what it is
that makes a Society to be so, which is such a real consideration with one
another. Again, That though every Christian be bound to join with some Society,
or Church, yet not being determined by Scripture to what particular Church they
should join; therefore, says he, (for Christians better understanding what
their mutual Duty is one to another, who is their Pastor, to whom they owe the
Relation of Members) That there should be some significant Declaration either
by their Words or Actions of their willingness to join with such a particular
Society in Gospel Ordinances: Mr. Vines upon the Sacrament. p. 322, 323 324.
This he grants to be necessary too. And further, That when Churches are
overrun with Looseness, Ignorance, and Profaneness; this is useful, says he,
if not necessary. Yea, that at all times it seems the most likely way to
advance the Practice, Power, and Purity of Religion. See it more at large, p.
138. 140.

If it be Objected, That though the Law of God or Nature has not, yet that
there are Laws of Men that do determine the Matter as to the particular
Churches, to which every Member must join himself (to wit) to the Parish
wherein each Member resides for the time being; and also, as to the manner of
joining and being admitted, (that is) by their being Parishioners.

To say nothing of the Irrationalness of this way, (...) the Apprehension of
such who consider, what it (...) that makes a Society to be so, and any one to
^ecome a Member thereof; or of such, who know that it is to have Communion in
Christian Societies ^s such.

We Answer, First, That there were no such Laws ^ade by the first Christian
Emperors against Chri^tian Liberty in this case.

Secondly, If any were made since, it is reasona^le to enquire, how such, who
made those Laws, ^ad this Authority derived upon them from God in ^uch cases?
If it cannot be showed (as we think it cannot be) then the Freedom continues
still to Chri^tians.

It is wonderful that Men, yea, Christians, should ^hink it most just to
preserve Men's Liberty of Liv^ng where they please, and to remove from one place
to another, to choose what Society they please in Civil things; And yet
restrain Men's Liber^y in this case, as if Soul-health, Liberty, Comfort, and
Profit, is not to be preserved above that of the Body: Especially since the Law
of Nature, and the Law of God has left it free.

Thirdly, That Law which makes all Persons in^efinitely Living, or that shall
Live in such a Pre^inct to be a Church, and Members one of another ^n a
particular Society, and puts them under a ne^essity of joining together, as one
Body, in the Matters of God, can very hardly be defended from oppugning the
Laws of Christ, which forbids Fel^owship in such things, with such and such
Persons, many of which may be found in every Parish amongst us.

But to prove by some particulars now, That the Power in Church Affairs, was
for some Ages Exercised in and by these particular Churches, and no^
elsewhere, without any Interruption or Control considerable; And without any
additional or Superior Authority, Bish. Nicholson Vindication of the Church of
England, p. 26. agrees this of Deacons.
after the Apostles days. An^ first, as to the choosing of their Ministers,
Acts 6* 2, 3.5, 6. The whole Church there, the Multitude, by the Apostles own
Direction, did choos^ their Deacons, and were Judges of their Qualifications.
The Apostles told them what the Deacon^ should be, the Multitude were Judges
whether they were such. For, the same seven (without Examination or Exception)
which they chose, were by the Apostles set apart for the work: The Apostles
being then the only Officers of that Church, which was then but one Society or
Congregation. Lorinus Salmeron, and Gasper. Sanctus upon Act. 14.23. Deer. Part
1. did 62. See Assembly of Divines upon Act. 24.23.
So for the Elders or Bishops, Acts 14.22, 23. Paul and Barnabas ordained (or
appointed) them Elders in every Church; but for the manner; it was by suffrage
(i. e.) by the Peoples choice or Vote* thus the very Text is rendered in some
Translations* and so by Magdeburg Divines Translated: They created Presbiters
in every Church by suffrage* Cent. 1. Lib. 2. Cap. 4. Col. 401, 402. and this
could not be but in particular Congregations, who could meet together to this
end. The Apostles carried no Men with them, but passing from Church to Church,
they appointed such of every Church whom they found there; and who were more
capable of Judging, than the Church of which they were Members; and who had
experience of, and acquaintance with them.

That this was so, is yet more evident by this, That afterward for many
hundred years together, this way only was continued in the Churches; for the
Congregations or particular Churches, to choose their own Bishops and other
Ministers, and they ^ccounted it as their Right, without any control; as ^or
instance, in Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. Lib. 3. Cap. ^ 1. p. 44. It is said, that after
the death of James, ^he Apostles and Disciples of our Lord gathered themselves
together to consult who should succeed, and they all with one voice judged
Simon worthy. So Eusebius. Lib. 6. Cap. 28. p. 110. when all the Brethren of the
Church of Rome had gathered themselves together for the Electing of a Bishop
(their Bishop being dead) and many had thought upon Notable and Famous Men (
Fabianus being present) the whole Multitude with one accord, and the same
Spirit of God, agreed upon him, and made him Bishop.

The People of a Church in Constantinople (being by their Bishop before his
Death desired to choose one of two Men, he named, because of their Virtues) did
(after his Death) meet, and choose one of them. Soc. Eccl. Hist. Lib. 2. Cap.
4. p. 253. So did the People of a Church in Millan, being met together, with
one voice chose Ambrose to be their Bishop; which the Emperor concludes there
to be the work and will of God. Socrat. Lib. 4. Cap. 25. p. 335. There are such
Multitudes of Presidents and Instances of this Practice, that it would be
endless to mention them: Only see some Instances in the same Histories of
Socrates, Lib. 2. Cap. 9. p. 256. Lib. 4. Cap. 13. p 324. Lib. 6. Cap. 2. p.
359. Lib. 7. cap. 7. p. 377, 378. Lib. 7. cap. 12. p. 380. cap. 26. p. 390.
Evagr. Eccl. Hist. Lib. 4. cap. 6. p. 473. Lib. 2. cap. 11. p. 436.

This continued unquestioned 500 Years at least. And though attempts were
sometimes made by Bishops, and the Civil Powers, they engaged t^ Depose
Ministers, and thrust in others upon Churches; yet still the Churches refused
them, and chos^ others themselves, when they wanted them, a Soc. Lib. 2. cap.
6. p. 254 One Emiseus there refused at two several places by the People, a
Alexandria and Emisa. So likewise Socrat. Lib 4. cap. 7. p. 318, 319. when one
Eunomius wa^ sent to Cizicum by a Bishop of Constantinople, an^ commanded to be
placed there by the Emperor yet was he refused, and Eunomius went and Live
with him that made him Bishop. So again, Socra^ Lib. 7. cap. 12. p. 380. One
Salvatus rejecte^ by a Church in Constantinople. So again, at Cizicum, where a
Bishop at Constantinople appoint Proclus to be their Bishop. The Church at
Cizicum understanding what was done, prevented it, an^ chose Dalmatius, a
Religious Man, to Govern and Proclus being not admitted there, spent hi^ time
at Constantinople. Socrat. Lib. 7. cap. 28 p. 391. and many more Instances of
this Nature might be given.

Yet we find no complaint made thereof, as any irregular Act of the People,
which doubtless would have been, had it not been their known right: Cyprian
agrees to this, that if any were intruded upon the People, he was taken for a
false Bishop, no^ a true Pastor, for which he is quoted by the Magdeburg
Divines, Cent. 3. cap. 7. col. 175, 176* Moreover, the Emperor Constantine
acknowledges this right to be Lodged in these particula^ Churches: See his
Epistle to the Church in Antioch, where he tells this Church in general, that
they did affect Eusebius, and would have Elected him to be their Bishop, and
then he persuades them to choose another, seeing all did not agree, therefore,
says he, not Lawful; because, says he, he that is Elected to a Bishopric by
the general Suffrage of Wise men assembled to deliberate thereof, ought by Gods
Law to enjoy it. This is Recorded in Eusebius, of the Life of Constantine, Lib.
3. cap. 58. p. 52. Yea, the great Nicene Council agree it in these words,
expressed in Socrat. Lib. 1. cap. 6. p. 225. (Speaking about some who might be
in a Capacity of being made Ministers) they say, if they be found worthy, and
the People choose them, they may Succeed the Deceased, etc. Yet further it is
manifest by the same History, That where any one Congregation did divide into
two Bodies, each apart chose their own Bishops for themselves, as in the Case
of the Church of Antioch, Socrat. Lib. 5. Cap. 9. p. 343. Lib. 4. cap. 1. p.
316. So in many other Cases, when those of the true Faith had Bishops imposed
upon them by the Arrians, they divided themselves from the Arrians, and chose
to themselves Bishops, and Assembled alone.

And it is observable, That all these Bishops thus chosen and appointed of the
People of these particular Churches, were still acknowledged as Lawful Bishops
by all; and in all the Councels mentioned in those Histories. Nor do we find
the least Objection any where Recorded in those days against such, who came
thus to this Office, as being unlawfully called.

To this Practice of the particular Churches, and their Right thereto, the
Fathers give in their Testimonies also; a touch of them therefore. Tertul. in
his Apol. to the Gent. Cap. 39. p. 137. English Translation, says, That in
these Assemblies there are Bishops that preside, they are approved of by the
Suffrage of them whom they ought to conduct. So says many others, Possidon. in
vita Aug. Cap. 4. Leo. 1. Epist. 95.
quoted by the Magdeburg Divines, Cent. 2. cap. 7. col. 134, 135. Cent. 1. Lib.
1. cap. 4. col. 179. Cent. 3. cap. 6. col. 146, 147.

The Roman Presbiters, in their Epistle to Cyrian, affirm, that every Church
has a like Power of Choosing, Calling, and Ordaining Ministers, and for just
cause again to depose them. Cyprian. Lib. 1. Epist. 4. Aug. Epist. 100.
Cyprian. Epist. 68.
And Cyprian himself says, That the right of choosing such as are fit, and
refusing the unworthy, belong to the People and whole Church, and that by
Divine Authority. And that the Officers and People did consult about it with
common consent. And for these things he is quoted by the Magdeburg Writers,
Cent. 3. cap. 7. col. 153.173, 174, 175. Cap. 6. col. 135, 136.146. and also
that the People did consider the Life and Manners of the Persons to be chosen,
and judge; and much more to this purpose in those places before, John Ferus a
Friar, in his Comment upon Act. 11.
and Magdeburg. Cent. 5. cap. 6. col. 178, 179, 180.

Now we shall add a few Testimonies and Judgments of latter Ages, and of Men
otherwise differing.

The Papists themselves, at the Council of Trent, acknowledged, that this was
the usual Practice of the Church of God for 800 Years together after Christ,
for the particular Churches to choose their own Ministers; and they then
affirmed, that there were remaining at that day the Records thereof at Rome:
and they then and there desired, that those Records might be destroyed, lest
Luther (who maintained this Right to the People) should make use of them to
bring in the Custom into the Church again. And they there also acknowledge,
that this was taken from the Church by the Authority of a Council only who made
a Decree against it. See the Conference of Rayno'ds and Heart, c. 6. p. 223.
Heart says out of Genebrard, that Clemens took not the Bishopric by the
Council of the Lord, least the Example of taking it by nomi^ation of Peter
should pass to posterity, and derogate from the free providence of the Church
in choosing of her own Bishop Geneb^ard Chronolg. l. 3. in Lin. See more. l. 4.
Seculo. 11. Cited in the same Confer. Cap. 7. l ^76.
Council. Trident. in English, Lib 7. p. 590, 591.598. See more of the same
Council, Lib. 8. p. 725. And he that wrote this History complains against Rome
about this, in these words: The Church of Rome grant not the People the
Election of their Ministers, which certainly, says he, was an Apostolical
Institution, continued more than 800 Years. Council. Trident. Lib. 2. p. 163.

Bishop Jewel, in his Reply to Mr. Harding, p. 230. Says, out of Cyprian, Lib.
1. Epist. 4. That the Bishopric was bestowed upon Sabinus, by the consent and
voices of the whole Brotherhood of that Church to which he was to be Bishop:
He there says, that Honorius the Emperor Writing to Boneface, does agree him
to be Bishop, whom some of the Clergy, and whole Brotherhood shall choose. And
the Bishop himself then there affirms from hence, that every particular Church
is called the whole Church. And after, in p. 282. The Bishop affirms, that
Cyprian, in the same place, says, That the People being Obedient to Gods Law,
have Power, especially to choose worthy, or refuse unworthy Priests.

Mr. Stillingfleet, in his Irenicum, p. 306. quotes Tertul. Exhort. Castil. c.
7. for these words, That all the difference between the Ministers and People,
comes from the Churches Authority; and again, p. 416. himself says, That
Episcopal men will hardly find any evidence in Scripture, or the Practice of
the Apostles, for Churches consisting of many fixed Congregations for Worship,
under the Charge of one man; nor in the Primitive Church for the Ordination of
Bishops without the preceding Election of the Clergy, and at least, consent,
and approbation of the People; so much he allows there, and something more in
p. 339. where he uses these words (speaking of Elders) now the voice of the
People, which was used in the Primitive times, is grown out of use, etc. by
which he confesses it to be the Primitive Practice. But Mr. Stillingfleet
having (as he says) been at the pains to transcribe some of Bishop Cranmer's
words, they will serve well here, and we shall again transcribe so much of them
as speaks to this particular. See them in the same Irenicum, p. 391, 392. They
are these. That in the Apostles time, when there were no Christian Princes, by
whose Authority Ministers of Gods Word might be appointed, nor sins be
corrected by the Sword; there was no Remedy then for correction of Vice, or
appointment of Ministers, but only the consent of Christian Multitude amongst
themselves by an uniform consent to follow the Advice and persuasion of such
Persons whom God had most endued with the Spirit of Wisdom and Council, etc.
Sometimes the Apostles, and others unto, whom God had given abundance of his
Spirit, sent, or appointed Ministers of Gods Word; sometimes the People did
choose such as they thought meet thereunto: and when any were sent by the
Apostles, or other, the People, of their own voluntary will, with thanks did
accept of them, not for the Supremacy Imperial Dominion that the Apostles had
over them to command, as their Princes or Masters, but as good People, ready to
Obey the good Counselors, and to accept any thing necessary for their
Edification and Benefit. And again, that the People before Christian Princes
were, commonly did Elect their Bishops and Priests; thus far of Bishop Cranmer:
which words of his (as Mr. Stillingfleet there affirms) he put his own Hand to,
and gave it in, in answer to certain Questions put to him in King Edward the
Sixths Time, and now remain upon Record.

Bishop Nicholson, of Gloucester, in his Vindication of the Church of England,
p. 27. grants the Truth of this. That the People did choose their Pastors in
the Primitive Ages of the Church, in express terms, and says, it was taken
away from the People by Christian Princes, when the Fathers disliked the use.
So far of him in this place.

Polanus, in his Sintagma, Lib. 7. Cap. 15. fully proves, and affirms, this
Right to be Lodged in these Churches. -- Under this Head, De Electionibus seu
vocationibu^ Ecclesiasticis.

First, he says, That the Liberty, or Power of Election, calling or sending of
Ecclesiastical Persons, is a Right, which the whole Church has in choosing,
and calling to themselves approved and fit Ministers, and in placing them into
Sacred Order, p. 542. After in his next p. 543. under this Question; a quibus
Electio seu vocatio Ministrorum Ecclesiae fieri debeat? By whom the Election,
or calling of Ministers of the Church ought to be made? He says, That unto the
Legitimate (or Lawful Election of the Ministers of the Church, especially of
the Pastors,) is requisite, a free and ingenious consent, and Suffrage of the
whole Church (whose business it is) that is of the Elders and Flock. The which
consent must not be had by entreaty, or sold for a price, much less forced and
extorted; so that it is the part of the whole Church, to choose Ministers for
themselves: And there he gives these following arguments to evince it. First,
because even in the time of the Apostles, the whole Church (whose business it
was) did choose Ministers for themselves (or to it self.) Neither did the
Apostles themselves, says he, Ordain any one for Ecclesiastical charges, only
by their own Authority, but always by the Church consenting and approving, Acts
6.2, etc. and 14.23. Secondly, because by this means the Churches own Liberty,
which Christ has given to it, is kept. For a Pastor, or Minister of the Word
of God is not to be obtruded upon the Church of God against his will. Can.
Null. invit distinc. 61. Thirdly, because it serves to this, That even the
Ministers may, with a good Conscience, Rule the Lords Flock, by whom he is
Elected; and the Flock of the Lord may in like manner yield themselves the more
easy to him to be Instructed and fed, than to him, who, beside (or against)
their will, is thrust upon them: and again, he is not to be acknowledged for a
Lawful Pastor of the Church, who has been intruded on the Church by the
Authority and Command of the Prince. Quod testatur Council. Parisiense primum.
Can. Octavo Tomo Secundo Council. And after he says, in the same p. That fit
Persons are to be nominated and presented to the People before the Election,
and should be openly proposed in the Assemblies. And again, in p. 544. Under
this Question, Qualiter seu quomodo Ministri Ecclesiae Eligi and vocari
debeant? How the Ministers of the Church ought to be chosen and called, Acts
14.23. Those Persons are to be Nominated, of whom the Election and Calling
ought to be made, to this end, that the Church by the free Suffrage of the
whole Congregation (or such to whom she has committed a Right and Power of
choosing) may approve and accept of one of them.

That the Suffrages are collected by some Pastor of the Church, or of another
to whom he shall commit it. And they are given, either in Order by every
Elector, Viva voce, or jointly of all or many, by lifting up of hands, or
either way, etc. For, if by giving their Suffrages, Viva voce, there were
variance, and they go into many Sentences of unprofitable and tedious
prolixity, Those who had any Votes for Ordination were again named; and every
one being named, they who chose him were commanded to lift up their Hands. At
the Nomination of whom, either all or many lifted up their Hands; this Man was
concluded to be Lawfully Elected. After this manner, says he, Paul and
Barnabas did Create Elders, Acts 14.23.

And after, under this Question, By what Rite or Ceremony? etc. he says, He
who was Elected by the Church with free Suffrages, at length received
Ordination of the Pastors of the Church, 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5.22. the whole
Multitude of the Church being present. Then Polanus concludes with these words.
They do therefore grievously sin who do manifestly drive away the
Ecclesiastical People or Flock from the Election of their Ministers; which,
says he, the false, or Counterfeit Popish Bishops do; yea, they do grievously
sin, who do impose Bishops and Pastors upon the Church against their will. Thus
far Polanus agrees in his own words.

From some of the former Authorities, The African Synod, Athanasius, Cornelius,
and others. The Presbyterian Divines, in their Book, called, Smectimnius,
admits this power to reside in the People of particular Churches, and that by
Divine Authority. They say,

First, That the especial power of Judging of the Worthiness, or Unworthiness
lay in the People.

Secondly, That the power of choosing, or refusing them upon this Judgment,
resided in the People.

Thirdly, That the power descended upon them by Divine Authority. Athanasius,
say they, in his Epist. ad Orthodoxos, blamed the Intrusion of Bishops as
against the Apostolical Precepts, against the Canon, and compelled the Heathen
to Blaspheme.

Mr. Prin, in his Book of un-bishoping Timothy and Titus, p. 69. affirms this
out of Alcuvinus de Diviniis Officiis, Cap. 37. That Ministers of all sorts
were made to the Year 800 by this Election of Clergy and People, and that they
were all present at their Ordination, and consented to it. Also he affirms, in
p. 72, 73. That Martin Bucer, in his Book of recalling, and bringing in again
the use of Lawful Ordination, says, That this power is in the People. Much
more might be produced, to prove this particular, See only Magdeb. Cent. 4.
cap. 6. col. 43. Council. Trident. in English, Lib. 8. p. 725. Lib. 7. p. 591.
598. Lib. 6. p. 404, 405. And as to imposition of Hands, upon these thus
chosen, Mr. Prin, in the same Book, p. 72, 73. quotes Jerome Epist. to Evagr.
and his Comment upon Titus, for this; That the Ancient Consecration of Bishops
was nothing else but their Election, etc. And that all the Rites and Ceremonies
now used are but Novelties. And Martin Bucer, for these conclusions, in his
aforesaid Book, and in his Scripta Anglicana, of the Office of Pastor, p. 154.
159. 191. and on Mat. 16. That imposition of hands, on those chosen Ministers
belong to the Presbiters, but that this they have not Originally, but only
Instrumentally, as Servants to the whole Congregation. And that this ought to
be done publicly in the Church, where they are Elected before all the
Congregation: and that the imposition of hands is no essential part of
Ordination, Luther held this Council Trident l. 7. p. 590.
but that it may be omitted. And that those who are Elected, and Lawfully
called to the Ministry by the Suffrage of the whole Church and People, are
Ministers Lawfully called and Ordained without this Ceremony. And Mr. Prin
there further proves this by David Blond. Apol. Sect. 3. de Ordinatione and
plebis in Electionibus jure, from p. 309. to 448. He also affirms, p. 81. That
Morney, Amesius, Morney Lord of Plessis in his Book de Eccesia, cap. 11.
and sundry others there quoted, say, That the People alone, in case of
Necessity, where are no Bishops or Ministers, or where Bishops refuse to ordain
as they ought, may Elect and Ordain Ministers. The right of Ordination and
Election being Originally in the whole Church and people, etc. and that
imposition of hands is no Essential, but Ceremonial part of Ordination, as
Angelus de Clavaso, Peter Martyr, Mr. Baxters body of Divinity, of Ordination,
p. 79.
and others, both Papists and Protestants affirm.

Mr. Stillingfleet, in his Irenicum, p. 392. where he transcribes Bishop
Cranmers answer to the Questions before mentioned, has set down these words
amongst others, as the Bishops own words. The Bishop having affirmed, that the
people before Christian Princes, did commonly Elect their Bishops and Priests,
says further, That in the New Testament, he that is appointed to be Priest or
Bishop needed no Consecration, for Election, or appointment thereto (says he)
is sufficient.

Now, having so great a cloud of witnesses beyond all exception, and a
concurrent sentence in this matter, by Persons at so great a distance each from
other in their Judgment, in other things, and living in several ages of the
World: It seems strange, that there should be such wrestling against the
common right of the Church of God; and such a stir to make that Scripture, Acts
14.23. to speak something else, than that, which so many Learned, eminent,
Godly Men agree it does, and the practice of the Church so long and universally
and fully affirm it to do. Much more strange it is, that men should be blamed
for being of this Judgment, and practicing accordingly, having so much ground
to believe it to be the truth.

If any should pretend, that there are other Officers in the Church of God
besides Ordinary Bishops and Deacons, Ho^ker in his Eccles. Polity 4th Book, p.
417, 418, etc. allows Presbyter and Deacons to be the Clergy, and that no where
in the New Test. are they called Priests, nor will he contend for that Name.
See more, p. 123, of the same Book.
by Divine Right to continue. Let such prove it, if they can. But it seems
clear that after Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, these extraordinary
Officers of Christ, were deceased (who while they continued, had extraordinary
Furniture given them from Christ, for their work.) These of Bishops or Elders,
and Deacons, in the particular Churches, were all one no superior and General
Officers over many, as Mr. Stillingfleet, in his aforesaid Irenicum, p. 416.
says, that the Episcopal Men will hardly find any evidence in Scripture, or
the Apostles practice, for Churches consisting of many fixed Congregations for
the Worship of God, under the charge of one person.

First, it is manifest, that Bishops and Elders in those days were the same
Officers, and not one above the other, Acts 20. where the Apostles ^nt for the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus, and ^^ving Discoursed with them, he gave them
^harge, that they, the same Persons, should take ^ed to the Flock over which
the Holy Ghost had ^ade them Bishops (or Overseers, as our Tran^tion has it.)
So when Peter writes, 1 Epist. 5.^ 2, etc. He there calls the Ruling Officers
in ^eneral, Elders: whether Ruling only, or Ruling ^^d Teaching Elders. See 1 Timothy 5.17.

Bishop Cranmer, in the place before quoted by ^r. Stillingfleet, in his
Irenicum, p. 392. says, that the Bishop and Priest were at one time, and ^ot
two things, but both one Office in the begin^ng of Christ's Religion.

Dr. Fulk, against the Rhem. upon Titus 1.5. and Jerome, in his Comment upon
Titus, affirms ^is.

And the Magdeburg Divines quote Jerome, Am^rose, and Chrysostom, for the
proof of this; and ^lso for showing how in after Ages one Elder was ^xalted
above the rest, Doctor Whittaker in his Answer to Campian in his ten Reasons
10. Vol.
and then called the Bishop ^y way of Eminence, and that this was by Humane
^uthority. Cent. 2. Cap. 7. col. 126. Cent. 4. ^ap. 6. col. 491. Cent. 5. cap.
7. col. 737. Nay, ^regory Nazianzen wishes this Episcopal decree ^bolished,
and says it is Tyrannical, Orat. 28. So ^ad it proved in his days, as it seems.

Bishop Jewel, in his Reply to Mr. Harding, p. ^22. 229. 250, 251, 252.
alleges this out of Je^ome, Cyprian, etc. That Bishops are greater than
^riests, more of Custom than of Gods Ordinance; That the Power of all Priests
by the Authority of Gods Word, is one, and equal; and that it was ^nly Policy
that set one over many. And in p. 257. ^oncludes against Papists in these
words: If Christ (says the Bishop) appointed not one Priest ov^ another, how
then is it likely he should appoint o^ over all? And so Mr. Stillingfleet, in
his afo^said Book, See Smect. p. 24. 26. Raynolds conference with Heart, cap. 8.
p. 461, 462. affirms this Policy to be the ground of raising one E^de^ ab^ve
others, and so step by step to the Pope See also p, 540 541,
p. 276, 277. 310, 311. proves this (...) large; That Bishops and Presbiters
were the sa^^ in Primitive times; and that Arius was not c^demned for that
Opinion, but for his separat^^ from such who set up Bishops above other Pries^
and he quotes Aug. Epist. 29. for this. That (...) difference between
Episcopacy and Presbitery, t^ the one is greater than the other, arise only by
(...) Custom of the Church attributing a Name of gre^er Honor to them.

Secondly, That Bishops, Elders, and Deac^ were all the Officers Christ
intended to have c^tinued in the Church after the Apostles days, see^ clear in
this; That when the Apostle wrote to (...) Church of the Philippians, he
mentioned these ^ly. To the Bishops and Deacons, Phil. 1.1. A^^ when the Holy
Ghost mentions the Qualificati^ of Church Officers, he names none but these. N^
does he seem to intend any other, nor any other ^corded in the Scripture of the
New Tes^ment, which doubtless would have been, if Ch^ had intended any other to
have been continued (...) the Church, for it would have been necessary (...)
have known how such should have been Qualifi^ as well as these. But of these
two see at large 1 Ti^ 3. Titus c. 3. And that these were all in the Primiti^
Churches, the Century Writers affirm, Magd^ Cent. 1. Lib. 2. cap. 7. col. 508,
509. Cent. ^ cap. 7. col. 125. This also may we note; T^ after the Church had
departed from the Apostoli^ Order, and by humane prudence appointed o^ Elder or
Bishop in every Congregation or Socit^ (...) the first step, and after in a
larger Circuit) ^ve the rest. Yet even these Bishops were then ^ke manner
chosen by the Body of those Church^ where in he was to be Bishop, as the
Authori^ herein before alleged fully prove.

But now, if it shall be Objected (as some have ^med to do) That this power of
Election in the ^urch was not a Privilege belonging to them of ^t, but of
convenience. Ere we give answer, (...) shall go over some such pretenses as
these.

first, the Papists. Council. Trident. lib. 7. p. 590.
They at the Council of Trent ^^itted this use to have been in the Primitive
times the Churches. But as to the Right, they say ^re, That though the people
did choose, yet it (...) by the tacit, or explicit consent of the Pope.

This conceit will easily fall, for in those days ^re was no such thing in
Nature as a Pope, (if ^y mean by a Pope such a one, as is now at ^me with such
Authority as he challenges) there^ he could not by his consent bring it in; or
had ^een so, the Pope had erred, to have given con^^ to the Church, that she
should have called her ^isters in another way than Christ had appointed, Christ
did not appoint this way. If Christ did ^oint this way, then his consent was
insignificant-mentioned in this case; unless they will say Christ ^n appointed
no way, but that he left all to the ^retion of the Pope in this matter; which
we ^k they will not affirm.

Again, Secondly, Bishop Nicholson, of Glou^er, in his Book before cited, p.
27. admits the ^ter of Fact, that the people did choose; but, ^o the Right, he
says, first, That it was after (...) Apostles days.

Although we see Archbishop Cranmer, Polanus, the Magdeburg Divines, and many
others of express contrary Judgment in the places before quoted, and agree,
that this was in the Apost^^ days, and their own way in which they Ordain
Elders in the Churches.

Secondly, he says, That this was not a Pri^^ledge belonging to them of Right,
but of Conve^ency, for which we have the Bishops own word ^ly, not the least
proof offered; against which (...) stream of other Learned and good men's
judgme^^ before cited generally run. And this also the ^shop himself, in the
same place, in the very n^ words ingeniously adds, and affirms, That (...)
choice of the People was derived from the Rule^ Christian Equity and Society;
and he there furt^^^ sub joins this excellent effect it had. That he^ it came
to pass, that the People did quietly rece^ willingly maintain, diligently hear,
and hear^ love their Pastors.

From whence we may conclude. That su^ such, whom the Bishop there says, took
away (...) Power from the Churches, were to be blamed, (...) rashness at least:
And that there is a loud call for (...) restoring of this Convenience (if it be
no mo^^ to the Churches, since it was derived from such ^cellent Rules, and
has such desirable effects. N^ such to be found following any other way,
brou^^ in, in the room thereof. And that it may of ^^vine Right, rather than of
Convenience, brou^^ in by man's Wisdom; for it is rare to find a C^^stitution of
man's derived from such Principles, (...) to have such Fruits, which do exceed
for good^ the Constitutions of Christ himself.

Again, Thirdly, One more such pretense we (...) in Mr. Stillingfleet, in his
aforesaid Book, p. 2^ Who, (though he had before in the place herein ^oted,
allowed that the People did choose; yet ^e he) says, It seems strangely
improbable, that the ^ostles should put the choice at that time into the ^ads
of the People, and he makes this the only ^und of his conjecture. That there
were none ^n that were fitted for the work, but whom the ^^ostles did lay their
hands upon; by which, says (...) the Holy Ghost fell upon them, whereby they
^^re fitted and qualified for the work: the people ^n (says he) could no ways
choose men for their ^ilities, when their abilities were consequent to ^^eir
Ordination. These are his own words, as to ^^s matter. But his ground seems
very feeble, for ^e concluding of such an improbability: for we ^ust either
take it for granted, or he must prove: ^rst, that the Holy Ghost fell on none
but such on ^nom the Apostles laid hands: Secondly, That the ^oly Ghost fell on
no men till the Apostles had ^d hands upon them for the Ministry: Thirdly, that
when ever the Apostles laid hands on any, they ^ere by that imposition of Hands
Ordained Mini^^ers. If this be not granted or proved, then there ^^ght be many
in every Church qualified with gifts (...) the Holy Ghost, and fitted for the
work; some ^^thout laying on of hands, some by laying on of ^ands of the
Apostles, and yet not Ministers there^^. Then these were fitted for the work,
and these ^ight be chosen by the Church before Ordination. ^ut so it was; it is
evident that the Holy Ghost fell upon many without imposition of hands; that he
^ll upon some by imposition of hands before they ^ere made Ministers: That all
were not made Mi^^sters on whom the Apostles laid hands, and who ^^ceived the
Spirit. So that Multitudes were fitted and qualified for the people to choose
in every pla^^ almost. See Acts 10. There were many heari^ Peter Preach, and
while he was yet speaking, (...) Holy Ghost fell on them all, and they spoke w^
Tongues; here is no imposition of hands, nor s^ting apart for the Ministry, for
they were not ba^tized, ver. 47. yet were these Persons qualifi^^ for the
People to have chosen any man among them. Again, Acts 8.14, 15, 16, 17. The
were many Men and Women at Samaria that belie^ed, and the Apostles, at
Jerusalem, hearing of (...) sent unto them Peter and John, who prayed, and la^
their hands on them, and the received the H^ Ghost. Yet sure Mr. Stillingfleet
will not sa^ these were made Ministers by this; however the were qualified
thereby to have been chosen by t^ People.

Again, Acts 19. Paul found certain Disciples (...) Ephesus, twelve in Number,
of Men; he la^ on them, and they received they Holy Ghost, a^ Prophesied. And
there is no color to say that the^ were Ordained Ministers thereby: So that,
the^ were more Persons qualified for the work to be ch^sen by the people before
Ordination.

Yea, what says Mr. Stillingfleet to that place (...) Acts 6. where the
Apostles direct the Multitu^^ to choose out from amongst themselves seven M^ of
honest report, and full of the Holy Ghost a^ Wisdom, whom the Apostles might
appoint, and^ Now, had Mr. Stillingfleets conceit been true, th^^ the
qualification was consequent of Ordination, (...) had been in vain to have
given such a direction to the people. But we see the people did find out among
themselves seven such Men every way fitted to (...) Ordained Ministers.

There were many of the Brethren in that single ^^ngregation at Corinth
abundantly qualified for (...) work, as does clearly appear in those Epistles,
(...) the rest of the Brethren were to covet such gifts (...) qualifications,
though they might never be ^^de Ministers; and so in several other Churches.
(...) did not the Apostle to Timothy and Titus, set ^wn what should be the
qualifications of such who ^^uld be made Bishops and Deacons, with which ^^y
must be furnished before they were to be Or^^^ned. Sure then it cannot be
imagined, that ^^e were such to be chosen until they were Or^^^ned. By this
time Mr. Stillingfleets strange ^^probability may be removed, and if this be
all (...) ground he has for it is improbability, he may ^^clude, with others,
That the Apostles did put (...) Electing power into the hands of the People
(...) their days, and that Abilities were Antecedential, (...) not
Consequential of Ordination.

^t is wonderful that such a famous and Learned ^^n, as Mr. Stillingfleet is,
should (through ^^l against the Peoples right of Election) be so ^^ch mistaken.

^ndeed it is lamentable to see, how Protestants ^eneral, when they write
against the Papists, do (...) assert the peoples power of chosing their
Mi^^^^ers by Divine right, as in many of the instances ^ore. Yet at home
amongst their brethren, they ^^ffle and are loath to confess the truth of it;
they not practice it, they will not suffer other to do it, (...) are persuaded
it ought to be so: yea many ^^^tend against it, and make Laws for another
^^nner of making Ministers. In so doing they do (...) a little advantage the
Popish interest.

We have here purposely digressed, a little (...) show what poor devices there
are to deceive (...) people, that they may not think it their duty* privilege
to choose their own Ministers, and the such men might order this matter at
their pleasur^

And now for answer to the objection it self, the needs no more to be said but
this; That the Div^ right of the people in these Churches about t^ matter, is
already proved by what has been sa^ Unless better evidences can be showed to
the c^trary, than any of the aforementioned suggestio^ and conceits or other
thing we have seen or heard.

Or if it shall be objected further, that although was so in the infancy of the
Church (as some s^ yet it may not be so now, and Decrees of Counc^ or of the
Church (as some term it) and Laws of M^gistrates have taken it away.

Answ. 1. The Churches were better able to ^^termine of the mind of Christ
then, than now, the were fewer occasions to turn her aside in those da^ in such
matters; B. Jewel on Hag. 1. Hodiae venenum, infunditur in Eccles.
and we have no new revelati^ of the truth in this thing, more than they then
h^ They had more abundant of the spirit of God amongst them, than now amongst
us: they had (...) Apostles then living amongst them, and after the for some
time, such as saw the Apostles and t^ practices in these things, and conversed
with the about such matters. And sure while these lig^ were in the Church, she
was most like to walk the right rule, and so after ages judged. The tr^ is, had
those men that then made up the Chu^ been still living, they might have been
said to h^ been in their infancy in those days, and now in (...) age; but they
being dead and new Church-ma^ still arising, it may be said she is still in her
infan^ And verily much more childish she is, than she was ^n those days. But
the Church in Name, the Older she grew, the more she doted, and when all ^hese
ancient lights went out, the more she stum^led; like Israel of old when Moses
had been gone out 40 days, they made them a Calf, Josh. 24 3. Judges 2.7.8.
etc.
and Aaron ^he High Priest was also in the folly: and the Elder that Church
grew (when their Fathers, who had ^een Gods wonders, were dead) the more blind
and ^dolatrous they waxed. Therefore is it much safer ^o follow the footsteps
of the Church in her infancy, ^han her Rules in her age: so far as is possible.

But 2dly. What warrant have we from Gods word to conclude, that the Church
must walk by ^ne Rule in her infancy, (or more properly, in the ^rimitive
Gospel days) and by another in her el^er age? one under Heathen Magistrates,
another under Christian? not the least word for it in Scripture that we can
find; had it been necessary, or the ^ind of Christ, it should have been so, no
doubt ^ur Lord would have let us known his pleasure in (...), and have left
some Rules for it. And who will ^ead for the taking away such things from the
^hurches by humane Councels and Laws, which christ, as King and Lawgiver to his
Church has ^iven unto them.

That in the ordinary meetings of these Churches, ^e matter of their worship
and work, was only ^ading the Scriptures, expounding them, or ^eaching,
exhorting, comforting one another, ^ging Psalms, sometimes made by the holy
bre^ren, breaking bread (or participation of the Lords ^pper) prayer (as he who
prayed was able,) giv^g to the poor, etc. as appears by these Scriptures, Act.
1.14.15. chapter 2.41.42. Act. 12.5.12. 1 Cor. 11.20.23, etc, chapter 12. chapter 14. Act.
20.7. 1 These. 5.11.14. Heb. 10.24.25. So it was after the Apostles days,
Eusebius. Hist. lib. 7. c. 17. p. 28.29. Tertul. in his Apol. c. 39. p. 137. 139.
141, Engl. Transl. says, that here we pray to God, etc. read the holy
Scriptures according to the Condition of the times, what serves to the
admonishing and confirming of the faithful; we cease not says he, to confirm
or discipline by the strength of precept, we continually repeat here, we make
exhortations and threatings, they feast says he, and before they sit down,
they pray; after they sing Psalms or Hymns, every one composeth after the
capacity of his mind, and as it began with prayer, so it ended etc. Plinius
secundus, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 3. p. 53. lib. 10 cap. 3. p. 184. says something of
it. And Justinus says, that here the writings of the Prophets and Apostles
were read, then preaching to stir up the people to imitate the things read,
then all stood up in prayer; then the Lord Supper, (prayer preceding;) then
every one gave to the poor as he would, for this he is quoted by the Magdeburg
Divines, Cent. 2. c. 6. col. 114. 115. And they also say that Nicephorus and
Clement write, that they ha^ here Psalms composed by the faithful, Cent. 2. c.
6 Col. 115.116. And for the manner, they further in the same, 114. col. say,
that here they read the Scriptures, as they could, and he that was chief o^ did
preside, prayed and gave thanks as he was abl^ and so other things as above.
And to this Tert^ in his said Apol. cap. 30. p. 119. says, that the prayers no
man did prescribe, or declare to the what to say, because (says he) it is our
heart. W^ prayed a Prayer conceived and produced, etc, a^ it was decreed at the
Council of Carthage again reading of any thing but the Canonical Scripture, in
these Churches, Magdeburg. Cent. 4. c. 6. Col. 412. No other service or
prescribed forms, or any reading of prayers, etc. once mentioned to be used in
those days. It Is true in process of time, step by step, forms of prayer and
prescribed rules of worship crept in; or were thrust in upon the Churches, upon
pretense at first, that by this, they might prevent the spreading of the Arian
Heresy, which said they, men might vent in prayer if they had liberty to have
prayed what they had pleased: therefore they agreed, that Ministers should make
their own form, and pray no other: then after that, these forms should not be
used till he had conferred with some of the able brethren of the Church whereof
he was Minister: then, the next step was that this prayer must be approved of
by a Council e're they might use them: again, that one and the same form should
be used in several Churches, as it is at this day, all which, such as are
acquainted with History, cannot deny. But from this we conclude, it was not so
from the beginning: and it is evident also that the power of managing of the
worship of Gods appointment (according as we see it was in those days)
belonged to the particular Congregations and each did (as to the circumstances
of these) as they judged most convenient, and tend most to edification, nor did
any other in those days ^ntermedle with these matters but in their own
Churches, nor did these Churches themselves ever ^dd any thing to their
worship, or prescribe any ^orms of prayer, or rules of worship to which they
^ecessarily bound themselves, till this policy ente^ed about the Arians, which
never had any success ^o the end pretended. We see that they prayed before, as
they were able, and no man prescribed words, they read according to the
condition of the times. The Pastor or Bishop exhorted to follow such things as
were read, and he gave thanks as he was able: they sang Hymns composed by
Godly brethren, etc. nothing imposed upon them, nor did any then pretend
authority over them to give rules to the Churches in those things.

That in those ordinary meetings of these Churches, the private brethren (who
were able) did (without any allowance of any Church but the Congregation,
whereof they were members) openly preach, exhort, admonish, and comfort one
another mutually, see Romans 15.14. 1 Cor. 12. chapter 14. yea they might Covet gifts
to this end, as the Apostle there directs the Corinthians: and it is said of
them, 2 Cor. 8.7. That they abounded in utterance, and how could this be known
or used if not in their Assemblies, Jerome. upon 3d. Titus.
see also Colos. 3, 16. 1 These. 5.11. Heb. 3.12.13. cap 10.24. 1 Pet. 4.10.11.
If it be said that these had extraordinary gifts, their practice therefore, is
no rule. Answ. The Officers of Churches themselves in these days, have no such
extraordinary gifts; and if the brethren now, have such ordinary gifts as the
Officers have, as to this work (both being from God) ought not these brethren
then, by the same rule to employ their tallen^ also in an orderly manner? (as
the Apostles directed the use of extraordinary gifts amongst the Corinthians)
for the Churches good; as believers o^ old did use their extraordinary gifts
for the Churches good in those days; especially these gifts which are given
chiefly for this end: that believers should employ them for the edifying of
their brethren; when as tongues were not given for that end, but for a sig^ to
the unbelievers, 1 Cor. 14.22. This the brethren did ordinarily in the
Primitive Churches, as the Magdeburgh Divines allege out of Ambrose, that in
the time of the Apostles, in the first Church, it was granted to all men to
preach and explain the Scriptures, Cent. 4. c. 6 col. 491. and Fulk against the
Rhem. upon Romans 10. allow this right, and urges this place of Ambrose and
Ruffinus to prove it. And in the Churches afterward, Reynold in his conference
with Heart c. 3. p. 103, 104, says that all the faithful owe the duty of
strengthening their brethren each to other according to the measure of Grace
given to them.
the brethren did the like Justine writes, that in his time, the gift of
Prophesying did flourish in the Church, Eusebius. l. 4. cap. 18. p. 68. Irenaeus
affirms that in his time every one receiving grace of Christ, after the
quantity of his tallent bent himself to benefit the other brethren in the name
of Christ. Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 7. p. 82. This practice is also affirmed to be
lawful and usual in those days, in their open Assemblies: yea when Bishops
themselves were present in the Congregation, as the Bishops of Caesaria and
Jerusalem maintains and gives diverse instances in those days against one, who
found fault only because they preached when Bishops were present; not for their
preaching only or otherwise, yet this also they justify, as that which was
lawful and in common use at that day: See Doctor Tailor Prophecy, p. 109.
yea and that which the Bishops themselves did then desire the brethren to do.
See it at large, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 19. p. 106.

Mr. Harding against Bishop Jewel (though Papist) yet he says that Prophesying
is expounding of Scripture and interpreting; and he there grants that in case
God shall please when we come together in the Church for Comfort and Edifying,
to give into our Hearts, and put into our Mouths what we should Pray and
Preach, and how we should handle the Scripture, then we might do it; and he
there further says and allows, that in the Apostles days they came into the
Church to the intent that they might profitably Exercise the gifts God gave;
and by the same (especially by the gift of Prophesying) edify one another, and
Teach one another. See this in Bishop Jewels reply to Harding p. 192, 193. And
the Bishop himself agrees, that the brethren as well as Officers may have gifts
of the Spirit; these are his words in p. 527. 532. That the Spirit of God is
bound neither to sharpness of Wit, nor abundance of Learning; oft-times,
(says he,) the unlearned sees that thing that the learned cannot see, See
Raynolds in his Conference with Heart. c. 2. p. 63
and he there quotes Ephiphanus l. 2. for these words, only to the Children of
the Holy Ghost all the Scriptures are plain and clear.

Bishop Nicholson of Gloucester in his aforesaid Book p. 32. from Romans 12.7, 8.
says, that those gifts are given to other Christians as well as to Officers,
and that they ought to use these tallents, as well as Officers; and there he
proves it by other places of Scripture also. So that it is plain, that the
brethren may have the Spirit of God and such gifts of Prophesying as Officers
have; then surely it is given to them for use.

Mr. Stillingfleet in his Book before mentioned, p. 249. says, first that it
was so in the Church-meetings of the Jews, these are his words; that any one
amongst the Jews, who enjoyed any repute for Religion or knowledge of the Law,
was allowed a free liberty of speaking for the instruction of the People, as we
see (says he) in Christ and his Apostles, Act. 13.15. though they were no
Officers. And secondly, he confesses at large, that it was so in the Churches
in the primitive times, that such did Preach, etc.

The Truth is, there is not one president of any credit for some hundred of
years, of any complaint made against this practice or use, as unlawful,
irregular or as an usurpation of, or intrusion upon the Ministers office, nor
was there any decree in the Church of God in those days for the prohibiting of
it. And it is very clear, by all the places before, that every particular
Congregation did order every thing about this matter themselves and none else;
since the Apostles days, did intermedle with the ordering thereof.

Now, how the prohibiting of the brethrens improving their Tallents in this
case and robbing of the Churches of that profit Christ intended them, by
bestowing such gifts, will be answered at the last day can hardly be resolved
to the Comfort of such who shall be active in it.

That these Churches or Congregations usually met together for the performance
of these and other things, when, and where they pleased, Mr. Vines of the
Sacrament, p. 194. agrees that these Churches have power so to do.
and as often as they agreed so to do without any prescribed Rules in the
Apostles times, for either time or place (except on the Lords day) and that
these Churches practiced according to this liberty, for some ages: we think
none can deny, since the Scriptures every where clear it, where the meeting of
Christian Churches is spoken of: sometimes in Schools, sometimes in Houses,
etc. as the Churches pleased, and was most convenient for them; and one Church
was no rule in this, to another; nor were any places or times set down, as
Rules for more than one Congregation to walk by; unless, they did voluntarily
approve of what another did, and so do the same. Thus it was after the Apostles
days as the Magdeburgh Divines say, Cent. 1. l. 2. Cap. 6. Raynolds Conference
with Heart, c 8. p. 491. Raynolds says Christians may sing the song of the Lord
in all places, now, no ground unholy, every house Sion, and every faithful
Company, yea every faithful body a temple to serve God in.
Col. 492, 493. That no certain places or hours were prescribed, or enjoined in
the Churches; but each Church did herein as was most convenient. It Is true, we
find, that after some time, They, for convenience of meeting, built some
places, used others formerly built for the commemorations of some Persons or
things, as Ecclesiastical History testifies. And when the Arian Bishops had
prevailed with the Emperor to shut up those places from other Christians; these
met in private places, and built them new ones, and there met by themselves,
yet were not these blamed in those days for these meetings, though not in their
public places; nor any punishment awarded for them: No, not by these cruel
Arian Emperors. In those days nothing but the Churches meeting in any place did
consecrate that place, and Worship was equally accepted in a House as in a
public Temple; in one place, as in another; at one time of the Day, as another.

That in these Congregations Societies or particular Churches, and not
elsewhere, for some ages together from the Apostles downward, Offenders,
scandalous sinners, wicked persons, etc. being members of the Congregations,
were admonished Publicly, and in case of obstinacy or notorious fact, Mr.
Vines upon the Sacrment, p. 166, ^95. say, That it was the power of a Church of
Christian, as such, to prevent scandals.
cast out of the Church, by the consent of the whole Congregation, whereof he
was a member; that is, The whole Society, Ministers and brethren met together
for that work. And by them again to be received in again upon repentance. And
that the judgment of all, in this Case, lay wholly and only in this Church as
such, and all this by Divine Right. The Church of Corinth (which was but one
Congregation, who met in one place toge^^er to partake of Ordinances, as before
is proved) ^ad this power, 1 Cor. 5. where the Apostle blames ^he whole Church
for not casting out the wicked ^erson, ver. 2. charging them to meet, and do
it, (...) the name (or power) of our Lord Jesus, ver. 4, 5. and gave them to
know, or put them in mind, that it was their power and duty to do it, ver. ^
2. do not ye judge them that are within? says ^e, is it not your duty, and
power to judge them that are within your Church? is it not your practice (...)
to do? That this authority of theirs in this ^atter carries the force of his
argument, is plain, ^^om his conclusion, ver. 13. Therefore put away, etc. he
would not have made their bare judgment, that such a power resided amongst
them, or that ^hey practiced such a thing, his premises for such a ^ositive
conclusion, had not the right of judging and casting out been in them,
according to Christ's ^hind, in that of Matthew. 18. Tell the Church, etc. Bishop
Jewel was of the same mind from this Text, because such a Church only (who can
easily meet (...) one place as a Church; not the general Church in ^ne sense or
another, is capable to hear what is told them, etc. See his words before set
down at large. and the same Apostle writes to this Church again, ^s a Church to
receive the same person in again, he ^aving manifested great repentance, And to
this he ^erswades them by several arguments.

First, That the former Censure of many was suf^icient unto him.

2ly. Lest he should be overwhelmed with sor^ow; and

Thirdly, Because of Satan's device and design, which was to destroy by that
which was appointed ^f God to heal. Therefore the Apostle beseeches them to
receive him in again, 2 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8, 1^ which argues strongly, that their
power lay in thi^ also, as in casting him out. So he wrote to the Gal^thians to
cut off such who troubled them with fals^ doctrine, And we find the seven
Churches in As^^ acting thus, and not one blamed for the neglect (...) another
in this matter, nor one commended for the good in another, but each Church for
it self. Perg^mus blamed for having such amongst them that he^ the doctrine of
Balaam. Thyatira for suffering the woman Jezebel to teach and seduce, etc. The
Church of Ephesus commended, for trying the false Ap^stles, Magdib. Cent 1. l.
2. cap 7. Col. 522.
Rev. 2.2.14, 15, 20. which clearly shewe^ that these Churches had no
dependency one of another; but each had power both to try false teacher and to
have cast them out, not to have suffered the^ amongst them; and the not doing
it, or the d^ing of it, accordingly is taken notice of by the Lord Jesus
Christ, as a neglect, or a work of ea^^ Church, as particularly, and alone
concerned, and (...) the whole body of each Church, as is evident (...) those
places, and these words there used in the close of what was written to each
Church. He^ what the Spirit says to the Churches; not to the Officers, or
particular Persons offending, or Bishop but the whole, and they blamed for
suffering su^^ Persons amongst them. That those Churches we^ but particular
Societies, or single Congregation^ and the things spoken are spoken to the
whole bod^ of each Church. Ambrosius, Ausbertius, Perkin^ and Brightman affirm.
And also Dr. Tulke, Tydal, and the Old Translators, call them seven
Co^gregations. Ephesus one, and that said to be b^ one Flock, Acts 20. For at
this time were m^titudes of Jews and Heathens in this City. Ye^ ^en Polycarp
their Bishop was called out to suffer ^^re were but few Christians in that
City, as Eu^ius History tells us. The Presbyterian Divines ^ree this. See
Smect. p. 40, 41, 43.

Tertul. also tells us, That in these Congregati^s, these things were done. In
these Assemblies ^^ith he) we make Exhortations and Threatenings, (...) Divine
Censures, that banisheth Sinners and ex^deth them from our Communion: We Judge
^^m (says he) with very great Circumspection, ^cause we know that God is in
the midst of us, ^d knows what we do; Apol. Cap. 39. p. 137. (...) this the
Magdeburg. Century Writers fully ^ree. And also sets forth the manner how the
Con^egations did it, Cent. 1. Lib. 1. Cap. 4. col. 158. ^b. 2. Cap. 4. Col.
358, 359. Cap. 6. Col. 498. ^^d again, they prove this from Augustine, Cent. ^
Cap. 4. Col. 380, 381, 382, 383, 384. And ^ain, they say, from Ambrose ad
Valentinianum ^peratorem. That those Churches had this Pow^ and none else; and
this ought to be done openly the Congregation, the People being present, Cent.
^ cap. 7. col. 500, 501. And that, in the Epistle the Roman Presbyters to
Cyprian, it is affirmed, at the Presbyters, Deacons, and Lay People ^re wont to
be together in Council, and to speak ^d confer their own sense and mind in
these things those days, Cent. 3. cap. 7. col. 176.152, 153. ^^d that Cyprian
himself says, That as the Peo^e and whole Church has Power to choose their
^^n Ministers: So if the Bishops did fall into He^ie, they were deposed by the
Clergy and Peo^e, and they appoint another. And that it was ^t Lawful for the
Bishop to do any thing herein ^thout the Peoples Councels, Cent. 3. cap. 7.
col. 173, 174, 175, 176. And again, they say that Origin did rebuke the Pride
of some Priests* those days, who did despise the Counsels of t^ Inferior
Priests and Laymen, Cent. 3. cap. 7. c^ 151, 152, 153. Many more Testimonies
might (...) offered for the proof hereof in those days, no^ denying it, or
practicing otherwise for many Ag^ And Mr. Stillingfleet, Mr. Vines upon the
Sacrament P. 129, 173 194, 195, 196. agrees all this f^lly. And also says,
That God gave this great Charter to the Church; not the Emperor, and that God
gave it to them, as a Church.
in the same Irenicum, p. 4^ says, as to a Power arising from mutual compa^
and consent of Parties, he acknowledges a Pow^ to bind all included under that
Compact. Not (...) virtue of any supreme binding Power in them; b^ from the
free consent of the Parties submitting, sai^ he; which he says there, is most
agreeable to the Nature of Church Power, being not Coersive, b^ Directive; and
then he avers, That such was t^ Confederate Discipline of the Primitive Church,
before they had any Christian Magistrate. From which words of his may be
gathered; That there was (...) Agreement amongst Christians of each Society
(...) Congregation, to submit to the Laws of Christ; f^^ he says, none can be
bound but those that consen^ (and it canno tbe supposed that such a
confederatio^ or Agreement can be well made amongst more tha^ can conveniently
meet in one place, as a Church that all are bound who do thus Confederate, or
joy themselves together in a Society: and that this Society and Church by
virtue of this Confederatio^ as a Church, has Power in this case to deal wi^^
as many as do come amongst them, and consen^ Especially, since he has in the
same Book, p. 13^ agreed, that a real confederation ought to be b^tween those
who join themselvas together in Go^pel-Ordinances in Order to their being a
Church and says, that none will deny this, who know what it is that makes a
Society to be so, which is ^^ch a real confederation with one another. And
^^terwards, p. 148, 149. to the matters in hand; more ^xpresly he says these
things. That the Jews, being ^^e Church of God, secluded Men from their
So^eties, which, says he, may be looked upon not (...) a civil, but a Sacred
Action, and that they had ^^is Power of Excommunication: and for the Chri^^ian
Church, he says, the practice of Discipline upon Offenders was never
questioned, etc. That ^ence, says he, we gather in, that it has been the
^ractice of Societies constituted for the Worship ^f God, to call Offenders to
an account for their Of^ences, and if upon Examination they are found ^uilty,
to exclude them their Societies: and that it (...) the dictate, of the Law of
Nature, That every Offender against the Laws of a Society; must give ^n
account of his actions to the Rulers of the So^iety, and submit to the censures
inflicted on him. from all which sayings of his, this will follow: That every
particular Church or Society, joining together by a Confederation amongst
themselves, ^ave this Power within themselves, to call Offenders ^o an account,
and to seclude them their Society, if ^here be just cause found. Yet take one
place more ^f him, and then we shall leave this as undeniable; it is in p. 228,
229. where he says, It must in reason be supposed, that all Matters of the
Nature of ^candal to the Church must be decided there, Mat. ^8. And there he
Argues, the Lawfulness of Ex^ommunication in Christian Churches; and adds ^his:
For if every Person (says he) might with^raw from the Society of such a one,
as continued ^efractory in his Offense, then much more may a whole Society, and
the Officers of it, declare such a one to be avoided both in Religious and
Fami^ civil Society; which (says he) is the formal ^ture of Excommunication.
Thus Mr. Stilling^ Lodges this Power in every Society or Chu^ joined together
by mutual consent, over every (...) that consented; by the unquestioned
practice^ the Churches, Nature of Societies, and the v^ Law of Nature.

To these Churches, for the most part, the E^stles were directed, which the
Apostles wrote, es^^cially when they wrote to any as a Church; as (...) the
Corinthians, Thessalonians, etc. And w^^ they wrote to more than one
Congregation, tho^ in the same Country, they directed them to (...) Churches,
in the Plural Number; as the Epistl^ the Galatians: So the Epistle to the
Churche^ Asia; otherwise they wrote in general to all (...) Saints, 2 Cor.
8.19, 23. 1 Cor. 16.3 Act. 14.26.27. Act. 15.30. Colos. 4.16, 17. 1 These. 5.27.
or all in such a Country, and not to a^ Church as such. And to these Churches,
that (...) The whole Body of each of them, Officers and P^ple, all
Church Affairs were Directed. The Churches, as such, sent Messengers, etc.
app^ved of such (to be sent to them) by their Lette^ and as a Church Received
Letters, (...) assembled together to read them, to agree (...) things that
concerned the Church; as the Chu^ in Antioch, Jerusalem, and others, So after
(...) Apostles days. Ignatius, Polycarpus, and others, w^ wrote Epistles to
Churches, as such, directed the to such particular Churches, and to the whole
^dy of them: and makes mention of their Minist^ in the Body of their Epistles,
as most of the Ap^stles did in theirs: See the Epistles of Polycarp^^ and
Ignatius, at large. Yea, the Emperors themselves, when they had any thing to
write to a^ Church, as such, about any thing that did conce^^ them as a Church;
as in the Matters of election of ^^nisters or restoring them again after
banishment. ^^ey wrote to the whole people of the Church, as ^^seb. and Socrat
testify. See the Epist. record^. Eusebius. of the life of Constantine, lib. 3.
cap. ^. p. 52. 53, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 2. p. 252. 253. p. 18. p. 268. 269.

So that by this we have herein before set forth; though but a part of what is
Extant to the same ^rpose) it may be judged somewhat clear, that ^^rticular
Churches have this power by Divine ^^ght, unless it can be proved by better
evidences, that it is placed by Divine authority elsewhere, or ^at this power
is given to none at all: which we ^^nk none will suppose. If therefore any have
^rested this power from these Churches, and invest^ any other there with, and
continue the same by ^^ce of Humane Laws, and so hold the People in ^bjection
thereunto; It will be necessary good ^arrant of Scripture be showed for it: or
else it ^ay be said of such as once it was said of the Scribes ^d Pharisees.
Math. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. It is ^ritten ye shall do so and so. But you say no,
it ^all be thus and thus, as we may there see at large; ^d (as Christ there
concludes against them) he ^d, In vain do ye worship, teaching for Doctrines ^e
Commandments of men. Or if men should be (...) Mr. Stillingfleets mind in the
general, That there ^no form of government of Divine right. Or of ^e Bishop
of Gloucester his mind in this particular, that the Peoples electing power was
not a Divine ^^ght. Yet let these judge of it so far as the same ^ersons
agree the Contrary in the same Book. And ^st Mr. Stillingfleet in p. 199.
averrs that all essen^lls of Church Government are contained in Scripture
clearly. That essentials are such things the are necessary to the preservation
of such a Socie^ as the Church. From which words of his, may (...) gathered;
That he grants here in a few word what he seems to bend his whole discourse
again^ For, whatsoever is clearly contained in Scriptu^ is of Divine authority,
all that is necessary for t^ preservation of a Church-Society, is therein
c^tained, therefore Church Government; yea (...) very form of it, being
necessary to Church p^servation (or else there needs no talk about it, (...)
not necessary) and contained in the whole of it (...) Scripture, is certain and
of Divine right. And y^ if men will not believe, that this does follow, the he
intends thereby, the form should be include but that he would distinguish
here; Then let the persons allow, but that which Mr. Stillingfl^^^ grants
afterward in the same book, p. 417. whi^ is this. That that form of
Church-Governme^ which comes nearest to Apostolical practice is t^ best, and
tends most to the advantage of the pea^ and unity of the Church of God. That
this for^ is to be gathered from Scripture, and Antiquit^ Whence we infer,
if then that be best and m^^ for the Churches peace and unity, which com^
nearest the Apostolic practice, etc. And this G^vernment and order, we have
before endeavour^ to evince, be sufficiently proved to be nearest t^
Apostolical practice, and gathered to be so from Scripture and Antiquity.
Then, at least, it is t^ best form of Government in the Church, and m^ for the
Churches unity and peace. And so for t^ Bishops mind about Election of
Ministers. I^ men (who will be of this Judgment against the Divine right of the
people in this matter) also be swa^^ed by him to believe what he says further
about it; ^his words were before recited. That this was derived upon the people
from rules of Christian equity and society, and had admirable effects, as we
have fully set down under that particular head of the Churches power in
choosing their own Ministers, look over his Words in p. 27. of his Apol. whence
in brief may be observed; That, except any other way of choosing them than by
these Congregations (as before) be derived from the same rules and have the
same good effects; or it cannot be proved that those rules and effects are
equally good with these, at least; Then it follows, that that way of making
Ministers by the particular Churches Election, is the best, and most for the
Churches, and also for the Ministers advantage; The Excellency of those Rules,
and the Desireableness of those Ends, still remaining; and the contrary effects
from a contrary practice being apparent, and the rules whence this latter way
came in, can hardly be made out to be of equal worth with the rules from
whence the former was derived.

Well then, if these premises be true and cannot be disproved by better
evidences and authorities: We shall offer to consideration these things.

First, Why should any judge evil of those who own, and practice according to
this? Or how in^eed, can any (convinced of these things) join themselves to, or
have to do with any Church or Congregation denying these things, or opposing
them, or giving up this power to others, and cast^ng off their duty up on
others, and whose Ministers ^re made after another manner and imposed upon
them? Or how can any such convinced Ones have ^o do in Congregations and
Ordinances otherwise Ordered and Acting then according to this rule, in faith
to expect Gods presence and blessing in it? how can any knowing these things
(without renouncing Christ as Lord and Lawgiver in his church) own and
subscribe to the exercise of this power by others, then these Churches? much
more, how can any so convinced, enforce others to give subjection to any
Usurping this power without sin against Christ. Whatsoever is not of Faith is
sin; so that if we are found in the practice of any thing in these matters not
commanded at all, or of any thing commanded, in other manner then is prescribed
by the Law of Christ; we cannot groundedly believe for a blessing there, Mr.
Hooler Eccles. Polity, in the Preface.
having no promise for it: Nay it is sin if we do but doubt it, Romans 14.22.23.
Therefore every one ought to be at liberty till he be convinced and fully
persuaded in his own mind, er'e he meddle with these things.

Secondly, Surely this then justifies and commends such, who being fully
persuaded of the truth of the premises, do endeavor to regulate their
practices in all Church affairs by these rules: for the Scripture says, as we
have received how ought to walk, and to please God, so should we abound etc. 1
These. 4.1. and as Tymothy was charged, to continue in the things he had
learned, and had been assured of, knowing of whom he had learned them, and that
from a Child he had known the Holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.14, 15. So are Saints
in general commanded to stand fast and hold the Traditions which they have been
taught by word or Epistle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. especially when they have by reading
and searching the Scriptures like the Noble Beraeans, Act. 17. proved these
things to be so, and find that the primitive Gospel Churches practiced
according to this; and so, trying all things, hold fast that which is good, and
stand fast in the liberty Christ has left them; for in so doing they are less
like to err, Mark 12.24. do ye not therefore err, not knowing the Scriptures,
etc. And if these have their foundation for their practices here, they may
boldly say with Paul, Act. 24. after the way they call Heresy, so worthy I,
etc. believing all things that are written, etc.

Bishop Jewel in his reply to Harding, p. 111. alleges these words out of
Cyprian lib. 2. Epist. 3. (speaking of Bishops) If any of my Predecessors have
not followed or kept that thing which the Lord by his Example and Commandment
has Taught us, he, for his simplicity, may be pardoned, but if we wilfully
offend, there is no pardon for us, who are already warned and instructed of the
Lord,

Again, that after God has once opened his truth to us, if then we shall
continue in error, etc. And again in p. 144. he quotes Cyprian, ad Caecil. lib.
2. Epist. 3. for these words. It behooves the Religion we profess, and our
reverence toward God and ^he very place and Office of our Priesthood, to keep
^he Truths of the Lords tradition, and by the Lords ^dvertisements to correct
that thing, that by certain ^ath been amiss, that when he comes in his Glory
and Majesty, he may find us to hold what he warn^d to keep; that he taught us,
to do that he did. All which words of his presses an exact keeping to ^he
Rules left us, when we know them.

But if it shall be objected, that the people of the Churches are unlearned,
and cannot understand ^criptures, and thence it is they mistake and wrest
^criptures; that it is for learned Men, who understand Tongues, etc. to give
the meaning of Scriptures, and that others ought to submit to their judgments
herein, and to practice as the learned Fathers and Doctors of the Church have
done before us.

See Helis Sermon. of the abuse of Difficult places of of Scripture. Matthew.
1^.10.11.
For Answer hereto briefly. First, The Apostle by the term [unlearned,] intends
not unskilful in Tongues, nor in humane learning, but unskilful in the
Spiritual meaning of the Holy Ghost in the Scripture. We know the Gospel is hid
to some, to them that are lost, etc. though otherwise never so learned wise or
great; and to others it is given to know.

Secondly, That in this sense, the Scripture is not understood by the help of
the greatest Art and Skill of Tongues, nor the largest humane Wisdom of any
(this can only reach the letter) but by the help of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor.
2.14. The things of God are foolishness to the Natural man, nor can he know
them, because they are spiritually understood o^ discerned. Now surely, none
will deny but that (...) man may be very learned and wise in humane things, See
the Conference between Raynolds and Heart, c. 2. p. 58. cap. 6. p. 2^7.
and have great skill in Tongues, and ye^ be but a natural man still, that is,
not having the Spirit of God, by whom spiritual things are opene^ to us where
is the Wise? where is the Scribe? where is the Disputer of this world? and God
chose the foolish things of this world to confound the wise etc. that no flesh
should Glory in his presence, Matthew. 12.7. c. 13.10, 11.12, Luke 19.41 42. Joh.
3.10. Act. 13.17, 27. Act. 26.9.
a^ is abundantly clear in 1 Cor. 1.18, 19, 20.27, 28 29. And this was apparent
amongst the Jew^ their most learned men (Scribes and Pharisees chief Priest,
etc. with all their learning and pretense to greater knowledge than the rest of
the Jews, could not find out the meaning of the Prophets concerning Christ, but
Crucified Him; and Christ said of them, that they were the blind leading the
blind, and that they were therefore blind because they thought they did see
above others, although these were as confident, that they were the only knowing
men; as the learned Doctors, and Rulers of Churches of latter ages, have been
of themselves. And the contrary on the other hand, ^o. 9.39. Bish. Jewel's
Reply to Harding, p. 533. 526 Luke 24.44 45. John 8.12, 31. Joh. 6.14. Ephesians.
1.17, 13. 1^ Epist. Joh. 2.27.
we see men of no knowledge in Tongues, etc. nor much worldly Wisdom when
Christ by his Spirit had opened their understanding, they then understood the
Scriptures.

And for this end amongst others was the Holy Ghost promised to the followers
of Christ, he himself said, that such as believed should not sit in darkness,
but have the light of life; that his Spirit should take of his, and show it to
them. And the Apostle says, the anointing which they should receive should
teach them, etc.

Thirdly, That this Spirit of God is neither promised nor given to the learned
Doctors, able Schoolmen, or Governors of Churches only; but is promised to all
believers in general, and so bestowed upon all Christ's members in common,
though in different Measures, as the Spirit pleases; and many times more
abundantly upon such, who had least of outward greatness, of skill in the
tongues, or humane Wisdom, that God might be glorified the more, and that no
flesh might glory, as in 1 Cor. 1. chapter 2. before mentioned does clear,
therefore such may come to the knowledge of Christ's mind in the Scriptures
hereby, as well as learned men.

Each part of which answer Bishop Jewel in his reply to Harding, Bishop
Carleton in his little Book before quoted, and others fully maintain: We shall
transcribe some few things, first as to this, It is not learning but the Spirit
of God that makes men able to understand Scriptures. Bishop Jewel p. 216. he
says out of Tertul. Contra Hermogenem, that knowledge of Philosophy and
affiance of learning has caused Divisions and Heresies in the Church, and
therefore he called the Philosophers the Patriarchs of Heretics; Again in p.
526, 527. out of Chrysostom he says, that to understand Gods Word, we need no
silogismes or knowledge of Logic, Husbandmen old men, etc. do understand it,
that Julian charged the Christians that their women were so learned in the
Scriptures, and again p. 532. he says, out of Epiphanius lib. 2. that only to
the children of the Holy Ghost all the Holy Scriptures are plain and clear: and
again p. 434, that it is true that flesh and blood is not able to understand
the will of God without special revelation, Christ opened the understanding of
his Disciples, that without this special help of Gods Spirit, the word of God
is unto the reader (be he never so wise or learned, says he) as the Vision of
a Sealed Book, etc. Secondly, as to this, that the Spirit of God is not given
to the Doctors, rulers of the Churches or Learned men only; but also to all the
members of Christ in common, in some measure; and that they ought to search the
Scriptures, may understand them by the help of this Spirit, as well as the
learned, who have skill in tongues, and humane learning. Cardinal Cajetan
(though a Papist) at the Council of Trent affirmed this; That a sense of
Scripture, against the stream of the Doctors is not to be rejected, if agreeing
with other Scriptures: For God, says he, has not tied the sense to the old
Doctors. Council. Trident. lib. 2. p. 158. Bishop Jewel in the same Reply to
Harding. p. 205. says, That Chrysostom did persuade his people to read the
Scripture; That they are plain and easy; that the Ignorant and Simple men, by
prayer unto God may attain unto the knowledge of them without any Master or
Teacher, by himself alone; and he there quotes Chrysostom in Math. Hom. 2. in
Ps. 43. ad Colos. Hom. 9. Contra Anomaeos. Hom. 3. in Genesis Hom. 35. and for
these words also, If thou use to pray diligently, See Raynolds his Conference
with Heart, c. 2. p. 62.
there is no cause thou should desire the teaching of thy fellow servant,
for God himself will abundantly enlighten thy mind without any interpreter; and
again, it cannot be that any man with great study, fervent desire, reading the
Scripture, should be destitute, though he want the teaching of man, yet will
God himself from above enter into our hearts, and lighten our minds and our
reason, and open things that are hid, and become our teacher of such things we
know not.

Again in p. 519. 531. 532. 534. etc. he alleges many Fathers to prove that
the people ought to be diligent in searching Scriptures both men and women;
That that is the way to keep from Heresies; That such who search cannot be
deceived. And in p. 526. 527. he says again, out of Gerson. That the weighing
and consideration of Faith pertain as well to others, as to the Prelates; yea
to the Lay People, and that better many times (says he) then to many Priests.
And that we ought rather to believe a Lay man, if he bring the authority of
Scripture then the Pope and a general Council. And again p. 532. he (speaking
of the understanding of the Scriptures) says, That in these things the Spirit
of God is bound neither to sharpness of Wit, nor to abundance of Learning;
oft-times the unlearned (says he) sees that thing that the learned cannot
see. And again after p. 534. having said before, That without the special
helps of Gods Spirit, the word of God is as a sealed Book, etc, He there adds
these words, That this revelation is not special to some but general to all
the members of Christ. And he here blames Mr. Harding, for having so low an
esteem of the Vulgar people, as the Scribes and Pharisees had of the followers
of Christ: These are accursed not knowing the law, said they, Though the
Apostles says he, calls them Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of
God. Again p, 537. That the learned Fathers have evermore thought, that in such
perilous times of dissension in Judgment, it is most behoofull for the people
to have recourse unto the Scriptures, Act. 17. And out of Chrysostom: in opere
imperfecto, Hom. 49. upon these words, ye shall see the Abominations, etc. That
Christian men who will be assured of the true Faith must resort to nothing but
Holy Scriptures, else (says he) they will be offended and perish; and not
knowing which is the true Church, and by means thereof they shall fall into
the abomination of the desolation. And out of Chrysostom. Hom. 49. That we may in
no wise believe the Churches themselves, unless they say and do such things,
as be agreeable to Scriptures, Again p. 544. See Ray^^^ds Conference with Heart.
c. 2.6^.
he says out of Theodoret de natura hominis. lib. 5. That you may commonly
see, not only the teachers of the people and Rulers of the Churches, but also
Tailors, Smiths, etc. do understand the Principles of our Religion; women who
live of their labor, Servants, Husbandmen, Ditchers, etc. can reason of the
Holy Trinity, of ^e Creation of the world, of the nature of man, a ^eat deal
more skillfully than either Plato or A^stotle was ever able to do, and that
Origin said to ^s Hearers thus, when I speak what I think meet, Origin in
Joshua Hom. 21. Bishop Hooper in his Declaration of the ten Comman. fol. 46.
Jer. 44.17, 18. Ezekiel. 20.18.
^amine and judge you whether it be well or other^ise. Upon which words the
Bishop concludes ^at in old times the Vulgar people were able, not ^ly to
understand the Scriptures, but also to judge their Preachers. And (as to our
Fathers exam^e) he says p. 542. that our Fathers examples are ^t always
sufficient Rules: for (says he) they ^e been led in Ignorance, Many Heretics
(says (...)) plead nothing but that they were born in, liv^ in that they now
practice, and received from ^eir Fathers. So much of this Bishop here.

A word out of Bishop Carleton, and we shall con^de this. He in the same Book,
(called a Directi^ to know the true Church, p. 23. 24. 36. 37. ^^. 39. 44. 46.
47. 53. See t^^ Conference between Raynolds and Heart c. 2. p. 45, 46.
) there affirms and proves (...) many Fathers, that the Scripture is the judge
of ^ntroversies; that we must not take what the ^urch teaches without
limitation: For (says (...) she has a Rule to teach by the Scriptures; and
(...) long as she teaches by this, she is to be heard. That is a manifest
sliding from the true Faith, and an ^ident sign of Pride, to reject any thing
that is writ^, or to bring in any thing which is not written: ^at we should not
regard this or that man's sayings, (...) seek all these things out of
Scriptures, Optatus l. 5. contra Parmenian Donat. Cited by Raynolds in the same
Conference, p. 402.
from ^ich we must in nothing depart. And of the Pa^sts, he says, That they
presume that they deal ^th simple men, who may not examine their Do^ines; and
therefore he advises us, lest we should (...) deceived, to look to our Rule,
which is the Scrip^re. Now, from all this we have transcribed, we may conclude
this Objection to be fully answere^ and the Matter undeniable; That other
Membe^ of the Church besides Learned Doctors, skilled (...) the Tongues, and
Governors of the Churches, man understand the Scriptures by the help of the
Spi^ of God. That they ought to read them, a^ search them for this end; That
God will give (...) them his Spirit to open their Understandings; a^ sometimes
more to those, than to the Learned D^ctors: That Learning and Worldly Wisdom
cannot unfold Scripture without the Spirit of Go^ That it is no safe way to
follow our Fathers step^ no, nor the Rules of Councels, nor Churches, a^
further than they follow the Scriptures: That it (...) safe in times of
dissension in Judgment to make (...) the Scriptures: That the Scripture is the
Judge (...) Controversies. Now, we know it is in vain f^ unlearned men to read,
and impossible to search t^ Scriptures, or try Doctrines by them, if M^ learned
in the Tongues cannot reach to understa^ them, or may not conceive of the sense
of the^ and give their Judgment of them, as their ow^ Rule for their own
Practices. And surely it is n^ ground enough for any Man to believe, that such
thing is the truth, and to expect Gods Blessing (...) the Practice of it, See
Mr. Hildershams to this, Lecture 59. on Joh. 4. Lect. 8. on Joh. 4. Mr. Gee in
his Exposition of Romans 18.
barely upon this. That Lear^ed Men, Nay, though very Godly Men, have (...)
Interpreted such a Scripture, or was of such an ^pinion about it, or that the
Learned Godly Me^ who went before us, did practice thus; unless (...) so he
himself be by their Demonstrations and R^^sons, clearly satisfied in his own
mind, that the Opinion and Practice therein is really the ve^ Truth.

If these things be full to answer such an Objectio^ ^t by Mr. Harding against
the Protestants; why ^t as full and suitable, every way to confirm the ^swer
here Offered by Protestants to the self-same ^bjection made against them by
their Fellow-Bre^en?

If it shall be Objected further, That many ^stimonies for the proving of the
Premises, from ^ence these conclusions are drawn, are not Scrip^es, but
Traditions. To this Answer may be ^de:

First, That those Examples and Evidences con^ with the Scriptures, and
therefore the ^ore heed to be given to them; especially conside^^^g that these
are only Matters of Practice gene^^ly owned, and not contended against in those
^ys; and also considering how some of these Te^^monies have remained so many
hundred years un^literated against all the Endeavors of Rome, and ^ers, whose
Interest and Practice these things op^se; and who have for their Interest sake
corrup^ most of the Fathers and Councels, to make ^^m speak as they would.

Secondly, That they are the sayings and consent Ancient and Modern Writers,
and Men of dif^^^ent Judgments in other things; yet all accord in ^s, as the
Practice in those days in these things, (...) that it was by Divine Right,
which may add ^he weight to them. But,

Thirdly, No more will be demanded, That these ^stimonies should speak for the
Matter in hand; ^n the Adversaries cause, these and the like Au^rities to
testify against them: Surely it will be ^nted, that they are as forcible, and
may as ratio^^ly be used, where it makes for, as where it makes ^^ainst any
position.

We are to keep the Ordinances and Order one delivered in the Church, as they
were delivered b^ the Apostles, and according to which the Church of God in the
Primitive times did walk: Be ye f^^lowers of me, says the Apostle; Keep the
Ordinances, (or Traditions) as I have delivered the^ unto you, 1 Cor. 11.1, 2.
Therefore did he, wh^ the Corinthians there had erred about the Lord Supper,
send them again to the first Institution (...) regulate themselves by: after he
had told them their disorder, said, I have received of the Lo^ that which I
delivered unto you. That the Lo^ Jesus the same Night, etc. and so repeats aga^
the whole Institution, in the same Chapter, ver. 2^ 24, 25, 26. forms nothing
anew, but repeats wh^ he himself received of the Lord, both for Mat^ and Form.

Thirdly, Doubtless, such who fear the medli^ with any other manner of
Churches, Ministers, O^dinances, or other manner of Ministration, so (...) to
join with them, or partake in them, are to commended, if they are confirmed by
these E^dences in the truth of the Premises: For the Scr^ture tells us, we may
not add to, or diminish fr^ the Rule the Lord has set us, but Obey that every
thing, Deuteronomy. 4.2. especially since the do^ of any thing in God's Worship not
commanded, Hooper Epist. to King Edw.
so dangerous. What became of Nadab and A^hu, for their doing that which was
not command though not forbidden in any express words, (...) there could be no
warrant in God's Law, Lev. (...) 1, 2, 3. God also complains of such, Jer. 7.^
for building High Places, which he command not: Therefore God did not only
direct and command about the Tabernacle and Temple, and ev^ ^art thereof, but
also every Tittle of the Worship ^erein, and the manner and Circumstances
there^bout. And God takes it ill, as an intrusion upon ^s prerogative Royal,
See Bishop Andrews upon the second commandment.
when Men shall presume (...) do any thing, in his Worship, as a part thereof,
which he commanded not, or walk therein by any ^ther Rule than what he has
prescribed, for no ^an was permitted to vary by adding, or dimini^ing.

Mr. Stillingfleet, in his Irenicum, p. 6. says, that whatsoever is looked
upon, as a part of Wor^ip, if not commanded of God, it is no way ac^eptable of
God, therefore unlawful, Mat. 15.9. and says, That Tertul. de Orat. Cap. 12.
rejects ^l those things, as superfluous and superstitious, which are done
without the Authority of the Lords, ^r his Apostles commands. So say we, that
such ^s vary purposely may expect that God should re^ect them, and their
Offerings, and say to them, ^ho has required this at your hands? The Pro^het
Isaiah, Chap. 24. ver. 5. tells us the sad ef^ects of such things: The Earth,
says he, is de^led under the Inhabitants thereof, because they ^ransgressed
the Laws, changed the Ordinances, etc. ^ishop Jewel, in his Reply to Harding,
p. 111. Quotes Cyprian, for these words which were before cited, That if any of
my Predecessors have not ^ept the thing the Lord has taught us, he for his
^mplicity may be pardoned; but if we wilfully Of^end, there is no pardon for
us, who are already ^arned, and instructed of the Lord. Yea, further ^e say,
all men are to be excused, though they pon^er well, and do not hastily embrace
these things thus ^ltered or added, till they are well tried by the Rule, (...)
the same Bishop Carleton, in the same Book, in his Epistle to the Reader, said;
Because Seduce^ pretend so much to love Souls, and glory so much (...) the Name
of the Church; he should be careful to t^ the Spirits of such men, that speak
in them; for says he, it is a great fault to believe any thing wit^out trial:
Again, Trust neither us nor them, un^ you have tried; try before you trust. And
he the^ quotes Chrysostom for these words to his Hearer^ That they should be
more careful in trying Doctri^ which are delivered to them, than in telling of
M^ney. Again, That the Rule we walk by, must (...) known and certain; if not
known, no Rule to (...) if not certain, no Rule at all. And this also, sai^ he,
Cardinal Bellarmin agrees. And Bishop N^cholson, of Gloucester, in his
aforesaid Book, (...) 67. advises such, who would be satisfied abo^
Church Government, to search it to the depth, an^ stay till he has consulted
the Ancients, etc. an^ p. 41. tells us, That it will not be enough for us (...)
answer, that we have followed the Judgment (...) this or that Church; but upon
what certain ground^ we have followed it. That the ground of Consc^ence is
Science; which also, says he, flows from certain prime, immediate known
Principles; n^^ from probable or conjectural. From all which sayings of the
Bishop, it is clear, That there is (...) necessity of trying things e're we
practice, therefore not hastily to embrace things of this Nature And the rather
too, because some things may be s^^ up like to Gods Ordinances, and yet not
truly such Thus was Jeroboam's Feast he Instituted, 1 King 12.32, 33. The Text
says, It was like to tha^ which was Observed in Judea, but it was not the
same; for he had forged it in his own heart. An^ in such cases men may the
easier be deceived. An^ ^e Apostle, Titus 1.13, 14. forbids us to give ^y heed
to Jewish Fables and Commandments of ^en, who turned from the Truth; therefore
try^ of those things, which are offered to our practice (...) the Matters of
God, is necessary, e're we med^e; That we may discern, whether God has
com^anded them, or whether they are not Jewish Fa^es, or at best, but the
Commandments of Men ^rned from the Truth. Nay further, Christians ^e not to
busy themselves in enquiring into any ^her way, or manner of Worship than what
God ^th prescribed. Israel, when they were a Church, as charged, Deuteronomy. 12.30,
31, 32. not to enquire, ^ying, how did those Nations Worship their God, ^st
they should be ensnared: But God gave them ^^press Commandment in these words;
That whatever thing I Command you, observe to do it: thou ^alt not add thereto,
nor diminish from it; Thus ^od held them to the Rules he had prescribed them
(...) the Matter and Manner of his Worship. And (...) (well knowing how apt
those his own People ^ere to fall in with another way of Worshipping ^^n that
which he prescribed, and that they were ^^e to be taken with the general way of
Worship ^ed in most Nations, as afterward they were for ^e Civil Government as
other Nations, although ^od had appointed it otherwise at that time) cau^ns
them before hand not so much as to enquire ^er another way, but cleave to that
which he had ^dered them.

How cautious then should Christians be of sud^n Meddling with any thing in
Divine Worship, and ^urch affairs, till it be fully clear to them, that ^ery
part therein, with which they have to do, be ^ods Commandment, and agreeing to
his mind; and not the way only of the generality of Worshippers, and Customs
of the Nations, and those tha^ went before them.

And let all this therefore persuade men (wh^ would have these cautious ones
punished for the^ practices, wherein they walk by the Rules of God Word and
primitive example (as before) and al^ for their Nonconformity and forbearing
to su^scribe to another way: though they are not pe^swaded or convinced by Gods
Word, and such T^stimonies as are produced, that this other way (...) of God,
or that God will own and bless them i^ it) to hear them speak further for
themselves i^ the words of the Godly Presbyterian Ministers, i^ their Petition
for Peace and amending the Liturg^ p. 5, 6. 18. They are these: Suffer them,
w^^ desire nothing but to Worship God according to (...) Will, as near as we
can: God, say they, is Jealo^^ in the Matters of his Worship. And for their
L^berty in this, they offer these Reasons.

First, Because they dare not consent to that which they Judge to be Usurpation
of Christ's King^ Power.

Secondly, Because They dare not be guilty of A^dition to, or diminishing from
his Worship, or doing (...) by any other Law than that by which they must (...)
judged: Suppose they mistake, yet it is commend^ble, say they, that they are
fearful to displease Go^ and dare not do that which they judge to be sin
against God: Should not the Love of Christ put (...) upon tendering of such as
are tender of Gods H^nour: For he, say they, that shall do that to plea^ Men,
or escape Sufferings, which he thinks is s^^ no doubt deserves the wrath of
God. And (...) (say they) should be loath to drive Men upon si^ though we know
their own infirmities to be the occasion. It is Gods prerogative to search the
heart, Math. 7.1.2. and these are ready to appeal to God, that what they do is
only because they would not sin, And if others say they shall step into Gods
Throne, and say, it is not for fear of sinning, not Conscience but Obstinacy;
all humane converse, say they, upon these Terms, will be overthrown. And as in
their Book of proceedings upon the Commission with the Bishops, p. 11. It will
not justify us in the day of Judgment (if we sin) to say, that our Superiors
Commanded us.

Fourthly, That also it may be granted surely, that no man may rationally be
blamed, much less punished for not obeying the Laws of any persons (as a
Church who assume to themselves, the name of the Church, as invested with
authority to make Laws, to impose upon others in these Church matters: For, if
a fourth Church on Earth distinct from the three descriptions above, be not
found, and proved to be vested with this power, and capable to execute it
according to Christ's mind; none of these three did ever execute any such Power,
the two first never made Laws, since they grew to big to meet in one place, the
third never made any to be binding or observed further than in, and by the same
Congregation or Society, where they were made, and by whom they were agreed to.

It is true we find, That other Churches liking the Rules, of some one Church,
did imitate them and agree of the same in their Churches also, as Socrat. ^n
his Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 21. p. 351. etc. affirms, That in those days
there were diversities of Observations and Rites in several Churches, without
any forcing of any; but every Church as it seemed good to them; and that such
as liked those Rites, did commend them to their Posterity for Laws.

And Mr. Thorndike in his Book called the true way of composing differences,
page 26, 27. says, That if a part of a Church (speaking there of a National
Church, as men term it) shall give Law to the whole, such part that so does,
for so doing are Schismatic, If therefore any particular Church (being but a
part of the whole in his sense) should make Rules for the whole, or if it be
said that the Convocation or Synod is such a Church, who have this Power to
make Laws for the whole, these also are but a part of the Church in Mr.
Thorndikes sense, and but a little part too. If these therefore shall give Laws
to the whole; then hear what Thorndike says. If yet they say, This is the
whole Church in their Representative. Answer first, cannot justly call
themselves the Representative of the whole; for they were neither chosen nor
sent by the whole, nor did the whole ever entrust them with any such Power: Nor
were they chosen, sent and entrusted by the particular Churches of the whole,
without which (in any rational way) they cannot be supposed to be the whole
Church, in her Representative: no, nor the Church of England in her
Representative, if not so sent, chosen and entrusted by the particular Churches
thereof as above; nor will they (we presume) challenge any authority from
Christ, immediately derived upon their persons to be the Churches
Representative, and to make Laws for them.

But Secondly, If it should be granted (though against all reason) that they do
indeed represent the Church of England: yet then it must be proved by the Word
of God, or very good authority, that any such Representative was called the
Church and so accounted, and has such power to make Laws for many Churches or
Congregations by Divine-right, and to whose Laws those Churches were bound to
give obedience for Conscience sake.

If that in Acts 15. be urged, it seems to be altogether impertinent, unless
they will make the Apostles (and whether all or some only we cannot determine)
the Elders of the Church in Jerusalem, and all the brethren of that Church, a
Convocation, or Synod. And such another we can hardly find now adays; that
this was so and no other, is apparent from the very Text, for all these met
together about the matter, and it is said verse 22. It pleased the Apostles and
Elders, with the whole Church, to send chosen men of their own Company, etc.
chief men amongst the brethren; and in the next verses we find, That the
Apostles, Elders and Brethren, wrote about the matter, and say, It seems good
to us being assembled together, with one accord to send, etc. here the brethren
were as much the Convocation, as the Elders. But then also consider the causes,
why the Church at Antioch sent to this Church at Jerusalem about this matter,
and why they in Jerusalem write their mind again to them, they are two. The
first may be Supposed, that is, because there were some of the Apostles, the
second is Expressed, that is, because those men who came to Antioch and
preached the Circumcision there, pretended that they came from Jerusalem, from
the Apostles and whole Church there, with this Doctrine: therefore was there
great reason, why they should apply themselves to them to be resolved of the
truth in that matter, for about the same question Paul and Barnabas had before
disputed at Antioch, and also mark the matter they write about, it has a
suitableness to that, which they had desired to be resolved in. The epistle
tells them, that they who wrote the Epistle, had given no such commands to
those men to teach such things, ver. 24. And further, That it seemed good to
the Holy Ghost to lay no greater burden upon them than such necessary things
therein mentioned, which things were necessary to be abstained from; because
the use of them would then have offended, and fornication was sin in it self;
and by the way, note, here are no new things required to be done of those, but
somewhat they should forbear to do, because by doing it they may offend such
who could not judge it to be lawfully done, and sin. Here now is not the least
footsteps for such a Synod as the Convocation, our Council of Bishops or
Ministers, as a Church to make laws which shall be binding to any more than
themselves, who agree to them. For the Church at Jerusalem (had such a thing
fallen out with them as did at Antioch; That some had come from Paul and
Barnabas, and that Church, with false Doctrine unto them) might as well have
written to them at Antioch, to have been resolved, And Paul and Barnabas, and
the Elders and Brethren of that Church of Antioch might have written an Answer
to them with equal authority.

Nay, but is there ground to give like credit or subjection to a Rule of any
Convocation or Synod now, as there was to the Apostles in those days? Surely
No; But if it be said, that they are the Churches Representative, and their
Laws are the Laws of the Church by humane authority only, then it will be
necessary to prove, That such, who take upon them to make Churches and Convey
power to them, by their Laws, have such a power delegated to them from Jesus
Christ so to do; Otherwise their Laws will not creat such a Church with
authority in these cases, and to whose Laws obedience is to be expected for
Conscience sake. The old Rule must be remembered, None can give to another that
he has not in himself.

But if it be said, that the Governors of the Churches of a Nation or
Kingdom, with the Magistrates authority, have power to determine of matters
indifferent in their own nature, about the worship of God and in Church
Government, and by Law to impose them, upon the particular Churches of that
Nation.

For Answer to this first, we think it a matter of no small difficulty, for
either Magistrates or Governors of Churches, or both together to determine
what things are so indifferent in their own Nature, about the worship of God,
and as to their use and practice, that they must needs be so accounted by all
the members of the Churches there: Hookers Eccles Polity in the Preface.
For this is Necessary in this Case: Christ's Law Romans 14. being clear in this;
That if any absolutely indifferent thing used or imposed be really an offense
to weak Christians, that is, when such weak ones do upon serious thoughts,
judge the things themselves in their own nature, not indifferent, or else as
they are used and circumstantiated, but sinful or suspicious, in this case
they may not be used by other Christians, much less imposed: For if these weak
ones should do this, when imposed, while they thus judge, they should sin, And
for such as look upon these things and impose them as indifferent, they may
without the least scruple lay aside the use of them themselves, and much more
dispense with others for not using them: For a thing purely indifferent may as
well not be used as used, especially when they prove an offense to others; If
men choose to obey God rather than Men.

Thus says Mr. Stillingfleet in his Irenicum. p. 63. That nothing should be
determined, but what is sufficiently known to be indifferent in its own nature,
and he there confesses, that there is a great difficulty to know sufficiently
what is so; and gives this as his reason, because one looks upon that to be
indifferent which another does not. And again in p. 118. 119. See Doctor More
in Book called the Mystery of Godliness Book 10. c. 10. p. 515, 516, etc.
treating of liberty of Conscence.
He says, that the power of Governors in these things extends not to bind men
to go against the dictates of their own Reason and Consciences, and again
there, says he, when all is said every man will be his own judge in this case
concerning his own welfare, and that an erroneous Conscience takes not off the
obligation to follow the dictates thereof. So that from this (were there no
other thing in the case, but that men do differently judge of the same things,
both as they are in their own nature, and also in their use and ends) Church
Governors would find it work enough to determine such things so as it cannot
be an offense to any: which thing must be regarded, if Christ's Law be had in
any reverence. Yet further, there are many other considerable things in this
case, as to their use and ends, and as those things determined may be
circumstantiated. As first, when things determined to be used in the matters of
Gods Worship, do not in truth answer the ends of their use, and whereto they
were determined above others, as for Edification, Decency, Order and Peace in
the Church, and in these cases also, every man must be his own judge, whether
it does in truth lead to those ends, or not; they may be offensive, and then
(if the Apostle Paul, may be judge) they are not to be used, for the total
laying aside, and not using such things at all, will tend most to Peace and
Edification, Romans 14.10. and thus the Fathers in former ages judged; for which
Mr. Stillingfleet in his aforesaid Book. p. 68. 69. Quotes Aug. Epist. 119. ad
Jan. Cap. 19. for this, that he desires there, that such things might be taken
away, and uses these words as his reasons; That although we cannot positively
say, how such things as those do manifestly impugn our Faith; yet in that they
load our Religion with servile Burdens (which the mercy of God has left free)
that they make our condition worse than that of the Jews; for they, although
strangers to Gospel liberty, had no burden charged upon them by the
constitutions of men, but only by the laws and commandments of God. And again
p. 61 62. he Quotes Ambros. and Augustine against imposing of things
indifferent upon this very ground, because they answer not the ends intended
but produced the contrary effects and he therefore cites these words of August.
to this purpose, I says Aug. have often found it to my grief and sorrow that
the troubles of weaker Christians have been caused by the contentious obstinacy
of some, on the one hand, and the superstitious fearfullness of others, on the
other, in things which are neither determined by the authority of Holy
Scripture, nor by Custom of the Universal Church, nor yet by any usefullnesse
of the things themselves, in order to the making of men's lives better, only for
some petty reason in a man's own mind, or because it has been the Custom, of
their Country, or because they have found it so in other Churches; they raise
such quarrels and Contentions, that they think nothing Right or Lawful, but
what they do themselves.

See the Conference of R^ynolds with Heart, c. 8. p. 510. Raynolds maintains it
to be duty to remove such things as our fathers set up, if turned to error and
superstition, and quo^es the Canon Law, Did. 63. for it.
Secondly, Another thing may make the use of indifferent things about Gods
worship unlawful as to their use; that is, where they are used by the
generality of people, not as indifferent things but as necessary; with an
opinion that their worship is not perfect except it be performed after the
manner determined, which is an abuse of them. It is true the Papists say of
their Images, they are but indifferent things: yet it is well known, that the
generality of them do not so esteem of them; which Mr. Stillingfleet also fully
agrees, in the same Book p. 64. So it is certainly known amongst us
Protestants, that the generality do look upon and esteem of many things
(indifferent in their own nature) determined and long in use, as necessary; so
that they think no part of Gods Worship, or Church affairs well performed, or
perfect, if not exactly done, according to that rule determined and in use; and
therefore will not willingly do any thing otherwise; though they were never
Compelled to it by law: which indeed has been the ordinary effect of a
Constant use of any indifferent thing about worship or Church matters, that
people by Custom and Usage drink down an opinion of the necessity of their
use, and cannot endure their removal: Wherefore that indifferent things might
be still known to be so, and so accounted: they should be used indifferently;
and not the same constantly, to prevent this superstitious and Idolatrous
opinion men apt to have of them by their countenance. Bishop Jewel in his reply
to Harding p. 542. said that many Heretics plead nothing, but that they were
born in, lived in that which they now practice and received it from their
Fathers.

Now for others to use these things, otherwise in^ndifferent in themselves, is
to harden these in their error and superstitious opinion.

Thirdly. This also may make the use of Indifferent things unlawful, when the
things determined and imposed are not so judged by those, who determine them;
nor determined and imposed by them as things indifferent, but as things
necessary. In this case it is not to be used; then much less imposed.
Protestants in general agree; That it is sufficient warrant for our separation
from the Church of Rome, because they impose things upon men's Consciences as
necessary, which are doubtful, unlawful, suspected, or offensive to weak
brethren. This Mr. Stillingfleet agrees in his said Book; and again in p. 119.
he says, Let men turn and wind themselves whether they will, by the same
Arguments that any will prove separation from the Church of Rome Lawful
because she requires unlawful things, as conditions of her communion; It will
be proved lawful not to conform to any suspected or unlawful practice
required, by any Church Governors upon the same terms, if the things so
required be upon serious and sober enquiry judged unwarrantable by a man's own
Conscience. And again p. 61. 62. he says, that whatsoever is imposed as
necessary does immediately bind Conscience; and that none can have command of
Conscience, but God himself. For all these things see what the Magdeburg
Divines say. That in the use of these things we must take heed lest weak
brethren be offended, or obstinate or refractory ones, in their pertinacious
and ungodly opinions, be confirmed. Cent. 1. lib. 2. Cap. 4. Col. 414, 415,
416. And again, That they may be used freely; if Compulsion happen not, Opinion
of Worship, Necessity, Scandal, or manifest Occasion of Ungodliness. But, say
they, if any of these things happen, by which the weak and Godly are Offended,
the Refractory and Adversaries of Truth are confirmed in their error, then
these things ought not to be used freely. Cent. 1. Lib. 2. Cap. 4. Col. 441,
442.

But if it be said here, That these things are not determined, as things
necessary, but as things indifferent: For Answer, First, Neither those who
determine these things, nor those who do impose them do declare, that such
things so determined in the whole of them, are indifferent things in their own
Nature, nor that they ought to be so accounted in the use of them. And
Secondly, It seems clear, that they do determine of these things above others,
and so use themselves, not as things indifferent, but as things necessary, and
so immediately binding to Men's Consciences: For either they determine of them,
above others, and so impose them, as things tending to Peace and Edification,
and for Decency and Order; or for no end at all (unless it be to make Men bow
to the Judgment of such Men who thus determine;) if the latter, no warrant can
be pretended for it; if the former, then are the things necessary (if we must
look on them to tend to this end more than other indifferent things do) for
things, truly tending to those ends, we are bound to regard by Divine Command,
and so the Conscience becomes bound. Whatsoever things indifferent in their own
Nature, be determined above others to be used in the Matters of God, as that
which above other things tends to Order, Decency, Edification, or Peace and
Union in the Church, and imposed by any, who have Power for to Judge,
Determine, and impose them; in this case Obe^ience must be given, either
because those things ^o indeed best conduce to the End (and then we ^ught to
use them without imposing, if we look upon them so.) Or because we are to
believe them ^o be so upon this ground, That God (having gi^en the Power to
these Men to determine in these Matters and impose) does also give them
Spiritual Wisdom and Judgment above others in these things, and lead them
infallibly to determine of these things; to which we ought, by Divine Command,
^o submit our selves. If upon either of these we Obey them, our Consciences are
immediately ^ound, and they become necessary things: For we ^re Commanded to
follow those things which make or Peace and Edification; and also to Obey them
which have the Rule over us. Upon one or both ^hese grounds Governors determine
and impose, or upon none at all; either that the things are above others for
Order and Decency, Edification and ^eace; or as the Governors are such over us,
whom ^e ought to Obey, in these things, as infallibly ^uided.

If any shall pretend that they are not determined (...) infallibly the best to
the ends proposed, then it ^ill follow, That no Obedience at all can be
ex^ected from such Persons, who may Judge (and ^at rationally and Christianly
too) that those de^^rmined things, in Truth do not answer those ends ^roposed,
so well as other things may do, but ra^er that they hinder and oppose them.

But further it will appear, that indifferent things ^e determined and imposed,
not as indifferent, but as necessary: first then, when the Laws about suc^
things are made severe; and less strict about things necessary; and when the
Execution of those sever^ Laws are violently pressed by those Persons who di^
determine of these indifferent things, and at the same time good Laws about
necessary things no^ regarded.

Secondly, Then when such who cannot submit t^ the indifferent thing imposed,
in the manner of doing, may not use the necessary thing it self, as no to
Exercise a Man's Ministry in the Church, ove^ which the Holy Ghost has made him
a Bishop Or not to meet, pray, exhort, etc. and Worship God, as he has
appointed. Not to Baptize, no to Communicate at the Lords Table, not to ca^ out
wicked Persons, or remove Offenses (a which things are necessary, being Gods
Ordinances) unless they do all these after the form and manner determined and
imposed; yea and then, when they are set so high, That no Person who cannon
submit to such Forms and Rules in such things, (which they call indifferent) in
Gods Worship cannot, or may not have any Communion with the Churches thus
imposed upon, but be Excommunicated upon this ground only, that they submit no
to those determined things, as to those which ar^ most Decent, and for Order
and Edification, Unit^ and Peace in the Church, and imposed as such though such
things be esteemed otherwise of by those Persons who submit not to them. If
thi^ make not such determined things to become neces^sary Conditions of
Communion, we know not wha^ does: And it may be, the things themselves so
determined of, may be in themselves unlawful, suspected, and Offensive to weak
Brethren.

So that from all these things which may happen ^n the case of indifferent
things: It may easily be granted, That it is a very difficult work to find out
things in their own Nature so indifferent, that they shall not be doubted,
suspected, or judged unlawful, and not Offensive unto any; that shall so fully
answer the end proposed, that they may be determined as the best above other
indifferent things for that purpose; and not to be judged otherwise by such
Churches and Christians who must use them; And so to determine of the manner of
their use, That the generality shall not esteem them as necessary, or use them
so; or that they should be so used, as not to restrain the free use and
Exercise of Necessary Duties of Worship, and in Church Affairs, although
performed in another way by such, who cannot submit to the way prescribed. That
the use of them shall not harden or encourage the Refractory in their errors:
All which things, no doubt, ought to be well weighed e're Men undertake to
determine of, and impose those things which Christ has left free, and which
the Church in the Primitive times used as things indifferent; and each Church
ordered and altered as they pleased: For if either of these things fall out in
the case; these indifferent things may not be used, though they should be
granted to be never so indifferent in their own Nature, much less may they be
imposed.

But, Secondly, If the Matter were granted to be evident, that they might find
out, and determine of indifferent things, so as to answer the ends of their
use, and be freed from the abuse: See Doctor Tailor liberty of Prophecy. p.
109.
The next thing to be resolved, is, By what Rule of Gods Word can these make
out, That this Authority is derived upon them from Christ, thus to determine of
one indifferent thing above another to answer the ends of the use thereof, Mr.
Hooker in his Eccles. Polity, first Book. p. 26, 27. says, Impossible it is
that men should have complete lawful power but by consent of men, or immediate
appointment of God.

Power if lawful, then it is either granted or consented to by them over whom
they exercise the same, or else given extraordinary from God.


and to be imposed upon a the Churches within their reach. Either they mu^^
have it immediately from Christ, and have promises of Guidance herein; or
conveyed to them by the Churches themselves. To derive it from Christ
immediately is a very hard work; and sure they will not challenge it as
conveyed to them by the Churches, unless they will first acknowledge the
Churches to have this Power in themselves, and then make it out, that every
particular Church and Society in that Nation, have given their Vote to entrust
them with this Power; but the Truth lies in the quite contrary: For, First,
Those who undertake to determine thus for the Churches, will not confess, That
these Churches have Power to determine of themselves, or to choose any to
determine for them; and then they can never prove any such Power by the
Churches Vote. No such things were known among the Primitive Gospel-Churches;
For every Church or Congregation did in these indifferent things even as they
amongst themselves judged fit, and agreed, being left free by Christ and his
Apostles, so the Churches used them. None for many Ages undertook to determine,
nor did the Churches empower any so to do. Nor indeed is any such trust reposed
in any Persons, by the Churches at this day. The particular Bodies of
Congregations, and many of their Officers too, are looked upon in this Matter,
as insignificant Ciphers. It is true, Episcopal Assemblies, after a few Ages,
began to take upon them to give some Rules to Churches (though those were
Observed, but so far as the Churches thought good) yet these determinations of
theirs, answered not the ends pretended: For, as it is cited before in this
Discourse, out of Gregory. That Contentions have been always increased by
Episcopal Assemblies; so, he that reads the Ecclesiastical History impartially,
may every where plainly perceive the truth thereof: And how far they answered
the ends of Order, Edification, Peace, and Unity in the Churches in these days,
we shall leave the judicious observers of such things to judge. Then may we
enquire further, How any rational Account can be given, why one part of the
Christians in a Nation, and those very few in comparison of the whole, should
determine of such things to be imposed, for all the rest, seeing no special
power is derived upon them so to do, nor any promise of infallible Guidance in
this matter entailed upon Them more than upon others. And as to these Matters
we shall offer a few things more, in Mr. Stillingfleet his own words, in the
same Irenicum, p. 45, 46. That the Pastors or Governors of Churches are
commanded, Mat. 28.20. To teach what Christ had commanded them; but no
Authority, says he, thereby given to make new Laws to bind the Church, but
rather a tying them up to the Commandments of Christ, already laid down in his
Word. For, says he, A Power to bind Men's Consciences to their determinations
lodged in the Officers of the Church, must be derived either from the Law of
God giving them this right, or else only from the consent of parties: For any
Law of God, there is none produced, says he, with any probability of Reason,
but that, Heb. 13.17. Obey those who have the Rule, etc. But that, says he,
implies no more than submitting to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Gospel,
and to those whom Christ has Constituted as Pastors of his Church, wherein the
Law of Christ does require obedience, etc. But this (says he) gives them no
Authority to make new Laws or Constitutions binding men's Conscience, any more
than a command from a Superior Authority, that inferior Magistrates should be
obeyed does imply a Power in them to make new Laws to bind them. Yet he here
acknowledges a Power arising from the free consent of the parties submitting:
which (says he) is most agreeable the Nature of Church Power, being not
coactive but directive. And that such was the confederate Discipline of the
Primitive times; And again further in p. 118, 119. That if it be said, that men
are bound to be ruled by their Governors in determining what things are lawful
and what not, he Answers, That no true Protestants can swear blind obedience to
Church Governors in all things; That it is the Highest usurpation, to rob men
of the Liberty of their Judgment: That it is our plea against the Papists, that
every one has a Judgment of private discretion, which is the rule of practice,
as to himself.

We (says he) allow a Ministerial Power in the Governors: yet (he says) this
extends not to bind men to go against the dictates of their own reason and
Conscience, their Power is only directive and declarative, and in matters of
Duty can bind no more than reason and evidence brought from Scripture by them,
does. Again either therefore men are bound to obey all things absolutely, and
without any restriction or limitation; which (says he) if it be not Usurpation
and Dominion over others Faith in them, and the worst of implicit Faith in
others; It is hard to define what either of them is: or else if they are bound
to obey only in lawful things, I then (says he) enquire, who must be judge
what things are Lawful and what not: If the Governors, still then the Power
will be absolute again, for to be sure (says he) what ever they Command they
will say, it is Lawful either in it self, or as they Command it. If every
private person must be judge, what is lawful and what not, which is Commanded,
then he is bound no further to obey than he judges the thing to be lawful,
which is commanded. And he there affirms, See the Bishop of Glou. Apol. p. 41.
(as we have before set down) that every man will be his own judge in this
Case; and that the plea of an erroneous Conscience takes not off the Obligation
to follow the dictates of it. Again let men (says he) turn and wind themselves
which way they will, by the same Arguments any will prove separation from the
Church of Rome, Lawful; because she requires unlawful things as Conditions of
her Communion. It will be proved Lawful not to conform to any suspected or
unlawful practice required by any Church Governors upon the same Terms, if the
things so required, be upon serious and sober enquiry judged unwarrantable by a
man's own Conscience. And again in p. 120. 121. he quotes Mr. Hales of Schism,
p. 8. for this, That where any thing unnecessary, suspected, and by many held
unlawful, is imposed; it is duty to separate. See this more at large
transcribed there in Mr. Stillingfleet, who there Commends Hales for as Learned
and Judicious a Divine, as this Nation bred. And Mr. Stillingfleet there adds
these words. If we (says he) would take away all unnecessary things, suspected
by many, and judged unlawful by some, and make nothing the bounds of our
Communion but what Christ has done, etc. allowing a liberty for matters of
indifferency, and bearing with the weakness of those, who cannot bear things
which others account lawful; We might, (says he) indeed be restored to a true
Primitive luster.

All which things of Mr. Stillingfleets may as forceably be turned against the
Magistrates imposing these things by Law, as against the Church Governors
determining them to be imposed: for if one were not absolute in their Power, to
determine of one indifferent thing above another, for others to practice; sure
neither the other to impose such things: Tertul fo Scapula.
for what ever may not lawfully be determined for, or required of, may not be
imposed upon others, and they compelled to obedience. That which Christ has
left indifferent about these things should be so used, and no man should
presume to take away their indifferency by imposing them by force of Law; since
God has not given to every man alike apprehensions of the same things, So Mr.
Hooker his Eccles. Pol^^y in the Peface asserts that whatever we do, if our
own secret judgment consent not unto it as fit and good to be done, the doing
of it is sin to us, a though the thing it f^lf be allowable. Romans 14 5. See
al^o his second B^ok, p 58
as the Apostle says, one esteems one day above another, another esteems
every day alike. And again, I know that nothing is unclean of it self, but to
him that esteems any thing unclean, to him it is unclean. All things are
pure, but it is evil for that man who eats with offense; therefore he directs
here, that every manshould be fully persuaded in his own mind, Romans 14.5.14.20.
and chap. 15.1. That the strong should bear with the infirmities of the weak.
And again 1 Cor. 8.4.7. he says, we know an Idol is nothing, etc. howbeit
there is not in every man this knowledge: where he also in the latter end of
the same chapter, exhorts those who do know, to have respect to those who do
not know, and rather than offend them, not to use their own liberty in such
things which were indifferent in their own Nature.

Thus we see the Apostle (though he could infallibly resolve the lawfulness of
the things in themselves) yet would he be so far from determining these things
to be done by others who had other apprehensions, that he would not use the
things themselves* nor would he have others to use them, where their use proved
offensive to weak ones: and would have every one persuaded in his own mind (and
this he knew was Gods prerogative only) Such who offend their brethren by the
contrary, sin against Christ. How then is it possible to justify an imposition
of such things by Laws (which say they, bind Conscience to obedience because
the Magistrate commands) upon such who doubt of the lawfullness of the things
themselves, See Doctor Moor in his Book intit. mystery of Godliness, Book 10.
c. 10. p. 515, 516, etc treating of liberty of Conscience and of the Duty of
Christian Magistrates in matters of Religion. See also de Eccles. l. 4. c. 14.
maintains liberty in Religion by many Arguments, See Hookers Polity p. 159,
160, 161. of his fourth Book.
or as they are circumstantiated: for this is to put such upon a necessity of
sinning, either they must do the thing enjoined, and so sin; or if they do it
not, they sin in not obeying the Magistrate (if the Magistrate commands makes
it necessary;) sure we are, that in the Primitive Churches, they thought so:
for neither Governors of Churches, nor Emperors (when Christian) did for some
ages, determine for, or impose upon many Churches in these things; or if any
did tamper this way, the Churches did not take themselves at all bound to
regard it: for in those days so may Churches or Congregations, so many several
usages or forms in these things, as each Church thought best and most
convenient for them. Thus the Magdeburgh Divines agree Cent. 2. Cap. 7. Col.
134.135. That every Church had a like Power to exercise the Ceremonies received
from the Apostles, or to make new ones for edification: so also says Socrates
of his days in his 5th. Book 21. chap. English transl. p. 351. etc. That in
those days there were diversity of observations and Rites in several Churches,
without any forcing of any, but every Church as it seemed good to them, etc.
That it is plain, that the Apostles left every man free without Fear,
Compulsion, or Constraint, to adict himself to that which seems to him to be
good and Commendable; That hardly could two Churches be found, that observed
the same Rites, and Ceremonies; that in the observation of Easter and other
holy days every man did as he thought good, etc. see this at large.

So that from all that has been said in this matter; we cannot think that upon
a sober discourse, Those that call themselves the Governors of the Church will
ever arrogate to themselves, by prepretence of Divine Authority, any special
right to determine of any indifferent thing above another, to be that which is
every way lawful and inoffensive, and that which is most for edification,
decency and order, unity and peace in the Church: Or that they have any special
skill of judging in this case, above other learned and Godly men in the Church:
and if not, then it may be believed that they will say, be it far from us to
determine in such cases, for others, or to desire our determinations should be
imposed upon others; And then we are confident the Magistrate will be farther
from Challenging any right to determine of those things, nor will he undertake
to impose by Law upon the Churches: but it has been common amongst Church men
to deal subtly in these things, first themselves determine and set down Rules
in these cases, and tender them to the Magistrate to confirm by Laws, as those
things which are necessary to the ends aforesaid; And then when they are
established by Law; and they themselves cannot justify many or any of them to
be necessary, or any way answering the ends proposed; They presently lay the
charge upon the Magistrates, and say, its commanded and we must obey, being by
virtue of his Law bound in Conscience so to do. Certainly, let us not deceive
our selves, God is not mocked, Christ has pronounced a woe against them by whom
offenses come. The excuse of the Magistrates commanding it, will not serve
their turn when our Lord comes to judge in Righteousness.

Yet there are some who are highly offended against such who walk after the
Rules herein before set down, as near as they can, and fear to err from it, as
that way of worship and managing of Church affairs, which they judge according
to Gods word to be Christ's mind they should walk by; and as that in which the
Churches, in the Primitive and best ages walked; and which also has been by
many learned and Godly men in all ages since, held to be the true way. And
these offended ones generally conclude against such, that they are Separatists
from the Church, Schismatics, Factious, etc. for so doing (the old Callumnies
cast upon the Apostles and other Saints in former ages, and by Papists upon
Protestants in latter ages) and their way called Heresy and evil spoken of, as
Act. 24 c. 25. c. 28. Though in Truth these offended ones understand not, in
this case, what they say, or whereof they affirm: either it is pure ignorance
in such, not understanding what a Church is, from which properly a Separation
may be said to be made, or in which a man may be said to be guilty of making a
Schism; or what Act it is that may properly be called a separation from, or
constitute a man a Schismatic in such a Church; or else ignorance, that is
wilful, arising from interest that blinds them: These do just (as the
Presbyterian Ministers, once said in Smect. p. 58. 59. take it in their own
words. These do (as the Papists) dazzle the Eyes and astonish the senses of poor
People with the Glorious name of the Church, etc. This is the Gorgons-Head (as
Doctor White said) which enchanted them: they call, say they for obedience to
the Church, etc. no mention of God and Scripture, If we (say these Divines
there) question what is meant by the Church of England, they storm, as he that
holds by an unjust Title will not suffer the Title to be questioned; they
(say these men) sometimes make the Convocation the Church, excluding both
Presbiters and people, as not worthy to be reckoned of the Church; sometimes
the bounds of the Kingdom is the Church. If so, say they, why not England,
Scotland, and Ireland one Church, being under one Monarch.

Thus they contend and know not upon what foundation; but, having heard of the
name of the Church, and found Ordinances and Forms of worship amongst them,
and Discipline used according to humane Laws and Constitutions: here they go
and never so much as enquire, or put it to the question, whether they are
agreeable to Scripture, or Rules prescribed by God; And then they take it for
granted presently; that such, who do not in these matters as they do, are
Separatists and Schismatics, and deserve punishment (as rashly as the two
Disciples did in another case Luke 9. who would have fire from heaven upon the
Samaritanes: but they knew not what Spirit they were of, as Christ told them;
they never considered upon what ground they desired such a thing, whether it
were Christ mind or not, that it should be so. And as Augustine, quoted by Mr.
Stillingfleet in his aforesaid Book, p. 61.62. complained of men in his days
about Ceremonies, who contended highly, yet had no ground for it but this, (as
his words are) because it had been the custom of their Country, or because they
have found them in another Church, etc. they think that nothing is right and
Lawful, but what they do themselves. And as Bishop Jewel in his Reply before
cited, said of many Heretics, That they had nothing to plead, but that they
were born, lived in, and received of their Fathers what they did practice: upon
some such poor grounds as these does the ignorance of men work, thus to abuse
their brethren. And that it may so appear. Let such persons be persuaded to
weigh the premises well in the fear of God, and take these conclusions with
him. First, that such who continue in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ (and
thus hold Union with the Head of the Church according to John 15.4, 5.)
continue in and do not separate from the Catholic Church the body of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the first Church in this discourse described; for there is no
other Union between the members of this Church (as such) but this, their being
by one Faith united to one Head; and from thence animated by one Spirit; and
such who so continue, cannot be called Schismatics in this Church. To this
Doctor Carleton agrees in his aforesaid Book p. 6, 7, 8 9, 10. etc. 2dly. That
such who continue to make a profession of the Faith of our Lord Jesus, and do
not openly deny him in their works, do still abide in the visible body of Jesus
Christ, The Church 2dly above described, and cannot be said to separate from
this Church, or be guilty of Schism here; for this profession is the only
thing wherein the unity of the whole visible Church lies. And thus Mr.
Stillingfleet in his Book called a Rational Account etc. p. 331. says, That
there is no separation from the whole Church, but in such things wherein the
unity of the whole lies: For separation says he, is a violation of some
union. 3dly. That such who continue to walk in, and with any visible Company,
Congregation or particular Church on earth, holding the true faith, in the
orderly participation of Ordinances in man-as the Scripture directs, and in
subjection to Christ's Laws given to be executed therein, as such a Church, the
Church 3dly above described; he cannot be said to separate from, or be guilty
of schism in this Church.

Now then if these offended ones will justify their charge against such who do
not in Church affairs, as they do; It is necessary they prove such whom they
thus accuse, guilty either of infidelity absolute, or of their denying their
profession of Jesus Christ, or of withdrawing from the Congregation or Society
to which they were regularly joined, without just cause, and refusing to walk
in such a Church of Christ in the orderly participation of ordinances and to
submit to the laws of Christ exercised therein. Or they must find a fourth
Church described in Scripture, or in the Apostles days; and show such a one
now, from which a man may be said in a proper sense to separate; and also prove
what act it is, that makes a separation from that Church; And that these
persons are guilty of separation thence by such an Act, or else they cannot
rationally conclude any of these to be separatists, or scismaticks, in any
sense at all: If they can do neither of these, they will see cause to be angry
no longer.

But it is possible they may allege against some of these, that they have
separated from the particular Congregations whereto sometimes they were joined;
therefore are they seperatists: For Answ. first, Then it must be proved, that
they were regularly joined to that Congregation; that is, by a voluntary Act of
theirs in understanding which is proved by some express desire, in him that
joins; and an actual admission by the Society to which he is joined: For a
man may ignorantly sit down at a Sacrament in these Churches, where no order is
observed, to prevent that confusion, as in Most Parish Churches; yet this makes
not a regular joining, nor him a fixed member of that Church or Society; a
heathen may do this; besides, this is not consisting with the nature of a
regular Society of rational men, much less of Christians, where must be a
consideration or compact between all the parties obliged; yea further, if a man
be made of such a parish by the law of the land, and bound by the Law, join
with the same Parish as a Church, and be one of the members thereof; This
cannot be a regular joining him to this Church neither, without his own
voluntary Act: For by the Law of Nature, and the law of God, men are left free
to join themselves to what Congregation or Society they pleased; Amos 3.3 How
can two walk together except they be agreed.
And it is against both these, yea against the very nature and well being of
such Societies, to force men to be of this or that Society against their own
minds, and without the free consent of the Society it self: yet this was the
case of most (we presume) who withdrew from parish Churches and Societies;
either they did never by any act desire a regular admittance, or did the
Society ever in truth make any Actual admission; only sat down at a
Sacrament, or they were made of the Society by a Law, neither of which can be
made out to be such a regular joining to that Society, as to d^nominate any
such person to be a Schismatic or Seperatist for leaving them and joining
himself to any other. Besides should we grant that they were regularly joined,
and so actual members of this or that Church, yet if they remove to another
Church (if the Church of England be but true to their own Principles, and own
their common practices, See Mr. Vines upon the Sacrament. p. 266. he says, as
we may remove for health etc. so for more fruitful Ordinances.
as regular) the guilt of separation cannot lie in this neither: for they allow
a man to leave one parish and go to another, for convenience of Habitation,
Air, Trade, etc. Bodily advantages, and then join with the other Parish
Church, as a member there, and leave the first: yea and that without
acquainting the first Church, (whereof he was a Member) with his intentions,
and for this he shall be no Separatist: so that from this it is clear, that
separation lies not barely in this; that men leave one Congregation or Society
and join themselves to another. And we think it may easily be granted, that if
outward concernments be enough to acquit a man from the guilt of separation on
such an account, and warrant his remove from one Church to another; much more
may Soul concernment, justify a leaving of one Church and adjoining to
another. Yet further we hope none will deny, but that there may be just cause
for withdrawing from some Societies; and whether this might not fall in for a
sufficient plea for many to clear themselves by, from any crime upon the
account of withdrawing from the Society where once they were, and joining to
another: Mr. Stillingfleet in his said Irenicum, p. 117. 118. 120. agrees thus
much; That where any Churches retaining purity of doctrine, do require the
owning of, and conforming to, any unlawful or suspected practice, men may
lawfully deny conformity to and communion with that Church in such things,
Hales of Schism p. 8.
without incurring the guilt of Scisme, and gives this reason for it; If our
separation from the Church of Rome, was therefore lawful because she required
unlawful things, as Conditions of her Communion. Then wherever such things are
required by any Church, Non-communion with that Church in those things will be
lawful too; And where says he, Non-communion is lawful, there can be no
Schism in it. If that justified our withdrawing from the Church of Rome, Mr.
Raynolds conference with Heart p. 666. 667.
will it not (says he) justify men's Nonconformity in things supposed by them
to be unlawful. And again, our best Writers against the Papists lay the
imputation of Schism not upon these who withdraw Communion, but upon those who
require such things, whereby they did rather eject men out of their Communion,
than the others separate from them: And he quotes Mr. Hales of Schism, to
prove fully, The refusal of Communion (in case any unnecessary things,
suspected by some, and held unlawful by others, be made Conditions of
Communion) to be Lawful, and Duty, etc. Now it may be this might be the case
of every one who has withdrawn Communion from parishes; that many things are
required there, whithout a Conformity to which, no communion can be had with
them; That these required things are, (in the judgment of those who thus
withdraw) unnecessary useless, unlawful or suspected at least: And then this
will, upon the same grounds, acquit every such one (who have withdrawn) from
the Charge of Scisme. And though Mr. Stillingfleet seems a little (in the 117.
p. of the said Book) to mince it in these words. I say not that men may proceed
to erecting of new Churches. Yet he in his Book called a Rational Account etc.
p 332. seems to own such a thing, when he pleads against Rome, and justifies
Protestants separations These are his words; Suppose all the particular men I
converse with were Leprous, my associating my self with them, does not imply
any separation from the Communion of all mankind, but that I am loath to be
infected as they are; Therefore I withdraw till I can meet with healthful
persons, withwhom I can associate again; And if several other persons (says
he) be of the same mindwith me, and we therefore join together, do we therefore
divide our selves from the whole world? Thus he in this place clearly intimated
a withdrawing from one Society upon good grounds; and then for as many as be so
withdrawn, and of the same mind, to join themselves together and associate by
agreement, and that is no separation. And no doubt, but that there is matter
enough to be found, sufficiently to warrant such persons in this also as well
as in withdrawing Communion.

But if yet they shall say the Church of England is that from which these
separate. How, pray? If the Church of England be granted to be a Church in
either, or both of the two first Descriptions herein before given (though, in
Truth she be but a little part of both) yet there is no other Union with her as
one Church, nor can there be; but the Union in Faith under one Head, Jesus
Christ, and participation of the same Spirit, and the profession of this Faith:
So that none can be said to separate from her as a Church, or be guilty of
Schism or breach of Union here, but such who renounce the Faith and their Union
with Christ the Head in Word or Deed, and forsake their profession of it. And
this Church of England cannot be pretended to be a particular Church under the
third Description; for they never yet associated as such; nor is it possible
for them as a Church to meet in one entire body in one place to partake of the
same Ordinances, or do any other Act, as a Church or Society, but always met in
their several Bodies or Churches, for performing of all Acts of a Church as
such. In like manner also, do these who are so blamed. Therefore in this sense
neither, can they be (by any Rule of Reason) said to be guilty of Schism.

If these Offended ones shall yet say thus. That such Men refuse to join with
our Congregations and Ministers in our way: For Answer to this (besides what
has been said before to justify their continuing by themselves;) First, it is
thought in Charity to be presumed, That these Men are convinced of the Truth of
the premises; That in truth, all things about Church Affairs were managed in
and by particular Churches, Congregations, or Societies by Divine Authority,
and so Ordered as before: Their Ministers chosen, the Matter of their Worship
without any addition, alteration, or diminishing according to Divine Rules;
Scandalous Persons cast out, etc. That these cannot judge it Lawful for them to
do any thing in these matters, contrary, or not according to this Rule; but
think, if they should, they must sin against God. And then this must needs be a
sufficient plea for these, in this case; especially since other things (to them
doubtful, unnecessary, and sinful) are made necessary Conditions of Communion
with those Congregations: So that none can communicate with them, but of
necessity he must submit to, own, and join with there things, and neglect the
other way. Secondly, Is any man bound to join with, or partake in every
Congregation in England, or in more than one? or must he be guilty of the
breach of Union? Surely no; may not a Man abide in his own Parish all his Life,
and refuse to have any Minister but his own, or Communicate with any
Congregation, but that whereof he is a Member? Yet he shall not for this be
accounted a Schismatic, or Separatist: It is presumed, no Man will say, he
shall. Wherein then lies the difference? These men thus accused do join
themselves to some one Congregation or Church of God, according to the Rules,
as was in the beginning, and there they abide in the Orderly participation of
Ordinances and Subjection to Christ's Laws therein executed, and disagree in
nothing of the true Faith from other Churches. So that it follows, That barely
upon this pretense neither, can they fasten the Crime of Separation upon those,
who do not join with their Congregations and Ministers. May not members of
Parish-Churches be as properly said to be Separatists for refusing to join
themselves to those Congregations, Societies, or Churches and Ministers in
their Worshipping of God, as these for not joining with them? Nor can it be
said, That these dis-agree with the Church of England in any thing wherein the
whole Church of God is agreed, or the whole Church of England; but only in some
things wherein the Church of God, yea, in England, dis-agree amongst
themselves; as Mr. Stillingfleet, in his said Book, called, A Rational Account,
p. 357, 358. affirms against the Papists, in these words: We, says he, have
not separated from the whole Christian World, in any thing wherein the whole
Christian World is agreed: But to dis-agree from the particular Churches of the
Christian World in those things wherein those Churches differ amongst
themselves, is not to separate from the Christian World, but to dis-agree in
some things from these particular Churches. The case is here the same: These do
not separate from the whole Church of England, but only dis-agree in those
things wherein the particular Churches differ amongst themselves. And then walk
with such who can and will agree with them in these things. If they say the
Parish-Churches are most Lawful and right, and so their Ministers,
Ministration, and Order. Let this be first decided by Gods Word, and their
Lawfulness better proved, than the Churches Ministry and Order, and Management
of Church Affairs, amongst these; and before set forth as the Primitive
Practice; and then they say something.

But if they justify all by the Law of the Land only, it may soon be answered
by this, That it was not so from the beginning. That the other way is proved by
the Law of God, and Practice of the Primitive Churches, and approbation of
Learned and good Men in all Ages; yea, and of Men of contrary Practices
themselves: Therefore surely the best plea against this. For if Magistrates or
Governors appoint any thing in these matters not agreeable to these Rules, so
that Men cannot be satisfied in their own minds, but doubt it is Lawfulness;
such doubting ones may not be in the practice of it, (till they be satisfied of
it is Lawfulness) without sin: Nor will it be a sufficient Excuse in the great
Day of the Lord, if they thus sin, To say, that the Magistrate commanded me to
do it.

If they shall yet further allege, That these Persons agree not to, Walk not
in those Practices and Rules in the Church of England, which are prescribed by
the same Church, and to which the generality of the same Church agree, and
submit; and therefore they may be said to be Separatists and Schismatics.

Though a full Answer to this may be gathered from the Answer to the last
Objection, And what has been said in this before to acquit them from this
Charge upon such an Account. That is, that the Church of England (as such)
never prescribed any such Rules, because they never met in the whole, or in
their Representative, to consult about, or agree upon any such Rules, for the
whole. Nor can any who have made such Rules, pretend themselves upon any
Divine, or Rational grounds to be the Church of England, and entrusted from
above with any such Power to make such Rules for the Churches Practice; nor are
Men bound to use any thing in Gods Worship, or about it, not commanded by God
himself, so long as they suspect such things in themselves, or as they are
circumstanciated, to be unlawful; of which, every Man must be his own Judge for
his own Practice, because it does so highly concern him, as he would please God.

Yet we shall add this further by way of Answer. First, It is no true Rule;
therefore to Practice those things which the generality of a Nation do, barely
because they do so: For, we think, few will deny, that the most go the broad
way, the wrong way, love not, follow not Christ's Laws and Rules. Secondly, That
the generality of the Church of England, in truth do not agree to those Rules
and Practices in the Church; but would rather be glad that they were altered
and Reformed, if the Magistrate would please to permit it; which we will make
out thus: First, it may be taken for granted, we judge, That the greater number
of People are not so studious, as to inform themselves of the true way of
Ordering of Church Affairs and making of Ministers; but take all upon trust, in
these matters with the greatest implicit faith that can be; what ever their
Governors do in these Cases, they subscribe to and practice; do herein as
others do, or as they are enjoined to do, or as their Worldly Interest leads
them. That there are others, who come not near any Churches or Worship at all,
who care for none of these things, are practical Atheists, and of these not a
few. Some again, and that a considerable Number too, who are professedly
against all our ways; as Papists, and others, who pretend to be above all
Ordinances and External Rules in these Matters. So, that when all these are set
apart (as being not fit to give Sentence in the matter, nor their practice of
any consideration in this case.) The number of Knowing, Serious, Conscientious,
and Judicious Christians (whose Sentence only is worthy regard in this
business) in the Church of England, will be but few. Secondly, Of these few,
the Major part consent not, in heart at least, it is not their Judgment, that
those prescribed Rules in the Church of England, are so Decent, Lawful, Useful
to Edification or tend to Peace, as is pretended, as many (though they Actually
submit to them) have openly declared. And there are (no doubt) many more,
(might they speak freely, and not be Offenders) would testify this. A
considerable number also of these demonstrate their dissent by their Sufferings
for their Nonconformity to them, and practicing after another Rule in these
things. If then the Major part of the Knowing, Sober, Judicious, and
Conscientious Christians in England dissent, How can they say, The Church of
England prescribes, or Commands this or that? Or have agreed on, or determined
of this or that? Or that the generality of the Church agree to this, or that,
(for an Agreement must be a judicious Act of the mind) to say, That the Rabble
of Ignorant, Careless, and notoriously scandalous Persons agree to it, love it,
embrace it, and contend highly for it; will help little to commend the Judgment
of the Church, or make her Laws valid. And if this be so, Then, Thirdly, In
what sense, or by what Rule of Reason can one part of the Christians in England
rather be called Schismatics, and Separatists for not agreeing with the other
in these things, than the other part for not agreeing with the first (except,
at least it be in things apparently and undoubtedly Lawful, and tending to
Edification, and so accounted by all, that Offense cannot be given.) It can be
no way resolved, but thus; That those who are uppermost in outward Power,
whether one party or other, will have it so.

We shall therefore end with the words of Tertul. in his Apol. Chap. 39. p.
142, 143. English Translation: We Offend no body, we Injure no body: When any
Virtuous or Godly People are associated, when any Pious or Chaste Persons
Assemble together, their Union should not be called a Faction, but a Lawful
Society.

FINIS.

