QUERIES UPON QUERIES OR Enquiries into certain QUERIES UPON Dr. PIERCE'S
Sermon at Whitehall, Feb. 1.

The third Edition.

Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred Majesty.

Queries upon Queries.
QUERIE I.
WHether for the Papists with restless importunities to solicit for an
indulgence, be to sit down peaceably and grant themselves erroneous? Do they
call that only a sitting down peaceably, not to grow outrageous, and arming
themselves with public force to fight for their Religion? or is it not
moreover not to repine at their present happiness, and to desist from craving
any public favor? If you grant your selves erroneous, is it fit you should be
indulged in your errors? Is it not favor enough to be Connived at, when there
are such sanguinary laws in force against you, which, if his Majesty so
pleased, might be put into execution? Or if he should gratify you, since you
are so erroneous as to advance the Pope's Supremacy above that of Kings,
whether when you have gathered strength by being cherished under his wing, will
you not take the boldness to assert what you have now the confidence to affirm,
and proceed from humble desires of public favor and indulgence, to impudent
demands of public Countenance and settlement? If so, whether it be not
seasonable to give the King a Caveat against such Dissenters, who are wont to
sit down peaceably no longer then they must needs?

QUERIE II.
Though his Majesty had declared his Resolution against your Doctrines before,
yet was that Resolution so strong that 'twas impossible to fortify it? or were
there like to be no assaults made against it? If not, whence come your frequent
desires of a Toleration? If there were, was there not need also of a
Confirmation? Do you not too much overvalue the Courtiers, when you say they
neither know the Fathers and other Authors, nor can judge of those quotations
the Sermon does refer to? If they don't know, nor cannot judge, must you needs
imply them so stupid as to be incapable of instruction? If they have no reason
to suspect them, nor ability to view or disprove the quotations, why may they
not satisfy themselves without an Ocular search? If they have, they are
submitted to their Examination as well as yours, and it is no question but you
will both find them to be exact. How could the Preacher know but that some of
you would hear him? He might assure himself you were usually present, though
not as Auditors, yet as Spies; if not to be converted by it, yet to pick
quarrels at the Sermon. And presuming you there, why might he not intend to
convert you, when he knew that what he delivered was able to persuade you, if
it did not meet with prejudices more invincible then your judgments to subdue?
Might not the Discourse be directed to check your insolence, who upon the
King's Declaration began to walk undisguis'd? or to prevent the growth of
Popery, that though you compassed Sea and land, yet you might gain no more
Proselytes by your industry? or -- etc.

Querie III.
Suppose we should say, by what was from the Beginning we mean Primitive
examples: Can these be no rule of Reformation, because we are not to do as men
have done, but as men ought to do? Does not the same Reason destroy all
Patterns, and oblige us to abstain even from doing well, because others have
done so before us? Christ, to reform the Pharisees, sends them to the Beginning
for a Rule; we, to reform the Romanists, send them to the Beginning too. If
Christ did as he ought, why may not we imitate him, and at the same time do
what has been done, and what ought to be done? If not -- Blasphemy. If to do
as has been done, and as ought to be done, which you so carefully distinguish,
be inconsistent; Is it not easy to infer, because the Papists do now as they
have done, therefore they do not as they ought to do? Suppose again, that we
understand Primitive Rules contained in Scripture: As for those Articles which
lie plain and open, they need not the Light either of yours, or ours, or
another Interpretation to discover them; so that your Dilemma has no horns, or
but blunt ones: As for the other, the Querie is, whether you or we more closely
follow the confessed Rules of interpretation. If you have, do you not lay that
crime to your own charge, which we endeavor but to prove you guilty of, a
partiality in your own cause? If we have, why do you still hug your own
errors, and not rather close with our Truths, while our Arms are open to
embrace you?

Querie IV.
When you imply that the Preacher in Contending only for the old Protestant
way, contended not for that which was from the Beginning: what do you mean by
the old Protestant way? That good old way, before it had the Name of
Protestant, or after? If before, it was and is the same way which was from the
beginning; and did not he in contending for it, contend for that which was from
the beginning? If after, he confesses 'twas so called p. 36. because the
Assertors of it protested against the cruel edict of Worms, and that the Title
was almost as novel as a very great part of the Roman Creed is; why then do you
say, that he contended only for the New, when 'twas indeed for the old
Protestant way? When you say, that the Eastern Churches claim a greater
Antiquity then ours; do you mean, the Articles of their faith were more
Ancient, or they were more early in embracing them? If the former; why is it
not proved? If the latter; what is it to the purpose? Do we pretend to have
received the Christian faith before all other Churches? or rather do we not
avow our selves to own the same Truths, which if they received sooner, yet both
of us from the Beginning?

Querie V.
It had been said, Sermon. p. 10. That in matters of Indifferency which are
brought into the Government, every Church has the liberty to make her own
Constitutions; but we are to look upon nothing as an Article of Faith, unless
it comes from the Beginning, etc. Which passage did you read, or no? If not,
why do you undertake to make Queries upon it? If you did, why do you talk of
Surplices, Organs, Bishoprics, Officials, Pluralities, etc. and take so much
pains to no purpose, unless it be to amuse the ignorant and unobserving Reader?
Did the Sermon say all things must be reduced to what they were in the
Beginning, or only Articles of Faith? And are Organs, etc. Articles of Faith?
While you personate the Fanatic, don't you talk as impertinently as if you
indeed were one? But, perhaps, the whole Querie was raised on purpose to tell
the world, the Preacher had Pluralities. If so, why had you not withal told
us, how he came by them? Not by purchase, but desert? not by seeking, but
acceptance, when they were cast upon him? That they are Dignities, not Cures?
But setting all this aside, Do you think him worthy of his Preferments, or not?
If not, why do you bestow one upon him? for he was never Canon of York till you
made him. If you do, why do you envy him, and discover this envy, in reckoning
his being Chaplain to the King as one of those Preferments, when the world
knows there is nothing but trouble and honor, no Emolument at all? Whether
therefore is it lawful to dissemble and falsify, or no? If not, why do you do
it? If it be, sure from the Beginning, unless among the Romanists, it was not
so.

QUERIE VI.
Whether there be any Heresy in the world which never had a Beginning? If not,
whether it may not be said to begin with its first Author and raiser? If so,
whether all of the same persuasion may not derive their Antiquity from him? Why
then may not the Disciplinarians fetch theirs as far as the Heretic Aerius,
who says as plainly as Epiphanius can make him speak, that a Bishop does not at
all excel a Presbyter, either in order, honor, or dignity? Whether was S.
Peter any more then an ordinary Presbyter or no? If he was, then he was not the
first Presbyterian, as you would have him. If he was not, how come his
Successors to be Bishops? If a Presbyter and a Bishop be all one, why does not
the Bishop of Rome level himself with his brother Presbyters? And why may not
the Socinian look upon Sabellius, who, if Epiphanius speaks truth, did think
such a thing as that the Son and holy Ghost were no Gods, or not coequal and
coeternal with the Father? But to stir that no farther which stinks already, To
what end is your whole sixth Querie directed? Is it any advantage to your
Cause, whether the Anabaptists look upon Agrippinus, the Solifidians upon
Eunomius, or no? Are you angry that such petite heresies should have founders
of so great names, while your own great one pretends to S. Peter, but has
indeed none? Were you not afraid, lest the other parts of your Pamphlet should
fall under the censure of the Preacher's pen, and therefore endeavored by such
little plots to divert him? If you were, Whether your whole Religion, like your
Queries, have any more then a flattering outside, not to be searched into by a
severer eye then that of a Novice?

Querie VII.
When Christ tells S. Peter, his faith should not fail, did he mean it should
be impossible to deceive him? Are those Scriptures that speak of full Assurance
of faith, to be understood of full perfection of knowledge? When our Savior
says that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against his Church, are the words
to be understood of infallability or perpetuity? To enter into Heaven through
persecutions and tribulations, is it not to be saved so as by fire? Were not
those imprisoned spirits, the souls of those who perished in the Flood, and
were reserved in some safe, but tolerable custody, till Christ came and
preached Repentance to them, which, upon their delivery, immediately vanished?
Or if Purgatory be that prison, is it not an excellent employment for the Pope
to be the Jailer? Was Maximilian the second forced by the Protestants, or by
the Reasonableness of the thing it self, to write that Letter asserting
Priest's Marriage, considering all which Thuanus says is, that he did it Re
ipsa urgente? Why is it not as lawful to marry, as to keep a Concubine, one
being allowed by God, the other by the Pope Only? Why did Scotus say that
Transubstantiation was not a Truth before the Lateran Council, if he might not
be quoted for it? And when he says non fuit dogma fidei, who taught you thus to
construe it, that 'twas only forecast till then? May not a man be damned for
eating that bread, and drinking that wine unworthily, which represents the Body
and Blood of Christ? Again, Did Christ give the Bread to any but Disciples and
Ministers, or not? If not, why do you not withhold this from the Laity too? If
he did, how does it appear that he gave them not wine also? If there were none
besides Disciples present at the Administration, how could Christ give either
Bread or Wine to them, they being not there to receive it? If there were any,
by the same evidence by which it appears they were there, is it not clear
likewise that they received both? When the Christians went from house to house
breaking Bread, would it not be a hard case, if they should have no drink to
it? Did they not encourage Nero to cloth them with Beasts-skins by confining
themselves to Horse-meals, it being fit their garb should be suitable to their
fare? Suppose the Jewish Liturgy was in Hebrew, could not the Jews understand
that Hebrew, no, not their Mother Tongue? Were not the Proselytes to their
Religion proficients in their Language too? If not, how came they to be
Proselytes, the only probable way of their Conversion being either by reading
the Jew's Books, or conversing with their persons? and could they do either
without understanding their Language? If they were, though the Jewish Liturgy
were in Hebrew, why could they not understand it? You grant the Primitive
Liturgies were in Greek and Latin; were not they the most Common Tongues, one
of the Eastern, the other of the Western world? If ignorance of the Tongue had
been requisite, why did they suffer them to remain in such known Languages? If
praying in an unknown Tongue was established by primitive practice before
Gregory the Great's time, was that practice corrupt or no? If it was, why did
he establish it by an Ecclesiastical Law? If not, how do you reconcile it with
S. Paul's command to pray with understanding? 1 Cor. 14. If Invocation of
Saints were heard of in Ignatius his time, it was not in Christ's, who forbids
us to pray to Angels, which sure are greater Favorites then the Saints. If an
Universal Supremacy was from S. Peter by right, though it could not be got till
Boniface the third; did Gregory the Great know that it was his Right, or no? If
he did, why was he so injurious to S. Peter himself, and that See, as to
disclaim it, and that with so much spleen and indignation, as to call him
Antichrist who should usurp it? If not, how comes the Enquirer to be wiser then
his Holiness? If that Pope was Infallible, then Omniscient too; and if you know
more then he, you must know more then he who knows all things; then likewise
Boniface must be Antichrist, because Gregory says so: If he was not, how did
his Successors gain that Prerogative, who had far less knowledge then himself?

Querie VIII.
May not the Catholic Church have many parts, and yet preserve its unity? As
in the same Natural body there are many Members, yet but one Body. Are not the
Churches of the several Kingdoms of Christendom these parts? Whether is it
possible for Corruptions either in Doctrine or Government to creep into them?
If not, how came they into the Church of Rome? If it be, is the Church so
corrupted to be Reformed or not? If not, why does not our Savior permit the
Pharisees quietly to enjoy their old Customs of Divorce? If a Member be
diseased, may we not endeavor after a Cure? If it may be Reformed, what
Physician must we consult? Must we go to Rome for a Remedy? from thence
possibly come our Corruptions, and can we expect a Reformation from them? Will
the same Enemy that sowed our Tares, pull them up too? Can the sword which made
the wound, become the plaster? Is not every King Supreme in his own Dominions?
Have we nopt the same warrantable Rules of Reformation, plain Scripture,
Natural Reason, and Moral Prudence, which others have? If we are Corrupt, why
may not he reform us? Does Christ bid us follow a Multitude to do evil? or
rather are we not commanded to let them depart from us, and purge our selves to
a Primitive integrity? Is that one way we are all bid to be of to be found in
the Roman or the English Church? If you say in the Roman, where do you read
that? If in the English, do you not walk in a wrong way, because in a way that
is not ours?

Querie IX.
Were our Reformers here in England members of the Catholic Church, or no? If
not, then the Roman Church is no part of the Catholic, because they were of
the Roman Faith, and yet according to you not Catholics. If they were, may the
same person be a member of the Catholic, and the Head of a particular Church,
or not? If not, do you not split your self upon those dangerous Assertions,
That a King can be no Christian, or a Christian no King? If he may, why may he
nor reform the Church he is Head of, as head of that part, though not as a
Member of the whole? If therefore those Members of our Church who desire a
farther Reformation, were Heads of it too, they might reform us: but so long as
they are only Members, I think they may not; what think you? If it be your
judgment, that they may, why might not our first Reformers, though Members of
the Roman Church, yet reform it? If you think that the Head only can reform,
whether is the King Head of the Church which is in his own Kingdom or no? If
not, are you not traitorous, while you go about to rob him of his Supremacy,
and do you not deserve favor and indulgence from him? If he be, why do you
quarrel with our first Reformers, when you know the chief of them was the King?

Querie X.
Whether those points commanded to be believed by the Council of Trent upon
pain of damnation, were to be believed upon that severe penalty, before the
sitting of that Council. If they were, then those are damned who died before
the Creation of those Articles, because they did not believe them; how then
fare the souls of our Sires? If not, was not that a Cheritable Council, to make
the way to Heaven narrower then Christ had left it? But supposing, with you,
that they were not necessary, the Querie will be, whether they were lawful
before it. If they were, then were they not added by the Council of Trent, as
you acknowledge they were, but established by a more Ancient Sanction: If not,
could that Council make an Article of Faith, which is beyond the power of any
Authority under heaven to do? Gal. 1. 8. Can that which is unlawful in it
self, be made lawful by a Command? or may the daughters drink poison, because
they are bid to do so by their Mother? or if they might, is not Rome a kind
Mother, that will prescribe it? Suppose again, that those points were
Antecedently indifferent, such as might be believed, or might not; were they
enjoined because they might be believed, or because they might not? If because
they might, then either that doctrine may be believed which is not Apostolical,
contrary to S. Paul; or those Injunctions were Apostolical, contrary to your
selves, who confess they were New. If because they might not, Oh the power of
the Council of Trent, which can make us believe those things that an Angel from
Heaven may not do! How does it now follow, because a lawful Magistrate may
command a lawful thing to be done upon pain of damnation, disobedience to a
lawful command being damnable; therefore the Council of Trent may as well
command things to be believed that are utterly unlawful, upon the same penalty?

QUERIE XI.
What do you mean by the Church? The virtual Church, as you are pleased to call
the Pope? or the Representative Church, as you always style your Councils? or,
as we understand it; The whole Company of Believers? If you take it in this
latter sense, the Scriptures and the Primitive Fathers were to be found in the
Church; why might we not then have recourse to them? When we suspected that the
Pragmatical Romanists delivered to us Traditions of men, instead of the
Doctrines of the Gospel, might we not consult those Oracles for satisfaction?
If in the two former senses, why might we not run from the Church, i. e. from
the Pope and his Councils, to the Scriptures and Fathers? If we might, have you
any reason to be angry with our Reformers for doing what you allow them? If
not, do you not advance your own Constitutions above those of the Scriptures
and the Fathers, while you will us to obey yours and slight theirs? Again, Let
us by the Church understand the whole number of Christians that lived betwixt
Christ's days and those of our Reformers, called by you the Essential Church;
was there not in that great Intervall of time a succession of different Ages
and Centuries? Did not a part of this whole number of Christians fill up those
several Ages? Do we not call those the Primitive Christians, that the Primitive
Church, which lived and flourished in the Age of Christ, or the Centuries next
succeeding? Had not you in the latter Ages, by entertaining new Articles of
Faith, by introducing other Doctrines then what were from the Beginning,
corrupted your selves, and so became Separatists from the Primitive faith,
truth, and Church? Why might not our Reformers then make a secession from the
corrupted Romanists, as they did from the purer Christians? If there be any
difference in the Schisms, it is this; you separated from the Primitive by
defiling, we from you by reforming our selves: And which, I pray, is the
greater credit?

QUERIE XII.
Whether when the Protestants left Rome, they did not take the Scriptures, the
Primitive Church, and the four first general Councils along with them. If they
did not, why don't you show us that Iota as to which they left them? If they
did take them, is it any doubt whether they left them?

QUERIE XIII.
Whether he that said Jerusalem was the Mother Church of the Jews, did not say
Antioch was the Mother, at least the eldest, Church of the Gentiles? If so, is
it possible that Rome should be their Mother too? If there be two mothers, must
not Rome, which was the latter, be a stepmother to them? And are they not like
to lead a prosperous and happy life under such an indulgent Matron, who is wont
even to kill her children out of very kindness to them?

QUERIE XIV.
If S. Peter brought Christianity into Britain, as Gildas says, and you
consent, whether this will not exempt the British Church from any subjection to
the Sea of Rome. If ever Peter was there (which is a question not to be
decided) did he bring it hither before he carried it thither, or after? If
before, why must we, who were the first Christians, truckle under Rome that is
our junior? If after, was it while he was living, or after his Death? If while
alive, what will become of your pretensions, that he seated himself at Rome,
there exercised Episcopal Authority, and dying there bequeathed his chair to
Clemens, or Linus, and the succeeding Popes? If in his absence he left a
Deputy, it will seem strange that one man's head should fit another shoulders:
If not, 'twill be more strange that the body should tarry there while the head
travailed into England. If after his Death, are we not beholding to him that he
would rise out of his grave, and take such a long journey to plant the Gospel
here? And will it not become you who are so much devoted to S. Peter, to own us
for your Superiors, if for no other Reason, yet for the miraculous plantation?

QUERIE XV.
Whether you do well to make a Comparison between Henry 8. and Phocas, who was
indeed an incomparable villain. Was not one a King by Birth, the other of an
obscure parentage, and by merit but a Centurion? One came to his Crown by
rightful succession; the other to the Empire by the unnatural murder of his
Master Mauritius and his children. One had reason to be displeased at Clement
7. who had so often deluded him in his appeals, so long usurped what was his
Right; the other had not the same reason to be displeased at Cyriacus, who
could not invade his Right, that had no other Right to be invaded but what
blood and rapine could give him to the gallows. Suppose he had been the lawful
Emperor, if he had denied Cyriacus the Title of Universal, and made himself
supreme within his own Dominions, he had done well, And did H. 8. who was
indeed our lawful King, do any more then throw off the Pope, and restore his
own Supremacy to himself? You applaud Phocas his justice for robbing
Constantinople, and placing the Title of Universal in the Bishop of Rome, that
being the chief Seat of his Empire; would you have been content if H. 8. when
he degraded Clement, had made the Bishop of London Universal, that being the
Metropolis of his Kingdom? If not, do you not do to others as you would not
be done to your selves, in permitting Phocas to strip Cyriacus, and not
suffering King H. to do the like to you? If you would, why do you appropriate
that title to your selves, while you confess that, if the King had so pleased,
the Bishop of London might have been as Universal as my Lord of Rome is?

QUERIE XVI.
S. Peter says Christ is the Cornerstone, 1 Pet. 2. 6. you say S. Peter is:
which must we hearken to? If S. Peter were a pillar, could he be a Cornerstone
too? Whether S. Paul knew S. Peter or no? If not, why did he not excuse himself
for rebuking him, as he did for his reviling the High priest, with an I wist
not who he was? If he did, sure he knew him to be not so much, or no more then
his equal, when he rebuked him so openly, and made no Apology for his boldness
neither. Whether the Pope be not S. Peter's successor, as in his Chair, so in
his Dissimulation too, because he can pretend to humility in the midst of so
great pride, and exactly counterfeit it, while he has such an Absolute
Authority. Whether from this Humility does not proceed his so inveterate Enmity
to Ambition in others, that he will not suffer them to aspire beyond his own
great toe. Whether S. Paul might not be born among the Jews, and yet Preach
among the Heathens; and so though he were an Hebrew of Hebrews by parentage,
yet be an Apostle of the Gentiles by employment? If the Pope be Lord of Kings,
as you say, does he not Lord it over God's heritage? Are Kings, no part of
God's heritage? Does not Christ's Vicar too much disgrace his master, by
condescending so far as to be the servant of the servants of God? They that
rule over the Gentiles exercise Lordship; but do our Lords Bishops rule over
the Gentiles? A Gentile and a Heathen, you say, are all one: and is it not
enough to make us Heretics, but you must make us Heathens too? and so neither
keep Faith with us, because we are Heretics, nor suffer us to hold the same
Faith with you, because we are Heathens?

Imprimatur.

Dan. Nicols, R. P. D. Arch. Cant. Capel. Domesticus.
Ex aedibus Lambethanis Martii 21. 1662/3.
FINIS.

