Divine Characters: OR, The True Christian Discovered, AND The Hypocrite
Detected. In Three Treatises. The first Treatise showing, That both Saints and
Unconverted Sinners ought daily to go to God in Jesus Christ, for Pardon of
their sins, because they are many and great. The Second Treatise showing, How
we are to expect Salvation, not from any Righteousness of our own, but by the
Righteousness of the alone Mediator, JESUS CHRIST; how we shall be made
Partakers thereof, and Evidences of the Truth of it. The Third Treatise
showing, The Gospel-Evidences of a True Christian, as they are experienced by
those who are truly Believers, and the false Appearances thereof plainly
refuted.

To which is added The Sum and Substance of the Christian Religion, in a
SHORT CATECHIZE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1695.

Divine Characters. In Three Treatises.
The First Treatise. Showing that both Saints and Unconverted Sinners ought
daily to go to God in Jesus Christ for Pardon of their Sins, because they are
many and great.
PSALM. XXV. 11. For thy Names sake, O Lord, pardon mine Iniquity, for it is
great.


IN this Psalm, you have David's sins laid in with weight upon his Conscience,
and in the deep sense of their guilt, pleading with God about mercy and pardon;
The sense of that one great sin, in the matter of Vriah, (meant especially in
the Text) brought in the sense of other sins of his youth upon him, as is
usually Gods way in humbling a sinner, and at ver. 7. you have him at the feet
of God, begging as for his life, as to the remission of them all; Remember not
the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: According to thy mercy, remember
thou me, for thy Goodness, O Lord: And here at the Text, for thy Names sake, O
Lord, etc That which I design to lay before you from the words, is to open to
you, and press upon you, the weight, and blessedness of a pardoned condition,
that you may be awakened to it, while the day of mercy lasts, and may indeed be
in very good earnest about it, till, through infinite grace, you may obtain it,
and live and dye in the sweet and blessed peace and comfort of it, through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

That which I intend to give out from hence (through the spirit of grace
assisting) is but as previous and preparatory to the opening of a justified
estate, and the New Creature in Christ; that (if God will) your consciences may
be brought to a thorough a wakening, a spiritual sight and conviction of sin,
and a self-emptyness, which is the good and safe way of a Soul to Jesus Christ;
which from this Scripture take, in these plain Observations.

Obs. 1. That great and weighty concernment that should most of all take up the
thoughts of the hearts of poor sinners, is that their sins may be pardoned.

2. Such who come to God by Jesus Christ, to have their sins pardoned, they
look upon them as great sins. -- for it is Great.

3. The great reason of Gods pardoning a sinner, and the Plea that a poor
sinner has with God, is, that God will pardon for his own Names sake.

1. To begin with the first proposition, viz.

That great and weighty thing that should most of all take up the thoughts of
the hearts of all the Children of men, is, that their sins may be pardoned.

This may be evinced from the frame of blessed David's spirit, and other the
pardoned ones of the Lord up and down the holy Scriptures, exercised with such
a violence and importunity with the Lord, in this matter of the Pardon of their
sins, as if they had no other thing, besides what conduced thereunto, to beg of
God in the world, and all that God gave them in the world (as indeed it is not)
were nothing without it, therefore you have them thus wrestling with God about
it. According to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my
trangressions, Psalm. 51.1. If there be any mercy in Heaven, let a poor guilty
soul have a drop of it; yea, David lays a kind of violence upon God, Psalm.
65.2. -- As for our transgressions, thou shall purge them away, thou shall do
it, I cannot, must not, will not be denied this, thou shall do it for me. So
Moses interceding for the people, Exodus 39.9. If I have found grace in thy
sight, O Lord, let my Lord, I pray thee, go amongst us, (for it is a
stiff-necked people) and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine
Inheritance; with what vehemence of heart does Moses cry, if I have any favor
with thee, let it be laid out this way, Oh Lord, let my Lord, etc. Otherwhiles,
when the blessed sense of a pardoned condition is upon their hearts; Blessed is
he whose trangressions is forgiven. Blessed man, or woman, as ever he was born!
Blessed He, and only blessed, and fully blessed, and for ever blessed, whose
sins are pardoned! And then admiring the blessed God in such riches of Grace,
as to pardon sinners; Who is like to thee, a God pardoning iniquity? Mic. 7.18.
Thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, etc. Neh. 9.17. Psalm.
103.1, 2, 3, 10. Bless the Lord, oh my soul, and all that is within me, bless
his holy name! why? what had the Lord done? see verse 3. Oh, who forgiveth all
thine iniquities; who forgiveth, and forgiveth All great sins a well as less;
sins of nature as well as life; sins before conversion, and sins since
conversion; sins of knowledge, as well as of ignorance; for David was under all
these, yet All, All, All, forgiven, and that freely too, only because the Lord
is gracious, verse 8. and so forgiven them as never to come before him any
more. As far as the East is from the West, so far has he removed our
trangressions from us, verse 12.

I shall hint some Reasons of the Truth, why it is, that the pardon of sins
does, or should, so greatly take up the hearts of sinful creatures.

Reason 1. The pardon of sin should thus greatly take up the hearts of all that
indeed expect pardon, because 'twas the greatest thing (if I may so speak) that
ever took up Gods heart, how a sinner might be pardoned. He laid forth more of
his wisdom and goodness about it, than in the making of the Heavens and the
Earth: The framing of the New Covenant, the giving out of his eternal Son Jesus
Christ, God manifested in the flesh, such a Glorious way of reconciling justice
and mercy through the death of Christ, (the choicest piece of divine Wisdom
that ever was brought forth) they were all conversant about, and their proper
tendency was about this great and weighty concernment, how, and that a sinner
might be pardoned; when Moses had that blessed enterview and parley with the
Lord, Exodus 33. and 34. and Moses getting nearer and nearer to God, who was
glimpsing out a ray of glory upon him, breaks out, Show me thy glory: I will,
says God, I will show thee what way of Glory I most design to my self among
the Sons of men, -- I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will
show mercy on whom I will show mercy. And as if this had not been enough (the
heart of the blessed God was so infinitely taken with it) Chap. 34.5, 6. The
Lord comes nearer to him, descended in a Cloud, and stood with him there; and
as if merely to have spoken what he had before said to Moses, Namely, That he
should have mercy, had not been enough, at verse 6. He proclaims it, and makes
it as his proper Name and most glorious Title, The Lord, the Lord God, Merciful
and Gracious, etc. verse 7. forgiving iniquity, etc. As if forgiving iniquity
were the great design of glory he had upon the world; his heart most affected
and taken up with it; this is the first reason; poor sinners should have their
hearts most taken up about the pardon of sins, because the heart of the
infinite wise and blessed God is most taken up about it.

2. The pardon of sin should so greatly take up the heart of a poor guilty
sinner, because Nothing is a Blessing to a man till his sins are pardoned, but
All a curse. The Scripture is well known that proves it, among many, Deuteronomy.
28.15, 16. If thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to
observe to do all his Commandments, and his Statutes which I command thee this
day, that all those curses shall come upon thee and overtake thee, Cursed shall
thou be in the City, and cursed shall thou be in the field; Cursed shall be thy
basket and thy Store; Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of
thy Land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep; Cursed shall
thou be when thou come in, and cursed shall thou be when thou go out, the
Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke in all that thou
set thine hand for to do, etc. Now that Soul that does not hearken to the
voice of God, according to the tenor of the New Covenant, to come unto Jesus
Christ, to have his sins pardoned, to have the spirit given him to walk before
God in all his ways, is in an unpardoned condition, and so liable to all these
curses; now, under the old Testament God did more usually come forth in visible
strokes of punishment upon outward mercies: But under the New Testament, his
judgments (especially upon such as are under the Gospel) are more spiritual,
(as blessings to his people run in a more spiritual way) as in cursing them
with hardness and blindness of heart, having resisted the truth, but yet though
such outward curses are not so visibly and frequently executed, (though
sometimes they are) yet unpardoned unconverted sinners enjoy not their outward
good things as a blessing, but they serve but to further their damnation, if
their hearts are not (through infinite grace) made soft, and turn unto the
Lord, that they may be pardoned. Now, to have outward mercies, and be hardened
in an impenitent estate under them, is a far greater curse than to have them
smitten or imbittered from the Lord, though with the heaviest hand. This is the
2d. Reason of the point: Every thing is a curse, (while such) to an unpardoned
sinner; therefore it is of the greatest weight to have his heart taken up about
it.

3. The person of an unpardoned sinner is hated of the Lord, therefore the
weight of it is very great, Psalm. 5.5. Thou hate all workers of iniquity.
All, be they what they will, high or low, rich or poor, God hates them; and
while they are workers of iniquity, they are certainly unpardoned; what they
may be in the decree of God, is nothing to that sinner in this condition: While
he is a worker of iniquity, he has no ground for any other apprehension of
God, unless he turn in unto him; now, what a dreadful thing is it, to be hated
of that great and righteous God, a drop of whose wrath is able to scortch the
Soul with uspeakable torment; yet such is the condition of a wretched
unpardoned sinner; therefore it is his great concernment to look to it, etc.

4. While a sinner is unpardoned, he is under the Law. What that is, I shall,
if God will, further discover; he stands bound over to the most exact
fulfilling of it, under the penalty of Hell, bound to make God satisfaction to
the utmost, upon the least breach; and being under transgression of it, is
under wrath and condemnation, if he abide so, without Remedy. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, but All condemnation to those
that are out of Christ Jesus, as all unpardoned sinners are; therefore it is a
condition above all others to be weighed and considered, and not to be rested
in one moment.

5. Neither the Prayers, nor Alms, nor any other duty of an unpardoned sinner,
are at all accepted with the Lord. This wretched sinners will not admit of, but
think if they perform any duty to God, he accepts of it, and that indeed it
makes an atonement for their sins; take that one eminent place in Isa. 1.15.
Though you make many prayers, yet I will not hear you; mark it, you that think
because you make, or say, as you style it, many good prayers, sure God hears
you; No, says God, I will not hear; why? see verse 16. they were not washed
from their sins, therefore the Prophet calls them to come to the Lord, that
they might be pardoned, verse 38. It Is true, when a poor sinner has his heart
smitten for sin, and comes to the Lord, upon the account of promises of grace
and pardon through Jesus Christ, with full purpose of heart to cleave unto the
Lord, and so begs for pardon, and all things that do accompany pardon and
salvation, then God hears his cries at the very first breathing of his soul,
Lam. 3.56. but not till then does God regard the multitude of his Prayers,
Alms, Worship, Keeping conscience to men; therefore certainly if nothing be
accepted with God, till in a pardoned condition, such an estate requires great
and deep thoughts of heart of it.

6. Upon all this, it will follow, That an unpardoned sinner will have no other
word from the Lord Jesus Christ at his coming, but go ye cursed; Everlasting
darkness, and wrath, and woes, and all misery must be his portion for ever. If
he dye in his sins, Joh. 8.29. his soul must be eternally damned, without all
remedy; Live and dye unpardoned, and be damned unpardoned: When Jesus Christ
shall come, neither he himself, nor Saint, nor Angel, will or can speak one
word, for a soul that dies unpardoned; though the soul screek out for a drop of
mercy, it will be answered with nothing but the Echoes of the screekings of
other desperate souls, ready to be hurled with it into the same everlasting
burnings; no eye to pity there, though Ministers and Saints did warn, invite,
weep, mourn, pity, when on this side the grave, yet at the great Judgment it
will not be so. No, nothing but upbraiding of Devils, for neglecting
Gospel Grace, and refusing the terms of pardon, and for gross security; this
will be the portion of every unpardoned sinner, that neglects the day of his
salvation; therefore the pardon of sins requires the deepest thoughts of heart,
and can never be made too sure to a poor sinful Creature.

Use 1. Is the pardon of sin be of so great and infinite weight, how does this
meet with the wretched deplorable carelesnefs of a world of souls in this day,
that think of nothing less than whether their sins are pardoned, that will hear
of nothing that may call this great matter into question, or may awaken them to
it, Oh how many poor souls, I fear too many of you, (though so often and
earnestly pressed to it) that were never before the Lord mourning after the
pardon of your sins? What a light matter would it be to be pardoned, if there
should be no more in it, nor care about it, than most sinners, that call
themselves Christians, make about it: Ah sinners, why do you make no more ado,
no more matter of it? why so senseless of that, which is alone worthy all the
thoughts of thy heart? if thou should live a million of years to dispatch
this one thing, to get thy sins all pardoned. You that are Elderly people have
a large reckoning, especially upon your account of sinning against Gospel Light
and grace; make haste, what you do, do quickly, lay hold on eternal life, the
sun is ready to set upon you, and woe with you, as ever you were men and women,
if you fail of a good and sure dispatch of this one concernable thing, that
your sins are pardoned; And you that are younger, take heed least the day of
grace set upon you, and you be given up to your own hearts lusts, and no word
that is spoken from God or Man shall ever reach you: Oh, tremble at trifling
with convictions and light, but begin to honor the Lord Jesus, and bow unto
him, and wait for the promised effusion of his spirit, and the joy of the Lord
shall be the joy of your youth, and the Love of the Lord will be very sweet and
precious to you.

2d. Exhort. Oh then let every soul of us be deeply affected with this weighty
matter; let your souls say within you, Oh the dreadfulness of an unpardoned
condition! what tongue can express it? to have all my store, (little or much,)
house, corn, cattle, trade, all under a curse, and enjoy it as a curse, and
only to further my eternal damnation! to be hated of the great God, and not
loved, to be under all the condemnation of the Law! wherever I read of wrath
and woe, it belongs to me; to have not one of my prayers, nor any thing else,
accepted of the Lord! to be in a condition of expecting nothing from Jesus
Christ at his coming, but go go ye cursed; when I shall see so many blessed
souls that took pains for Heaven, enter into the Kingdom, and my self shut out!
Woe is me, if I speak peace to my soul in such an estate one moment more; Awake
my soul, Awake! Away, in to the blessed God, for mercy, pardon, grace, Christ,
his blood, spirit, holiness, eternal life; I will go, (the Lord helping me) and
cry in the bitterness of my soul for them all; and if 'twere possibe to weary
the Lord with the cries of my poor soul, I will do it, till he have mercy upon
me, and bid me go in peace; the Gracious God shall as hardly deny me, as ever
he did any poor sinner that lay bleeding at his feet for mercy and grace from
Heaven, to heal a poor condemned soul; Oh what have I been doing in the world
all this while? get a little something, and my sins unpardoned; in daily danger
of dying in them, and so be lost without all remedy for ever; Oh! such will be
the great thoughts of heart about the pardon of sins, when the Lord shall speak
to a poor sinner, and the Conscience shall be thoroughly awake about it.

Oh! let me yet in the name of the Lord, argue out this matter with thee. Be
serious for once, and ponder it in thy heart, what is health or wealth? what is
it to have something about thee in the world, and lay up yearly, and thou go
deeper in debt with the just God every day? What if all the world be at Peace
with thee, and God thy enemy, and hate thee, as thou have been showed? What if
all the world say of thee, Blessed, if God, and his holy Word of truth,
pronounce thee Cursed, because thy sins lie upon thy soul, and the Spirit of
grace is not upon thee? Ah! poor Creature, do not, do not let thy sins lie upon
thy precious soul any longer, do not be contented to be a child of Gods wrath
any longer; Oh! do not thou, poor careless soul, if there be a spark of pity in
thee; Do not, as the Devil flatters, rest in this, and say I hope better, and I
hope it is better with me, and I hope I am or shall be pardoned, and so fall
asleep till thou drop into Hell. You that think it an easy common matter to be
pardoned, know not what it is, you have yet no part in this blessedness.

Says a poor convicted soul, 1. It Is a great matter that any sinner in the
world is pardoned, much more such a one as I, if ever I attain to it.

2. Souls that get pardon, do make it their greatest care to be assured of it,
they do not leave the matter at sixes and sevens, and put it off with bidding
the heart hope well, but they labor after a Gospel- assurance of it.

3. Such Souls will labor to see that nothing be wanting that must accompany
pardon of sin, and a state of salvation, Heb. 6.9.

4. They try all their pretenees to pardon and grace over and over; and will
take nothing upon trust from their hearts, or the Devils flatteries, or the
flatteries of carnal Ministers; but search and prove, and lay their hearts
under the Word and Spirit, till it be sealed by the Holy Ghost, and that they
are wrought of God for this self same thing, and that he has given them the
Earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 5.5. Well therefore say in thy heart, in good
earnest, Oh! it has not been so with me, I have been careless, I thought well
of my self, I never questioned this weighty matter to purpose. Oh! the Lord
give me grace, to take pains in the use of means, to be violent for Heaven. Oh!
I will not rest (Oh! let me not) till I am assured indeed that my, my sins are
done away, and Christ is mine: Go, and say, and do it, and the God of all grace
and might be with thee in it.

But yet further to press the weight of this matter upon thy Conscience, that
thou may go off thoroughly convinced, and resolved to pursue effectually the
compassing of this so great a blessing, of getting thy soul in a pardoned
estate, Do but weigh with me the matchless blessedness of such a condition, and
methinks thy heart should not but be taken with it.

1. The first is, Peace with God, Jesus Christ having made Peace, Romans 5.1.
Col. 1.20.

2. Consider, Pardoned souls become the dear Children of God, see Ephesians. 1.5.
etc. Having predestined us unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ unto
himself, according to the good pleasure of his Will, to the praise of the glory
of his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved; in whom we have
Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, etc. The glorious grace
of Adoption comes in upon the forgiveness of sins; therefore Chap. 5.1. the
Apostle further hints this so blessed a privilege; Be ye followers of God, as
dear Children; and Gal. 4.5. the Apostle gives it out as the great and blessed
fruit of Redemption, -- that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. Oh! to be
translated from being amongst the children of wrath, to be numbered among the
dear Children of God, to come under the protection, care, tender love of God,
as a Father, What soul would not be restless till he attain unto it?

3. Pardoned souls have access to God, Ephesians. 2.18, 12. In whom we have boldness
and access, with confidence, by the faith of him, Heb. 4.16. Let us therefore
come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace
to help in time of need. This is the blessedness of pardoned souls, they have
free access to God, as a Child to a Father, to speak, and plead with the Lord:
As soon as ever they come before the Lord, they are admitted into his presence,
and God's eye and ear is toward them, and they have their requests, either in
kind, or a better thing given to them. This is another inestimable good of
blessed pardoned souls.

4. As they are Gods dear Children, and have free access to him; so when once
he has freely and fully pardoned them, he loves them with an infinite, unmixt,
unchangeable Love: Behold what manner of love is this, etc. 1 John 3.1. The
Lord does freely let out love, full love, to his pardoned ones, as if they had
never sinned, because he never looks upon them out of Christ; when God takes a
poor sinner to himself, he does not barely and merely pardon him, and save him
from wrath, and no more, (as earthly Princes pardon many whom they love not)
but God sets his Love upon them, as it can never enter into his heart to hate
them: He that loves me, says Christ, shall be loved of my Father, Joh. 14.21.
And if God afflict them, it is to make them better, more like unto himself, to
bestow more grace upon them, Heb. 12.10. and Gods Love to his blessed children
is like himself, infinite, unmixt, everlasting. This is another infinite
blessing of pardoned souls, to be thus loved by their God.

5. Pardoned souls are brought into a justified state, from which they shall
never fall. Thus runs the tenor of the new Covenant, the bottom of all this
blessedness; I will remember their sins no more, Heb. 8.12. -- No more, Words
of a sweet and blessed sound to whom they are spoken by the Holy Ghost, that
when poor souls that have come to Jesus Christ in a Gospel way, for pardon, and
have pleaded, and taken hold of promises of grace for that end, and yet
sometimes unbelief is stirring. Oh! will not God, one time or other, call back
to remembrance all my former iniquities, and charge them upon me? No, says the
Lord, it shall never enter into my heart, I will remember them No More; Blessed
words, and blessed condition indeed. Ah! who would be without it?

6. Pardoned souls shall be kept in the hand of the Lord in all their ways, 1
Pet. 1.5. His Love, Fear, Laws, Power, Spirit, shall be in their hearts, that
they shall not fall from him, Jer. 82.40. And I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good; but I
will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me; He
preserves the souls of his Saints, he keeps the feet of his Saints, Psalm.
97.10. 1 Samuel 2.9. for their good, Romans 1.28. And if they fall, the Lord
humbles them, heals them, takes them up again, puts new strength into them, and
his kindness must not depart from them, etc.

7. Pardoned souls are Gods Heirs; Gal. 4.7. Romans 8.15. etc. Heirs of God
through Christ, and joynt-heirs with Christ; Heirs of all his Promises of an
incorruptible inheritance that never fades away, reserved in Heaven for them.
1 Pet. 1.9. Though the Lord give them no inheritance of earthly possessions,
yet they are his special Heirs of the heavenly inheritance. Not the poorest
believer in the world, but may say with a heart full of blessed and humble
rejoicing, Though I am worthless in my self, and am so accounted in the world,
yet through infinite grace, I am one of the richest Heirs in the world, a
Coheir with Christ, of an exeeeding eternal weight of glory.

Use 1. If such, and more than is or can be named, be the blessedness of
pardoned souls, Ah! what poor secure sinner (that must also be everlastingly
damned without it) would miss of it? Say, sinner, instead of being cursed,
hated, damned, and that for ever, (for as is mercy and love to pardoned ones,
so is to such as miss of it, for ever) I say, instead of that, which any heart
but what is plagued with hardness, would melt and tremble at, to become a dear
child of God, and have free access to God, be loved of God, for ever justified,
no sin for ever remembered against thee, every thing befall thee for good, and
be an Heir of God, and be even as blessed as God can make thee, and that for
ever. Ah! where is the sinner that would be without this? Who would slight that
word of the Lord that would teach you, and lead you to this blessedness? Who
would despise, or neglect the day of grace, now while within the reach of it?
who would run a dreadful hazard of being given up of God, if you thus trifle
with Gospel-salvation? Ah! the good Lord pity you that do thus; you are fit to
be mourned over, had we hearts to do it, with tears of blood. Yet once more,
Awake, awake, you careless ones, before your bodies drop into the grave, and
souls into hell. Oh! do not, do not take pleasure in soul-murder; do not put
off the one, only, main, necessary work, and leave it undone, till it may be
impossible to have it done. Tell me in good earnest, can thou well be without
the pardon of thy sins here and for ever? Soul, thou may well enough be
without much Land, and much Money, and many great friends, and yet be well,
exceeding well contented, nay, better, if thou have Christ and Grace, than with
them. But say, can thou, can thou well be without the pardon of thy sins?
Can thou well live and dye hated by the great and righteous God? Can thou
well be where the fire it never quenched, and the worm never dies? Say, can
thou well miss the presence of the ever blessed God to all eternity? Are damned
screeking Spirits good company for ever and ever? Away, away sinner to the
blessed God, betake thy self (put it not off an hour longer) to crying,
repenting, mourning to God for free pardon, for Christ, for the Spirit, and
look up to the Lord to give thee a heart to do it, wait humbly, and carefully
on the Gospel of Grace preached; and yet though thou have hitherto been idle,
thou may attain unto this blessedness, as well as the blessedst Saint in the
world, if thou will be serious, diligent, earnest, (as so weighty a matter
requires) about it. The good Lord give thee a heart to do it.

2. Do not rest in false Evidences, false hopes of pardon. Many sinners might
seem to have got pardon, and gone well to Heaven, if they had not vainly and
foolishly hoped so. Oh rest in nothing, and never rest without it (as I have
pressed thee in love) till thou can say, from a well grounded
Gospel-evidence, wrought forth with fear and trembling. Now I have the
blessedness that accompanies pardoned souls: Now, oh now (rejoice with me
blessed souls) I am, I am a Child of God, I have access to the blessed God, and
my soul pleads with him every day. Ah, now God, my God does love me: Now I am
justified, in a state of Justification, from which my God will never let me
fall. Ah, my sins, though great, shall be remembered no more, no more; I shall
be kept, safely kept, in all my ways; if I fall, the Lord will take me up, and
I shall not utterly fall; however it is, or may be with me as to the world, and
the things of it, I am rich (though poor, worthless, nothing in my self,) with
all the riches, unsearchable riches of my Christ, I am an Heir of God, I need
nothing, Oh, the sweetness, peace, joy, contentment, Heaven of such a blessed,
and for ever blessed condition! Now tell me sinner, (and let it stick with thee
till thou art got well to Heaven) is not, is not the pardon of thy sins the
work of the greatest weight before thee on this side the grave? which is that I
first promised thee to prove to thy Conscience from the first Observation.

3. I might hence insist to stir up poor souls, who have been awake for Heaven,
and have been, and are crying and waiting for the pardon of your sins, to be in
this matter with all your might, because you see it is wonderfully weighty and
concernable to you, beyond all imaginations; get your doubts, and fears, and
misgivings of heart well removed; see from whence your doubts do arise, and
follow them home to your hearts, and then be with the Lord much, and in his
Word and Ordinances, till the Lord make it clear day in thy Soul, and thou walk
in a sweet spirit of Adoption before him.

4. Let pardoned ones, whom it does cost much, as to means to get it made good
to you, make much of your comfort, and do not Trisse it, nor sin it away; and
keep the sense of a pardoned condition warm and lively upon your spirits, and
then you will love the Lord much, Luke 7.47. Lord, thou have forgiven much, as
much as to any; Oh, let me, let me love, love much, very much.

Conviction of sin and self-emptiness.
THe second Consideration we observed from the words, and proposed to be
opened, was this;

Obs. 2. Such who come to God to have their sins pardoned, they look upon them
as great sins.

Pardon mine iniquity, for it is great, etc. The Original word as well
signifies Many, as Great, my sins are great and many; many great sins lie upon
me, pardon, Oh pardon them, Oh Lord, etc.

Thus you have this blessed man David in several Psalms, aggravating his sin,
Psalm. 38.4. Mine iniquities are gone over my head, and are a burden too heavy
for me to bear; against thee only have I sinned, Psalm. 51. So blessed Paul,
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, whereof I am the chief; that
sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful, Romans 7.13. So Peter at
the first Glimpse of Christ, and a word from him, falls upon his knees, cries
out, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, etc. Luke 5.8. So the Publican, God
be merciful to me a sinner, agreat, vile sinner, nothing else but a sinner: So
the Prodigal, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, etc. Luke
18.13. and 15.21.

In the opening of this Point, first I would show, Why, such as come in a right
way for pardon, do look upon their sins as great sins.

1. How they come to see them so.

2. When a sinner may be said to have seen his sins so great as a pardoned soul
should do.

1. Sinners that come to God for pardon and find it, do look upon their sins as
great sins, because against a great God, great in power, great in justice,
great in holiness; I am a worm, and yet sin, and that boldly, against a God so
great; for a worm to lift up himself against a great and infinite God; Oh this
makes every little sin great, and calls for great vengeance from so great a God.

2. Because they have sinned against great patience, despising the goodness,
forbearance, and long-suffering of God, which is called treasuring up of wrath,
Romans 2.4, 5. Oh, says a poor abased sinner at Gods feet, How have I wearied
the patience of God! I have not wearied thee, says God, but thou have been
weary of me, and have made me to serve with thy sins, and wearied me with thine
iniquities, Isa. 43.23, 24. Oh, this is an humbling and heartbreaking word to
a poor soul before the Lord; this makes his sin appear great indeed. I have
wearied the blessed God with my sin, and yet he calls upon me that he may
pardon me, ver. 25. of the same Chapter. This greatens sin to purpose, to a
poor soul that has abused much patience.

3. Sins do appear great, because against great mercies. Oh, against how many
mercies and kindnesses do sinners sin against, and turn all the mercies of God
into sin! Oh, says a poor soul, drawing near to God, I turned all the mercies
of the Lord against him, took his mercies and fought against him with them, and
served the Devil and my lusts with them; if God will come and account with me
for them, how shall I answer him?

4. That which greatens sin in the eyes of poor sinners that cry for pardon,
is, that they have sinned against great light, light in the Conscience; this
heightens sin exceedingly, especially to such as are under Gospel-means, and is
indeed the sin of all in this Nation; there is nothing more abaseth a soul than
this, nothing makes it more difficult to believe pardon, when humbled for it;
therefore it is, that many poor souls fear that they have sinned the
unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, because they have sinned against
knowledge and light, which though while they are humbled before the Lord, it
cannot be that they have so sinned unpardonably; yet in as much as it is the sin
that borders next upon the sin against the Holy Ghost, it much greatens sin to
a poor soul under the sense of it. Such a sinner is said to reproach the Lord,
Numb. 15.30, 31. Therefore to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to
him it is sin; James 4. last. To him it is sin, that is great sin, of which God
will take the severest account: Therefore such as have the Profession of
Christianity, and the knowledge of the Word in some measure, and yet go on
impenitently in sin, they are the greatest sinners in the world, and will have
the greatest damnation; and this circumstance in sin makes, or should do so,
such souls that never lived in notorious sins, be under deep abasement,
because, though their Sins were not so gross as many others, yet they were
against great light and knowledge, which makes every little sin continued in
great in the account of God, and great in the account of the sinner, when he
comes before the Lord in the sense of it. Oh, I pleased my self in sins that I
knew to be sins, and was convinced by the Word of God of them, yet I went on,
and loved them.

5. Continuance in sin, much greatens sin to a poor soul, that is, after
pardon; especially such as are not very early converted. God will wound the
hairy scalp of such a one that goes on still in his trespasses, Psalm. 68.21.
Oh, I added sin unto sin, says a poor soul, spending the choice time of my
youth in sin, when I might have been getting the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and
honoring of God. This lay close upon David's spirit, as appears in this 25th.
Psalm. 7. Oh remember not the sins of youth, etc. Yet we do not find that
David's youth was notoriously sinful; but in as much as he spent not his youth
to get knowledge, and to serve the Lord fully, 'twas his burden and complaint
before the Lord; much more such whose youth was spent in nothing but vanity,
profaneness, lying, swearing, profaning of the Sabbath, sports, past-times,
excess of riot, and the like, when God lays it in upon their Consciences, must
be grievous and abominable to their souls.

6. Multitudes of sins do make sin appear great, this made David cry out for
multitude of mercies, Psalm. 51. and Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable evils have
compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not
able to look; they are more than the hairs of my head, therefore my heart
fails me. One sin, but a sinful thought, is worthy of a thousand Hells, much
more, multiplied, numberless, infinite sins, in thought, words, walkings,
calling, worship, in all I have done, I did nothing else but sin: Therefore the
least sinner in the world is a great sinner, when God lays his account before
him.

7. Another thing that greatens sin is, that it was against purposes and
resolutions of forsaking such and such sins; and yet all broken, sometimes
against solemn vows, against prayers: This consideration upon many a poor soul
sticks hard, and lays low, and makes his sin grievous indeed, that against
purposes, vows, prayers, he should return to his sin; this makes him cry out,
Oh my sin is great, great indeed; Does, will the Lord pardon such a Wretch? etc.

8. Sin appears great, when seen by a poor soul, because it was reigning sin,
Romans 5. and 6. Sin reigned to death, etc. Oh, says a poor humbled sinner, I
did not only commit sin, but I was the servant and slave of sin, I obeyed sin
as a Lord, and that willingly, I obeyed it in the lusts thereof; where God,
Christ, his Spirit, Word, Law, should have dwelt and reigned, there sin and
lusts bore sway, and had the command of my soul. A little sin when a reigning
sin, is a great sin. All that sin can do, is but to rule the sinner, and so it
does the least sinner that is under it, though it break not forth into gross
notorious actings against the Lord, and this does much greaten it.

9. Sin in the fountain makes it great: As it may be said, there is more water
in the fountain, than in the pools and streams it makes; because there is a
continual issuing and flowing out of it, which is able to make far greater
streams: So in the nature, in the heart, is there as in the fountain, and
therefore it is more there than in the breakings forth of it in the outward man;
so that, though a sinner in his youth has been restrained from many great
sins, yet in as much as sin in the fountain was as full as in any sinner in the
world, though restrained and pent in (which the sinner was not beholding to his
own heart for) it renders him a great sinner before the Lord, when savingly
enlightened. The want of this consideration makes outwardly righteous persons
not look upon themselves as great sinners; they see and feel not sin infinite
in the fountain of it, which mostly greatens it, above all the actings of it in
this life.

10. A sinner drawing nigh to God for pardon, sees his sin as great, because
thereby he was led captive by the Devil at his will: He that commits sin is
of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. commits sin, so as in a state of sin, under the
power of sin, and not born of God, why such a one is of the Devil, under the
power of the Devil, of the Devil and not of God; and this because of sin, which
gives this dominion to the Devil. Oh, says a poor Creature, I that was the
creature of God, and should have lived to him, lived to the Devil, and the
service of him; and took part with him, against Christ, his Word, his Saints,
and was an enemy to them: This greatens my sin before the Lord.

11. Sin appears great, because great is the wrath of God against sin; sinners
are said to heap up wrath, Romans 2. and they are called the Children of wrath.
God to manifest his displeasure against sin, pours out everlasting wrath upon
an unpardoned sinner, to leave the sinner under endless torment of soul and
body. God hates nothing but sin, and for sin, and so hates it, that infinite
endless wrath must be the vengeance of it. Oh, when God gives a sinner a
glimpse of this! Oh the greatness of every little sin to deserve such wrath!
How shall I flee from and escape the wrath to come? who can stand before such
wrath, who can bear it?

12. The way of any sinner's deliverance from such wrath, shows sin to be
exceeding great, in the price and ransom that is paid for the salvation of him
from his sins, the price of the blood of the eternal Son of God. How great was
sin, how sinful and damnable the nature of it in the eye of the righteous God,
when justice could not be satisfied but by such a way? Oh, says a poor soul
that comes for pardon, what a damnable thing is sin, which was once nothing to
me, that redemption from it is at such a rate! God had no greater a price to
give, than what he laid down to save a wretched sinner from his sin. Oh, 'twas
great sin that must crucify the Lord of life and glory, therefore does my soul
hate it.

13. Lastly, This consideration also greatens sin, in as much as a poor
creature has drawn and tempted others to sin with him, especially such as have
lived more vainly and loosly, and it lies hard upon many a poor soul after
thorough conviction. Oh, how many have I drawn to sin, not only by my example,
but encouragement and persuasion, that may be now in Hell for such sins, or are
under a state of impenitency, and hardened by me. Oh, this is an abasing
consideration to a poor, convinced, humbled sinner, when God smites his heart
with it.

Use 1. Before we go further, let us labor to apply this to the consciences of
all. I have showed you, the matter we are upon is the weightiest that ever took
up God's heart, the pardoning of a sinner; and therefore, how should it swallow
up the hearts of poor undone souls, that are so infinitely concerned in it. I
beseech you therefore, lay to your hearts what has been spoken as to the
greatness of sin; and consider, If souls that come to God by Christ for pardon,
see their sins as great sins, and it is their great trouble they cannot see them
greater;

First then, This may serve to take off that woeful deceit of heart, and
delusion of the Devil, of poor careless souls that dream of pardon, and yet
never in any measure thus saw their sins as great; this shows the heart was
never touched of God, never smitten for sin as yet; this is the way indeed of
unpardoned sinners, they are lessening their sins to God and themselves,
finding out circumstances to lessen them, of others tempting them, and the
Devil, and the like; and many or most of Men or Women allow themselves in the
same, or they were overtaken, or the like; they think they can easily pacify
God again, and that God makes not so great a matter of it; thus a deceitful
heart and a cheating Devil juggle together, and sooth Conscience in a damnable
peace: And such souls call their great reigning sins their infirmity, and God
will not be so exact as some of the Preachers make him; here is a sinner
rivetted in a cursed estate. But now take a Soul whom God (as I shall show)
has made sensible of sin, and the weight of pardon, and comes to the feet of
the Lord for it, it is quite otherwise. Oh, my sins, Wretch that I was and am,
were little sins to me before, but now they are great sins; I called it my
infirmity to lie, swear, profane the Sabbath, allow my self in any excess; but
now I see 'twas reigning sin, soul-damning sin, great, oh great sin; Oh that I
am out of Hell! Oh the patience of God! Is there mercy for such a wretch? What
a wonder will it be if I get to Heaven? How great will that mercy be that
pardons me?

2. Therefore in the second place, Examine how it is with you? and whether you
have had some such workings of heart; Have you been before the Lord in David's
posture, Oh, mine iniquity is great! Oh, I I have sinned against a great God,
wearied great patience, turned great mercies into sin. Oh I have sinned against
great light, How shall I be pardoned? Sins continued in, and multiplied from my
youth up, and these against serious purposes, under the reign of it; there is an
infinite fountain of all evil within me. If I have been any way restrained, no
thanks to my own heart for it. Oh, says a poor soul, I was led by the Devil,
befooled by the Devil, served the Devil against God; and now, what can I
challenge at the Hands of God? What belongs to me but wrath, great wrath,
everlasting wrath, infinite Wrath? If one sin deserves a thousand Hells, what
do innumerable transgressions do? If Mercy be not infinite, How shall I look up
to God, or how shall God look down upon me? Oh, I say, let your Conscience
answer, has it been thus, in some good and real measure, though not so deep as
your soul desires. I know there are degrees, and I also know till God come to
let out himself in such a way as this, that sin is great, and greater in mine
eye then ever, we make but slight work of it in our spirits; want of this makes
many in these days run away with pleasant notions of Grace, Christ, Light,
(though blessed be the Lord for ever, for the more glorious Revelation of all
these, but I speak of abuses) but sin was never great by the appearance of God,
and so they wanton with such Notions which at last wear off, and so they come
to nothing but a reproach to the Gospel.

3. In the third place, therefore, let it serve to exhort sinners to look back
upon your lives, even from your youth up: You may find one more of the
discoveries mentioned of the greatness of sin, that you will fall under;
especially such as have been given to the profaneness and vanities of the age
you live in, lying, swearing, profaning of the Sabbath, to riot, ungodly
pastimes and sports, reviling the Godly, or other more secret wickednesses and
pollutions; any of which may bespeak thee in a state of sin and wrath, joined
with thy living in the neglect of known duties, upon which neglect God has
pronounced a curse, as the neglect of secret or Family Prayer, Jer. 10. ult.

Or if thou have not been engaged in gross sins, but have been sober and well
carriaged from thy youth up, yet thou may be still in a state of sin, but go
a little more soberly to Hell, and in more danger of being damned in thy civil
sober carriage than great sinners, with which thou art apt to compare thy self,
and seeing thy self not so bad as them, think all is well; but remember well
what has been proved, that sin is greater in the Fountain than the streams,
though it make a greater noise or show to others in the stream of ones life;
thou have a Hell in thy nature, an infinite fountain of any wickedness, that
ever any of the Sons or Daughters of men did commit, an Idolater, an Adulterer,
a Murderer, a Sodomite, a Devil in thy Heart and whole frame of thy Nature. In
a word, one sin, which thou call little, reigning but in thy heart, and
cherished there, is enough to send thee to Hell, as if thou were the veriest
Reprobate living. Remember, the same Paul that thought himself a blameless man,
Philip. 3.6. afterward cries out of exceeding sinfulness, Romans 7.13. yea, the
greatest, the chief of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. But I hope to meet with thee, and
with thy conscience, as to this conviction, more hereafter.

The next inquiry will be, when a poor soul may be said to be under such a
discovery of the greatness of sin, as may lead him to get pardon through Jesus
Christ.

1. One discovery I have named already; which is, such a soul does not go about
to lessen his sin, but greeaten it to his greater abasement; it is his fear he
does not see his sins great enough, to lay him low enough before the Lord.

2. When such a sight and discovery of sin, it begets trouble upon the spirit:
In Psalm. 28. you have David under a great discovery of sin, and he cries out,
there is no rest in my bones, because of my sin; I am troubled, I am bowed
down, I go mourning all the day; such a trouble, that will not admit of peace
and healing, but from Jesus Christ, till it can take hold of Jesus Christ in a
promise of Grace and Pardon, and come to him, and close with him to be
justified and Sanctified by him and in him; as I am at large to show, if God
will. I speak this, because there is a trouble for sin, that often ends in a
more dangerous peace: Many poor creatures have for a time been troubled for
sin, and they have made one shift or other to quiet themselves, it may be leave
their sins, and do a little something more, but never come in a Gospel-way to
Christ; which I am also (through grace) to evidence in the discovery of a false
Conversion. However, so it is, that every soul that is unbottomed from a false
peace, a peace in sin, or resting in his duties, he comes under trouble, more
or less, in and for his sin, as he gets to pardon.

3. God smites a soul for some special particular sin; Jer. 3.13. Only
acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy
God, and have scattered thy ways under every green tree, etc. General
acknowledgment of Sins comes to nothing, it is the note of a Hypocrite; but
particular Sins lying upon the soul, speak forth spiritual convictions, when
joined, I mean with other workings of heart we are now setting forth. So Christ
dealt with the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4.16.29. Found her at, and smote her in
her particular Sin.

4. As God smites, so the sinner is in particular confession before the Lord,
loads his heart with Sin, till it breaks.

Object. But who will not confess himself a Sinner, you will say?

Answ. Truly few, in a Scripture saving sense. A word or two more to this; That
confession of sin before the Lord, is a duty, and such as has the promise of
forgiveness of Sin, such places of Scripture will clear, Psalm. 32. I
acknowledge my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid; I said I will
confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my
sin; Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but he that
confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy; If we confess our sins he is
faithful and just, to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1.9. This being a duty to
which so blessed promises are annexed, it is of much concernment to souls that
are very serious about forgiveness, to have it stated aright, according to
Scripture and saving Experience.

There is a confession of sin, that does not entitle to the promise, which a
hypocrite may reach to; so Pharaoh, Exodus 9.27. I have sinned this time, the
Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked; here is confession, but no
pardon; so Judas, Matthew. 27.3, 4. I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the
innocent blood; so Saul, 1 Samuel 15.29. I have sinned, for I have transgressed
the Commandment of the Lord; Here are verbal enforced confessions, when the
hand of God was upon them, and yet did not end in mercy.

The confession of a Hypocrite proceeds only from judgment felt or feared; but
that which is sincere and ends in mercy and pardon, goes upon better grounds.

1. As first, Confession that has the promise of pardon, is accompanied with
hatred of sin. So in that blessed draught of the New Covenant Ezekiel. 36. I will
save you from your uncleanness, etc. verse 29. and verse 31. Then shall you
remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall
loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities, and for you
abominations. Then, when God comes in a way of mercy and pardon, then God will
make them remember their wickednesses, that they had even forgotten, and had
thought that God had forgotten them also: They thought they were good ways
before, but now the Lord shows them they were not good, and they loath
themselves: Sin is not only a terror, but a loathsome thing to them, hateful to
the soul that is under this conviction.

2. Whence, secondly, Saving confession respects the pollution of sin. They
shall loath themselves, etc. That thou may remember and be confounded, and
never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward
thee; In that 38th. Psalm. David is in self-loathing; this does arise (as
presently I shall show) from a glimpse of Gods holiness, which I humbly
conceive, no reprobate in the World does reach to, to loath sin, because it
makes him an unholy Creature.

3. It follows therefore that such confession follows sin to the root, to the
fountain, there sees it most abominable, odious, infinite. So David Psalm. 51.5.
I was shapen in iniquity, etc. A Hypocrites confession ends in outward gross
sins, from terror only, and reaches not to heart-sin, pollution of nature; and
if he can reach to reform such outward gross sins, he has done, as he thinks,
the utmost, but never comes to loath (and so to mortify, through the spirit)
sin at the root: But sincere souls, touched by the Holy Ghost, with a saving
sense of sin, do drive sin home to its original, to its root, in the universal
corruption of heart and nature, and there the severest edge and indignation
against it is let forth.

4. Brokenness of heart for sin, is an effect of such confession, Psalm. 51.17.
Isa. 61.1. and 57.15. And this arises upon sense of Gods patience, goodness,
love; as hatred of the pollution of sin, arises from a sight of Gods Holiness;
Pharaoh cries out, he had sinned, when he smarted with punishment, but was still
under the plague of his hard heart, Ex. 9.27. and 34. There is indeed a kind of
brokenness, that the hammerings of terror, by punishments, or by the Word, may
work, which may a little wear and rough-hew the heart, and yet go no further,
but yet leave the heart under its natural hardness, but now that which is the
Spirits saving work kindly melts the heart, makes it soft, and so it can pour
out it self to God in heart-melting confessions; at least, the poor soul mourns
over the hardness of its heart, oh that I have thus sinned, and yet my heart
will not break? blessed be every stroke, and every word of God, and every
Ordinance, that through grace breaks my heart more. A sincere soul sets a high
price upon brokenness, and yet rests not in it, etc.

5. Such confession that has the promise, is accompanied with soul abasement;
He that humbles himself, shall be exalted, Luke 18.14. spoken upon the
Publicans acceptance with God in his Confession, smiting upon his breast, in a
deep abasement, not lifting up his eyes to Heaven: So that great promise, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my people shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face,
and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive
their sins: This is a work of the narrowest search of any other. I intend, if
the Lord will, to speak to this more distinctly and fully, only now a word of
Humiliation, as is joined with such confession, that has the promise of
pardon, which is the scope we drive at.

1. When the Soul is in confession, and under the Lords humblings in order to
pardon, The poor Creature acknowledges himself infinitely unworthy that ever
the Lord should cast a look upon him, or give out mercy and pardon to him: This
Conclusion is fixed upon the soul, and the Soul falls down abased in the sense
of it, whatever the Lord do with me, I will lay my mouth in the dust, I am
worthy of nothing from the Lord, but a thousand Hells; this quiets the heart in
some measure, whatever the pleasure of the Lord be toward him.

2. As the poor sinful Creature is worthy of nothing, so he will give glory to
God, if God never pardon; God is never the less righteous or holy, if he never
let out one drop of mercy upon so vile a Creature: Thou art holy, says David,
Psalm. 22.3. But I am a worm, and no man, verse 6. A worm, fit for God and man
to tread upon, and yet must not rise up against God, nor say to him, what do
thou? No Man: I have unmanned my self with sin, I am dust and vanity it self,
vile dust; that is my make, my frame: Oh, I must give glory to his justice,
though I perish for ever.

3. The poor Creature has no good, no, not the least, to procure pardon, or to
move God to pardon, Psalm. 14.3. Says a poor humbled soul, treating for pardon,
if mercy and pardon must come forth upon terms of my good, having or doing any
thing, but what has infinitely Sin enough in it to damn me for ever; assuredly
to Hell I must: No, Sin enough to send a world of souls to Hell, but not a drop
of good to move the Lord to mercy. If God give out mercy upon a Sight of good,
I expect not a drop from him.

4. It follows from hence, when a sinner comes humbled, he comes as nothing
else but a sinner: Luke 18.13. God be merciful to me a sinner: One, that is
nothing else but a wretched Sinner, for so the Publican means it, as in a
contrary frame to the Pharisee, who thanks God that he was not so bad as many
were, though the Pharisee no doubt would acknowledge some Sin, but now the
Publican is All a sinner, in as bad a condition as any Sinner in the World:
Poor Souls in these days, they hope they have not so much need of Christ as
many great sinners, they be not nothing else but Sinners, they have or do some
good: The discussion of this will be the next discourse, only now a word more:
Know Sinner, that one Sin strikes off all thy pretended good, as shall at large
through mercy be proved to thee: Stick to one drop of good in thee or from
thee, when thou come for mercy and pardon, and thou losest all: Oh, to be
wholly condemned, wholly unrighteous, wholly a sinner, is a great work; it is
the most distinguishing conviction of any other. While a man has any thing to
live upon, he is not fit to beg; so while a soul has a drop of any thing, that
in his own sense, may the more admit him to pardon, he cannot have it. Take it
thus, If one come to your doors and beg, and he has good Clothes on his Back,
and he should say, I have good Clothes on my back, I have something of my own,
therefore I pray give me: Would you not answer, if you have something of your
own, and are pretty well clothed, why should you beg; it is not for you come
and ask alms? But if a poor naked wretch come, and say, and cry, Oh, I am a
poor Creature, a poor naked destitute creature, I have nothing, all is gone, I
have lost all, pray cover me, pray feed me; out of great pity you will look
upon such a poor Wretch, and do something for him, if you have any bowels: So,
if a Sinner (as that Pharisee did) come and say, Lord I have done this and
this, I have not been so wicked as many, I do some good, therefore pardon, that
therefore will make the Lord send thee away without mercy: No, says God, live
upon what thou have, if thou have any thing: Oh Sinner, thou art not fit to
beg, (to beg mercy and pardon) till thou have just nothing of thy own, which
the natural pride of thy heart will very hardly come off to.

5. In the way of Men's Tribunals of Justice, and Courts of Life and Death: If a
Malefactor be condemned by the Law, and he yet plead, Though I am proved a
Thief or a Murderer, yet I have kept the rest of the Law, I have broken no Law
of the Nation that deserves death beside, shall not this rather justify me,
than this crime condemn me; No, says the Judge, That Is nothing to us, though
thou have kept the Law in other things, thou must dye by the Law, as a
Transgressor of it, for this thou have done: Why then, says the condemned
person, I must plead all mercy. Just so it is at the Tribunal of God, comes a
poor Soul that is convinced he has sinned, Oh, but says he in his heart, I
have kept the Law in many or most things, will not that commend me to God? Will
not God look upon my good more than my evil? No, says God in his word, thou
have broken the Law, and thou art cursed, therefore the Law can show thee no
mercy. I can take no notice of any of thy pretended keeping of it in any other
thing; Oh, then must a poor Sinner say, then it must be all, all of mercy, if I
am ever pardoned; this may be enough to discover such a humiliation that
follows confession that has the promise of pardon.

6. One thing more, which I shall but mention; such a confession of sin as has
the promise of mercy, is accompanied with a firm resolution, through grace, to
forsake Sin, every Sin, in heart and life; He that confesses and forsakes his
sins, shall find mercy, Prove. 28. as before. Mark well that famous promise,
Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him,
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon: Here Is forsaking ways and
thoughts; Sins of Heart and Life, and not a forsaking or leaving of some great
Sins, but forsaking and warring against a sinful disposition, sinful thoughts;
and not only a mere leaving of sin, but a returning to the Lord, which he
cannot do, if held under the love of but one Sin; and a turning to God only
upon the account of free mercy, and then God abundantly pardons: A good word
suited to a poor soul, under the sense of sinning abundantly, therefore need of
abundance of mercy and pardon.

Use 4. Therefore the next Use will be of Examination: Have you been under such
a trouble, as before opened, about Sin, and the pardon of it? Such a trouble
that would not be quietted but by clasping about Jesus Christ; has the Lord
smitten you with the deep sense of a particular Sin, your bosom Sin, and
thereby been brought to a deep sense of the evil of all Sin? Have you been upon
your knees, your faces in as peculiar a confession as you could, hating,
loathing, Sin and your selves in it? Oh, have you driven Sin to the root, the
fountain! Oh, there is a Hell of it within? Say, do you know what it is to gave
broken hearts under the weight of Sin, and the sense of the Patience, Grace and
Love of God, held forth to you in Jesus Christ? Do you know what soul-abasement
is, acknowledging in confusion of face, that you are worthy of nothing from the
Lord for ever? not so much as a glimpse of mercy, a good look from him, because
you have so sinned against him? Have you glorified God, though he never pardon
you? and is he holy and blessed, though you are banished from him for ever?
Have you been so reduced to see that there is not the least attom of good to
commend you to the Lord, and so lain down as nothing else but a Sinner before
him; thousands of Sins to damn thee, but not a drop of righteousness to cover
thee; and so creep to the seat of mercy, infinite, free mercy? yea, have thou
seen and felt the difficulty of such a self-emptiness, that thou would rather
part with all thy Sin than thy self-righteousness: A poor soul would take up
from Sin, upon conviction of the damnableness of it, and be more righteous and
holy, but to be reduced first to nothing, nothing else but a poor, vile,
unrighteous, weak, empty creature, and so to Christ; here the pride of heart
sticks. Now soul, be narrow and close in the search of this; for fail here, and
fail in all.

Use 5. Let it exhort you that have never been under any trouble about your
Sin, and the pardon of it, that you do not ward off, and get from under such
convincing, searching words, that may trouble you: Many poor sinful Creatures
resolve they will never hearken to such a word as shall trouble them, and
cannot bear such preaching as would trouble their Consciences: One word with
you, Why soul, Have thou been dishonouring God, abusing his patience and mercy,
transgressing his Holy Commands, slighting his Grace, and yet thou must not be
troubled for it? Will thou have thousands of Sins upon thy Soul unpardoned, and
tread upon the brink of Hell every step thou go, and not be troubled about
it? It seems then thou resolvest not to trouble thy self much about that petty
business (as thou make it) of being damned for ever, or saved for ever? No,
nothing about Sin, Guilt, Pardon, Heaven and Hell, must trouble thee? Alas,
poor deluded creature, what care it there to get to Hell peaceably; for never
any one got to Heaven so, that was never troubled about getting his Sins
pardoned: Away, away with such a cursed peace, and let it now trouble thee that
thou have put off this work so long, that Sin and thy Soul have been at such a
peace so long. Be now at a professed war against it, and take part with the
Lord and his word, that it teaching thee how yet to arive at the blessed Haven
of Peace, not with Sin, but with the blessed God, against whom thou have so
greatly Sinned; Oh look unto him to smite a hard secure heart, to strike a
Bosom Hellish Lust, for whose peace thou have so long, and so foolishly
contended; yea, go in secret, and fall down before the great God, parcitularly
confessing and shaming thy self, hating, loathing, humbling, till thou cry out,
as David here, Oh pardon; what a great matter it is for any poor soul to be
pardoned? Now, great mercy for a great Sinner, or I am lost for ever.
Out-sinned pardon thou have not, if thou come in this posture to God for it.

But you may further enquire, how does God bring a poor Soul to this pass, to
such a deep sense of Sin, such a fight of himself, so as to be thus before the
Lord in self loathing and abasement. Only now a Word; (1.) When a Soul is
brought to this pass, God lets out an appearance of himself in measure, upon a
poor creature, such a glimpse of light and purity, that makes the creature fall
down, and cry out, Oh I am vile, vile as the dust I tread on? (2.) God gives
out the Spirit in the word, which convinces and searchech the soul, shows its
condition, state, sin, the damnableness and pollution of it, the greatness of
it, as was showed: The spirit opens the holiness and spirituallity of the Law,
Romans 7.9. and shows the Sinner, as in a glass, what he is: The spirit gives a
Sight of Jesus Christ pierced with the Sins of such as come unto him, Zach.
12.10. These do cause loathing and bitterness upon the Soul of a poor Sinner,
drawing near to the Lord for pardon.

Therefore it is great wisdom to be where God speaks, where God appears, where
God gives out his spirit, which is usually in the word preached powerfully, and
setting thy self in secret to muse and ponder about an eternal condition; or
when the afflicting Hand of God is upon thee, do not say, I am not so great a
Sinner as to make so much ado about Pardon or Heaven, if that be thy temper,
thou art the most likely to be in the road-way to Hell, in peace that will end
in woes and sorrows, of any Soul in the world. Oh, wait for Gods appearance,
and every little Sin will be great, a Hell of Sin within thee, though outwardly
civil and sober; wait for the Spirit in the Word, and go and pray for it. It Is
one thing to know Sin by the Letter of the Law, which commands this, and
forbids that, and another thing to know, see, feel Sin, and the infinite evil
of it, the exceeding Sinfulness and Pollution of it, by the conviction of the
Spirit; so as to see it most in the fountain, in thy nature, and there loath
and bewail it, because it makes thee unclean and unholy, and unlike God, and
unfit for God, or holy communion with him: Which is the way and most certain
evidence of the Spirits saving conviction of Sin, (as distinguishing from that
which a hypocrite may have) and carries a soul to the fountain opened, Zach.
13.1. that its iniquity may be thoroughly cleansed.

Use 6. If Sinners that come to God for mercy and pardon, see their Sin as
great, then it will follow, that great Sinners may be pardoned and saved: You
that are great Sinners, old Sinners, Oh hearken to this, you that are yet
within the reach of Grace, and Mercy, and Pardon, if you will come to Jesus
Christ for it, the greatness of your Sin is no bar to you, but, if you fail of
pardon, it is because you will not come to Christ for it, and accept it upon
Gospel-terms; you will not have pardon with a new heart and new life, or you
make a slight matter of pardon, or you think 'twill come of course; or you are
afraid to enter into a serious review and debate with your selves, because your
Sins are so great, they will terrify you, or take you off your pleasure and
peace of your minds, and joy in the world: Away, away with any of these pleas;
though thou have sinned much, greatly, long, with all thy might, come to Jesus
Christ, and those great Sins are no more before his blood to wash them away
than the least Sin (if any be little) that ever was committed and pardoned,
Isa. 1.18. Do not hence say securely, Oh it is well, that great Sinners may be
pardoned, I ever thought so, what need so much ado? Do not thus harden thy
self, and make such a cursed use of so Blessed a Truth; but therefore come in,
lay down thy weapons, with which thou have been fighting against God; will thou
hold up rebellion, and yet cry pardon? Is it equitable thou should expect it?
No, fall down at the feet of that God against whom thou have so greatly sinned,
in the posture has been showed thee; and then though sin has abounded, yet
grace does much more abound, Romans 5. last. Great Sinners have become great
Saints, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you? Who were they? Idolaters,
Adulterers, Revilers, Sodomites, etc. and such like. You that have been such
like, God may have as much Glory in your pardon as he has had dishonor by
your Sin: Only be not such a Devil to thy self, as to turn thy back upon it,
and when thou have thus long rebelled, to tell God, he must stay thy leisure
for thy acceptance of his pardon, thy Sins are too sweet to leave as yet; I
tell thee, Soul, and I have showed it, that Gods pardons cost him dear, and are
precious; and if thou deal thus, they may be locked up in Heaven from thy
wretched Soul to all Eternity. Who but a desperate wretch, but would take mercy
and grace from Heaven, that may make him blessed for ever, when God offers it
by his dear Son, let thy Sins be never so great? why, wretched Man or Woman,
Have thou not done God wrong enough already! but must thou stay yet longer in
thy cursed Sin, and wrong him yet more? Have not done enough already to damn a
thousand Souls, but would do more, and make as sure of Hell as thou can? I
beseech thee, Sinner, great Sinner, young or old, do not put me off, nay, do
not put the Lord off with a pardon in his hand, a promise of Grace ready to be
sealed by the Holy Ghost, if thou will now, from thy Soul, readily say, why
then be it so, Lord Jesus I come to thee; if the terms be leaving all this
deceitful Sin, and to be made like unto thee, be it so, I accept of it, tear my
lusts from my heart, I have served them long enough, too long; Oh now, if there
be any mercy in Heaven, let me have it, save me, (not in) but from my Sins, Oh
Lord, for they are great, great indeed; I will, says the Lord, and he speaks
it in Ezekiel. 36.29. I will save you from all your uncleanness; it is as much as
if the Lord should have now spoken it from Heaven, Mark every tittle in such a
promise! Now thou cryest, Oh, will, will the Lord save? I will, says the Lord;
Oh but, will he save me from such uncleanness, yea, from uncleanness; what
from All? yea, from All thy uncleanness; fall down and Adore, and cry out, Oh
grace, free, rich, infinite, glorious grace; admire, Angels, Saints, Sinners,
Behold one of Gods wonders, A great sinner saved.

Use. 7. And so seventhly, it may serve to exhort blessed souls brought into a
state of peace and pardon, still to keep an eye upon the greatness of mercy: If
mercy were not great, how could any Sin be forgiven? Thus this blessed man
David, is breathing forth, Blessed is he whose iniquities are forgiven! Oh
bless the Lord, Oh my soul, who forgiveth all thine iniquities; Oh how great is
thy mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the lowest hell: So
should pardoned, called, redeemed souls, see themselves called and taken out of
Hell it self: Out of a Hell of abominations, pollutions, wrath, under which
they were fast held by the power of darkness. Say, did ever such a soul get to
Heaven? shall I not be the wonder of Heaven and Hell, how I got to Heaven, and
escaped that wrath into which thousands, that were better than I, are now
plunged? there is no other reason, but because mercy is great, greater than the
greatnesses of Sin, with which I shall conclude the second Point, namely, When
Sinners come on to find pardon, they see their Sins great.

Obs. 3. The great reason of Gods pardoning a sinner; and the plea that a poor
convinced sinner has with God, is, that he will pardon for his own Names sake.

For thy Names sake, Oh Lord, pardon, etc.

That is, not for any worth that is in a poor creature, not for my sake, but
for thy own glories sake, thy mercy sake; grace and mercy will be hereby
glorified. God gets himself a Name by the pardoning of a poor Sinner, that Name
which he proclaims to Moses, Exodus 34.6. The Lord merciful and gracious, etc.
Now, God has given forth the ground of this plea in the New Covenant, where
his Name is thus made most glorious. And when he had given forth a brief and
blessed draught of the tenor of the New Covenant, Ezekiel. 36.21. The Lord gives
out this as the great reason often mentioned, why he would take such a way of
making another Covenant, wherein he wills all, undertakes all, does all, works
all, as resolved it should be a Covenant, and a way of grace that surely should
hold: He gives out this, I say, as the ground of all, I had pity for my own
holy Name, ver. 21. Thus says the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, but
for mine holy Names sake, ver. 22. I will sanctify my great Name, ver. 23. And
when the Lord had showed what he would do for the poor Jews in special, and so
for all Sinners taken into Covenant with him, that he would sprinkle clean
water upon them, cleanse them from their Sins, give them a new heart, put his
Spirit upon them, write his Laws in their hearts, and so take them to be his
people, he again concludes with the same ground as before, that all this was
still for his own Name, ver. 32. Not for your sakes I do this, be it known unto
you, etc. And yet, that he would as certainly and fully do it, as if all the
engagements from man in the world had been upon him, as undoubtedly make good
every part and article of the Covenant, he adds, ver. 36. I the Lord have
spoken it, and I will do it; you may safely abide by it: Neither should his
grace and power come hardly from him (as poor doubting souls surmise) as if
'twere as much as ever the Lord could do, to give out mercy and grace to poor
Sinners; but, says the blessed God, in another place upon the same account,
having given out the promises of Grace in the New Covenant, Jer. 32.37. and so
on, He subjoyns, -- I will do it with my whole heart and my whole soul; mark
it, poor souls, with my whole soul, will I pardon you, love you, never turn
away from you to do you good, and never suffer you to turn away from me. If
poor souls (for whose sake I put it) should here ask, what is this Covenant,
what do you mean by it? only a word here. God at first, when he made man,
agreed with man to be his God, to give him life for ever, upon these terms that
man would keep the Law that God gave him, and 'twas a Law that would have given
all glory to the Creator, preserved the creature in a holy and blessed order,
and been a blessing to the whole Creation; but man transgressing here, the
blessed God from his own good pleasure, for his names sake, gives out another
Covenant, provides in it terms of reconciliation, for the first breach of the
first Covenant, sends his eternal blessed Son Jesus Christ, to be a mediator of
this new Covenant, gives him commission to offer it to all, and that freely;
and to let the World know, that if any Sinner in the World, never so great,
come and put up his plea, make his claim, enter his claim, accept of this
Covenant and new agreement with God, accept of the terms of it, give up himself
mutually to God back again; then will God be his God, and that upon better
terms than before with Adam, pardon, own, love, bless, unite to himself, never
suffer him to fall; mercy built upon an unmovable foundation, The foundation
of God stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19.

This briefly is the meaning of the New Covenant, upon which all our mercy is
built; now from first to last, from the first to the top-stone of it, from
Election to Glory, all is done and made good for the Lords own glorious Names
sake. Souls elected, the Covenant transacted between God and Christ, Jesus
Christ sent, the Sinner called, forgiven, justified, sanctified, adopted, kept,
glorified, All for his Names sake; See the promises running thus, in most
places, Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions. Why?
for my own sake; Purge away our sins for thy Names sake, Psalm. 79.9. This is
the bottom of all. This name he has revealed in Jesus Christ, Exodus 23.21.

Now, because the further clearing of this blessed truth is my design, through
Grace in the next discourse, I shall speak but a word more by the way of use
only.

Use 1. If it be thus, that whatever God gives out to poor souls, is for his
own Names sake, that this is the plea a poor Sinner has; let it then be for
your information and instruction, that you have no other plea to be heard in
Heaven but this, (the plea of Jesus Christ being upon the same bottom) Don't
make a sorry pile of carnal duties and works, and say, for the sake of these,
Lord do me good, and pardon where I have failed; the Lord may send fire from
Heaven to consume thee and them, because of their pollution, and that it is a
cursed offering, but never hear thee, and bless thee upon such a plea; No, no,
say in thy soul, and that from full conviction, If ever I have any thing from
God on this side Hell, it must be for his own Names sake; I expect, I plead, I
wait, upon no other ground.

Use 2. If the Lord's Names sake be the only plea for grace, then let poor
Sinners drawing near to God by Jesus Christ, be persuaded that it is a good
plea, and most acceptable before the Lord. Now this is the way of the heart of
poor creatures, from rooted self-love and pride, we think, if God could give
out good unto us for our sakes, it were something; if there were any thing to
be beheld in us that were commendable to the Lord, I could go with some
confidence; but seeing it is thus, that I am nothing else but vile before him,
how can I go to him? with what face? or, how can he give out unto me? Sinner;
be as low as thou will or can; but reason not so with thy self. If God can as
freely, as fully do thee good, all good, for his own Names sake, and has
thereby the more glory by it; why should thou so stand upon thy terms with
God, and not be as willing, as contented, to accept of Mercy, all mercy, for
Gods own Names sake, as well as for thy sake? It Is thy pride, be it known unto
thee Sinner, as thou think thou art, and not thy lowliness; know, for thy
comfort, God can more readily, easily, do thy soul good, upon the terms he now
is, for his own sake; and so the thing be done, thy soul pardoned, blessed,
saved, and all shall end in everlasting love upon thee, let the Lord have all
the Glory, though thou have nothing to boast of for thy own sake. And yet also
know, that when the Lord says, he does it for his own sake, he does not
exclude that he has no respect and love unto thee; but that the great and
highest motive with God was, and is, his own Name, his own glorious grace, why
he ever had a thought of good to an undone creature; that there was no motive
in the creature, unless misery, which is no glory; but all is done, given,
estated upon souls, undone, poor Sinners freely, for his own sake.

3. Let it exhort souls to make use of this plea, therefore, and that with
great, though humble confidence; It never failed poor Souls since the world
was, that made use of it when they were low and helpless, and eyed and pleaded
mercy for mercies sake, they had it, and never went away but blessed.

The Second Treatise. Showing how we are to expect Salvation, not from any
Righteousness of our own, but by the Righteousness of the alone Mediator, JESUS
CHRIST; how we shall be made Partakers thereof, and Evidences of the Truth of
it.
ROMANS 3.19, 20. Now we know, that what things soever the Law says, it says to
them who are under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world
may become guilty before God.

Therefore by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight,
etc.


HAving spoken, as the Lord has helped me, as to the weight of the pardon of
sin, and the way to it; I now come to open the completing this mercy in a poor
souls complete justification before God. So it has pleased the Wisdom of God
to order the way of his glorious mercy to poor Sinners that shall be saved,
that he does not only let forth free grace for the remission of their sins, and
merely pardon them, but has so blessedly ordered the matter, to bring them in
a state of Righteousness, a complete and perfect righteousness, as Adam in his
perfect estate was in, not by making the Sinner personally holy and righteous
in himself, in his own nature, but by giving out his eternal Son Jesus Christ,
to fulfill all righteousness in their stead, by satisfying and keeping the
perfect Law of righteousness, which is imputed to the Believer as if he had
fulfilled it, and were wholly righteous in his own person; in which lies the
great mystery of the Gospel. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, says
Paul, etc. for therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith, etc. Romans 1.16. namely* that righteousness of Jesus Christ whereby God
will justify, put in a state of righteousness, made over to them by faith that
shall be pardoned and saved.

To endeavor to evince and discover the necessity of such a justification, and
the nature of it, and how a poor soul comes to be invested in it, to have a
right unto it, is my design, as the Lord shall graciously assist in this
ensuing discourse. Oh that I might do it in the simplicity of the Gospel,
plainly, convincingly, spiritually, as I ought to speak.

In the prosecuting hereof, I shall first show that righteousness is not to be
attained any other way, not by the exactest keeping of the Law, so as to
commend us to God; not by setting our selves to keep the Law of God as well as
we can, and so we hope God will accept of it; which being naturally rooted in
the hearts of all, I find it the hardest piece of conviction, and most hardly
received of any other; souls are a thousand times more easily beaten off gross
sins, than beaten off the confidence of the good they think they do, and so
come as Nothing else but sinners to Jesus Christ; want of this conviction makes
all the Hypocrites in the world. This is that part therefore I shall first
begin with, according to the Apostles Method in this Epistle.

The Apostle lays down his Doctrine, which he was to prove in the 17th. verse
of the 1st. Chapter, The just shall live by faith; to make way for which, he
first proves in the remaining part of the first Chap. that the Gentiles
knowledge of God, which they had by the things that are made. The Creation and
Providence of God over the world, left them in unrighteousness because they
held the truth (of the being of a God) in unrighteousness, even the wisest and
learned of them, such as professed themselves to be wise, verse 22. and brake
forth into Idolatry and all abominations, for which cause God gave them up,
etc. verse 26, 28. At the 17th. verse of the 2d. Chap. The Apostle undertakes
the Jew, strikes off all his privileges, and at the 9th. verse of the 3d.
Chapter, concludes both Jew and Gentile, in the same condition, as to the
obtaining of such a righteousness by the Law, that might commend either to God;
What then are we, (who are Jews) better than they, (who are Gentiles?) No, in
no wise, for we have proved that Jews and Gentiles are all under sin; As it is
written, there is none righteous, no not one: Which he further proves by
several Scriptures to the words of the text.

In which the Apostle prevents an objection, namely, that some might urge, The
Scriptures urged may concern some few and grossly wicked persons, and not all
mankind in general: No such matter; whatever the Law says, it says to them
that are under the law, which are all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, as in
their natural corrupt estate; All under the Law, from whence the Apostle
infers, (1.) That therefore every mouth is stopped, (2.) All the world is
guilty before God. (3.) That no flesh, within or without the Church, can be
justified by the Law. From whence I draw these four plain observations, to
prove what is my main design, viz. That no man can attain to such a measure of
righteousness by all that ever he can do, in his best keeping the Law, as may
commend him to God; which four are these.

1. Every Son and Daughter of Adam in their natural estate are under the Law.

2. That a Transgressor of the Law has nothing to boast in, nor to excuse
himself from his sin, or the righteous judgment of God due unto him. [That
every mouth may be stopped.]

3. Every Soul in the world is under guilt and condemnation: [That all the
world may be guilty before God.]

4. Every soul lies under an impossibility of reaching to such a Justification,
by the best keeping of the Law, as for God thereby to accept of him.

I intend briefness in the opening of these, and what plainness also the Lord
shall help me with: This is a principle rooted in the hearts of all the
Children of men: That still there is a sufficiency in them to keep the Law of
God, in such a measure as God will accept them for it; This being heightened,
by the ignorance of times, and darkness of Gospel light, and of the New
Covenant of Grace, upon the spirits of this Generation, they are most hardly
beaten off it; say poor souls, If I keep Gods law as well as I can, and worship
God, and do not harm my Neighbor, God will accept me, and pardon where I fail;
but to be convinced that all that keeping of the law is made void by one sin,
and so see an absolute necessity of righteousness, another way and out of
themselves by Jesus Christ, though it be preached by many good men, yet few,
very few, in this Generation live in the practical sense and sight of it; yea,
how many professors (not hereby to reproach any) have confessed to the Glory of
God, and their own abasement, that since the breaking forth of a fuller light
of the nature of the New Covenant, Gospel Grace, the Righteousness of Christ,
they have been shaken in their bottoms, being legal, and thought if they took
up from their sins, and had a kind of sorrow for them, and then set themselves
to obey the law strictly, be close in the Sabbath, and some such duties, that
God would accept them, being still ignorant, at least practically, that when
they were convinced of sin, they were to see where to have a righteousness, and
how to get into Christ, and have life and strength in and from him for their
new Obedicence; which is that I drive at in this, and my afterward discourse
in opening the New Creature, as in Christ.

Having premised this, I come to speak to the first particular laid down,
namely,

Observe. 1. Every son and daughter of Adam in their natural estate are under
the Law.

By the Law, I do not mean the Mosaical or old Testament way of worship: But by
the law, I understand that which we style the moral law, the law of the ten
Commandments, that was written in Adams heart, and afterward given out by God
unto Moses at Mount Sinai; and promised in the New Covenant to be written again
in the hearts of all that are really called into the grace of ihe Covenant,
Ezekiel. 36.27.

To be under the Law, is an Expression familiar to you, you know what it is to
live under a law: To be under this law of God then bespeaks these things.

1. To be under it, is to be bound over to the exact fulfilling it: See Romans
10.15. For Moses describes the righteousness which is of the Law, that the man
which does these things shall live by them; that is it, to be bound over to the
fulfilling and doing of the law, which if done exactly, without the least
deviation, there is life promised to it: But upon the least transgression of
it, to be liable to the penalty which God has pronounced against the
transgressors of it.

2. It follows thence, that to be under the Law, is to be bound over to the
whole Law, in its full and perfect latitude, as it reaches the whole Man.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
Book of the Law to do them: Mark well the tenor of these words: Here is
required of every one an exact doing (not only purposing and thinking to do;)
and that not only of some or the most of the Law, but in all things; and that
not only for a time, but a Continuance of doing so, or else under the curse:
One sinful thought has a curse belonging to it, as well as the breach of the
whole Law, if under the Law. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the
Law, 1 John 3.4.

3. To be under the Law, is to be subject to, and to be under all the curses,
threatenings, judgments, wrath, that it threateneth to the transgressors of it,
here and for ever: Whatsoever the Law says, in point also of judgment and
wrath, it says to all that are under it.

4. To be under it, is to be bound to make God satisfaction in our own persons
for the breach of it; I mean, while under it, every soul is so obliged to make
satisfaction, to the justice of God: If a poor soul be in his natural estate,
and so under the Law; he must stand or fall to the Law: God expects personal
satisfaction from every soul that sins against it, that will stand to his
keeping the Law, in whole or in part, and God in his justice can bate nothing
of what he has spoken.

Now, That all Men and Women are by nature, as of and in the first Adam, thus
under the Law, to wit, to be bound up to it, and to have life only upon the
exact and perfect fulfilling of it, to be bound up to the whole Law, subject to
the curse of it, upon the transgression of one part, bound to make God
satisfaction in his own person for any breach thereof, I briefly prove.

Says Paul, Romans 6.14. Ye are not under the Law, but under grace; Implying,
till a soul is brought under grace, the Covenant of grace, justifying and
sanctifying grace, in and by Jesus Christ, he is under the Law, whosoever he
be; so Gal. 4.5. -- To redeem them that were under the law, etc. implying also
that all mankind are naturally under it, till under the power and efficacy and
privilege of Christ's Redemption.

The main reasons of it are,

All are under this law, because all Mankind were bound up under the same
Covenant with Adam, who was a public person, representing all mankind, as a
man may bind up himself and his posterity to such and such Conditions; and such
a Covenant, decree, or obligation binds his posterity in Law, so was Adam bound
up to God; See Romans 5.12. the special Scripture that proves this truth;
Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: So verse 16, 17, 18, 19. by one
that sinned, etc. by one man's offense death reigned by one; by the offense of
one judgment came upon all men to condemnation: By one man's disobedience many
were made sinners: Implying clearly, that the guilt of Adam, as representing
all his posterity, was and is imputed to all; and therefore all were, and are
bound over to the same Law; bottomed upon that word of the Lord to Adam, by
which God put the Covenant upon him, Genesis 2.17. For in the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shall surely dye* Adam had the law of Holiness and Righteousness,
the Moral Law, written in his heart before, and his nature perfect, which bound
him over to obey every command of his God; now God gave out that external law
unto him by way of trial, in which the form of the Covenant was implied; but
sinning against that, he transgressed the Moral law, written in his heart also,
which bound him over to obey God in all things; so that the sin of Adam was (at
least virtually) a transgression of the moral law, now abiding and obliging
mankind; which law we all brake in him, as it was given to all in him, and
being written in Adam's heart, it was as much as if it had been actually
written in the hearts of all mankind; which does also appear by the remnants of
the Law, (as that there is a God, and man should be just,) and remaining in the
hearts of all: Therefore by nature we are all bound up to, and are under this
law.

2. It does appear that all do sin and transgress this law of God, therefore
they are under the penalty and condemnation of it: This Argument the Apostle
brings to prove the same thing, verse 9. of this 3d. of the Romans -- For we have
before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin: And verse
12. They are all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable,
there is none that does good, no not one; Thefore seeing all do sin, they are
bound to answer the law (as you use to phrase it,) and are subject to
whatsoever the Law pronounces against the transgressors of it.

3. All the partial keeping of the Law, will not deliver a Soul from that
penalty that belongs to the breach of the whole: Keep me all or none, as to
your deliverance from the curse, says the law. But this I am further to prove,
when I speak to the next verse, The impossibility of a sinners being accepted
by his best keeping of the law.

Use 1. Are all Men and Women in the World, young and old, naturally under the
law, bound over to the most exact and rigorous fulfilling it under a curse, and
are indeed under all the curses and threatenings it pronounces, and bound to
make God satisfaction in your persons, while you are under it? Oh! let every
poor Sinner be convinced of it, what a state is this for any poor soul to rest
it self satisfied in? who is the man or woman that is not a transgressor of it?
and therefore see to it, and that before the execution of judgment come upon
thee without remedy. Sinner, if thou wast condemned by the Law, and under a
sense of death, how would beg for a reprieve? and beg of all thy friends to
interpose for thee; what an amazing word would it be to thee? Thou art
condemned to dye. Ah sinner, it is the case of thy precious soul, Thou art
condemned to eternal death, by the law of God, the sentence is pronounced from
the righteous Judge of Heaven; Away Sinner, with all speed to a Mercy seat.
Acknowledge thy condemation just by the Law, go to the great and potent
Advocate of Heaven, Jesus Christ the righteous; put thy case into his hand,
tell him thou bast none else to make to, and that thou have heard he has
helped many a condemned Sinner, in the same case as thou art; and that thou
have heard he has laid down a price for such as thou art to redeem them from
the curse of the Law: Follow him, and if he speak but a word to the just and
great God for thee, the sentence of the law is remitted, a pardon of grace
comes forth, and at last the Holy Ghost shall be sent from the Father, and the
Son to witness it, and seal it in thy own Conscience; and that blessed word
shall be thine, Therefore there is now no condemnation, etc. who shall condemn
me, since Jesus Christ has cleared me? and has made the Court of Heaven for
me? Go and ponder in thy soul every day; and say, Is It nothing to be under a
Curse? condemned by a Law to be damned for ever? shall I let my poor soul lie
in such a case one hour longer, especially when a way I hear is opened to me to
get from under it? Say, what satisfaction can I, wretched creature, make to the
righteous God? None, but by suffering what infinite justice will lay upon me,
which is no less than infinite punishment. Oh! get in upon thy conscience, what
it is to be condemned by the great God, to lie under guilt, to have no plea or
excuse by the Law left thee; which I will labor to prove to thy conscience,
and then further urge thee, which is the import of the next point.

Obser. 2. A transgressor of the law, as he has nothing to boast in, so he
has nothing to excuse himself for his sin, or from the righteous judgment of
God due unto him; which is drawn from these words -- That every mouth may be
stopped, etc.

This the Apostle intimates, Romans 2.1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man,
etc. speaking to the Jew who went about to free himself. And the judgment of
God is according to truth, against them which do such things, verse. 2.

Reason 1. A poor sinner has nothing to excuse himself for sinning against the
law of God, because the law is good and righteous, Romans 7.12. Therefore the law
is holy, and the Commandment holy, just, and good, says Paul, when he was
under such a Conviction of sinning against it as we are pressing; So 1 Timothy
1.8. But we know that the law is good, etc. It Is a Law that gives glory to the
Creator, and all good and blessedness (as in it self) to the Creature* A Law
that is full of all wisdom and blessedness, takes care for the good, blessing,
peace, order of the whole Creation, that man might not sin against his Maker,
nor, in the least, harm (nor think to do so) his fellow creature, so that its
proper end is goodness, preservation to all; Now what excuse for a creature,
most concerned in the good of it, for sinning against such a Law? what has a
creature to say for himself? how inexcusable is he before God, Angels, and Men?

2. God writ this holy and blessed Law in the heart of Adam, as he was a
public person, whereby he, and in him all mankind, had power to keep it,
therefore the sinner has no excuse before God; He gave man a power, though he
did not lay a necessity upon his will, but left them to the liberty of it, but
man corrupted himself, Genesis 6.12. Whereby he disabled himself from keeping the
Law: Now if a man disable himself, it can be no rational excuse for neglecting
the duty, so that his Mouth is stopped as to any plea or excuse before the Lord.

3. Though man had blurred and defaced the fair and original Copy of this holy
and good law written in his heart, yet God gave it forth again by Moses in
Legible Characters, one end whereof was to leave all Mankind without excuse;
therefore this strikes off all plea for the sinner, especially to such to whom
it is revealed.

4. There is a remnant of this Law yet in the heart of Adam, which though not
sufficient to enable him to an exact performance of it, yet enough to leave him
without excuse; so Paul, Romans 2.15. to prove this point we are now upon,
speaking of the Gentiles, -- Which show the works of the Law written in their
hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean
while accusing, or else excusing one another. There is enough of the law
remaining in every man's heart to accuse him, when he does evil; and excuse him
so far as he does right, though man by habitual sinning, does much stifle it;
so that this also helps to aggravate his sin, and to leave him without all plea
or excuse.

5. There is that to be known of God, in the creatures, that may and does leave
a sinner without all excuse for sinning against him; this the Apostle argues as
to this very purpose, Romans 1.20. For the invisible things of him from the
Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even his eternal power and god head, so that they are without excuse,
etc. The creatures could not say, we will make our selves thus and thus, and
subsist in such an order and harmony; therefore there was one first Infinite
Being, who made all things, and by the same power does uphold them, to which
first Being, all the creatures must owe their homage and conformity: Now though
such a glimmering of light can never suffice to lead a soul to the true
worshipping of God, as the Apostle there argues, yet it leaves the creature
without excuse, which is that I am proving from it.

6. All the Children of men do sin presumptuously, wilfully, and obstinately,
against the Law of God; man's sin being not so much from his weakness to obey
the law, (though weak he is) but from the rebellion of his will against God and
his law; as it is in the case of disobeying the call of the Gospel also: Now
whatsoever a man does presumptuously and wilfully, it leaves him without all
excuse; and this is it that is charged upon the Children of men, by the holy
Ghost in the word, that their sin was obstinate rebellion against the great God.

From all these, the truth of the Assertion does appear, that every
Transgressor of the Law is without all excuse before God.

7. As the Creature has no excuse for his sin, so it follows he has no
pretense against the righteous judgment of God; We are sure the judgment of God
is according to truth, Romans 2.2. and Chap. 3.4. That thou may be justified
in thy savings, and clear when thou art judged; that is, whatever any sinner
may dispute to the contrary, God is righteous when he judges; if the Law be
just, and holy, and good, once written in his his heart, and had a power to
have kept it, that God has given out this law again to him, the remnants of it
in his heart, so much to be known of God in the Creatures, and that he sins
presumptuously and wilfully against God, and so blessed a law, made for his own
good, certainly must every sinner conclude, the Lord is righteous when he
judges, and every mouth must be stopped.

Use 1. If it be so, that no sinner in the world has any justifiable excuse
for his sin, then let this truth come in into your consciences, and strike off
all vain pretenses, and wretched excuses, when you have sinned against the
Lord; which usually are such as these, when sinners break forth into this or
that rebellious way, they cry, Oh! it is my nature, my natural disposition; and
then they think that excuses or allayeth the matter, whereas it aggravates,
for we our selves corrupted our natures. Says another, I have been so
accustomed to such a way, to drink to excess, sometimes to swear, to use the
Lords name vainly, and as a byword; whereas the custom of sinning is the
greatest and most grievous aggravation of it. Says another, it is my company
that draws me, or the example of others, or it is my temptation, when they are
under the Spirit that works in the children of disobedience: Or, that they do
keep the Law as well as they can, and think this will excuse: Whereas nothing,
no plea that ever a sinful deceitful heart put up, or that the Devil suggests,
can before God excuse any sinner in the world, rich or poor, knowing or
ignorant, from the exact and perfect keeeping of the Law, (if they are under
the Law) but upon one transgression of it, the law does most justly condemn and
curse them.

Nothing is more natural to fallen man, under sin, than when having sinned, to
devise an excuse, and thinks and surmiseth, that because such an excuse will be
taken by his own blinded Conscience, therefore God will also accept of it, and
so flatters himself in his own eyes, till his iniquity be found to be hateful,
Psalm. 36.2. Thus Adam as soon as he had sinned, he thought how to excuse the
matter, puts it off to the woman, and the woman to the Devil, which trade
sinners have well learnt, and have driven it on ever since to their own
damnation: Observe this, if every sinner, yet under the law, and the power of
sin, had not some vain pretense and excuse to ensilence conscience, and
foolishly thinks to insinuate unto God, he or she, must needs fall down before
the Lord, see all their pretenses and coverts to be damnable flatteries, and
soul-cheatings, and so Judge themselves, and pronounce God most righteous, if
he damn them for ever.

Oh therefore, Sinners, Away with all your pretenses, no more excusing, but
judging, and go to the great God, and fall down at his feet, crying out, Oh, I
am a Transgressor, the Law condemns me, no excuse will be taken, my mouth is
now stopped; whatever God do with me, he is most holy and righteous. If I were
going to Hell I must justify God, and cannot say unto him, why do thou
thus? Thus it is with a poor soul, when the Lord by his word and spirit
discovers sin, reveals the law, lays it in upon the conscience, discovers the
Holiness and Exactness of his Justice, that the law shows no mercy, but cries
out for fulfilling, or pronounces absolute condemnation, then I say, a sinner
cries out, Oh I am cast by the Law, I am gone by the Law, All my Pleas are found
too light, All my endeavors to keep it is worth nothing, if guilty in the
least, while I am under the law. I must find out a righteousness elsewhere,
another way, or Condemnation, just condemnation is my portion for ever; Here Is
the first stroke of a convinced sinner, when God is outing him from himself,
and all his Coverts or Excuses, and brings him naked to put on the
righteousness of his Son Jesus Christ, freely held out in the Gospel; which is
the work in hand.

2. If no excuse can be heard or taken, for the the transgression of the Law,
for but one breach of it, but every mouth is stopped; how much less will any
excuse be taken, for withstanding the Gospel of grace by Jesus Christ. Says
our blessed Lord, If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin,
(that is not so great sin and comdemnation) but now they have no cloak (nor
excuse) for their sin; If a righteous law leave all the world without excuse,
much more a Gospel that offers free grace, and pardon, and righteousness, by
Jesus Christ to any sinner, condemned by the Law, that will come in, as so
condemned, and accept of the free gift of Righteousness by him.

But that I may yet a little further labor to bring in the sense of Guilt upon
the soul, I shall prove every soul guilty before God of the transgression of
the Law, and show what the sense of guilt is, which few there are that have, in
a saving way.

Observe. 3. Every soul in the world is guilty before God of the transgression
of the Law. -- And all the world may become guilty before God.

This has been proved, where we have showed that All have sinned, and come
short of the glory of God.

This guilt is threefold, which is set home upon every sinners heart, when
convinced of sin by the spirit.

1. The guilt of Adams sin, which stands charged upon every sinner in the
world, while under the law, Romans 5.18.

2. The guilt of the corruption of our natures, sin in the fountain, as I have
showed, which is likewise upon every Son or Daughter of Adam, they are all
corrupt, Psalm. 14.1. wherein lies the exceeding sinfulness of sin.

3. The guilt of actual rebellion against God, sin brought forth, and acted in
the outward man against God.

Now under this threefold guilt is every sinner in the world, while under the
Law, the effect of which, if not reconciled, is punishment suitable to the
guilt; which is -- Thou shall surely dye, And The wages of sin is death,
Eternal Death, Romans 6. last.

Use 1. This may therefore inform and convince, that every sin brings guilt
upon the soul, and so deserves death and everlasting wrath from God; you that
make light of sin, to lie, to profane the Name of the Lord, be in worldly
discourses on the Lords day, in any way of sin whatsoever, weigh this in thy
conscience, there is not the least sin but makes thee guilty before the Tribunal
of God; God, the Law, Angels, Conscience, are all witnesses against thee;
where is the soul that will think to avoid this charge? shall I prove every soul
of you guilty, and that before God? If this were proved by the power of the
word in the conscience, I know what (and I shall show it you) will be the
effect of it; lay your Consciences to the Word, and if thou art found guilty
before the Lord this day, go home with the sense of it upon thy soul, and do as
a guilty sinner should do.

1. Consider first, as to what concerns God, immediately; the Law requires,
thou should have no other Gods but him, Exodus 20. which Jesus Christ
interprets, is, to love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul:
Now, has God had thy whole Heart and Soul, dare thou say so? Has not the
world had more of thy Heart than God? Do not thou love the World, and the
things of it? Do not thy Affections, Thoughts, Desires of thy Heart, even day
and night, go after it? Yea, you cannot but grant, that it is so? Then God and
Angels are witness, that thou art guilty of the damnable sin of Idolatry. And
such a one shall not, as such, enter into the Kingdom of God, Ephesians. 5.5. Know by
that Scripture, A covetous heart may send thee to Hell, as well as any sin in
the World: -- No Covetous man who is an Idolater, shall enter into the kingdom
of God. Read over the place every day, and tremble at it: Here Is guilt already
enough to damn thee.

2. Thou have worshipped God superstitiously and idolatrously, after the
Traditions and Commandments of Men: You that are elderly people, are all guilty
here in a grevious manner in the time of your ignorance and superstition,
coming to Sacraments with sins upon your Souls, from which sins your are not
converted, and changed to this day, which the Apostle calls eating and drinking
damnation, or judgment; under which guilt you still lie, and would heap up more
of this guilt, were not some more tender of your Souls than your selves? Art
thou not now ready to cry out, Oh hold, hold, you need go no further, my
Conscience is smitten: Oh! guilt, great guilt lies upon me! Oh that 'twere the
cry of many Souls before the Lord, how might it end in mercy that shall be for
ever!

3. But yet further to pursue thy Conscience, (for that is the nature of guilt)
does not the Lord require in his law, that thou should not take his Name in
vain, Exodus 20.7. Now sinner, stave off this guilt if thou can: How often have
thou abused and profaned this great and dreadful Name, the Lord thy God, by
swearing, or in thy by words, crying, Oh Lord, Oh God, for God's sake, for
Christ's sake, upon every foolish vain occasion, with no more reverence of His
Name, than the most common name in the World? And some of you have, as many
days as you have lived since your Childhood, been frequently guilty of this
great evil, which thou have made a small matter of, which if ever God pardon
it, it will appear to be odious guilt, from the height of thy Heart-Atheism.
How often have thou heard the Word, and thy Heart been after the World, and thine
eyes gazing up and down, that it is easy to discern thou regardest not what is
spoken from God to thee? and the same in Prayer: How often have thou babled over
the Lords Prayer like a Charm, with no reverence of Gods Majesty upon thy Soul:
In thy bed, it may be in a drowsy manner, or if otherwise, not understanding
the Words thou speak, much less thy Heart affected with them; or, it may be,
saying over the Creed, and the Commandments, or some Book of Prayers, as
abundance do, grievously profaning God's Name, and offering Lip-labor, which
his soul abhors; yea, know, what has been often proved, that thy prayers,
and all thy worship, and good deeds, (as thou call them) are an abomination
to the Lord, while thou art in thy sin, an unconverted and unholy person; yea,
the way of thy worship, in which thou placest thy greatest confidence, has
been the highest aggravations of thy sin, in offering up to God that which his
soul hates; Isa. 1.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. -- When you make many prayers (says
the Lord) I will not hear you, etc.

And as to the sanctifying the Sabbath, which thou should make a holy rest
unto God, thou have made it a mere fleshly rest, consuming the day upon thy
lusts, in vanity, idleness, carnal and worldly discourses in families, in the
streets, to the high dishonor of the Name of God, and hardening of thy heart
against the truths of God, rendering thereby the preaching of the Gospel wholly
unprofitable to thy soul: A carriage far unlike a man that has the grace of
God upon him, and a most invincible argument to thy Conscience, that thou
make not God, his word, ordinances sabbaths, a holy delight, and know not
the excellency and sweetness of Communion with him; say, sinner, and lay thy
Conscience to this conviction, is hearing and that with love, praying,
praising, meditating, conferring of holy things, the very Heaven of thy soul,
and so longest for such Exercises, as the joy and strength of thy heart?
Nothing less! Thy own Conscience being Judge; but hear drowsily and
negligently, it may be despisingly; revile the Preacher, speak evil of the
word, out of thy gross ignorance, and hatred to be reformed, speak vainly,
carnally, worldly, with such as are like thy self. Here Is guilt enough to send
thee to a thousand Hells, if God smite not thy heart for it, and thou turn not
unto him for pardon and a better heart to be given to thee.

Add to all this, an unthankful and unholy use of Gods good Creatures; it may
be thou have been betrayed by the devil, and thy own ready heart to some secret
sins, which thou think enough if thou can hide from man, not considering
the judgment of God that hangs over thee. But if not so, yet a heart full of
uncleanness, envy, wrath, malice; which our Lord Jesus Christ, in his opening
the Law in its spirituality, Mat. 5.21, 22, 27, 28. convinces to be murder and
adultery, which it may be, thou have never considered of, so thou have not been
an actual adulterer, or murderer. In a word, There Is not a vain thought in thy
heart, the first rising of it, but brings thee under the guilt of condemation
of the Law, and as thou art under the Law, as if a transgressor in thought,
word, and deed of the whole Law; This may seem strange to thee, but see it
proved, Jam. 2.10. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in
one point is guilty of all.

But it has been proved that thou art guilty of the breach of every
Commandment of God, from thy youth up.

But see further, sinner, (that some word of God or other may hit thee) this
Law could not condemn thee; would thou have been convinced of guilt, and made
in to grace by Jesus Christ, but thou art under the guilt of Gospel-contempt;
Come sinner, says Jesus Christ, see what I can and will do for thee, I Will save
thee from this condemning Law, I Will take away the curse, I Will remove all thy
guilt, blot out all the charge that is against thee, I Will put a righteousness
upon thee, I Will bestow my spirit upon thee, I Will give thee a heart to love God
and his Law, and in the inward man to delight to walk in it, and then take thee
to Heaven, and fill thee with glory for ever. All this Heaven of mercy and free
grace thou have slighted and sinned against, and brought thy self under
greater condemnation, than by the law: And yet, by the way, Jesus Christ will
do as much for thee still as I have spoken of, and more: Though thou have thus
sinned against Law and Gospel, if thou will come a poor, undone, guilty soul,
unto him, which is that I aim at in thus pressing upon thee; and were the sense
of guilt indeed upon thy soul, thou would seriously hearken to me.

Therefore yet further bear with me, Take home this guilt to thy Conscience,
and say, Oh guilty, guilty, of all that has been this day charged from the
righteous God upon me! Oh may the Lord find thee out this day, and lay in the
fresh sense of the guilt of sins, even of such thou have long since committed!
do not justify nor excuse thy self any longer; for that is the natural way of
thy heart, as thou have been showed. Never did guilty prisoner at the bar find
more shifts, more subtle pleas, than the proud and shameless heart of a sinner
will do, till God himself pronounce guilt in the conscience, and then the guilt
of one sin laid in, brings in the guilt of all other, and they sometimes come
in like waves and billows upon thy soul; Oh, let the sense of thy lying,
swearing, profaning the Sabbath, slighting the word, refusing Jesus Christ,
out of thy secret hatred of holiness, reproaching the people of God, because in
their practice they condemn thee, Oh let this, any, all, seize upon thee, go
and lie low before the great God, judging, charging, condemning thy self, and
say; God and his Word has found me out this day, and I go home with at arrow
of God in my conscience, I am the Man or Woman, that am found the guiltiest
soul in the Congregation; how to be delivered and saved from it, that is my
business now. Blessed be the advice and counsel now, (which formerly I
despised) of any good man that speaks in the Name of the Lord unto me, and will
show me there is yet hope for so wretched a creature as I am.

Particularly, these are the effects of the sense of the guilt of sin, wrought
by the Holy Ghost upon the conscience of a poor soul, in order to his salvation.

1. Fear of wrath to come, more or less, possesses the heart; can a man be
guilty and not fear, if truly sensible of it? This was upon Adam, after he had
sinned, and heard Gods voice, which struck him with sense of guilt, Genesis 3.10.
I heard thy voice and was afraid; so when guilt came upon Belshazzar, his
thoughts troubled him, Dan. 5.6. Felix trembled, Acts 24.25. The Jailer came
trembling, Acts 16.29. The fear of wrath, the fear of a miscarrying soul, the
fear of eternity, seizes upon the spirit of a poor creature; and then it is an
infinite weighty matter with a poor soul to be saved.

2. Shame is another effect of guilt brought in upon the conscience: So Adam
likewese was ashamed, and hid himself, because he was naked, Genesis 3. What fruit
had you in those things whereof you are now ashamed; Romans 6.21. So Ezekiel. 16.
last. That thou may remember and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any
more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou
have done, says the Lord; See also Ezekiel. 43.10, 11. Oh how is a sensible
guilty soul ashamed before God, Angels and men, of such ways and carriages, in
which he impudently before delighted himself? and lies down in his shame and
confusion of face, even covering his face before God, and ashamed to look up
unto him.

3. The soul walks up and down with a burdened spirit, those
creature comforts, delights, contentments, which before would still the spirit,
now will not; sense of guilt eats out the hearts of them, the soul must now
have something else than wind and vanity, (for so are creatures become to such
a poor soul:) It may be the deceitful heart carries a poor creature to this
thing and that, but finds no satisfaction there, the burden still remains, the
arrow that God has shot sticks fast, till Jesus Christ pluck it forth, and
heals all with his Blood and Spirit.

4. Guilty souls make out for deliverence, sue to Heaven, are enquiring how the
law may be satisfied, how guilt may be removed, how atonement may be had, how
bondage taken off; in a word, how he may come to see the face of a blessed God,
reconciled in Jesus Christ, and so love him, and bless him to eternity.

Why now, careless sinner, Is It not better be thus, than be hardening for Hell?
and have the guilt of sin as nothing to thee, till the books shall be opened?
all thy sins written in Letters of Blood against thee, Conscience accused,
charged, and witnessing against thee, and so away screeking to Hell without all
remedy, and can not be heard a word for thy self, nor any one, Saint, or
Angel for thee? Now thou may be heard, if thou will speedily acknowledge thy
guilt, not cover thy transgression nor hide thy iniquity in thy bosom, Job
31.33. but come with fear, and shame, burdened with thy guilt, to him whose
arms are yet open to receive thee, and is ready to take away iniquity off thee,
and take off thy burdens, put his hand under thy soul: And if thou would
know who it is, it is that blessed Jesus who loves to save such a sinner, as he
loves his life; therefore away to him.

But the heart of a guilty sinner will now urge; Well, if it be so, that some
guilt is upon me, yet I have done many things well, or as well I could, will
not that take off my guilt, and will not God impute the good to me, and pass by
the evil? Or will not God acept of the will for the deed? Or if I set my self
for the time to come, to keep the law as well as I can, will not that make God
amends? Alas, poor soul, these refuges will undo thee, if thou get not out of
them; No, No; Thy good shall not be imputed, nor thy will accepted, nor thy
obedience for time to come satisfy; I mean, still as thou art under the law,
As well as thou can, will not be heard here; If thou indeed gets justified in
Christ, and rooted in him, and so from a new principle of life in thy soul,
thou bring forth new and holy obedience, then thy will is accepted, and thy new
obedience, but not upon this account, as to justify thee before God; or as to
expiate and take off guilt from the soul.

This therefore is the next thing I am to prove to thy Conscience, if God will,
Namely,

Observe. 4. No man or woman under Heaven, can ever arrive at such a keeping of
the law, as to be accepted with God, for and by such a keeping of it.

I would press this as plainly as I may, for till this conviction be thoroughly
and practically received into the Conscience, a soul cannot make a saving close
with Jesus Christ.

What I mean by these deeds of the Law, is, I presume, understood; I mean, The
professed owning the true God, and frequenting his ordained worship and
ordinances, observing the Sabbath, making good prayers, doing some good, as to
helping thy Neighbor, and giving of Alms, making conscience of wronging or
defrauding any man, and refraining many gross sins; I mention these things,
because most men that go thus far, as your more civil sort of people, think
that it is impossible, but God must accept them in and for all this; that it is
for great sinners to be damned, they thank God they are not so; by the way,
soul, I shall not doubt to prove, that there is more hope of the vilest drunkard
in the Country, than of such a one; and that this thy good keeping of the law,
and that as well as thou can, will stand thee in no stead at all; and God
looks upon thee no more for it, than if thou were the greatest sinner in the
world; How say thou soul to this?

1. From clear Scriptures I shall demonstrate it, and Scriptural reasons, and
examples of such kind of persons rejected of God, and so labor to drive this
nail home upon thy conscience.

What need we go further than the words of my Text; By the deeds of the law
shall no flesh be justified in his sight? The Apostle speaks of such who
professed to own and make conscience of keeping the law, as well as they could,
such as were within (as you call it) the pale of the Church, and frequented the
worship of God, and were sober people: See Act. 13.39; -- From which (meaning
their sins) they could not be justified by the Law of Moses: They could not! an
utter impossibility of it, though they kept the law of God as well as they were
able, and hoped for pardon thereby, yet says Paul (which exceedingly troubled
them) they could not be justified thereby; Romans 9.31. But Israel which followed
after the law of righteousness, has not attained to the law of righteousness;
Though they followed after it, and labored to keep the Law of God to their
utmost yet they failed of their purpose, Gal. 3.10, 11. etc, For as many as are
of the works of the Law, are under the curse, that is, such as insist upon
works of the Law, they are so far from being the more accepted for all the good
they did, and all the evil they refrained, that they were under the curse, as
well as any sinners in the world besides.

Briefly, Paul who well knew the experience of this, it having been his own
case, as I shall show, spends two Epistles, of the Romans and Galathians, to
convince chiefly what I am now upon; therefore peruse them over and over.

Now the Reasons of it are these, namely, why any sinners keeping of the Law to
his best power, can not justify him, or make him the better, or at all
accepted with God for it.

This doctrine goes to the quick, and I know naturally you do not love it, and
it is irksom, and disquieting; the Lord make it disquieting and unsettling to
purpose.

Reason 1. The best keeping of the Law cannot make a soul more accepted with
God, (while under the Law, and not in Christ) because of the holiness of Gods
Justice, which being violated by sin, (it being also proved that all do sin)
cannot again be made up by any act of the Creature, the severity of his justice
cannot admit of it, therefore if the Law be transgressed, the sinner must dye,
as he is under the law, and stands to the law, or God is not righteous, which
to assert is execrable blasphemy. And if your thoughts should prevent me, with
a general notion of mercy, know, and consider it well, that the law shows no
mercy, but calls for justice, and justice it shall have upon every transgressor
whosoever, if he stand to his endeavor to keep the Law; The soul that sins,
it shall dye. From whence, by the law, I say, by the law, there is no appeal:
What you may do when you renounce the Law, for righteousness, and fly wholly to
a mercy-seat, is another case. This is the first reason.

2. The best keeping of the Law will not accepted, because of the exactness of
the Law; it requires full, entire, perfect fulfilling and obedience, or all
stands for nothing; If this were thoroughly weighed and laid to heart, we should
come to an issue in the point. Mark that Word, Gal. 3.12. Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things which are written in the law to do them: I
think I opened this place lately, but mark it well; the Law requires of every
one, and therefore of thee, whoever thou art, a continuance (without
intermission) of doing (not only purposing and endeavoring) All things, not
keeping nine, and breaking one Commandment; not keeping it outwardly, and
breaking it in thy thoughts of sin, but in All things, or Cursed, without
remedy, by the law, the Law can give you no remedy; see Romans 10.5. For Moses
describes the righteousness of the law; The man that does these things shall
live by them; If he does all things of the Law, not purposes them only, but
does them, he shall live by them, but not otherwise, but shall dye, and that
for ever, by the law: Now mark you, The same Law cannot at once justify and
condemn, bless and curse, quit and judge, save and condemn, if it therefore
condemn in the least, it cannot quit by all that ever a soul has done, or may
do, toward fufilling it. I instanced before, if a man that lives under the law
of England, all the laws of it, and he be found a transgressor of one law, that
is to be punished with death; it will not be a good plea for him that he never
brake any other law that deserves death: No, says the Judge, you must dye for
this; so as I have showed, the law pronounces death to the breach of any one
Commandment, any part of one, as well as to the breach of the whole. Therefore
he that pleads, as the Pharisee did, (and was never the more accepted,) that he
is no murderer, no blasphemer, no thief, no adulterer; it is all one, as if
thou have ever had an unholy thought in thy heart, (as thou have had thousands)
as thou art under the Law, thou art condemned; if this indeed had been the
tenor of the law, as it was a Covenant between God and the first Adam, that if
thou and thy posterity shall endeavor to keep the law as well as you can,
though you sail in some part, yet you shall be accepted; then this had been a
good plea before God, that you have so endeavored to keep it; but it is not so,
the Covenant does not run so, but, as has been showed, it runs thus; Here Is a
holy and righteous law, says God, the matter of the Covenant between us, if
you break it in any one least part of it, and but once, you are condemned, and
all your other righteousness shall not be imputed to you. This has been proved
from several Scriptures; and I think it is the hardest thing in the World to be
spiritually and practically convinced of it; such is the exactness of the Law,
that it admits of no bartering, of no terms whatsoever; it still cries, fulfill
me to the utmost, or dye.

3. The third Reason, which strikes off all hope of acceptance with God, by
keeping the Law as well as you can, is taken from the sinfulness of those very
duties and works which you place such acceptance in; There is a sinfulness in
every such duty, though the matter of the duty be good, yet the manner of
performing it by any natural man is wholly sinful; yea, there is a mixture of
sin in the most holy performances of any regenerate soul in the world, which he
is sensible of; but I am dealing with the natural man, as to his opinion of his
good keeping the law; I say there is nothing but sin in their performances, the
principle they proceed from is wholly sinful, viz. a corrupted, polluted heart
and nature: Can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit? Mat. 7.18. Can a corrupt
fountain send forth sweet waters? James 3.11. No more can a corrupt defiled
heart bring forth any duty or work, but what is loathsome to God, full of all
impurity: This a natural man is not able to see, nor consider of, till
convinced by the Holy Ghost, and therefore it is that he rests only in
performing the matters and bulk of duties to God and his Neighbor; but with
what heart, and the unholiness of it, he weighs not. Upon this account it is,
that the Scriptures speak at such a rate of natural Men, that they are an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.8. That his soul hates them, he cannot away
with them, they are iniquity, they are a trouble to him, Isa. 1. And that he
casts them back, as dung upon their faces, Mal. 2.3. Therefore if there be more
than sin enough, in that best keeping of the Law, toward God or Man, to damn a
soul for ever; Certainly a soul shall be never the better, nor at all accepted
for such a keeping of it. That which in it self has sin, nothing but sin in
the manner of it, cannot be a means to quit a soul from other sin, by which he
has brought guilt upon himself, let this be well considered, and (nothing but
a Christ) would be your cry to purpose indeed.

4. The fourth Reason or Convincement of this truth, that the best endeavor to
keep the law, will not give you more acceptance with God, nor take away any
guilt from off thy soul, is because such duties, and keeping the Law, are but
of the outward man, which is far from reaching the Compass of the law: The law
is spiritual, Romans 7.14. that is, it reaches to the inwards parts, to the
motions of the heart, as has been before hinted, and not only to the outward
man; therefore our blessed Lord, seeing the Jews insisting so much that they
were outwardly blameless, spends a large discourse Mat. 5.6, and 7. to beat
them off their confidence, in being outwardly righteous, and proves a man a
murderer by the Law, for one wrathful thought in his heart, Mat. 5.21, 22. Upon
this conviction you have him, as often as he spoke to the Jews, (that we may see
the weight of this Doctrine:) See Luke 16.19, 15. And the Pharisees also, who
were covetuous, heard all these things, and they derided him, And he said unto
them, ye are they which justify your selves before men, but God knows your
hearts, for that which is highly esteemed amongst men is an abomination in the
sight of God; Jesus Christ was convincing the wickedness of a covetous heart,
the Jews, who were carnal and formal, made a slight matter of this, seeing they
were outwardly blameless, and wronged no body; Ay, but, says Christ, God
knows your hearts, and his eye is most upon them, and though you are
outwardly righteous before men, and this is a matter highly esteemed of among
men, that you are righteous and blameless, yet it is an abomination to God; see
how severe the Lord is in pressing of this, (it being the great let of his
Ministry, and of the Jews stumbling at the Gospel, as it is with us) Mat. 23.
his last Sermon I conceive he preached to them, verse 25. Woe unto you Scribes
and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye make clean the outside of the cup and
platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess; so with the same woe
pronounced verse 27. Ye are like unto whited sepulchers, which indeed appear
beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all
uncleanness; verse 28. Even so also ye outwardly appear righteous unto men, but
within ye are full of Hypocrisy, and iniquity: Mark the Lords words, within ye
are thus, and thus, as if the Lord should say, God regards not what you are
outwardly, and your observing the law with the outward man; seeing you have
abundance of all iniquity within, which every unregenerate soul in the world
has; so you may see that an outward keeping of the law, stands for nothing in
the account of God, whatever it do with men and your selves which you hear
Jesus Christ gives forth, as the mark of an Hypocrite. Now you have heard, the
law requires inward as well as outward perfection, perfect holiness within, as
well as righteousness in the outward man; I verily believe, want of this
conviction upon the soul, sends more souls to Hell than any other thing in the
world besides; how confident are poor Creatures if they are a little
conscientious in dealing, and sober, and blameless to men? this you may be, and
be no better than Devils (as in your selves) in Gods account, and thy best
Character from Jesus Christ, Mat. 23.26. is, a Blind Pharisee. Every place, I
fear, abounds with them, therefore this inveterate cursed plea of being
outwardly blameless in keeping the Law, will not in the least render you more
accepted with God, but it is at the best but painted Hypocrisy: And yet,
wretched souls that you are, none so well persuaded of themselves as these.
This is the fourth Reason.

5. All the best keeping of the Law, does not, cannot, make satisfaction to God
for one sin of thy soul, therefore it is worth nothing; Gods Justice is wronged,
and if the sinner be remitted, God must be satisfied by the sinner himself, or
by another; Now all the obedience of a sinner cannot make satisfaction to God
in the least; if he had the whole world to offer up to God, it could not
satisfy him for the wrong of one Sin; See that known place, Micah 6.6, 7.
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God?
shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with Calves of a year old? will
the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of
Oil? shall I give my first born for my transgression, the fruit of my body for
the sin of my soul? Implying that there is nothing that a poor sinner of
himself can offer up to God, to make atonement of satisfaction to God, for the
least sin of his soul; should he offer up thousands of prayers, rivers of
tears, whole ages spent in services to God, take up to a severe new obedience,
if you should so take to a new course as never to sin more all your days, it
would not make God satisfaction or atonement for one evil thought of thy soul:
Now observe this, (for if thou art not rightly convinced of this thing, thou
art lost for ever) It Is naturally upon every man and woman's heart, that has
sinned, to imagine that when they have sinned, they can put off God, as to his
displeasure, with something or other, they will reckon what good they have
done, gone to Church, (as you style it) given Alms, been just to Men, or some
such thing; and the poor blind Creature imagines and pleases himself in it,
that this good thus done will well enough pacify God for his sins, or at least
he will go over some prayers, and be strict for a little while, and then they
doubt not but God (because also he presently smites not with judgment) is well
enough appayed, and he need no more trouble himself. Is not this the very way
of your hearts, has not the word found you out?

Object. But you will say; why cannot these duties and this obedience satisfy
and pacify God well enough for sin?

Answ. 1. Because there is sin mixed in them, they come from a profane heart,
as is showed in the last reason, (thou thou ignorantly, because thou know
not thy heart, call'st it a good heart:) Now that which is in it self sinful,
cannot sure satisfy for sin.

2. Because of the infiniteness of God's justice, as well as purity of it; a
finite creature cannot offer up a proportionable atonement to an infinite God.
Suppose a poor man were under the guilt of treason, and condemned to dye, and
he should go and offer up a little course broken bread to the Prince, would any
one think that this would satisfy the Prince for his treason? So, poor
deceived creature, thou art guilty of treason and rebellion against the great
and most high God, and thou come and offerest up to him thy poor polluted
broked obedience and duties, and think he will be satisfied with this;
whereas God may in the same moment justly send thee to Hell for the iniquity of
them. A poor sinful soul thinks, that because such doings and services do
satisfy himself, his own conscience, therefore he thinks they will satisfy
God also; because they quiet him upon any trouble for guilt, he thinks they
will also quiet God, and take off his anger and justice from punishing him:
Poor Creature, this thy way is thy folly, and the ready way to come under the
severe justice of the Almighty, who will not thus be dealt with, nor be thus
bribed with thy cursed sacrifices; this is a further convincement of the point;
all the creature can do, cannot pacify God for one sin, and therefore all his
best keeping of the law cannot justify a poor sinner before God, nor give him
acceptance in the least with him; till he sees pacification another way, and
takes up obedience from another principle, and to another end, as we are to
show.

6. All a man's endeavor in setting himself to keep the law to the utmost,
cannot give him acceptance with God, because it cannot give life to the soul;
Gal. 3.21. For if there had been a law, which would have given life, verily
righteousness had come by the law: Man has procured death and weakness upon
his soul, and the law cannot give life, nor strength to obey it. All that
righteousness which leaves the soul dead, comes to nothing; while a soul is
under the law, and upon the fulfilling of it, (as he hopes in a good measure)
still the soul is as dead as sin left it, and void of the life of God: True, a
poor soul thinks himself alive by his legal performances, as Paul thought, Romans
7.9. but he is dead in sin, and under the sentence of death by the Law, and all
the performances toward the keeping of it, can never give a drop of life to
such a poor soul: They are dead works, and there is no life in them, or from
them, therefore they stand no soul instead, while under the law, as under it he
is, whiles he goes upon this account.

7. The main reason of all, which is now but to be touched, is this: If a soul
endeavoring to keep the law of God as well as he can, may be accepted of God
thereby, what need Jesus Christ to have dyed: It Is Paul's great argument, Romans
8.3, 4. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh,
God sending his own son, in the likeness of sinful flesh, condemned sin in the
flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, etc. Mark
ye, what the law could not do, that it could not give us a righteousness
whereby God might accept us, therefore God sent his Son in the flesh, and
condemned sin upon him, which otherwise had been condemned upon the sinner
himself: Another place to this purpose is, Gal. 2. last. I do not frustrate the
grace of God; for if righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in
vain. If there were a possibility of a Creatures attaining to such a degree of
keeping the law as well as he can, that might render him accepted with God, and
procure pardon wherein he failed, then the dying of Jesus Christ was in vain,
to no purpose at all. Take heed you that are outwardly righteous, that you do
not frustrate the grace of God, and the death of Jesus Christ for ever, to your
own souls, by thinking you endeavor to keep Gods law as well as you can, and
make some conscience of it, and there fix your hope wholly or in part, and so
be undone for ever. Another place in the same Epistle, Gal. 4.4, 5. speaks out
the same truth. But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son
made of a woman, made under the law; to redeem them that were under the law;
that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. What need Jesus Christ to have
dyed, to redeem the elect from under the law, if they had been able to reach
forth to such a keeping of it, that God might be well pleased with, and with
them in it?

Now Jesus Christ's being made under the Law, implies these things, which I now
but hint forth.

1. His being under the punishment of the Law, which was due to such as were
under it; what ever the Law pronounced to the Transgressors of it, Jesus Christ
in effect did undergo it, See Gal. 3. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of
the law, being made a curse for us: If good prayers, making a conscience in
dealing, outward sobriety, harming no body, giving of Alms to poor people,
could have taken away the curse, did the wise and blessed God do well in giving
out his Son to be made a curse? were prayers, righteousness, good deeds made a
Curse? They will be indeed, in another sense, if thou think to be accepted
by them.

2. Jesus Christ being made under the Law, was to satisfy Gods offended
justice for the breach of the Law, for such as shall be saved, to make
atonement for God, Romans 5.11. If now all that thou have done, or shall ever
do, could make the least satisfaction or atonement to God, in thy good keeping
the Commandments as well as thou can, (as has been showed) God might have
kept his Son in Heaven, and not sent him to make atonement for any sinners.

3. To reconcile sinners unto God, Romans 5.10. When we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, etc. If reconciliation to God can be
had no other way, but by the death of Jesus Christ, will thy good endeavors
for the time to come to keep the Law of God as well as thou can, and take up
from a loose course, will those, I say, reconcile thee to God? See, poor
creature, how little need thou think thou have of Jesus Christ, and what a
mere notion a Savior is to thee, when it comes to the Trial!

4. Jesus Christ died to work out Righteousness for all that shall be saved:
Now if thou could come up to such a degree of being righteous, by thy fair
and good carriage, as thou think, to God and Man, this righteousness of
Jesus Christ was to little purpose, Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for
Righteousness, to every one that believes.

Now see, mistaken Soul, how they hope to please God well enough, and make him
amends for thy sin, by thy good endeavors to serve him in his Law, as well as
thou may, makes void the whole design of God, in the glorious gift of his
eternal Son, (as much as in thee lies) and robs him of the Glory of his Grace;
and makes thy Salvation (if it might be had in such a way) not of Grace, but of
Debt, Romans 4.4. Now to him that works is the reward, not reckoned of debt but
of grace; and thus thou in effect becomest thy own Savior.

Yet bear with me a little further, (because a sinner can never be too
thoroughly convinced of this matter) let me show you some examples in the
Scriptures, of such that thought as you do, and as all men naturally do, that
they by their honest and conscionable endeavor to worship God, and harm no
body, they should be saved; and yet were found light in the balance.

The first is that Pharisee, Luke 18.11. He thanks God, he was not as other men
are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, etc. Here was hope for his acceptance
with God, He was not so bad as others, as many riotous profane persons were,
not unjust in his dealings, no Adulterer, and should any one question his
Salvation and going to Heaven? Enough for great sinners to miss of Heaven, and
not such as he was, reputed a good and honest man in his Country, and amongst
his Neighbors well thought of by most. And yet for all this confidence and
security, a great sinner was accepted before him, and he not justified in the
sight of the God, though he was in his own sight, and the sight of others.

See another, Mat. 19.20. (which place has been at large opened to you) There
came a young man, a man of parts, with the same confidence to reason with Jesus
Christ about his condition, the man conceived he wanted nothing that a man
should have or do for Heaven; All these things, said he, I have kept from my
youth up; meaning especially the second Table of the Law, which Christ gave
out, not as thereby to put him upon the Law, but to find him out, and discover
him under the Law. When Jesus Christ searched the man's heart, and finds him
under the power of the love of the world, as a reigning Soul damning Sin, (for
all his outward blamelesness) and so to discover his heart to himself, puts him
upon trial of Self-denial; away the man packs as mute as a fish, and would hear
no more, (as worldlings now) of such Doctrine; unless he could be a Disciple,
and part with nothing, lose or venture nothing, he would rest as he was, and
hope his being an honest sober man, and well thought of, would bring him to
Heaven; and so, for ought appears, cheated his Soul to Hell.

The case of Paul has been often showed you; he was, as many of you think your
selves, blameless, Phil. 3.6. lived in no known sin outwardly against the Law,
frequented the public Worship, made Conscience of his dealings, was zealous of
the traditions and customs of his Fathers, and yet do you not hear him crying
out of it all as loss, ver. 7. and 8. He thought it was his gain before, that
it would have gained him Heaven, but now it is all loss, his keeping the Church,
his outward blamelesness stands him not in the least stead, but cries out, it is
All, all loss for Jesus Christ; the same Paul that before boasted, and thought
very well of himself, and was in much peace, and persecuted all beyond his
formal Profession, now cries out, away with this figleaf-righteousness of mine
own, it is as dung, I tread it under my feet for Jesus Christ; he that thought
himself so blameless before, now cries out, I am the Chief of sinners, 1 Timothy
1.15. And I am carnal, sold under sin, Wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? A mavelous Change indeed, and such
that is made upon every Soul, that is really brought off from the righteousness
of the Law to that which is of Jesus Christ.

Now to bring what has been spoken to this point to a more particular
Application.

Use 1. If it be so, that the best endeavor of any mortal creature to keep the
Law of God as well as they can, will not give them acceptance with God; then
you that have so imagined, and thereby spoken peace to your selves, namely,
that you hope if you keep the Church (as you use to speak) and harm no body,
and do any body any good you can, live not in gross sins, be well thought of by
your neighbors, you shall do well enough for Heaven, and you must hope well.
Ah poor creature, thou errest, not knowing the way of the Lord, nor of thy own
heart; how art thou befooling thy self, and deceiving thy own soul. No sinner
in so ready a way to Hell as thou, if thou continue thus, and let not go thy
hold, and get a new bottom for thy naked Soul, which I am to show thee.

Consider, man or woman, young or old, whoever thou art, thou have been proved
guilty of the breach of the whole Law of God, thou have been showed of the
exactness of the Justice of God, and the spirituality of the Law, how it
reaches the inmost motions of the heart, thou have been showed the Tenor of
it, as it was given forth as a Covenant; that the Law will not admit of the
least breach, though but in thought, but it condemns as if the whole Law were
transgressed, even every soul that is under it; here is the rigor of it; and
thou have been showed that the Law admits not of endeavors, nor of the Will
for the Deed, (if thou were once in Christ indeed, it would be so, but not as
now thou art) thou have been showed that there is sin enough in every one of thy
best performances to damn thee for ever; that thy Righteousness reaches but
the outward Man; within (did thou see it) thou art full of iniquity, that
whatever thou have done, cannot make God the least satisfaction (as thou
flatterest thy self) for the least sin: All thy obedience and duties cannot
give life to thy soul, but still leave thee as a dead tree, dead in thy sin,
that by this vain confidence thou do utterly make void the death of Jesus
Christ, as to any virtue or effect to thy own Soul; here is thy very case
plainly set forth, a thousand thousand sins to damn thee, and that
righteousness, obedience, good, thou hopest thou have done toward God and Man,
not in the least able to rescue thee, cover thee, deliver thee from the guilt
of one of the least of these sins; nor save thee from wrath to come, but leave
thy soul as sinful, guilty, naked, wretched, condemned, as if thou had been
nothing else but sinning all thy days: Oh wretched condition, that the Devil
and thy own heart have flattered thee in!

Oh, let this serve to convince, unbottom legal Professors, who have spoken
peace to themselves in being as good as they can, and obeying the Law as well
as they can, and so hope God pardons where they fail: Oh, you are ignorant of
the righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. Either what righteousness God requires in
the Law, as to be justified by it; or what is the Righteousness of the Gospel,
which is of Jesus Christ by Faith.

Oh you, who like that young man, have been righteous from your youth up,
brought up religiously, look to this, whether you make not this your
confidence, but (though under some kind of sorrowings for sin, and walking
exactly) yet never emptied of your selves, and renouncing your selves, and all
that was of you, and come poor and nothing to Jesus Christ, to be found in him;
who have not trembled as much at being found in your own righteousness, which
is of the Law, as at living in the greatest sin whatsoever.

You who have taken up from grosser sins of your life, your youth, and now
think you are safe, and bottom your hope upon your new outward obedience, but
have not the experience of your closing with Jesus Christ for righteousness, in
which alone you could stand before God, nor rooted into Jesus Christ in the
carrying on of your new obedience, (which I am also further to open:) Alas,
poor soul, thou art yet to seek for a bottom, for thy peace, and for Heaven, as
much as the greatest sinner in the world, and if you go no further, you will
certainly perish for ever.

I beseech you, Souls, Admit of this Conviction into your Consciences; says
the first Covenant of the law, A whole law kept, or nothing; says the
Gospel Covenant, which you are now to look after, A whole Christ closed with,
or nothing.

Mind it most seriously, you that stand upon your terms, and will not endure
any thing that may shake you, and disturb your peace; there is more danger of
your righteousness than your sin; your sin, it may be, you would leave, because
it may damn you, if continued in, but your righteousness, your confidence in
it, you would not leave, because you hope that shall save you, and pacify God
for you; and this will be your ruin, if you stick here.

But first to strike of some Objections, that the heart of such a legal
professor does put forth.

Object. 1. But you will object, Why do I speak thus? would I beat people off a
good coversation? Is not a blameless conversation, and honest walking, a good
sign, and ground for ones hope for Heaven?

Answ. I answer, not such a Conversation as you mean; the formal Jews, which
Christ preached to, were outwardly righteous, and yet 'twas not a safe ground of
Hope unto them, as you have been showed; a good conversation that witnesses a
hope for Heaven, must be, first, of a soul that does utterly renounce it, as to
commend him to God, that when he looks up to God for his acceptance, his
justification, he looks upon himself as nothing else but a sinner in that
respect, which, poor soul, thou do not. (2.) A good conversation, that
witnesses a hope of Heaven, is also a holy conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. To be
inwardly holy as well as outwardly righteous. Now thy care lies mostly about
thy outward blamelesness, and not thy inward holiness, therefore thy
conversation, which thou call good, is not a ground of hope to thee. (3.) Or
if thou do pretend to a little outward holiness, and think thou have a
good heart, yet thou do not walk in Christ, because thou have not, as a poor
self-emptied sinner, received him, Col. 2.6. Now thou must first be rooted in
Christ, verse 7. before thou can walk in Christ, that is, fetch all thy life
and power for any spiritual duty, or thy walking before God, from Jesus Christ,
by virtue of union with him, John 15.5. the experience of which thou art
ignorant of; (4.) It Is to walk in the spirit, Gal. 5.16. And thou have not the
spirit of God dwelling in thee, quickening, renewing, mortifying, etc. which
every gracious pardoned soul has. In a word, a good conversation is a
Gospel-conversation, grounded upon Gospel-principles, and for Gospel-ends; now
thou go no further, but look upon the law, as to be obeyed as well as
thou can, and in thy own endeavors, and thy own strength, from some
conviction of the law, thou set'st about it, and so hopest God and Christ will
save thee; Is it not so with thee?

Object. 2. But would you then have me do nothing, leave off to do well? If you
say, my good keeping of the law as well as I can, does neither justify me
before God, nor is so much as an evidence of God's accepting me, to what
purpose then is it? how ought I then do it? or may I not leave it off?

Answ. I answer, Truly, soul, I must needs deal plainly with thee, it is to no
purpose as yet, if this be thy condition, that thou have done any thing, as to
the saving of thy own soul; and yet thou must not leave off, as if thou
might live as thou list: No, Thou must begin anew, (as thou will be further
more at large directed;) first, see all thy former doings, either toward God
or Man, to be loss, because thou have done them by mere natural or legal
principles, and wrong ends, and so it stands for nothing; and then fall down
before Jesus Christ, Oh it is thy righteousness now, Lord, I come for; it is thy
spirit, I must have to quicken and strengthen me in the way of my obedience;
and so pray and hear, upon other grounds, to be taught of God, to receive the
Spirit, to have communion with God, but not thereby in the least to be
accepted. But this I shall open further, when I show why and how a Soul must
obey God, though he be not thereby justified. So this Objection is removed.

Object. 3. But, you will say, I hope I do not rest upon my own doings, no more
than others, I think no body does so, will you show me whether the heart is apt
to do so?

Answ. I will, and shall discover to you, that the heart of man is most
naturally apt to rest upon an outward keeping of the law, and to build a hope
and confidence for Heaven upon it; this I must a little insist on, as much
conducing to help on the conviction I am pressing, if the Lord by his power
strike in with it.

If it were not natural, (nothing more) for a soul to bottom upon its keeping
the Law, though fallen and unable to it; the Apostle would never have spent
time in the Conviction of it, which he so industriously does in this and the
former Chap. It has been the great evil upon the hearts of the Sons of Men, in
all ages of the Church: One of the first Sons of Adam was under it; Cain, when
he rested upon the bare sacrifice: It Is that the Prophets of God are reproving,
convincing the Church of the Jews of, more than of any one thing whatsoever;
See Isa. 1. throughout; Isa. 66. Jer. 7. Ezekiel. 33.31. The Prophecy of Hosea, in
the main bent of it, is to convince the formality of the Jews, and their false
confidence in resting in their heartless doings and performances.

In this case Jesus Christ finds the Jewish Church in, at his first coming, in
resting in some heartless performances in God's worship, and outward
righteousness toward men, which he sharply rebukes, and convinces them of
the vanity of it, Mat. 5.6, 7, 9, 13, 15, 18, 21, 23, 25. Chapters of Matthew,
with which you may compare the other Evangelists, and see how much ado the Lord
Jesus had to beat them off from this confidence, and how few of them were
beaten off it: And Paul witnesses, that upon this very ground they were
rejected of Jesus Christ, Romans 9.32. Not upon the account of gross outward sin,
but for their being conceited of their good condition for Heaven, because of
their frequenting public worship, and being blameless in the sight of men;
yea, from this natural principle (joined with the delusion of the Tempter) did
the Church of God degenerate into the Synagogue of Satan, as Antichrist rose in
the world, first trusting in the performance of their worship and works, which
brought in penances, and such kind of Sacrilege against Jesus Christ, and all
other Trumperies, to build fallen men upon his own bottom, and to devise a way
of satisfaction to God, wherein they failed; to which the hearts of Men are
most naturally carried, which made that Doctrine so easily and generally
overrun the world. Against which accursed Doctrine, that famous Witness of
Jesus Christ, Luther began his main battery; and though the Doctrine of
Justification by Jesus Christ be known to the Protestant World, yet practically
to be brought over to it, by an Union with Jesus Christ, is but (we may fear)
thinly known or understood, yea, not only by the common spirits of England,
that rest in a Notion of being Protestants, but even amongst many who have
professed something beyond it, as I before have hinted; yea, the Lord Jesus
Christ professes to expect to find multitudes of Professors at his coming
under this soul-damning snare, of being found in themselves, and in their own
righteousness, and not in Jesus Christ, Mat. 7. and 25, etc. By all which it
may amply appear how easy, how natural a thing it is for the hearts of the
Children of Men, to bottom their confidence in what they do toward God and
Man, in their obedience of the Law, as to place their acceptance in it.

Add to this the reasons of it, why the hearts of all the sons and daughters of
Adam, are naturally apt to rest upon the law, and their own doings, and to hope
for peace by it.

1. Every natural man, has something of the remains of the Law, which God at
first wrote in the heart of our common Father Adam, Romans 2.14, 15. which being
a little drawn forth by the Letter of the Law, it makes a poor creature set
himself to endeavor to keep the law, and hopes to attain to such a degree as
to be accepted with God for it: Now there is no such thing in the heart to come
to Christ, or to have righteousness in another; therefore a soul sets himself
to the Law, and endeavors more or less, the keeping of it naturally.

2. Man would fain make up the breach he has made with God, upon his own
account: As a Man had naturally rather do a thing himself, than be beholding to
another; therefore upon Conviction of guilt he sets himself to make up the
breach, to satisfy God by some atonement or other, that his own heart can
contrive; his sorrowing and repenting he hopes may pacify God, or some new
sacrifice of more performances, or being better for the time to come: Thus the
heart works secretly, and upon his own account; God letting forth some mercy
(as he thinks) where he fails, he hopes to make up any breach that sin has
made between God and his soul; and thus he is still upon the Old Covenant,
under the law.

3. A Sinner is more apt to keep to the Law, than go to Christ, from a secret
pride of heart; he would not be found at a total loss with God, to be wholly
undone, and unable to do any thing toward his own peace and salvation: A soul
naturally had rather part with all sin, and have his nature made perfectly
holy, than be quite undone in himself, and come to have all his righteousness
in another, in Jesus Christ. And here it is, that most souls stick in the
coming off their own bottoms, to be justified in Jesus Christ. In a word, Man
had rather do any thing, than come a poor destitute sinner to Jesus Christ for
all.

4. Because it is not suitable to the Light of natural reason, that a soul
should satisfy God, or become righteous any other way, than by his own
endeavor; to be righteous in another, is of Divine Revelation, which till a
Soul has, he cannot let go the principle of self-justification.

The next thing to be considered will be this, if all men are under the Law,
and the curse of it, under the guilt of the whole law, without all excuse
before God, under an impossibility of attaining righteousness or acceptance
with God, by the best keeping of the Law, and yet a natural and strong aptitude
to rest upon the law, and that a soul may reform and take up, be strict in
obedience, and yet still be under the law, how then may a soul know whether in
the way of his Obedience, he be yet under the Law, and not under Grace? Some
Discoveries I shall lay down at present, resolving a fuller discussion of this.

And by the way, know and consider, that though thou art under the the
profession of the Name of Jesus Christ, and pretendest Salvation by him, yet
practically and really thou may be still under the Law.

1. If thou have never been convinced of this close evil in thy heart, of
resting on thy praying, and repenting, and endeavoring to keep the Law as well
as thou can, I say, if the Spirit of the Lord has not convinced thee of it,
and of the great danger of it, and so humbled thee, and brought thee off it,
thou art certainly under the Law as yet.

2. If thou do not watch against this evil, and do not find a great
difficulty, not to rest upon a performance of any duty to God, thou do then
certainly rest upon it.

3. If thou art well satisfied, that thou art kept from outward gross sins; and
the sin of thy (...) is not thy greatest burden, mourning under the weight of
it, then thou must know that thou art yet under the law.

4. If thou think God will accept of the will for the deed, if thou do as
well as thou can in every duty, so as to accept thee thereby, as if it had
been done perfectly; this also bespeaks thee under the Law.

5. If thou can not experience, how the Lord by the light and working of his
word and spirit has brought thee off thy legal foundation thou wast building
upon, and showed thee, that such things as thou did account gain, became but
loss unto thee, for Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.7.

6. If thou art not troubled about the Hypocrisy of thy heart, and not abased
for it, even in thy best performances; then thou art yet upon the bottom of the
Law, and restest in it.

7. If thou art not mostly troubled about believing, and do not find it the
most difficult work of thy soul, if no complaint to God of an unbelieving
heart, then thou art indeed a Hypocrite, and under the Law.

8. If thou art not humbled to God for the sinful mixtures of thy duties, the
deadness, distraction of them, and so see thy acceptance cannot be in them,
but in Jesus Christ; then thou restest in them.

9. If thou do not give up thy self to the leadings of the Spirit, and do
not find, that in the main of thy course, thou art led by the Spirit, then thou
art under the Law, Gal. 3.18. But if ye are led by the spirit, ye are not under
the Law.

10. If thou art not troubled about thy inward growth, in mortification of all
sin, and more holy Communion with God, then thou art also under the Law: One
under the Law, that is somewhat strict and conscientious, may grow in the bulk
of outward Duties, but not in inward Holiness.

11. If thy care be not to live in the sense of thy Justification by grace
through Jesus Christ, and to preserve the light and peace of a justified state,
which thou have been called to by grace; then thou live in self-justification.

12. If thy great care be not, if thou find it not thy greatest difficulty,
to be kept a poor empty creature in thy self, and live in the fullness of
Christ, if self-fulness, self-exaltation, be not the great evils thou watchest
against, (at least in some measure, thou art sensible of the roots of them)
then thou art yet under all I have been proving, the law, guilt, and a curse;
and all thy duties and doings, as I have showed; abhorred of God.

Examine thy heart by these particulars over and over, and if by these thou
can not make out that thou have been through rich grace, brought off from thy
own foundation upon the law, and so come, with much difficulty, to the
Gospel Grace, and righteousness by Jesus Christ, and that if thou had been
let alone in peace in thy former state, thou had been certainly damned; sure
thou art then as yet void of any interest in the Gospel saving righteousness;
thy pretended faith, and hope, and duties, and works, and conscience, all is in
vain.

Now the soul that has the blessed experience of all these, and can say, I
have through infinite mercy been brought off my own foundation, and I have
found the difficulty of it, I find my heart apt to settle upon my own
performances, and it is that I would watch against; and I can experience the sin
of my Nature the greatest burden, and cry out of it daily before the Lord; the
Hypocrisy of my heart is an abhorring to me, I do find believing the hardest
work of my soul, I do mourn under the sinful mixture of my duties, I do give up
my self to the spirits leadings, I am troubled about my inward growth, and
humbled for the shortness of it, I would learn more and more to live out of my
self for my Justification, and to be kept a poor empty nothing for ever before
the Lord; if this, I say, be thy experience, then thou shall have peace and joy
in the Holy Ghost; thou may rejoice in a justified estate, Christ, his
Righteousness, Grace, Spirit, Heaven are thine.

Having now laid open the Sinner, as under the Law, excuseless, guilty and
under Condemnation, under an impossibility of obtaining righteousness and
acceptance with God, by the best endeavors to keep the Law; I would now set
upon the opening the Gospel-Righteousness by Jesus Christ, through which only a
poor condemned Sinner can find acceptance; but that I conceive it first needful
to speak a word to those words in the close of the 22th. verse, (viz.) For
there is no difference; which may further help on the conviction we have been
upon.

The Jew might object to the Apostle thus; you by your Doctrine seem to
conclude all under the Law equally, and under guilt; you make no difference
between us Jews who have the Law, and endeavor to keep it, and the open
profane Gentiles and Sinners; in this, you do us wrong; No, says the Apostle,
There Is no difference, you who in part keep the Law, are under the same
condemnation as others; that which I shall lay down, will be this.

Observe. There is no difference between the most profane person, and the
righteous and sober, as to justification or condemnation by the Law.

I mean this; the just sober man, as to his keeping of the Law outwardly or in
part, is in as damnable estate as the profanest wretch in the world: This will
hardly go down, but it is most clear from the Apostles words read unto you, and
has been in part proved, by showing all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, Jews
and Gentiles, sober and ungodly, all under the Law.

But a little further to prosecute this Doctrine; for, where a man or woman,
who has lived honestly or soberly in the eye of the world (but yet out of
Christ) convinced that he or she were in as bad and damnable a condition as any
great sinner in the world, it might be a startling to them, and a means,
through the Spirit's working, to bring them off their vain confidence, and to
lead them to Christ.

Now that I may clear this, let us first consider, what it was that might
difference the sober Jew from the profane idolatrous Gentile; it being the
same, which, such as conceive themselves sober harmless people in this day, do
put confidence in.

1. The Jew was Circumcised, which was the first Ordinance of the Old
Testament-Church, as Baptism is of the New, and it does appear this was much
insisted on by the Jew, by what the Apostle speaks, Romans 2. verse. 18, 19. For
he is not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which is
outward in the flesh, but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision
is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not
of men but of God.

2. They had the Scriptures of God, Romans 3.2. Unto them were committed the
Oracles of God; which indeed the Apostle calls an Advantage, (in the same
place) as it might be a means to lead them to the knowledge of God, and to the
Promise of Jesus Christ, but no advantage at all, (as to the mere having them
read and opened, and in a general Faith, believing them) as the more to
justify them in the sight of God.

3. The Jews were under the public Service of God, such as was ordained by God
himself, Romans 9.4, 5.

4. They were for the most part righteous to Men, and sober, and blameless in
the outward man; Ye indeed are they which are righteous before men; as the Lord
often speaks of them: Now it is most clear, that these things did not difference
the Jew, as to acceptance with God and Jesus Christ, from the most profane
sinner; for the Lord Jesus Christ rejected these, and called to himself
Publicans and Harlots, and tells the Jews that such should enter into the
Kingdom of God before them, Matthew. 21.31. As might be further instanced in the
case of the Pharisee and Publican, Luke 18.9.

Now the Reasons of this point have been before hinted, namely, that a mere
sober Man under Christian Privileges, is no more accepted with Christ, nor in
any nearer capacity to come to Christ, than the greatest sinner; because one
sin puts a man under the condemnation of the Law, as well as a million of sins
against it; one felony condemns a man as well as a thousand, and the
Malefactor must dye by the Law for it. All the good a man does, will not be
imputed to him, if he be found a transgressor in one part of the Law, Ezekiel.
18.24. All men come short of the glory of God, in the fulfilling of the Law,
and he that falls short but in one mile is in as bad a case as he that falls
short twenty miles: Jesus Christ accepts of no man for his righteousness, but
as a Sinner, nothing else but a Sinner; so that still the case of a just man in
reference to the Law, is as dangerous as the greatest sinners in the world.

Use. A little further to press this; you who are baptized, have a general
belief of the Scriptures, are under part of the public service of God, are
just and harmless as to men; but yet are under the power of Unbelief, and see
it not, are not born again of the Spirit, are not in Christ Jesus: You who rest
satisfied in such a condition, and think your hope for Heaven well-grounded,
and will not be beaten off it, I must tell you, and it is proved unto your
Consciences from the Word of the Lord, that there is no difference between you
and the vilest sinners in the Country, as to your acceptance with God: Though
it be thus with you, yet, as you have been showed, you may be under the Law,
condemned for one transgression; and what can you be more, than be condemned?
Neither does all this, as in it self, any more prepare you for Jesus Christ;
and therefore let all the Convictions, Arguments, Demonstrations, we have
produced from the clear light of the Word of the Lord, at last prevail with
you, that you who thus satisfy your selves, because you are baptized, believe
the Scriptures, frequent the service of God, are just and sober, therefore it
is well with you, and you will trouble your selves no further in the matter of
your Salvation, that the estate of your Souls is as unsafe and desperate, how
secure soever, as the vilest Drunkard in the Country.

Therefore, let this Conviction have force upon your Conscience, that you must
come anew to Jesus Christ, as a mere sinner, having nothing to commend you to
him.

Say, from the Light of the Word, though I have thus satisfied my self, pleased
my self, in these Duties and outward Privileges, yet there is no difference
between me and the vilest sinner, in order to my acceptance with Jesus Christ:
Nay, if this Conviction take upon thee, thou will say to the glory of God, and
thy own Confusion; If there be any difference, it is that thou art the greatest
sinner, having mocked the Lord, rested in outside service, dealt
hypocritically with the jealous God, offered him abominable sacrifice, and
therefore fit to be abhorred of the Lord for ever: Oh! that this might be the
posture of thy Soul! and so thou may come and lie prostrate at the feet of
Jesus Christ, crying, Oh! no more, no more, a righteous person! but a sinner, a
guilty sinner, a condemned sinner, a poor, blind, naked sinner; nothing else
but a sinner! Away with all my former confidences, tear them from my heart,
Lord. Now Lord Jesus, I cast my self upon thee! Oh! let me creep unto thy
blessed feet! Oh! I come to thee; not because I am righteous, (for I would
abhor my self for ever in the thought of it) but as a poor perishing sinner,
the worst of sinners, an hypocritical sinner: Oh! that I could take hold of thy
righteousness, to cover my naked Soul; I expect it only upon the account of thy
Free Grace; Oh Lord, I come unto thee, do not, do not reject me.

And thus I have been endeavoring to lay the sinner before Jesus Christ in
such a posture, having proved him under the Law, excuseless in his
transgressing of it, guilty before God, under an impossibility of reaching to
an acceptance with God, by the best keeping of the Law; labored to beat him
off such props and confidences that the Heart naturally cleaves to, and stripped
him of all, naked as Adam, when he had sinned before the Lord, as nothing else
but a Sinner, which is that I have driven at. I now come to speak of the way of
a poor Souls justification, and acceptance with God, by Jesus Christ, as the
Lord shall assist, to the capacity of the weakest.

ROMANS 3.24. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is
in Jesus Christ, etc.


I Am now come to open the Gospel-righteousness, wherein a poor sinner finds
acceptance with God; which in ver. 21. of this third of the Romans, is said to
be now manifested; that is, more fully manifested by the Revelation of Jesus
Christ in the Gospel, being witnessed (before) by the Law and the Prophets,
Even the righteousness of God, which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ unto all,
and upon all them that believe, ver. 22. called the righteousness of God;
namely, that whereby God does only justify and accept of a Sinner, wrought
forth by the obedience of Jesus Christ, and made over and imputed to a poor
Soul that does embrace it by Faith, whether Jew or Gentile, outwardly righteous
or profane: All that ever come to God, must come this way, and stand before him
in this Righteousness, or perish for ever; which I shall begin to open from
ver. 24, 25.

1. Being justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in
Jesus Cheist.

2. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood,
etc.

We have endeavored, in the former Discourse, to go along with the Apostle, in
proving, that by all the Deeds of the Law, all the best Obedience that a sinner
can reach unto, he cannot be justified before God, neither in part, nor in
whole, that your good deeds will not procure pardon, nor poise down your sins,
but all, by the Law, equally under condemnation.

Of what importance then is it for poor condemned souls to be well acquainted
with, and really and practically invested in that way of justification, that
God in infinite wisdom, mercy and love, has set forth in the Gospel, which is
that I now design.

The Apostles arguing is thus: If all fall short of righteousness, and
acceptance with God, by their own obedience; if all have sinned, and come short
of the glory of God, then are all, and that equally, condemned: If so
condemned, then acceptance with God, and justification, and remission of sins,
must come in another way: The Rise and Fountain of which, must necessarily be
Gods free mercy and grace: If made righteous, it must be in the righteousness
of another, wrought forth by another: Justice must be satisfied by another, a
price paid to God for a sinners redemption by another, which is Jesus Christ,
blessed for ever.

From the words then, I shall first lay down this plain Observation, viz.

Observe. Gods free mercy and grace is the first Fountain of any sinners
salvation; or, It Is upon the account of Gods free grace that any sinner is
saved.

Thus runs the current of the whole Gospel, the main design of the Gospel being
to glorify the riches of Gods Free Grace by Jesus Christ. Among many other
Scriptures the Apostle does most convincingly discourse in Romans 5. from the
15th. to the end; setting the Free Grace of God unto Justification, in
opposition to a sinners condemnation; But not as the offense, so also is the
free gift; for if through the offense of one many be dead, much more the grace
of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded
unto many. To the same import runs the rest of the verses, The free gift of
many unto Justification, much more they which receive abundance of grace, and
the gift of Righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ: All of
Grace, and of Free-gift, abundance of Grace, from first to last; That as sin
reigned unto death, so might Grace reign through Righteousness unto eternal
life, by Jesus Christ our Lord, verse last. So the Apostle in that Epistle to
the Ephesians, wherein the Doctrine of Grace is blessedly given forth, drives
all the spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, mentioned Chap. 1.3.
etc. to this blessed Fountain, Chap. 2.4. etc. But God who is rich in mercy,
for his great love, wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins has
quickened us together with Christ, (for by Grace ye are saved;) so verse 7. That
in the Ages to come, he might show the exceeding riches of his Grace; and ver.
8. For by grace ye are saved, it is the gift of God.

Therefore the invitation of the Gospel to sinners runs upon this score; Ho,
Every one that thirsts, come to the Waters of Life, Isa. 55.1. And, Whosoever
will, let him come to the Water of life freely, Revel. 22.17.

I might illustrate this in all the particulars of a sinners salvation, God's
fore-ordaining and choosing any to salvation, 'twas to the praise of the glory
of his grace, Ephesians. 1, 5, 6. The gift of his Eternal Son Jesus Christ, from free
love and grace, John 3.16. The New Covenant, and all the Promises of it, freely
given out for his own Names sake, Ezekiel. 36. Effectual Calling, from free grace,
2 Timothy 1.9. The gift of Faith, actual Justification, Tit. 3.7. Sanctification,
Perseverance, Eternal Life and Glory, all flowing from the same fountain of
Free Grace: Some Reasons of the Design of the Blessed God in this, may be
gathered from the Scriptures:

The Free Grace of God is the Fountain of all, in any sinners salvation;

1. Because, There is nothing in the Creature that may move God to save him:
Nothing at all, all we know or do, could not move God to mercy, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8.
The Lord did not set his love upon you, because you were more in number than
any people, but because he freely loved you, etc. Not for your sake do I do
this, etc. Ezekiel. 36.32.

2. As God saw nothing in him, so the sinner is able to bring nothing to God,
to draw out mercy of his own, therefore says the Lord, Isa. 55.1. let him come
without his price: As the sinner lost all his good, so he can procure none anew
to bring to God, that may in the least move the heart of God to give out more
to him.

3. If it were not all of Grace, then the Creature would have occasion of
boasting; but the Lord in infinite wisdom, so laid the Project of a sinners
Salvation, that no Creature should have the least ground of boasting: So the
Apostle having given out the Doctrine of Grace in this Scripture we are upon,
draws this conclusion, ver. 27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded, etc. So
in the 1 Cor. 1.29. the Holy Ghost lays down this as the main scope of God in
the Gospel: That, No flesh should glory in his presence, Therefore Salvation is
all of Grace, of Free Grace.

4. If it were not so, The glory of God would not be so great in the Salvation
of a sinner. It Is now so laid, that all might be, to the praise of the glory of
his Grace, Ephesians. 1.6. It being the highest piece of glory, that the Wise and
Blessed God did ever design unto himself, that his free, rich, abundant,
infinite grace might be made known in the Salvation of a Sinner: That he might
make known the riches of his glory on the Vessels of Mercy, which he had before
prepared unto glory, Romans 9.23.

Use 1. If God's Free Grace be the Fountain of all in a poor Sinners Salvation,
then let it establish our judgments in this Doctrine: Therefore God had no
respect to any foresight of Faith or Works in the Creature; God had no respect
to the freeness of his Will, for he knew he had none: God had no respect to any
conditions to be wrought in us; but all he did, and does, was from absolute
Independing Grace: Nothing moved him but his own Free Grace. The same
Free Grace that pardons, gives and works, all in us; all from the same Fountain.

2. If all be of Free Grace, then there is no meritorious procuring Cause in
us, that moves the Lord to mercy: Now the contrary is naturally rooted in our
hearts, poor Souls are most apt to conceive, that if they can grieve for their
sins, repent, and reform, this will sure move God to mercy and pardon. A most
dangerous snare, from which a Soul, after much conviction, is hardly wrought
off: Now, though God in the way of a sinners Salvation, has promised to give
Repentance, Act. 5.31. and a Spirit of mourning for sin: Yet a poor soul must
take heed that he make not this a procuring cause of Pardon: Many a Soul sticks
here, before emptied of himself, even of his very repenting, and so come for
grace and mercy, upon the account of the Free-promise only: How many a Sinner
might have been saved, if he would have been saved freely?

3. If God has so laid the Design to save a Sinner freely, then how great, how
just is the Condemnation of guilty sinners, that will not hasten in unto it;
how could the Lord have laid it more freely than he has? Oh that any sinner,
for ever condemned to Hell without it, should withstand it! Why sinner? Shall
the blessed God, that might have much glory in condemning thee to all Eternity,
be willing to save thee freely; and will thou not come and bow unto him, and
accept of it? All the contempt of God in all his holy Commands, is not like
this, to turn the back upon Free-Mercy, Free-Salvation: This will be the Worm
that never dies, to any of your Souls that shall not come into, and rightly
accept of Gospel-Salvation, that you might have been saved freely, have had
grace, remission of sins, Jesus Christ, the Spirit, Eternal Life freely, and
yet turned your backs upon it? But you may demand, How is it that any sinner
does so? What is it that causes any Soul to forego Free Grace and Mercy, when
held out unto him, that we may beware of such hindrances?

I will therefore show you such Hindrances, that keep Souls from accepting of
God's Free Grace in Jesus Christ, when held out unto them.

1. Wilful Obstinacy, Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come unto me, that you might have
life: Ye will not; such is the stubborness and rebellion of the heart of a
sinner, that he will not, as we speak, because he will not; to such a height
has sin raised the heart of the rebellious children of men; for every natural
man, till made sensible of unbelief, thinks he has power of himself, (though
he has not) but his Rebellion lies in his Will: I would have gathered you, and
you would not, Mat. 33. last.

2. A sinner does not accept of Free Grace, because he stands upon his
self-justification; he will not be persuaded he has so much need of all
Free Grace, as the Gospel discovers; as has been showed at large, though he
has sinned, yet also he has obeyed, and so he puts one against the other, his
obedience against his sin, and so hopes to get that mercy he has need of. And
upon this ground, more sinners, even that profess the Name of God, do miss of
Heaven, than any other in the World: It Is not so easy a matter to submit to
God's Free Grace alone, as many do imagine: Upon this Snare, many of the Jewish
Professors of Christ fell short, as it is clear from the Epistle to the
Galathians, and did frustrate the grace of God.

3. A Sinner has a secret thought of making God satisfaction, by his sorrow
and amendment, and so makes void the Free Grace of God: It Is the easiest thing
in the World to put up legal sorrow, and amendment of life to God, as that
which may make God amends; yea, to make an atonement of every Duty, which is
the closest and most desperate evil of the heart: So did the Jew by his
sacrifices and obedience, which caused the Lord to pronounce them, That his
soul loathed them, Isa. 1.

4. A Sinner does not savingly close with free grace, from secret pride of
heart, he would not be found so poor and helpless, so unrighteous and
ungracious, as to be beholden to free mercy for all; many persons will rather
starve than beg, than live upon another man's mercy: It Is so between a sinner
and the Lord, till God humble him, he would rather venture Hell, than come and
acknowledge utter Condemnation, nothing but sin upon him, and so stoop to free
mercy.

5. The sinner stands off from Free Grace, because he will make his own terms:
He will condition for his carnal case, his self-interest, his bosom lust, the
love of the World, and hopes God will allow him his terms, which he proposes
to himself; and herein he is ruined. Now God has drawn up the tenor of his
free grace in the way of a Covenant, and though there are no conditions left to
the creature to make good on his part, by his own power, (for that will easily
imply a self-sufficiency in him, and is absolutely derogatory from the grace of
God in the Gospel Covenant) yet God has drawn up (as I may so speak) what
other good things he will bestow on the subjects of his free grace, Namely, The
Law to be new written in their hearts, the gift of the Spirit, Newness of
heart, with the making good of all those promises, in a degree, that hold forth
Holiness and new Obedience, which must accompany the free pardon of sins, and
make indeed the free grace of God more glorious: Inasmuch as when he pardons
them he will save them from the service of sin, work his Image upon them, bring
them to a blessed conformity to himself, which considered aright, sweetens and
heightens the free grace of God, and makes the terms of it more blessed. In a
word, Mercy and Holiness must go together, a Savior and Sanctifier, which a
sinner from the cursed love of ease and satisfaction to his lust sticks at, and
so comes not up to Gods terms, (which are blessed and holy) and so misseth of
grace and mercy for ever, because he chooses Sin rather than Holiness.

6. Yea, a sinner (and I speak all this while of such as pretend to an interest
in free mercy) misseth of this grace, because he takes up the terms of God in
his Covenant-grace in his own strength, will repent and come up to new
obedience before he comes to the promise, to the free grace of God for it;
which is also a dangerous snare. A Sinners first work (being convinced as we
have opened) is to throw himself upon the free grace of God for all, to give
all, to work all, and to follow God by virtue of Promises, of such good and
Grace as the tenor of the Covenant holds forth: It Is an usual thing for poor
Souls first to think to convert themselves, make themselves holy, and then come
to God, and Jesus Christ, this is an indirect course, Oh! a poor Soul must
begin at the Foundation of Gods free Grace, for Christ, for Pardon, for the
Spirit, for Conversion, for Holiness, for all, as held out in Promises, and
then the work will be sure, and prosper, and naught shall hinder it.

7. Sinners fail of this free Grace of God, from a neglect and a sleighting of
it, Heb. 2.3. How shall you escape, if you neglect so great salvation? Sinners
do hear that, though they are sinners and condemned, in a damnable estate, yet
Jesus Christ will save them; if they will come unto him, sit them for Heaven,
and do it himself for them, and in them; yet through a desperate folly,
security and careless temper, the heart being in a dead sleep, they wretchedly
neglect it.

8. From the power of Unbelief, which they are under, and see it not.

Thus have I showed those special hindrances that cause poor Souls that hear of
Gospel Grace to withstand it, and for ever to miss of it.

Oh that this word of the Lord might find you out, and might be as a glass to
show you your own hearts; you who by a wilful obstinacy have withstood the
Gospel-calls hitherto, Oh, now fall down before the Lord, and cry, I yield, I
yield, thou blessed God, thy Patience, thy freest Grace has overcome me; Lord,
take away a rebellious obstinate heart from me! Ah Lord! Thou have waited to be
gracious, and Christ, and Mercy, and Heaven have been offered to so vile a
Wretch freely: Now, Lord, I throw my self at thy feet, a thousand Hells are too
good for me: But if grace, infinite grace, be free, there is yet hope for me. If
there be not grace enough in Heaven for me, let me go to the depth of Hell But
Lord, I take hold of thee, I desire to do it Oh, do thou take hold of me, and I
shall not perish.

You who have stood upon your terms, and hoped you had righteousness enough to
cover you, and God would look upon that, and not upon your sin, you are the
most abominable in God's sight: You, who secretly in your hearts think your
sorrowing and reforming, makes God amends: You who have wrapped your selves in
these Cobwebs, and through pride of heart, will not lay them down; Oh, if thou will have mercy, thou must have all in a way of mercy and grace, all freely, or
nothing at all; see all thy righteousness made void by one sin against the Law,
and therefore cursed and condemned by it; therefore thou have no Plea but free
mercy and grace: Oh lay down all thy other Pleas, they will never be heard in
Heaven! and now cry out, Oh it is of grace! Proud selfish Wretch that I have
been; it is all of free grace, if ever I am saved: If God cannot pardon freely,
bestow Jesus Christ freely, I am undone for ever: Oh the wicked castings of my
heart this way and that way! Oh there is nothing, nothing but infinite misery to
move mercy! All my goodness is an accursed thing as from my self: There Is an
infinite Fountain of sin and self-righteousness in men: Oh could I come to an
infinite Fountain of grace! Thus thou will come to God, when he shall smite thy
heart, which now look up unto him to do.

You who have been making your own terms of ease, and lusts, and world: Oh
render up your hearts to the gracious, blessed, holy terms, that God proposes:
Why should thou not be willing to be made holy? Why should not the Lord
rather rule thee than sin and the Devil? What more beautiful and glorious than
the Image of God? Oh accept of Holiness with Mercy, through the Lord Jesus
Christ! Come unto him for both; be willing to be set apart for God, a Vessel
purged and sanctified for his use, and thou shall behold the face of God
shining upon thee; and whatever is laid up in Christ, in Promises, in Heaven
and Glory, shall be thine.

You who have thought to make your selves holy, and then come to Christ to be
justified; be convinced of your great Error, and now come as sinners to Jesus
Christ, to be justified and sanctified in him, and see all grace laid up in
Jesus Christ for such as come unto him. Say, Oh blessed Lord Jesus, I cannot
fit my self for thee! If thou can not accept me as a poor undone helpless
sinner, coming unto thee, I never expect a blessing from thee.

And you who have slighted this free, rich and glorious grace, see what you
have done, and be abased for it; see how you cast back mercy upon the face of
God, who would freely be reconciled with you, pass by all the grievous injuries
you have done him, enter into a Covenant with you, bestow his Christ upon you,
fit you for communion with himself here and for ever: And all this you have
slighted, and yet must unavoidably be for ever damned without it. Sinner, who
can plead for thee, when thou shall go on to despise, neglect, slight such
grace? To Hell, without pity of God, Angels or Men, when freest mercy and grace
shall be slighted.

I do therefore stand this day in the Name of Jesus Christ, to acquaint you,
that he will save you freely, if you will come unto him, be your sins what they
will, so you come not as righteous, but as sinners to him; so you take his
Righteousness to cover you, and his Spirit of grace to unite you to him, and
make you holy, and will give up your selves unto him: All which he will help,
if you will come and cry to him, yea, if you cannot come, he will draw you; if
you are unwilling, he will make you willing, if you have no heart, he will give
you heart: What more? Wretched man or woman, that shall stand off one moment
longer! Is not Hell too good for thee, if thou shall now turn thy back upon
such grace? Let me have your Answers this day: Let me know that sinner that
will go home resolved to be as careless as he formerly has been, as
well-opinioned of himself, as much resolved against Holiness, as thoughtless of
being damned, if he withstand the Lord in his Free Grace one day more? Oh! Will
not your hearts stir? dead, stupid Souls! Shall God's Free Grace, his Christ,
go a begging this day, and will not a sinner come up to his terms? Old sinners,
that are going into the grave, and Hell too, will not you accept of Free Grace,
of Christ, the Spirit, this day? that are upon the brink of the grave and
everlasting burnings, and have many a thousand sins yet unpardoned? Is all this
nothing to you? but rest in a blind hope of mercy, without coming to Jesus
Christ, without care of being made holy, and fit for Heaven: Oh, you have been
fast asleep in sin, deceived by your own hearts, abused by the Devil, forty,
fifty, sixty years, Is It not time for you to bethink your selves, to go and cry
to the Blessed God; Oh, Grace, Pardon, Christ, Heaven, upon any Terms! My
righteousness I have trusted in are poor Cobwebs, my Confidences vain; Oh, for
a drop of Free-mercy and grace, from that Ocean that is in God, and 'twere
better than all I have done for Heaven yet: Oh Lord! Now, now I come to thee:
Is there free-mercy and grace for one that has slighted it? Yea, though thou
have gone on frowardly in thy own heart, yet he can heal thee, Isa. 57.17, 18.

And you that are younger, it is a desperate thing now in times of Gospel Light,
when it glares upon your faces, to shut your eyes, to go on in the way of your
own hearts, to slight Gospel Grace, to harden your selves, and cry, hereafter,
hereafter. Alas! thou know not what shall be on the morrow; the Thread of
thy life is quickly cut with a stroke from God. Beside, to go on long, from
year to year, against the loud and frequent Call of Jesus Christ, against
Convictions, that thou should do otherwise, is the way to be given up to
utter hardness, and the Lord to move upon thy heart no more. There Is a day of
grace to every Soul, which if he suffer to set and go down upon him, he is
irrecoverably lost for ever: Look to it, you younger men and maidens, that have
yet no work upon you; that are the same you were, under the means you have
lived; that have not the Spirit of grace and mourning upon you, when others are
praying and wrestling with the Lord, and taking the Kingdom of Heaven by
violence. Oh up, and be stirring, the day of grace has shined long upon you:
Hold out no longer, Come, Come, Come, you careless Sons and Daughters, and the
way is open to you: The door of Free Grace is open, Christ's Arms are open; you
may be saved and blessed for ever, if you come in, now you are invited; I can
take no excuse: Come, or say, I am resolved for Hell, and to venture the utmost
in the condition I am in: Oh, bold and fearless Atheism! What shall I say to
thee, if that be thy Resolution? But I cannot be so answered: Say, you Sinners,
as if I should name you; are you for Heaven, or Hell; for Free Grace, or your
own patch'd-up righteousness; for carnal ease, or any Pains for Heaven; for
your Lusts, or for Holiness; for Jesus Christ, or the Devil? let thy heart
answer in good earnest this day.

Now shall I at least have this Answer: Hold! I am resolved for the Free Grace
of God, for the Lord Jesus Christ; If all the sinners in the Congregation, yea,
in the World, should turn their backs upon him; The Word of the Lord has
overcome, Oh Lord Jesus, may I come? such a Wretch as I come? Yea, says the
Lord Jesus, Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will, let him come. Grace is as free as ever
it was: Say then, Oh Lord, I come; draw me, and I will come: Into the Arms of
Free Grace I throw my self, my Righteousness is an abominable thing: Ah! a
Christ upon any terms; Oh let, let me creep unto thy Blessed Feet; let me have
the lowest Room in thy Heart: Take what way thou will to purge me, so I may but
get well unto thee. Now Lord, as much Holiness as thou will, let thy precious
blood wash me all over. Well, go thus, and acquaint the Lord Jesus with it from
day to day; wait, he will speak to thee, love to hear more from him, and of him
in his Gospel, and thou biddest fair for Heaven; yea, there will presently be
joy in Heaven for thee.

In a word, I protest against you in the Name and Authority of God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, who has sent me, if you shall withstand the grace of God in
Jesus Christ, freely, most freely offered you, I shall be a Witness against
you: And if any sinners in the World shall be certainly damned, you are they,
who neglect this great Salvation: It Is come to this, I would, says Jesus
Christ, and ye will not. What ado to have a sinner that is sinking to Hell, to
come to the Lord Jesus Christ, to be freely saved? What should a guilty sinner
do, but come to a free Savior to be saved, and accept of his terms (which are
so blessed) with a thousand hearts if he had them? Now say, how am I
straightned, till I get to him; I would go and weep my heart out to him, had I
a heart to do it.

Now I leave what has been spoken to the good pleasure of God, and the work of
his Power, who is able to send away every Soul trembling and resigning up
themselves to him.

Only a word to any poor humbled doubting soul, that thinks infinitely well of
all this, but says in his heart, all this grace is too good for me, I have
sinned against it, and slighted it; I fear, whether ever I may be accepted. Oh
remember, and consider, that Grace were not Grace, if 'twere not free; God can
save a sinner freely; that is enough to stay thee; yea, though thou have
slighted grace, (as where is the Saint but did so, before effectually called?)
yea God will save a sinner freely, that will come by Jesus Christ unto him. He
will: What would have more? Do not stand reasoning thus; but, if thou art a
sinner, undone without him, cast off from thy own Confidences, go to him in the
Name of God, and believe him upon his own Word: Say, I take thee, Blessed Lord,
upon thy own Word; thou say, Whosoever will, let him come: And Lord,
therefore I come; I durst not come, were I not invited freely; and if I must be
saved freely, if ever, then thou art to bestow all, work all, begin and perfect
all; Oh blessed Lord, I come unto thee for it; go and do thus, and thou shall
be comforted, and rejoice in his Salvation.

I might also here press blessed Souls, who have been drawn to Jesus Christ,
and overcome by Free Grace to do it, to live in the Admiration of that grace,
and to be low, and poor, and emptied in your selves, in the abundant sense of
it all your days. Let your enjoyments and seize be what they will, be it
known unto you, that by grace ye are saved; and you had, and have as much need
of it, as any sinner in the World. God's Design in saving you, was to glorify
Grace, and it must be your Design also here, and for ever.

Having thus opened, in some measure, the grace of God, to be the Fountain of a
sinner's Salvation, I shall now proceed to discover the way of the conveyance
of this grace, which is by Jesus Christ: (Being justified freely by his grace,
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ.) Though God resolved to bestow
grace upon such as shall be saved freely, yet in a way of his own most wise and
blessed Designing, by his Eternal Son Jesus Christ, to whom this Dispensation
of Grace was committed; which I shall further open in this Doctrine: Namely,

Doct. All that Grace and Mercy which GOD gives out freely to sinners, is
conveyed to them by his Eternal Son, Jesus Christ.

I might be abundant in the proof of this: See in that 5th. of the Romans v. 17,
21. -- Much more they which receive abundance of Grace, and of the gift of
Righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. And verse. 21. That as
sin has reigned unto death, even so might Grace through Righteousness unto
Eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord: All the Grace that should reign unto
Life is given out by one Jesus Christ. The Law was given by Moses, but Grace
and Truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17. All the Treasures of Grace were laid
up in him; and therefore he says of himself, Matthew. 11.27. All things are
delivered unto me of my Father, and none can come unto the Father but by me;
which he makes as the great Argument why sinners should come unto him, verse.
28. Now, so far as the Lord has revealed the wise and holy Counsels of his
heart in his Word unto us, let us enquire into the Reasons why he took such a
way to give all his grace to the children of men.

Reason 1. The first is this, That as Mankind lost all in the Fall of the first
Adam, as he was a public person, representing all that came of him: So it was
the Wisdom of God in the recovery of lost-man to bring forth another person,
that should be fully stockt with Grace and Righteousness, as a public person
to represent all the Elect unto the Father; upon which account Jesus Christ is
called the Second Adam, 1 Cor. 15. And the Apostle sets the first Adam in his
offense unto Death, and the Grace and Righteousness of Jesus Christ, as the
Second Adam, one against the other, Romans 5.15, 16, etc. For as by one man's
Disobedience many were made sinners; so by the Obedience of one shall many be
made righteous: And so the Apostle sets the Life, Grace, Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, as the Second Adam, against the Death, Condemnation, Disobedience of
the first man that sinned in the seven last Verses of that Chapter. And herein
the Wisdom of the Father is most excellently set forth, and the ground of
Consolation to Believers laid upon a most sure Foundation: That whatsoever they
lost in the First Adam, they recover with much more abundance in Jesus Christ;
for so the Apostle has [that much more] in the Scripture mentioned, three or
four times; that Saints may see how abundantly complete they are in Christ.

Reason 2. All Grace is conveyed by Jesus Christ, because there needed a person
to stand between GOD and Sinners, as a Mediator to work forth Reconciliation
between them. Now who was meet but the Lord Jesus Christ to undertake this? He
being the Eternal Son of God, equal with God, was near unto God. A mere
creature was infinitely unfit for such an undertaking, and he being also the
Son of man, clothed in the nature of man; he thus partaking of the nature of
God, who was to be appeased; and of the nature of Man, who was to be
reconciled, he became a most meet Undertaker of so glorious a Work; Whence he
has that blessed Title given him of Mediator: Jesus the Mediator of a New
Covenant, Heb. 12.24. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man,
the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5.

3. God resolved that his blessed Son Jesus Christ should have the Honor in
this blessed Transaction, to convey his Grace to lost Sinners, James 5.22, 23.
That all men should honor the Son: So the Apostle fully, Col. 1.16, 17, 18,
19, 20. All things were for him: And that in all things he might have the
pre-eminence, etc. For by him, and to him, and for him are all things. This
Honor the Father committed to the Son, to bring about this great Contrivance
of bringing Man back again unto God.

4. God letting out his Grace by Jesus Christ, renders his love more abundant
and acceptable to poor Sinners, John 3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave
his only begotten Son, etc. So loved it, that he could not give forth a greater
manifestation of his love. Now the Father purposed to render his love to
sinners, by the gift of his Son, most full and glorious; and therefore gave him
out of his Bosom, and all the Riches of his Love and Grace by him.

5. This way of the Father's Dispensation of Grace by his Son Jesus Christ,
has rendered the Grace of God most sure and unchangeable to his own. The
Covenant of Grace being now established between the Father and Jesus Christ;
Jesus Christ being the Undertaker in it for all the Father gave him, it is
certainly founded upon a sure Bottom: This was the Fathers Promise, Isa. 42.6.
-- I will give him for a Covenant to the People. Jesus Christ, as a common
person, did represent all the Elect in the Covenant, as the first Adam in the
first Covenant did represent all his; and Jesus Christ did undertake to bring
them to God, to bring them into the Covenant, and so to estate them in all the
grace, and Mercy, and Blessing of it; Therefore the Mercies of the Covenant are
styled, The sure mercies of David, Isa, 55.3. As a Type of Jesus Christ, coming
of the Seed of David, wherein is set forth the excellency of the New Covenant,
the whole Transaction of it entrusted in the hands of Jesus Christ, and
therefore not one drop of the Mercy of it, can ever fail those that are taken
into it.

6. By the giving forth of Jesus Christ, the whole of Gospel-Salvation is
rendered more glorious: The Wisdom, Justice, Holiness of God, as well as Mercy
and Love, do shine forth in Jesus Christ: And therefore the Gospel-Mystery is
styled, The manifold Wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10. Every Attribute of God is
glorified in the giving out of Jesus Christ.

7. Yea, had not God taken this way of making out himself by Jesus Christ, the
world had dwelt in gross darkness of him; therefore Jesus Christ is styled, The
Image of the Invisible God, Col. 1.15. The express Image of the Father; The
brightness of his glory, Heb. 1. And in 2 Cor. 2.6. The light of the knowledge
of the Glory of God, is said, to shine in the face of Jesus Christ. The
Creation is but a dark shadow of the glory of God, as to what is revealed of
God in the manifestation of Jesus Christ. There are the Footsteps of God in the
Creatures, but his Character and Image in his Blessed Son Jesus Christ.

8. There could not have been access to God, but by Jesus Christ; for through
him we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father, Ephesians. 1.18. How could
polluted Dust draw nigh to the absolute Majesty and Glory of God, had not he
let forth himself in Jesus Christ, as in our own Nature, and so makes way for a
poor sinner to come before him.

9. Had God let forth Mercy to Sinners, and not given out his Son Jesus Christ,
his justice must have been violated, which is the main of all. The word of the
Lord was absolute; In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye, Genesis
2.17. which was meant of the Eternal Death of the Soul, in its separation from
the life of God; as is clear in Romans 5. last. where grace unto eternal life by
Jesus Christ, is put in opposition to that death which was by sin, which must
therefore needs be meant of Eternal Death. So Romans 6. ver. last. Now this Death
must be executed upon all the Posterity of Adam, or else God must take some
other way to satisfy his Justice, he will save the Sinner, which was upon his
own Son Jesus Christ; as will further be evidenced in the following Discourse.

10. The blessed God took this way of letting out himself, his Grace, by Jesus
Christ, that thereby Saints might have Union with him, which was a holy Design
of the Father in saving them; -- That they may be one in us, John 17.21. The
deepest and most unconceivable Mystery in our Salvation: Now Jesus Christ, as
the Eternal Son of God, taking upon him our natures, we became capable of being
united to him, through the Spirit, and made one with the humane nature of
Christ, whereby we are also united to the Godhead, and so become one with the
Father and the Son, which is the top of the Saints perfection.

Use 1. Now what has been said, as to the grounds and reasons of God, in
giving out his eternal Son, and letting forth all grace by him, may serve to
acquaint us with this rich and glorious Mystery, as it is styled, Col. 1.27.
Namely, God reconciling the world by Jesus Christ, letting forth the knowledge
of himself, glorifying all his Attributes, making such discoveries of his
Glory, providing such a way of Mediation, such a glorious Mediator, laying the
blessed project of a sinners glorious Salvation so sure, rendering his love so
acceptable and glorious, making way for free access unto himself, and how we
might become one with him: Oh! the depths of the Wisdom and Love of God; which
of them may we admire most? Well may Angels pry into this Holy Mystery, well
may it be the astonishment of Heaven and Earth, of the whole Creation: How much
more of a sinner, for whose sake it was thus ordered! Oh, that we might fall
upon our faces, and adore the Wisdom and Grace of God, in such a contrivance as
this, Oh, unmeasurable Goodness! unfathomed Wisdom! Eternity is but enough to
admire it! To behold God in Christ, will be the vision which the souls of
blessed Saints will be wrapped up into, to all Eternity.

2. Oh! therefore what infinite Mercy is it to be brought forth in the
New-Testament-times, when the Mystery hid in God, hid from ages, kept secret
since the world began, 1 Cor. 16.25. is brought to light, and sparkling upon
the darkness of the world; when the glory of God is risen upon the World: Now
if this Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. Woe unto them
that close their eyes, when the light shines round about them; Oh, you that yet
sit in darkness, and the shadow of death, Arise, Awake, look up, that
Gospel Light may shine into you; Oh cry, and wait that your eyes may be opened
to behold God coming forth, in the Revelation of Jesus Christ in the glorious
Gospel, wait for the Spirit, and that the Gospel in the preaching of it may
become the ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. Oh guilty world, that so
slight the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and contemn the Ministration of it; woe
unto them.

3. If God does let forth no Grace and Mercy, but by Jesus Christ, it may serve
to unbottom poor souls from a general carnal hope of Mercy, not being
acquainted with the way of Grace by Jesus Christ, nor coming as lost sinners in
themselves to be found in Christ, and justified by Jesus Christ; this they
utterly neglect, having an empty notion of Christ's dying, but know not for
what; and upon what grounds and how a sinner gets to God by him; Oh! let this
reprove you for this gross and damnable neglect, and convince you that all your
pretended hopes of Mercy will vanish, unless you learn the Knowledge of Jesus
Christ.

4. And therefore, If no way to the Father, no Interest in Mercy, no access to
God? but by Jesus Christ, let it serve to teach poor ignorant sinners, yea all
of us, how to get to God, to Mercy, into his Covenant; Oh! No way but by Jesus
Christ; Oh! I can never come to the presence of God's Majesty, but by Jesus
Christ, who is appointed Mediator to bring a poor sinner to himself, to make
way for him into the presence of God, to conveigh Mercy and Grace to a poor
sinner; Oh, say, that I could acquaint my self with Jesus Christ, take hold of
his skirts, and he will bring me into the favor, love, covenant, vision, union
of God; this is the way for a sinner to come unto him, John 14.6.

5. Let it call upon Saints that know Jesus Christ in the Spirit, that they do
not grow strangers to him, that they neglect not Jesus Christ: Oh! Neglect him
not in his blessed Mediation, Grace, Love, Fellowship, Appearance, Ordinances:
It Is a grievous thing, and very apt are Saints to it, to neglect Jesus Christ;
Oh! still know and consider, that as your access to God was by him at first, so
it is still; His Mediation for you, his love and grace, and fellowship, is as
good as ever, as precious as it ever was; therefore have high and precious
thoughts of him, of your blessed access to God by Jesus Christ.

The next thing that I come to open is, how Jesus Christ wrought forth
Salvation and Justification for a Sinner, so that the free grace of God might
by him be freely let out upon a sinner, namely, the work of his Redemption,
[through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ,] verse 24.

I shall not insist upon the many difficulties that the wisdom of the flesh
has started about the word or work of our Redemption, but endeavor, as I have
promised, to give it out in a plain, Scriptural, practical manner, for the use
of poor sinners.

Redemption signifies a deliverance from Captivity, by a price or ransom laid
down.

Man had sinned himself into captivity, and a just condemnation; God from his
own free Mercy, was willing he should be set at Liberty, but this should not be
done but by a price or ransom being paid to God, which was the intervening
death of Jesus Christ, who being the eternal Son of God, came down from Heaven,
took upon him the nature of man, was willing to stand in the room of sinners,
bearing their sins, in the undergoing the punishment for them, whereby God laid
upon Jesus Christ the Iniquities of all that shall be saved, Isa. 53.6.
proceeded against him as if he had been the sinner, in a way of Justice,
executed his wrath upon him; Thus he is said to dye for the sins of his own, 2
Cor. 5.15. Heb. 9.15. and to give himself for us, and to give his life a ransom
for many, which death of Jesus Christ is styled an expiatory Sacrifice, an
atonement and Propitiation, all which, do imply, that by the death of Jesus
Christ satisfaction was made to the infinite Justice of God, as if the sinners
that are saved by it, had suffered the utmost of Divine Justice in their own
persons; Thus much may serve briefly, to open the nature of Christ's Redemption.

The Doctrine I shall lay down from the words will be this.

Doct. To the Salvation and Justification of a sinner, (in order to God's
letting out his free grace upon him) there was required the death of Jesus
Christ, as a price laid down to the justice of God for his Redemption.

I might urge many more Texts besides what have been named, As 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
-- Redeemed not with silver and gold, etc. but with the precious blood of Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. In whom we have redemption through his blood, even
the forgiveness of our sins: This was it which was typified by all the
Sacrifices in the Old-Testament-Dispensation, as in the Epistle to the Hebrews
at large; especially in the 9th. Chapter, verse. 12, 13, 14, 22. -- And almost
all things are by the Law purged with blood, and without shedding of blood is
no remission.

From hence the Reasons of Divine Wisdom, thus proceeding, so far as revealed
in the Word, will be clear.

Reason 1. That the Justice of God might be glorified in the Salvation of
sinners, as well as Mercy. Now there being atonement made to Justice by the
death of Jesus Christ, the Righteousness of God has a share in the glory of
man's Salvation, with the Grace and Mercy of God.

2. The Purity and Holiness of God's justice did require it, which being
violated by the sin of Man, it was most equal that satisfaction be made, which
no mere creature was able to do; and therefore the eternal Son of God, blessed
for ever, was appointed of the Father to it: Therefore it is said verse 25. of
this third of the Romans. -- That he might be just, and the justifier of them
that believe in Jesus; given as a reason of God's setting forth his Son to be a
propitiation.

3. The express word of the Lord did require it, who pronounced to all mankind
in Adam, that the transgressor should surely die, Genesis 2.17. Therefore upon his
transgression, the sinner must either die in his own person, or another in his
stead, which God in his infinite wisdom might order as he pleased; Now God
being willing to glorify his mercy, chose to lay this punishment on his own
Son Jesus Christ, and not on the condemned Sinner, which Jesus Christ also
voluntarily undertaking, the word of the Lord was fully made good, and Jesus
Christ dying for the sinner, (being made a curse for him) 'twas all one as if
the sinner himself had died.

4. God gave out a holy and righteous Law, written in the heart of Adam; which
Law was just, and holy, and good, Romans 7. Now this Law being broken, God would
not dispense with it, in showing mercy to the sinner, unless his Law was
satisfied, which Jesus Christ undertook, Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not
do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, etc. Gal. 4.4. But when the
fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under
the law, to redeem them that were under the Law, etc. So that the Law was
fulfilled by Jesus Christ, as if the sinner had kept it fully in his own
person, by Christ's becoming obedient to the death of the Cross, and so
suffering the punishment of the Law, (still in the stead and name of the
sinner) and by his keeping the Law, in the pure original righteousness of his
nature, 2 Cor. 5.21. and Heb. 7.26, 27. and by his actual obedience to it, in
the perfect observing of it, Romans 5.19. For as by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one many were made righteous: Namely,
by the obedience of Jesus Christ, which he gave unto the Law: Now all sinners
being condemned by the Law, the Law could not remit them, till it was
satisfied, it called for punishment, and full obedience, which Jesus Christ
gave unto it.

5. God could not so freely (to speak after the manner of men) let out grace
and mercy, unless such satisfaction had been given by Jesus Christ: Now it can
come easily, delightfully, cheerfully from the righteous and gracious God,
seeing his justice will not plead against it, but for it, being blessedly
satisfied, and Jesus Christ by his death did fully merit it and deserve it at
the hands of God, and laid down as much as God in infinite justice would
require, therefore it is now as well justice as mercy, for God to remit a Sinner
that comes to God by Jesus Christ. 1 John 1.7. God is just to forgive us our
sins.

Now, hereupon, God having ordained and accepted of such a way of atonement,
his justice glorified and satisfied, his word (that the sinner should die) made
good, his Law to the utmost satisfied; what remains, but that the blessed God
can remit the bondage, guilt, condemnation of the sinner, having thus accepted
of satisfaction? what remains, but that he should pronounce, as he does, Job
33.24. Deliver him, for I have found a Ransom; God can now pardon the sinner
that comes believingly by Jesus Christ to him for it, without any regret, his
justice shall be glorified by it, as well as his mercy; God has charged all
upon another, and accepted of full payment, called himself to witness of it,
and will never repent of it.

Object. If any should Object, Wherein is free grace glorified, if God has
received full satisfaction to his justice?

Answ. I answer,

1. 'Twas infinite free grace for God, to give out his blessed Son Jesus
Christ, when there was no obligation upon him; he gave him, and sent him
freely, John 3.16. from his own free love; therefore there is infinite of free
grace in Man's salvation.

2. 'Twas infinite grace toward the sinner, to accept of satisfaction by a
surety, Heb. 5. and not on the sinner, the party offending, himself; what
abundant grace and love, to lay the sins and guilt upon another, especially the
only Son of his bosom, who was without all sin, 2 Cor. 2.21. and not to condemn
the poor helpless sinner for ever.

3. 'Twas infinite free grace, for God himself to contrive the way of such a
Redemption: Had it been left to sinful man to have found out a way, how justice
might be satisfied, he could never have done it: It could never have entered
into the heart of Man or Angels, to have offered to God a satisfactory way for
the making up of his wronged justice, but he must have perished for ever.

4. The Father was at Liberty to impute this Redemption of Christ to whom he
would, to this sinner, and not to another, Romans 9. He will have mercy on whom
he will have mercy, etc. So that it is indeed a debt to Christ; but all of free
mercy and grace, to any sinner that is saved.

Use 1. If then Salvation and remission of sins came in this way, by the death
and blood of Jesus Christ, then it may discover to us the infinite hatred that
God bears to sin, that, to make expiation and atonement to his justice, there
could no sacrifice be found but the death of his eternal Son Jesus Christ; Oh!
that ever a sinner should delight in that, which the holy God so much hates and
abhors?

2. Let it be for convincement to poor sinners of the infinite necessity of
this way of Redemption by Jesus Christ, in laying down his life to satisfy the
justice of God, and of getting their part in it; you have heard the case of a
Sinner, condemned by the Law, liable to eternal death, subject to the rigor of
divine Justice, no way able or in a capacity to make satisfaction to God, mercy
as it were bound up by justice; Oh! therefore what necessity of a Mediator, of
a Redeemer, to work forth deliverance; to lay down a Ransom for sinners, dye
and undergo the curse and wrath of the great and dreadful God, fulfill the Law,
make satisfaction to the wronged justice of God to the utmost; this Jesus
Christ has done for miserable sinners that will come unto him. Now the most of
poor souls, have but a Notion of Christ's dying, but know not what is meant by
Christ dying for me, though sometimes in their Mouths; Oh! sinner for Christ to
die for thee, (if thou gettest a part in his Death) is to undergo the
punishment, and curse, and death, that thy soul was liable to, which otherwise
must have come upon thee to the utmost; it was to be made sin and a curse, for
thee, to bear thy Sins, and stand in them; Oh! that thou could really be
convinced of the necessity of this Redemption, that thou could never come to
God without it, and therefore to get thy poor soul stated in it!

3. If satisfaction to Gods justice can only be by the blood of Jesus Christ,
then let me again press you, that you take heed of performing your duties and
repentings as if thereby you did satisfy and pacify God for the sin of your
souls. This is the most dangerous snare upon poor souls, that though they have
sinned, yet they hope God will be pacified with some praying, and sorrowing,
and amendment: Now, though this shall be in a spiritual manner, upon every
pardoned sinner, and it is a capacity God puts the sinner into, when he applies
the death of his Son, and so gives out mercy and pardon, yet you must most
carefully take heed, that you offer not up such duties, as if they did make God
amends, and pacify him for your sins; but look above and beyond them, as if
they were not, and so to cast your eye to the great sacrifice of the blood of
Jesus Christ, which Alone makes atonement to God, and makes way for a poor
sinner to come to him.

4. That as sinners would learn the blessed Mystery of this Redemption, and the
necessity of it, and how it makes atonement, merits mercy and pardon, procures
peace and reconciliation with God, so they would come and accept of it, and
fall down before the righteous God, and plead it to him; Thou have heard the
way of God's letting out mercy to sinners, and no mercy but in that way, but by
justice being satisfied by the death and blood of Jesus Christ, whereby he
becomes the Savior of sinners; now this blood is offered up to God, the price
is paid and accepted with God, and in the Gospel of God it is revealed and
preached to the guilty world, and it is freely offered to any poor sinner, that
will come and accept of it, and make claim to it, and plead for mercy and
forgiveness upon the account of it, and will come to the terms of it, which is
to be accepted and pardoned alone by virtue of it, to be washed and sanctified,
and actually delivered, not only from the guilt and condemnation of sin, but
the power, and reign, and pollution of it.

Oh Sinner! be awakened and stirred up by the word of the Lord, to get actual
deliverance from the guilt, bondage, reign, service, of thy sin; go and cry to
God, offer him up the blood of his own eternal Son, tell him thou see he may
let out justice upon thee to destroy thee, and damn thee for ever; of thy self
thou have no plea against it: But ask the blessed God, if it may not be more
glory to him, and his grace and mercy glorified by it, if he will accept of
satisfaction by his own Son Jesus Christ? plead to him, that thou hear he
died in the room of guilty, condemned sinnners, such as thou art, ungodly, Romans
5.6. yea, tell him, with an humble adoration of his mercy and love in it, that
thou hear in his blessed Gospel, that it is offered to any sinner that will
come and accept it, and that it is proclaimed from Heaven, and there is
satisfaction made by the blood of a Jesus for the greatest Sinner, such as thou
art; Oh! cry unto him, that therefore thou come and begg'st to be heard in
thy plea, and that it may be entered in Heaven, that thou come for all the
ends of his death, thou art weary of the service of thy lusts, and the
pollution of thy nature, and therefore thou would have thy nature cleansed,
thy conscience purged, all which thou find the blood of Jesus Christ is able
to do; yea, tell him, and plead it with some humble boldness, that thou art
acquainted that Jesus Christ prays in Heaven, for such sinners that come and
plead his blood to thee, and that he is heard in what he prays, and that
therefore forgiveness must be had; yea, say, thou will hold on thy plea, thou
have no other, and art resolved against any other: If thou shall to Hell
pleading the blood of a Savior, be it so, but I am resolved to plead it to the
utmost; yea, tell him, and cry to him, that it cannot repent him, that he has
ordained the sacrifice of the blood of his own Son, and therefore why should
thou be rejected? Yea, Come to this Issue, through the Spirit of Faith upon
thee, that if it can be, that a Sinner crying out for pardon, upon the account
of the death and blood of Jesus Christ, and for sanctification, may go to Hell,
then thou will willingly lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and open it no more, but
sink under Divine Vengeance to Eternity.

Oh! That every poor sinner might go home with this plea in his heart, written
there by the Holy Ghost; and pierce Heaven with his or her cries and groans, and
put the blood of Jesus Christ before him, and plead for mercy and holiness, to
be pardoned and sanctified, till God say, Go in peace, thou art pardoned,
redeemed, and blessed for ever.

Yet a little to excite a poor drowsy sinner to this eternal Concernment.

1. Consider, thou art under the guilt of thousands of Sins, one whereof is
enough to sink thee to Hell: Guilt, if continued, is Hell begun, and wants
nothing but the execution of Vengeance upon thee. Oh what should a guilty
sinner do, but close with a Savior, and get an interest in Redemption from it!

2. Especially considering that all the Duties and Obedience thou have
performed toward God, or ever shall, have not made (nor ever will) the least
payment to God for thy sins, thou art as much in debt to God as ever thou wast,
as much behind with him: All the Items for the sin of thy Nature, thy thoughts,
words, and actual Wickedness, and thy sinful neglects, stand uncancelled, all
ready to be charged upon thee, and naught will be accepted for payment but the
Death of Jesus Christ, the only price that God will hearken to: Nothing will
cancel the Book where all thy sins are recorded: Nothing will blot out the
Handwriting that is against thee, but the Blood of Jesus Christ, Col. 2.13, 14.

3. God is resolved never to forgive you the Debt, till you have put in this
Plea, and it be recorded in Heaven, and you have it in a Gospel-way: No
forgiveness of Sins, but by Redemption pleaded, claimed, possessed, and sealed
by the Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 1.7, 14.

4. Thou art yet under the Bondage and Reign of thy sin, and therefore under
condemnation; the Law is gone out against thee, thy Sentence pronounced; Cursed
is every one that transgresses, etc. says the Law; and thou art in bondage
yet, and have not procured actual deliverance from it. If a Prisoner be
condemned, and lie in Fetters in a Dungeon, and hears of a Ransom paid for him,
what is this to him, till he have Liberty. So for a Sinner to be in the Fetters
of his Lusts, held fast by them, a Bondman to the Devil, and hear of a Christ
laying down a Ransom, what is this to him? unless he sue it out, and get actual
deliverance and liberty, the liberty of the Sons and Daughters of God, and have
a Spirit of Adoption, to cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.4, 5. That being made free
from sin, (the Reign and Power of it, by the Power of the Lord Jesus revealed
in him) you may become servants to God, and have your fruit unto Holiness, and
the end everlasting Life, Romans 6.

5. Consider, as thou stand in thy filth and uncleanness of thy Sins, thou
art unfit for God, either to please him in any thing thou do, or to be with
him in Heaven hereafter; thy person and services are loathsome to the Soul of
God; therefore get washed and purified in the blood of Jesus Christ; Go on to
cry, and wait, (and beg a heart to do it, and that in Faith) till thou shall
feel Peace coming in, by thy constant Plea of the blood of Christ, till thou
shall feel cleansing virtue of it upon thy Soul, till thou shall experience the
power of his death destroying Sin in thee, and so shall find, thou have
fellowship with him, and so a part in this blessed Redemption we have been
treating of.

6. Now to encourage a poor Sinner to this coming to God, with the Plea of
Christ's blood in his heart and mouth, and to draw forth the Faith of a poor
humbled doubting Soul.

Consider the All Sufficiency and worth of the price of the Death of Jesus
Christ, to satisfy the justice of God, and procure Pardon and Sanctification
for a poor Sinner; which may appear from such like Scriptures. The Apostle in
the 7th. of the Hebrews, having been opening the excellency of Christ's
Priesthood, which is chiefly conversant in this Work of Redemption, in the
offering up of himself a Sacrifice, concludes, ver. 25. of that Chapter.
Wherefore he is able to save them to the utmost that come to God by him. To the
utmost, that is, with a perfect Salvation, that nothing more can be desired to
it. So in the 9th. Chap. ver. 11, etc. The Apostle reasoning from the Levitical
Sacrifices, to this of the blood of Christ, argues the full perfection of it.
-- By his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, (namely, into
Heaven) having obtained eternal Redemption for us; and thence concludes, ver.
14. How much more shall the blood of Christ purge the Conscience? etc. A much
more upon that, above all the Sacrifices that were offered up to God; which
will appear,

1. Because of the eternal Godhead of Christ's Person, by which he offered up
his blood unto his Father, Heb. 9.14. -- Who through the eternal Spirit offered
up himself without spot to God. Which put an infinite value and efficacy upon
the offering of his blood, inasmuch as Jesus Christ was God as well as Man;
though he could only dye in his humane nature, yet the efficacy of his Godhead
had an influence upon the price of his dying, which put an infinite worth upon
it, and so renders it full and perfect Redemption.

2. The price of the blood of Jesus Christ, did not only give a bare
Satisfaction to the justice of God, but it had an infinite Merit in it, a
redundancy of Merit, whereby it deserved at the hands of God, that Sinners that
are interessed in it, should have remission of Sins, grace, the love of God,
and glory to come, spiritual blessings, which the death of Christ purchased for
the elect; which being also by the free purpose and compact of God, there must
necessarily arise an infinite Merit in it.

3. The All Sufficiency of the price of Christ's blood is evidenced by his
Resurrection and Ascension into Glory, implying that he wrought forth full and
perfect Redemption by his Death, therefore he is said to rise again for our
Justification, Romans 4. last. and to be justified in the spirit, 1 Timothy 3. last.
that is, God by raising him from the dead, justified him in the atonement he
had made by his Death, and that he did cheerfully accept of satisfaction by it.

4. The Blood of Christ procures boldness of access to God, therefore there is
an infinite worth in the price of it; Heb. 10.19. Having therefore, Brethren,
Boldness to enter into the Holiest, by the blood of Jesus; which boldness does
arise from the full satisfaction that is made to Divine Justice, in as much as
God, upon the Acceptance of it, has nothing to charge upon the Sinner himself,
no quarrel against him, having charged his sins upon Christ, and therefore the
poor sinner may come with an humble boldness into the Presence of God; and this
is that which puts boldness into the Conscience of a Believer, when he appears
before God.

5. From the Experience of it; the soulest Sinners that have come unto it, have
been washed from their sins by it, as 1 Cor. 6.11. Idolaters, Adulterers,
Sodomites, Drunkards, Revilers, have been washed, and justified, and sanctified
by it. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1.7.

6. It cleanses and perfects them for ever, therefore called eternal
Redemption; once for all, and for ever, Heb. 10.10, 19. For by one offering he
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified; once justified, and for ever.

Now from this Satisfaction, Merit, All Sufficiency of the Sacrifice of the
blood of Jesus, to cleanse a sinner, to commend him to God, how safely may a
sinner venture his Soul upon it, (which is the first act of Faith?) A poor
sinner when under conviction, and the terror of the Lord has taken hold of
him, lies trembling before the Lord, whether God will let out Justice or Mercy
upon him; he is ready to give glory to the justice of the Lord, if he reject
him for ever. But now if a poor soul get a sight of the blood of Christ, how it
deals with the justice of God, what full and all-sufficient Satisfaction it
has made to God, for the sins of such as plead it to him, how God more
delights in it, than in the condemning of the sinner, what a stay is this to
the wavering, doubtful spirit of a poor sinner? when he can come to see justice
to have its due, and so God can freely let out Remission to a poor Soul, upon
the very first Act of a poor sinners closing with it, though not presently
evidenced in his Conscience; Oh, sinner, venture the Issue of all upon this
price of the Blood of Jesus, thou may see thou have the greatest reason in
the world to do so, thou will never come to have a safe bottom for thy Soul,
till thou come thus to deal with the justice of God, as fully satisfied by
the blood of Jesus Christ, thou will still be off and on about Free-Mercy, till
thou come to fix here, and be in some good measure established in it: Be daily
in exercising thy Soul in such ventures and castings upon it, and the Spirit
will at last witness Peace and Reconciliation to thy Conscience.

In a word, Sinners you that have had no stay to your spirits for the
forgiveness of your sins, but a blind hope of Mercy, look up, look up to the
justice of God, and see this way of access to God for you, by the blood of
Jesus: Oh! let not any profane sinner trample it under foot, cast it back upon
the blessed face of God; say not in thy heart, Let God take the blood of his
Son to himself, I Will not be washed from my Sins, I Will not be sanctified, I Will
rest as I am! Desperate Sinner, of how much sorer punishment shall thou be
thought worthy, than any Sinner under Heaven, who rejectest the only worthy
price of a Sinners Salvation? Know, the great God will let out all his justice
upon thee to the utmost, and Oceans of his Wrath shall fall upon thee, if thou
thus abuse the blood of his Son; a greater guilt than all thy Ungodliness thou
have hitherto been wallowing in from thy youth up; Oh! come thou despiser, and
cast thy soul under the droppings of this blood, and it shall cleanse thee,
though thy soul were as black as Hell, Zach. 13.1.

And thou poor formal outside Professor, who never did feel the virtue,
healing life and warmth of the blood of Christ upon thy heart: Oh, rest not in
good thoughts of it only, but come believingly to it, as thou have been
exhorted: Say, and that with thy heart, Now, Lord, I would know the power and
efficacy of this Redemption upon my poor soul: Wash me, Lord, wash me; I
renounce all but the blood of this Christ, as to making way to God for me: Oh!
let it pacify my Conscience, and purge my Conscience, and I shall be clean.

If the Spirit of the Lord shall work thy heart to come as a guilty, helpless,
unholy sinner in thy self, to this blood of Jesus, and make thy approaches to
God daily, and argue for Grace and Remission upon it, and purging thy Soul;
these inestimable blessings will be the issue of it, which I will but name to
thee.

1. Thou shall certainly find forgiveness of thy sins; In whom we have
Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our sins, Ephesians. 1.7. God will
remember them no more against thee; and thou shall have peace with thy God for
ever.

2. God will let forth an infinite unchangeable love upon thee, Romans 5.5. which
love he bore thee from Eternity, but will now manifest it to thee, and estate
thee in it for ever.

3. Thou shall have boldness of access to God, Romans 5.2. even into his intimate
presence, to speak with God face to face, and ask of God what thou will,
according to his will, Heb. 10.

4. All the Promises of Mercy, Grace, and all blessings here and for ever,
shall be thine; made over, sealed in the blood of Christ.

5. Thou shall rejoice in the hope of the Glory of God, Romans 5.2. with all
Saints, and see thy self an heir of Heaven.

6. Thou shall be still a washing, and purifying, and fating for Heaven, till
thou shall be taken up unto God, and live in the Ocean of his Love to all
Eternity.

Now if ease in thy sin and the world can do better for thee, than this that I
have named, then keep in; but if not, (as most certain it cannot) Arise, and
come, to this blessed Redemption, and get thy part and portion in it; and thou
shall say, Blessed be thy counsel and advice for evermore.

But now upon this Redemption of Jesus Christ, how is a sinner said to be
justified; that is, to be put into an actual Possession, of the Redemption of
Jesus Christ, through the Free Grace of God?

1. When the compact was made between God the Father and Jesus Christ, as to
the Salvation of those that the Father gave to Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ
undertook the fulfilling of the Condition of the Covenant, God did purpose in
himself to justify them from Eternity, and looked upon them as in Christ, 2 Timothy 1.9. Ephesians. 1.4. So they were justified as to the purpose of God from all
Eternity.

2. When Jesus Christ performed the Condition of Obedience in his dying, and
paid unto God what he required at his hands, for the sinners redemption, then
did God, as in the Court of Heaven, discharge the sinner, (though not in the
Court of Conscience) and when Christ arose and came to Heaven, the Father gave
him in an absolution of them all, from the guilt of sin, and obligation to
death; and so at the death of Christ all the Elect were meritoriously
justified, inasmuch as the price was paid and accepted of the Father, Romans 5.10.

3. When according to the purpose of God, through the purchase of Jesus Christ,
a Sinner is called by grace, has Faith given him, (as purchased also for him)
to embrace Jesus Christ in the Promise, to receive him as offered in the
Gospel, and with him all spiritual blessings; then is the Soul put into the
actual possession of what God, in his purpose and love, determined to give him,
and Jesus Christ by the purchase of his blood gave him a right to before, and
so there is an Act of God's pardoning Mercy passes upon the sinnner, he has
an actual discharge given in unto his Conscience, has the Obedience of Jesus
Christ imputed to him, and so is looked upon by God not as a Sinner under
guilt, but as righteous in the Righteousness of Christ, which bespeaks him
justified, that is, made just and righteous before God, by the imputation and
making over Christ's Righteousness to him, as if righteous in his own person:
Upon which Act of God there is a full Remission of sin, as in the Text, and the
believer is put into another State, a State of justification unto life through
Jesus Christ, Romans 8.1. who before was in a State of Death and Condemnation.

Before I speak of that Faith which, through Grace, puts a Soul in his pardoned
and justified State, I will briefly apply this to the capacity of the weak.

1. It may inform and instruct you in this great Mystery, that any sinner that
is saved must be thus justified, made righteous by the Obedience of Jesus
Christ; he must come to see the justice of God made up, a price paid unto God,
and this to be actually made over to him: As we shall presently show; most of
sinners, it is to be feared, do not consider this, that speak of mercy, and
pretend they hope in mercy, but are never convinced of the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ, and what it is to pass from a state of guilt to a state of
righteousness by Jesus Christ, from a state of condemnation, to a state of
justification without which, there can be no Salvation.

Oh be convinced, sinners, of this great matter of the necessity of the
righteousness of Christ, his obedience in fulfilling the Law to be made over to
you, to be brought into a justified state, or you can never have pardon of sin,
and be accepted with God; you can never stand before God, but in the
righteousness of Jesus Christ. Say, If I do not get the righteousness of Christ
made mine: If I do not get thus justified, I must never expect pardon of my
sin, and acceptance of my poor soul at the great day of the Lord. This is the
Work of the Spirit, to be savingly convinced of this, John 16.8. Oh look up to
the Father for the Spirit thus to convince you, not only of sin, and the
damnableness and sinfulness thereof, but of your infinite need to get, not only
some general hope of Mercy and Pardon, but the righteousness of the Son of God,
to bring you into a state of Pardon, Reconciliation, Peace with God.

2. It may further clear unto you, that your justification before God is not
within you, but without you, wrought forth by Jesus Christ, for such as are, or
shall be called by grace, and imputed to them, not inherent, or wrought in
them: It Is not grace in you, that does or can justify you, though renewing
grace shall be wrought in all that are so pardoned and justified. Therefore,
though thou must be changed in thy self, pray and be holy, and obey God in all
things, yet thou can not be hereby justified, but still thy justifying
righteousness is in Christ, and not in thy self, as the only procuring
meritorious cause of Pardon, and Peace with God, Jeremiah 33.16. Isaiah 54.
last.

3. The great question therefore that should come upon thy heart, is, Whether
thou art in a state of condemnation or justification? If not justified, thou
art still, as I have showed, under the condemnation of the whole Law: Nothing
thou have yet done or shall ever be able to do, will stand between Wrath, and
Hell, and thy poor soul, till thou come to be justified in the blood and
righteousness of Jesus Christ. Oh sinners! ponder of this great thing that is
now laid before you? Can you say from a Testimony within you? Oh! I was thus
and thus once under the reign, power, guilt, condemnation of sin; but now, now,
(blessed be rich and free grace) I am washed, justified, in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ: See that Word, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. And such were some of you,
but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of
our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

Or at least, that I may speak to poor, weak, willing, trembling souls: Is this
it that your souls are restless after? Oh that I were, that I were, in such a
blessed state! Oh that I could but believingly say, the righteousness of Jesus
Christ were mine, and that now I am, I am justified! Oh what peace, and
sweetness, and joy, would fill my heart! Why Soul! If this be indeed the
breathing of thy Soul, Jesus Christ is thine, and thou art justified and
pardoned, and God will at last give in unto thee (if thou continue to follow
him) the sense and comfort of it in thy poor Soul: Only by the way take a
Discovery or two of the reality of thy Heart in this matter.

1. If thou Soul, from a Spiritual Conviction, be under a real making out after
justification by Jesus Christ, then thou would also be as really sanctified,
be made holy. 'Twas as much in the purpose of God to call thee out of a state
of sin, and to sanctify thee, as to pardon and justify thee, 1 Ep. John 5.6.

2. If thou art brought into a justified state, thy soul making out after it,
thou art made alive in the Spirit, Romans 8.1. Thou art in Jesus Christ, and
would walk no more after the flesh and the lusts thereof, but after the
Spirit, Gal. 5.18. If ye are led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law;
namely, to condemn you, but are free from the curse of it: And verse 23.
Against such there is no Law; that is, such as would walk after the Spirit, be
led by the Spirit; and show forth the fruit of the Spirit: And this is that
which the Apostle intimates, 1 Ep. John 5.10. He that believes on the Son of
God, has the Witness in himself, namely, of the Spirit: So that every
justified person has the Spirit of Christ (according to the measure of the
grace of God) dwelling in him, is quickened in the Spirit, being once dead;
prays in the Spirit, mortifies sin through the Spirit, is taught by the Spirit,
and so in all other saving and sanctifying virtues of it: If it be not thus
with thee, thou, as yet, have no part in this blessedness, but art under
condemnation unto death. And therefore, sinner, come before God in the sense of
thy condemned estate, and give up thy self to Jesus Christ to be washed,
justified, sanctified; and then blessed for ever.

3. Let called and sanctified Believers labor to live in the sense of a
pardoned, justified state, that God is not off and on with them, in the matter
of justification, though it may be sometimes darkened and clouded, as to the
evidence of it. Oh! do you labor to preserve the sense, and sweet and blessed
peace of it in your souls, and give glory to the riches of grace; for, now
there is No, No, condemnation to you; you are passed from Death to Life, and
the Blessed God imputes no sin unto you: Let this be the highest and strongest
Argument to Holiness, and love to the glory that possibly may be; and if indeed
you walk in the comfort of it, it will be so unto you.

Only let me give caution here to young Converts, whose hearts, at the first
discovery of the free and glorious grace of the Gospel, and of Jesus Christ,
are wonderfully taken and affected with it, but after a time, are apt to wanton
with it, (unless the first humiliation be the deeper) and to wax slight in
Duties, and so their Lusts recover strength again, and return upon them; and
either they fall, or are near unto it, to the fresh wounding of their Souls.
This has been the condition of many; therefore be well cautioned in it, and
walk with fear in the midst of your joyous apprehensions of the sweetness of
grace, and the endearing love of the Lord Jesus to you.

Having briefly showed what the nature of justification is, what it is to be in
a justified state before God, I now come to open more particularly how a Soul
comes to be partaker of this justification, through the Redemption of Jesus
Christ; namely Through Eaith in his blood, ver. 25. of this 3d. of Romans

Observe. As God, through Free Grace, has set forth Jesus Christ to work forth
Redemption for sinners; so there must be a special believing on, and applying
the blood of Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of sins, by every one that is
saved.

Therefore justification is attributed to Faith, Romans 5.1. Therefore being
justified by Faith, we have peace with God by our Lord Jesus Christ. So Gal.
2.16. and 3.11. In all which places. Faith is put in opposition to the works of
the Law. And so the righteousness of Christ is called the Righteousness of
Faith, Romans 9.30. and 10.6. in opposition to the righteousness by Works: Not as
if Faith were the matter of our justification, that it did, as an Act or Work
in the Soul, justify before God; but that God does thus make over the blood
and righteousness of Jesus Christ to a Soul, by enabling the Soul to come unto
to take hold of, to apply to it self, to appropriate the merit of the blood of
Jesus Christ for its own Redemption and Salvation, which may afford us a plain
Description of justifying Faith, precisely considered; Namely,

Faith is a Work of the Holy Ghost in the Soul, enabling it to appropriate, or
apply to it self the blood and righteousness of Jesus Christ, for the Remission
of sin, and its justification unto eternal Life.

So it is called the work of Faith with power, 2 These. 1.11. and it is expressed
by receiving of Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. and believing on his Name, coming unto
him, resting upon him: So that, plainly, Faith is a going out to, believing in,
trusting on another; namely, the Lord Jesus Christ: For what it can never be
able to find or bring about in or by it self, which may lead us to the more
particular way of the Holy Ghost's working this power in the Soul, in the saved
ones of God.

1. In the working of Faith in the Soul, it is first brought to see an
impossibility of coming to God, as in its self, or by its self, concluded under
an utter unability to pacify God, or make up a righteousness in it self, to
get access to God. The soul is emptied from vessel to vessel, till all the
things that it counted gain before, become loss for Jesus Christ; this is the
first work of the Spirit, it empties a poor sinful Creature of all its refuges,
all its dependencies, all its sufficiencies, and so becomes naked in its guilt
before God, and therefore is brought to this, that its acceptance to God, (if
ever it be accepted) must be out of its self; what ever become of him, he must
perish as in himself.

2. In the work of Faith, the Soul is brought to see that this was the end of
the Revelation of Jesus Christ, of God's setting him forth to be a
propitiation, that he might work forth Redemption and Righteousness, that this
is a way of God's own ordaining, Jesus Christ was set forth for this very end,
even by God himself, and therefore the soul is brought to this conclusion, to
venture the Issue of its life, and eternal salvation upon it; and so throws it
self, as in a sinking condition, upon the grace, blood, righteousness of Jesus
Christ, sink or swim, live or perish, saved or damned; there the soul casts
Anchor, there it pitcheth, to this it will stand or fall before the righteous
God; if there be not enough in the blood of Jesus, to give it acceptance with
God, the Soul resolves, to Hell it must. There says a poor self-emptied Soul,
I cast even away my self (if it might be) upon it, Phil. 3.9.

3. The soul is brought on to believe the report, that God in his word makes
concerning his Son Jesus Christ, and of the price, value, merit, and
all sufficiency of his blood to save a poor sinner, even to the utmost, that
comes to God by him, Heb. 7.25. to answer all the wants and distresses of a
poor soul, namely, in pacifying the Justice of God, fulfilling the Law, making
atonement, removing guilt, procuring remission of sins, reconciling to God,
Romans 5.9, 10. Much more being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved
from wrath through him: For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God
by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his
Life: In all which things, the soul is enabled to believe the report of the
Gospel, that the blood and death of Jesus Christ can do all this for poor
sinners that shall pitch upon it.

4. In this working of faith, the soul comes to see and fasten upon an absolve,
unlimited Free promise, where any sinner that will, may come to Jesus Christ,
and so have the virtue of his death and blood applied to it; and therefore that
he as well as any other sinner in the world may come to him, and make claim to
his blood, and plead it before God; whosoever will, let him come! Rev. 22. Now
says a poor self-emptied sinner, I do not find that I am any where excluded,
but invited and called upon, to come to the Lord Jesus, and claim an interest
in his blood, and that I may plead it even at the throne of his Justice, and
that I may warrantably, safely, upon good grounds, given out from the mouth of
God himself, take hold of the Lord Jesus in such a Promise, and there is no sin
or unworthiness can exclude me, unless I will frowardly and wretchedly exclude
my self: I do not find, says the poor soul, that any sin is too great for the
Sacrifice of that blood of Jesus, so the sinner will come to it, yea, that it is
the greatest sin, and the top of condemnation, not to come to it; that I more
injure God, by standing off from Jesus Christ, than by all the filthiness,
blasphemies, ungodlinesses, my Soul ever wallowed in, Heb. 10.29. The Blood of
Christ is a price sufficient for the sins of the whole World, therefore, says
a poor soul, for mine; He is the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the
world, and therefore he can take away mine; and I am freely called and invited
to it, and it is my Rebellion not to come, what can I have more? And so sense of
Peace, and Reconciliation falls in upon the Soul.

5. The Soul by its often renewing of such Acts of Believing, comes at last to
see the blood of Jesus Christ appropriated to him; now it can stay it self upon
the word of promise; and can sometimes rejoice in believing. If I roll my self
upon the blood of Jesus, I have the Word of God for it, that I shall be saved,
we shall be saved from Wrath through him; not, it may be, but, we shall be
saved, and all upon the account of being justified by his blood, Romans 5.9.
which justification arises upon this believing we have mentioned.

Thus have I opened the nature of Faith, as it is precisely justifying, as it
applies and appropriates the blood and righteousness of the Lord Jesus, for
Remission of sins, and Justification unto eternal Life; I might insist upon the
discovery of the effectual operations of Faith in the Soul, as may distinguish
it from a mere belief of the History of the death of Jesus Christ; take two or
three.

1. When the Soul by Faith does act upon the blood of Jesus Christ for
justification, it does also bring the power and efficacy of it, for purging of
the Soul, Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the
eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your Conscience from
dead works, to serve the living God; So Acts 15.9. Purifying your hearts by
faith. There is a purifying virtue in the blood of Jesus Christ upon the souls
of Believers; they are for the purging away the filth, as well as the guilt of
sin; there is no believing soul but cries out, Purge me, Oh Lord, purge me, and
thoroughly, from my filth.

2. The soul has a secret, yet real fellowship with the death of Jesus Christ,
to crucify and destroy the body of sin in a justified believer which arises
from its union with Christ, Romans 6.5, 6. For if we have been planted together
in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his
Resurrection; knowing that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of
sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. Every true
believer can really say, I am, or I would be, Crucified with Christ, Gal. 2.20.
Which the Apostle there brings in as an effect of Justification by Faith.

3. Every justified believer looks upon this as one great end of his
Justification, that he might live to God, Gal. 2.19. That I might live unto
God. Likewise reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed unto him, but alive unto
God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.11. Every justified Believer does
thus reckon of himself, I am to be dead to sin, but alive to God, I am to yield
my self to God, verse 13. To have my fruit unto Holiness, verse 22.

4. Faith that justifies, does through the Spirit work the Soul to
Gospel-obedience, to all the Laws and Ordinances of Jesus Christ, which shall
be revealed to be the Will of Christ, from the Command of Jesus Christ, and
from a principle of love to Jesus Christ, John 15.10.

5. A justified believer will deny himself for Christ, take up his cross and
follow him; let any sufferings be proposed to a called believer, and let him
know it is for Jesus Christ, and that soul (unless under a temporary desertion
or temptation) will choose and embrace those sufferings, and undergo them with
some cheerfulness, Luke 14.26, 27.

7. Every justified believer has a Marriage Union with Jesus Christ, Ephesians.
5.25, 26, 32. The soul has chosen Jesus Christ, having broken off from all
other lovers, has betrothed it self unto Christ, in an everlasting Bond and
Covenant, has given it self to Christ; as Jesus Christ bestows himself and all
he has upon the soul, so does the soul bestow it self, and all it has, upon
Jesus Christ, and having so done, resolves to be contented with him in every
condition; whom have I in Heaven but thee? and none on earth in comparison of
thee; says every gracious Believer.

7. Every justified Believer lives by his Faith; Gal. 2.20. lives upon Jesus
Christ for all, and fetches all from him, sees him as a Treasury of all Grace,
has recourse unto him, this being the most proper act of Faith, to make the
soul live out of it self, upon another, Namely, Jesus Christ for all.

8. Faith that entitles the Soul to Jesus Christ, works by love to all Saints,
Gal. 5.6. When the Soul closes with Jesus Christ, it will also close with his
Disciples, as distinguished from carnal, unsavory, dead Professors. What makes
the living among the dead? a living Soul, alive in Christ, highly priseth
fellowship with such as are alive.

I might name many more particulars, but these may suffice, as the most
distinguishing.

1. Let what has been spoken serve to discover to you, Whether you have Faith
that does entitle you to the blood of Jesus Christ, and the forgiveness of your
sins. Can you say, Your Souls are carried out after more purging, and it is your
daily cry to Heaven? Can you say, that you are often crucifiing with Jesus
Christ? And Oh that I were, that I were but crucified with Jesus Christ, that I
might reckon of my self as dead to sin! and oh that I might live to God, and
might walk in Gospel-obedience! That I might thoroughly deny my self for Jesus
Christ, and choose to suffer with him and for him. Oh I would more clearly see
the Marriage-union between Christ and my poor Soul! I would, I do, bestow my
self upon him, and all that is mine; I do give my self to him! I will be content
with him here, and for ever: Whom have I, whom have I, but him? Oh, have you
found, in some good degree, such Workings of heart toward Jesus Christ! And do
you live by your Faith, upon Christ, upon Promises? and do you maintain your
Souls this way: And do you love, and delight in the Fellowship of living Souls,
savoury Souls; or do you, at least, long that you may have some opportunity to
do so? If you cannot, in some measure, experience these things, your Faith is a
dead empty Speculation; such a Faith that is so far from uniting you to Christ,
that indeed it keeps you on this side Jesus Christ: And therefore say of it,
it is a Faith that is in vain, that keeps me dead in my sins: Oh therefore, say
in thy heart, I will now wait on the Word, the Ministration of it, that is
ordained of God to beget Faith; I will go and pray the Father to draw me to
Jesus Christ, and that my Soul may be united to him, that I may have Fellowship
in his Death and Resurrection; that I may be made alive unto God; that I may
feel the pacifying, purging virtue of the blood of the Lord Jesus upon my poor
Soul.

By what has been said, Believers may try their Faith; and if they find their
Souls to have experienced these things, they may take comfort that they are
justified by Faith in the blood of Jesus, and therefore shall be saved by his
Life.

To wind up all in a word of Exhortation.

1. God has set forth Jesus Christ to be a Propitiation, that through Faith in
his blood, a sinner may become justified from his sin, then what encouragement
is there for sinners to come to him, and believe on his Name, to venture the
Issue of Eternal Salvation upon him, since God himself has set him forth for
that end and purpose, that sinners might come unto him, and be washed,
justified, saved from their sins. It Is not then to be doubted but that God as
he has therein taken care for the Salvation of the sinner, so for the glory of
his own righteousness: So that the sinner has no reason to doubt, that comes
to Jesus in the way proposed but that God can take pleasure to accept of him
through the blood of Jesus. 'Twas the most deliberate Act that ever the Wisdom
of God was taken up about the setting forth of Jesus Christ, to be the Savior
of Sinners through his Blood: 'Twas the first Foundation that God laid from all
Eternity; and after he had promised Jesus Christ, it was some thousands of
years before he set him forth to the world: And therefore God cannot repent nor
change his mind and purpose as to accepting, pardoning, justifying, sanctifying
poor sinners, that cast their Souls upon it, by the Blood of his Son Jesus
Christ. Upon which it is, that blessed Souls are brought in, in the Scriptures,
magnifying the grace of God for their cleansing by the blood of Jesus, 1 John
1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin: So are the Saints
brought forth triumphing, Revel. 5.9. Thou wast slain, and has redeemed us to
God by thy blood: And Chap. 7.14. These are they who have washed their Robes,
and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb. Therefore, I say, with what
boldness may poor sinners come unto it? and how certainly are they in God's way
to Salvation? in which way blessed Souls have been ever found, and none did
ever miss of this end, the Salvation of their Souls.

I have now dispatched what I shall speak at this time, as to the Doctrine of
Justification, by the Free Grace of God, through the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, and of saving Faith therein, and shall commit it to the Lord to work it
upon the Conscience; I shall a little insist upon the last verse, in the
removal of that Objection which the heart puts up against this blessed Truth.

ROMANS 3. last. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid; yea, we
establish the Law.


THE former Verses intermitted, might have afforded us much choice matter, in
the opening the Doctrine of Grace, and the Righteousness of Jesus Christ;
Namely, that God is just in the remission of a Believer, upon Faith in the
Blood of Jesus, from verse 26. And that the Doctrine of Grace excludes all
boasting from the Creature, from ver. 27. That Jew and Gentile, all that are
saved, must come to God, and be justified in this way, and no other, from ver.
29, 30. But I must contract my self. I come now to the Objection, that the
Heart, so far as it is carnal, does naturally make against this Doctrine:
Namely, If a Soul be only justified by Grace, through the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ, does not this then make void the Law, and all Obedience to it?
What need then of our Obedience? God forbid, says Paul, we establish it, that
is, the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, does rather establish it. The Law
does stand established in a threefold sense.

First, Jesus Christ has established it by fulfilling it, whereby the
righteousness of the Law is fufilled upon us, Romans 8.4. Jesus Christ perfectly
fulfilled the Law, and kept it, and so makes over the righteousness of it to
Believers, as has been showed; and so the Law stands established.

Secondly, The Law stands established as a means, through the Spirit, to
convince of sin, and of our shortness of the righteousness of it; as ver. 20.
And so Christ often made use of it for such ends.

Thirdly, The Law stands established as an Everlasting Rule of righteousness and
holiness, promised in the New Covenant to be written in the Heart, Heb. 8.

So that, through Jesus Christ, in justifying by his blood, has quit the
sinner from all guilt and condemnation by the Law; yet he has not given the
Believer a discharge from all obedience of it: And therefore to evince this, I
shall lay down this Position, that

Observe. Though all a Believer has done, or can do, cannot justify him before
God; yet there are other blessed ends, why he should obey God, and delight in
his Law.

1. Obedience to God is placed as the great End of our redemption, Luke 1.74,
75. -- That we might serve him without fear, (a sear of bondage) in holiness
and righteousness before him all the days of our life. God has not only in his
purpose the remission and salvation of the Sinner, but that thereby he would
have all that are called into this grace to serve him in Holiness. And this end
is to be upon the heart of the Believer, when justified by Faith: The purpose
of God in this, is, that I should serve him in holiness, 1 Timothy 1.9. That I
should live to God Romans 6.11. as has been showed.

2. From the Sovereign Command of God, who says, Be ye holy, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.
This is enough to a Believer, that God has commanded it, though there should
be no other end in it.

3. Holiness and Righteousness is the Soul's conformity unto God; it is a Beam
of God, an Image of God, which he designs to be renewed upon all that shall be
saved; as shall be further showed.

4. Justified Believers do see an equity, goodness, and blessedness in the Law
of God, in all his holy and righteous Precepts, though they were not commanded.
The Law is holy, just and good, Romans 7. says Paul, speaking after the
regenerate part. So David, Psalm. 119. often, Thy Commandmeats which I have
loved. They give God his due, and the Creature his due; and therefore to be
walked in, though not thereby justified.

5. There is a principle of love to God, shed abroad in the heart of every
justified Believer, from the sense of his rich, pardoning grace, the freeness
of his love which acts and constrains a Soul to take delight so far as it is
regenerated, in every Command of God Romans 5.5. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. For the Love of
Christ constrains us, because we thus judge that if one died for all, then
were all dead; and that he died for all, that they which live should not live
to themselves, but to him that died for them.

6. Called and justified Believers have blessed sights of Jesus Christ, that
wonderfully take their hearts: They have glimpses of the Beauty of his Holiness
and would therefore be made like unto him, 1 John 3.2, 3. They would obey the
Will of the Father, as Jesus Christ did: They would be holy and righteous, and
wise, and patient, and Heavenly, as Jesus Christ was.

7. Believers, in the way of their Duty and Obedience, have blessed Fellowship
and Communion with God: Says God of his Ordinances, Exodus 25.22. There will I
meet thee, and commune with thee: And Exodus 20.24. -- In all places where I
record my Name, there will I come unto thee, and bless thee. They are
everlasting Promises to all the ways of obedience, wherein the people of God do
walk before him in. They pray, they read, hear, they partake of the Supper in
Christ's way, and there they have life and blessing to their Souls, and many a
sweet intimation of love and mercy they have whispered into them; they set
themselves to walk with God in his fear and counsel, and God walks with them;
and their lives, if they keep close to God, are sweet and comfortable to them.
And this is even as much to them, as if they were thereby justified: They would
not miss the sweetness they meet with in such ways of Duty for all the World.

8. By their Sanctification and Obedience, their justification is comfortably
evidenced to them, Romans 6.16. Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves
servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto
Death, or of obedience unto Righteousness: And -- Ye know that every one that
does righteousness is born of him, 1 John 2.29. We know that we have passed
from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren. So that, no doubt, Believers
may come to a sweet and blessed Evidence of their good estate, and of their
justification by the work of Sanctification in them, and their willing
obedience to God, though a Believer does not always, and at all times, fetch in
his evidence of Believing, and of comfort, this way; but sometimes from the
Promise, and from the more immediate Testimony of the Spirit. But though a
Believer does not, and it may be cannot always fetch in his consolation and
peace from Sanctification and Obedience: Yet that soul that wholly neglects it,
and slights Evidences from Humiliation, Sanctification, and Obedience, had best
timely look to it, that the Witness in himself he pretends to, be not from
imagination of his own heart, from the wicked ones delusion, and from some
overly notions of grace that may affect his heart, but leave him on this side
Regeneration.

9. Believers do perform their Duties, as returns to God: Every called Believer
says in his heart, as David, Psalm. 116.12. Oh! What shall I render to thee?
How gracious has God been? and now how holy should I be? Who shall love the
Lord, and fear before him, and praise him, If I shall not? To whom shall his
Name, Laws, Ordinances, be precious, if not unto me? Who is more bound to love
the blessed God than I? and how shall I love him but by obeying him? Thus does
a Believer perform his obedience, as a Testimony of a thankful return to God;
though I do not say, that this is all his motive.

10. By the Obedience and Holiness of Believers, God is much glorified in the
World; it is the greatest glory that God designs to himself in the World, even
by the holiness, and willing, gracious obedience of his people to him. When the
World lies in wickedness, and makes war against the great and Holy God, this is
that which honors God, that he has a people, called by his grace, that set
forth the glory of holiness in the world, that are witnesses to the holiness of
God, the holiness of his Worship, and all his ways, and profess and endeavor
to walk in them! and by this, others are brought on to glorify God on their
behalf, 1 Pet. 2.12.

Use 1. It may serve for instruction and information of your Judgments and
Consciences, that there are other blessed, and necessary, and holy Ends, in the
Sanctification and Obedience of a Believer, though they do not pacify God, nor
justify the Believer, nor procure mercy by way of worthiness, to a poor Soul
called thereunto, which may therefore serve to discover the damnableness of
such kind of Doctrines, that teach and cry in this day, Grace is free, Christ
has done all; what need you pray, and have Ordinances, and be holy? This is of
the wicked one, and comes from his Instruments and Factors, who are sent abroad
to damn Souls: You may see, that not one of those Ends mentioned, but is of
weight enough to convince a Soul of the necessity of Holiness, Duties and
Obedience; and such men's preten^es, are not a Scripture-way of Free grace.

2. If there are blessed and holy Ends of a Believers Duties and Obedience,
though he is not there^y justified, it may serve to take off that prejudice of
heart, through misunderstanding and Ignorance, that is apt to be upon the
hearts of such as are Car^al, when they hear that all their Duties, Sobriety,
and Righteousness, is to be accounted as loss for Christ. You see there are
good and necessary Ends of all Duties of Obedience; only still take this with
you, and to your Consciences, that till you come as poor and naked to Jesus
Christ, for your justifying Righ^^ousness, and so get life in and from him, and
so are ^^rried on in a way of Duty; else your Duties serve ^u for no end and
purpose, unless for a lesser degree of Torment in Hell, only be encouraged to
wait upon the means for the receiving of the Spirit, for the Knowldge of Jesus
Christ: And these things I have spoken may be your Experience.

3. It may further direct Believers, what ends they are to propose to
themselves in the way of their Duties and Obedience, to be carried on in them
through the Grace of GOD, and the daily supply of the Spirit, as one great end
of your Redemption, that you should serve the Lord in Holiness, to eye the
Sovereign and Absolute Command of God over you; that thereby you are made
conformable to God, and show forth his Image, and to the Death and Resurrection
of Jesus Christ, that there is an equity and goodness in all the Holy and
Righteous Ways of God.

And see that the Love of God be shed abroad in your hearts, to draw out your
love to him, and so be acted in your Obedience. Get your hearts taken with the
beauty and glory of the Lord Jesus, and so long after likeness to him: See that
you look after Communion with God in your Duties, and that you do not neglect
your Evidence for the Pardon of your sins, by the sight of your sanctification,
and your Universal Obedience: And perform them not as to procure mercy, by any
proportion thereunto is your Duties, but as Returns to God, and consider how
much God is glorified in the World by the Obedience of his people.

And thus may you carry on your progress in Holiness, and a sweet and
coscientious performance of Duties, and walking with God; and yet live by your
Faith for your justification, by the rich and Free grace of God, through the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, as if you had never obeyed at all.

In a word, If thou have felt the power and virtue of the blood of Jesus Christ
upon thy soul, coming as a poor, naked, polluted, guilty Soul unto it (as thou
have been showed) and have received life from Jesus Christ, by a believing
closing with him; and art waiting for a sight and sense of thy justification,
but do yet want it; remember still, that in the performance of thy Duties,
thy Heart (which it is very apt to do) lays no stress upon them, as in them to
appear before God, and to procure the favor of God, but still go forth to the
grace, blood, righteousness, promises of Christ, and there fix for thy
acceptance with God, and be much in renewing of Acts of Faith; that is, casting
thy Soul upon them, and Evidence will come in; yet go on in humbling, praying,
waiting, reforming, sanctifying, obeying, as to the ends mentioned; and the
peace of God fill thy heart.

2. Believers, that have some sense of your justification, do you remember that
you obey God, not that thereby you were, are, or ever may be justified; but
because you are justified: Therefore you obey the Lord, and delight in his
ways; keep this in your eye, and 'twill keep the heart from going to bottom
upon your selves, as gracious, and partly righteous, which mixtures render
Duties uncomfortable, and keep souls from Assurance: No Believer performs his
Duties so spiritually, sweetly and comtably, as that soul that labors to keep
the sight of his Justification, still upon the Account of Free Grace, and out
of himself, that soul enjoys sweetest Communion with God in the way of his
Duties, and gets to Heaven with most comfort and assurance, AMEN.

The Third Treatise. Showing the Gospel-Evidences of a True Christian, as they
are experienced by these who are truly Believers, and the false Appearances
thereof plainly refuted.
2 COR. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a New Creature.


I Have been opening the difference between the Righteousness of the Law and
the Gospel, showing the Necessity, Nature, and Way of obtaining
Gospel-justification by the Blood of Jesus Christ, and have discovered a Soul
estated therein; I shall now endeavor to open the Gospel New Creature,
peculiarly, as distinguished from that which is called (in appearance) a
Legal-New-Creature, etc.

Now let a soul fail in either of these, and lost for ever, fail of a saving
close with Jesus Christ for righteousness, or being a New Creature in Christ,
and you perish in your sins, and the wrath of God will overtake you.

I shall not now take up time in opening the coherence of the words, nor will
it much be desired, as to our design: I shall therefore draw this plain
conclusion from them. Namely,

Observe. There Is an absolute necessity, in order to the Salvation of every
soul, to become a New Creature in Christ.

Having proved it, we shall open the way of being a New Creature, and how in
Christ: Then how distinguished from an appearing New Creature, (but not so
indeed) and so give forth the Evidences of it. Those Scriptures that speak of
the necessity of being born again of the Spirit, John 3.3, 5. And of being
converted, Mat. 8.3. do evince the same truth, Gal. 6.15. Neither Circumcision,
nor Uncircumcision, avail any thing, but a New Creature. For we are his
Workmanship created unto Christ Jesus, etc. Ephesians. 2.10. He that has wrought
us for the self same thing is God, and has given us the earnest of his Spirit,
2 Cor. 5.5.

The necessity of this New Creature does arise,

1. From the tenor of the New Covenant, in which way God has obliged himself
to give out mercy; and in no other. Now thus runs the New Covenant, this is the
great Article of it; Make you a new heart, and a new Spirit, Ezekiel. 11.31. Which
God promises to give to all he takes into a Covenant of mercy and peace with
himself; I will put a new Spirit within you, and a new heart will I give unto
you, Ezekiel. 11.19. And to the same purpose, Ezekiel. 36.26. Wherein, as we shall
show, lies the special part of the New Creature.

2. Because the Old man, all that is of the First Adam, the whole frame thereof
is corrupted and polluted; therefore it must be repaired, renewed, be made new,
if ever it enter into glory, Ephesians. 4.22. That ye put off concerning the Former
Conversation, the Old man, which is corrupt, according to the deceitful Lusts,
and be renewed in the spirit of your mind; and that ye put on the New man, that
after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness.

3. Whosoever shall be saved, shall be a New Creature, from the great design of
God in giving out his Son Jesus Christ, which was, that all the Elect should be
made conformable to the Image of his Son, Romans 8.29. For whom he did foreknow,
he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son that he might
be the first born among many Brethren. Jesus Christ is called the express Image
of the Father, Heb. 1. And to that Image all Believers shall be conformed:
Jesus Christ, the firstborn, and all his Brethren, to be made conformable unto
him. God was infinitely pleased with such a Pattern, and resolved all that he
gave to him, and designed for glory, should be conformed to his likeness.

4. All the services that a sinner offers to God, are not accepted, till a New
Creature; till a Soul shall act from a new, living, holy principle, toward
God, Pray, and hear, and give Alms, God regards it not, till a New Creature: So
the Word of the Lord often casts back the services of unregenerate men upon
their faces, as loathsome to the Lord, because they proceed from the old corrupt
Adam, from unchanged Natures, Isa. 1.15. When you cry, I will not hear you;
Why? You are in your uncleanness, therefore Wash you, make you clean.

Use. Oh let this make for your Instruction and Conviction, that if ever you
come to God in glory, you must first be New-Creatures: If you will have mercy,
you must have it in the way of the New Covenant, and if so, you must be made
new: While you have nothing but the Old Adam, you are corrupt, and polluted,
and abominable. If you shall become the Brethren of the firstborn, Jesus
Christ, you must bear his Image, and have it renewed upon you. Oh, you that are
yet in your old sins, and walk after your Old Lusts, you are not New Creatures:
You will not think so, thefore sit down with this conviction, That as yet you
have no part in this blessedness. Oh! All of you who are the same that ever you
were, whether living in gross sins, or sober and civil from your youth up, you
are yet of the Old Adam, nothing but corrupt nature upon you: Your hope is
vain, and you are blinded in your sins, and the Grace of God is not in you.

2. Oh! Let me before I go further, put this to trial, and suffer the word of
the Lord which shall one day judge you; can you say in good earnest, Old things
are past away, and all things are become new in me? Now I am a Vessel in the
hand of God, wrought by his Spirit, and there is through infinite grace a new
workmanship upon my Soul? I shall lay down rules for the particular discovery
of this, only at present yield up your conscience to the power of the Word, do
not slink from under it; if it find you out in your sin, in nature, the same
that ever you were, give glory to God, and say, the word of the Lord is quick
and powerful, and go off with this conviction in power upon thy soul, I never
expect to go to Heaven and glory, if I become not (through Grace) a New
Creature.

But before I go further, I would open, that every soul that is a New Creature,
must be in Christ; and why.

So says the Apostle to these Corinths, in this Epistle, 13. Chap. 5. Examine
your selves, prove your own selves, know you not that Jesus Christ is in you,
except ye be reprobates? ye are created into Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.10.

If a man abide not in me, he is cast out as a Branch, and is withered, John
15.6.

Now herein lies the great Mystery of Godliness, unto which all our Evidences
for Heaven are resolved, and therefore this is a weighty enquiry. I am to speak
of it, especially as it relates to the making and forming the New Creature.

This being in Christ is expressed by being rooted into Christ, Col. 2.7.
Planted into him, Romans 6. Built up in him. Col. 2. All which bespeaks a real
union with him; that this is not a mere imaginary thing, but as true and real
as the union between the root and the branches, John 15. and the foundation,
and the building, Ephesians. 2. which is wrought by the Spirit of the Lord Jesus,
drawing and uniting true believers unto him; the same Spirit dwelling in them;
Romans 8.9, 10, 11. -- By his Spirit that dwells in you.

Now to consider, Why all that are New Creatures, according to the Gospel, must
be so in Christ.

1. Such as are Gospel New Creatures must be in Christ, because if they be New
Creatures, they must be Living Creatures. Now God has laid up all life, that
shall be dispensed forth, in his Son Jesus Christ, John 5.21, 26. -- The Son
quickneth whom he will; for as the Father has life in himself, So he has
given to the Son to have Life in himself; Because I live, ye shall live also,
John 14.19. Now naturally all sinners are dead in the old Adam, and utterly
unable to beget life in themselves: Who can make alive his own soul? but when
they were Newborn, as new Creatures, they are said to be quickened in Christ,
Ephesians. 2.5. As God breathed life into man at first, and so he became a living
soul; so in the new Creation, the soul is said to be created into Christ,
Ephesians. 2.10. and to be made Alive in him, Romans 6.11.

2. If there were not a real union of the soul with Christ, life (if it should
be given without it) would not be preserved in the soul, Thou hold our Soul
in life, Psalm. 66.9. As the branch, though it was once quickened, cannot
preserve its life, if cut off from the root; and therefore a continued supply
of life from Jesus Christ, to the soul, is necessary, as to all its spiritual
actings as a new Creature.

3. By being in Christ, the Soul is made partaker of the divine nature, 2 Pet.
1.4. by which the regenerate part, all gracious habits are infused in the soul,
whereby the New Creature is formed up in believers. Hence it is, that all grace
and holiness is infused into the Soul, as distinguished from Common grace, that
at last withers, John 15.6. If a man abide not in me, he he is cast forth as
a branch, and is withered, etc. therefore a necessity of being in Christ.

4. Without being in Christ, the power and reign of sin, the body of sin, will
not be destroyed; no destroying the body of sin, by any possible endeavors,
but by the influence of the death of Jesus Christ, and a real fellowship
therewith, which cannot be attained but by being planted into Christ, Romans 6.5,
6. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall
be also in the likeness of his resurrection: Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
might not serve sin: All the proper mortifying power that Believers have of the
body of sin, is drawn from fellowship with the death of Jesus Christ, which
fellowship arises only from being one with him.

5. The Image of God cannot be renewed upon us, but in Christ: As we have born
the images of the Earthly, we shall also bear the Image of the heavenly; 1 Cor.
15.19. So Romans 8.29. -- we are made conformable to the Image of his Son; by
union a Soul is made partaker of the fullness of Jesus Christ, as all grace is
laid up in him, and of that fullness partakes by measure of every grace from
him, John 1.16. And of his fullness have all we recieved, and grace for grace;
that is, Grace according to the pattern of Jesus Christ, partaking of every
grace in him according to the measure allowed to every Member and Branch in him.

6. Without being in Christ, no duty is accepted with God; by being in Christ,
we are accepted in the Righteousness of Christ, whereby all the duties of a
child of God are accepted with the Father, 1 Pet. 2.5. as performed by a
Principle of life from Jesus Christ, and offered up to God in the name and
Righteousness of Christ; otherwise let praying and all other duties be never so
strictly, frequently, devoutly performed, they find no accptance with God, and
the Soul is not bettered by them: Without me ye can do nothing, John 15. says
Jesus Christ.

7. Without being in Jesus Christ there can be no holy fruit in conversation
brought forth to God, John 15.5. He that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth much fruit: All the fruit that is of our own stock, comes to
naught; but the fruit that is brought forth in Christ, from implantation into
him, is precious fruit unto Repentance. Reformation, Holiness and
Righteousness, and doing of any good, unless it proceed from the life we have
in Christ, is Pharisaical, and comes to nothing, and will be burnt up in the
day of the Lord; wherefore sanctified believers are called the trees of
Righteousness, Isa. 61. as planted, engrafted into Jesus Christ, whereby they
bring forth all their savoury fruit unto God.

Use. See now the great, and weighty, and indispensable necessity of getting
into Christ, of having union with him, the main pillar, upon which hangs all
your comfort; do what ye will, and be out of Jesus Christ, and it is an
accursed, loathed sacrifice; do what thou will from thy own stock, and it is
bitter fruit: A dram of what is performed in Christ, is of more worth than a
mighty, daily bulk of duties without it; not hereby to lessen a believer, as to
muchness of duty, but to show the unacceptableness of all duties, though never
so many, long, devout, till a poor soul performs all from a new principle, and
power of life in the soul from Jesus Christ, and so a New Creature.

Oh! that poor souls were thoroughly convinced of this, who, so they perform
duties, never consider this. Oh! lay to heart thy dead condition, and the
infinite necessity of getting into Christ: No life in thy soul, no preserving
of life, till in Jesus Christ; nothing of the divine nature upon thee, no
destroying of sin, nothing of the Image of God upon thee that is saving, no
duty accepted, no fruit unto God in thy conversation, till thou have the real
experience of this blessed Mystery in thy soul, of being one in Christ, through
the spirit, till thy soul knows what union and fellowship with the Son of God
means: Therefore souls that fall short here, their knowledge, profession,
conversation, is lost labor, as to the great matter of eternal life and
salvation.

2. If all that are truly and savingly New-Creatures are in Christ, then a New
Creature any other way, is but a semblance and appearance of it, and not so
indeed and reallity; if from our selves, from the power of the Law upon the
Conscience, or upon any other account whatsoever.

And therefore, I still say, the more we consider of this matter, of the more
narrow enquiry do we find it to be.

There is a semblance and likeness of being New-Creatures, which is not really
so, a semblance of Holiness, a holy fruit, which is not truly so, but will at
last wither; and hence, all the withered Professors in this day, as we shall
presently show.

I shall not here speak of such, as pretend to no manner of change inward or
outward, such as are in all things, the same they ever were, as such as live in
known gross sins, they have no appearance or pretense of claim to the Title and
Character of the New Creature; by their own concession and acknowledgment they
are still the same as ever they were, therefore, not so much as pretend to be
made new; to such I shall, if God will, apply a further word before we have
done.

Only now of the Semblance of the New Creature (falsely so called) but not
really so.

1. A soul being convinced of the damnableness of such and such a sin, from the
Law, and the power of the Word upon the Conscience, that a soul living,
continuing in it, shall never enter into the Kingdom of God: As from such a
place, as 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not enter into
the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, Adulterers,
Idolaters, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves,
nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. And such were some of you, etc. I say, from this or the like
Scripture, a soul may be convinced, that if he continued in any of these gross
wickednesses, he shall never see the face of God, and so may take up from the
gross outward Acts of them, or at least, from a frequent commiting them; now
this person may go no further, and because he has left some special gross sin,
he thinks himself a true Convert, and a New-man, and may flatter himself with
the conceit of being the New Creature we are to set forth; but no New inward
man, no coming to Christ, not being in Christ; and it may be feared, many Souls
are under this dreadful snare.

2. Such a kind of outward Reformation may arise from special Judgment and
Affliction upon a sinner, trembling that God bath smitten him for such a sin,
and so may take up from it; and this also often passes for conversion; not but
that sometimes God begins the first stroke by laying his hand upon a sinner,
but I speak of a mere taking up from a profane course, and never getting into
Jesus Christ, which many rest themselves in.

3. A sinner may leave some sins of youth, as inconsistent with riper years;
and upon that may take himself to be a Convert, or a kind of New Creature, to
be changed and turned from what he was; but no forsaking this sin with loathing
of it, as against God, no brokenness of heart for it, and the root of it still
unsubdued in his heart.

4. A sinner may take up from some gross sins, as inconsistent with reputation,
credit in the World, or his profit and wordly advantage; so many debaucht
persons turn to be great worldlings, and yet take themselves to be good
Converts, when they have turned from a sin that would waste their Estates, to
be wretched worldlings; yet these go away with a good opinion of themselves.

5. Sinners may take up and reform, to get the favor of some Religious Friend
or great Person that does countenance Religion, in hope of some special
preferment or honor by them; and so get a form of Profession, an Ability to
speak of good things, own the best people, hear good men, and yet all this
proceed from a rotten heart, as it was with Simon Magus, Acts 1. Hoping after
great gain by the gift of the Holy Ghost, the gift of Miracles, and yet was in
the Gall of Bitterness and bond of Iniquity.

6. Souls may have a kind of Conviction, and taking up to some new duties, in
the sinful neglect of which they have long lived; as to a kind of secret
Prayer, in observing the Sabbath more strictly, read more, hear more, (things
good in themselves, when used as means to find Jesus Christ in) and yet may
continue long in these, and not a Gospel New Creature in Christ; never humbled
so as to be emptied of themselves, and come to Jesus Christ, as for
Righteousness, so for life and strength for the performance of all duties, and
subduing of all Sin, and therein chiefly the Legal New Creature (so called)
does consist, in taking up to most known outward duties, something strictly,
and make Conscience of them, as of gross outward sins, and yet no Gospel
New Creature. I wish there are not too many such.

7. A Soul may take himself to be a New Creature, from some good liking that he
has of such as are better than himself, and some purposes and resolutions to
be better, which purposes for a time carry a man forth, till new Temptations,
and then they will not bear a man forth: Thus you shall find many sinners
purposing and strongly resolving to take up, to avoid such courses they have
found to end in trouble, and yet fall back again, because purposing in
themselves, and not getting into Christ for strength, and these think
themselves to be a kind of New-Creatures.

8, Yea further, a Soul may be under some terrors of Conscience for a time, and
yet heal and relieve himself by leaving the sin outwardly that occasioned such
terror, and taking up to a greater bulk and formal course and round of set
duties, under which such Souls ensafe themselves and settle in a kind of peace,
and take themselves to be New-Creatures, because they were under terrors, and
forsake some sins, and perform more duties, and yet never healed by the Blood
of Jesus Christ, nor have taken root in him.

Before I go any further, let me bring home, if the Lord will, these things to
your Consciences, and let it be a word to find out such whose conditions have
been opened.

Such then of you, who happily have left some gross sins, some open profane
courses, because the Word of God has glared upon your Consciences, and you
could not commit such sins in Peace, that upon some special affliction have
taken up to a little stricter course, that have left the sins of your youth,
only because they were youthful sins, not suitable to riper age, or have ceased
from Lewd Courses, because of your credit among men, or your worldly profits,
sins in which you could not thrive in your Estates: If this be all, know it,
that you are not the New-Creatures we are speaking of, you are far from the
Kingdom of God; and if you come no farther, even to see your selves wholly at a
loss, and so get to Jesus Christ, you are damned for ever.

Yea, if any for the Favor of Men, or some outward advantage, have taken up a
seeming profession of Religion above the ordinary rate, and this be your main
principle; know, thou art seven times the Child of the Devil more than thou
wast, to deal thus Atheistically and Hypocritically with the great God, who
will one day lay thee open to all the world, and thou shall be confounded in
thy self, because of this thy abominable iniquity.

And such as have come a little further, that from some conviction of your
shortness of what you should be, have betaken your selves to a greater bulk of
duties, make Conscience of many sins and many duties, and so you have settled
your selves in your course; know you also, this you may do, and be far from
Gospel-New-Creatures.

Such also as rest in purposes and resolutions, wishings and some wouldings to
be better, this will not do, if it be no more; or such as have healed your
selves, and have not been healed by coming to the Lord Jesus Christ, by a more
exact way of some outward duties; know it, and be convinced, that the core will
break out again, and you are yet to seek for a well grounded peace, and are
none of the Gospel-New-Creatures.

Now another degree of Mistakes of the New Creature, does arise from the taking
of Common Grace, (which a Hypocrite may reach to) for truth of renewing,
sanctifying Grace; and know, that every Hypocrite does not know himself to be
such, but a Hypocrite is one that appears to himself and others, to be what he
is not; he takes himself to be a good Christian, a Believer, a New Creature,
and is not so. The ground of some of these great Mistakes I shall mention.

As first, A poor Creature thinks himself safe, because what he does, he thinks
he does it all with a good heart. No one so confident of the goodness of his
heart as a Hypocrite, because he knows not his own heart; in that great
Reformation in Josiahs time Jeremiah speaks of, Chap. 3.10. that Judah turned
to the Lord but feignedly, not with the whole Heart: Yet the people thought
otherwise with themselves, as it is likely, when they entered into a Covenant
with God, with good Josiah.

This is that most poor sinful Creatures do bolster up themselves with, in
their Ignorance and Security, that they do all to God and Men with good hearts;
whereas a renewed Soul doubts of the goodness of his heart, and has matter of
humbling for it in every duty.

2. Another mistake of poor souls is, (as to the Gospel-New-Creature) from a
misprision of sins of infirmities, for such as are indeed reigning, damning
sins; As to instance, to lie for advantage, to swear petty Oaths sometimes, by
Faith and Troth, by the Mass, to mention God's Name frequently, as a byword,
crying, Oh Lord, Oh God, slightly, vainly, or sometimes to drink to excess, or
the like evils: It Is common to hear wretched Souls, when convinced of them, to
excuse the matter: Why, it is their infirmity, whereas it proceeds from a heart
wholly unregenerate, and under the power and reign of sin.

Infirmities of the Children of God are not allowed by them, but humbled,
mourned for, every day watched against, the root of them they endeavor to
mortify through the Spirit; which the common professor that calls all his sins
his infirmities, does not; Oh! Souls, there is a vast difference between the
infirmities of such as are indeed New-Creatures, and between the reigning sins
of natural men; sin reigns in its peace, power, habit, in the heart, no
subduing, crucifying, purging, which a New Creature does and has.

3. This mistake of the New Creature does arise from a misconcieving of the
reluctance of a natural conscience, before or in the committing of sin; taking
it for the Conflict that is in a truly regenerate Soul, between the Regenerate
and Carnal part; which mistake usually is bottomed upon a misunderstanding of
that place of Paul, Romans 7.15. For that which I do, I allow not, etc. Hence,
say many unregenerate, graceless persons, Why though they do break out into
such and such things, and omit such and such duties, yet they do not allow
themselves in it; that is, their Conscience is not wholly seared, and so make
some resistance, and this they take to be saving grace; a gross and most
dangerous mistake; now take such a person, and he has not a delight in the Law
of God in the inward man, as Paul had, verse 22. does not cry out as inwardly
burdened, wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? No such daily complaints and groanings under the weight of it, No eying
God through Jesus Christ for deliverance from it, No serving the Law of God
with a Renewed inward Man, No walking after the Spirit; so that unless it be so
with you, that no allowance in the conscience, and yet do it, it comes to
nothing; and an Hypocrite may and does as much, till given up to a seared
conscience, past feeling.

4. From a mistake of Faith, taking that for sound and saving which is common
to a Reprobate; such as James describes in his Epistle; speaking of Men who say
they have faith, and have not really; a Faith that believes God is; the
Scriptures; the dying and rising of Jesus Christ, and all other Gospel truths,
as it pretends; yea, that he believes on Jesus Christ, and hopes to be saved by
him, as well as the holiest; and upon this they have a kind of peace. I have
spoken before of justifying Faith, only a word as to the New Creature, know
therefore, that Faith that does not teach a soul to deny it self, that does not
purify the heart, that does not live upon Jesus Christ, and so created into
him, is not the faith of the New Creature, but a common, dead, putrefying
faith, that suffers the soul to putrify in sin, and works not to the cleansing
of it.

5. To instance in some other graces; as namely, Repentance, which souls do
take to be only a wishing the sin had not been committed with a little fear and
sorrow after it, and this they think to be true repentance; which when true, is
accompanied with loathing of the sin, and our selves, and our corrupt natures,
brokenness of heart for it, and from it, and turning to God by Jesus Christ,
and eyes the honor, patience, holiness, love of God, in its sorrowing, more
than his wrath; and has for its effects, carefulness, indignation against it
self, vehement desire after more holiness by Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 7.11.

6. A false and carnal hope of Heaven, mistaken for a gracious saving hope,
deceives the soul in this matter: Many poor souls, yea, it may be feared, the
most, think they shall go to Heaven, because they hope so, and think they ought
to hope: Now a saving hope of pardon and Heaven is rightly bottomed, namely
upon the riches of Gods Grace, Titus 3.7. Upon the righteousness of Jesus
Christ, Gal. 5.5. Upon some special promise of God; Upon experience of God,
Romans 5. And purifying the soul, 1 John 3.3. as I may have occasion more at
large to speak.

Oh! this false and carnal, cursed hope, that is not thus bottomed, serves only
to shut up the heart against the power of the Word, and a saving closing with
Jesus Christ; till a Soul is dashed in this hope, it will never get a better.

7. A form of knowledge, especially if increased under the Ministry of the
Word, may much deceive a soul in this great and weighty concernment; so Paul
speaks of the Jews, Romans 2.20. having a form of knowledge, and of the truth of
the law: Many have a Catechistical form of Knowledge, they can describe what
Faith, and Repentance, and Regeneration is, and then think they have it
themselves, because they can tell what it is, and do believe it to be such:
There may be much knowledge in the head, and yet no renewing grace in the
heart: That knowledge that is saving, brings with it a power upon the Soul, to
love, delight in, to experience the goodness, virtue, sweetness of what it
knows: It transforms the soul into the image of what is known, 2 Cor. 3. last.
It is spiritual, and it makes the heart, the affections spiritual.

8. A Misconceit of the grace of love, is also a false ground in this matter:
As that a poor soul will think that he loves God, when he has no knowledge of
him, nor delight in him, nor communion with him; nor does love his Image, which
is holiness; and that he loves all, every one, whereas much envy and malice
reigns in the heart, if but a little provoked; and for the people of God truly
so called, they hate them for Hypocrites, Schismatics, and what not; or if a
little better thoughts of them, it is not love to Christ, and his Image in them,
that acts them, which is the nature of the grace of love. But yet are justified
in their conscience to be the people of God.

9. So is patience, humility, meekness, mistaken; some natural dispositions are
most patient and meek, and these poor Creatures are apt to mistake for grace,
when it is nothing but mere nature, and more candid disposition; and such Souls,
from natural temper can bear much, and it has an appearance of of grace; but
yet here may be no work of the Spirit all this while, humbling, meekning the
soul in its own vileness, no mortification of contrary lusts, no humbling for
pride of heart, without which no true gracious humility; no meekning by the
Gospel, and the power of Christ's love upon their Spirits; and yet upon this
account, you shall have poor carnal souls pretend much (as I have often heard
it urged by them) to the fruits of the Spirit, mentioned Gal. 5.22. of love,
joy, peace, goodness, patience, temperance, when it is nothing but disposition,
ingenuity, or from civil education.

10. As great a deceit there is about the fear of God; many poor souls do fear
the punishment and wrath of God, which is all they do, and then they think this
is the fear of his Servant; the fear of the Lord, which God promises to put
into the hearts of his own people, Jer. 32.40. is a fear of God, because he is
holy, because he is gracious, because he has pardoned iniquity; They shall
fear the Lord and his goodness, Hos. 3. last. which fear is mixed with a sweet
and blessed love to God, and consolation of the Spirit, at least a waiting for
it.

11. A misapprehension of good works, causes a mistake of the New Creature;
many are convinced that works of Mercy, and Charity, and Justice, are to be
done, and so from a pitiful nature, or from vainglory, or from a secret
thought to appe^se God, or from Legal conviction at least, they will be ready
to do Charitable works, (things good in themselves) and this they think
discovers their Faith: And herein lies a common deceit in the vulgar professors
of the people of England: Now all the good works (falsely so called) done out of
Christ, are fleshly, and not accepted with God: A Papist, and many a carnal
Protestant, (even also for the sin of his soul) does much this way; but good
works, properly so called, do flow from a living Faith, from love to Jesus
Christ, and design not a self-justification, but the glory of God: And gracious
Souls do find it very hard to perform them, with holy ends.

12. Mistake of a good conversation; which may only be a moral conversation,
civil, sober, righteous as to Men, but minds not Holiness to God, which is the
special part of a Gospel-Conversation: And yet the most of people go away with
this, that they are believers, and in a good state for Heaven, because they
have a good conversation, which they greatly mistake. That which the word of
God calls a good conversation, as an evidence of Faith, is not only a mere
outward blamelesness, (which the Pharisees had), but to walk with God from a
Gospel-principle, from Gospel Grace, and the love of God in the heart, chiefly
respecting holiness to the Lord, and the fear of the Lord upon the heart; now a
soul that has nothing of this may be outwardly blameless, a Jew and Heathen
may be so, and nothing of the grace of God upon them.

Use. Now the Lord make this to be a convincing searching Word to you; you that
have left some gross sins, from the word upon your consciences, from
afflictions, from worldly advantages, from age; be it known unto you, this you
may do, and more, and be still the Children of Wrath, in an unpardoned
condition, and not the New-Creatures we are speaking of; yea, though thou have
taken up to New-duties, and make conscience of many sins and many duties,
thou may still be out of Jesus Christ.

And you that call your daily sins (which have dominion over you, your
infirmities, when not humbled, nor mourn for them, nor cry for strength against
them, this your way is your folly, and the Devil and your own hearts greatly
deceive you, yea, you call such sins your infirmites, (meaning, as if they were
the infirmities of the children of God) that cannot consist with truth of
grace, such as common lying, and common profaning the Lords Name in your
mouths, and neglecting to sanctify his Sabbaths, and living in the neglect of
secret spiritual Prayer.

And such of you that have some striving in you consciences, before and after
the sin, know it, i^ may be so, and yet not a drop of saving grace in you, no
regenerate part wrought forth in you; and yet how many bear up themselves upon
this score, and think thence they allow not themselves in the sins they commit,
in Paul's sense, look to this, or you may for ever perish in this snare; I have
given some marks how you may know it.

Take you heed also, that you take not that which is called Common-Grace, which
is common to Reprobates, for true grace. There Is a false Faith, a false
Repentance, a false Hope, and so of the rest, in which you may assuredly go to
Hell, you may have a harmless conversation, and do some good works of Charity,
and yet perish for ever, you may have nothing of the New Creature in you; and
yet give all your goods to the poor.

In a word, you may leave outward gross sins, have convictions of wrath to
come, have purposes (such as they are) to be better, take up to New Duties,
have common grace, think you have Faith, Repentance, hope that you are humble,
patient, have a good conversation, and do good works, and yet not be
New-creatures in Jesus Christ, as we shall further evince.

I have yet one more deceit to discover, and that is the Mistake of a Scripture
good conscience: It is true, that the Apostle in 1 Timothy 1.5, 19. puts Faith and
a good conscience as the great comprehensive Duties, but there is not any one
thing more mistaken, than what this good conscience is; too many Preachers
press this carnally, and carnal people go away with it, that they have Faith,
yea, they never doubt it, and for a good conscience they discharge it; I have
spoken of Faith already, but now that which such poor seduced souls take to be
a good Conscience, is only to wrong no body, to be just to all, not to purloin
others goods, to take and keep nothing but their own; they take it to be
chiefly conversant about the duties of the second Table, concerning their
Neighbor; a little to rectify this soul-damning mistake.

1. A Scripture Conscience is an Enlightened Conscience, which before was shut
up in darkness, Ephesians. 1.18. The light of the Word of God is set up in the
conscience, whereby it discovers those truths in their power and worth which
before it was dark unto.

2. A good Conscience is a Conscience searched by the power of the Word,
convinced to be under sin, and guilt, and pollution, whereby trouble does arise
in it; God laying in the weight of guilt, the damnableness of sin, the
pollution of it, upon the Conscience, so that the soul cries out, what shall I
do? How shall God be pacified, and the soul saved?

3. And hence it is an awakened Conscience, which before was asleep; Awake thou
that sleep, Ephesians. 5. The voice of the Spirit does awake that Conscience
that before was asleep in sinful security.

4. A good Conscience is convinced that all the keepings of the Law, and
keeping a Conscience to men, cannot justify the soul before God, cannot
commend it to God, which a Second Table-Conscience imagines it will, and so in
peace: Paul kept a Conscience as to many things, Acts 23.1. I have lived in all
good Conscience before God unto this day; meaning, I conceive, from his youth
up, when he was a Pharisee; but when his Conscience was convinced and awakened,
and came to see Jesus Christ, he saw that all his keeping a Conscience, as to
many sins and Duties, could not in the least commend him to God.

A good Conscience is sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ, Heb. 10.22. Let
us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the Eternal Spirit offered himself to God, purge your conscience from
dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. So that this is the efficacy of
the blood of Jesus Christ upon the Conscience of a Believer, it pacifies it in
the sense of the forgiveness of sins toward God, so as it can draw near to
God; and it purges it from dead works, sin, and pollution, to serve God
acceptably. This is a good Conscience indeed.

6. A good Conscience respects all the Precepts of God, as well of Holiness to
God as Goodness to Men; which the Conscience we have been speaking of, does
not. Such a one makes not conscience of this great and absolute Precept, Be ye
holy, 1 Pet. 1. It makes not conscience of purging the heart of secret mourning
to God, of the purity of God's Worship: It makes no Conscience of lesser sins,
as we have showed, not of all sin, as Herod heard the Word gladly, but made no
conscience of persecuting John to death, when he stood in the way of his Lusts:
Now, I say, a good Conscience respects Precepts of Holiness, secret as well as
public Duties, inward as well as outward Sins, lesser sins as well as greater.

7. A Scripture good Conscience is much taken up about godly sincerity. So
Paul, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our Conscience,
that with simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but with the
grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the world, etc.

Thus a soul that walks with a good Conscience toward God, labors to approve
it self in all things, with a godly sincerity, to do all as unto God.

Lastly, a good Conscience labors to keep it self pure and undefiled, it is
accompanied with a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1.5. Now the end of the Commandment is
love, out of a pure heart, and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. A
Soul that would keep the Conscience good, would keep it pure, and the whole
inward man pure, as a Temple unto God.

Use. Now see how many ingredients go to make up a good Conscience in a
Scripttre-sense, and what a great mistake is in this weighty matter, and how
far abundance of people that make conscience of their dealings with men,
conclude thence they have a Scripture-good-Conscience to God, when they are not
savingly enlightened, their Conscience never searched by the power of the Word,
and thoroughly awakened out of a natural condition, never humbled for resting in
themselves and their Duties, not having their Conscience sprinkled with the
blood of Jesus Christ, and purged thereby, not having a tender respect to all
the Precepts of God, not to walk before him in godly sincerity, nor with a pure
heart: You then that are short of these things, you are wholly to seek in that
which you so much pretend to, and speak peace to your selves in, the having or
keeping a good Conscience; you have as yet no part in this matter.

2. What has been spoken of a good Cnnscience, may be for instruction and
direction to the Called Ones of Christ; how to preserve the Conscience good and
peaceable, and so to live and dye in the peace and comfort of it, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Get it sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus Christ every day, and
under the searching of the Word, and awake unto God, and pure and undefiled,
respecting all the Holy Precepts of God, as binding to your conscience, so will
the conscience be tender, and peaceable, and God will witness in your conences
your acceptance with him in his Son Jesus Christ.

I would give out further some Notes of Trial, Whether you rest in false common
grace or not, as to what we have already spoken in so weighty a matter.

1. By your never suspecting the truth of your grace, but taking all upon
trust, never doubting but you have Faith, and do repent, and so of all the
rest; that soul that never suspected his grace, may well fear that his
pretended grace, is no more than what a Hypocrite may reach unto: The poor
called children of God, are exceedingly jealous their Faith is not sound; that
they are short in every grace, because of the woeful mixtures that they find;
more Unbelief than Faith, more hardness of heart than softness, more Pride than
Humiliation; and so of all. Now that soul that goes away with an unsuspected
confidence of every Grace, sure flatters himself, and his way will be found to
be deceitful.

2. That Soul that draws back his conscience from the searching power of the
Word, when it gives out ways of trial of Sincerity and truth of grace, and puts
it off, as if not concerned in it; this may well be speak a false heart. A
gracious heart would bring the Work over and over to the Touchstone of the
Word, delivers up it self unto it; yea, is much with God to search him, in
point of a firm Work upon his Spirit, as to any prevailing Iniquity in his
heart; as David, Psalm. 139. When he was before the Lord, appealing to him, and
opening his heart to him, speaks thus, ver. 1. Oh Lord thou have searched me,
etc. thou have: And yet, ver. 23.24. begs of God yet further to search him:
Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts; and see if
there be any wicked way in me, and lead me into the way everlasting.

3. False Grace is discovered by its easy acting, When you can easily believe,
easily repent, easily be humble, and so of all others. Certainly, it is all
naught. There is great contradiction within, and from the Tempter, as to act
Grace begun in a soul; yea, a daily supply from Jesus Christ must be, to act
any Grace livelily; which the common, pretending, easy Believers are not
sensible of. It cannot be but every act of Grace must find more or less
resistance from flesh and blood, which is so vigorously opposite to the nature
and acting of real grace in the Soul.

4. Such as are never humbled for the spiritual wickednesses of their hearts;
(I call them so in opposition to the more gross and fleshly wickednesses) now
these are Hypocrisy, selfishness, spiritual pride, vainglory, unbelief; many
that have had trouble for some gross sins, and will withstand some gross
corrupttions, through common grace, never come to be abased for these depths of
the heart, which are more hardly discerned; I may well enough call that soul as
yet a Hypocrite, that is never humbled for the Hypocrisy of his heart, for
selfishness, and the rest.

5. Common-grace measures the soul chiefly by Negatives, what it is not, rather
than what really it is, as the Pharisee, Luke 18. -- I am not as other men are;
pleases himself rather in what he is not than what he is: I am not thus and
thus, as abundance of debaucht persons are; but whether he be called of God,
emptied of his own righteousness, sanctified in Christ Jesus, a New Creature in
him, he puts off the Examination.

6. Common grace does at best respect a man's self in all it does, and not the
glory of God, which it sees not; let others be as wicked as they will, it is
not much to such a soul, let every one look to himself, such a soul does not
avoid sin as sin, but only for fear it should damn him; whereas the proper
nature of Grace is to respect God, his Holiness, Name, and Glory.

Thus have I laid down some plain Discoveries of the pretended New Creature,
that which I have styled a Legal New Creature. I shall now proceed a little
further to make discovery of a more seeming Gospel New Creature, yet but
seeming.

That which has the nearest resemblance of the New Creature, is, when from
some common enlightnings of the Gospel of Grace, and some overly tastings of
the good Word, the affections being something stirred therewith, there is some
affection expressed to the Gospel, and some outward Reformation upon it, and a
Profession above the common formal rate taken up, joined also with common gifts
of Praying, or Prophesying, knowledge, etc. Now all this may make so great a
blaze and flourish, that it shall be hardly discerned by such a Professor
himself, or others that are spiritual; that all this may be, it is clear from
several Scriptures, Heb. 6.4, 5. where mention is made of enlightening, tasting,
gifts of the Holy Ghost, and yet such to fall away, and never to renew
themselves again; and to be nigh unto cursing, verse 8. and verse 9. Beloved we
are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation, etc.
Implying, that these things may be, but do not always accompany Salvation: So
the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 2.20. speaks of such who had escaped the pollutions
of the world, through the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and yet again entangled
therein, and overcome, and their latter end worse than the beginning.

They shall escape many gross pollutions, and that through a kind of knowledge
of Jesus Christ, and yet be again overcome, and return wholly to them. So
Matthew. 12.45. Our Lord Jesus speaks of the house swept, and garnished, the
unclean spirit cast out for a time; some outward reformation, a damp upon the
lusts of the heart, and knowledge, and common gifts, and yet the unclean spirit
returning again.

Examples might be produced of such Professors in the Gospel, as that of Judas,
an eminent Professor, a forward follower of Christ, suffered some persecution,
and gifted, and yet proves a Reprobate. Simon Magus, baptized by Philip,
renounced his Sorceries, took upon him a forward Profession of Christ,
accompanied Philip, and yet his heart not right in the sight of God, Acts 8.13,
21.

It may be more than feared, this age (to the high scandal of Sinners and
Saints) has produced many such, that have been much taken with the glorious
grace of the Gospel, their Consciences something awakened for Heaven, the
affections stirred, have attained to flourishing gifts, and yet returned to
their first nothing, turned blasphemers, and professed Atheists.

And no doubt there is such a Majesty, Excellency, Sweetness in the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, that may for a time much affect a carnal heart, and may be
recieved with joy, Matthew. 13.20. The very History of Jesus Christ dying for
sinners may much affect; that he will freely save Sinners, the glory he has
provided for his own, these and the like things may much take the affections
for a time, make a soul ashamed of gross pollutions, and yet no New Creature
all this while: And of such as these it is that Christ does prophecy of, Mat.
25. who shall have Lamps, Light and Profession, go along with the wise Virgins,
wise and truly gracious Professors, not be discovered (many of them) till the
Lords appearing, and yet kept out of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Now of all others, these have the most resemblance of a real New Creature, and
yet fall short, and perish for ever.

I should prevent my self, should I at large discover wherein such Professors
are short, only a word or two.

1. Such Souls are never emptied of themselves, and humbled, and so come poor
and nothing to Jesus Christ, though happily they may be able to speak of it, as
many Souls have a form of Gospel-Knowledge, and can say, We are nothing, and
yet never had the saving experience of it upon their own hearts.

2. Such Souls have no true brokenness of heart for sin, they much slight it;
yea, say many, it is Legal; brokenness for sin is a low dispensation, as they
will style it; without which (in some measure) no saving repentance, which is
as necessary to Salvation, as believing on Jesus Christ, and Free Grace.

3. Though such souls may reform many things, yet there is some unsubdued lust
in the heart, that at last breaks out, and carries an end the heart, as with
Simon Magus and Demas.

4. Under all such enlightnings and tastings which may for a time affect the
heart, the heart still remains unchanged, and so no New Creature.

5. They are not rooted into Jesus Christ, which we have showed is the root of
the New Creature; not rooted and built up in him, Col. 2.7. Therefore it is said
of the Hearers with joy for a time, that they had no root, Mat. 13.

What has been spoken as to this, may put the more forward Professors upon a
close and diligent search, and to see if their Seize in enlightening,
tasting, knowledge, gifts, reformation, be no more than what a Reprobate may
attain to, and to lay their hearts under the searching Power of the Word, and
to open their hearts to God, and cry unto him, and keep a godly jealousy over
their spirits: And rest not till you get poor and emptied, and humble your
selves, your hearts broken for sin, every lust subdued and crucified, the heart
changed, and your Souls rooted into Jesus Christ, by a saving union with him;
yea, to give up your hearts to what we shall further say, through grace, as to
the plain opening the real Gospel-New-Creature.

The Gospel New Creature positively opened.
I Might here show you how every faculty of the Soul is renewed, as the
understanding, by the infusion of new and divine light into it, which is styled
the Enlightening the eyes of the understanding, Ephesians. 1.18. and to be renewed
in the Spirit of the Mind, Ephesians. 4.23. How the will is altered and changed, the
affections made new, the conscience purged and sanctified, with all the powers
of the Soul, but I shall not take this Method, but rather pursue a more
familiar way, more particularly showing the make of the New Creature, in
reference still to its being so in Christ, which is our principal scope. First,
then:

1. To the making and framing the New Creature there must be a New-Nature; if
there be a New Creature formed, there must be a New-Nature to make it so; hence
believers that are in Christ, are said to be partakers of the divine nature, 2
Pet. 1.4. Which is wrought by the incorruptible seed of the word, 1 Pet. 1.22.
Whereby we are said to be born again: And Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he
us with the word of truth, etc. Which seed is the seed of God in believers, the
seed of every grace in the soul, which is something of the likeness of God
wrought in the soul, and so acts the soul toward God, which is styled the
infused habits of every grace in the soul; this New-Nature works contrary to
the old corrupt nature, and it is styled the regenerate part, the new inward
man, Ephesians. 4.24. and as soon as it is wrought and formed in the soul, it works
against the sinful dispositions of the old Adam in us, and there is a new war
or conflict begun within us, (which is something more than the resistance of a
natural conscience, as we have showed) I see another Law in my members, warring
against the Law of my mind, Romans 7.23. etc. The flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these two are contrary to each
other, Gal. 5.17. And under this daily conflict and war within is every
New Creature, while we abide in the fleshly Tabernacle. This is the first
peculiar distinguishing Workmanship of the New-Creatures, there is a new seed, a
new divine nature infused into the soul.

2. As there is a New-Nature, so it follows that this New Creature has a new
life, it is a Living New Creature; so regenerate persons are said to be
quickened in Christ, who were before dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1, 5.
And The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and live, John 5. And they
are said to be alive unto God, Romans 6.11. Christ lives in me, Gal. 20. Which
new life must necessarily be, because,

1. Every natural man, (as has been already hinted) is dead in sin, and is
said to be without this life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. The life of God departed from
the soul, whereby it had Communion with God, upon our fall in the first Adam;
therefore, if we are recovered, we must have a new Life from God infused into
us.

2. If there be not a new life breathed in us, we can put forth no spiritual
vigor in any duty toward God, and so all our duties, services, worship would
he dead fleshly duties; this I have also hinted in showing the necessity of
being in Christ, if a New Creature.

3. As there is a new nature, and a new life, to begin the New Creature; so,
thence there is a new breathing: The Soul falls a breathing after God, and after
Jesus Christ: As the Life which God breathed into Man at his first Creation, is
called the breath of life, Genesis 2.7. And as soon as ever there is life, this
new life breathed by the Holy Ghost in the New Creature, there is presently a
breathing of this life, as indeed one of the first discoveries of it, (as
breath is the most immediate acting of Life) the Soul breaths, and pants, and
cries after God himself, Psalm. 42.1. As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks,
so pants my soul after thee, Oh God: I opened my mouth and panted, Psalm.
119.131. So that Prayer that is spiritual, it is the breath of a living soul;
Paul that breathed out cruelties against the Saints, when converted, and made
alive, he falls a breathing after God; Acts 9. -- Behold he prays. And this
does indeed arise from the very nature of saving grace, which is to carry a
soul to God through Jesus Christ, to set it a longing not only after mercy, and
pardon, and peace, but after God himself, Psalm. 63.1. My soul is athirst for
God, the living God, etc. As also from the dissatisfaction and emptiness the
soul begins to find in all Creature-enjoyments, which now it cannot (having had
a view of Christ) be satisfied and contented with, but the soul must have God,
must have Jesus Christ, must have the likeness of Jesus Christ, and so it
breaths, cries, pants after God, and the possession of him, and communion with
him, as the Souls highest perfection.

1. Now, therefore, before I go any further, let this be well weighed: Have you
this breathing in you, which when you were dead in sin you had not? This is the
least degree of Grace, if the Soul be not thus breathing, panting, thirsting,
longing after Jesus Christ, so that you cannot, must not be satisfied, but in
the enjoyment of him; verily you are dead, and the grace of God is not in you;
so that it may be for a true discovery of your states, Consider what your
hearts do most breath after, what they most earnestly Pant for: Oh! Is it for
Jesus Christ himself? The hearts of Carnal Worldlings are said to pant after
the dust of the Earth, Amos 2.7. That is it the carnal man's heart thirsts
after, but a soul in Christ breaths upward, the Treasures of Heaven it pants
after, and will never be at rest, till satisfied with them.

2. This may serve to distinguish formal praying from that which is of the
Spirit, in the Children of God. There Is no such thing as the breathing,
panting, crying, longing of the Soul after God, and Holiness, and Communion
with him, in formal saying of prayers, the thing done quiets the Conscience;
but for God himself the Soul thirsts not for. Therefore you that pray in forms
in secret, and content your selves in saying and repeating such a form of
words, sure you have little or no breathing for Jesus Christ in such Duties,
the Heart is not exercised in longings and pantings for God; ye Souls that pray
out of forms, upon terrors, and no more upon the Conscience, but you thirst
not, breath not after God himself, you may be short of the life of God in you.

3. This may also encourage weak Souls, that have but broken words to express
themselves to God, yet your very Souls do breath and pant after the Lord,
verily the life of Christ is in you, if it be indeed so with you, and God will
hear those breathings in you, Lam. 3.56. Hide not thine ear at my breathings.
The blessed God will not hide his Ear from the breathings of his poor Children.

Only let crying, panting Souls, take heed, that this breath be not stopped nor
intermitted; it is a most dangerous thing to intermit the breath of Prayer, that
it grows weaker and fainter; it will be a sign unto you, and a sad one too,
that the New Creature is rather decaying, than increasing in you.

Be not contented with no more praying than will just, as we say, hold Life and
Soul togerher; that is to live at a very low rate, but just to live, if that.
As breathing takes in the Air, revives, enlarges the Natural Spirits, renders
the whole man lively and lightsom, and vigorous, so does this constant
Spiritual breathing with God, and after God; it enlarges the Heart, revives
the Soul, keeps freshness and vigor of Spirit in the way of God; when God
comes in with a full gale upon the soul, how sweetly is it refreshed, how does
faintness, weariness, indisposition, go off, and the Spirit of a poor Creature
is cheerful with God, and blessedly delights it self in him. Oh, delight to be
every where, in every way, where God breaths upon the hearts of his people, and
where they breath after him.

And let new living Souls take heed by the way, how their hearts do pant after
the Earth and World, and the contentments of it: This will as much damp
Spiritual Life, and breath in the Soul, as any evil whatsoever: Lay your hearts
to the fullness and sweetness of the Lord Jesus Christ, and breath strongly for
them, and those things will be but wind and vanity.

1. But I must proceed: I come now to speak of the next discovery of the
New Creature, and that is, it has new senses; That you may see how fully it
answers the frame of man, as a Living Creature, and what a New Creation this
is: As the New Creature has a New-Nature, a new inward life, and has a new
breathing, so it has new Spiritual Senses: So the Apostle, Heb. 5.14. speaks
of the Exercise of Spiritual Senses. And as the Natural Life is exercised and
preserved by Senses, so is also this new Spiritual Life of the New Creature,
which I shall mention particularly.

First, There is a New Ear given to this New Creature: This Jesus Christ has
frequently promised, that he would open the deaf Ear: So Job 36.10. He opens
also their Ear to Discipline, and commands that they return from iniquity.
The hearing Ear, and the seeing Eye, the Lord has made even both of them,
Prove. 20.12. By this opening the Ear, is meant the opening of the Heart; as
it is said of Lydia, Act. 16. Whose heart the Lord opened: The heart is shut up
naturally, and naturally cannot hear the voice of the Spirit, till the Lord
himself open it. A natural man hears no more than the voice of a man, and the
Letter of the Word, but when this New Creature is formed, he is ennabled to
hear the voice of Jesus Christ himself, the voice of the Spirit, Joh. 10.27. My
sheep hear my voiee. A Soul can then say, This the Lord speaks to me in
special; This is the voice of Christ that calls me, to come to him, and that
Soul comes; Jesus Christ speaks with a convincing, particular, powerful Word,
and the Heart being opened to receive it, obeys it as his voice: And so in
every Ordinance, it is the voice of the Spirit of Christ the New Creature waits
for; He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches, Rev. 3. last.

Secondly, The New Creature has a new seeing eye: The eyes of the
Understanding opened, to see into the blessed and hidden mysteries of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ; says the Apostle of the Natural man, Eye has not
seen, 1 Cor. 2.9. And, seeing, they see not, Matthew. 13. But Christ speaking of
called Disciples, says, Blessed are your eyes, for they see, etc. They have a
new sight of God in Jesus Christ, which sight does abase them, and also draw
them to Jesus Christ. The Vail being in part taken away, they can look into the
things of God which they saw not before, the Scriptures begin to be unveiled,
and they see beyond the Letter of them, into the Life and Spirituality of them.
And thus the Lord Jesus promised of old, especially as to New-Testament-days, I
will bring the blind by a way that they knew not, I will lead them in paths
that they have not known: I will make darkness light before them, and crooked
things straight, etc. Isa. 42.16.

Thirdly, There is a new power of tasting given to the Soul, as another
Spiritual Sense, which before the Soul had to no purpose. A new and blessed
tasting of the good Word of Life, Thy word is sweeter than the Honeycomb,
Psalm. 19. How sweet are thy words unto my mouth, Psalm. 119.103. If so be ye
have tasted that the Lord is gracious, 1 Pet. 2.2. there is a new taste of the
bitterness of sin: The heart knows its own bitterness, says the Wiseman: A
Tasting of the special, free, and precious love of Christ: A tasting of the
goodness of God in mercies. And thus there is a savoury spirit given to the
New Creature, whereby he does delightfully savor the things of Jesus Christ,
and can speak savourly of them to others.

Fourthly, Add to this a new smelling, to which the Spouse of Christ often
alludes in Solomon's Songs, Because of the savor of thy good Ointments, Chap.
1.3. speaking of Jesus Christ, who is a new and precious Perfume to the Soul:
Who is this that comes out of the Wilderness, perfumed with Myrrh and
Frankincense? Chap. 3.6. so says the word of the promise, Chap. 4.6. -- His
smell shall be as Lebanon: And when Jesus Christ breaths in his Ordinances upon
blessed Souls, it is as sweet and delightsom Perfume to them.

Fifthly, There is a new feeling wrought as an effect of this new life, which
the Soul has in Christ, when a new Creature is in him. The natural man is
without feeling, as a dead man is; let never so great a weight lie on a dead
man, and he feels not, but now take a Soul created into Christ, and he feels a
new weight within him, Heb. 12.1. Sin is not only a burden, as to the weight of
Guilt, but every corruption (even when the sense of guilt is removed by Jesus
Christ) is a Weight to the Soul, under which the Soul cries out, mourns, groans
to be delivered, Romans 7.24. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? Sin hangs like a dead body about him.

Use. If the Gospel-New-Creature is a living New Creature, and does exercise
Spiritual Life, and has new spiritual senses, Let this then be a word of
Trial, to discover the state of your Souls. Can you say, I that was dead, am
alive? I was once spiritually dead, without feeling, did neither see nor hear
nor taste in a spiritual way; but now the Lord, in rich grace, has opened my
deaf ear, and my blind eyes, now I have heard the Lord himself speak to my
soul; now I have seen the Lord, and my heart is taken with him: Now I savor*
the Word of Grace, and the Ministration of the Gospel is a sweet savor in
Christ to me, the Name of Jesus Christ is as good Ointment to me: Now I feel a
body of sin, and groan under it, and press after the destroying and crucifying
of it. Souls, If this be not your Experience, you are dead; your are without
the Life of God, and Christ in you.

Oh! Go to God, Sinner, as you have been exhorted, and cry to him to open your
ear to hear, and your eye to see: Be convinced, that as yet your Ear has been
stopped, as to hearing the Lord himself speak to you. Oh say, Woe is me, that I am
where the Lord uses to speak, under the Ministration of his Gospel, and yet he
never spoke to my Soul. Does the Lord love me, and never speak to me?

Pity, Lord, Pity a poor, deaf, blind, stupid, unsavory Wretch, and breath
life into me; and then wait for the Lords Voice in his Word. Now let the Spirit
himself speak unto me, and unveil my heart, that I may see into the Mysteries
of Jesus Christ, and may savor them upon my poor Soul.

2. Let living Souls in Christ exercise their Spiritual Senses, keep the Ear
open to, and waiting for the Spirits Voice, be prying into the Mystery of God
in Christ, and all Gospel Truth, get a clearer sight of Jesus Christ, till you
shall be infinitely taken with him, and love him for himself: And keep the
heart savoury, and the precious scent of Gospel Grace upon your Spirits, and
labor so to feel the weight of the body of sin, how it poiseth, polluteth,
cloudeth the Soul, that you may come to that frame, to cry out to be delivered
from it. And let it be abundant matter of Praise to the Riches of Grace, that
God has given life and senses to your Souls, which he might have left under
the death of sin, to all Eternity.

5. The next Discovery of our Gospel-New-Creature is this, namely, He has a
new heart. So Ezekiel. Chap. 18.31. -- Make you a new heart, and a new spirit,
which the Lord has in Free Grace promised in the New Covenant, Chap. 36.26. A
new heart will I give you: Which I shall precisely consider, and show
particularly wherein the heart is made new.

1. The heart naturally in its old, corrupt frame, is a Rebellious heart; Jer.
5.23. This people have a rebellious heart: The usual complaint of the Prophets.
Now when the Lord makes the heart new, he begins to take away the Rebellion of
heart, as it naturally opposes the Word, Power, and Spirit of God, and the
heart is made obedient and pliable to the Power of the Word, the Spirit's
Teachings, Isa. 1.19. If ye be willing and obedient, you shall eat the good of
the Land; but if you refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured, etc. My people
shall be willing in the day of my power, Psalm. 110. The heart of it self is
stubborn, obstinate, unwilling to stoop to the power of Truth, to yield to
Jesus Christ, but when it is made new, it becomes of a yieldable frame, to the
practical Obedience of Gospel Truths.

2. The heart, as an effect of the former, is naturally hard and impenitent,
Romans 2.5. cannot mourn for sin: But when it is made new, God makes it soft,
Ezekiel. 36.27. I will take away the stoney heart out of your flesh, and I will
give you a heart of flesh; which is a soft and tender heart, whereby a Soul can
pour out its complaints to God: Yea, the heart will pour out it self like water
to the Lord, Lam. 2.19. The heart receives impressions of truth, as by its
softness it is more and more wrought to a new frame, as in the hand of the Lord.

3. The Heart is naturally proud, and makes the sinner self-conceited, and well
opinioned of his own condition, and will not suffer the sinner to abase himself
to God, and to take shame to himself: But, when a new work of God is upon it,
the sinner humbles himself under the mighty hand of God, bears his reproach
before him, and cries out, Oh! What shall I do for an humble heart? Lord, take
away, subdue pride in a wretched Creature, James 4.10. Now he becomes a poor
self-emptied Creature, undone, helpless, and to a full Christ he at last goes.

4. The Heart is naturally Hypocritical: The Hypocrite in heart heaps up wrath,
Job 36.13. Now when God makes the Heart new, then it begins to be sincere, in
some good measure, for God; before the poor deceived sinner thought he did all
with a good heart, that he did bear much upon, that he did all with a good
heart; but when God shows him his heart by the Candle of his Word and Spirit,
then the poor Creature sees what a Hell of Hypocrisy was, and is within him;
that he acted in all his Duties, as from himself, so to himself, and not
uprightly unto God: But when the Lord new frames the heart, then the Soul is
after new, sincere, holy aims for God in all it does, is most abased for
selfish and hypocritical mixtures, and would account nothing well done, but as
God is designed in it, and labors to walk in simplicity of heart, and godly
sincerity, as of God, and in the sight of God, etc. 2 Cor. 1.12.

5. The old heart is full of all uncleanness and impurity, and cares not to be
cleansed: So says Christ to the Jews, Matthew. 23.27. Within you are full of
dead men's bones, (rottenness) and of all uncleanness. But now when the
New Creature is forming up, then the heart is after purifying; Purify your
hearts, ye double minded, James 4.8. Then what a blessedness would a pure heart
be, says a poor creature? Oh! that my heart were cleansed! Wash thine heart,
says God, Jer. 4.14. Oh! that it were washed, says the New Creature! And this
is one of the most special works a New Creature will be after, as he is more
formed up in Holiness, to keep the heart pure, as a Temple for God.

6. The Heart naturally is dead, as already hinted, and feels not its own
deadness; but when renewed, then the heart does live that seeks God, Psalm
22.26. It feels, and mourns over its own deadness, and cries out, Quicken, Oh
quicken me, Oh God! No Duty is well performed then, but as the Heart lives, in
some measure in that Duty. Now it feels its own burdens, pollutions, lusts,
corruptions, carnality, earthiness, and bewails it before the Lord.

7. The Heart is naturally divided between Christ and the World, Christ and
Lusts, Hosea 10.2. Their heart is divided: But under its renewings, the heart,
as to the main bent of it, makes a whole close with Christ; the great business
of a Soul then is, to give the whole heart up to Christ, and fears he can never
do it fully and singly enough; and when the heart lusts after other things,
so far as it is renewed, it is fetched in again to Jesus Christ.

8. The heart of it self is unbelieving: Take heed lest there be in you an
heart of unbelief, Hebr. 3. Now when the heart is made New, there is a Work of
Faith with power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. And then the soul is made sensible of that
bitter root of Unbelief, that is naturally in their hearts, and they find it
the hardest work in the world, to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins, to fix on Promises, and that a believing heart is a special
gift of God, and a work of the Spirit; which while a poor sinner was shut up
under Unbelief, he felt not.

Use 1. To unchanged persons, who are the same in heart as ever they were; Oh,
learn by what has been opened, what is the natural make and frame of them:
There is in you a Rebellious heart against the Lord, and wilful obstidacy
against his Word and Spirit, and therefore it is that you cast the Word of the
Lord from you, and in your hearts despise it, and say, This is not the Word of
the Lord, and we will not obey it: You have hard and impenitent hearts, and
therefore you do not mourn for sin; you have proud hearts, and are
well-conceited of your condition, though damnable, and therefore you do not
humble your selves to God; you have Hypocritical Hearts, and see it not full of
Hell, of Uncleanness, dead in sin, and without feeling, a heart divided between
Christ and the World, unbelieving, and yet say, you have Faith: If thou can
not make out a Newness upon thy heart, as we have showed, thou have still thine
old heart, with its lusts, and thy estate is as yet damnable, let thy
Knowledge, Profession, Outward-blamelessness, be what it will.

2. Oh, therefore, let this Word be yet for further Trial of your Estate. Can
you say to the praise of free and rich Grace, that God has in some measure
taken away your Rebellious Heart from you, and you can stoop and yield to the
power of Truth, and rejoice in it, that God has made your heart soft in some
measure, and the Pride of your hearts, in the false conceit you had of your
selves, has a stroke from God upon it, that God has showed you your deep and
cursed Hypocrisy, and how your heart was divided, and was wholly unbelieving;
and that the Remnants of these wickednesses in you, of heart rebellion,
hardness, pride, hypocrisy, pollution, unbelief, are your greatest burden, and
you mourn over them daily.

If this be not your Experience, let that man or woman know, he or she is a
Hypocrite and Unbeliever, and sees it not, etc.

3. Therefore, let it convince you, and exhort you to go and fall down before
the Lord, and beg him to open your hearts (which naturally are shut up in
Darkness) and to abase you in the sense of your Rebellion, and that he would
even do this for you in much Mercy, to take away a rebellious, hard, proud
heart from you, and would make your hearts pliable to the Word, and make them
soft and humble before him, and to close with the whole heart with Jesus
Christ, through a work of Faith upon you. Do this in the fear of the Lord, and
through his Grace coming upon you, and see what God will do for you; and you
will be your own wonders, that ever such abominations should lie hid in your
hearts, and yet you not be confounded in your selves in the sense of them.

4. Let Souls that are through infinite grace, under some heart-renewings, know
that they have never done with this Work, till they come to Glory: Yea, Soul,
thou have depths of rebellion, pride, hypocrisy, pollution, unbelief, which
yet thou have not reached to; and therefore as thou must ascribe all to Grace,
for what the Lord has done upon thee, and remember, to thy greater humbling,
how much ado the Lord had with thee, to bring thy heart under so much as it
is; so to consider, that the Candle of the Lord must more and more search thy
dark and deep heart, and it is to be thy daily work, or else all these evils
will again much prevail upon thee.

Love therefore a searching Word from the Servants of Christ that are over you.

6. The next Discovery of the Gospel New Creature is this; namely, The Gospel
New Creature has New Affections.

Briefly to instance in some of the chief.

1. The New Creature has new fear: The fear of an eternal Condition, that
first usually seizes upon a convinced sinner; the fear of a just and angry God
against sin; and, at last, upon its renewing, a holy, awful fear of God, as
great, and holy, and good; a fear of sinning against him, and that because he
is gracious. Naturally this affection of fear in a carnal heart is conversant
about the loss of outward things, about shame in the World, and the like; and
so far as it respects God, his Soul, it is a slavish fear of breaking out of
some grosser sins only, lest God should damn him; but not fearing the Lord with
a gracious Son-like fear, a fear that purifies the Heart, a fear that is mixed
with a blessed love of God, and delight in his ways.

2. The Heart is exercised with new Sorrow: A godly sorrowing for sin, such
sins which were once the delight of the Heart; such a sorrowing that works an
Indignation against the Darling sins, a taking of a kind of Revenge of our
selves for it, a vehement desire after pleasing of God and Holiness, 2 Cor.
7.11. There is a sorrowing over a crucified Christ, and a sorrowing after him;
and well is a poor soul, when it can go in secret, and have this affection most
exercised with sighs, and groans, and tears, and sad complaints against it self.

3. There is a new joy by degrees instilled in the Soul, of which though there
are various measures; to the Children of God, yet every New Creature can go
thus far, though not in that vigor of Spirit he would do, that (when the
Spirit is free from great distempers) it can say, he has some joy that he is
delivered from the dominion and thraldom of lusts, that it is its joy to go
before God; I will go unto God my exceeding joy, Psalm. 43.4. Even when under
some disquietness of Spirit; as verse 2. Why do thou cast me off?

Yea, will a poor soul say, God and Communion with him, (could I see his face)
would be my greatest joy. And the carnal joy of the heart, when it breaks
forth, leaves the soul but more in heaviness, and the New Creature would have
his joy run spiritual.

4. Upon this the New Creature has New delights: The Word of God becomes his
delight, seeking the face of God and the People of God; Delight thy self in
God, Psalm. 37. And his chief delight is in the Saints, Psalm. 16.3. The heart
cannot, as it could formerly, delight it self in folly, and in vanity, and in
vain carnal ways and people, but is rather burdened with them.

5. The Soul is raised and engaged in a new Love: The Heart is taken with Jesus
Christ above all things, and loves him most; and loves God because he is Holy,
loves his Word, and loves those that love him most: Every New Creature can say,
as David, I love the Lord, Psalm 18.1. and 116.1. Yea, the soul is brought to
love Jesus Christ for himself; He is the beloved of the Soul, and not only the
grace, and peace, and blessing, and Heaven that he gives. And to Love Jesus
Christ, and to express it to the utmost, is the frame of soul that a Convert
presses most after, and he would get the heart more purged, mortified,
spirituallized, that it might go forth in Love to Christ more strongly and
sweetly, and enjoy the precious perfumes of his Love more constantly.

6. The Soul is raised to a New hope; a new hope of Heaven and Glory, which
before was feigned and deceitful: Now the Soul is after a well-bottom'd, real,
lively hope of Heaven: Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again to a lively hope,
etc. Oh! the new and blessed hopes that a soul does more and more reach to
(when distempers and darkness is not upon it) of seeing Jesus Christ as he is,
living with him for ever, of being perfectly sinless and holy, of Joys that
shall be endless, of being swallowed up with divine Glory, when the Spirit of
the Father does breath most sweetly, and mostly raises the heart to glimpses of
Heaven.

Use. As we go along, we would put things to trial; therefore say in good
earnest, Soul, Have thou had new fears upon thy Soul, as to an eternal
condition? and is the fear of sin, and of the living God, upon thy heart? and
does this fear keep thy Heart awful and watchful? say, have thou had new
sorrows for sin, and it is thy Trouble they are no more abundant? Can thou
joy in going to God, and in the Word of his grace, and are spiritual things thy
delight? Do thou find a heart-closing Love to Jesus Christ above all, and
can thou love God, because he is Holy, and thou would be like unto him; and
have thou new experienced hopes of Heaven?

Say, soul, Do all thy affections run in a new Channel, and the stream of them,
in the main, turned from world and vanity, to the Ocean of God in Christ, his
fullness, goodness, love, grace and glory? and that when thy affections, or any
one of them are diverted and turned aside, thou can and do go to God to
have them fetched in again, and thou would have all the affections of thy Soul
run freely, clearly, spiritually, fully, strongly upon Jesus Christ? and thou
art humbled, that they are carnal and worldly in any measure?

If this be not thy case, but the affections of thy heart are wholly fleshly
and worldly; thy fears, thy sorrows are about worldly things, thy joys, thy
delights about carnal pleasures, and worldly increase, thy love goes after the
world in an uninterrupted, unmortified course, thy hopes going forth about
great things for thy self, and thy hopes for Heaven lie at all uncertainty, and
thou do suffer it to be so; verily thou art unchanged, and have no part as
yet in New-Creature-blessedness.

Only let me add this Caution, that in this matter of the New creature, you
take the whole frame together; and therefore do not rest only in this, that you
have had your affections something stirred in hearing the Gospel, some fears,
and sometimes the heart a little melted, and some joy for a time in the Word;
which affections may sometime stir in a soul, whose heart is not subdued and
changed, and so it wears off again, but carry your selves back to what I have
said, that you mainly look to the Rebellion, Pollution, Hypocrisy, Unbelief of
the heart; that these be in good earnest, still a subduing you.

3. And so also for real Converts, though you should labor to preserve your
affections, lively, savoury, yet look mostly to the sincerity and spirituality
of them, or else when they wax faint again (as that may be) you be at a great
loss of your Consolation; neither do you always measure your selves by the
stirring and overflowing of affections, but rather by the abasement of your
spirits, hearts, purity, and sincerity, and the holiness of your affections,
and your acting faith in all your duties, which will procure a more lasting way
of peace and comfort; though when thus rectified, the going out of strong and
tender affections is exceeding sweet and precious, and most desirable by all
Saints.

(7.) The next discovery of the New Creature is this, (which I may consider
with some distinction from the former) The Gospel New Creature has new
thoughts.

By the Thoughts I understand the pondering, musing part of the Mind, (that I
may speak plainly to all) the imaginations, fancies, purposes, meditatings,
musings of the Mind of man, which are very much altered, where there is a new
and divine work and power in the Soul.

To this the Prophet speaks, as to saving conversion, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked
man forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return
to the Lord, etc. So that a Soul returning to the Lord, forsakes his vile
thoughts, and does not give way to them, and feed them as before. So Jer. 4.14.
How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? And Psalm 119.113. I hate
vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love.

To show a little, why the thoughts of the heart shall be changed, and then
more particularly, how.

In a natural heart, All the imaginations of it are evil continually, Genesis 5.6.
They became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened,
Romans 1.21. Where the thoughts, as issues of the lusts, do rove to and fro at
full liberty, without any effectual control.

1. As first, Atheistical thoughts; secretly denying God, his Justice,
Holiness, Word, or that God will not judge sinners according to the rigor of
his Word; Thou thoughtest (says God) I was altogether such a one as thy self;
and Psalm 50.21. The Fool has said in his heart there is no God, Psalm 14.1.
For when he sins against him presumptuously, he does strike at his very Being,
Justice, and Holiness, and either says in his heart, There is no God to judge
him, or secretly wishes there were none.

2. Profane thoughts, according to the most predominant lustings of the heart,
do act a natural heart; as vain, unclean, proud, worldly thoughts, which are in
contrivance to make provision for the lusts of it, the heart even continually
exercised with unclean, proud, wrathful, revengful, or covetous practices;
therefore says the Wisdom of God, Prove. 15.26. The thoughts of the wicked are
an abomination to the Lord: Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, Adulteries,
Murders, Thefts, etc. Matthew. 15.19. The evil thoughts get up and act over
wickedness, and then they purpose and contrive for the acting of it, and set
the whole man on work to make provision, and to effect it; which though s being
drawn forth by sinful objects, or the working of the fancy, and the Devil
working by both, do break forth into abominable practices, unless restrained by
the Lord; for indeed the Fancy, the imaginative Faculty is the very Forge of
the Devil, where he frames all the wickedness that is brought forth.

Now these being the natural actings of the thoughts of the heart as unchanged,
there must necessarily ensue a new working of thoughts upon the change (...)

O^^y observe by the way, by this any sinner may know how it stands with his
Soul: If Atheistical, profane, unclean, worldly thoughts, carry the heart an
end, and rove up and down at liberty, and the heart even delightfully feeds on
them, without going to God, and mourning over them, for their purging and
mortifying, or no; or but an unwilling resistance of them, how dwells then
the grace of God in thee? verily not at all, and therefore reflect upon thy
self, for by this thou may know the state of thy heart, and thy lusts are yet
in their strength, and rule in thee, and will post thee to Hell, if the Lord
meet not with thee.

A gracious heart has bubling up of such thoughts, and the Devil casts in
suggestions to set them a work, but they lodge not there long, but they are
resisted and purged.

Take therefore these Notes of a carnal unchanged heart.

(1.) Such a soul makes little or no conscience of thoughts: Thoughts are free,
say wretched souls, but that is a Proverb suggested by the Devil. (2.) Such a
soul is not humbled, does not mourn for wicked thoughts, but only looks to the
outward man a little. (3.) Such a soul does not bring them to the blood of
Jesus Christ to be purged. (4.) He does not conflict with them, resist, check,
hate them. (5.) He does not watch the thoughts of the heart, nor labor to set
them upon holy Objects: If it be thus with thee sinner, thy heart works
wickedness, and thou art loathsome in the sight of the holy God, who knows and
observes all thy thoughts afar off, Psalm. 139. and will one day reckon with
thee for them: What do thou but even deny God to be the great searcher of
hearts, the All-seeing God, who carest not how vain, vile, wicked, unclean,
profane, loathsome, devilish, the thoughts of thy heart are?

But wherein does this newness of thoughts show it self.

1. The New-Creatures Thoughts are changed, as to himself; who thought well of
himself, as to Heaven and Happiness before, but now sees himself vile, and
has worse thoughts of himself than any one in the world can have of him.

2. He has new thoughts of God: New thoughts of his Holiness, and Justice, and
Greatness, and Glory; Oh! how great is God, how holy, how just; and so is
greatly abased before him. He has new thoughts of his goodness, grace, and
love to poor sinners, upon which the thoughts do much work, thoughts of
admiration and praise, and the soul delights in holy and gracious musings of it.

He has New Thoughts of Jesus Christ, of his Person, Grace, Blood,
Righteousness, Spirit, Word, People. Before he had poor, low, empty, carnal,
unsavory thoughts of Christ, but the heart being changed, and the Mind
enlightened by the Holy Ghost, the Thoughts work toward Jesus Christ, the Soul
has deep and serious thoughts of his grace and love, precious thoughts of him.

4. He has new thoughts of Eternity, of an Eternal condition, which much
possess the Heart what may become of his Soul: What will it profit to gain the
World, and lose his soul? How he may treasure up for Heaven, make sure work for
Heaven, whatever be his condition in this world; and the serious and frequent
thoughts of this, do much poize the Spirit of a Believer.

5. He has new thoughts of the ways of God, and Holiness; before he thought
basely, or notionally of them, now he has real thoughts of Holiness, and of
the ways of Jesus Christ, he does believe, and finds a reallity in them, and
has good thoughts of them, as to engage his soul to them.

6. He has New Thoughts of Holy People, whom before he esteemed Hypocrites,
and Pharisees, Factious, and the like; that their strictness was their Pride
and Hypocrisy; but now he honors them most, is humbled greatly for such
thoughts of them, and prizeth them as the Excellent of the Earth, and their
company will be most desirable, and most delightful to him, Psalm. 16.

Use 1. To sinners, that you do go to God, and get your hearts possessed with
such thoughts of God as these are, how great, how just, how holy he is; and
this will make you tremble at going on in your pollutions any more. Bethink
your selves of the state of your souls, and of an eternal condition: Says
David, I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies, Psalm.
119.59. Bethink your selves how short a time it is e're an eternal condition
shall pass upon you, and how long the blessed God has waited to be gracious to
you; and get new thoughts of Jesus Christ, and get to his feet, and make a
resignment of your selves to him; and then your thoughts will go after more
excellent, and soul-quieting, and soul-delighting Objects, than hitherto you
have been exercised with.

2. To such as are New-Creatures in Christ, and have New Thoughts of
themselves, of God, his Justice, Holiness, Greatness, Graciousness of Christ,
of Eternity, of the ways and people of the Lord, let this be a word of
Exhortarion to you, to look to your Thoughts; says the Wisdom of God, Prove.
23.7. As he thinks in his heart, so is he. A Soul is before the Lord,
according to the thoughts of his heart. Oh take heed of giving way to, and
feeding vain, unclean, unholy thoughts of any kind, and let me press it upon
you with these Motives.

1. Consider, that such thoughts are your sins, lay that to heart. God may
justly damn a soul for unholy Thoughts: Know, thou may commit Adultery, or
Murder, in thy Heart, though it break not forth actually. If thou have done
foolishly, in lifting up thy self, or if thou have thought evil, lay thy hand
upon thy mouth, Prove. 30.32. This will help to keep thy heart in awe.

2. That God's Eye is strictly and continually upon the Thoughts of thine
Heart, Psalm. 139.2. and therefore David cries out to God, to search his heart
for them. Oh, did a gracious Soul still consider this, that the jealous Eye of
God is upon every thought and motion of his heart to sin, it would make him
look closely to the Thoughts of his Heart.

3. Consider, that evil thoughts and musings of sin, are the beginning of all
open wickedness, Jam. 1. 15. Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth
sin, and such thoughts are usually set on fire by the Devil.

4. They do defile the soul, Mat. 15.20. Out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, etc. These are the things which defile a man: Which defilements
unfits the soul for communion with God; they make a filthy puddle in the Soul
and what a case is a poor Creature in to come to God, in Duty, in such a pickle.

5. Evil Thoughts do pervert the Heart from God, which should be fixed upon
him; they draw away the strength of the heart from God; they suck up the juice
and marrow of the heart, which should be spent in spiritual things in Jesus
Christ.

6. Such Thoughts do grieve the Spirit: Nothing more; the Spirit cannot delight
to teach and comfort, when the heart is mostly acted by foolish and unholy
Thoughts.

7. When such Thoughts are acted in the Soul, God may leave you to the power of
them, to break out to some grievous fall, and so may shipwreck your peace and
comforts for a great while, and go with broken bones, and it may cost you much
bitterness, before you are healed.

8. If vain, carnal Thoughts, are not resisted at first, but given way to, they
are hardly checked and subdued, and turned upon other Objects, and therefore to
watch the first Risings of them.

Now, not one of these Considerations, but may make a Child of God to tremble,
how he lets forth his heart into vain, carnal, idle, defiling thoughts and
musings, which do so much wast a gracious Spirit, and lay him open to such
woeful dangers as these are.

To help a Child of God in this spiritual Work of looking to, and a holy
ordering the Thoughts of his Heart.

1. Be deeply humbled to God, with abhorring and loathing for Atheistical,
unclean, proud, vain, foolish, worldly thoughts, that crowd in upon you; when
you make them your Burden, you will be the sooner eased.

2. Delight thy self much in the Word of God, not only in Public Hearing, but
Daily Reading; and not only Reading, but getting some good word upon thy heart,
that may season thy thoughts and affections: Says David, I hate vain thoughts,
but thy Law do I love, Psalm. 119.113. The love of the Word of God made him be
so far from cherishing vain Thoughts, that he did hate them. It does appear
this was a special part of David's exercise of Spirit, to get some blessed Word
upon his heart, and he thinking of it, and so it did turn into the sweet and
wholesome nourishment of the New Creature: Oh how I love thy Law, it is my
meditation all the day: Blessed and holy practice, worthy a gracious Saint
indeed; you have one word especially that David had much on his heart, out of
the Books of Moses; (for we know not whether any other Scripture were then
exant) it is that of Exodus 34.6. where the Lord says, he will proclaim his Name
and Glory: The Lord God merciful and gracious, long-suffering, abundant in
goodness and truth, which you have in Psalm 103.8. Psalm. 86.15. and 145.8.
Happily one of those sweet words which he often magnifies: How has a single
word dwelt upon the heart of a Child of God, and has kept the heart savoury
for Christ.

3. The next Remedy against such Thoughts, is, Much Prayer, diligence,
fervency, pouring out the heart to God, till the heart melts, and runs forth
sweetly, spiritually, and is engaged with God, and has a sight of him, and a
divine impression of God's Majesty left upon the soul.

4. Get more and more brokenness of heart for sin; when the Heart has been
broken, 'twill not so easily get into Vanity again: At least, a Child of God
should take care that it should not; when the heart is broken and mourning, the
Spirit does wonderfully in that work refine the heart: All the sleightness,
vanity, defilement, distraction, that comes upon the New Creature, is mostly
for want of this.

5. Mortification of that Corruption that is most apt to stir, does much cure
our thoughts: Inordinate Affections are the Saints greatest Evils, and do
bespeak an unmortified heart, as to what a Child of God should still be
pressing after, even to be dead, and crucified with Christ. Those that are
Christ's, have crucified their Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5.22.

6. Contending for a Spiritual Heart: So far as the Heart is spiritual, it acts
spiritually: It Is the carnality of Heart that works up all those frothy
distempers that defile us. Paul's corruption was much let out upon him, when he
cries out of the carnality of his Heart, Romans 7. which should be the daily
complaint of God's poor Children.

7. A great help to the preserving the Thoughts of the Heart, according to the
New Creature, will be to consider, How precious the thoughts of God are to his
people, Psalm. 139.17. How precious also are thy thoughts, O God, unto me? How
great is the sum of them? If I should count them, they are more in number than
the sands, etc. David in v. 2. was considering how God's Eye was upon his
Thoughts, and 'twas a means to rectify them, and then David's Thoughts run
forth in the sweet and blessed apprehension of the preciousness of Gods
thoughts in him, from all Eternity, and in the ways of his Covenant toward
him: If Gods thoughts to us be holy, and precious, and ever toward us, the
thoughts of his Servants should be so also, and as little common and unsavory
as may be.

More particularly, let us yet consider what blessed, and excellent, and
glorious things, such as are New-Creatures in Christ have, to exercise their
thoughts about.

1. Gracious Souls have the Attributes of God to exercise the thoughts of their
Hearts in; the Infiniteness of God, his Greatness, Holiness, Glory, etc. A
blessed Exercise for Saints indeed! So we find the Scripture-Saints sweetly
taken up with contemplation and admiration of the Excellencies of God himself;
Thou art glorious in Holiness, Exodus 15.11. says Moses. But Thou art holy,
says David, Psalm. 22. Oh how great is thy Goodness! Psalm 8.31. as might be
abundantly showed; and the exercise of the thoughts this way, has a powerful
influence upon the Heart, as to its abasement, purity, sincerity.

2. Saints have the riches and freeness of the grace of God in Jesus Christ,
toward poor sinners, to be taken up withal: Oh, the free, rich, distinguishing
Grace of God to a poor Creature, that was posting to Hell, that was a
Rebellious Wretch, a vile Hypocrite, the worst of sinners, the most unlikely to
be converted of any sinner in the world. We have David and Paul's hearts
swallowed up in this above any other; as David in many Psalms is in the
admiration of grace, and Paul in most of his Epistles makes it his great scope,
as the great Argument, to be not only believing, but humble and holy, and
heavenly, all their days, especially Col. 1. and Ephesians. 1st. 2d. and 3d.
Chapters.

3. Saints have the unsearchable Riches of Jesus Christ to take up their
thoughts with, the Excellencies and Dignities of his Person, the Beauty and
Glory that is in him, the depths of his love, the matchless price of his blood,
his bowels to sinners, his care of his Churches: Oh these are things worthy the
thoughts of Saints indeed!

4. They have to take up their thoughts, the glorious blessedness of the
forgiveness of their sins: What a blessed state, a state of forgiveness in the
blood of Jesus Christ is! Blessed, Oh blessed for ever, are they whose
iniquities are forgiven! Bless the Lord, O my soul, who forgiveth all thine
iniquities, etc. Psalm. 103. God has not appointed me to wrath, but to obtain
salvation through my Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5. Oh blessed ecstasy, for a
poor, called, pardoned Believer to be in!

5. Such as are New-Creatures in Christ, they have the Mystery of the
New Covenant, the everlastingness of it to bring their hearts to, and to work
the Promises thereof upon their hearts, to muse on the returns of their
Prayers, to behold the continual Providence of God toward them, and his ways
of mercy and kindness to them.

6. They have the shortness of their time, the vanity of their lives, the
certainty of Death to muse on; Lord, make me to know the number of my days,
that I may know how frail I am: Yea, they have a future and eternal state of
Blessedness and Glory to have their thoughts swallowed up into: That they shall
one day see Jesus Christ, as he is in all his glory, and never look off him any
more: They shall do nothing else but love him, enjoy perpetual communion of
Saints, be praising, admiring, adoring the blessed Majesty of God for ever and
ever.

Oh! If there are such excellent and blessed things, for the thoughts of the
holy-ones of God to be exercised in; Oh! what base Dunghill hearts have such
that pore upon nothing but earth and filth. Let it not be so with such that
have tasted the good and sweetness of those things, that have real substantial
soul-filling goodness in them: What matter of Complaint to God's poor Children,
whose hearts are too too apt to sink earthwards, poised with weights that they
cannot keep them up in the vision of God, his Christ, and what ever is blessed
in him; Oh! when the thoughts of your hearts must be taken up with your
Callings, which cannot be done without it, keep a Watch over them, let them not
run forth to sinful distempers, but that you may be fit to go to God, and
converse with him, and get the blessed savor of these things upon your hearts,
and do not let out your thoughts to idleness, and soul-defiling vanity, and
feed upon vanity, when there are such solid glorious things to feed upon, which
you expect to be taken up with, in an infinite unwearied delight to all
eternity.

And do not suffer the Devil to take up his abode, by his subtle and sudden
suggestions, or more close insinuations upon you. If he make his Inroads,
resist, check, defy with abhorrency his first Attempts, before he work up
corruption in you: And remember still, your spirits and bodies are the Temples
of God, and the Temple of God must be holy, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. What, know ye not,
that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost that is in you, which ye have of
God, and ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price, therefore
glorify God with your spirits and bodies, which are Gods: And thus much of
this special evidence of the New Creature, in the newness of his thoughts, and
the acting of them.

8. The Eighth Discovery of the New Creature is this,

The New Creature has a new Lip, a new Tongue, let loose to speak of God, and
for God: And this also I shall a little insist upon: Says our blessed Lord, A
good man out of the good Treasure of his heart brings forth good things,
Matthew 12.35. Good, and wholesome, and savoury Words: To this we find the Holy
Ghost in the Scriptures often pressing; says the wise man, Prove. 20.15. The
Lips of knowledge are a precious Jewel; The mouth of a righteous man is a well
of Life; The lips of the righteous feed many, Prove. 10.11, 12. So the Apostle;
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your Mouth, but that which is good,
to the use of Edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers, Ephesians. 4.29.
Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, etc. Col. 4.6. By
which places it is evident that a special discovery of the New Creature is
herein manifested.

1. The New Creature has a New Tongue to speak Savourly and Experimentally of
the things of Christ, and the work of the Spirit, Because that which the heart
is exercised with, it will be bringing forth. Out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks; an evil man out of the abundance of evil in his heart
brings forth evil things, as a good man does good things, Matthew. 12.25, 28.
If the heart and affections be spiritually exercised, the Tongue will be
speaking forth.

2. Because thereby a New-Created Soul does give glory to God; they speak of
the Testimonies, works, goodness, grace, and the wonders of the Love of God to
poor sinful Creatures: And hereby God is much glorified; Come and hear, all ye
that fear God, and I will tell what he has done for my Soul, Psalm. 66.16.

3. Gracious hearts do hereby stir up the Grace of Christ in them; it is like
the blowing of a spark, and makes the heart to glow e're it is aware; gracious
Conference is the very breath of the Spirit, which kindles all our Graces
afresh; as it was with the Disciples going to Emaus, Luke 24.32. Did not our
hearts burn within, while he talked with us by the way.

4. Good Souls do not only profit themselves, in receiving good, but they
profit others; one of the best ways that we do good, is in profiting weak
Saints or Sinners; how has a word spoken from a savoury person, humbly and
wisely, dropped in upon the Soul of a sinner, which has been its first
awakening. And so upon a poor weak tempted Child of God, how seasonably has
God ordered a word for a poor soul from conference with another!

Use. If a New Creature in Christ has a New Tongue as well as a new heart,
then let it be for Conviction of sinners, whose Tongues as well as hearts are
exercised in vanity, altogether in profane, or vain, or carnal, or worldly
Discourses; this shows there is no good treasure in the heart: The Apostle
James follows this Conviction very closely, and makes it the Character of a
carnal pretending Believer, or false and dead Faith, James 1.26. If any man
among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his
own heart, this man's religion is vain. It Is but a seeming to be religious, a
vain Religion, where the tongue has a carnal Liberty; and he calls the
Tongue a world of iniquity, set on fire of Hell, Jam. 3.6. an unruly evil, full
of deadly poison, ver. 8. The evils of the Tongue that bespeak a sinner
unregenerate, are these; and they are frequent among this generation.

1. Speaking evil of the Spirit of God, and ways of God, and People of God: Oh,
such, say they, have the Spirit, that they be Holy, and they are so strict that
they will not do such and such things as others do: This is a degree of
Blasphemy, and borders upon the brink of the unpardonable Sin. These are styled
by the Apostle Revilers, 1 Cor. 5.11. and 6.11. and they, as such, shall not
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. The giving out of the Spirit upon plain
meaning people, in the measure it now is, is a new thing, but not therefore to
be despised and reviled.

Every Town and Family almost does abound with this wickedness and dreadful
provocation, and it is the saddest sign upon the generality of people
whatsoever; only, it is to be hoped, they do it through Ignorance, as Paul did,
1 Timothy 1.13. and God, as he has done, may humble and convert many of them, to
the praise of his Grace; only let sinners that have been frequently showed the
desperate wickedness of such speeches, of scoffing at the Spirit and Holiness,
and call it Hypocrisy, tremble lest God give them up, when they sin against
Conviction, and the clear light of the word in this matter.

Had I time to reason a little in the power of the Lord, with such souls; why,
Consider seriously and in good earnest, Can you be so sottish, and so wilfully
blinded, that have heard or read the Scriptures, to imagine that you are God's
and Christ's, and have not the Spirit, and are not made Holy, nor crying to God
that you may be holy? He that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his;
And, without Holiness you shall not see the Lord; How dare you then, in the
Atheism and devilish wickedness of your hearts, scoff at the very Name of the
Spirit and Holiness! The lowest place in Hell will be yours, that have been so
often admonished of this, unless God smite you to the Earth for it: True
Converts have the saddest Humiliation for this sin, as they have been more or
less guilty of it.

2. Or you that are not so desperately carried forth in this open ungodliness,
of speaking evil of what you know not, but yet make little Conscience of lying
for your profit, or in excusing a matter, so you may do it covertly, and count,
it a venial small sin; or you, that when provoked, swear profanely, and
desperately, tearing the Name of the great and dreadful God, wreaking your
anger and wrath upon the Name of God, and the blood of Christ; your Tongues are
set on fire on Hell, and the Spirit of Disobedience, the Devil works in you;
not a drop of the Grace of God in you.

3. Or you who have your petty Oaths, by your Faith, by your Lady, and by
Creatures, or make mention of the Name of God, and Lord, in your ordinary
Discourse, vainly, and as a byword, crying, Oh Lord, upon every slight
occasion, and for God's sake, and Christ's sake do this, and this, in poor
trivial matters; verily there is nothing of the New Creature in you: And yet
these great Prophanesses you call your infirmities, and it is your infirmity to
swear, when angry and provoked, and you say you forget your selves, when you
mention the Name of the Lord God slightly, or through Ignorance plead for it,
that you may do so; I tell you, Souls, they are your reigning, damning sins,
who are frequent in them: And in carnal prayerless families, as most are, how
often in a day may these ungodly speeches be heard, by men, women and children?
If the fear of God were upon you, or any work of Grace, you durst not do it,
nor indeed could do: Therefore do but observe your selves a day, and see how
often you are here guilty, and tremble before God, and go and humble your
selves at his feet, that you may find mercy, and have another heart and mouth
given unto you: Pray, and cry, and wait for the good treasure of the Word of
Grace in your hearts, and 'twill be otherwise with you.

4. Yea, you who are engaged in worldly Discourses on the Sabbath Day, in your
families, at your doors, in the streets, in idle and vain jesting; you are not
of God, born again by his Spirit, you take no delight in the Word of God, the
meditation of your heart is not in it, you speak little of it, because you
savor it not. Tremble you Worldlings, who show it this way, at that Word, 1
John 5.5. They are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the
world hears them: If ye are of the world, you are not, as yet, of Jesus
Christ, the power, love, of this present World rules in you, and that may damn
you for ever.

Know, sinners, you that make little Conscience of vain, profane words,
(though you pretend to make some conscience of your word of promise to Men, for
your credits sake, and so think you have grace, (all which a Turk will do) that
by your words you shall be judged; and of idle words you shall give an account
at the day of Judgment; and by thy words thou shall be condemned, Mat. 12.36,
37. Such words as we have opened, to be damning sins. And therefore, do not put
off this guilt from you, in saying, it is your infirmity, and so make light of
it; but know, it is guilt which will send you to Hell, if the Lord humble you
not, and change you.

It Is a certain Rule, a profane heart, and a profane mouth, a carnal heart, a
carnal tongue, a worldly heart, a worldly (yea Sabbath Days) tongue: Therefore,
you are not New-Creatures in the least; and therefore begin with the heart,
that the heart may be smitten of God for this sin, and changed, and seasoned
with the word and grace of Christ upon you; and it will be better with you, and
you will have a tongue to speak well of the Spirit, and the things of God, and
his People; and to speak for God, and reverently of his Name, and delight your
selves in it.

2. Let this be a word to such, as through grace are become New-Creatures in
Christ, that you would show it in this discovery, in a new Tongue, that you
give not your selves that liberty of vain, carnal, much less profane
Discourses, as formerly; as indeed you will not, if you be new Creatures. Men's
Converse do either lie among such as are wholly carnal and worldly, or such as
savor that which is good.

As to the former; as in all our carriage, so especially in our Words, there is
great caution to be had.

1. Not to mix our selves with them unnecessarily, unless we find we have
strength enough, through a dependency on the Lord, to avoid their snares, and
do it with a purpose of heart to do them good, by reproving or counselling
them. Many a good soul has been sadly worsted by mixing unnecessarily with
vain, profane or frothy company.

2. If Providence cast thee amongst them, sometimes it may be the Wisdom of a
Child of God to keep silence; as David, Psalm. 39.1. I said I will take heed to
my ways, that I sin not with my tongue; I will keep my mouth with a bridle,
when the wicked is before me: I say, it may be sometimes best for a Child of
God to do so; there is a secret conviction goes forth, by the silence of a
servant of God oftentimes, and to have them as soon as we can, so it be not
done scornfully, but humbly and civilly: I do not mean a total silence, but a
weariness.

When you are cast among carnal persons, as to your Callings, necessarily, Take
heed of giving your selves a full liberty, multiplying of words unnecessarily,
but be reserved and watchful; that by any thing you say, or indeed any other
carriage, the person you converse with, be more hardened in his carnal course,
or be offended more against the ways of Godliness; which, indeed, a Child of
God should most heedfully consider in all his ways: Oh, it is a blessed and
gracious design, rather to better than worst all we converse with.

3. If you have a heart (as you are to look up to God for a heart) to reprove
what may be reprovable, (as often it may be your duty) or to commend the ways
of God unto them, to render them acceptable and precious, and comfortable, or
any good word of the Lord to mention to them, or of an etetnal condition; let
this be done,

1. Seasonably: It Is a great matter for a servant of God to speak fitly, to
wind off another from a carnal Discourse into good things; to insinuate them
discreetly; here is much Wisdom, and it is to be asked of God.

2. With meekness: Not sharply, nor rashly, nor proudly, nor censoriously, but
with a meek and gentle spirit, -- showing all meekness to all men, 2 Tit. 2.
That they may perceive you do it, not to censure them, nor with vain
ostentation, but that it proceeds from an honest heart, and unfeigned love to
them: This is to be done, when we find men's spirits in the most serious
capacity; and we having endeavored to sweeten them, and to get some room and
respect in their Affections.

3. That it be done savourly, and feelingly, not slightly, that it may appear
what we give out to them is upon our own hearts, and what we do really feel and
enjoy, which carries much convincement with it.

2. If Providence cast you among God's People, (as this indeed should be our
choice) it is not well to part from each other without something of God, his
Word, Grace, Goodness, Providence, People, their own Hearts, Temptations,
Comforts, according to what is upon their Hearts, or what they conceive may be
of best use to those we speak to, considering their condition, or temptations,
or falling short, or in what, if stronger Christians, we may our selves be
helped and encouraged; and not to give way to indisposition or temptation, or
fear we shall speak as Hypocrites, (which is sometimes a snare) but to have a
ready mind and cheerful delight to do it: Not but the people of God may in due
season speak of their Callings, and of Affairs and Occurences in the World;
yea, and sometimes that which may beget cheerfulness, so we watch our hearts in
it, and take heed of an uncomely inordinateness in it.

But do you tremble at obscene Words, wrathful words, to be suddenly provoked
to speak passionately, at taunting, jeering words, reproaching others, or
censorious of others, vainglorious words; of which much might be spoken to
every particular.

3. As this may humble the people of God for the sins of the Tongue, their
vanity and unprofitableness, so let it stir them up to look for grace, suitable
in this so weighty a matter: That our Lips may be as a Well of Life, and may
savor of what is holy and good in God's sight: Some Directions yet as to this
Duty.

1. Get in much good Treasure in the Heart: As our Savior speaks, Mat. 12. The
more good Treasure of the Word, of Grace, of Experiences, of sweetness, of
comfort, the more ready we shall be to give forth and also receive in from
others.

2. Do not follow your fancy, in speaking what it still dictates, but your
judgment: Many good men too too much follow a working fancy, though there may
be a sober cheerful Exercise of it in season; but we are too apt to run forth
to excess: The Devil will kindle Squibs upon the Fancy, which we must rather
quench than feed and bring forth.

3. Keep some good thing upon the Heart; some good Word you daily take in, as
was directed as to your Thoughts, some comfortable Experience of God, the sense
of what you received in an Ordinance, that you may discourse of the Word last
heard, Psalm. 45.1. My heart is enditing of a good matter, my Tongue is the Pen
of a ready Writer: Oh blessed, when it is so with gracious Souls: I muse on the
works of thy hands, Psalm. 143. My meditation of God shall be sweet, Psalm. 104.

4. Pray for a good frame of heart, and keep it so: Pray till the heart be made
tender, savoury, quickened, enlarged with the sense of God's Majesty, Holiness
and Goodness upon your Spirits, and then watch to keep them so; a savoury
Heart, and a savoury Mouth.

5. Be not provoked by the vain and frothy Language of others, though they may
be good men, to comply with it: We are too apt to take encouragement to that
which may be evil, because it is the liberty another good man takes, which is
often a snare.

6. Keep the fear of the Lord upon thy Heart, a holy awe of God and his
Presence, one of the choicest Duties of a Saint, especially in this matter. The
fear of God makes the Spirit serious, and yet mixed with comfort and a comely
cheerfulness, Psalm. 4.4. Stand in awe of God, and sin not.

I might also lay down Motives to this choice Duty: It does much please and
delight the Spirit of God; it brings in much good to the soul: Gracious
conference is an Ordinance of God, and blessed to the quickening, establishing,
succouring, and refreshing the hearts of Saints. Accustom your selves to it,
and you will find indispositions wear off, and you will do it out of a ready
mind, and gracious delight: Only, be not only a talker, from Notions in the
Head, nor affect a disputing, wrangling Knowledge, (usually the effect of
Pride) but do it from Heart-experience in some measure; or what you would fain
get more upon your hearts: And let it not be only a talking-knowledge, but an
humble walking-knowledge.

Remember, to thy continual abasement, how many sinners thou have helped
Hell-ward, by thy lewd, vain, profane speeches, by thy reviling at the Lords
ways and people, and how thou have encouraged and hardened them this way in
sin. Oh, now let thy work be, through infinite grace, to tell sinners, that
there is more good infinitely in Jesus Christ than in the way of folly. Now
draw as many as thou may, according to thy measure of grace, to Jesus
Christ, and Heavenward.

And thus much be spoken of this Discovery of the New Creature, in its showing
it self in a new Lip.

9. The 9th. Discovery of the New Creature.

Such as are New-Creatures in Christ, they will have New-Company. As soon as a
soul is new forming up in Christ, he says, as David, Depart from me ye evil
doers, for I will keep the Commandments of my God, Psalm. 119.115. Depart from
me all ye workers of Iniquity, for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping,
Psalm. 6.8. I am a Companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep
thy Precepts, Psalm. 119.63. So the primitive Saints, as soon as converted, they
become Companions of the reproached Ones of the Lord, and took joyfully the
spoiling of their Goods with them, Heb. 10.34. And so Moses chose affliction
with the people of God, before Riches and Honor with the Profane, Heb. 11.26.

Now this real Converts do:

1. Because wicked and carnal men will act and speak wickedly against God, and
his ways and people; which a heart broken, and made tender, cannot endure to
hear and observe: David said, it was like a sword in his bones, Psalm. 42.10.
when wicked men reproached the Lord and his servants.

2. Converts are in great danger to be tempted to sin, as Joseph in Pharaoh's
house, by the company of wicked and carnal persons; the Devil will lay snares,
especially for weak Souls: It will be hard for weak souls to pass without
guilt, by mixing with them.

3. Saints will contract deadness and indisposition by their company; it
causes old Lusts to stir, and other sins of heart to be working. The carnal
part will be too ready for compliance with them; how hard to come off from
them, not worsted.

4. Such as are New-Creatures in Christ, have quite different Spirits from
wicked and carnal men, different principles, different ends, and therefore they
must needs avoid them, and cannot take satisfaction and contentment with them,
unless under great temptation.

Use 1. To sinners unconverted, who take pleasure in your carnal, merry
company, but are burdened with the company of godly, and you secretly disdain
them, and the Devil suggests to you, that they are Hypocrites; know this, and
be assured of it, and your Consciences must acknowledge it, that ye are yet in
your sins, and haters of Holiness, and you love not the appearance of it:
Certainly, you are none of these New-Creatures, and you cannot know your selves
by a better Character, than by the company you most delight in. You do not make
choice of your most intimate company by their Godliness, but from wordly ends,
or mirth, or good fellowship, as you style it, or generosity, or some such
carnal end; verily, the grace of God is not in you, and your condition is
damnable.

2. As ever you would find mercy, look up to the Lord to turn your hearts to
himself, and then to those that fear him: Break off from your vain company, who
engage your hearts to vanity: What says the Wisdom of God, A Companion of
fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13. No such fools (how witty, or prudent, or
civil soever otherwise) as carnal souls, that delight in vanity; Oh hearken to
the instruction of the wise, and your soul shall live. I confess this is the
hardest pluck in conversion, but yet it must be done, with a vigorous
resolution, through grace; when once the bands are broken, and you come to
find, as you will, abundant more sweetness in the Lords ways, verily you shall
never repent your so doing.

And such as have some desires toward goodness, and have some better thoughts
than you have had formerly of good people, you will make little progress in
grace, and peace, and comfort to your own souls, till you do this; till you can
abhor your selves for your vanity and profaneness among carnal men, and can with
full purpose of heart cleave to the Lord, and overcome fear or shame, or
whatever such cursed evils that are in your way, and all your rocks of offense,
you will make little of it as to evidence any sound work in your hearts, and
peace with God by Jesus Christ; one days accompanying with carnal men, will set
you more backward in the matter of godliness, than many days after will help on.

3. Let such as would evidence the New Creature, be very watchful in this
matter, and not to touch pitch, lest they be defiled; mix not your selves
unnecessarily, as has been exhorted in the last head, among carnal men, unless
you have a good and holy end in it; so as Jesus Christ did, going among great
sinners to do them good, which indeed bespeaks a great strength of grace, and a
Christ-like spirit, and Saints should be much with God for it.

And among your selves, that Saints do still better and not worst one another
Spirits, when they come together; the more you are with Saints, the more you
love them, and delight in them: Have a compassionate healing spirit to one
another infirmities, and be not offended, but look upon, and love the
appearance of God in each other: And remember, that receiving and doing of good
is your great business till you come to Heaven.

Yea, let all that have a new work upon them, diligently find out the Company
of Saints, such as are visibly joined to the Lord, and to each other, to enjoy
Ordinances holily, and to help one another Heavenward; Woe to him that is
alone, says the wisdom of God: Let not gracious Souls content themselves in
pollutions of worship, and without the company of the godly; such do decay,
wither, make a poor shift to hold out in their profession, grow worldly, or are
overtaken with the Errors of the times; as for the most part, they are the
solitary professors who are drawn aside from Gospel Truth, and not such (as it
has been unduly charged) who are in the fellowship of the Gospel, for that end
and purpose, to help, strengthen, pray for, watch over each other.

10. Such as are New-Creatures in Christ, they have (if I may so speak) new
feet, namely, to walk with God in a new conversation: The steps of a good man
are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his way, Psalm. 37.23. I have
(says David) refrained my feet from every evil way, that I may keep thy word.

This New-walk of a Saint, of a New Creature, is a large field; that I may hint
the most material things of it,

1. A New Creature does more and more set himself to walk with God; (1.) As
under the eye of God, considering that the jealous eye of the Lord is still
upon him: Thou compassest my path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with
all my ways, Psalm. 133.3. (2.) To keep Communion with God; to be conversing
with God, speaking with God, and unto God, and waiting to hear God speak unto
him. (3.) To walk in Jesus Christ. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord,
so walk ye in him, Col. 2.6. which is, to walk in the Life of Christ, in the
Light of Christ, in the Love of Christ, in the Strength of Christ, in the
wisdom and patience of Christ, and so in all: This it is to have fellowship with
Jesus Christ, and to walk in him; to do all in Christ, and through Christ, is
the main work of the New Creature, as 'twas hinted in discovering the necessity
of the New-Creature's being in Christ. (4.) The Walk of the New Creature is to
walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in
the Spirit. There Is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8.1. To walk in the Spirit, is,
(1.) Not to fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh, Gal. 5.16. Not to be under the
power of them, or to make provision for them; not to feed them, but to crucify
them; They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the Affections and
Lusts, Gal. 5.14. which is put as an evidence of walking after the Spirit. (2.)
It Is to be led by the Spirit, Gal. 5.18. to give up our selves to the leadings
and teachings of the Spirit, Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will, for thou
art my God, thy spirit is good; lead me into the land of uprightness; is the
cry of every true Convert in Christ; who would not be led by his own Spirit in
any thing, nor by any other men's spirits, but waits for the Leading of the
spirit in every work and way, wherein he would walk before God.

5. The New Creature walks after the revealed will of God: And as many as walk
according to this rule, peace be upon them, Gal. 5.16. speaking of the
New Creature, who walks after a rule: Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who
walk in the Law of the Lord, Psalm. 119.1. He sets himself to walk in all the
precepts of God, and esteemed them all holy and righteous.

6. The New Creature walks in his integrity: Let integrity and uprightness
preserve me, Psalm. 25.21. As for me, I will walk in mine integrity, Psalm.
26.11. And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and set me
before thy face for ever, Psalm. 41.12. This is the gracious resolution of every
Convert, to walk in his integrity, through which God will preserve and uphold
him in all his ways, and when the World reproacheth him, God will set him
before his face, and that for ever.

7. The New Creature, so far as he is a New Creature, walks humbly: This is
that the Lord does require of thee, walk humbly with thy God, Micah 6.8. To
walk humbly before the Lord, toward sinners, and toward Saints: The soul that
walks most with God, walks most humbly toward men.

8. The New Creature walks in love; And walk in love, as Christ also has loved
us, Ephesians. 5.2. In love to all Saints, as Saints, a special part of the
Gospel-walk: Not in love to such or such a party of Saints, which is but
self-love, but in love to all that walk with God.

9. More Particulars might I mention, as walking honestly toward all men, not
oppressing, defrauding, but righteously, charitably, compassionately: So far, I
say, as he is a New Creature, he walks thus: Only let me add this, that the
New Creature walks by Faith, 2 Cor. 5.7. and not by sight: He is ever learning
a life of dependency, lives upon the All Sufficiency of God, the Righteousness
of Christ, the fullness of his Grace, the word of his Promise, and so lives out
of himself, upon the fullness of God in Christ, and his truth in his Promise,
even when he feels not his presence. And herein briefly consists the Life of
Faith, to live out of our selves, upon another, even the fullness of an infinite
God, manifested in Jesus Christ.

In a word, The New Creature in Christ, as he is called of God, through
infinite Free Grace: So is he to walk in all things, Worthy of his vocation,
Ephesians. 4.1. To walk worthy of the Lord, even to walk as Jesus Christ himself
walked, 1 John 2.6. To walk in this present world, how he might express the
virtues of Christ, the Grace and Love of Jesus Christ so freely revealed to
him, to walk self-denyingly, holily, patiently, harmlesly, profitably,
heavenly, as one that is called from Darkness to Light, from the power of Satan
to God, called out of the world, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 2 These. 2.14.

Use 1. If this be the Walk of the New Creature, then such who walk not as in
the Eye of God, but after the Atheism of their Hearts, consider not, that God
sees them in their most hidden ways, that walk after their lusts to fulfill
them; that walk not in the Spirit, that mind not Holiness, so they keep a kind
of Conscience to men: Verily, the Spirit of God dwells not in you, you have
no Evidence for Heaven as yet; you are of the World, and you walk after the
course of the World, Ephesians. 2.2. You walk Hell-ward, and are held by the Cords of
your Lusts, and your Paths lead unto destruction. And therefore turn in to
Jesus Christ, whose Paths are Wisdom and Safety, and lead in the way of Life,
and Peace, and Blessedness, even all that choose them, and delight in them.

2. Let such as have the New Creature formed in them, approve themselves to
God, to Saints, and to the World, in this their New-Walk: Oh see! you are
called to walk with God; and therefore be as in his Eye continually; make
Communion with him your chiefest joy. Walk in Jesus Christ, in his Life, Light,
Power, Love, Wisdom, and fetch your daily supplies from him: Walk in the
Spirit, after the Spirit, as much as may be; and see that you keep close to
Rule, to the revealed Will of God, and not to Delusions; be able to appeal to
God, Judge me, Oh God, according to mine integrity, Psalm. 26.1. that you may
have this Peace and Comfort in all your ways; Thou upholdest me, Oh Lord, in
mine Integrity. And see you walk humbly before God and Men, and in love to all
that profess love to Christ; and they do, in some measure really express it,
and carry it justly and compassionately toward all men.

Learn above all, the Experience of the Life of Faith; live not in, or upon
what you have received, but live out of it, upon the Fullness of the Lord, as if
you had received nothing. Oh ply the Throne of Grace, that you may be filled
with the Spirit of Jesus Christ, and to walk in this present World, as near as
may be, after the Holiness, Patience, Meekness, Wisdom, and Love of Jesus
Christ, which he showed toward all men, having your hearts and Conversations
in Heaven, where your treasure is.

11. The New Creature does in all things labor its own perfection, and is
therefore still in conflicting with, destroying, crucifying, purging out the
old Creature, the old man, all of the old Adam, till it sits down in Victory,
in a full perfection of Holiness and Glory, which it shall have (and not till
then) at the appearing of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4.22. -- That ye put off
concerning the former Conversation, the Old Man, which is corrupt, according to
the deceitful Lusts, and be renewed, etc. Knowing this, that our Old Man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, Romans 6.6.

This is the main Work of the New Creature, where it is really formed in
Christ, to destroy and purge out the Defilements and Dregs of the Old Man, of
Sin, Self, Corruption, that it may be as a new Lump, as a Vessel made meet for
the Lord's use, as formed up, set apart, anointed, sanctified for God, and his
use, here and for ever, AMEN.

To the Blessed God Alone be all the Glory.

FINIS.
Childrens Bread: OR, The First Principles of the Knowledge of GOD.

To Season the Heads and Hearts of Young Ones betimes.

By way of QUESTION and ANSWER.

Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it, Prove. 22.6.

And that from a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15.

By A. P. late Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1695.

Childrens Bread: or the first Principles of the Knowledge of GOD, etc.
Quest. WHo made you a living Soul?

Answ. God, who made all things, made me a living Soul, Genesis 2.7. Psalm. 139.14.

Q. Who is God?

A. God is a Spirit, the great, and holy, and good God, Joh. 4.24. Jer. 32.18.

Q. Is there but one God?

A. There is but one true and living God, in three Persons, the Father, Son,
and Spirit, 1 These. 1.9. 1 Ep. Joh. 5.7.

Q. How is God known?

A. God is known by his works, and by his holy Word, Psalm. 102.24. Prove. 2.1,
2, 3, 4, 5.

Q. Why did God give you such a Soul?

A. God gave me a Soul to know him, and glorify him, Col. 3.10. Rev. 15.4.

Q. What will become of your Soul when you dye?

A. My Soul must go to God in Heaven, or else be damned in Hell Fire for ever,
Mat. 25. last. Joh. 5.29.

Q. How came your Soul to be in danger of Hellfire?

A. Because I have sinned against God, I deserved eternal Damnation, Psa. 9.17.
Romans 2.9.

Q. How came you to sin against God?

A. The first Man Adam sinned, and brake the Covenant of God, and I in him,
Romans 5.18, 19. Genesis 2.17.

Q. What is the sin of your Nature?

A. My Nature is corrupted with sin, and has the seed of all sin, Psalm. 14.1.
Psalm. 51.5.

Q. What is sin?

A. Sin is the breaking of God's Commandments, Deuteronomy. 11.27, 28. 1 Ep. Joh. 3.4.

Q. How many are the Commandments of the Law?

A. The Law of God contains ten Commandments, written in Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.

Q. What is the first Commandment?

A. Thou shall have none other Gods but me, Exodus 20.3.

Q. What does the first Commandment require?

A. To have one God for my God, and to love him above all things, Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5.
Mat. 22.37.

Q. What is the second Commandment?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc. Exodus 20.4, 5.

Q. What is required in this Commandment?

A. To Worship God according to his own Word, and not after men's Inventions,
Mat. 15.10. Isa. 29.13.

Q. What is the third Commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, Exodus 20.7.

Q. What does the third Commandment require?

A. To think and speak of God with reverence and fear, and not to take his Name
in vain, Deuteronomy. 28.58. Prove. 1.7.

Q. What is the fourth Commandment?

A. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day, etc. Exodus 20.8.

Q. What does this Commandment teach you?

A. To keep the Lords day holy, and not to spend it in vain sports and idle
words, Isa. 58.13. Rev. 1.10.

Q. What is the fifth Commandment?

A. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee, Exodus 20.12.

Q. What does this Commandment of God teach you?

A. To give Honor to all to whom it is due, and to obey my Parents in the
Lord, Tit. 3.1. Ephesians. 6.1, 2.

Q. What is the sixth Commandment?

A. Thou shall do no Murder, Exodus 20.13.

Q. What is required in the sixth Commandment?

A. To do good to every one, and not to have angry thoughts or angry words,
Mat. 5.21, 22. Prove. 19.11.

Q. What is the seventh Commandment?

A. Thou shall not commit Adultery, Exodus 20.14.

Q. What is the meaning of this Commandment?

A. To keep my self from all Uncleanness, and to be Chaste in my thoughts and
words, Mat. 5.27, 28. Ephesians. 4.19.

Q. What is the eighth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not Steal, Exodus 20.15.

Q. What does this Commandment forbid?

A. It forbids me to take any thing that is another, or to spend what is mine
own vainly, Ephesians. 4.28. 1 Cor. 6.10.

Q. What is the ninth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbors, Exodus 20.16.

Q. What is the duty of the ninth Commandment?

A. It requires the speaking truth to others, and forbids lying, Zach. 8.16.
Ephesians. 4.25.

Q. What is the tenth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not Covet, etc. Exodus 20.17.

Q. What is required in the tenth Commandment?

A. To be content with those things that I have, and not to have a covetous
heart, Luke 12.32. Heb. 13.5.

Q. Have you kept these Commandments of God?

A. No: I have sinned by evil thoughts, and words, and deeds; and come short of
fulfilling the Law of God, Mat. 15.19. Romans 3.23.

Q. What is due to you for sin?

A. Sin has brought the curse of God upon my Soul, and made me a Child of
Wrath by Nature, Gal. 3.10. Ephesians. 2.3.

Q. How may you escape the wrath and anger of God?

A. God in his rich mercy has revealed Salvation from sin by Jesus Christ,
Joh. 2.4. 1 Timothy 1.15.

Q. Who is Jesus Christ?

A. Jesus Christ is the Son of God the Father, and he took our Nature upon him,
and became God and Man in one Person, Heb. 2.16. 1 Timothy 3.16.

Q. Why was Jesus Christ made Man?

A. Jesus Christ was made Man, that he might dye for our sins, and was raised
from the dead, Romans 5.8. 1 Cor. 15.3.

Q. Why did Jesus Chrst dye for us?

A. Jesus Christ dyed to redeem us from the Curse of the Law, and to work out
Righteousness for us, Gal. 3.13. 1 Cor. 1.30.

Q. Where is Jesus Christ?

A. Jesus Christ is sat down at the right hand of God in Heaven, Heb. 1.3.
Heb. 8.3.

Q. What does Jesus Christ do for us in Heaven?

A. 1. Jesus Christ is our High Priest in Heaven, to plead the shedding of his
blood for us, and to pray for us, 1 Ep. Joh. 2.1, 2. Heb. 7.25.

2. Jesus Christ is our Prophet, to teach us by his Word and Spirit, Mat. 17.5.
Acts 3.22.

3. Jesus Christ is a King, to Reign over us, Acts 3.35. Rev. 15.3.

Q. How may you come to be partakers of this Salvation?

A. I may become partaker of Salvation, by coming to Jesus Christ as a poor
lost sinner, to be washed from my sins in his blood, and to be justified by
him, Rev. 1.5. Acts 13.38, 39.

Q. How does God justify a sinner?

A. God in his free Grace forgives a poor sinner for Christ's sake, and imputes
Christ's Righteousness to a Believer, Romans 3.24, 25. Romans 4.6.

Q. How may you come to believe on Jesus Christ?

A. God works faith in dead sinners by his Spirit, in hearing of the Gospel
Preached, Romans 10.17. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.

Q. In what manner does God work faith in the Soul?

A. 1. By convincing me of sin, and revealing Christ in the promise, Luke 7.37.
Joh. 6.37.

2. I must pray unto God to work faith in me, and to reveal Christ to my poor
soul, 2 These. 1.11. Ephesians. 1.17, 18.

Q. How may you come to pray?

A. I must beg of God to give me his holy Spirit, to help me to Pray, Luke
11.13. Romans 8.26.

Q. How may you know the Spirit helps you in Prayer?

A. When I confess my sins, and humble my self to the Mercy and Grace of God by
Jesus Christ, and beg all Mercy and Grace, for Christ's sake, 1 Ep. Joh. 1.9.
Joh. 14.13.

Q. How must you be found a Praying Child of God?

A. 1. I must Pray to my Heavenly Father, every Morning and Evening in secret,
Mat. 6.6. Psalm. 45.17.

2. I must also read some part of the Word of God, and pray that God will teach
me by it, Prove. 6.21, 22. 2 Timothy 3.15.

Q. What is the work of the Spirit of God?

A. I must be born again of the Spirit, or never enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Joh. 3.3. 1 Pet. 1.13.

Q. What is the fruit of being born again?

A. 1. I must be in Christ, and a new Creature in him, 2 Cor. 5.17. Ephesians. 2.10.

2. I must press after all holiness in Christ Jesus, in heart and life, 1 These.
5.14. 1 Pet. 1.15.

Q. What is required of souls that thirst after more of Christ?

A. It is the duty of such as would have more of Christ, to join themselves to
a particular Church of Christ, Acts 2. last. 2 Cor. 8.5.

Q. What is a Church of Christ?

A. A Church of Christ is a Congregation of Saints by profession, gathered by
the Gospel, and joined together to enjoy all Ordinances, and to Edify one
another in forbearance and love, 1 Cor. 1.2. 1 These. 5.11.

Q. What is the Covenant of Grace?

A. The Covenant of Grace is, Gods taking us to be his peculiar people, and our
giving up our selves to him, that he may be our God for ever by Jesus Christ,
Genesis 17.7. Isa. 56.6.

Q. What be the Ordinances of the Covenant?

A. Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. In Baptism, by the washing with Water, we are delivered up to the Name and
Profession of Jesus Christ, Mat. 28. last. Gal. 3.27.

Q. What is the Lords Supper?

A. The Lords Supper is the showing forth of the Death of Jesus Christ, and our
Communion with his Body and Blood by Faith, in which forgiveness of sins is
sealed to Believers, 1 Cor. 11.36. 1 Cor. 10.16.

Q. When are you fit to pattake of the Lords Supper?

A. When I can give up my self to Christ, and my heart is drawn after him,
though I am weak in Faith, Romans 14.1. Rev. 22.17.

Q. What privilege is there more in being of a Church of Christ?

A. When I am in a Church, I am in a special manner in the Prayers of Saints,
and to partake of all help and comfort from them, Isa. 5.15, 16. Romans 15.1, 2.

Q. What is the further comfort of newborn Souls?

A. 1. If I am new born of the Spirit, I am a Child of God, and Heir of Heaven,
John 1.12, 13. Romans 8.16, 17.

2. I shall be kept by the power of God unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 5. 1 These. 5.23.

Q. What further great privilege have you, if you be a Child of God?

A. If I become a Child of God, God will love me for ever, and is my Father,
and will hear my poor Prayers to him, 2 Cor. 13, 14. 1 John 5, 15.

Q. What is the further duty of a Child of God?

A. 1. I am to grow in Grace, and the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, under the Word
and Ordinances, Mat. 25.30. 2 Pet. 3.18.

2. I ought to love all Saints, as Saints, though they differ from me in
Judgment, 1 Ep. Joh. 3.14. Col. 3.12.

Q. What is the great Work God will do in the World?

A. To increase the Kingdom of his Son Jesus Christ, and to subdue the Nations
unto him, Isa. 9.7. Revel. 11.15.

Q. Shall there be a Resurrection of the Bodies of all from the dead?

A. When Christ comes to Judgment all shall be raised from the dead, and shall
stand before his Judgment Seat, Heb. 6.2. 2 Cor. 5.10.

Q. What shall the reward of all be at the last Judgment?

A. They who be in Christ, and have done good, shall have Everlasting Life; but
such as have done evil, Everlasting Damnation, Mat. 24. last. Joh. 5.29.

FINIS.

