A DISCOVERY OF DIVERSE SORTS OF ASSES: WITH The Description of their Condition,
setting them forth in proper Colors, according to Smithfields Fancies and
Inventions.

ALSO, Follies Petition against all sorts of Fools and Asses, desiring to have
them banished to the I Will of SILLY.

Stultorum plena sunt omnia. printer's or publisher's device

July 8. London Printed for John Powel. 1642

IT is well known that in Diebus illis, in former times, I was a very dirty
myry Smithfield, and a very Dunghill of deformities, until the city brought me
into compass, railing me in on every side, that I might come into due form and
proportion.

Now there comes into the walks in Smithfield many horses, various in shape,
color, and condition, which are rodden together in a shufling pace to allure
and draw on buyers: I could wish therefore for novelties sake, that all ignorant
Asses, black, red-gray and brown, might be all brought on a day into
Smithfield, for else they will never be sold to their worth, and let them be
ridden with bridles of authority in their mouths, or else they will fall to
braying and railing against their Governors, and Masters: for an Ass when he
is angry will encounter with a Lion, though he lose his skin; but if these Asses
kick and fling against their Riders authority, let them be tied to my Rails in
Smithfield, or to the sign-posts that stand a cross, for if they be thus
haltred it will learn them more wit.

But because I Smithfield am no Scholar, nor under stand any thing but Horses
and Oxen, who with their hoofes would sain beat wit into me, but cannot: and
therefore setting learning aside and beyond my Bars, I will seek all the
Corners of my Invention, especially my Tavern corners, and with the vermillion
color of wine, paint out and describe my Market or Fair of Asses in such
manner as I can fashion and form them according to Smithfields fancy.

First, you know that the spirit seasonable, if it could assume an unreasonable
figure and shape, might and would appear often in the form and likeness of
an Ass, but of several conditions and qualities; so that Smithfield does in
this fained Fair or Market intend to describe and explain the colors,
complexion, properties and conditions of several sorts and kinds of
verationall qualities that may be denominated and called Asses, for Smithfield
medles with no persons but asse-like properties.

The Ignorant Ass is the ass of asses, most excellent and eminent in
nonsense and want of understanding, he is dull of conceit, and his words walk
alone without wit in a slow asse-like pace, and this ass is a fumbler at all
things, and a great stumbler, especially at strawes, he is feareefull as it is
the nature of ignorance to be, and will start at every thing, this ass knows
nor understands any thing but eating and drinking, pissing and farting, and
living according to instinct of Nature.

The proud Ass is contrary to the former, for he holds up his head as if it
were full of brains, when there is nothing but empty windines, yet he will play
with his Bridle, look often upon his legs and body, and then smile to
himself, as if he would say, how brave am I? Alexanders Bucephalus was a Jade
in respect of me, this kind of animal thinks himself wise, and scorns all
but himself.

The Covetous Ass loves to carry burdens and heavy loades of Cabbages and
Turnips, but never eats a bit, takes pains and wears his hoofes to pieces
with trotting up and down to gather wealth for others, hope of profit is his
only provinder, which makes this ass look so thin and lean, that one of his
jaw bones would serve Sampson to kill a 1000. Philistines withal; he had
rather part with skin than his riches, which when he dies he leaves behind
him to some young heir that is an arranter ass then himself. But to come to
the asses of the times, is not the petty-fogging Lawyer a kind of stupid
Dulman, that has been indeed in much request, and many Countrymen have
appeared in the shape of Angels to make these asses speak as Balaams did, but
now they may shake their long ears, for they can no longer graze upon and
devour the poor Commons, so that now they are grown stark dumb, and if they
will do any thing they may turn Porters, because they how to carry the matter
very well.

But there are certain kind of asses that have raw wits and Roundheads, these
are mad kicking flinging animals, that cannot endure the Bridle of Authority,
and if they come by any thing that is like a cross, they will start and turn
back again, and run out of the way with their Prick-eares as if they were mad,
in the Country they will trot five or six miles to Church, and return again
without eating a bit, and in London in regard of their proud abominable
ignorance, bleating and braying of Sermons out of Tubbes, and for their
blockish stubbornenes in scorning Learning, they may be justly called
stiff-necked asses.

There are another sort of asses that voe think themselves fine fellows,
because they can in an obstreperous manner outswagger the Devil, and so
thunder out execrations against the poor Roundheads, that they dare not show
their heads when the Rattle-heads be in place: so that the one seems like
Sampson with a long bush of hair as if his strength lay therein, and the other
Rotundian animal looks with a supercilious countenance as smooth as a scalded
Pigge; and therefore the one does reside at York, and the other that is the
Roundheads live plentifully at rack and manger in London.

If you desire to know the symptoms and signs of your gray Asses, they are so
big-bodyd and so well trapped with gold and silver, that you cannot overlook
them, they are somewhat stricken in years, and by the stateliness of their
pace you would think them as wise as a City Justice, this ass gets on the
Lions skin, and with the authority of his warrants frights delinquents, and at
a Sessions he brayes on a Bench, if he be of the inferior sort, his gray head
shakes with a Palsy ague, and he walks on three Legs that is by the support of
his staff, and at last marries a young wench when he can neither neigh nor wag
tail.

There is moreover a mad-braind Ass, that is so wilful, that he will not be
reformed by any good counsel, but will violently run on in all pernicious
courses, he will run his head against a post if he be angry, and will stray
abroad into all wild and vicious paths, until at last he be caught and put
into the Pound, that is, into the Counter or Ludgate.

The Cock braind Ass is somewhat like the mad-braind, but they differ because
the Cock-braind is ever running after females, and affecting change in all
things, this Ass will leap his Neighbors wife, and will breaks over the hedge
of Matrimony to come at her, he will take a journey only to see Towns, or to
dine at Barner and come back again, for his actions are precipitate without
any intention or end, he loves to be in the fashion, wear fine clothes and
have a new Mistress, when he has the happiness to purchase a new suit, this is
a kind of Tailors ass, that changes himself into all shapes and colors.

The haire-braind Ass is timerarious and rash, and casting up his head will
rush forward though he fall into a ditch or quagmire, this Ass will without
any advice run his head into the Halter of Marriage, or debt, and sometimes
by stobbing and committing manslaughter, brings himself to sing a pen^tentiall
Psalm at Tyburne, he is very much subject unto Quarrels, and vents his
ordinary anger with beating his wife and servants, or breaking his Tobacco
pipes against the walls, age and the whip of wedlock may tame this Ass.

Besides all these there are many other Asses, as your Frenchified ass, that
goes stradling with his legs so wide asunder, that a wheelebarrow may run
between them, and this came with leaping of Mules and Muliers, that is women.

There are also intelligent Asses that will discourse profoundly of matters
above their understanding. And valiant asses, that when they come into the
Field will shoot wet powder backward, and beshite themselves for fear. Folly
therefore being ashamed that the old Proverb is true, Stultorum plena sunt
omnia, the world is full of Fools and asses, has framed this petition against
all sorts of asses.

Follies Petition against all sorts of Fools and Asses.
Proudly and foolishly shows,
THat whereas a number of asses and malignant parties have long ears, and do
eat more hay then their bodies are worth, being shitten companions, and
hayre-braind coxcombs, whose understandings are full of want of knowledge,
plotting many things in their dreams, and contriving such strange devices, as
the Wisemen of Goteham never thought on, and whereas some of them out of their
stubborn senses, meddling as fools will do, with politic businesses, drink
themselves drunk with discoursing thereon: and whereas there are many prating,
gaping, covetous, and factious fools, humerous fools, and timerarious fools,
fools in long coats and cloakes; and wherea^ some of them have endeavored,
contrary to the Laws of Reason and the peace of the I Will of Man, to fill a
scive with water, and not only to drown Eeles, but to put red Herring into the
Thames to breed there, and to catch all the Rain that has fell in Bottles,
folly therefore desires, that these and all other sorts of fools may be
banished to the I Will of Silly, there to make a Commonwealth of Coxcombs.

FINIS.

