A Discovery of the Savoy-Plot; with an Account of the Manner of Seizing and
Securing Fourteen Priests and Papists, with great Bundles of Papers, some of
which are said to be the late King's Declarations, etc. in Dutchy-Lane near the
Savoy.
Licensed, June 17th, 1689.
NOtwithstanding the late Act of Parliament to Banish Papists Ten Miles from
the Town and the many other Statutes made against their going to Mass, and to
Curb the Insolency of their Pernicious Principles and Practices which they have
continually demonstrated against the Government, yet we find that they are so
regardless of the Laws, as to continue in open Defiance against them, and to
Lurk in every Quarter about the Town, there being such of them who Daily hold
their Cabals, where they Consult Notorious Falsehoods on purpose to defame the
Government, and broach it for Current about the Town; but through the Vigilance
of some discerning Protestants, a whole Nest of them was Yesterday in the
Afternoon discovered and seized upon in Dutchy-Lane in the Savoy, to the Number
of Eleven, all Papists, if not most of them Priests and Jesuits. That English
Proverb, When Rogues fall out, Honest Men comes by their Goods; being hereby
Verified, for one Mrs. Curtain a Lodger in Mr. Fitzgeralds House in
Dutchy-Lane in the Savoy having some difference with her Land-Lady, took the
opportunity to give Information at Court, that a Swarm of Irish Priests,
Jesuits and Papists, were privately hatching Mischief in a Vault under Ground
in the said Mr. Fitzgeralds House; a Messenger with a Band of Soldiers having
first Guarded all the Avenues, entered the said House, and as they were
secretly escaping, seized about Eight, but being informed that more were there,
they found one hid in the Oven, a Second in a Cubbard, and a Third in a Trunk,
and carried them off, with the Master of the House, with all their Books and
their Papers, which may prove of dangerous Import, it being said, some of King
James' Declaration are among them; they also seized one Mr. Somorson, with
several others, at his House in the said Lane, and have carried them all for
the present, being Fourteen in Number, to the Round-House by the May Pole in
the Strand, and will this Day have them Examined at White Hall, and great
Discoveries are expected from it.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Linsey at the Unicorn in the Strand, 1689.


