Doctor LAMBS DARLING: OR, Strange and terrible News from Salisbury; BEING A
true, exact, and perfect Relation, of the great and wonderful Contract and
Engagement made between the Devil, and Mistress Anne Bodenham; with the manner
how she could transform her self into the shape of a Mastive Dog, a black Lion,
a white Bear, a Woolf, a Eull, and a Cat; and by her Charms and Spells, send
either man or woman 40 miles an hour in the Air. The Trial, Examination, and
Confession of the said Mistress Bodenham, before the Lord chief Baron Wild, and
the Sentence of Death pronounced against her, for bewitching of An Styles, and
forcing her to write her Name in the Devils Book with her own blood; so that
for five days she lay in cruel and bitter Torments; sometimes the Devil
appearing all in black without a head, renting her clothes, tearing her skin,
and tossing her up and down the chamber, to the great astonishment of the
Spectators.

APpointed to be printed and published, as a Caveat and Warning piece for
England, Scotland, and Ireland.

July 25 James Bower, Cleric.



London, Printed for G. Horton, 1653.

HIstory often speaks, and common observation assures Us, that Bees gather
exeellent honey out of the bitterest herbs: So, were we wise, we might make
good use of this ensuing Relation: Wherein we may consider how the Devil guls
and deceives the souls of the sons of men, He (without doubt) to bring them
into such an unhappy league with himself, promises them to be no Inferiors to
the greatest in the world. But to the subject of my Discourse.

There was lately arraigned at Salisbury, before the Right Honorable the Lord
chief Baron Wild, Judge of the Assise, one Anne Bodenham, formerly servant to
Dr. Lamb, for her strange and wonderful Diabolical usage of a Maid, servant to
M. Goddard, by name Anne Styles; who having lost a silver spoon, went to the
foresaid Witch, to discover the person that had stolen it; whereupon this
cunning woman put on her spectacles, demanded 12 d. which she had, and then
opened a book, in which there seemed to be the picture of the Devil, to the
Maids appearance, with cloven feet and claws; after which, the Witch took a
green Glass, and showed the maid the shape of many persons what they were doing
in her Masters house, and said, that the spoon should be brought again shortly
by a little boy; but said, she would have occasion to come to her again very
suddenly; and accordingly, within two days after, her Mistress being afraid of
being poisoned, sent the Maid again to the said Witch, to know if there were
any such thing intended, and the maid going, a little black Dog, to her
apprehension ran before her over Crane-bridge, and brought her to the Witches
house, being dark, where the doors flew open, without knocking, and the Witch
met her at the second door, and told her she knew wherefore she came, and that
it was about poisoning; for, said she, on Friday night there shall be a cup of
spiced Ale prepared, with poison in it; but be sure you give your Mistress
notice of it. The next day being Saturday the maid was sent again to the Witch
to get some example shown upon the Gentlewoman that should procure the poison;
and the Witch gave her a powder, Dill leaves, and the paring of her own nails;
all which the maid was to give to her Mistress; the powder was to be put in the
young Gentlewomens Mistress Sarah and Mistress Anne Goddards drink or broth, to
rot their guts in their bellies; the leaves to rub about the brims of the pot,
to make their teeth fall out of their heads, and the paring of the nails to
make them drunk and mad. And told the maid that when they gave it them, they
must cross their breasts, and say, In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ grant
that this may be. But the maid coming again on the Monday following, asked her
whether she approved of her journey for London; the Witch replied, Will thou go
to London high or low? To which the maid answered, What do you mean by that?
She said, If you will go on high, you shall be carried to London in the Air,
and be there in two h^urs; but if you go a low, you shall be taken at Sutton
towns end. Yet before she departed, the Witch desired the maid to live with
her, and she would teach her a more stranger Art: What Is that, said the maid,
she answered, you shall know presently, and forthwith she appeared in the shape
of a great black Cat, and lay along by the Chimney: at which the maid being
affrighted, she came into her shape again, saying, But before you go, you must
seal unto me your body and bl^ud not to discover me; which she promising to do,
she forthwith made a Circle, and called Beezebub, Tormentor, Lucifer, and
Satan, appear; then appeared two spirits in the likeness of great boys, with
long shagged black hair, and stood by her, looking over her shoulder; then the
Witch took the meids fore-singer of her right hand, and pricked it with a pin,
and squeezed out the blood, and put it into a pen, and put the pen into the
maids hand, and held her hand to write in a book, and one of the Spirits laid
his hand or claw upon the Witches, whilst the maid wrote, and when she had
done writing whilst their hands were together, the Witch said Amen, and made
the maid say Amen, and the Spirits said, Amen, Amen; and the Spirits hand did
feel cold to the maid as it touched her hand, when the Witches hand and hers
were together writing; and then the Spirit gave a piece of silver (which he
first bit) to the Witch, who gave it to the maid, and also stuck two pins in
the maids head-cloathes, and bid her keep them, and be gone, saying, I will
now vex thee far worse, then ever I did the man in Clarington Park, which I
made walk about with a bundle of pales on his back all night in a Pond of
water, and could not lay them down till the next morning. Thus having ended her
diabolical speech, immediately after the maid were exceedingly perplexed with
inward Torments, crying out, O the Devil, the Witch, and the two ragged boys
are pulling me a pieces! Oh very damnable, very wretched: this hand of mine
writ my name in the Devils book; this finger of mine was pricked, here is yet
the hole that was made; and with my blood I wrote my own Damnation, and have
cut my self off from Heaven and Eternal life; the Devil came, oh! in a terrible
shape to me, entered within me, and there he lies swelling in my body, gnawing
at my heart, tearing my bowels within me, and there is no hopes, but one time
or other will tear me all in pieces; O hold me, hold me, or else the Devil will
t^ke me: I see him now standing on the top of the house, with glittering eyes,
looking on me, and will carry me away. Thus was she miserably tormented, for
the space of five days, many times being pulled from those that held her,
which made the people in the Room run away from her for fear; the maid being
thrown from the low bed whereon she lay, to the top of the high bed, and her
clothes torn off her back, and a piece of her skin torn away, the Candle in
the Room, standing on a Table, was thrown down, and put out; at which time,
there being a little boy that was almost asleep, but with this noise being
frighted, had not power with the rest, to go out of the room, staid there, and
saw a spirit in the likeness of a great black man, with no head, in the room
souffling with the maid, and took her and set her into a chair, and told her
she must go with him, he was come for her soul, she had given it to him: But
the maid answered, that her soul was none of her own to give, it belonged to
her Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who had purchased it with his own precious
blood; and although he had got her blood, yet he should never have her soul:
Whereupon after tumbling and throwing the maid about the Devil vanished in a
flame of fire. After many such like cruel Torments, sometimes lying in a
trance; sometimes foaming at the mouth; and sometimes being tossed from the
lower bed to the high bed; and from thence to the top of the Tester; yet at
last (when news was brought that the Witch was executed) it pleased the Divine
providence of the great Jehovah of Heaven, to restore her to her former state
and condition, crying out, Oh what a loving God have I to break me off with
this league from the Devil! Oh what a sweet Savior have I that has ransomed
my poor soul from the infernal Lake, and brought me even from the very brinks
of Hell: Blessed be his name; he has wrought my deliverance, and dispossessed
the evil spirit. Many other strange and diabolical actions, the foresaid Witch
both practiced and put in execution; namely, by her several Charms and Spells,
she would convey either man or woman 40 miles an hour in the Air, she was one
that would undertake to cure almost any Diseases by the said Charms, but
sometimes used physical ingredients, to cure her abominable practices; she would
undertake to procure things that were lost, and restore goods that were stolen;
she could transform her self into any shape whatsoever, viz. A Mastive Dog, A
black Lion, A white Bear, A Woolf, A Monkey, A Horse, A Bull, And a Calf.


She had likewise the marks of an absolute Witch, having a Teat about the
length and bigness of the Nipple of a woman's breast, and hollow and soft as a
Nipple, with a hole on the top of it, on her left shoulder, and another
likewise was found in her secret place, like the former on her shoulder, which
was given in to the Court upon evidence by Molier Damely, Alice Cleverly, Grace
Stokes,
for which, she was arraigned and condemned to be hanged; no sooner was
sentence denounced, but she skriek'd out with a most hideous noise, and desired
to be buried under the Gallows and coming to the place of execution, she ran up
the ladder, and the rope being put about her neck, she went to turn her self
off; but the Executioner staid her, and desired her to forgive him: she
replied, Forgive thee! A pox on thee, turn me off; which were the last words
she said. Thus, dear hearts, you see, those that forsake God in their lives,
shall be forsaken of him in their deaths.

FINIS.

