A DISCOURSE Concerning the AFFAIRS OF IRELAND.
LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert. 1650.
THey that go about to conquer Ireland, and to reduce it to a form of
compliance and obedience, shall find inward advantages from the consciences of
their enemies, and designment of providence to pursue those sins in which they
lie, stubborness, idleness, ingratitude, with those punishments which are
aspectabiles, and not usually adjourned to the general doom of the great day. A
thing of the largest inhancement of enterprise and extent of possibilities,
when David's Sword is drawn out of the sheath of the Ephod, and we stand bound,
not only by the fundamental Maxims of State, but by the very tenor and right
of our being (which as it is antecedent to State-relations, so it is primalily
obliging) to be instruments in the hand of God, assuming us for the respective
distributing and awarding his judgments.

Ireland has been formerly to us what Italy was to the French, a grave or
Caemetery, a burden to our State rather then a profit, and it almost stood like
France in our Title, the ground uncertain; we have had a successive right for
hundreds of years, no particular dispathy with the Nation, but what was
accidental, and of a secondary intention from our different Religion, and those
revenges which are deepest impressed, and have the most indelible character
(Religion toward their Country making it Sacramental) set on them amidst the
often struglings for the life of their liberty; For Nimrods and hunters of men
know this, that if the people, that unruly beast, be not killed at one blow,
their distemperd blood will be unfit to dye the Robes of Sovereignty. But if we
look about the world, the Art of keeping that which the sword bequeaths, and
presents no other Title but what howsoever the conquered thinks unjust, is
almost among things lost, in which the Romans were their Crafts-masters: And
it is in our hopes, that as some noble spirits have renewed their Discipline and
instaured the ancient credit, and severity of the field; so this considerable
part of wisdom shall not long lie neglected.

The Spaniard seems to have some skill in this secret of Government, as the
Italians say, where they fix their Empires they are eternal; but every one
knows to well their Arts, as likewise the Turks.

But to come somewhat nearer the business, since the wisdom of the State has
looked on that unpolisht part of their Dominion, and desired wisely to secure
it, as the avenues and approaches of this Nation, and the present case of
things gives us opportunity, we may exercise that part of wisdom which looks
forwards.

We are not generally now of so quick a sense of out sufferings, nor are the
issues of our zeal so strong, as to actuate our passions into a general
extirpation of so large a moity of Christendom, we are better taught, it is the
reserve of Omnipotency to punish with deluges; for as inseriour Tribunals do
not reach all sins, so do they not take notice of all persons in their
collective capacities: How shall the corrective part of justice which is most
allowable, have any room when it comes with fire to burn up its subject?

Christians by a more exalted advanced Discripline more accomplishing its
design, as the great medium of rational society and commissure of mankind, has
taught us other securities then revenge, which always (if great and politickly
universal) swells over the banks and bounds of Christianity: or if limited and
confined leaving exasperations in the persons, gives an eternity and infinity
to evil. We proceed not to the defalcation of a person who is not incurable,
and to count any one desperate and derelict, is tacitly to resolve not to live
up to the extensive latitude, and intensive height of our Religion, whose
exemplarity, if drawn out and approximated to persons in the circumstances of
duties, would expel from rational nature, and disposess any baseness that
pretends to render it insanable.

There may be room for a general pardon, Gospel Cities of Refuge, an overture
which, unless the spirits of the enemy be very high, (as they are not in those
Provinces at this time) and so it breeds contempt, may have an effect, as
carrying a hand of superiority over a party, and is infinitely remote, far from
any thing of equality, or acknowledgment to that party we have already designed
to mercy before a victory; And all Reason of State besides reason of morality,
and experience in our Nation has found it advantageous to reduce things to the
Sanctuary, by first posting up Pardons and terms of composure, which no
endeavor of enemies or braveries of contempt can make so transient, but
somewhat will be sticking; For those Protections which were formerly given, and
Leases of life now, upon the submissions of persons, are of a more uncertain
tenure, of a more private mercy and advantage to Officers, then of public
reputation to the clemency of the State; the difficulty of suing them being
anxious, their limited terms usually expireing together with their Loyalty.
The Majesty of the State, which is religiously to be maintained with the
circumvallations of Laws and Prerogatives, may wisely secure this Act of mercy
from slightings, with public resentments of the depretiation of such an
overture, with convenient restrictions and exemptions of persons, and
particular advantages to greater submissions, or signal merit and service, all
in the for malities of Law given out, as at the request of the Provincials.

The case of Religion is of a deeper disquisition, the Nobility of that Kingdom
have made it a pretense through all the course of their rebellions, and the
Irish Sea is not tempestuous, unless beat upon by the wind of such seditious
pretenses; They speak with some passion, that our tyranny was worse then
Pharaoh's, entituling their particular interest with the general concernment of
Christianity, defense of Faith and Law of God. That Speech of the Spaniard,
that they were a peeple so barbarous that he did not think Christ died for
them, is to be thought to be the result of his despair and anger, freely
breathed out before his confinement he was to undergo, for his disservice to
that Master that knew how to use the pretentions of Religion, in a design once
dearer to him then his life. This fuel to the fire of the rebellion, is not to
be taken away by a persecution of their Religion; for they are so inhumane and
unlike men, that we are first to reconcile them to our nature, humanity, and
their own reason, before we can put them in a capacity of the duties and
propositions of our Religion; For we must not understand any thing by Religion
in its objective property extensive to Faith, but many partial objects of
assent complicated together, which like pearls would be cast to swine, when
they are represented to faculties utterly incapable of rational Proposals: and
as natural actions which do not communicare materiam with spirituals nor ends,
are first existent before they were privileged by God into means and relatives
to our end and eternities: so we first exist as men, before we are fit for the
super-inductions and after-sanctions of Christianity; Nor would this fierce
proceeding have a better reason from the nature of Religion, which is of
another judicature and appeal, and to be brought into the soul by intrinsical
arguments. Tortures although they weaken the nerves of Religion, yet they
stretch them larger and distend them, the nature of Religion arming; for
certainly, it is a Religion creeps on the ground and does not relate to God,
(which yet all Religion does) which neither by the professed severity of punitive
duty and documents of mortality, or expectations and prepossessions of future
state (arguments of state speaking home to the soul) each of which the worst of
Religions, and therefore the wisest will most pretend, could fire the
affections naturally of a violent and inflameable matter into some expresses of
ecstasy amidst torments, where it has all the advantages of its improvement to
an high ascent, that the instances of death turning all hopes to future, and
making them almost present can furnish with, which one blaze at the time of
death carries so much of confirmation in it, to popular minds that have not
Religion in the intellect, as it is too dangerous an argument to be publicly
urged, when wiser heads are almost startled in private. I Will add this one thing,
if once this obtains that the power of sounding and interdicting co^munities of
society, shall merely hang from the differences in our overtures of Religion,
we having left plain fact and compact, are already run into a rule of morality,
for civil constitutions and sanctions of State, our Divines will be our
Lawyers; and this rule of morality, being according to the goodness and malice
of acts which are of a dubious and obscure disceptation, of various
apprehension and circumstance, we run our selves into the toyls of confusion,
and affront highly sociable nature, by giving it under the power of a Law,
which is not a proportionate means to bring us to the end designed in its
Creation.

The violent prosecution of their Religion will but procure a further
alienation from us, for their lying in that Religion being of secret reason,
and only punible by God that knows it, and under his notice and cognizance,
we have no reason to put outermost which will satisfy their exasperated
spirits in the justice of such proceedings; yet whatsoever Toleration be
granted in this necessity of things, private, or in out-townes it must be
composed with infinite caution that it may not seem to give jus verum but only
impunity; for by experience we know that those Edicts of pacification in
France which the wisdom of the Council of Henry the fourth looked on as the only
remedy left for to heal the wounds of that Nation, made by two great Factions,
bringing that State to an Engagement which was infinitely to the disadvantage
of superiority by making it stoop to a lesser relation, was cause of most of
the ensuing wars, and besides being (as all such things are) full of limits and
cautions, and like a stream of an unconstant and doubtful channel now receding
to this party, now to that, would breed even in the exactest performances
eternal matter of confusion; thus should we be always conquering and yet never
overcome, a thing dangerous to us who have always an estate there to lose,
when we have not our forces there to succor it.

I wonder when some Kingdoms so easily take the vein of the Religion of their
Conquerours, fitting the Crown of Sovereignty and Robes of Priesthood to the
same person, according to first institutions in their different capacities, and
yet the principles of this Nation have risen when there was nothing to commend
or scarcely to make the Religion tolerable, yet surely it is fit we think God
had his ends in this action and sudden conquest, and has designed the care to
us of eating it out by prohibitions, in public Towns serting up men vehement
in their affections, exemplary care to be had against the founding of Irish
Seminaries, instituting and executing all the severest politic Laws against
any strangers that should seduce them, or incense them, giving them to
understand universally, that we stand now on terms of composition with Spain,
from whence they were wont to flush their hopes, and animate rebellions, and
that whilst there be born an even hand over the respective Nations, in terms
of compact or usury, or indifferent (upon their securities) preferments and
promised immunities and exemptions: yet there is to be a particular bosom
open, and encouragement to any that embrace the reformed Religion, care to be
that Churches may be repaired, and that function that serves at the Altar, be
secured from the disrespect or contempt of their enemies, either in persons or
service, and in the chief Cities and Towns there may be other Schools besides
the University in Dublin, the Statutes of which may be renewed, and good
stipends for Professors, and encouragements, the delogation of which business,
is referred to such men as need no particular instructions; Hither the youth
and Gentry of the Nation being invited, they may learn at least to hear well of
the Protestant Religion, and there may be laid a fair ground for insinuation,
or at least a moderateness in their opinions.

And since the plague, and war, and justice, (and indeed the Commander in this
war has been but a judge itinerant) have laid wast the Land; care must be
taken of populations and reinforcing the stock of the Creation; yet in this
business, we must not look on our sending Colonies as letting out the
distempered blood of this Nation, or as an honored exile for men of most broken
hopes and profligate spirits, nor yet must it be the seat to minds discontented
with the present Government, least that controversy be added to all the other
Propositions of rebellion; but they must be persons of indifferent, honest,
ineffective spirits, fit for those employments which do not exercise the
fingers but the arms, and that not only from the nature of that wasted
harassed Nation which wants these Arts to recover it; but out of the account of
the danger of fellulary idle professions, which leave men wind enough to make
up into discourses. We must not judge the advantages of Colonies by the vastnes
and circuit of the ground they overspread, but by the strength and union; the
first in this numerousness of the Irish Nation, is rather to be prevented then
wished; for besides the uncomfortableness of cohabitation with such ill
neighbors, and their envy, which will be consequent to our out-witting them,
and flourishing in their own Country, which usually Plantations do, as being
parts of a whole somewhere confederate with them and careful of them, and
having fresher hopes, and only a general curse on the Land to struggle with,
not yet by particular defilements having made it more barren, it is to break the
power of the Nation, and to dispark the English-Pale by cutting it into many
streams.

Wisemen once thought, that if not the equality and evenness of our justice
and Government, yet the parity of our condition with the Irish, would have
brought them to an uniformity in State, and greater compliances; yet we have
found, this may be hudled up amongst the many oversights in prosecution of the
relative interest of that Nation. We all know that for all these forty years of
Peace and Plenty, their Nobility respected in our Court, their Religion not
much oppressed, they were ingrafted into our familyes, filled every place but our
Churches, and had we not bin to deal with acts of cruelty but with nature,
could our blood have softend this Adamant we had bin secure, for by the
intermixture of marriages, and interlacing private allegiances, we conveyed
English blood into their veins, somewhat degenerating into their rudenesses,
and naturalizing their incivilities; yet in the last horrible Rebellion, a
business of secret causes and secretest contrivance, all kindreds, tenants,
wives were designed, not scarcely the greatest courtesy through the extensive
body of the whole Nation, in all the variety of relation, could endear them, as
to save the lives of any by revealing their accomplices: never had humanity task
to recover such minds. All the advantage their dissemination had was this, that
the ruin sooner and more universally overflowed them: had the main body bin in
the chiefest Towns and Cities, they had bin a general terror to the Provinces,
strength to the Nation, and could not possibly have presented to us a spectacle
of so much sadness and resentment, by exhibiting to us the greatness of what we
did possess once by the space that their ruins covered; It would be good that
the undertakers in Plantations be bounded by plots, according to exact
prescriptions and the securer conveniences of the Country, which must be more
severely looked into, because men in such undertakings, will prefer the
covetousness of their desires before the securing themselves or the Nation.

It will be necessary to raise a Tribunal of justice; In this there are two
cases; either it may be Marshal, according to the Military condition of the
Nation, which kind of Government, as it is necessary it should be put into such
hands whose actions are commenced with zeal and severity, because it has
something more in it of absoluteness then ordinary forms; so is animalis
justitia a virid way of domination for an unsettled State, and for diffusing
greater terror, guarding the majesty and authority of the Laws: The other
process is by Judges and those relative subordinations, as Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
etc. as we have in the Counties of England, and to which that Nation has been
formerly used, and it has this of endearment in it, that as it is of a more
moderate and civil Robe, and being a long harangue and series of orderly acts
and solemn proceedings, and containing under it many appellatives that are
expresses of subordination and course, it will be the most infallible, visible
and living argument of plenary possession, power, and protection, that our
Reason from any Topic can make out.

The Nobility among them maintayn their Authority over them with cruelty,
taxations, rites of their Country, barbarousness in their creations and
installments into the successions of their predecessors, by Genealogies far
fetched and deduced without any light of History through the dark Mazes of
Antiquity, and other Enchantments, which carrying with them the custom and
reverence of their Religion, do exceedingly bolster up their usurpt
pretensions: This is a rank of a doubtful usage in the condition of this State,
where there are not particular persons unless by a civil command of
Government, and general reverence of the conquering Nation, in such a
successive height of blood and greatness; and of these they will be apt to
remember that they were once below them, and may be again, conquered Nobility
living most unwillingly under free States, where there is not a Court to
entertain them; yet for all this, the Romans by the Majesty of their Nation
gave a Title, paramount to the blood and honor of the greatest Princes of the
world, by hallowing any person that was entrusted in their service; I wish this
had been better observed in this State hitherto; that course which some Kings
of Scotland took toward the Nobility, in a case almost parallel may be
considered; but to destroy their petry Dominion, the peeple may be taken under
the immediate protection of the State, and what Land they hold of their Lords,
may not be rented according to arbitrary uncertain assessments, but certain
rents and sums, as our Farms in England. But thus by weakening the Nobility,
the peeple might rise, dangerous to a peeple that would not thank us for being
disenslaved, but think themselves nearer a general Liberty. For as God first
moving the parts of the Creation, infused a quantity of motion in every body,
and collectively over all the world; which in the main body of things, is still
the same, not suffering any imbellishment in its main stock, though by
particular communication one part now moves in the air, another lies on the
ground: so there is infused into Kingdoms and the world a main stock of spirit,
motion, activity, which although now is in the Nobles, and then in the peeple,
according to the variety of the conjunctions of causes and bandying of
contingencies; yet in its diffusive issue is still maintained invariable,
entire.

It may be wisdom to maintain still a difference of Coins in both the
Kingdoms, and that ours may not be transported thither to the impoverishing
the Nation and furnishing the Rebels with money, when many occasions bring it
into their hands, which may further them in their rebellion by procuring things
they want for them in other Countries. And for further convenience in this
business there may be offices of Exchange according to the distinct
proportions in London, Chester, Bristow, Cork, Waterford.

If I knew any virtue they had, I would have it encouraged, making it if
particular to run through the whole object and habit, if restrained and
provincial, to be general and National; or by actuating it if it be but in the
power of their nature.

To conclude; Let us not despair of them, but carrying our things with wisdom,
expect providence, which is to acts of wise and politic natures what concourse
is to natural powers; and tho Hell may seem to plead dereliction with our
Maker, as to the tenure of that nation, yet we shall presume on God by
interpreting his silence into alienation, imposing significations upon eternal
acts, which we do not do in our own before constitutions; Nulla est
prescriptio contra Deum, because of the infinite right he has to any thing
that was once his own; if he does yet take no notice of them: no man that
speaks worthily of God dares imagine that as he made them by his word, so he
must forfeit them by his silence.

FINIS.

