THE DISORDERS OF BASSETT, A NOVEL.

Done out of French.

LONDON, Printed for John Newton at the Three Pigeons over against the Inner
Temple Gate, in Fleet Street. 1688.

The Translators PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Author of that little French Novel (whereof this is a Translation) in his
Preface to the Reader, does assure him, that there is not any one Character in
the whole Piece, which was drawn by the Life; and that he designed it no
otherwise then as a general Representation of those many and great
Extravagancies* which Bassett had occasion'^ in France, and which were the
Grounds of a late Edict; whereby not only that, but some other Games of the
like Nature, were publicly forbid.

Now if he could s;ay so, how much more may the Translator; who, being an
absolute Stranger to this Game, as well as all others, cannot reasonably be
thought to have designed this as a Reflection upon any Person whatever,
especially since he did not think fit to lay the Scene in England. The Pastime
of a few idle Hours, and the desire of preserving that very little smattering
in the French Language which he can pretend to, was all the Inducement or
Design he had in undertaking this present Translation; wherein (though he never
intended it as a literal one,) there are but very few places, and those too
little material, that vary from the Original.

THE DISORDERS OF BASSETT.
ONE Day at Madam Gendrill's at Bassett, he that kept the Bank taillied with
the greatest Fortune in the World; he never lost so much as one Septet-le-va,
and seldom the Paroli, insomuch that he broke all the Setters; some were
complaining and sighing, others crying, fretting, and swearing; every one, in
fine, had some particular way or other to express the great Concern he was in;
amongst whom Madam Landroze bore no small part, she having been a considerable
loser; and that which vexed her most, was to lose the same Card four times in
one Deal. The Marquess of Roziers, who was in Love with her, being extremely
afflicted to see her so concerned, Madam, said he, set the rest of your Money
upon the Knave, I believe 'twill prove a good Card, having lost twice already.
You have never yet been lucky to me, Sir, said she, yet I Will venture for once;
the Knave won a Sonica. Pray Madam, said the Marquess, make the Paroli upon the
same Card. Once more, Sir, said she, I must needs tell you, you were not born
to bring me good Luck, yet however I Will venture; the Knave won again. Now, Sir,
said she, upon what Card shall we make the Sep-et-le-va? Madam, replied the
Marquess, very coldly, I was never born to bring you good Luck, therefore be
pleased to choose one your self. Pray, Sir, said she, think of a Card quickly.
Madam, said the Marquess, very heavily, you will certainly lose it; she made
the Sept-et-le-va upon the Ace, the Ace lost; whereupon she rose up on a
sudden, tore the Ace, and all her Book; and throwing the Pieces at the
Marquess, I should think it strange, said she to him, in an angry and
disdainful way, if in all my Life, I should thrive in any one thing, wherein I
have to do with you; believe me, we two were not born but to be a Plague to
each other. The Marquess tried to pacify her, and proffered he^ his Hand to
wait on her home; but she refused it very Scornfully, without so much as taking
the least notice of him. This Carriage of hers troubled him extremely, and
threw him into a deep Melancholy, which his Friend the Count de Charlois having
perceived, rose from Bassett, and went away with him in his Coach.

When soon after, as the Marquess was lolling very thoughtfully, the Count
turning that way, and looking steadfastly upon him, said to him, Unhappy Wretch
that thou art, to have a concern for one who does so little deserve it; a silly
Coquette creature, whom none but your self would ever have thought of. What do
you find in her, continued he, that is taking? She is lean, she has a wide
Mouth. What, said the Marquess, intetrupting him, do I see in her that is
taking? Who ever saw more lovely and charming blew Eyes then hers are? Was
there ever a clearer and a more delicate Complexion, a whiter and more even
set of Teeth, a better proportioned Nose, or a more exact and easy shape then
she has? Call you those lovely and charming Eyes, replied the Count, which are
so sunk into her Head; or that Complexion delicate and clear, which sometimes
is so hideous yellow? Her Nose is inclined to red, or looks bluish at the
best: If her Teeth are white and even, it is that she uses Opiate Powders, and
the File so often. Is that to bs exactly and easily shaped, to have such an
aukard gate as she has? Her Neck, I must confess is white; but yet, were it not
for the Tailor, it is such a one as no body would see it. She Is a Wit it is true,
but a very dangerous, and illnatur'd one. If any Woman is Handsome, Airy, or
any ways accomplished, she cannot endure her, but in all Companies where e're
she comes, is raising a thousand spiteful Stories of her. She hates all
Womankind; but then, to make amends, she is is in love with all Mankind: And I
believe you are the only Man she ever used ill; and that for no other reason,
but because you have too much worth in you; a thing no ways agreeable to her
humor. For my part I declare, if heretofore I have had any inclination for
her, it has been a very slight one, and such as never went near to my Heart.
Count said the Marquess, I Am told you two are not very well together. Troth
replied the Count, very briskly, because I Am grown weary of her. She Is a
strange humored Woman, and it is almost impossible to please her. When I used
to visit her I looked as thin and lean as a Skeleton. What I now tell you, is
not out of any spleen to her, but a real concern I have to see you so
desperately engaged, and a desire to cure you of so unreasonable and so
unfortunate a Passion. Alas! dear Count, replied the Marquess; little do you
know my heart in this matter; I am not my own Master as you think; my reason is
quite given up, and whatever Difficulties and Arguments she opposes to my
Passion, serve but to make her more absolutely imperious. Nay, what way is
there in the World, that I have not tried to cure my self of the Passion I have
for Madam Landroze; and yet all, alas! has served only to make me more
desperately in love with her. How often have I, quite disheartn'd by her
slights, with Tears in my Eyes, said to her, Farewell Madam, and for ever
farewell? Once I took up a resolution never to see her more: but scarce could I
in pain, linger out two whole days in that mind, but I was forced to take up a
new one. I am not, I would then say, sufficiently revenged of her in not seeing
her any more; 'twere fit she should see her self slighted, and me prefer
another before her.

I went to Mass to the Petits Capucins, where I knew she used to go every day.
I will salute her, thought I, but it shall be with that coldness, and
indifferency, that she shall soon perceive how little I value her; and if I
show any Concern or Complaisance for any body, it shall be for Madam Rocheron
her mortal Enemy. ah! thought I, so shall I be fufficiently revenged. But oh!
the moment I spied her out in the Church, I forgot all my former Resolutions;
and instead of a cold and a disdainful Behavior, I saluted her with all the
submissive and languishing Looks imaginable.

As I was discoursing with Madam Rocheron, I observed a Shagreen in Madam
Landroze's Looks: immediately, forgetting the Design that brought me thither, I
flew away in a great hurry, and confusion, without being able to beg her
Pardon. When I came home, reflecting upon my weakness; fly, fly, said I, every
place where Madam Landroze is: there is nothing but absence can cure me. The
Court was at Fontainbleau. I left Paris, and went thither, where I sought out
for a hundred Pastimes, and Diversions, to make me forget her; Walking, Gaming,
Treating and Gallanting the Ladies, was the constant business of the day. Yet
would you wonder to see how this cruel Passion did slily shuffle it self into
the midst of all my Diversions. I had not gone an hundred Yards into the Wood
at Fontainbleau, when falling into a deep Melancholy, my Head ran of nothing
but Madam Landroze, and I wished to meet her there, that I might reproach her
with Ingratit ude. When ever I entertained any of the Ladies with any piece of
Gallantry, I insensibly addressed my self to her, who had most of the Air of
Madam Landroze. At Bassett, at the Queen's, or any where else, when I have lost
a Paroli or Sept-et-le-va; alas! said I to my self, Can so unfortunate a
Creature as I am, ever hope to have good luck; when ever I have won, these are
not the Joys, thought I, that can make me happy. In the midst of great
Dainties, the delicate Flavor of the richest Wines imaginable, is no otherwise
pleasant to me, then as it serves to amuze me with the vain Thoughts of what a
concern she will be in to have lost me, and of being capable by that means to
make her sensible of the loss.

All the while the Court was at Fontainbleau; I spent my time so miserably as I
tell you; and by this way of living. I was grown so moap'd, and so fallen away,
that no body could have known me. Being sensible at last, that none of these
Remedies were sufficient to cure me; I resolved to return to Paris, and
throwing my self at her Feet, to ask her Pardon. But after I had given her a
faithful Account how dismally I spent my time at Fontainbleau; would you
believe what an Answer this Ungrateful Creature made me? Monsieur Marquess said
she, you have made good use of the time you spent in reading Romances, and have
an admirable way of representing the Characters of those great Heroes. Oh cruel
Creature! was ever the like said? Faith Marquess, said the Count very briskly,
shall I tell you my mind plainly; you are a mere Novice in this Affair. Alas,
what good can you hope to make of such Florid Discourses: the Ladies of this
Age, (especially such as Madam Landroze) are for something more substantial,
and to the purpose. Are you in Love with a Woman, and would you that she should
return it? find out what she takes most delight in, and make your Court to her
that way. Is she Musically given? entertain her with public Musick-meetings,
and treat her often at the Opera. If she loves Play, go halfs with her, and be
sure never to let her want Money. Does she love fine Clothes, and to be always
well dressed? Present her with the Richest, and most fashionable Silks you can
meet with. If she loves to eat well, make her frequent entertainments; and, as
often as may be; let 'em be given out of Town; and then if at any time, you
find her in better humor, and more transported then ordinary, make use of the
opportunity; bear up to her briskly, and be not frighted with the show of a
forced Modesty: if she is angry beg her Pardon, and lay the blame upon the
violence of your Passion: Women are always easy to forgive Affronts of that
nature: As soon as ever you are reconciled, be not afraid, but at her again,
and try your Fortune three or four times more; till at last, take my word
for it, you will find that Happy and Critical Minute you look for. Count replied
the Marquess, you talk like an Errant Debauchee: Know you not, that I naturally
hate Debauchery, and desire nothing further of Madam Landroze, then to make my
self Master of her Heart? Alas! Poor Young Man, said the Count, a Woman's
Senses and Affections always go together; So that whoever pleases the former,
may be sure not to miss of the latter. Well, well, Count, replied the Marquess,
you, that pretend to be so bold, how would you, were you in my place, behave
your self before Madam Landroze? How? said the Count, very easily: She loves
Play, and particularly Bassett; keep a Bank at her House, do you-tailliee, and
let her be your Crouppier. I am acquainted with the Chevalier Briere, he is a
cunning professed Gamester, knows all the Gamesters about Paris, and would be
glad with all his Heart to go in the Bank: He wall bring you as many Gamesters
as you desire. Madam Landroze is Covetous, and the advantage the Bank has over
the Setters, is so great, that at the long run, you will infallibly be a
considerable winner. This is the way you must take to win her Heart. By this
means you will have an opportunity of seeing her every day, and of rallying
with her upon all those who lose their Money. As for the Chevalier, it is no
matter whether he knows the Intrigue or no; for he has an admirable way of
making Discoveries. In fine, you will be allowed a great freedom, and have a
thousand little secrets told you; and without jesting, the Money she will win
in going with you, will make you appear more amiable in her sight, and she
consequently more sensible of the Passion you have for her. Ah! Count, replied
the Marquess, what a Proposal have you made me, I have so great a Passion for
Madam Landroze, that I cannot endure the very thoughts of it; to keep a Bank at
her house, and make it a public Gameing Ordinary, and Rendevouze for all sorts
of People, where every Rake-helly Sharper of the Town, and common Strumpet, is
Hail-fellow-well-met with Persons of the best Reputation and Quality, to expose
her every Minute to a thousand Foolleries, and impertinent Disputes and
Quarrels: Fie! fie! it is a thing I cannot endure to think of. Troth, replied the
Count, it is pleasant to see how wonderful nice, and tender you are of Madam
Landroze's Reputation; when, at this very instant, People of the best Quailty
in all Paris, make no scruple of having Bassett at their Houses; and I know
some of very good Fashion, that neither care for Bassett, or any other sort of
Gameing, and yet are desirous to have it at their Houses for the Profit of the
Card-money; and if you will do so for her, take my Word for it she will never
scruple it. Will you hold an hundred Pounds, continued the Count, that she does
not agree to it, when you have once convinced her that there is Money to be got
by it? All Women are Covetous, and she the most in the World. In fine, the Count
made it so plain and clear to the Marquess before he left him, that he went
away with a Resolution of setting up a Bank at Madam Landroze's

The next Morning the Marquess of Rozier's went to her Levee, where having
diverted the peevish humor she was in (as being but just up) he began to
demonstrate to her how disadvantageous a Game Bassett was to the Setters, and
how certainly advantageous to them that keep the Bank, when there were a great
many that played. That at Venice, where Bassett was first found out, the
Venetians Farmed the sole Power and Right of keeping the Bank, at Fifty or
Sixty thousand Crowns a year, which could never turn to Account, were not the
advantages which the Bank has infinitely great, as was easy to be
comprehended; for Example, said he, there are Thirteen different Cards; suppose
then, that the Gamesters set upon the Thirteen different Cards, it must
necessarily follow, that the last Card but one is clear Gains to the Bank, in
that the Dealer cannot loose the last Card, which is a ne v^ pas; besides, if
all the Twelve Cards go every Deal, let 'em loose or win, one Card or other of
the Thirteen will be fass'd; Judge therefore how great an advantage the Bank
has. I must confess it does not so happen, that they set upon the Thirteen
differrent Cards every Deal, and that the Cards are not always well mixed, but
that sometimes Two or Three of a sort shall come together, and at other times
the Dealer's Card does not come till the Six last Tailliees; yet take it one
time with another, the Bank has certainly a very great advantage; these
Reasons, together with the Reflection she made, upon how much she had lost at
that Game, made her resolve for the future to leave it off. The Marquess
finding her in a right Temper for his design, proposed to her to have Bassett
at her House, that she should keep the Bank, recommending to her the Chevalier
Brierie, as one who would be glad to have a share in it, as a Man of a general
Acquaintance in Paris, and one who would bring 'em Gamesters enough. Madam
Landroze liked the Motion, and readily agreed to it; and, after a little pause,
she hinted to the Marquess that with her late losses she was quite run out of
her Money, yet that there was a Merchant she used to deal with, who upon some
Allowance, and defalcation for Interest, would accept of an Assignment upon one
of her Tenants, and advance her the next Years Rent upon it. The Marquess
offered to lay down the Money, and make a Bank for her; which she refused, but
borrowed Three hundred Louis d'ors of her Merchant, to which the Marquess put
Three hundred more, and the Chevalier as many; so that they made up a Bank of
Nine hundred Louis d'ors. What with the pains the Chevalier took to divulge it,
and the Reputation of the Persons concerned, it was quickly known all the Town
over; Gamesters came from all parts, and the very second time they Dealt, there
was so great a Crowd, that notwithstanding the Table held above Thirty, there
were several that could get no room. The Marquess taillied, and Madam Londroze,
and the Chevalier crouppied. Sure nothing could be more Entertaining, than to
see a Number of People setting round a great Table, some looking pale, some
red, some ready to split themselves with laughing, others swearing, storming,
fretting, and making a hundred several Grimaces: Sometimes you should see a
young Heir, yet in deep Mourning for his Father, at one setting play away all
that the good Old Gentleman had been scraping up for three or sour years
together; the Play Master of the Army the poor Soldiers Pay; Abbots their yearly
Revenues; Officers their Pay; the new married Man his Wifes Portion; the
Magistrate his Bribes; and married Women loose great Sums of Money, just before
taken up upon their Necklaces and Jewels. Now and then you should see some
People, having lost all, rise up and go away after a very desperate manner, and
of a sudden return with their Pockets full of Louis d'ors; the purchase Money
of some Plate, or Suit of Hangings just exposed to Sale: In fine, there was a
great Rendevouze and Medly of all sorts of People; the young Heiress with the
old Widow, the grave Statesman with the fluttering Courtier, the infamous
Strumpet with the Ladies of Honor, and the Upstart Valet de Chamber with his
late Lord and Master; a Scene then which nothing can be more ridiculously
Pleasant: One time there were two Citizens Wives, who having been considerable
loosers, went home twice for fresh Recruits; and having at length lost all they
had, went away with Tears in their Eyes. The Chevalier perceiving what a taking
they were in, and having a great Curiosity to hear what they said, went close
after 'em in the Dark, and overheard one saying to the other, What shall we
do? Oh! Unfortunate Creatures! for my part, I am grown desperate, and wish to
dye: you see Cousin, continued she, you must no longer make a Difficulty of
giving up your Daughter to the Farmer general of the Revenues, he has assured
me you shall never want Money, and it is the last Shift we can make; when he has
done with her himself, he will marry her off to one of his under Officers, or if
he should not, yet are there many others who knowing nothing of the Matter,
would be glad of her: The Men are mere Block-heads in that Point, and my
Husbanb, poor Man, who fancies himself a Conjurer, knows no more of that matter
than another Man. In the mean time one of the Footmen coming with a Candle, the
Chevalier stole away, as fearing to be seen. Another time a young Lady betwixt
Seventeen and Eighteen, handsome and well dressed, being at play, and having
very bad luck, the Chevalier over-saw her Card several times; which Madam
Landroze taking notice of, watched it the more narrowly; at last, after the
loss of Two and twenty Louis d'ors, she went away very discontentedly;
whereupon the Chevalier following her, overheard an Old Woman saying to her,
Have not I often warned you of the danger of Play? What think you will your
Mother say when she sees you without the Petycoat? Were not the Two and twenty
Louis d'ors, she gave you, enough to have bought one, but you must play 'em
away in hopes to get more, that you might have a Richer? You have done finely,
have not you? for my part I look for nothing less than being turned out of Doors.
Immediately the Chevalier addressing himself to the young Lady, told her he had
overheard their Discourse, assuring her how much troubled he was at her loss,
it being no fault of his that she had not won, and that her Card had not been
over seen every time. At first the young Lady blushed, but the Chevalier
proferr'd to lend her some Money with so much Importunity, that,
notwithstanding the many refusals she made, he at last in a manner forced her
to accept it. He waited upon her to a Shop, where they laid out Three and
thirty Louis d'ors upon a Petycoat. He was with her a great while all alone.
The next day she was engaged at Bassett, and so for several days together. She
never was without Money. Madam Landroze, said the young Lady; was much obliged
to the Chevalier, for supplying her so constantly with Money, and that she had
found out the Mystery by their oagling each other: But certain it is, that
about Two or Three Months afterward, there being a great deal of Company, she
was missed on a sudden; and that one day her Woman, as she was unlacing her,
told her plainly she never saw her Breast so high. She is slipped out of Town,
and it is given out she is gone into a Monastery. Another time, a Friend of the
Chevalier's had just set his Foot into the Room where they were Dealing, when
of a sudden he drew back to avoid being seen; the Chevalier made after him, and
pressed him to come in; he desired to be excused, but the Chevalier being very
earnest with him to know the Reason his Friend asked him, Did you, said he,
mind the Old Gentleman that sat next you? yes, replied the Chevalier; know
then, said he, that he is worth Eight hundred thousand Livres, and has three
Daughters to marry, that he goes about to the Bassett Tables only to take
notice who comes there, and if he finds any one that courts any of his
Daughters at play he positively commands her, to whom the Court is made, to
break off with her Lover, and forbid him the House, protesting that no
Bassett-player shall ever marry any Daughter of his. Now I being very well with
the Eldest, and in no small hopes of getting her, she gave me this Advice,
which I Am resolved to follow. The Chevalier being satisfied with this Reason,
and going back into the Bassett Room, fell a rallying so severely upon the Old
Gentleman, that he obliged him to quit the Room, as looking upon him to be one
that would hinder their Custom.

Nothing can be a stronger Instance, to how great Extravagances the love of
Bassett may subject one, than what hapen'd to the young Count de Angluron; he
was a Friend of the Chevalier's who meeting him one day in Town, asked him how
chanced, he, that was so great a lover of Play, had now quite left it off: The
young Count told him, he was now wholly taken up another way; for that he was
fallen desperately in Love with one of the most Beautiful Creatures in all
France, of whom he was likewise not a little beloved; that his Passion for her
had perfectly cured him of that for Play. The Chevalier told him there was
Bassett at Madam Landrozes, whether People of the best Fashion in Town did
daily resort, and invited him to it, and to bring his Mistress along with him.

Next day the Count and his Mistress, the Marquess of Roziers and the
Chevalier, were at Madam Landroze's very merry together; but being too soon to
begin to Deal, they fell into a Discourse about play. Madam Landroze said, He
that was given to play could never make a good Lover, or be very observant to
his Mistress. The Marquess of Roziers was of Opinion one might easily disengage
himself from the love of play: In answer to which, the Chevalier in a rallying
way said, that whoever has once placed his Affections upon play, can never wean
himself from it as long as he lives. The Count de Angluron was for maintaining
the contrary, and looking languishing upon his Mistress, said, That from his
own Experience he could prove, that Love was an infallible cure for any
Inclination to play. And for my part, replied his fair Mistress, I think any
Woman very ungrateful that cannot be of the same Mind. The Chevalier, for the
Jest sake, still persisted in it, that no Man who, loves Bassett can ever leave
it off for a Mistress; a Mistress, said he, may perhaps requite her Lover for
the many Torments she makes him endure; but can she at any time give him a
Paroli, a Sept, a Quinze, or a Trent-et-le-va? No! no! never was any Ladies
favor of that Consequence. By this time the Company being come, they gave over
the Discourse; and the Marquess of Roziers began to Tailliee: Do but observe
now what happened to the Count de Angluron; this Man, whom Love had so well
cured of any desire of play, at first played but very little, and was taken up
rather in watching his Mistresses Eyes, than his own Cards; he lost 'em every
one; then being heated, and in hopes his luck might turn, he set as much upon a
Card at one time, as he had lost since he first began to play. He lost it;
whereupon he doubled and doubled on, loosing some Cards, and winning others; of
every Card that he won, he made the Paroli and a Sept-et-le-va, which he still
lost; so that after this manner he had played off One hundred and fifty Louis
d'ors. He went out, and sent for the Chevalier into the next Room, where he
profer'd to sell him his Coach and Horses. The Chevalier thought it a good
Bargain, and bought 'em: This Money was as little lucky to the Count, for he
soon lost it. A second time he sent for the Chevalier out into the next Room,
to sell him his Mistresses Diamond Clasps. The Chevalier at first was
unwilling, but the Count, as also his Mistress, in complaisance to him, did so
press and importune him to it, that at last the Chevalier bought the Diamond
Clasps. That Money lost, he sold the Pearl Necklace too, as little lucky as the
rest. The Count de Angluron grown desperate with all these losses, taking the
Chevalier aside, prayed him to let him have some Money upon his Note,
protesting solemnly he would repay it in two or three days: The Chevalier
seemed not to mind him, having made an Oath never more to lend a Farthing
without a Pawn, by reason of some disputes he had lately had with some of his
best Friends upon the like occasion. Well, said the Count, in a great concern,
will you lend it me if I pawn to you the thing of the World I value most, and
which I would Redeem at the expense of my Life; it is that Beautiful Creature
that came along with me, I will leave her in your hands, till such time as I
have repaid you to a Farthing of what shall borrow; doubt not, my dear
Chevalier, but some time before the end of the Week you shall have your Money,
and in the mean time I shall take it as the greatest Obligation imaginable. The
Chevalier surprised to hear of such a kind of Pawn, and calling to mind that he
had but just before heard the Count maintain, that Love was an Infallible cure
for any Inclination to play, was so pleased with this Passage, that 'twas as
much as he could do to forbear laughing out right. He told the Count very
coldly, that he could not take that Pawn, for what, said he, would you have me
do with that young Woman? What would I have you do with her, replied the Count?
Alas! what should one do with so precious a Pawn? What sou'd one do? do by her
like a Man of Honor; whereupon the Chevalier desired him to think no more
on it. Go then, said the Count, pulling his Hat over his Eyes, and turning short
from him, you have dealt unworthily by me, and I Will declare it to all the
World, you don't play like a Gentleman; so flung out of doors, without so much
as thinking of his Mistress, who all this while was seeing 'em play at Bassett,
and forced to walk home on foot, the Coach and Horses having been not long
before sold and delivered up.

There were several other no less pleasant Passages at this Bassett-Bank, which
I purposely forbear to take notice of, that I may come to speak of the Passion
which the Marquess of Roziers had for Madam Landroze. The Count de Chariots
hearing of the vast Sums of Money which this Bank had won, had a Curiosity to
know how well the Marquess of Roziers had succeeded in the advice he gave him
to gain Madam Ladrozes Heart; and to that end he made him a Visit. She is
wonderfully pleased, said the Marquess, and is often counting over the great
gains she has made by the Bank. She Is always in good Humor, and when we are by
our selves, we rallyee upon those whose Money we win; but as for what Advances
I have made, toward the Mastery of her Heart, they are little more than what I
made the very first day. Do not you Marquess, said the Count, make the right
use of her being in good Humor, and wait for the Critical Minute? Believe me,
replied the Marquess, I loose nothing for want of assurance, but she puts me
by, and rebukes me with so much Indignation, that I often begin to despair. Is
it, said she, once to me, because I sometimes vouchsafe you my Company at play,
that therefore you presume to take this Liberty? Very fine! indeed Monsieur
Marquess, that is not like to be the Price of our Bank. Therefore Count,
continued the Marquess, to deal plainly with you, yours has failed, so that I
must now think of some other way. Well, replied the Count, I Will tell you one,
that cannot possibly fail; Contrive all you can to loose, and quite ruin the
Bank; put Madam Landroze upon borrowing of every body, upon pawning all her
Jewels and Movables; she is extravagant, and so excessively fond of Play, that
rather then want Money for Bassett, there is not any thing she will not sell,
pawn, or promise to do: I Will undertake, that when she is under such
Circumstances, she will be no longer reserved to you, and 'twill be in your own
power to make your self Happy. But how, said the Marquess, interrupting him, do
you mean by ruining our Bank, and what way should I do it? I mean, replied the
Count, that you shall agree with some of your Friends, to come and play deep,
while you being to deal, shall so shuffle the Cards, as that they may win; then
which nothing can be more easy, let them make the Paroli, the Sept, and
Quinze-et-le-va, and in a short time, take my Word for it they will break the
Bank, Madam Landroze shall borrow of every body, pawn all she can rap and rend
for Money to make a new one, which shall have as ill success as the former; and
never believe me more, if when you have once reduced her to that Condition, you
do not find her more Affable and Courteous; if you are unwilling to entrust a
Secret of this Nature to any of your own Friends, I Will help you to some fit
Persons, and engage the Chevalier to join with you in this thing; for he is a
Man no ways nice in these Matters, provided he suffer not in point of Interest.
Ah! Count, replied the Marquess very hastily, what a Proposal have you made me?
I play Crimp? I that so detest all such knavish Practices? I cheat Madam
Landroze, a Person I dote on above all things in this World? Think you I can be
so hard-hearted, as to bear up against those Afflictions, which the being
reduced to such Extremities must inevitably throw her into? No! no! Count, you
don't know me; and let me assure you, I had rather despair of ever obtaining
any favor from her, then purchase it that rate. Faith Marquess, replied the
Count, you mistake me quite, I propose to you the cheating Madam Landroze? I
never had any such Thought in my Head, and I Am sorry, that as you are my Friend,
you should know me no better; my meaning is, that you should restore her all
the Money she looses; but that being reduced to such streights, she might think
she owes all to you which you return to her, and so can refuse you nothing:
Don't be apprehensive of how great a concern she may be in, but think rather
how highly she will look upon her self to be obliged, and what Acknowledgments
thereof she will make to you; this, in my Judgment, is the only way to prove
successful in your Amor; now choose you whether you will make use on it. The
Marquess of Roziers having better considered of the Proposal, and the Reasons
wherewith the Count de Charlois had enforced it, approved of it very well. The
Persons who were to manage it came to the Marquess to receive their
Instructions; the Chevalier being assured by the Count, that there was nothing
intended but a piece of Gallantry, and that Madam Landroze should have her
Money again, readily assented to it: As for the Marquess, all his Business was
practicing to shuffle the Cards, and to remember what the Count had taught him.
They agreed amongst themselves what Cards should win, and the Marquiss's Valet
de Chamber, who waited at the Bassett Table, and to whom it belonged to bring
his Master the Cards when he dealt, had his Lesson given him how to place 'em:
In fine, matters were so well managed, that at the third setting down, the Bank
was quite broke, and the Persons designed won all the Money. Madam Landroze
immediately pawned all her Jewels, Plate, Furniture, and whatever else she
could make Money of to set up a new Bank, which held out not above four
settings. The next Day after this second Bank was broke, the Marquess made her
a Visit about the time they used to begin play. He found her lying in a
careless Posture upon a Palate-Bed, leaning upon her Elbow, in such a
melancholy Fit, that he hardly knew her: He sat himself down in an Elbow Chair
that stood by the Bed side, and having for some time fixed his Eyes languishing
upon her, Let us not Madam, said he, disguise the matter, I see plainly what a
trouble you are in for your late Losses, whereof I have so great a Resentment,
that I would readily Sacrifice all I am worth in the whole World, to bring you
out on it: Ah! Madam, how happy should I be, could you but imagine how pleasant
those Services are to a Lover, which he pays to his Mistress; be pleased, said
the Marquess, pulling a Bag from under his Cloak, and throwing it upon the Bed,
to accept of these Twelve hundred Louis d'ors for your present occasions; I
have still a Foond left to set up the Bank again, which I intend to venture. We
have had an ill run long enough, and may now reasonably hope for a turn; yet
should we loose this Foond, I can find Credit for another; upon the whole
matter, I Am resolved, though I hazard every Farthing I am worth in the World, to
try to change your Luck. But alas! Madam, while there is not any thing I would
not do to serve you, may not I hope you will do something for my sake? you
cannot be insensible how long, and with how violent a Passion I have adored
you, though to this minute I never met with the least return of any thing, but
Scorn and Cruelty; How many severe shocking things have you said to me? How
little Inclination had you ever to any thing I proposed? and how unmoved have
you ever been at the Torments I endured for your sake? And now, Madam, my
Passion is grown to that height, that without some undeniable Proofs of your
Love to me, it is impossible I should live any longer. Well then Marquess, said
Madam Landroze, fetching a great sigh, since it must be so, I will now freely
own the Passion I have for you, which hitherto, (for some private Reasons best
known to my self) I have thought fit to conceal; yes Marquess I do love you,
and that too a thousand times more than you do me. Do you love me, Madam,
replied the Marquess, interrupting her? and yet have treated me all this while
with so much Cruelty and Disdain? Call you that Love? if, Madam, you would make
me believe you love me, turn all your Frowns into Smiles, and let a thousand
unspeakable Joys make amends for those many Torments I have so long endured; a
Reservedness to those we love, argues a great coldness and indifferency in our
Love; let your care in omitting no Opportunity of doing me a Favor be an
Argument of your Love, and to make it unquestionable; let its violence appear
in some more than ordinary Attempt. What, Monsieur Marquess, replied Madam
Landroze, would you have me grant your request, the very minute I Have received
the Obligations from you? No! no! my Love is too real ever to express it self
in an Act of Kindness, that looks more like paying a Debt, then the free gift
of a generous Passion; it is my Heart you desire, let her alone then, freely to
dispense her Favors according to the Dictates of her own Inclinations, and
after a little Patience, you will have no reason to complain. Oh! ungrateful,
continued Madam Landroze, you reproach me with my being severe and rigid to
you, when alas 'twas the Natural result of that great Love I bore you. Yes
(since it is to no purpose to conceal it any longer) I protest ingenuously to
you, when ever I fancied you did any thing that did not answer those tender
Thoughts I hoped you had for me, I fell into a Rage so beyond all Reason, that
I hardly knew what I did: Alas! you little think how much you were obliged to
me, for even then, when in my Looks and Actions there appeared the greatest
disdain, I adored you from the bottom of my Heart, and felt an inward concern
for you, which till that instant I was a Stranger to. I set my self to study
your Humor, and found the only way to secure your Heart to me, was to keep it
in a perpetual Motion; for, if at any time it had nothing further to desire, it
began to grow cold and abate much of its fondness, the loss whereof I so
dreaded, that there was not any desperate Remedy in the World I would not make
use of to prevent it. Ah! did you but know how many Tears and Sighs, that
affected Coiness and Scorn, I showed, has constantly cost me, how would you,
instead of upbraiding me with it, have thought your self obliged to have
pitied me. But oh! Words are too weak symptoms of a bleeding Heart, that is
ever attended with more violent ones; here then, I give my self up to your
Desires, do with me as you think fit; Inhuman Creditor! pay your self, come,
Cruel, as thou art! Why do thou stand off? then looking languishing on him
with Tears in her Eyes, she threw her self at his Feet; Pardon said she,
pardon, my dear Marquess, I am sensible you have too much Honor to use any
force, and if I refuse you at present, impute it only to the struglings of a
disabled Virtue, just yielding to the power of Love.

Just as she had said these Words, the Chevalier Brierie came into the Room,
and found her at the Marquiss's Feet; but she hearing some body tread very
softly behind her, and perceiving in the Glass just opposite to her, that 'twas
the Chevalier, continued still at the Marquiss's Feet, and seeming as though she
had not seen the Chevalier, immediately turned the Discourse in this manner.
No! Sir, No, I Am resolved never to rise from this Posture, till you have
promised me not to fight with my Brother. I ask you a thousand Pardons for
whatever he has said to you, he is a passionate hot-brained Fellow, and grown
desperate to find himself obliged to repay me the Money I lent him. As she was
saying these Words, she turned her Head about to the Chevalier on a sudden,
seeming to wonder what noise she heard; then, as though surprised to see him
there, she started up on a sudden, having first winked upon the Marquess to
withdraw, which accordingly he did, but in so great a hurry and confusion, at
what had lately befallen him, that he had much a do to find his way home. Ah!
dear Chevalier, said Madam Landroze very heavily, I am undone, I am the most
unfortunate Creature on Earth, if you don't take pity on me; for the love of
God use all the interest you have with the Marquess not to fight with my
Brother; but Oh! that thoughtful and reserved Look, which he went away with,
has dashed all my hopes, for I have ever observed it to be the surest sign of a
revengeful Temper. Feigning at last to come to her self she told the Chevalier
'twou'd have done her a great kindness, had he hapen'd to come but a Minute
sooner; that having lost her Money at Bassett, she was forced to dun her
Brother for what he owed her; who thereupon brought her that Bag which he saw
upon the Bed, showing him that which the Marquess laid there that her Brother
fell very severe upon her for playing at Bassett, which kept her always at
home, that she was peek'd at it, and so they came to high Words, that in the
heat of the Dispute the Marquess very unfortunately came in, and offered to
take her part; at which her Brother was so incensed, that they fell to Words,
and in the Passion they were in, but for the respect the Marquess had to her,
they had drawn upon each other in her Chamber; that her Brother went out first
threatening the Marquess, that she had done all she could to prevent the
Marquess from following him; yet that she was still in a perpetual fright of
what might ensue hereupon. The Chevalier with all his cunning was caught in the
Trap, and being naturally impatient, after having promised to do her what
Service he could in this matter, he immediately took his leave of her. He
understood at the Lodgings, where Madam Landroze's Brother lay, that he went
out in the Morning early, and had not dined at home; as for the Marquess he was
but just gone to bed, and had left word if any body came he was not to be
spoken with. This confirmed the Chevalier in what Madam Landroze had just
before told him, and made him try to prevent the mischief which he thought he
luckily foresaw. The Marquess tho in Bed, as they told the Chevalier, was so
far from being asleep, that it is not to be imagined, how restless and
distracted his Thoughts were; when he reflected upon those tender and
passionate Expressions wherewith Madam Landroze had lately Entertained him, he
was Transported with Joy even to a degree of Madness. What, said he to himself,
does Madam Landroze love me, and conceal it only to preserve me more constant
to her? Is it possible that all those Cruelties I Have endured from her, should
be only the Effects of a melancholy Apprehension, least I did not love her so
passionately as she could wish? Yes! yes! neither the loss of Reputation, or
fear of what might happen, could withold her from giving her self up to me to
do what I would with her; it is I only that am a trouble to her, least what ever
she does for me, I should impute rather to Design, than the free Motives of a
disinterested Love. Fear nothing, continued he, shall I ruin your Reputation,
shall I, that have so great an Adoration for you, expose you to the violent
Prosecutions, and fury of a Jealous Husband? No! no! I renounce the Thoughts of
any pleasure that you must purchase at so dear a rate; the enjoyment of your
Heart is all I ask, and it is that, and only that can make me the happiest or
unhappiest Man breathing. Then again, falling headlong from that high Rapture
into a deep Melancholy, What, said he, what have I done, to deserve so much
kindness from her? Is it by Treachery, Cruelty, and Cheating? What to have
betrayed her basely, to have been so cruel as to make her loose her Money, to
have seen her so reduced as to sell her Jewels, Plate, and Furniture, to have
stood unmoved at her greatest Despair, to have played the Pick-pocket, and hired
People to assist me in cheating her? Are these the Stratagems to conquer
Hearts? thus, and much more than can be expressed, did the Marquess rave all
Night? When he had called to mind that he had suffered Madam Landroze to throw
her self at his Feet, he was almost distracted, and called himself an
unmannerly Brute; when he considered the Chevalier Brierie had surprised him in
this Posture, and overheard what he said, he was so confounded that he knew not
what to think; he could not imagine what Madam Landroze meant by desiring him
not to fight with her Brother; and how she came off with the Chevalier; and
what troubled him yet more, was, that he had taken notice how very observant
the Chevalier used to be to Madam Landroze, which made him think he loved her,
and mistrust least his Rival, by telling her how she had been cheated, should
ruin his Interest with her to all Intents and Purposes; thereupon he thought
the safest way would be to begin first, and throw himself at her Feet, in hopes
to merit his Pardon by a voluntary confession of the Crime: He thought the
Night very tedious, and waited for Day with great impatience to execute his
Design; at last the Hour of seeing Madam Landroze being come, he was in haste
to be going, but just as he got to the Door, he found some of the Guards there,
which a Marshal of France had sent; it is not to be imagined, how wonderfully
troubled and surprised he was at so strange a disappointment; he sent presently
for the Count de Charlois to unfold this Mystery to him. The Count understood
by his Friend the Marshal of France, who sent 'em, that the Chevalier Brierie
had informed him of a Duel that was to be fought by the Marquess of Rozeirs,
and Monsieur de Lisle, Brother to Madam Landroze, upon a Quarrel that happened
lately betwixt 'em. Thereupon he went to the Chevalier, who told him how he had
found Madam Landroze at the Maquiss's Feet, and all that she had said to him.
The Count returning to the Marquess complained of his unkindness in not
acquainting him with the late business betwixt him and Lisle. The Marquess, who
did not then call to mind that Lisle was Madam Landroze's Brother, and what she
had said to him upon the Chevalier's surprising her at his Feet, protested to
him with a thousand solemn Imprecations, he was so far from having had any late
dispute with Lisle, as that he had not either spoken to, or so much as seen him
this Twelvemonth. If what you say be true, replied the Count, either the
Chevalier is the greatest Impostor, or Madam Landroze the most deceitful and
designing Woman alive. Afterward the Marquess, as he was telling him of some
particular Passages that happened the day before at her House, began to
remember, how upon the Chevalier's surprising her at his Feet, she entreated
him not to fight with her Brother, and made signs to him to withdraw; which
accordingly he did, leaving the Chevalier with her all alone: This made him
sensible of the Truth of what had been told him, and considering how
serviceable the Count might be to him on this occasion, he told him ingeniously
every particular Circumstance of the whole Affair, and desired his advice and
assistance therein. Forthwith the Count went to the Chevalier, assuring him the
business was made up, and that 'twas for Madam Landroze's Credit that it should
not take Air; so they went together to testify the same to the Marshal of
France, and to get an Order for recalling the Guards. This order came very
opportunely, for they who were sent to serve Lisle had not as yet been with
him; but staying to drink a Glass of Wine at a Tavern-next Door to his
Lodgings, there they received the Countermand. The Marquess of Roziers was in a
continual fright at what Madam Landroze's Brother would think of the matter,
and the great prejudice it might be to her Reputation. As soon as the Count de
Chariots had brought him an account of the happy success of his Negotiation, he
fell into a Discourse about Madam Londroze's death: Marquess, said the Count,
where was your Wit to loose* so fair an opportunity? Troth, I know not what to
make of you, thou have lost thy self in her Opinion beyond all hope of
recovery; for let me tell thee, all such faults are unpardonable with Women. Is
it possible thou should come to this Age, and not know that Women use such
little Tricks, only to decoy and bring Men on with greater eagerness, Count,
replied the Marquess very briskly, if you knew Madam Landroze you would be of
soother mind. She Is all Truth, of a tender Disposition, Generous, incapable of
any little Trick, and endued with a thousand other extraordinary
Accomplishments, which few either Women could ever pretend to; nay I know her
Temper so well, that she can least defend her self against that way of
Courtship I have always used to her: I have ever sacrificed my Will to her
Interest and Pleasure, whereby she is assured how much I love her better than
my own Life; It Is sufficient to secure her to me as long as she lives. Alas!
Marquess, said the Count, shrugging up his Shoulders, you will never do any great
Feats amongst the Women; the way, continued he, to have gained Madam Landroze,
and kept her sure to you as long as you would a mind to it, bad been to have made
use of the opportunity she gave you; it is by that, as by some secret Charm, a
Man gets so great an asendant over a Woman's mind, that she can deny him
nothing, humors him in all things, falls out with the whole World in his Cause
is careless of her carriage to her Husband, or the concerns of her Family,
values not her Reputation: In fine, if her Gallant be but a bold experienced
Sinner she enters in without the least reluctance, and stops at no Crime tho
never so execrable. What you say Count, replied the Marquess, is very true of
lewd debauched Women, and such as have lost all sense of Repueation; but all
Women are not under such Circumstances, and Madam Landroze, of whom we were
speaking, least of any Woman in all France. Once more, replied the Count, I
must needs tell you, I find you do not know the Sex; there are hardly any, and
especially Madam Landroze, but what are Fantastical in their Amors; they
suffer themselves to be hurried away I know not how: When ever they love or
hate, they can give no Reason for either, but are equally inclined to both by a
whimsical and unaccountable Humor; they are true to nothing, but their
Interest, or when they want an Opportunity to be false; they are naturally
Coquets, and their affected Virtue is nothing but a Cloak to their Coquettry.
They have design in all they say or do; but above all Tears are the Masterpiece
of their Cuning, and the surest Baits to catch the wariest Cudgeons. Though I,
continued the Count, defy even those, as well as all others, and what I now
tell you, I have either had experience of, or observed in most Women. I have
known 'em leave very worthy deserving Persons, whom they once had a great
kindness for, and who have had no less for them, to take up with pitiful
inconsiderable Fellows: Sometimes because they either danced or sung well;
sometimes being dazzled with the glittering of a rich Embroidred Coat, a well
fancied Equipage, or a hundred other such fantastical Reasons. One day a
married Woman, lamenting the loss of her Lover, who was killed in the War, said
to me, Alas! poor Youth, how lovely he was, and how dearly he loved me? How
often have we ran the Balls together? How often has he carried me to Plays?
then fetching a deep Sigh, Oh! unfortunate Wretch, said she, that I am! Farewell
Balls, farewell Plays, they are all over with me, for who is there now that will
carry me to 'em? No! no! I shall never see any more. Another time a Widow, the
very first year of her Mourning, viewing her self in the Glass, said to me (as
I was standing by) with Tears in her Eyes, Ah! Sir, what a loss have I had of
my Husband? At which I began seriously to Comfort her: Comfort, replied she
sighing, talk not to me of Comfort; see what an ill Air this Bandore has, bow
frightful this plain Linning makes me appear? What Man will endure now to look
upon me? when I have not patience to see my self in the Glass?

But to say no more of other Women, let us come to Madam Landroze. What think
you of the Artifice she used to blind the Chevalier, of the Reason why he found
her at your Feet? For my part, I think it a Masterpeice to see a come-off, so
well contrived, and acted so to the Life on a sudden. Well! well! Count,
replied the Marquess, let us have no more on it, you have said enough, and I
verily believe you are so great a Woman hater, that, should I let you run on,
you would reap up the Story of the Ephesian Matron, it is not in this, continued he,
I ask your advice, but what I should do with Madam Landroze, as to the Moneys I
made her loose, for I have still in my Hands above Eight hundred Louis d'ors of
hers, over and above the Twelve hundred I left with her that day the Chevalier
found her upon her Knees. He told him he thought he had great reason to
distrust the Chevalier, that he was in a continual fright, least he should
betray him in making a discovery to Madam Landroze, which would ruin him in her
Opinion to all Intents and Purposes; that he had thoughts to prevent it by
restoring to her what Money he had of hers, and making an open Confession of
the whole matter, in hopes she may pardon it as the rash Act of a violent
Passion. The Count was of another mind, he maintained there was no Reason to
distrust the Chevalier, that such a Confession can never take with Madam
Landroze, who will infallibly look upon the whole design to be no better than a
downright Cheat, that the better way were, to let her win it back again the
same way she lost it; that if he was in haste to have it done, he might make a
match to taillee at her House to day, that he should return the Money to the
same Persons that won it before, and appoint 'em to be there on purpose to
loose it back again, by which means they will see plainly, he did not design
Cheating; and should the Chevalier chance to speak on it, as he mistrusted, the
Event was sufficient to justify the Act. Besides, said he, if the Town should
come to talk of a Quarrel between you and Madam Landroze's Brother, when they
see you Taillying at her House, 'twill be looked upon as an idle Report, and
soon be forgotten. The Marquess approved of what was said. The Count went to
the Chevalier, and the other Persons who were to loose the Money, to acquaint
'em with the design, and give 'em the Money, with all Orders necessary
thereunto. Then he gave notice to several other Gamesters that there would be
Bassett at Madam Landroze's about Six of the Clock. As for the Marquess he went
to Madam Landroze's, and told her what the Chevalier had said to the Marshal of
France, how they sent some of the Guards to him, and what bad hapen'd
thereupon. Afterward he proposed to her the taillying at her House about Six
of the Clock: She desired nothing more then to play, and was only troubled that
they did not begin two Hours sooner.

There chanced to be a great deal of good Company there that day, who designed
to play deep: But just as the Marquess had drawn out the Bank money, in order
to Talliee, and the Setters made choice of their Cards, they heard a great
noise in the Street, they saw a public Officer with a Trumpet before him, and
a piece of Parchment in his Hand, in the midst of a great crow'd, and heard him
pronounce the Word Bassett several times, but could make nothing of what he
said. Mean while the Company being greatly puzzled to know the meaning on it, in
came an Old Gentleman, Husband to a young Lady who was then present, and had
set several Louis d'ors upon a Card: With great Joy in his Looks, he told 'em,
it was an Order of Council to forbid Bassett; then looking a little angrily, he
commanded his Wife not to play; she laughed at him, and the more he forbid her,
the more pressing she was with the Marquess to deal on: The Penalty of the
Order, said he, is Five hundred Livres forfeiture upon every one that plays,
Three thousand upon him that keeps the Bank, and the House where they play to
be shut up. This perplexed and madded all the Company. Madam Landroze was for
rallying it off, and said, she liked the Company too well to shut her Doors
against 'em. The Marquess was loath to incur the Forfeiture of Three thousand
Livres. The Chevalier, enraged at the Order, was very positive, and offered to
lay Five hundred Louis d'ors, one might safely play the rest of that day;
however there being few of his Mind, they broke up and went away without it. As
they were going off, he endeavored to persuade 'em to come back, but finding
it to no purpose, told 'em, that the forbidding Bassett was of a mighty
consequence, which he was desirous to communicate to 'em, and therefore invited
'em all to Supper. The Ladies, and all those Gentlemen who were Strangers to
the Chevalier, thanked him for his Invitation, and went away, while such as
were his Friends and Acquaintance, went along with him to the Petit-Paris,
where he bespoke a Supper. The Marquess promised the Chevalier to be there as
soon as he. In the mean time, as the Company were taking their leaves, he
counted over his Money, and put Eight hundred Louis d'ors in a Purse by it
self. Then finding himself alone with Madam Landroze, he offered her the Purse,
in which the Eight hundred Louis d'ors were, confessing the whole Cheat, in
hopes she would pardon him, and look upon it as the excess of Love. While he was
speaking. Madam Landroze turned sometimes pale, sometimes red, and changed
Color above a hundred times. What, said she, to him, reaching out her Hand to
take the Purse, is it possible? and are these Eight hundred Louis d'ors, and
the Twelve hundred you left here yesterday, my own? Which the Marquess assuring
her: Well, said she to him, you are a Man of Honor, and I forgive you freely;
in full assurance whereof, as likewise how much I look upon my self to be
interested in any thing that concerns you, I will make you an entire Confident
in all my Thoughts. Ah! Madam, said the Marquess, interrupting her, how good
and how obliging you are, and how sensible am I of it; nay further, continued
she, I Will give you advice which makes against my self, and if you're wife
you will follow it: but for fear any body should come in, and surprise me with
this Purse in my Hand, let me go lock it in my Cabinet: which accordingly she
did, and being come back again; Troth, Marquess, said she, I had a narrow
escape yesterday, for my ill Fortune at play had reduced me to so great an
Extremity, that I protest I had not the power to deny you any thing you could
ask me: But thanks to Providence, and my own little Cunning, I am now safe
delivered. But withal, Sir, continued she, I must needs say you have not lost
much by it; for whatever you had done with my Person, I had from my very Heart
detested the Action, and looked upon it only as a hard Ransom, to Redeem me out
of that Slavery whereinto my late Losses had unfortunately thrown me. Know
Marquess that my Affections are otherwise engaged, and that too, to the most
ungrateful Man breathing, one, who once had, or at least counterfeited a strong
Passion for me; and oh! if 'twas counterfeited, 'twas done to the Life; one,
who has a thousand times sworn to love me as long as he lived: However the
Traitor has proved false, and what is yet worse, Falsehood has been so far from
curing me of my Love, that it has rather increased it the more. Once when I
upbraided him with his Ingratitude, and begged him to return to the Passion he
formerly had for me; Could I, said he, Ah! Madam, how gladly would I do it? Can
there be a greater Happiness in the World, than that of loving where one is
beloved; but we are not so much Masters of our own Hearts, I value you above
any Person breathing, and would readily sacrifice my Life and Fortune to your
Service; but I beg you not to exact the Tribute of a Heart which is not in my
own power to dispose of: A hundred, and a hundred times have I called my self
perjured and ungrateful, and blushed at the shame of so infamous a Character;
but how in vain are all such Attacks, upon a Heart resolved never to surrender?
I thought this Discourse so very ridiculous, that I broke off with my Faithless
Lover, and forbid him from ever more corning near me; and yet Marquess, it is
but too great a Truth, and what I have experimented upon you, that the Heart is
a head strong Libertine, that will love only where it pleases. How often have
I, to the most advantage that could be, reminded my self of the great
Obligations I owe you, of your high Merit, and Passionate Affections for me,
with frequent Suggestions to my self, how happy I should be in your Love, could
I but love you again? I endeavored by such gentle Stratagems as these, to
surprise my Heart, and make it come over to you, till having by degrees got a
Habit of loving you, it should declare for you against that perfidious Man your
Rival: but so successless were all those Stratagems, that they recoyl'd upon
me, and what ever my Reason made use of to strengthen your interest, my Heart
insensibly turned to the advantage of that ungrateful Man. Judge now what
endeavors I Have used to persuade my self to love you, and to how little purpose
they have all been: It Is not Choice or Reason that governs the Heart, but being
biased by it knows not what, it suffers it self to be hurried away with an
unaccountable Pleasure, to it knows not whither, or wherefore; and so strangely
contradictory, is the Temper of those who are in Love, that they fondly pursue
their Tormentors, and fly from those that would make 'em Happy. Oh! Cruelty,
replied the Marquess, interrupting her, is it not enough to tell me you don't
love me, but that I have a Rival whom you do love? Well Marquess, said she,
since it is so, let us try in some measure to alleviate the security of our
Fates, you by endeavoring to wean your self from me, and I by studying to
forget your Rival; since to love, and not be loved again, is certainly the
greatest Plague upon Earth. For Heavens sake, Madam, replied the Marquess,
teach me the Secret to forget you, it is all the Reward I ask, of whatever I
have endured for you. There is a never failing one, said she, which is never to
see me more, and leave the rest to time. Never to see you more, Madam, replied
the Marquess, to spend Hours, Days, Months, nay Years without seeing you, or so
much as ever hoping to see you more; Ah! what a Cruel Remedy you tell me of,
will time, do you say, work the rest: Alas! how slow, and weak a Cure is Time,
for so violent a Distemper.

Just as the Marquess had said this, in came the Chevalier, and told him Supper
was ready, and that the Company staid for him; though the Marquess had a great
deal more to say to Madam Landroze, yet he was forced for that time to take his
leave of her; which he did with so much concern, that he could scarce hide it
from the Chevalier: Wh n he was come to the place where they were to sup, he
told those Persons whom he had engaged in the design against Madam Landroze,
that he had restored her all the Money they had won of her, and turned it off
with a Jest. Whereupon they gave him the Eight hundred Louis d'ors, which the
Count Charlois had given them.

Supper being upon the Table, and all the Company going to sit down, the
Chevalier told 'em he had a matter of great importance to impart to 'em, of
which it was highly necessary that every one should give his Opinion; that most
Voices should carry't: in order whereunto they should choose a President to
count 'em, but not begin the Debate till the Fruit was upon the Table, and in
the mean time to consider well of the choice. Several Healths went round
briskly, at last the Fruit being set on, the Chevalier asked the Company if
they had thought of a President, whereat they all, with one Voice, cried out
they had made Choice of him. Immediately the Chevalier putting on as Grave and
Magesterial a Look, as though he were President of the Council, opened the
Sessions in this manner, The defense of Bassett, Sirs, is to be the Subject of
our present Debate, and we, being the chief Gamesters, whatever Rule we make
herein, will be binding to others; wherefore I desire every particular Person
may give his advice in this weighty Affair deliberately, and without any
prejudice. The first thing then to be considered of is, Whether it is most for
our advantage to play at Bassett or not? And if to play, then secondly, What is
to be done to avoid the Order which was this day Proclaimed to the contrary?
Begin Monsieur l' Abbe, said the Chevalier, addressing himself to the Abbee
Olarion, you, whom the World has honored with the Glorious Title of Clerk of
the Bassett Table: For my part, Sir, said the Abbe, I Am of Opinion the whole
Company has reason to keep up Bassett, I Have ever found it turn to good Account,
and that the Bank must be the only Winner at long run. It Is true that Bassett
is an ill Game for the Setters, but we that are here present, have not so
little Wit, as to do any thing but go in the Bank. It Is not, continued he
smiling, but with great labor and pains that I have purchased that Glorious
Title of Clerk of the Bassett Table; having crouppied day after day, to several
Banks from two of the Clock after Dinner, till Eight at night, and so from Nine
till One of the Clock the next Morning: Now I leave it to you to consider, how
strong a Head a Man must have to undergo so great a Fateigue. The first Point,
which is, whether it is most for our advantage to play at Bassett, being thus
cleared, I come now to the Second, viz. How we may play at it without any
danger. This I must confess does a little gravel me. There is no Pleasure in
being made an Example. At first they will be very strict in putting the Law in
Execution: in my judgment therefore, it is not safe to oppose them in the heat
of their first Resolutions, but wart with patience till better days, which
cannot but be e're long, for Bassett is too too bewitching a Game, not to draw
many of the Nobility and other Persons of Quality in to play at it, which will
serve for a President to us; and this in short is what I think of the whole
Matter.

Come thou Reverend Judge of Bassett, says the Chevalier, thou to whose
infallible Decission all difficult and controversial Points of Bassett are
submitted with an implicit Faith, let us hear what you say. I, said Chatigny, am
of Abbe Olarion's Opinion, but could wish that in the mean time some Expedient
might be found out of playing in some Noble Men's or Ambassadors Houses, and
that sometimes we may have private Bassett in our Chambers to keep us in
breath. What think you, Noble Captain, says the Chevalier, you, that as the
Town will have it, have been so unfortunate at this Game. I, said the Captain,
for my part, have been so provoked with Bassett, that I wish him hanged who
first found it out. Before this Game came up, I and some others that understood
play pretty well, could now and then pick up a little Money, and strip a well
feathered Bubble without any noise. But now Bassett has so engrossed the whole
Trade, that there is nothing to be got for us poor Brothers of the Die. Now
Monsieur Marquess, said the Chevalier, addressing himself to the Marquess of
Roziers, it is your turn to speak. The Marquess, rouzing himself as one just
awaked out of a dead sleep, stair'd upon the Chevalier with such amazement,
that the Chevalier saw plainly he knew not what they had been talking of. The
Question, said the Chevalier, is whether or no it be for our advantage to play
at Bassett? The Marquess pausing a while, Never, said he, came any good of
Bassett, since it came into France, therefore in my Judgment it ought to be
banished for ever. But I must beg you will excuse me, and impute it to an odd
whim I have, that I don't give you my Reasons for it. I Will do it for you, said
Bautrin, taking up the Question. In Hell it self, said he, never was hatched so
damnable a thing as Bassett. Thereupon the whole Company burst out into a great
laughter, and cried he was not an Impartial Judge, having a Mortal peek to
Bassett, for making him walk a foot. Think not, Sirs, replied he, that what I
now say is out of madness for loosing my Coach and Horses; I am equally unlucky
at all sorts of Games, and had I not lost 'em at Bassett, I had done it at some
other Game; so that the exception I have to Bassett, is not from what I have
suffered but those general Extravagancies and mischiefs that attend it. At all
other Games one has time to consider, and by reflecting upon his Losses and the
Consequence thereof, to leave off; but in this there is no being governed by
Reason, or any time to reflect; it runs away with so much quickness. One
fancies to make the Paroli, or Sept et-le-va, which hapening to win, the
success thereof draws him in to venture all he has, or can rap and rend, in
hopes of the like good Fortune, till at last he looses all, and runs himself
over head and ears in as short a time as I Have been speaking. There Is the Duce,
says another, has lost thrice already, it is strange if it should loose the
fourth time; so thinking to have found out a sure Card, in full confidence of
winning, he sets all he has left upon it, which is fass'd, or looses the
Sonica. Then how he storms, and rages, and borrowing all the Money he can of
every body, to follow the Duce on, he looses it (if he would confess) four
times the deal following.

Next day, without fail, he must seek out for Money to pay what he borrowed the
Night before, and wherewithal to have his Revenge. Then the Clothes, Jewels,
and what ever Movables he has, go to pawn, and so he has it, he cares not what
Procuration or Interest he gives. With what fear, and concern, with what
impatience, and palpitation of the Heart, does he watch the Cards as the Dealer
is drawing 'em, especially if he sees the corner of a Card which looks like
his: Nay, I Will maintain Bassett does tire and wast the Spirits of those who
play deep, more then any other Game, even Tennis it self; for which Reasons the
Physicians do strictly forbid it to all those who are inclined to Consumptions.
I have seen Women naturally of a pale Complexion, redden like Fire, and Men in
the midst of the hardest Frosts swet as though they were in a Bagnio. Avalon,
whom ye all know, in the height of his Fever, said, Va ten Pistols, a Minute
after the Pay, then the double Pay, a Paroli of the whole, continued he, in a
great Agony, and on a sudden, raising his Voice, cried out, like one in
Despair, Oh! unfortunate Creature that I am! to loose the Sonica; insomuch that
'twas feared least those lightheaded Fits should turn to a perfect Frenzy;
and but for his able Physician Dr. Pyard, who (knowing he had lost much at
Bassett) advised him to send for some Gamesters to play by his Bed side, who
came and lost to him some Money, which to that purpose his Mother had given
'em, the unfortunate Youth might have spent the rest of his Days in Bedlam.

These are the least of those many Evils that Bassett is the cause of. Young
Gentlemen designed for the Clergy, or the Law, who, till Bassett came in, never
knew what Gameing was, now lay aside the thoughts of their other Studies, and
apply themselves wholly to the finding out some little Tricks and Advantages of
the Game, or how to take up Money at a Scriveners; who upon mighty advantages
supplies 'em with great sums. The Merchants, Perrywig makers, Tailors,
Hatters, Mercers, or Lace-men, cannot get a Farthing of Money from a
Bassett-player; his Purse is entirely devoted to the Bank, and to be put to no
other use. Upon the whole mat^ter, there are none but the Usurers, and
Pawnbrokers, but what loose by it. Let a Woman be never so discreet, or
virtuous, if she has once tasted of the powerful Charms of Bassett, she can
never wean her self from it: if she wants Money, she must have it one way of
other, and when she has no other Remedy, she borrows it of her Lover, who,
after that, is so far from finding her Cruel, that she will gratify him with
many Favors, which she will not vouchsafe to the poor Man her Husband. That it is
a certain Gain to those who keep the Bank, said the Abbe Olarion, is apparent
from their having always won. Fie! replied Bautrain, I never dealt in my Life,
but I lost: and there was a Lady of Lisle, one of my particular Acquaintance,
who in three Weeks time, by dealing at Six-penny Bassett, lost Three thousand
Livers clear. You shall have a Man, when he has been stuck at play, come to a
small Bank, and set a Hundred or Sixscore Louis d'ors upon a Card. The Bank
upon a Punctillio of Honor stands it, the Setter winning it, makes the Paroli,
and wins that too, so breaks the Bank, and at one Bout wins the whole Profit of
three Month. 'Twas so that Madam Fontaigners Bank was broke.

To conclude, the Council is wise, and had not forbid Bassett but for the great
Disorders it occasioned at Paris, and for our common Good. They have the power
in their Hands, and must not be disobeyed; the fatal Consequences whereof, are
in my Opinion too dangerous to be ventured. Scarce had Bautrain speaking, when
Vlisson taking up the Question, It Is observable, Sirs, said he, that the most
refined things in Morality, and the best in Nature, do, when used with excess,
prove the worst and most dangerous. No Game that ever yet was invented is
comparable to Bassett, if played at with moderation and temper, nor any so
pernicious when used to excess. The design of Gaming, is to amuze the Mind with
the various and extraordinary changes of Fortune, just as Bassett does: for a
Proof thereof you need but call to mind what Monsieur Bautrain said. A Setter,
said he, looks upon himself to be upon the Point of being made a Beggar, his
luck changes, a Sept-et-le-va comes and makes him a Prince. Can any thing be
more surprising? Can any thing be more transporting? Have you occasion for Ten
or Twelve Pistols to throw away upon any Divertisement, go to the Bassett
Table, and as soon as ever you have won 'em, take your own time to come away;
no body will press you to play on* no body will call after you, and you may go
off with 'em without being counted a close sharping Gamester; a freedom that is
the peculiar Excellency of this Game, and not allowed of in any other. When at
any time any of us are ill treated by our cruel Mistresses, we take advantage
of the Extremities to which Bassett reduces 'em, to subdue 'em to our
Affections: Is not this a great relief to a wretched Lover, who has spent Days
and Nights in Sighs and Prayers, without obtaining the least Favor? Hazard,
Quinque-nove, or Lansquenet, may produce as bad Effects, and are as quick
desperate Games as Bassett; besides, a Bassett player has great advantage over
all other Gamesters, he goes boldly into the Company of Persons of the best
Quality, and is well looked upon: If he talliees, he is much made of, and all
the Servants of the House are particularly observant to him. It Is true, there
is an Order to forbid it, the best way therefore is to address to the King, and
represent to him that Bassett does not so much hurt at Paris, as his Majesty is
informed, and so make an interest to have leave to keep a Bank: for my part
I Will make one willingly, and allow 80000 Livres yearly toward it for my own
share. This, Gentlemen, is my Opinion. Vlisson having made an end, the
Chevalier undertaking to speak to it, said, This appears to me, Sirs, to be a
matter of great difficulty; for, that it is of mighty advantage to keep the Bank
at Bassett, is so undeniable a Truth, that 'twere needless to use any Arguments
to prove how prejudical this Order to forbid Bassett has been to us sworn
Keepers of the Bank. The Point now to be considered of is, how we may continue
to play at it without running into any danger; a matter of so great difficulty,
that the more and more I think on it, the further I am from finding out which
way it may be done: There is no pleasure I Am sure in being made an Example: to
play privately and in a Room that is locked up, will not turn to account, or so
much as pay for the Cards and Candles: on the other hand it is too hazardous to
play in Noblemen's or Ambassadors Houses, as they did at Hoca, least an Officer
should come incognito, and under pretense of playing, serve us, to our great
comfort, with a Verbal Process for disobeying the Order. And how many poor
indigent Fellows are there, who in hopes of having the Fine, will turn
Informers. The King and his Ministers are fully satisfied this Game is
prejudicial to the Public, and therefore should we offer to Farm it at a
Million a year, they would never harken to the Proposal. There is no one here
but knows how they have forbid Hoca, under so severe Penalties, that though it is
so very advantageous a Game to those who keep the Bank, yet no body dares
venture to do it; and so will it be with Bassett. Come then, continued he, let
us Metamorphose Bassett into another Game, let it be much after the manner of
Hoca; but by giving it another Name, by playing it after a different way, and
altering the chances, we may disguise it so that no body can possibly know it,
and thereby evade the Penalty of the Order. The first thing to be observed, is,
that there be one who is to keep the Bank, and to have all the advantages that
he had at Bassett; only changing the Names. Those who formerly found out Games,
have neither gam'd more, nor had their Talents lie better that way than ours
do: Whereat the whole Company began to laugh, and approving of the Chevaliers
Proposal, set themselves to invent some new Game. Abbe Olarion was for
Lansquenet, as it is played at in Poland; Vlisson proposed Prieze; and the
Chevalier Nombre, insomuch that they were all divided upon which of these Games
was best; but being now grown very late, they adjourned the Meeting till
Tuesday next, at the same hour and place; then and there to consider further of
those Matters, and the success of these new Games. Then every one in particular
returning Thanks to the Chevalier, went away very well satisfied, and in good
Humor, only the Marquess of Roziers, who was fallen into a deep despair, with
what Madam Landroze had said to him, and the difficulties he found he was like
to undergo, upon the Resolutions he had taken to cure himself, if possible, of
his Passion for her.

FINIS.

