A DISCOURSE OF MONEY.

Being an ESSAY on that Subject, Historically and Politically handled.

WITH Reflections on the present evil state of the Coin of this Kingdom; AND
Proposals of a Method for the Remedy.

In a Letter to a Nobleman, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Briscoe, at the Corner of Charles-Street, in
Russel Street, Covent Garden, 1696.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THE Author of this Treatise, whom I have not the honor to know; whether
through Infirmity, or by Engaging late in the Argument; seems to stand in need
of an Apology with the Public, for not appearing earlier abroad, before the
Subject had been so far canvas'd. Wherefore, the Reader may please to take
Notice, That if he has not present leisure (amidst the warmth of Debates now on
foot upon this Theme) to read and weigh the whole Discourse, in the Method
wherein it is written, he may turn to Page 79, where the Dialogue begins; which
discourses and applies the whole Argument to the immediate great Question;
namely, The Causes and Remedies of the Disease of our Coin.

A DISCOURSE OF Money, etc.
My Lord,
YOU command me to give you my judgment on this difficult Subject of Money,
without Reflecting I fear, that as the Task is too great for my Forces, so the
time you have allotted me is too little for the work, tho my capacity and
talents were never so promising.

I am under a further difficulty by coming thus late into the Dispute, when
others (who besides their being better able, and having better means to acquit
themselves) have exhausted the Argument; so that the most I shall be able to do
will be but a Gleaning after their Harvest.

Under these disadvantages then of being constrained to take another method
than I would choose were I left to my liberty; of avoiding to speak to many
Points, as having been very pertinently spoken to already, and of going out of
the beaten Road to find out something that may be thought new, entertaining, or
instructing: If, I say, under these difficulties I shall chance to succeed in
my attempt, and afford your Lordship the least addition of Light to the
Knowledge you possess in most Subjects, I shall be very well pleased whatever
pains it may cost me to obey you. Leaving it entirely to your Election, whether
a Child of so weak a Father may be of strength to be adventured abroad and see
the World or no.

With this short Preface, and under the shelter of this just Apology, I
proceed; purposing to observe a little more or less the following Method.

I shall first Discourse generally, and go a little into the History and
Antiquity of Money.

Then I shall endeavor to show the the Reasonableness and Utility of the
Institution and Invention of Money.

I should have looked a little into the History of the Coin and Mint of
England, which would have been necessary, but I perceive that is already well
and painfully performed to my hand, by one who is both better able, and can
have recourse to better means to do it; and therefore I shall therein be silent.

I shall Essay to show in the expounding my Subject, how and when Money may be
Useful and Current, and answer all the Ends of that Invention without
containing any real or intrinsic Value.

I shall endeavor to explain the meaning of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Value, and
show their Use, and how it came to pass that from making Money of worthless
things, and baser metals, Men came to Coin Gold and Silver; and on that Article
shall endeavor to explain and assign the Proportion of the Intrinsic Value of
Money, and determine the precise difference there ought to be between the
Intrinsic and Extrinsic, or Political Value.

I shall proceed to enquire into the Evils and Maladies incident to Money, and
the mistaken Politics of some Nations (especially the Spaniards) therein, to
the great Grievance of the People, the Dishonor, Damage, and Danger of the
State.

I shall discourse of Dearness and Cheapness of Money, and Things; which cannot
be understood without reference to Money, and a comparison rightly stated
between them.

I shall mingle my Speculations on this Subject with Historical and Political
Remarks, and frame perhaps, or suggest Schemes of ancient Government, to
illustrate and explain difficult Questions, as they may occur about Money.

I shall necessarily Treat of Government, Peace, War, Trade, Arts, Navigation,
Exchange, Usury, Banks, and Money Projects, etc. as they tend to the
Explication and right Knowledge of my Subject.

In short, I shall travel necessarily over a great deal of ground, and endeavor
to remove many rubs in my Passage before I can fairly come to my Journeys end;
which is, to Establish a right Notion (at least my conceptions) of Money; and
to propose a Remedy of the Evil under which the Nation at this day Languishes,
on the occasion of the present Corruption and lamentable State of the Coin of
this Kingdom.

I may perhaps go into sundry other particulars which I have not here recited;
and it may be those I have may not fall out in the order herein above
specified: but I trust I shall no where be understood to go industriously out
of my way to meet any foreign or offensive Matter in the course of my Design,
which is to treat my Subject intelligibly, pertinently, and as becomes an
English man, uninfluenc'd by any consideration that might be thought to bias
my Love and Veneration to my Country.

The Use of Money is of very great Antiquity, as ancient as History at least;
whence may be gathered, that mankind had very early Notions of the blessing of
Society, and therein of improving their common ease and intercourse, by
inventing and subsistuting something that should render their Commerce one with
another more practicable and beneficial, than by Barter or Exchange of one
Commodity for another: Perhaps too it was consistent enough with the Virtue and
Simplicity of the first Ages of the World, to Coin their Money of Iron, Brass,
or other inferior matter or metals, which had very little, or no Intrinsic
Value, but was made Current, and received an Extrinsic or Political Value from
the Stamp and Authority of the Prince or State, within whose Territory it
passed and was received, but could be of no use without the Bounds of that
Power by Virtue whereof it reciv'd that current Value; because the profit
accruing by the coinage of base Metals being taken and assumed by the Prince,
it became a Prerogative and Mark of Sovereignty; and as all Foreign Coin was
therefore forbidden to be received, so it became Penal by that means to the
Subject to imitate or falsify it, as being from thence, I suppose, justly
called the Kings Coin.

But as the Ambition of Princes, Luxury and Avarice grew in the World, the love
of Money, and the desire to accumulate Wealth to compass the means and gratify
the ends of our depraved Appetites increased. But because Ambition, which aims
at Extent of Power and Dominion, could not be furthered but by Foreign helps of
Power and Means, by Armies and Provisions of War; because Luxury and a
voluptuous Life grew too great to be asswag'd by the Native Growth or Product
of our respective Climes and Countries; because the Avaricious Man, whose Vice
is merely to hoard and heap up Riches, perceived that Money in those early days
had little or no Intrinsic Worth, having but a nominal and arbitrary
Signification; it being in the power of the Prince or State to alter its value:
He therefore coveted by all possble means to possess something else not so
liable to loss by accident, emergencies of State, or caprice of Princes; such
as should contain a solid unalterable, independent Universal Approbation.
Which, in short, is what we mean by Intrinsic Value.

From these Causes then, and to answer the Ends aforesaid, we may fairly
conclude, that those two noble and universally esteemed Metals of Gold and
Silver obtained to be Coined and Manufactur'd into Money; which from thence is
properly called Treasure.

From the use then of Brass, Iron, or other base Coin (which having little or
no real Value, and therefore had no Virtue beyond the Extent of that Authority
which made it pass.) Men came from a Domestic (as I may say) to meditate on an
Universal Coin; whereby their Intercourse might be spread beyond their own
Frontiers; such as might obviate all the difficulties of Traffic in the World
abroad; as namely, when by their native Fruits or Manufacturies by way of
Barter, whether for Luxury or Necessity they could not easily be supplied, they
might have present recourse to, to remove that difficulty, and facilitate their
Intercourse; because with Money we may purchase every thing, but every thing,
and very often many things; do in some conjunctures chance not to be
Moneys-worth. Thus did Money by being made of Gold and Silver, and from no
other cause, obtained that Virtue, and acquired the Reverence that it has in
the World.

If Intrinsic Value then appears so necessary, and that the more any thing
contains of that Virtue which intitles it to the general Esteem, the greater
right it will have to our Veneration; it is a plain consequence, that the purer
and perfecter the Coin of a Kingdom is, the more acceptable and popular it will
be; for as the plenty and scarcity of good Blood in our Natural Bodies, which
by infinite and almost inperceptible Channels is conveyed and distributed to
the remotest Members, establishes a good or bad Constitution: Such is the
Treasure of the Body Politic, the strength and weakness, health and infirmity,
whereof (to pursue the Parallel no further) is founded on the plenty or
scarcity, perfection or impurity of the Coin. Wherefore I will take for
granted, that I shall not be censured for spinning my Speculation too fine, if
I briefly enumerate as they occur to me the Benefits accrewing to the
Commonwealth, by a wise and scrupulous care in the Regulation of our Mint,
whereby a just, rich, unadulterate Coin may be established and preserved.

First, I observe that Arts will flourish with greater Luster and Perfection;
and Industry, the Child of Art and Mother of Riches and Plenty, will by this
means be pursued and cultivated; in as much as Labor, which is the Original of
Property, will grow more in Use and Fashion, in proportion to the value of the
Reward. People at this Day do not Barter for Beads and Shells, but will expect
a Penyworth for their Penny; and as it is a mark of Slavery, so is it the means
of Poverty in a State, where the Magistrate assumes a Power to set what Price
he pleases on the Public Coin: It is a sign of Slavery, because the Subject in
such Case lives merely at the Mercy of the Prince, is Rich, or Poor, has a
Competency, or is a Beggar, is a Freeman, or in Fetters at his Pleasure; for a
Man may enjoy enough to Day, and more than will suffice to pay his Debts, and
to Morrow a Decree of the Prince, or a Proclamation of the State, to serve
perhaps some sorry present Public End, may declare him a Bankrupt. It Is a
cause of Poverty, because Arts and Industry by this means lose their Appetite,
sicken into Sloth, and sink by degrees into Misery; for where People labor for
uncertain or little Gain, the Edge of growing Rich is taken off, Poverty grows
into a Habit, and every laudable Profession falls into Contempt; as it is at
this Day in Spain, which we behold fallen from a flourishing State into the
most abject forlorn Condition, that it is possible for a free unconquered
Kingdom to sink to; much of whose Misery being, I am persuaded, owing to their
want of a due Penetration into matters of Money, wherein no People play more at
fast and loose. I say, all laudable Arts grow in proportion to the Reward; but
Gold and Silver, which have obtained a real universal value, is a solid
unchangeable unarbitrary Recompense: Wherefore the siner and purer your Money
is, the more it will charm and incite to the use of those Means that conduct
Men to the Possession of it.

The Species of Gold and Silver will by this means be propagated, and increase
in proportion to the Industry and Application of the People to obtain it;
because the Species growing more in demand, the use of it will spread wider;
and the more any thing is in request, the surer we are of its increase, by
Peoples engaging in a more general and ardent Endeavor to possess it.

The plenty of Gold and Silver which grows from a pure and rich Coin, will
raise the Value of your Land, which is the Natural Wealth of the State, as
Treasure is the Artificial; for, as low Interest springs from the plenty of
Money, so Land, which is the solid Foundation of that Security, which insures
the Property of it to the Lender, and which can never increase or diminish in
Quantity, must indisputably rise and fall in Value according to the plenty or
scarcity of your Treasure, which will be ever liable to Ebbs and Floods, while
States are obnoxious to Revolutions, by Sedition, War, Famine, Pestilence, or
the like.

The raising the Value of your Land, tends to the Improvement of Husbandry and
Tillage; for People, otherwise never so heavy, have a quick Sense of the Profit
of their Labor, and will bestow their Cost and Pains in proportion to the
Worth of the Subject Matter and the Benefit they gather from their Industry:
This will multiply Husbandmen, and propagate a hardy and useful Race of People,
the least Lucrative, the most Innocent and Prositable of all others to the
State whether for peace or war.

The love of Riches and desire of Gain thus growing upon us, becomes a greater
incitement to engage in all sorts of Difficulties, to despise Perils and
decline no means whatever that are likely to conduct us to our profit.

Hence Navigation the Nursery of our native Strength, the Rock of our Safety,
the Source and Foundation of all our Wealth, Power and Prosperity, becomes
cherished and improved, and all the incident Arts of that noble and useful
Profession cultivated and inrich*d; and how many hands are Employed; how many
Trades and Professions subsist and increase by the the Art of Shipwrightry
alone, exclusive of the Profits flowing to us by our Navigations, is too well
known to need my Observation here.

Let it be further remarked, that where your Money is pure, your Coin beautiful
and perfect, People will be won to value it in Proportion; and when Interest is
low, which is ever a sign of Riches, when it chances to fall of it self, as it
will be a means whenever it shall be made so by a Law. When good Security is
hard to find, when Men (of which sort there are many) have scruples about
Usury, and some there are also who want Assurance to adventure great Sums of
Money out of their hands: When these and the like Motives, I say, shall happen
where the Coin of a Kingdom is Pure and without Blemish, People will be
encouraged and invited to hoard and coffer up their Treasure, in proportion to
their Plenty, as there is no doubt Men do their fair Money at this day, on the
occasion of the present lamentable Corruption of our Coin. Which Money so
reserved and laid up, shall give no Impediment to Trade and the general
Commerce of the Nation; because it will be no other than as it were the
over-flowings of our Wealth: And whenever it should chance that scarcity of
Money might be justly ascribed to such or the like cause, the Mint when it is
set on a right Basis (as shall be shown by and by) will be ever at hand to
supply that want. Nor is it likely any such Sums so Treasured up, can lie
longer hid than during the Lives of the Possessors, which, at their death at
farthest, becomes spread and distributed amongst their Heirs, and takes its
course again in the Common Currant-Channel of Business.

By thus laying up and hoarding a proportion of our superfluous Wealth, how
eagerly soever over anxious Misers, and Men of Worldly Minds may contend to the
contrary, may, I am persuaded, without a Paradox, be made intelligible enough
to be a means of increasing the capital Stock of National Treasure, tho it lie
useless and yields only the present pleasure of Possession to the injoyer. And
how laudable it would be, and of what mighty Consequence it might prove to the
Glory, Power, and Felicity of a Nation, (and especially ours) to have the
Mastery of an immense Treasure spread and distributed among Myriads of
well-minded Subjects, who having it in their power, it will be odds but it will
be always in their Will too in any emergency of Danger or Distress of the State
(which is the bottom wherein all their Treasure is embarked) to part with each
Man his proportion to the Prince, thereby inableing him to save the whole. I
ask then whether this would not be more eligible to a Thinking Man and an
Englishman, to be always in a capacity of obligeing and gratifying a good
Prince, by the most signal and substantial Expressions that may be of his Duty
and good Will: which is parting with his Money to serve and support him;
whereby a perpetual concord betwixt Prince and People is preserved, good Laws
obtained, and every Grievance cured or prevented. Than on the other hand, for a
Nation to be unblessed with a covetous ambitious Ruler, who is himself a
hoarder up of Treasure, and who by great Parcimony, and perhaps for dangerous
Ends shall be able out of his standing Revenue, in a few years, to ingross and
become Master of all the Money in the Kingdom, where it must lie as dead and
useless as in the most concealed Coffers of the People, or be converted to
other uses than those for which it will be given, when regularly demanded and
appropriated. We behold the superfluities of most Men's Estates to run out into
Jewels, Plate, and rich Movables; all which in time loose of their Value, and
become for the most part of damage to the owner. Now if to gratify their
Vanity, and for bare Ostentation, Men will yield to this Expense: How much more
Praiseworthy would it be, and turn better to Public and Private Account, for
every wealthy Man, by cureing his mind of the anxious Thoughtfulness of letting
Money lie dead by them, as they call it, to have always a proportion of their
Store so laid up in good Money, which as it may be lodged with more safety, so
is it kept with better Fruit; for as the making costs him nothing, so the owner
loses nothing by the Fashion whenever he parts with it, as in his Plate, and
most other things of Value he does; almost every thing besides becomes the
worse for the wearing, but pure and perfect Coin, which contains its due
Intrinsic Value, shall, in all likelihood, be like rich Wine, which acquires
Virtue by its Age; for I think it may be proved to a Domonstration, that Gold
and Silver is not likely to grow much more plentiful in the world, but in all
probability to rise in value according to the growing scarcity of the Species;
which I shall endeavor further to explain anon. Furthermore, whatsoever Men
have lying by them which they keep not for profit, or show, or present use,
they part with more easily, and miss with less pain when it is out of their
Possession: Nor is it beyond the prospect of any Thinking Man that such a
practice of laying up Money in proportion to our Store, may become a means of
propagating the Species of Gold and Silver among us, and so of lowering the
Rates of Usury; which would beget a retrenching of the worst and most
pernicious sort of Gain of all others in a State, and a borrowing, as I may
say, from lazy Avarice, to lend on easier terms to the industrious and painful
Merchant, Tradesman and Artificer, etc. whose prime material being Money, when
that shall be obtained with less difficulty, they will be enabled to prosecute
their useful Callings with more Comfort to themselves, and greater Fruit to the
Commonwealth; for let interessed and avaricious Men say what they can to the
contrary, when all is done, the Merchant (and consequently every Trade and
Mystery depending on our Commerce with the World abroad) must now adays rest
contented to Trade and Labor for less Profit than heretofore, for Reasons too
long to explain here; from which Consideration, if the Interest of Money,
either by a Law, or some other means, does not fall proportionably, our Rivals
abroad, who perhaps see better in that medium, or stand in a better Light than
we do, may come to convince us of our Error when too late. I say, unless wise
and magisterial Remedies be applied, Trade must inevitably decay, languish, and
give up the Ghost, and at length the majority of Mankind be reduced to row in
the Usurers Galleys: But this whole Paragraph may perhaps seem superfluous, or
be thought too long a digression; wherefore in one word, if sober and
wellprincipl'd Men would weigh and digest this Proposition, I am in little
doubt but they would see Truth or Probability enough in it to win their
Approbation, for as it promises those good Effects and more than I have
enumerated, so like Goliah's Sword, which, though it seem to lie by the Walls, it
may in time come to be said there is nothing like it; for it may chance to tend
toward the cure of that Leprosy whose Contagion is become epidemical;
infecting our best and noblest Families, whose Ancestors thought Usury as
infamous as Forgery, which, in ancient and more innocent Times, stood branded
by the Laity, and censured by the Church. For Usury is no other than a kind of
a petty Tyranny, where the Borrower sells himself into Bondage to the Lender,
who are for the most part the cruelest Taskmasters in the World: And because
Usury was a Burden upon the majority, for the sake of a few, and yielded no
increase to the Public Stock, it was therefore forbidden to the Jews by the
all-wise Lawgiver, God himself; that is to say, among themselves, while to
their Neighbors round about (whom they had leave to vex and impoverish) it was
permitted them to lend and let out their Money on the hardest terms, the
Avarice of that sordid Nation could suggest. In a word, that I may not be
thought to declaim while I am so much in Earnest, let me once for all observe
to you, That where a Government is easy, where Arts and Industry flourish,
where Money abounds, and Trade is encouraged, where Interest is low, and where
all those Benefits accrue to a Nation, which we have specified and endeavored
to prove, to be in a great degree the Product of an excellent and
well-understood Coin: That State, I say, under such an Economy, shall above
all, and to crown their Felicity, increase and abound proportionably in People;
such a Country, like a great Market, where every good and needful thing is to
be had, shall invite every Body to come; and People will abide and set up their
Rest there where they can be most at their Ease. This, as it will further
insure our Happiness by augmenting our Strength; so, according to Sir William
Petty's reckoning (who was a most excellent Calculator) our Treasure will grow
from our Numbers, which is from the Power it self that Protects our Possession
of it, by the Proportion of Ten Pounds per Head per Annum for every Man the
Nation contains; after which Rule of computing, One hundred thousand additional
Inhabitants only, will amount to a Million of Pounds profit per Annum to the
Public; and such an accession of Wealth and Power to a Land of Plenty as ours
is, that perhaps yields, or may be made to produce Sustenance for double the
Inhabitants that now live on it, ought to be in every ones Wish and Aim to
compass.

From my general Notions of Coin, the Original, Institution, Nature and Use of
Money, which seemed a necessary Induction toward the due Explication of my
Subject, I proceed to observe, That Mankind had no sooner found it necessary,
from the Reasons we have rendered, that their Money should contain Intrinsic
Value, when their choice of the Matter whereof to make it, fell inevitably on
Gold and Silver; from the general Esteem, the Durableness, the Beauty,
Ductileness and Purity of those Metals, whereby they became every where more
valued among civilized Nations than any other Species; that is to say, a less
quantity thereof would be bartered or exchanged for a greater of any other
Matter or Metal whatsoever. Now that which contains more value in less compass,
is necessarily more worth, will lie in less room, is transported with more
ease, concealed and secured from Violence with less trouble, and the Possessor
enjoys it with less Hazard and Anxiety.

Tacitus observes, that the Scythians (otherwise barbarous enough) abounded
with Gold: The Reason was plain, they were a Nation always in motion, flying,
marching and wandering with great Celerity; had no abiding Place, and therefore
naturally and wisely chose to be Masters of such a Species of Wealth as they
could move, transport, stow, and dispose of most commodiously. From hence then
we may conclude, the World came to determine their choice of Gold and Silver,
whereof to make their Money, which for the sake of, and in order to that extent
of Commerce, whereof they began to have a taste, this kind of Money being
designed for perpetual Motion, was more apt for Circulation, and better
adjusted to the Uses of Intercourse, than any other whatsoever.

From the Reasonableness, or Necessity, or both, of the choice Men made of Gold
and Silver, whereof to make and coin their Money, it may not be much out of our
way to make a short Inquiry into the Original of the Rates and Value of Money,
how it became determined how it rises and falls, why and how the Proportion
between Money and Things varies, and by what Rules, to attain a right and
useful Notion of this intricate Subject.

Mankind for the Offense of our first Parents was by his Maker Sentenced to
Labor; By thy sweat shall thou live, says the Text; that is, thou shall Labor
or Die. This Sentence as it was the fruit of Original Sin, so it seems to be
the Foundation of Original Property: We can have no title to any thing; we can
call nothing honestly our own; we can neither be sustained, clothed, or
preserve our Being, but by Labor: The Earth, our Common Mother by which we are
nourished, will yield us nothing without Labor and Cultivation. I go to a
River or a Fountain to fetch water for my use, the water was nobody's, had no
Proprietor, and was no more worth than the Labor which I bestowed in fetching
it; from whence a natural Right and Property of that water is derived to me,
and I may dispose of it to another for so much of something else which he has
and I want, as my labor may be deemed worth. You have Gold and Silver, and I
have none; you would employ me for a year in your Service; I am a poor Man who
live by my Day-Labour and have but from hand to mouth, as they say. Now it is
plain, if you compute what Sum of Money will suffice to pay for the Labor that
produces all those Species of things that must go to sustain Cloth, and keep me
for this term of a Year, that Sum is what I ought to receive for my Wages; and
that term being reduced to days, will show what I ought to have per diem for my
Service, which in natural Justice is enough. By this Instance of a Contract, we
may be enlight'ned in the Notion, Use, and Value of Property, which by no other
way can be so easily rated; and by this Rule and no other, we calculate and
make our Estimates of the value of Works and Things; namely, by beginning our
reckoning from simple and uncompounded Labor; which, I say, is the Original of
Proprety, is every Freeman's own, who has a right to sell it for what it is
worth; and how that is calculated I have endeavored to explain.

The next thing to be sought in this Enquiry, is the Value cumparatively of
Gold and Silver, with other things which are bought with Money, namely, how it
comes to pass that just so much Money, or such a quantity of Gold or Silver, a
little more or less, comes to be a competent Price for such Things or
Commodities as we need, and which to supply our Necessities we are obliged to
go to Market for and Purchase with Money.

This Query is in like manner best resolved by an Example, which may show us in
one view, how the Value of Money comes to be regulated to such a Proportion
with other Species, so as to be consistent with the Ends and Uses of Traffic
and Intercourse, to which Purpose it was Originally instituted.

It is not hard to suppose, that a Thousand Men with their Wives and Families
should transport themselves by agreement, to some Spot or Island, as History
tells us the Venetians did, and others have done; invited by the Fertility and
Bounty of the Soil and Climate, which might be made to yield every thing
needful for the supply of their Necessities. We may farther easily imagine,
that a due Proportion of People of all useful Professions, were forted and
chosen by joint Consent, whereof to form and compose this little Body of a
Republic; every one, as it chanced carrying with him what Treasure he had;
which Treasure, in order to their Establishment, is cast into a Common Bank,
and destined to the Use of the Community. This Colony we can grant plants its
self where they have no Intercourse or Communication with the rest of Mankind,
but must live on their own Stock, and he sustained and supplied by their Labor
and the Fruit of their own Industry. Now it is plain, That with reasonable Men,
the first thing they would go about would be to deliberate how, by Laws and
Institutions, to establish themselves so as to live at their best Ease. They
know the Use of Money, whereof they have a certain Stock in Bank, which being
never likely to increase, nor, as it may be managed, is it absolutely necessary
to their Happiness that it should; wherefore they devise how to make this Stock
of Treasure, be it more or less, to become a certain Fund for Perpetuity,
whereon to establish their common Intercourse; in order to which, what is more
obvious than first to reckon and determine how many Species of Things, and no
more, are or shall be necessary to be had or used for their simple and
commodious Subsistence. Next they will calculate what Quantity will be
necessary of each respective Kind. And Thirdly, They will find the comparative
value of these Species one with another, which is known by the labor each
Thing will cost to make and it fit for their Use: For I observe, that every
Man's Day-labour must produce his daily Subsistence, or the Community at a long
run must dissolve: This being known and established, the next Step, which is
very easy to make, is to calculate from the respective Ages of the People,
whereof our little Body-Politick is composed, a mean proportional Expense of
the abovesaid Species per Annum, necessary to one single Member thereof; that
is, how much Labor it will cost to produce all those Particulars that any one
single Person shall need or be permitted to consume or expend within the
circuit of one Year; to which Revolution I the rather limit it, because within
that space the Earth yields her Increase, and the ordinary Changes of Things
happen, and it being the great Period by which Time it self is measured: This
being obtained, and your Stock of Treasure known, will produce a Rule that will
amount to a Demonstration for assigning a Value to your Money. Admit then for
Evidence-sake, that your Number consists of Ten thousand Souls, this Ten
thousand People will by your Calculation consume a known and certain Quantity
of the abovesaid several Species, which will cost such a Proportion of Man's
Labor to produce; now upon examination into your Treasure, we will suppose you
find just Two hundred thousand Pounds in Bank; divide your Two hundred thousand
Pounds Cash by Ten thousand, which was the Number of your People at that time,
and the Quotient will be Twenty, which is twenty Pounds in Money; which twenty
Pounds must inevitably answer for and be equivalent to the Labor of any one,
caeteris paribus per An. then upon reducing your Year into Days, the Product
will be about Ten Pence per Diem, and so much was the Day-labour of one Man
worth at that time; that is, while your People and your Treasure hold this
Proportion one with another; wherefore by this Rule every Member of this
Community has a right to receive Twenty Pounds out of the common Stock, to be
enabled to bring the Year about: Which will beget a constant intelligible
Circulation of your Coin, by you intended to answer all the Ends of Traffic
and Intercourse within the circuit of the Year.

But your People you will say, in so healthful a Soil and Climate, where
neither the Sword, Plague, or Famine is likely to diminish them, will soon by
the course of Nature multiply, but your Treasure cannot; and in such Case how
will your Money, which was but just enough before, suffice then? The Answer to
this Objection is easy, and will show us at once the chief Causes of the
rising and falling of Money, that is the Dearth or Plenty of the Species of
Things which happens in the wide World; where Government comes to be relaxed
and Chance for the most part Rules, where Necessity, which is blind, stumbles
on Remedies and Expedients next at hand to redress the Evils of our
Mismanagement or want of Foresight: But by our Hypothesis there can never
happen any such thing as dear and cheap, plenty and scarcity of Money; which I
thus prove. I say that your Treasure, which is Two hundred thousand Pounds, and
which is not to increase or diminish, is by this Contrivance and Calculation
plainly rendered a sufficient Fund to answer all the Ends of Intercourse in this
little Republic of Ten thousand People, but your stock of Money being
impossible to increase, and very probable that our Numbers of People should;
what Expedient can be found to get over this Objection since by our Calculation
the Money you have in Bank is but just enough for the Uses of your present
Numbers. Thus, I say, this seeming Difficulty is obviated; after the Revolution
of one Year you make a Census, and upon the Roll you find your People increased
one in Ten: Hereupon by the same Calculation and Rule of Proportion, you
plainly find that Nine Pence this Year in Money must inevitably be worth,
purchase and buy in the Market, whatsoever the last Year cost ten Pence; and
so, if your Numbers come to double, that which originally cost a Shilling, must
then cost but Six Pence: The like Rule serves in Case of the dimunition of your
People, by which means your Money shall, by exact Methods of Proportion, be
preserved in a due and perpetual Balance with the Species it is to purchase;
and the Price of Labor by the same Rule regulated and duly stated, and your
Stock of Treasure, by this means, becomes an everlasting unexhaustible Fund, to
answer all the Uses of the Government. And there is no doubt but by this manner
of Calculation, or some way like it, the Law of Assize was found and
established, whereby every needful thing was yearly rated and set at a certain
Price, which in frugal States is still practiced, and it were to be wished it
were every where more in Fashion.

I am well aware that Projectors, Mony-mongers, Bank-Brokers, and petty Dealers
in Politics, will be apt to take this Argument by the wrong Handle, and be
very earnest and in pain to show me a thousand Errors in my Hypothesis; but
these Gentlemen may please to understand, that as I am not conscious of any
Talents in the Politics, so neither is it my Purpose to wade in so deep Water,
a depth I know so much above my head; let it suffice, that by this Scheme of a
little State, where Religion, Justice, Innocence, Temperance, and Industry are
the Basis, the Building may stand, and Rules may be calculated to a
Demonstration for its Perpetuity. And the farther Men wander by Ambition,
Violence, Luxury, Avarice, Sloth, and the like Irregularities, from the
Innocence and Simplicity of this Original, the harder it is to conceive and
propound Remedies for the Evils such Errors produce. Wherefore, as we know an
Unite to be the beginning and simplest of Numbers, yet find too, that it is the
Basis of the Pyramid on which Arithmetic it self stands and is sustained; so
upon the simplest and least compounded Government, the Unite, as I may say, of
a State, unmixed and clean from all Infection of the Corruptions of humane
Frailty; we can best build our Speculations when we have a mind to amuse our
selves on the Subject of Laws and Government, because it is to that Fountain
alone which we can safely resort for Succors in the greatest streights of our
Meditation, deriving so much Light from the Reason and Evidence contained in a
simple, sound, regular Form of State, which is governable and durable to a
Demonstration; I say, we may be best aided in our Notions by reference to this
Original, when our Thoughts are busied about any other Form, how diversified,
distressed, or diseased soever: And for this Reason, and no other, have I
conceived and produced this Pattern, which serving my Purpose to exemplify the
Facility of obtaining a due understanding of my Subject of Money alone, affords
no just Latitude for Critics to busy themselves about any collateral
Reflections.

From this principal Rule then being taught to make a general Judgment of
Money, its Nature, Use and Properties, we may with ease be supplied with
Reasons sorted to every incidence of that Subject; as namely (to mention a few)
why Labor heretofore in England was worth but a Penny a Day, which now is ten
or twenty times that Value? Why an Ox that was then sold for a Noble, is now
worth Ten or Fifteen Pounds. How it came to pass that such numerous Armies were
heretofore paid and sustained when Money was so hard to find, and the like? so
that in short, by this clew we may be conducted through all the Labyrinths of
our dark and intricate Subject, and from the right Knowledge of the Causes be
enabled to take better aim in our Deliberations about the Effects; for as
Mankind grew to swerve from those first few rules which were adjusted to the
simplicity of Original Government, the love of Ease which is natural, (Labor
being a kind of pain, which we willingly shun) introduced Violence; the
stronger compelling the weaker to Labor, while he lived at his Ease. Sloth and
Idleness thus indulged, begat a taste of Pleasure; Pleasure fructify'd into
Luxury and Excess. This gave up the Reins to the Empire of the Passions, which
multiplied by the Power they gained, and became so many Tyrants and
Taskmasters; which at this day Rule with so much Cruelty over Mankind, and is
the Sourse of all those Vices, Impieties, and Misrule which at this Day infect
the World: And how various and diversified, how jarring and discordant soever
they may be amongst themselves, do nevertheless all combine and unite in the
single Service of this one Idol Money, whose Mysteries, in such a Babel of
worship, we are not to wonder should be so hard to unfold.

By these Encroachments then upon the Liberties of right Reason, through the
growth and corruption of our Appetites, which begat so many deviations from the
first Standard simple Maxims of Government, here by me, for Illustration sake,
propounded; we may by Analogy and Comparison be furnished with Helps in our
Judgment on every Doubt about this entangled Subject: As the Jews heretofore
had recourse to the Sanctuary, where all their Original Standards of Coins,
Weights and Measures were lodged, and from that Reason I suppose they were
called the Shekel, the Balance, and the Cubit of the Sanctuary. Pursuant then
to our Method, let us inquire what can be thought to disturb the Tranquillity of
our little Commonwealth: To which I answer, That nothing (humanly speaking) but
a departing from, or a relaxation of that Strictness of Order and Discipline on
which their Prosperity was founded: And this may spring from infinite Causes,
but I will instance only one or two; and first, by Ambition from without or
within, by invading of their Neighbors, or by their invading them: This arises
from Injustice, which infers Hostility, and Hostility introduces Violence of
every kind, whereby the Balance becomes broken, and the Harmony of our little
State threatened with Dissolution. But, to go no further than one single
abstracted instance of this Vice of Ambition, let us suppose a tenth part of
the Number which composes our Colony to be destined to the War: Is it not
evident, that if one Man out of ten shall be taken from the Plough, or any
other civil Occupation, and diverted to other Uses, foreign to the Original
Establishment, who shall be thereby exempted from the Labor and Duties
incident to his Membership of a peaceable State, that the remaining Nine must
by their Labor produce the Subsistence of Ten? This I think is plain, and from
hence, as the disproportion increases, Scarcity, Poverty, and Necessity are
introduced; for the Labor of the Industrious becomes at length too little to
sustain and provide for those who live excused from Labor, and who must
subsist whether they contribute toward their Subsistence or no: Whereupon
Despair, Desertion, Depopulation, and every evil Incident to War ensues. Hence
then, I say, does Ambition (which is a Dropsy of the Mind, the thirst whereof
is increased by the possession of what it most covets to assuage it) makes a
Breach in our Establishment, and urges a recourse to other Means and Methods
than were originally necessary to the well-being of the State; and thus
Treasure becomes needful, is more sought after, and consequently more scarcy
and more worth: For, as the wise Man says, Money answers all things; so is it
most true, that it becomes the only Plaster to all the Sores that are made and
fester through the malignity of this dangerous Disease, Ambition; and though
civil Necessities should clamor never so loud, it is not heard amidst the
clashing of Arms and Noise of Cannon, for Military Wants press to be relieved
like Spanish Beggars, with their Hand on their Sword, and plead a stronger
Title to our Compliance than any other Demand, how needful and just soever: And
this indeed is the Root and Original of Men's desires to acquire Riches; because
they would be out of the Power of those Accidents which threaten their Repose,
and covet to possess so much thereof as they conceive may suffice for
themselves and others. But this Fund, whether Public or Private, has a Bottom,
and while the Cause continues the Effects grow every Day less and less
supportable, and in the upshot, as I have shown, terminates in Misery and
Desolation. Thus we behold, how by this single Instance of Ambition, which is
an Enemy to our Establishment, the Order and Economy of our supposed
Commonwealth is broken, and the State runs to ruin; because the Means that are
to minister to it have Limits, but Ambition has none.

Avarice, which is an irregular love of Money, arising from a false Fear of
Want or Poverty, and grows into a habit of accumulating Riches, from an
over-anxious observation of the Streights People are often driven to, by Men's
breaking through the Boundaries of good Government, is another Evil, of
pernicious consequence to the very Essence of the Establishment we have
erected; for, let it be supposed that Usury alone, which is the Darling and
Firstborn Evil of this Vice, should chance (by indulging this Error) to be
introduced, (without mention of manifold other Mischiefs which attend it,) and
that there were but ten Jews or Money-Mongers, with each one hundred Pound in
his Pocket, admitted into the State, and these Misers had leave to lend their
Money at Ten per Cent. per Annum Interest; what think you would be the
Consequence of this Violationof our Establishment? Why plainly this, That in
fifty or threescore Years the Usurers would become Masters of all your
Treasure; that is, your whole Stock of two hundred thousand Pounds, Original
Money, would within that space of time center in their Coffers; which is true
to a Demonstration.

I might enforce manifold Instances of the Fruit of Misgovernment, and by
recurring as occasion should be given to our original Form of a little
Commonwealth, show by plain Political Arithmetic, and evident Calculation, how
and by what proportions Error prevails, and by what Steps the Body Politic
sickens and dissolves; as, namely, through Sedition, Luxury, Prodigality,
Sloth, and the like, but these may suffice for Samples, whereby to explain my
general Notions of Money, which I thought a necessary Induction to the Question
under debate.

I come now to draw Use from the Doctrines I have delivered: Wherefore to apply
them to our present Case, I observe our Government in the present Conjuncture,
to be under two very pinching Difficulties about Money; the one, from the
exorbitant present Occasion for the consumption of our Treasure; the other,
from our Coins being so abominably adulterated, diminished, and abused. As to
the First, I am not qualified to determine what the Nation can spare: But, for
the Second, I am sure I may say, it is more than we can possibly presume to
will not therefore presume to meddle with the Merits, or enter into the
Necessity of the one, as not being mine; but the Business of the Great Council,
now met, by whose Wisdom that important Question ought to be discussed; but, in
the other Point, I conceive it can give no reasonable distaste to interpose ones
Opinion, who by being an unbiased Observer, may, it is likely, stand in a Light
proper enough to discern; whose Tongue being untied by the danger he sees, may
have a little Right to lend a word of Warning to divert an impending Stroke,
whereof he is sure, when ever it lights, to have a share of the Smart:
Wherefore let me take leave to say, without meaning the least Offense or Injury
to any single Man, and for no other End than to set a Sea-mark, whereby to shun
this Rock for the future; that had our Pilots looked well out, this heavy
Disaster, under which the Nation grieves, had never befallen us; being a
Mischief plainly begotten for want of foresight of those in Authority, and was
propagated to the dangerous degree wherein we now behold it, by the Villainy
and guilty Practices of Goldsmiths, Bankers, Resiners, and Money-Brokers, etc.
who have been Gainers, Incouragers, Receivers, and Pourveyors to this
abominable Crime; and consequently, all Sharers in the guilt of so much Blood
as the severity of our Laws has drawn to punish it; of the present Sufferings
the Nation is under in the Consequence, and of the Expense of the Remedy, which
will be very great when ever we go about it.

Being now, after a longer Voyage than I intended, arrived within view of my
Port, and consequently obliged to steer my course with more caution than in the
wide Sea of Generals was necessary, I shall therefore I think do best right to
the subject I am treating, by resolving the whole matter now resting to be
debated into Dialogue, and the rather because I see abundance of questions
every where made, and doubts raised about it; I shall therefore digest the
remaining and principal part of my Discourse into Question and Answer, viz.

Question, Why is our English Coin called Sterling?

Answer, This is doubtful, but the prevailing Opinion is, that Money was first
Coined and made a Native of England at a Town of that Name, about the Ninth
Century, and was thence called Sterling Money; before which time perhaps the
Roman Coin, and that of other civilized Nations, was the Current Money among
us, as Cob's and all sorts of Outlandish Coin go at this day, or very lately
did in Ireland.

Q. Have there been any Alterations made in the Mint of England since this
first Establishment; because there is a great deal of talk, and People make
much a-do about the Sacredness of our Standard; and much talk there is about
the Mysteries of the Mint, etc.

A. There have been many Changes, Reductions and Establishments made in the
Mint since King Edward the First, whatever were before; in whose Reign the
Proportion of the Denarius or Penny, which Originally was the twentieth part of
an Ounce, became altered from twenty pence, to twenty six, from thence (as
seeming Reason of State perhaps suggested) to thirty two, from thirty two to
forty Pence, from forty to forty five, and thence to sixty Pence the Ounce; and
this last happened in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; from which time to this
day, there has not been I take for granted, the least Reformation made in the
Mint by any solemn Public Act of State.

Q. I desire to be informed what the Motives might be for so many Alterations
as you have enumerated; for, methinks, wise Men should not alter and determine
in a Case of this Magnitude, without some very well-grounded Reasons.

Ans. I confess I am to seek for a solid Reason for their so doing, unless it
were to propagate the Species, and so spread it wider among the People, by
mincing it into so many lesser Parts, to the end every Body, how poor soever;
might share in the Pleasure of possessing it; go to Market with more ease, and
manage their common Traffic with less difficulty; for, when a Pullet was sold
for a Penny, what Species of current Coin could be found to buy a thing that was
not worth the twentieth part of a Pullet, I cannot guess; for it is plain, we
go to the Shops and the Market at this day, to purchase sundry things, for our
Money, that are not the twentieth or the fortieth part of the value of a
Pullet; and we have no Reason to conclude but our Forefathers did the same:
Wherefore I must give you this for my best Reason, till I can be furnished with
a better.

Q. Would there be any good or harm in changing on, by enacting, for Example,
that the Ounce of Standard Silver, that now is established at sixty Pence,
should be rated at seventy or eighty Pence, and so forward, as Reason may seem
to suggest?

Ans. If you only mean barely the subdividing your Ounce of Silver into lesser
Particles, and do not intend by this Question to put a value, of your own
making, upon the Ounce of your Standard Silver, (for that will be the Subject
of another great Question,) then I think it would only beget a good deal of
Trouble and Intricacy in Business and Accounts, now that the Nation is grown so
deeply engaged in Foreign Trade and Commerce: Other good or harm I see none in
it; for our Coin is now cast and established into so low a Denomination, that
the poorest People have none of those Impediments in their Dealings, which
heretofore might be thought to vex and incumber them, when their Penny was the
twentieth part of an Ounce, which is now grown to be the sixtieth; and when
that was the lowest current Silver Coin, saving only that in those days People
for their convenience divided that Penny, either by breaking it, or by Scissors,
dividing it into four parts; which Species of Money, though now almost quite worn
out and extinct, has yet within our Memory been pretty plenty, and that was our
old thin blind Groats, which I believe, and think I have some reason so to do,
were for the most part those original Pence or Denarius's, that were coined
while the Penny continued to be the twentieth part of an Ounce, and obtained to
be called Groats; perhaps from the old Saxon or Danish word Grott, (which is
great,) that is, the great Penny; to distinguish it from the latter Penny, which
was so much less.

Q. How long think you Silver-Money, which is in continual use and circulation,
may last? For, it is plain, it wears and grows lighter by motion and usage, and
at length, without clipping or diminishing by Art, will wear out of it self,
and become too light to pass.

Ans. My Answer to the foregoing Question may be a sort of solution to this,
namely, that if those Groats were the old Penny, it is near Four hundred Years
ago since that Species was last coined; but this depends much upon the size of
your Coin, and the quantity of current Money in Stock and Use, and other
Circumstances, of no great moment to mention here.

Q. I think, however, one good Use may be made of this Observation; and that
is, to calculate from thence a little, more or less, by what Proportions
current Money may waste, and at length be worn out; for it is plain, that by the
bare usage, telling, and motion in its Circulation, it will diminish, and at a
long run be consumed: Whence we gather, that if there were no other way to
destroy it, there must be a supply from abroad to obviate that Evil, how little
soever it may seem: Wherefore I pray give me your Opinion therein.

Ans. If that be the use you would make of this Query, and you but grant me
leave to state the Question on the Proportion of our Moneys wearing out in the
space of four hundred years, then it is visible that your Stock of Money,
without a proportionable Recruit, will, without any other cause, be totally
extinct within that space of time; and so by Calculation it will be found to
waste after the Rate of a quarter per Cent. per Annum; that is, five Shillings
in the hundred Pounds; but then you must suppose it to be all small Money; as
there is reason to believe it was in those Days; for I do not know whether
Crowns, Half-crowns, Shillings, and Six-pences, are above two hundred Years
old, if so much; by which Proportion, at least, it is found, I say, that your
Money must be repaired to keep the Balance even. And by this reckoning too we
may gather, that our Money naturally and necessarily wastes one eighth part as
much as some Nations take for the Interest of their Money.

Q. Have there not been other kinds of Regulations and Changes made in our
Mint, besides those you have mentioned?

Ans. Yes, several; but let it suffice to mention only one in King Henry the
Eighth's time, which Prince, by his Profusions in pompous Living, Spectacles,
and vain Wars, being driven to great Streights for want of Money, which the
Nation could by no means supply: That Prince was made to believe that he might
be a very great Gainer by embasing his Coin, namely, (for Example-sake, for I
am not sure of the Proportion) by the allowing but Nine Penny worth of fine
Silver to the Shilling, and supplying the rest with Allay, and then telling the
People, by his Proclamation, that the new Shilling, which was intrinsically
worth but Nine Pence, should pass for as much as the other Shilling, which was
worth Twelve Pence; by which means he would save or gain five and twenty per
Cent, in the payment of his Debts, and in the pay of his Armies, and the like
his Fleets, etc.

Q. What Objection does there lie against such a Project, when the streights of
a Prince or State are pressing?

Ans. There are manifold Objections, so manifest, so just, and of so great
moment, that it would be tedious to enumerate them; which that Prince soon saw,
and endeavored to reform his Error. First, a Prince or State that yields to
such Councils is a Bankrupt, and, like a broken Citizen, compounds for his
Debts at five Shillings in the Pound loss to his Creditors, and by his or their
Proclamation publishes, That all Creditors whatsoever shall lose one fourth
part of what is justly owing them; all Landlords one fourth part of their
Arrears of Rent, and all Leases for Years to come (to name no more) shall lose
one fourth part of their Value; which, as it would be very unrighteous, and a
most grievous Injustice, so the Cure which such a Practice might be thought to
give to the Disease, would become a much greater Malady, and prove no other
than a senseless Chimera and crude Notion in the addle Head of the Projector.

Q. But will not the Public Stock of Money by such an Act of State be
increased proportionably? And shall not we then buy for Nine Pence what before
cost us a Shilling? And, if so, is this a small Benefit?

A. You are under a mistake, for your Shillings would it is true be twelve
Shillings then, for nine there was before; but then you don't reflect that
these twelve new Shillings will buy no more Bread and Beef in the Market than
nine Shillings did when your Money was five and twenty per Cent. better; so
that over and above the Folly (not to say Iniquity) of such an Act, there are
these further Evils attending it; as Namely, when your Money is commanded to be
coined, and current at the rate of one quarter more than it is intrinsically
worth, all your Neighbors round about you, will Coin and furnish your Money
from abroad, every ill Man will be Coining it at home, and Coin none but legal
Money neither, if they please, because the Profit will be great, without going
farther: While yet, the Temptation of greater gain would be likely further to
prevail, by debasing your Money yet lower and lower, which they may do without
much danger of Suspicion; because when once the public Money comes to be so
impoverished with allay, the Beauty and Complexion of your Coin is lost, and
then an additional Fraud, of three, four or five per Cent, is not so easily
discerned; by which means in process of time, the whole Mass of National Money,
shall be in danger of being impoverished into Counters. Furthermore, all this
sort of Money which you shall Coin your selves, you shall loose by in the
Coinage after the Rate of Five and Twenty per Cent, which is easy to conceive,
by observing to you, that the labor and charge in the Manufacturage of your
new Shilling, which is worth but Nine Pence, is equal to that of your old
Shilling, which was worth Twelve Pence; so that it plainly appears, that one
quarter per Cent. of the charge of the Coinage is thereby lost: Wherefore
computing your Coinage at the rate only of Two per Cent. you will be damnified
in the charge of the Manufacture, or Re-Coinage of five Millions of Money, the
sum of five and Twenty Thousand Pounds at least. In short, such a mistaken Act
of Regulation will, in my humble Opinion, amount to little less than a Law to
make Clipped Money pass; for it would be tantamount: The Species of Gold and
Silver would by this means by degrees vanish from among us; and what farther
mischiefs to the State such an Act might produce, a little time would tell us.

Q. One Question begets another. You lay a great deal of Stress I perceive on
your Notion of Intrinsic Value, wherein, (though you have already spoken to very
good purpose) yet I must pray you to assist me farther in my Notion of it in
our present Case.

Ans. I would not multiply Words, nor confound you with Terms and abstracted
Notions of Intrinsic and Extrinsic, but come briefly to my Answer, which I will
now limit to the single Question of Money, that being our Theme; pursuant to
which, I reply, That Gold and Silver, for the Reasons I have delivered in my
general Discourse of Coin, have obtained universally to be the Matter whereof
to make and coin Public Money; because those two Metals are every where more
esteemed; and, when fashioned into Money, there lying more worth in less room
than in other Metals, is thence more adjusted to the Uses of Motion and
Circulation; and therefore more proper and aiding toward the Ends of general
Commerce; for the sake whereof, and for no other purpose, I conceive it to have
been invented and established in the World. I say, Gold and Silver is all the
World over of more value, and preferred to most other things, and Men will give
you more in exchange of any other Commodity which shall be of greater bulk,
weight, or measure than either of these two Species contain in themselves; and
if this adds any thing to what I have already said, namely, That whatever has
most worth lying in least room, will be generally understood to be specifically
more valuable; then Coin made of Gold and Silver, does every where contain most
Intrinsic Value. Which Repetition perhaps may seem superfluous.

Q. By this Corallary drawn from your general Axiom, that Money now adays must
have its due Intrinsic Value; I infer, that the more Allay you put into your
Coin, or the less Gold or Silver it contains, the less valuable it will be in
the Eye of the World, and that it is not the calling a piece of Money a
Shilling by a Proclamation that will work any Effect; but, that if your Coin be
made generally base or light, it will be rated accordingly; where it will go
for no more than what it is intrinsically worth, notwithstanding any Edict to
the contrary: For, though it is in the Power of the Prince or State, to call a
piece of Money a Crown or a Shilling, and to make it Penal for the Subject to
refuse it for such; yet we may safely presume, that such an Act of State can
never be thought to influence the Seller of any Commodity, who will be still
left at liberty to vaalue it according to its real worth. Do I conceive you
right, or no?

Ans. You do; and the Reason is very plain; for Money is the Rule of Commerce,
and Commerce is become universal; but it cannot be a Rule if it be not equally
calculated and rectified to the Use of the general Good; which is the Honor,
Profit, Ease, and Tranquillity of the State.

Q. Explain a little more your meaning, by calling Money the Rule of Commerce.

Ans. It Is a Rule, because Reason suggested and Custom has established it such;
and, without this Rule, Trading People would be ever in the dark, and not know
how to make one regular Step in their Business, and consequently, the majority
of Mankind would have little or nothing to do without their own Boundaries.

Q. Open it further, by some Instance or other of Fact.

Ans. Let it be thus then: A Spanish Merchant observing here in England, that
Colchester Bays are at such a Price, and has a mind to send a Parcel into
Spain, where that Commodity is in request; but, that he may be under some
certainty, he writes to his Correspondent in that Country, to be informed what
Price Bays bear there: He tells him, so many Rials a Piece; the Merchant knows
the Intrinsic Value of those Rials, and presently reckons whether it will be
worth his while to buy Bays here in England (as the Price goes) to send to
Spain to be paid for them, as his Factor has informed him they will yield. And
by this Rule only he is or can be governed.

Q. But, do not the Spaniards now and then transgress this Rule, by altering
the Price and Value of their Money, and thereby violate this Law of Commerce?

Ans. Yes, I grant they do, to the very great damage of the Trade of that
Country, the distraction and confusion of Accounts, and impoverishment of the
Subject; who by that means, whilst they furnish Gold and Silver to all the
World, have very little or none Current among themselves, and (as I have
observed elsewhere) do manifestly owe much of the Misery they are in to their
want of a right understanding of this Mystery; and, were it not for their
Mines, and other Profits that arise by that Trade, which make ample amends for
this unjust as well as unwise Practice, the Trading World would have no
Dealings with them.

Q. But methinks, after all that you have said, it might be compassed by the
Wisdom of a thinking well-governed People, to make their Money current on what
Terms they please to decree; which may be done by Enacting good Laws of
Assize, thereby establishing a determined Rate or Price on every thing: In
which Case let your Money be little or great, base or fine, it may be made to
suffice for all your Uses.

Ans. I grant you would have Reason, and might make Nuts and Shells pass for
Money, as they do at this day in some Countries, if you were to be secluded
from the rest of the World, and would hold no Intercourse without your own
Frontiers; but, since by the corruption of our Manners, Mankind has stamped
this value on Gold and Silver, their Use is become necessary to our Ease and
Safety, and we can neither gratify our Passions and Appetites, nor defend and
secure our Peace, Liberty and Possessions without it; insomuch that Treasure of
Gold and Silver is become Essential to our subsisting and well-being in the
World; and in regard the only means of acquiring it is by our Industry, and the
Arts of a wide and universal Commerce, we can have recourse to no other Rule,
than by going with the majority in the trodden Track of Business, and bustle in
the World abroad, in order to the acquiring those Things which Custom through
Vice and humane Frailty has made necessary to our temporal Felicity; wherefore
your Law of Assize would here avail little or nothing; while I grant, that in
Domestic Matters it may be of great Use for the case of the Poor, and better
Being of laboring and industrious People, who must labor daily to eat their
daily Bread: Here I own indeed, that a judicious Regulation of the Prizes of
all Things we consume within our selves of our own growth, would be a means to
encourage Industry, and tend even to the Advantage of our Commerce abroad.

Q. I think you have made it pretty plain now, that if we would be Rich, Safe,
and Happy, we must swim with the Tide of the World, and steer the general
Course to arrive at the general Haven; and that pursuant to this End, in the
Calculations of our Measures about Money, we cannot wisely determine therein,
but by borrowing many Arguments from abroad, where our chief Intercourse lies,
and from whence we derive those means, (for they are not, I perceive, of our
own growth) which, humanly speaking, can insure our Prosperity.

Ans. You conceive me right; wherefore, I think, there will need no more Words
on this Point of our Debate.

Q. You told me but now that Money was the Rule of Commerce, which you
explained well enough; I would now willingly be informed by what Rules I may be
able to make a judgment of Money it self, or of the value of Gold and Silver,
whereof Money is made: For, can Money buy it self, or Gold and Silver be
purchased with Gold and Silver? This is a little dark to me, and puts me in
need of your help to explain.

Ans. My Answer to your Question is shortly this; That Gold and Silver, which
are a Merchandise, the same with Silk, Spice, or any other Commodity which we
purchase by Traffic, are of late Years grown more scarce, either by being
applied to more Uses, or that the Circle of their Use is become wider; by which
means it spreads thinner, and the quantity of the Species by that means appears
to be less, and indeed is so, comparing the Use that is now made of them with
what was practiced twenty or thirty Years ago: Whence the World wanting Gold
and Silver more, they come to be more sought after, and so better worth; which
is no more than to say, That less of either of them will suffice now than in
those Days, to purchase Labor, Bread, or any other Thing we need and would buy
with Gold or Silver. Wherefore there is no Impropriety at all in saying, That
Silver is become dear; namely, That an Ounce of that Species, which twenty or
thirty Years ago was not worth five Shillings, is now risen to be valued at
above six Shillings, because as much Silver as would make five current legal
Shillings, according to the Standard of the Mint then, ought to produce by that
Proportion six such Shillings now. I still use whole Numbers, it not being our
business here to insist on rigid Truth of Calculation, but to show barely how
every thing is reducible to it.

Q. Since you have led me thus far in search of this necessary Truth, I would
willingly be further instructed by your Reasons, how, and in what manner (by
descending to some particular Causes) this scarcity or dearness of Gold and
Silver is come to pass in the World; for the true Reason being known and
consented to, good use, I do not doubt, may be made to the Public of such
Knowledge.

Ans. The Reasons and Causes of this Scarcity I take to be manifold, I will
name but a few, and shall begin with a main Cause; and that is, The long and
obstinate War in Europe, whereby, through the Passion and Ambition of Princes
and States, the regular established Methods of Business and Intercourse of the
World is broken. By Sea there is nothing but Violence, Pyracy, and Depradation;
whereby the Hands of Industry are weakened; and that great Channel and Roads of
the World's Comerce is possessed and beset by Enemies and Robbers; and we here
in England chiefly, who pretend to be in our proper Element, who boast of
Conquest and Dominion there, whether by the Violence and good Management of our
Enemies, or the Drowsiness or Incapacity, or both, of our own Pylots and
Friends at home, whose Duty it is to be more on the watch, and to look better
out; have received so many deep Wounds in that tender and mortal part of our
Body, that it seems a Miracle how we subsist and survive it; while any one, who
should presume to probe and search this Sore to the quick, by nakedly stating
the Fact in our Maritime History and Conduct since the War, and though it should
be never so well meant, and merely in order to the Cure of the Malady, he would
be thought, I fear, to give too much Anguish to be endured; and such an
Enterprise (let the Purpose be never so honest and inoffensive) would taste too
bitter, and look too like a Libel to be suffered to pass uncensur'd of
Authority.

Thus it is with us by Sea: By Land the War rages more universally, and with
greater Violence, though not so sensible to our feeling here in England, because
our situation has hitherto secured us from Hostilities at our Doors, and our
Fields and Farms are not yet forag'd and plundered as our Neighbors are; but
what we pay, as I may say, to be exempted from such Violence, is almost
tantamount, and at a long run will as certainly impoverish and undo us: And we
may collect from manifold Symptoms, that our Destiny, without some almost
miraculous Means to save us, is not far off. Now to give you a Reason how War
impoverishes the World, because captious and skeptical Contenders in such
Disputes will be apt to say, What do you mean by broaching such Opinions, and
maintaining Paradoxes? Does War annihilate your Money? Is your Gold and Silver
dissolved, or gone into the Earth, from whence 'twas taken? This is Malice and
Trifling, and nothing else. To these Gentlemen then, and out of respect to
Truth and plam Dealing, these few following Reasons, of the chief Causes of
Poverty and scarcity of Money by War are tendered; Let us compute by the gross,
we have shown that Riches are the Product of Arts and Industry; whence is
inferred, That the greater Numbers there are of Men of Business and Traffic,
Artizans, laboring and industrious People, which are the procuring Cause of
Wealth, the greater will be the Effect. But War is a mortal Foe to Arts and
Industry, and consequently produces Effects directly contrary.

We behold Europe at this day engaged in a bloody and wastful War, which, for
ought I know to the contrary, imploys a Million in Arms, besides Horses and
Beasts of Burden, destined by Nature's Law to the Uses of Peace and humane
Ease, besides some hundreds of thousands who are exercised about Military
Matters, as Arms, Ammunition, Stores and Utensils of War, Fortifications, and
the like: All which mighty Numbers of Men and Things, are not only employed in
the profitable Professions of Peace, but are and must be sustained by purchase,
and paid for out of the Sweat and Industry of those that are, who by degrees do
not only grow too few for the work, but are over and above Sufferers, and
molested a thousand ways in their peaceful Methods of Life, as namely, by the
Violence, Rapine, Insolence, and Iniquity of those very People, whom they are
honestly, with great hardship, pain and parcimony, laboring to maintain; till
at length they come to cut down the very Bough that bears them, and kill the
Tree by whose Harbor they were sheltred, and by whose Fruit they were fed.
Thus the Land comes to mourn and lie waste, and the Means necessary to the
Support of great Armies becoming exhausted; Oppression, Poverty, and Calamity,
inevitably succeed. Furthermore, scarcity of Money is begotten in times of
Hostility, from great Sums falling into Hands where it is under no regulation,
being prodigally and voluptuously employed, squandered and scattered carelessly
about; by which means it does not circulate so currently, and make such regular
returns into the Public Coffers as in times of Peace, when Business and
Traffic is contained within their proper Channels.

Add to these one very great further Cause of the decay and scarcity of
Treasure; and that is, the Caution and Jealousy People are put under, every
one to save his own private Stake. For when Demands of Public Supplies wax
pressing, and Taxes begin to be felt, it is very natural for Men to begin to
meditate on Self-preservation, to foresee and provide for the Storm ever it
overtake them: Whence those who best can, whose Fortunes principally consist in
Money and Movables, withdraw their Effects to Countries as far as they can
from Danger; others hide and conceal by a thousand Arts every thing that is
Money or Moneys-worth, and cover from the World's Eye every appearance of
Wealth; profess Poverty, and practice all the methods of Parcimony imaginable,
to disguise and shelter themselves from the Jealousy and Tyranny of
Tax-gatherers, and will choose to abide the worst Treatment those cruel
Ministers can inflict, rather than discover Money, which they are sure will
yield them Comfort in better Times. And this I know to have been the Practice
time out of mind, in the Kingdoms of Barbary, where Tyranny reigns with a high
Hand, where the least suspicion of Wealth suffices to expose a Man to the
utmost Peril; where People therefore live under a perpetual Mask, and no Body
enjoys the least good thing, (whatever he may possess) but by stealth, from
which Cause (as I have been often assured from the Natives themselves) the
better half of the Treasure of those Countries is hid in Holes, and covered
under Ground: Insomuch, that it is grown into a habit, even among their
Princes, who take a Pride and Pleasure to bury their Gold. This, I say, is
another great Cause of the scarcity of Money in dangerous and hostile Times;
and, if we may allow but a fifth or sixth part of the Treasure (which would
otherwise appear among us here on this side the World) to have been so
withdrawn and diverted, there would be no doubt but such a diminution would
work a good part of the Effect we are searching after. To these common and
evident Causes of the Evils incident to War in general, we may here subjoyn why
War is of late more Burdensome than heretofore; and that is, by the overgrown
Greatness of the French Monarch, that aspiring Prince, who would put a Yoke on
the neck of Europe, conceiving that by the force of an immense Treasure,
whereby being enabled to bring greater Bodies of strength into the Field, than
was ever before practiced in our Hostilities on this side the World; he was
given to hope perhaps thereby to overwhelm us; which Design, though we see
hitherto to want the effect, we are from thence nevertheless instructed in the
Causes of this over-burthensome warfare, whereby we are put under an invincible
necessity of providing an equal Force, which produces an equal Charge to
withstand him, which I thought necessary to Note. Lastly, and over and above
the Impediments to our general Commerce, and the Interruption thereby of our
general Supplies of what we need, whereby the price of Money is inhanc'd, and
every thing comes harder to us. The Mines themselves of Gold and Silver, I am
well assured are exhausted, and yield not the Species in so great Plenty as
heretofore; to which, adding the wide use Silver and Gold every day obtains, by
spreading further into the North, and the Inland Countries: The great
Exportations to the Indies, Turkey, etc. from whence none returns, must to any
judicious thinking Man, be concluded to be among the Causes of that general
scarcity of Gold and Silver here in Europe, in comparison of what was observed
to circulate amongst us in Twenty or Thirty Years ago; which has raised the
value of the Species, and begotten that difference in price you enquire after.

Q. You have sufficiently explained the general Causes of the decay of Gold and
Silver in the World abroad, and in gross, would it be amiss to bring the
Question home, by asking you, how we here in England seem at least to share a
greater degree of the Smart of this Evil than most other Nations? Wherefore, if
it would not take up too much room, (for I observe our Subject begins to run
into a longer Argument than I expected) I should be glad you would instruct me
a little.

Ans. Your Question is reasonable, and I am ready to gratify you by recounting
a few of the many causes of this evil felt by us here at home, in a greater
Degree of late than ordinary. I shall begin with Trade, which is a rich,
cunning and coy Mistress, must have much Art and Address to acquire, and great
Attention and Assiduity to retain when gotten. This Lady seems to have been
neglected and ill treated by us of late. We do not, I fear, reflect enough,
that her Favors once lost are hardly recovered, because we have many Rivals,
who are jealous, wise and wary, and will be sure to stop the least gap we
leave, and hit every blot we make in our Conduct. There are loud Lamentations
in our Streets on this single Article of Trade: Let Authority be pleased (at
whose Door it lies) to lend some Attention to these Cries, and sift and search
the Causes to the Bottom, and they will find Sluts Corners enough. Let them in
their Debates and Deliberations, take knowing Men to their Assistance, using
such caution in their Choice; as that when they would penetrate, and cure the
Evils and Errors of one Branch of Commerce, to hear their Reasons with a more
willing Ear, who are sufferers by such Faults, than those of others who are
gainers by them, be their Parts and Talents otherwise never so Superior. For
Interest is a Passion, and Passion is both Deaf and Blind. The Turky-Merchant
exclaims against the East India Company, and these against them, while perhaps
both Trades may need Reformation with respect to the Public. The Art is well
to distinguish, for Trade, though it be the public Mistress, is courted by
particulars for private gain, which may, and do often interfere with the
general good, so that there is a less Mystery, and a greater to be discovered,
for private Men go as much in the dark, and in cuvert to their profit as they
can, and to find out and detect these bad intricate and bye ways, seems to be
the behoof of those who would go in earnest upon this work, which requires more
Judgment and Pains to execute well, then perhaps is practiced by our
Physicians. In short, it is from this great Fountain Trade, that all our Wealth
flows: If that be troubled and infected the Streams cannot be pure; every
Branch and Channel will gather filth, run thicker and slower, and in the end
the Stream will stand still, and the Circulation cease. But the most visible
and grievous Disease, of which our Commerce languishes, seems to me to be the
heavy Burdens of all Kinds laid on Navigation, which is the very bottom on
which all our Prosperity is built. Surely we should be more cautious if we
considered that we are running a Race with our Rivals in Trade; and a Prize of
unspeakable Value is set before us, where he who carries least weight is surest
to win the Course. Our New Market Gentlemen tell us, That barely an Ounce or
two in the weight of a Set of Horse-shooes suffices to lose the four Mile
Course: Shall we want the Discretion of a Jocky in our Deliberations about the
most solemn Thing that belongs to the Government? I could wish this Point were
better weighed that we might discern better, and lay it more to Heart, and that
our Friends and Neighbors the Dutch, might be our Teachers and Examples in the
Arts and Wisdom they Practice, to further Foreign Trade, in the Ease and
Encouragement they give to Navigation; which being the great Wheel that
regulates all the lesser Movements of the Machine of Business and Profit;
should be watched with a wakeful Eye, that nothing might clog or disturb its
Motion.

Q. While we are on this Article of Trade, I pray instruct me a little in the
Mystery of Exchange, which seems to me to have a great in fluence on
Money-Matters; which is the principal Subject of our Enquiries.

Ans. Your Questions grow harder and harder, and I honestly here own my
Ignorance of abundance of Arts, or rather Tricks, that are introduced and
practiced by crafty Traders in this dark way of Dealing. But thus far I may
observe, That Exchange is a kind of Usury, or lending and borrowing Money at
Interest, wherein Usance (as they call it) governs, and the Premium is
proportioned to the hazard and time of Payment: And, forasmuch, as Credit (on
which this Intercourse is founded) is a less solid Security than Land, the
Profit thereby does therefore excel that of ordinary Usury. In a word, Exchange
is lending and borrowing in one Place to pay and receive in another, and was
invented to facilitate the Motion of Commerce, but is grown to an Art of
setting the Dice on Necessity, and making every Man fine for his Wants; which
is as much as to say, That the more these Money-Dealers are let into the
Secrets of your Streights, the higher they will raise the Price of your
Redemption. Time was when Exchange was regulated here by Public Authority, and
established on an exact and solemn Scrutiny into the Nature and Value of all
Foreign Coin wheresoever we had any Dealings; to the end in exchanging Money
for Money, the Par (as they call it) being known and adjusted, (which was the
Proportion between the Value of Sterling and Foreign Money) they knew to a
trifle the comparative Intrinsic Difference of their respective Coins, and so
rated and governed their Exchange by that Rule, out of a jealousy lest we
might part with more of our Bullion for less of theirs in this kind of
Intercourse; which, at a long run, might prejudice and exhaust the capital
Stock of Treasure. But these wise Cautions are long since ceased.

Q. But have not you bin silent in one very essential Point in the Use of this
Mystery of Exchange; as namely, that of being applied to even the Scales and
Balance the Inequality that shall at any time be found betwixt our Importations
and Exportations, etc.

Ans. It Is true; and therefore something ought to be said here on that Subject:
Wherein you may be pleased to observe in few words, that in Trade, when
particular Merchants Export more Goods in Value than they Import, or Import
more than they Export, the Balance of each Man's Trade is always made up by the
help of Exchange; that is, they Lend or Borrow in one place to Receive or
Re-pay in another, as I have said. But when a Nation Exports more Goods than
Purchase the Goods they Import, they Trade to their Gain, and must receive in
Money what rests, to balance the Account. When what they Export is not
sufficient so to do, they must then Pay the Balance, and if there be
extraordinary Occasions to make Payments abroad, that Debt must needs be
increased, and they must pay so much the more, but which way soever the Balance
incline, it is made even by no other way but by Bullion, or by Money by way of
Exchange. And this I think may suffice for Answer to your last Quaery.

Q. What is your Opinion of Banks?

Ans. I have heard long and intricate Arguments pro and contra on this Subject;
but as Men for the most part contend more for Victory than Truth, I have not
bin much Edified by eithers Reasons, as not having not been possessed enough of
the merits of the Dispute; but he sees least into a Mystery who is least in the
secret of the Design. In a Popular and new Erected State where the Peoples
minds are doubtful and fluctuating, I think it to be a useful Invention;
because all who engage and incorporate into such a Community, do in effect give
Sureties for their good Behavior; for in such a case Men are engaged by
stronger Bonds than can be had from Conscience, Religion, Honor, or any other
specious Tie; because in these we are sure there may be Hypocrisy, but in
Interest we know there is none. On the other hand, these great and public
Banks in a State that is tottering and in danger, are very Pernicious; for
where the Treasure is there will be the Power; and in such a case if the Bank
should chance to decline from the Established Form of Government, so great a
weight can hardly fail to turn the Scale.

Q. Why should not a National Bank be always on the side of the Established
Government, is not that their safest way?

Ans. Because there are manifold instances of great Evidence, whereby it might
be made appear, that the distresses of State may instill Fears into the Bank
Proprietors, that their Money is in Danger, and in such Case, they will not
incline to favor the State; but because it is within in the Memory of Man,
that the Bankers and their Creditors were grievous Sufferers by one of those
many Cases incident to such Institutions. I will forbear to mention any other,
and observe only that the Bank then was not a Corporation, had no Consistence
or Constitution of Strength, to withstand such Attack; but wherever a body of
Men becomes established by Public Authority, shall be built on Public Funds;
obtain the sanction of Laws, to regulate and sustain them, and this Body shall
come to know its own Strength, to gather and grow Richer and Wiser in their
way, as they will do every Day, more and more: What Seeds of Faction and
Sedition may be Sown, and Spring from such an Innovation; what strength of
Opposition may be formed against the Measures the Government may at some time
or other take in the Regulation or Reformation of Abuses in the State as may
not suit with their Ends: In a word, what Influence such a Body of Men may
acquire over the Established Form of Government, who shall be backed with Laws,
enriched with the collective Treasure of the Nation, and united by the
strongest Bonds, superior to Oaths and Sacraments, Interest. Of what force
such a new Thing may be in an old Monarchy, repugnant every way to the form of
the State, methinks a short view with a very little attention may discern.
Wherefore I will take leave to conclude, That if Monopolies of little Things
are declared unlawful by our Statutes, from the Evils that are observed to grow
to the Public by Tollorateing them; then a Fortiori, a Monopoly of Money (as
it is plain such Banks are no other) must be so with a witness. We are told by
Classic History, that the Bankers or Monyers, (which was one and the same thing
among the Romans in that Age) became so Rich and Powerful, and by that means so
unruly, that the Grievances the State suffered under, by the Lycense that Body
of People (who were Established by Authority) had for their Lucre and unjust
Gain introduced, cost no less than a Civil War to redress; and the Dispute was
long deciding: The Riches and Impudence of the seditious Wageing a doubtful
Contest with that very Power that sat them up.

Such Establishments for ought I know, may be suitable enough to a Republic,
as being in their Nature of a Piece with such Forms of State. And the History
of the Bank of Venice may inform us how far it availed there toward the
Fettering of the People, and the establishment of that Aristocracy: But how
consistent they are with our ancient English Monarchy methinks there should be
some reason for wise Patriots and true English Men to weigh, before we wade too
far in such uncertain Depths.

Q. I see many printed Proposals of Banks, of a lower Rate; Projects and Funds
of Gain and Security, etc. to Adventurers, every where published and pressed on
the People: What is your Opinion of these new Inventions?

Ans. This Proposition does not seem to be within the Circle of our Inquiries,
which are calculated for national and general Use. But, so far as I conceive
our Subject and the Public are concerned in the Question, I will adventure to
speak my Mind, and no further; having nothing to do with the Designs and
Revelations of private Men, who may think they see when they Dream, and often,
like bold unskilful Pylots, carry themselves and those who trust them into
Perils and Loss. Though for the most part such Projects are Snares, being
calculated and laid for the certain Gain of the Inventers, and doubtful
Emolument of the Adventurers. Or, if you please, the Comparison will best hold
with the Art of Angling, wherein the cunninger the Artist is, the more will be
his success. Now the Bait is Profit, with which he covers his Hook; and, if he
would fish for Gudgeons, which is a greedy foolish Fish, it is no matter how
bare the Hook lies, so the Bait be but alluring: And here let our Artist but
light on their haunts and he is sure to have sport enough. Thus greedy,
covetous and weak Men are caught, whose Avarice and Hunger after great Gain
seals their Eyes to the hazard. But, when our Angler would catch shy and subtle
Fish, he has recourse to more sleights, will fish finer, and bait more
cunningly, that the Hook may not appear; and often is obliged to trouble the
Water too, the better to hide his Purpose: And this way Men of more Wit and
Caution are taken. But here let me be so just to own, that I am persuaded there
are very many well-meaning ingenious Men, whose Heads lying this way, do now
and then, by long Meditation and racking their Brains on one and the same
Subject, light upon Things laudible enough; but then such Projects are for the
most part intelligible at first sight, and, like Columbus's Egg, do not need
tedious and troublesome Explications, through the multiplicity of Calculation,
whereby the Evidence is discerned by but a few, and they see but darkly
neither: For all Projects are to be suspected of Artifice or Error, where many
Questions must be begged; where Contingencies are visible, and many Casualties
are incident: Which consist of many nice and intricate Parts, that, like many
Movements in a Machine, where, upon the failure of the least Wheel, the Motion
of the whole is destroyed. A further Objection, for the most part, lies against
these kind of Money-Projects; That they are out of the Road and Circle of
common Business; which is very hard to break, and Men of repugnant Methods meet
as it were in the dark in their Negotiations, and so interfere, justle, and
overturn one another; for, those who would go to their Proby a nearer cut than
their Neighbors, must leave the trodden Path of Business, where they will
either lose their way, or must trespass and do damage to many for the sake of a
few. Furthermore, all new Inventions of this sort, wherein Wit and Subtlety go
to their Composition, over and above the suspicion, the middle Rank of Men
(which are the majority) will and ought to have of their Utility; so of course
the fewer will be found to take part and engage with them, while the greater
and stronger Party, not being of their Mind, will become Enemies, and watch
perpetually to cross and perplex them, and combine a thousand ways to defeat
them: And thus their Success by that means is in danger of disappointment. Let
me add to these Cautions, That I, for my part, take all Projects of this sort,
which are erected on a view of Private Advantage, that are conceived with much
Art, and require to be managed by equal Address, seem to me to be little better
than Play at Cards or Dice, where Skill and Cunning (which is a sort of
out-witting ones Neighbor) mostly governs: And as this is but a lesser degree
of Fraud, so it often degenerates into rank Cheating; besides, being out of the
way of that simplicity of Intercourse, which is intelligible and practicable by
most Men, and by which all Ranks and Capacities of People may be guided and
bettered by honest Industry and Plain-dealing: I have therefore singled out
these few general Objections to such Projects of Profit, wherein the Public
seems not only to be nothing at all interested, but for the most part
endangered thereby of suffering Damage: I thought it therefore but a little out
of my way to encounter them, and, as I have spoken perhaps with more freedom
than will be forgiven me by some, yet I am persuaded I shall have the majority
on my side. In a word. I would fain see some of these supersine Artists spin a
Web of Use and Strength for Public Wearing; I would see Projects for
improvement and Encouragement of Industry and Peopling the Land, which mourns;
for introducing and increasing such laudable Arts and Manufactures as we have
not, and for Reformation of Abuses which have crept into those we have; When I
shall behold Proposals for alleviating the unmerciful Burdens laid on
Navigation, and transferring them, if they must be born, on something wherein
our Wisdom and good Sense may be better seen; which Burdens are as certainly
the Bane of Trade and Foreign Commerce, as Navigation is the Basis of all our
Strength and Riches. When there shall be sound Men fruitful of Invention of
Public and Popular Minds; who (without driving so furiously, and hunting with
so much anxiety after mystical Gain, of no kin at all to the Commonwealth,)
shall tell us how by plain and practicable Methods, we may be rid of the
Beggars and Idlers in our Streets; whose subsistence, as it is said to cost the
Nation near a Million a Year, that Sum might not only be saved to the Public,
but half as much, for ought I know, gained by a wise and artful Employment of
the Labor of that very Poor, whom we now sustain at so very burdensome an
Expense: When such praiseworthy Projects as these shall be suggested and made
Public, it will be Matter of Joy to every honest Englishman, and no Objection
will lie against the Matter and Meaning, whateser may be said to the Form of
such Proposals. But let us hasten to our main Question.

Q. Let me prosecute my Curiosity then to the Mark we have been all along
aiming at; and, according to the Light you have given me into the Subject of
Money in general, to ask you, how we shall be able to compass a just Rule for
the regulating our Coin here at home, while the Question seems, by your way of
handling it, to lie so deep, and is surrounded with so much darkness, that we
must pry into many Mysteries of State, travel into Foreign Trade and Intrigues
of Business to attain a due knowledge therein?

Ans. Perhaps the Question is not so hard, as at first sight it may seem: This
at least I may be sure of, that such Truths cannot lie very deep, which my weak
Forces may suffice to draw up. To proceed then, I first fix this Maxim, That as
your Coin may be too Poor, so it may be too Rich, either of which is a Disease;
and is to be understood by the Comparison and Proportion it bears, with the
matter of Gold and Silver out of which it is made; for we have shown already
the Necessity we are under, of making our Money so as to contain intrinsie
value; and being got over that Point, we come now to make an Essay, toward
determining the Proportion. I say then, that Money is poor or base
Comparatively, as when you make more Shillings out of the same quantity of
Bullion, by a new Law then was allowed by your old Establishment, for this
makes you but nominally the Richer, while Virtually and in Truth, you become
poorer by a quarter per Cent of the Charge of the Mintage of all the new Money
that shall be so Coined, observing the proportion mentioned already, and not to
repeat the Evils enumerated, this one more we may add; Namely, the Trouble and
Molestation of Telling, carrying and using more Money for less Profit than
before, which is some clog to Trade, whose course should be made to move with
all the Arts of Ease, Invention can suggest. That no Profit can arise to the
public any way, by such an Establishment of our Mint, (whereby your Coin
becmes so impoverished.) We need to go no furhter for a Proof, than the
Observation may be made of what has befallen us by Chance, in our Clipped and bad
Coin now grown and established by Custom into use among us, which happening to
be diminished to almost half the Original Value: We behold every thing risen in
Price as it were by that Proportion; and our Gold Coin which is not so liable
to Corruption and Dimunition, risen from the same cause near a Third Part,
which may suffice to show how the public is affected, when your Coin either by
Law or Chance comes to be too Poor.

Your Coin is too Rich, when a piece of Money, for Example, a Mild Crown shall
go but for Five Shillings in Money, to buy and go to Market with; when if it
were lawful to melt it down and sell it, for its due worth, would yield you Six
Shillings, there being Six Shillings worth of Silver in that Piece. I still use
round Numbers; the nicety of Calculation not being here necessary. Now, as on
the one Hand, when your Money is bad and poor, and this becomes established by
Law or Custom into use; every Nation abroad, and every bad Man at home (who has
art enough) will be Coining this Money for you, and will impart and utter it
for your use, and their profit, as some Nations (which I need not name) serve
the Spaniards at this day, by their base black Money, which does not contain a
sixth part of the value for which it passes with that blind Nation. I say by
this means, as your Mint shall grow out of use by the plenty of such Coin as
shall be Manufactur'd by others to your Hands; so your Money shall grow worse
and worse, (for there will be no end of debasing it) till your whole Mass of
Silver Coin shall be destroyed and converted into Trash and Counters, rather
than Money.

On the other Hand, when your Money happens to be too Rich, as has been our
Case by the great rising of Bullion in value, since the coining of our Mild
Money, it is plain, and there can be no room for doubt, but that such Coin will
be transported out of the Land, and by those whose profession best enables
them, will be melted down into Bars and Bullion, and from this Cause, Namely,
its over richness or goodness this Disease Springs, and hence is Consumed,
Vanished, and Extinct all or the most part of the noble Milled Coin, which was
Minted in the two last Reigns; there being no Action, how vile soever that Gain
with Impunity will not Sanctify, or hardly any Conscience so scrupulous, that
this Charm has not Power to Quiet and Absolve; wherefore let those, who by
their Occupation have the means of touching most Money, consider and be aware
what fort of People this Crime is likely most to touch,

Q. If this Doctrine of yours be bottomed on sound Reason (as it has the
appearance) it is visible that we are led into an Error, by those who would
teach us, that the Standard established Rule of the Mint, (namely, That your
Money must for ever be just so fine, and of such a weight) is Sacred, and
cannot be altered without damage and danger to the State.

Ans. It Is seen by what has been said, and is, I think, as demonstrable as anv
Problem in Geometry, That the Rules for Coinage, and the Standard of the Mint,
must vary according to the general scarcity or abundance of the Species of Gold
and Silver; and that it is, consequently, an Error in Fundamentals to hold the
contrary, as I have endeavored to show, and will need no further Explanation
here.

Q. Why (if what you say be true) is there so much variety in the Coin of
Countries, how comes it to pass that there is such diversity of coarse and
fine, light and weighty Money in the World? And that all Mankind, who are
linked in one general League of Intercourse, do not come to accord in one
universal Standard for their Money, which would save abundance of Trouble in
the Course of general Trassick, and set the Intercourse of the World on a much
surer and easier foot?

Ans. First, Because Silver and Gold are more or less plenty in the diverse
Countries of the World, comparatively, and so becomes more or less worth.
Secondly, It Is hard and hazardous to change any rooted Custom of a Country;
especially, in a Case of this general Importance, though in Speculation it should
appear never so just. Thirdly, The Use of Money (which was originally invented
for the Ease and Benefit of Commerce) is become corrupted, and made an
Instrument of Tyranny and Oppression: The Passions of Princes and States, where
the Government is absolute, making their Power, in this Point of Money, to
become a Yoke and a Burden, which was meant for the Comfort and Ease of
Mankind; forging Racks and Shackles for the Subject, out of that very Matter,
which by Nature, the first Institution and the right Reason of the Thing was
decreed, and devised for their Benefit and Consolation.

Q. You were speaking of Monopolies of Money but now, Do not Princes who enjoy
absolute Power, by this unlimited Authority, make a kind of Monopoly of Money?

Ans. Yes, such Princes can do that by their Power, which a great Bank may
compass by Art, or come to do by Accident and from the Nature of the Thing: And
we know the King of France himself, with all his boasted Wealth, often
Practices such poor Shifts; proclaiming one Value on his Money when he has a
great Sum to pay, and another when he has much to receive. But the World
abroad, by whose Sentiments Trading-People must be governed, will not heed it;
nor are influenced by it, and no solid Fruit can ever be gathered from such
Devices, which are ever signs of a sickly Constitution; and the Prince or State
that uses them, are like Men whose Bodies are decayed by much drinking of
Spirits; they are relieved indeed in the present Pangs they feel, but by the
very Draught, which in that Moment yields them Comfort, they are in the end
destroyed.

Q. Why is it called the Mystery of the Mint, if our Princes here in England
make none of those undue Uses of Coinage, as are in Practice among absolute
States?

Aus. Perhaps it is continued to be called a Mystery from the Power our Princes
heretofore claimed, or had, to make Coinage some way or other turn them to
Account, and the Profit arising thereby, being kept secret, was therefore
called so. Or, it may be styled a Mystery, from the difficulty most Men are
under, to conceive and see clearly in so cloudy and perplexed a Subject.

Q. How long have our Princes been so Wise, and so Good, as to part with a
Power which yielded them but a doubtful Profit, at the purchase of great
Jealousy of the People, lest such a Power as looked a little Arqitrarily,
might in time degenerate into License, and so come to be called a Grievance,
and the cause of Discontents and Murmures, in so free and noble a Constitution
as ours is?

Ans. I think King Charles the Second quitted his Right to the Profits accruing
by the Mint, for some valuable Consideration, which at that time, by reason of
great Coinage, amounted to thirty or forty thousand Pounds per Annum: Since
when we are, I presume, at liberty to consult and determine, by the best Rules
that Wisdom and Science can suggest, about such Laws and Regulations for the
Mint, as may be found most easy and beneficial for the State.

Q How did that Profit arise to King Charles the Second, etc. by the Mint?

A. I suppose diverse ways, but principally this; namely, that Bullion in those
days being much lower in Value than now, because more plentiful, and the
Standard Established to such a weight and sineness (which was not to be
altered) a proportional Profit came by that means of course to the King through
the cheapness of the Material out of which the Coin was Manufactur'd, in so
much that the Merchant or Goldsmith had a Merchantable Profit, to encourage
them to send their Bullion to the Mint, and the King a competent share of Gain
in the overplus. But pray note, upon this Question (which helps to unsold the
Mystery) that since those days (through the causes we have endeavored to
explain) the Material of your Money is risen in Value it may be a fifth part at
least; and that Batgain which was thought (and it may be really was) so
profitable to the King; then should his Majesty have entered into Covenants
with his People to Coin a certain Sum of Money yearly of the Established
Standard weight and fineness (which he could not alter) He might have lived to
see himself a great deal more a looser by such a Contract, then he had been a
Gainer; and behold all his Money to vanish as fast as it was Minted, as we have
plainly enough shown.

Question, I am now at length every way convinced, that our Money ought to be
all new Coined. And that by reason of the new and exorbitant price of your
Bullion, you must have a new Standard and Proportion for your Mint. But how
that can be found and settled, is a new Question, to which I stand in need of
your Answer?

Ans. We have traveled a great way to arrive fairly at this single Question;
and if we have gone somewhat about and made our Journey seem longer, then might
be thought necessary to some? I Answer, That it was for the sake of the
Majority, that this Voyage was taken, and therefore but just to go their pace.
Our Subject lies in the dark to the Multitude, and therefore we cannot open too
many Windows to let in the Light, to the end, the weakest Sihht may be enabled
to discern and make some Judgment, whereby to determine in a matter, that so
nearly touches every Body.

Question, Your Apology is reasonable, and I believe will be thought so by most
Men; but let us come now to an Issue, and decide this arduous Question: How,
and by what Methods and Rules of Proportion our Mint may be Reformed.

Answer, I will not trouble you with References to what has been said, that we
may not multiply Words, and will take for granted, you bear in Mind that our
Hypothesis is framed upon Reasons drawn from abroad, as well as at home;
wherefore we must take Foreign as well as Domestic Considerations to our Aid.
Your Money, I have shown is subject to these two chief Diseases, of being too
Rich, which is containing more worth than it goes for in Coin, which begets a
Consumption, and wasting by re-converting it into Bullion, exporting and the
like; too Poor, when it is either Coined by Authority through mistaken measures
of State, with too great an extrinsick allowance, or corrupted, clipped and
salsify'd by others, so as to become notoriously diminished in the intrinsic
Value; Which raises the Price of all things by the like proportion; begets
doubts Difficulties and Vexation in your common Traffic, and enhaunses the
rates of Exchange with your Neighbors, which has a mighty Influence on your
Trade abroad, encourages bad People at home to diminish and falsify it every
day more and more, because there is no rule left to compare and know your Money
by; And invites the Nations round about you (who may do it with more safety) to
import and utter it in such quantities, and still worse and worse, till in the
end, all your Silver Coin, the unclipp'd and the clipped shall be gone out of
the Kingdom; and what a calamitous State such a People must be in, needs no
Exaggeration here.

Q. I am glad you have repeated and renewed in my Memory these two chief
Diseases of Money, and given so reasonable a Prognostic of the Effects;
because I reckon you will now come to propose the remedy for Restoring and
Establishing the Health of our Coin, by such Rules as may seem as just as your
Argument hitherto has appeared to me reasonable.

Ans. To arrive then at that right Rule of proportion you require, (and which
we have been thus long in quest of) I first propose, that we should look a
little back here at home, and inquire, and be at a certainty, what Price
Bullion bore, when our last milled Money was coined. And we will suppose it
here about the round sum of Five Shillings the Ounce, then let us grant it to
be risen and advanced in Price, from Five to Six Shillings or thereabouts the
Ounce, which shall be the Value we will give it at this day: Both which Prizes
may be more or less, without damage to our reasoning about the Rule which I
would propose for our Government in this great Question. Now pray note, that
while the King had his Profit by the Mint (which was indefinite) and Silver was
at an Underrate no great difficulty could occur in the Coinage, for as long as
that gain lasted be it little or much, the King had it, who was enabled over
and above still to allow the Merchant or Goldsmith One or more per Cent profit,
to invite them to bring their Bullion to the Mint; that is, their Silver became
so much more worth to them when manufactur'd into Money (which they could
presently utter and employ) than when inthe Mass in their Warehouse: Upon
which Motive (namely their Gain) they carried it to the Mint. But that
incitement ceasing from the reasons I have given; there is not only no more
Money now coined, but even the Milled Money, which in those days was minted
(from the same Motive Gain) is melted down again, and reconverted into Bulloin,
as we have noted, and cannot too often repeat. If this be true, who can with
any shadow of Rcason gainsay the necessity we are under of changing the
proportions of our Mint, which must inevitably and for ever change; rise and
fall by a Scale of proportion rectified to the rising and falling Value of your
Bullion.

Let it be granted then, that your Silver is risen in Value from the causes
which have been enumerated: We will suppose here just fifteen per Cent. since
your last Coinage of milled Money; if this be true, then I say your Coin at
this day, if your Money were truly minted at that time, (which you are likewise
to consider) ought to be just fifteen per Cent. lighter than that milled Money
was; for I would by no means propose the least alteration in the purity of the
Standard; for the many reasons I have already delivered. Wherefore let
Authority be pleased by the help of Merchants, Goldsmiths, the Officers of the
Mint, and by all the cautious and judicious means possible, compass a right
knowledge of this Difference (which we do not you see here determine) and the
Rule for their Guidance in assigning, the just Proportion to your Coin must
plainly result from thence; as namely, if the Difference of fifteen per Cent.
here by me propounded were the exact truth, then your new Shilling to be
coined, and to be of the same fineness with the old milled Shilling, must weigh
and be worth (within a very small fraction) Ten-pence farthing; I go the
plainest way to work I can, to make my meaning intelligible to every capacity.

Q. But methinks by this Rule you are leading into the Error, which you have
been all along cautioning us to avoid, for by thus taking from the Subject One
Penny Three Farthings out of every Shilling seems to me to be very hard, and
will for certain be so reckoned by every Body.

Ans. With your pardon, no Body by this Rule, is, or ever can be injured;
because if People would but open their Eyes, and look with attention, they
would Discern, that this Ten-pence farthing will buy as much of every thing in
the Market now, when your Coin shall be rectified, as Twelve-pence would have
done at that time; which I think may suffice to satisfy your scruple.

Q. What would be the hurt then, if you should make your Shilling yet lighter,
provided it keep the fineness.

Ans. Every visible Departure from this Rule, would prove a proportional damage
to the Subject, and have the same Effect as in the case of clipped money; for
your Coin would abate in its Esteem with the People, in proportion to the
Dimunition of its due intrinsic Value; whereby all the Species of things would
rise, and grow dear, accordingly as we find to have come to pass on the
occasion of our Clipped Money; and in such case, I grant, the Objection you
have made would amount to a Grievance.

Q. But have you not taught that we are not to make our Rule for Regulating the
Mint from Observations and Reasons ariseing barely from among our selves here
at home, but with regard also and reference had to our Neighbors abroad with
whom we have Commerce?

A. I have and can suppose the price I have already assigned to Bullion at this
Day to be the result of a Calculation founded on that regard, but because it is
necessary to explain it I will, as well as I can, why that Caution is necessary.

We here in England live in the Neighborhood of diverse great Nations who are
our Rivals and Vye with us in the Arts of Trade, the Dutch especially, who
perhaps are Our Superiors in every thing that belongs to that great and
profitable Mystery. They are every way under a better Economy and observe
every thing nearer than we do; they live with greater Frugality, which is their
Wisdom, as enjoying but few necessaries to their subsistence of their own
growth; which habituates them to a narrower Inspection and Observation of every
the least thing that relates to their profit. This penurious Method of Life
which in them is a Virtue would not with us, it may be, thought so, who live in
a wide, rich and plentiful Country, abounding in all things needful to humane
life and ease. But this greater Extent and Latitude of Life and Manners which
we inherit, naturally mollify's us toward Luxury Sloth and Improvidence, and
whatever Virtues our good Soil may produce and our better Stars may shed
toward the exalting our Courage, enlargeing our Generosity, and forming our
minds for Magnanimity and other noble and plausible Endowments, which I think
are more inherent in us than most other Nations; these native benefits do, I
say, beget and infer an incapacity to deal with these our Neighbors in those
contests where Diligence, Penetration, Vigilance and good Husbandry are to be
the Weapons. Now Trade which they prosecute more by much for necessity then we
do, for they must Navigate or Starve, is the Prize held up between us, and I
fear it is found but too evident to our Cost, that in this strife the Virtues
and Manners which they profess are more appropriated to enable them for Victory
than ours. It would be tedious and perhaps Invidious to enumerate by how many
Arts they have won upon us of late, but I leave that Speculation to wiser
Heads, and keep within my own Circle which is the subject of Money; wherein how
far and by how many sleights they have contributed toward the pressures we at
this Day are sinking under on that Score, Printed Papers do so plainly and
honestly every day evince that I may spare here to explain. It is very likely
then (not to say very true) that all the Bullion wherewith we abounded before
this War, and all the Silver that has been clipped from our Money, does this day
in a manner Center in Holland and thereabouts; this must in evitably infer a
greater abundance of that Species among 'em and a proportionable scarcity with
us; that plenty with them must needs in some degree lower the value of the
Species, while this high Tide of Affluence lasts; as it must by the same Rule
inhaunce it here in our low ebb of Poverty. I pray then consider and weigh with
your utmost attention, how to attain and arrive at such a Proportion in the
renewing the Establishment of your Mint, that it may not be said Your want of
Wisdom and a thorough Insight into a Matter of so great Moment shall afford
them a new handle whereby to hurt you with your new Money. For Example, if you
Mint your new Coin with an overgreat Extrinsical Price, out of an over value
and regard to the present appearing Rate of Bullion here, which, I note has
acquired, as I may say, an undue and praeter-natural Ascent in our esteem; You
will thereby be in danger of your Neighbors improveing the advantage of their
lower price of Bullion to your Detriment, by Importing it to our Mint and
purchaseing therewith; even to the laying up in store for Years to come every
Staple Commodity and Manufacture of the Kingdom, by which means whatever
present appearance there may be of quickness of Trade, the consequence must be
pernicious; and I will adventure to say, that as no People whatsoever can be
conceived to contribute a greater share of Blood and Treasure toward
supporting the Burden of the War, so none I am sure even by this very means
are likely to taste less consolation from a Peace, whenever it shall happen.
Which must yield but Melancholy Reflections by every thoughtful Englishman,
and therefore one would think ought to awaken us; lest we sleep the sleep of
Death.

Q. What Method would you advise to obviate this Evil, for there is no doubt
but our superiors would be glad to turn every Stone to settle our Mint on a
right bottom.

A. You ought I think to begin with this first necessary Reflection, namely,
that this Exorbitant riseing of the price of your Bullion, is in a good degree
due to the present badness of your Current Coin, and the difference in price
even betwixt us and Holland in like manner to be grown in some proportion from
the same cause: Now both these Reflections are to bear some weight in your
Deliberations, least by over-rateing the causes you bend your Argument (which
you would streighten) too far the other way. To explain this point a little,
you are to reckon that whenever your Coin shall come to be bettered (be it more
or less) the difference or height of Exchange, or of the Price of Silver
betwixt you and Holland (which is all one) will be less of course, as from the
same reckoning the value of your own Bullion at home will sink too. Now I say
that the Amount of those two, which are but co-incident Effects, is to be
computed, and by proper helps (I mean such as may be had from Men who are most
busied in Trade and Exchange and as shall be thought to have Integrity enough
to be trusted) an Estimate ought to be first made, namely, to state to what
degree, a little more or less, the Exchange with Holland and the Price of our
Bullion here at home may fall, as a bare and simple effect of the regulating
our Mint, without heeding any other matter at all relateing to the subject.
When this Effect, I say, which is accidental shall be determined, as if it
shall be deemed to amount to 3. 4. or five per Cent, more or less, then this
sum, or difference is to be deducted and left out of the Argument; as namely,
if you conclude that this accidental Effect will be 5. per. Cent, that your
Bullion will fall of course on the Re-coining your Money; in such case if your
Bullion be risen 20 per Cent. in the whole you must deduct this 5 per Cent, out
of that difference; because it ought to have no Existence among the solid
Reasons for the change you are about to make.

Q. If I understand you right then, I conceive if the appearing difference
betwixt the price of Bullion now and heretofore be observed to amount to 20 per
Cent. the real difference by your reckoning is but fifteen per Cent, and upon
that Calculation, your Rule for a new Regulation of the Mint must be Built.

A. You understand my meaning. The next step I would propose is to consider,
what was the Original Motive of Assigning an Extrinsic or Political Value to
Money; I mean that little Value which was given to the public Coin more then
it was really worth, without regard to the salse Reasons of State that
afterward prevailed, and is at this Day in Practice in Rigid and Violent
Governments; and this was plainly for no other End, than to keep every one
their own Coin within their own Territory; For while it obtained, or there was
given 2, or 3, or more per Cent. Extrinsical worth by the Mintage, it was so
much more in esteem where it was a Native than elsewhere; which was a very
reasonable Device to prevent its wandering without the Circle of its Current
Virtue. Wherefore let your Coin be Established with such a proportion of
Political Value as may prevent its going abroad, and yet may not be thought to
affect you at home in the Prices of the Species of Things, which would amount
to an injustice and a grievance, in proportion to the Error you shall commit;
as I have shown. On the other hand, if you make your Money without any Nominal
or Extrinsic signification, it will (as I have often said and proved) be the
cause of your loosing it, by melting down, or going out of the Kingdom, upon
the least advance of the price of Bullion, and there is no manner of question
to be made but that Material will rise every day more and more as long as the
War lasts, from the general causes to which I have already ascribed. The
growing scarcity of Money in the World, now as it will be very hard to hit a
just mean proportion betwixt these two, so I think it is the safest Error to
incline to the giving your new Money too much rather than too little Extrinsic
Value, because as an Excess on that side will as it were obviate the danger
of the riseing Value of your Bullion, so the Error here, will affect us less
than the other way, because money, though a little too poor, is yet better by
far than none at all; is much more easily melted down and transported than it
is Coined and Counterfeited, the one may be done easily by any body, any where;
the other can be performed but by a few, and requires great secrecy and many
Tools; the one is a fault Finable only, the other Punished with Death, and
therefore likely to have fewer Offenders.

Q. I see but one very visible Objection to lie against this Opinion of yours
of giving your Money rather an over than under Exstrinsic Value, and that is
the profit arising by the Mintage; for if your new Money shall be made to go
for something more than it is Intrinsically worth, will there not arise a
certain profit somewhere by the Mintage.

A. Yes, plainly; for if you allot but 5 per. Cent Extrinsic Value to your new
Coin, the charge of the Manufacturage, which will not be above two per. Cent,
being deducted out of that 5 per. Cent. there will still remain 3 per. Cent
profit; which in the minting of five Millions of Money rises to 150000 pound.

Q. Whose will this Profit be? for the King you say has quitted his right to it.

A. I am no Judge of that; but if I had the honor of being a Member of
Parliment, I should willingly give my Vote to bestow it toward a Fund for the
new Hospital at Greenwich; For as no sort of Men have a greater right to our
general Charity then Seamen, so no Charity could rise so easily and from so
public a Fountain as this.

Q. You Determine then, I presume, that we ought to Re-coin the whole stock of
National Money; I do, because I think there cannot possibly Occur any mischief
by much so grievous and dangerous to the Nation, through any difficulty that
may be suggest'd to spring from the new Minting your Money, as those which we
suffer, and threaten us by delaying it. For the Mint or public Money is the
Pulse of the Body politic: And Tacitus tells us, that the Health and Infirmity
of the State was always measured by that Motion. And grave Authors further
assure us, That as the Roman Empire declined, it was manifested by their Mint;
their Money debasing, as the Power and Virtue of that great People sunk and
declined. Money is the public Measure of every thing we have; all our Meum and
Tuum is weighed and dispensed by no other Scale or Rule: If that be unequal,
false or doubtful, what Injustice, what Vexation, Murmurings, Poverty and
Peril, threatened the State thereby, needs no Rhetoric to enforce! Let it be
seen by the timely Wisdom of our Remedies, that the Disease was not Mortal, and
the Danger beyond the possibility of a Cure: The Calamitous Fire of London was
a Disaster which the World thought would have bin a Death's blow to the State,
and, during the Operation of People's Prognostics thereupon, brought us very
low in our Neighbor's Eyes: But the sudden Repair of that stupendous Loss, by
the Rebuilding with so much Magnificence the greatest City (for ought I know)
in the Universe, raised the Reputation of Our Glory, Courage and Wealth, to a
more surprising Degree of Value in the World's, and our own Esteem too; which
by Art, or Wisdom's Rules, could never have bin known or calculated. We may
hope for the like fruit from the same wise and steady Counsels: The Calamity of
our Coin is not inferior; the Cure seems not, in my poor Judgment, harder; nor
will the Benefits which the Nation shall reap in the Effect be less.

Q. Have you no further Advice to give, or Cautions to offer, in the main Point
of Regulating the new Coinage of Our Money?

A. I cannot repeat too often, and therefore once more do recommend to your
utmost Attention, the deliberating and determining the Proportion betwixt the
Real and Nominal Value of your Money; which is the Key of the whole Difficulty,
and requires the greatest Advice, Gravity, and Penetration to fix.

Q. Have not you said that the Material of your Money is not likely to grow
cheaper, but to rise still higher and higher; and yet but just now you gave me
an Instance of your foresight that on the Moment your Coin shall be regulated,
(whether it should chance to be rightly or wisely performed or no,) yet there
would presently, as a pure and simple Effect of such a Reformation, be a Fall
of the Value of Silver and Gold, and all the Species of things to a Certain
degree, the Quantum being undetermined?

A. In this Objection you seem not to be aware, that the Abatement of the Value
of your Silver and Gold you speak of, is no other than an accidental Effect of
that Cause: But the growing Value of Gold and Silver, whereof I have given you
my Prognostics is from the general Causes already by me produced; And
therefore this Effect, by the bye, has no Weight in your Objection, because it
will presently expire, and the general growing Scarcity be no ways influenced
thereby.

Q. You seem to have yet taken but little notice how our Gold Coin will be
affected by the Regulation of our Mint.

A. I have already noted, that your Gold must necessarily fall in its Value
upon the Repairing of your Silver Coin, the obvious Reason of its exorbitant
Rise being from the low Reputation of our Silver-Money; so that it has grown
higher through the reason of Comparison (as I may say) becoming so much the
more worth from the others happening to fall so low, which is therefore owing
purely to this unhappy Accident here at home: But of what ill influence it has
bin to our Affairs; the use our watchful Neighbors have made thereof, we are
loudly and truly everywhere told by public Papers. But a great deal of this
Evil, I say, will cure of it self, by your Silver Coin recovering its
Reputation: After which, if Gold shall be thought still to bear too high a
Value, I believe it may be in the Power of the Government to Regulate that at
any time by a Proclamation, or some wise Result of Council.

Q. I think I have now askd you all my Questions about the Matter; Let me now
ask you a few touching the Manner wherein you would proceed in this great Work.

A. I think, according to Advice already published, that more Mints than One
ought to be employed to carry on the business. And as a foundation to this
great Work, I propose that One Million at least, or Fifteen Hundred Thousand
Pounds worth of Bullion may be by one means or other compassed to be first
Coined into Shillings and Sixpences, to be a Fund ready prepared to pay upon
the spot for such Clipped Money as shall be brought in.

The next step I would propose to be made, should be the Calling in of all the
Half-crowns, Thirteenpence-halfpenies, Ninepences, and the rest of that unequal
Money; your Shillings and Sixpences to remain still current till this first
Work shall be over. This Money being brought in to the several Receivers
appointed, to be spread and distributed in the most populous Places of the
Kingdom, shall be paid for in ready new Money by the said Officers; viz. Five
new Shillings for five Shillings of your clipped Halfcrowns, etc receiving all
the old Money by Weight as well as Tale, according to the Method and Regulation
proposed by Mr. Lowndes; for to think of paying People by piecemeal with Bills
or Paper, who shall come from far, sull of Doubts, and pinched with Poverty,
and vexed already to the Quick with the Hardships they have suffered, and still
lie under; and where the Majority will be found to need every penyworth of the
Money they shall bring in to be Exchanged for present current Money: I say, to
propose such a Method as should not be very casie and intelligible to the
greater part of the People, might breed a Mischief of no verb easy Digestion.

Wherefore I humbly propose, that this Million and a half (or whatsoever the
Decay of the whole Treasure of the Nation shall be computed to amount to) may
be first found and provided by such means as to the Wisdom of the Parliament
shall appear most feasible; which, in my poor Opinion, will not be an
insuperable Work. This being first done, and you being then in possession of
the Balance of this Debt, which is owing to your general Stock of Treasure, by
the Clipping and Impairment it has suffered; there will remain no other
Difficulty but in the Minting and orderly Distributing and Exchanging your
Money by such Rules as I think have bin already very prudently and masterly
propounded by the said Mr. Lowndes.

I propose your beginning with Halfcrowns, etc. because the Work must be done
Gradatim, and cannot be compassed otherwise without much greater Difficulty and
Disorder; wherein a good deal must still happen after all your utmost care to
prevent it.

Your Halfcrowns, etc. being received and paid for (wherein I note that no
Brass or base Money is to be received,) this is presently to be Minted up to
increase your Stock of new Money to be Exchanged for the old. When this
Difficulty is passed, I would humbly propose that Proclamation should be made
for People to bring in one half or one quarter of their Shillings and
Sixpences, or such a proportion as shall be Deemed to amount to the Sum of new
Money you shall have got Minted. Which proportion of Shillings and Sixpences
being brought in and paid for, (a new Shilling for an old, etc.) shall be
forthwith Coined up to produce wherewithal of new Money to carry on your
Payments for the old.

I propose this gradual Method in the Coining and Calling in of your Shillings
and Sixpences I say, to obviate the Trouble, and ease you in the many
Difficulties which must needs otherwise occur in the transacting so voluminous
and multifarious a Work. When your first proportion of Shillings and Sixpences
shall be brought in and paid for, etc. you are to proceed to the next, and so
on till your Business shall be finished.

Q. You have yet made no mention of the remaining Mill'd-Money, and the rest of
the weighty and undefac'd old Coin of the Kingdom; of which sort there must
needs be a good quantity. What would you propose should be done with that?

A. I propose, that whosoever has bin so honest as to spare from the general
Spoil committed on our Coin, or so frugal or provident to have reserved or laid
any part thereof up, that it is but Justice they should be considered for the
same. Wherefore my Advice is, That all such Money should be left to the choice
of the Owners, whether to Melt it down and sell it for its real Worth, or to
dispose of it to the utmost height of its Value to those who may have a mind to
buy it, but still to be obliged to dispose of it, so as that it may be
re-converted into Coin.

Q. Will not bad Men fall to Clipping the Clipp'd-money anew, when it shall be
published by Proclamation, that all the Clipp'd-money is to be paid for on the
spot with good newcoin'd legal Money? Or will not those who have culled out all
the fair Money from the bad (which is not honest) and who by touching a great
running Cash, have it always in their power, will not such Men be able to make
a better hand of it by sending this picked Money to the Clippers to be trimmed,
and pared as close as Knavery and Avarice can suggest, than by selling and
re-converting such fair Coin into Bullion, as you propose?

A. I believe this might be very easily prevented, and people would not think
of Transgressing anew, or of making that undue use of their fair Money as you
mention, if this single Resolution shall be taken: Namely,

That Authority would be pleased to direct a judicious Scrutiny to be forthwith
made into the lowest declension the Coin of the Kingdom is at this day under,
and has suffered by Clipp^ng and Wasting it; and then admitting they find it to
be sunk, for Example, Forty in the Hundred, and that to be the most. In such
case I humbly conceive, that if they shall determine that all Money as shall be
brought to the Receivers to be Exchanged, which shall fall out to be diminished
below that proportion, such Want shall be made good by the Bringer or
Proprietor, and not by the Public. As on the other hand, all fair Money as
shall be so brought in, that shall be found to amount to more than the Value
assigned to your new Money; such surplus to be accounted for and made good to
the Deliverer, as I have proposed. I know there are some Objections seem to lie
against this Expedient; but I am convinced too, that the Benefit in the main
out-weighs them.

Q. What sort of Money would you propose to be Coined in the Minting your new
Money?

A. I know Crowns and Halfcrowns are less chargeable in the Manufacture; but
being more liable to Diminution by Drilling, and other Arts, and more coveted
by Strangers, and therefore more in danger to be Exported. I should therefore
prefer the Coining all into Shillings and Sixpences, with some small proportion
of lesser Money. But above all, I humbly propose that the whole Mass of public
Money should be re-coin'd and reduced to one Fashion and Manufacture; And would
avoid, as a Rock, all new Names and new Values to Money, though I observe it to
be somewhere proposed to be done with such old Money as might be thought to
remain undiminish'd; which they would have stamped with certain Marks to
express its new Value by; I say all new Christened Money, and all new Marks to
be stamped on old Money; and all odd, intricate and puzling Valuations of
Money, contain so many Dangers, Vexations and Difficulties, as I trust we shall
take care to avoid by the Self-evidence of the Evils that attend such a
Resolution.

Q. When you have done all you can, and your Money becomes reestablished to
your Wish; will it be ever the likelier to remain at home, do you think, though
we should follow in every Article the Rules and Cautions you have propounded to
prevent it?

A. You have bin told by several Treatises of Trade lately published, that a
main Consideration in the Conduct of our general Commerce, is to avoid, by wise
and cautious Measures, the overbalance of our Trade. For though you should have
Five thousand Trading Ships at Sea, and ten times that number of Seamen
employed in your Navigations, you Trade to loss, if you buy from abroad, and
pay more Money for what you fetch from Foreigners, than you receive from them
for your Service, and your own native Fruits and Manufactures; with all this
show of quick Trade, I say, and extent of Commerce, you are blowing a dead
Cole, and take all this pains but to diminish your Capital or National Stock of
Treasure: For Trade, without this prime regard, is but little better than
Usury: It may enrich a few subtle, bustling, busy Men by chance; but the Land
will grieve for their gain, and such profit to particulars will become a Charge
on the Debtor-side of the public Leiger-Book, whenever that Point shall come
to be narrowly sifted and debated.

Now if great Wisdom and Attention are due to the keeping this balance in our
hands, and the disposing it to lean toward our Profit, lest by inclining never
so little the other way, it should, like a slow Fever, at length consume us.
What Providence in our foresight, what Talents and reach of Wit, Prudence and
Application, may suffice to save us from the ruin which seems to bode us by
the exorbitant Overbalance we behold at this day! Which, like a Comet,
threatens the Nation, with this difference only, That we can Calculate to a
certain degree, where and how the Malevolence of the One will work, while we
can but guess at the Effects of the Other.

Q. But since this Burden must be bourn, and the bearing of it seems the
lesser Evil of the two, because Poverty is still better than Bondage: Methinks
we ought to set all our Wits on the stretch to find Expedients how it may be
longest sustained, and carried most commodiously: For why should we want the
Discretion of a Porter or a Slave; who being condemned to bear and carry a
certain Weight, will be sure to dispose of it, so as it shall least gall and
wring his Shoulders. Wherefore if we must sustain this Weight, I would be glad
to know your Opinion, which is the best way to do it in such manner as not to
sink under it so suddenly as you seem to fear.

A. This Question is too bold for Men without Doors to meddle in: wherefore I
shall touch it with the greatest tenderness. You know (for it is no Secret)
that there goes out of the Nation at this day a great deal above a Million
yearly in ready Money or Bullion, and by what Means this Money can circulate or
return to us again (it being the overbalance of our Trade, and therefore
moving in foreign Channels) is very hard to Divine.

Now this great Sum, whether your National Coin be good or bad, must go out of
the Kingdom, if this overbalance must be paid; And therefore if you have no
Bullion, you must send Money, where your extrinsical Value will not be
understood, and where your Clipped Shilling, which passes for a Shilling here,
shall go for no more than it weights; and therefore there must go a great deal
more to pay a foreign Debt, than would suffice to pay the same Debt here at
Home.

Wherefore if a Million of this Money, which by the urgency and fatality of
this destructive War goes yearly out of the Kingdom, were in another manner
employed; as, namely, to maintain a so much greater Maritime Strength of our
own as may amount to that Sum; and by thus easing our Neighbors of just so
much in their Naval Expense, which they might transfer and employ to the same
Uses for which our Money is at this day Remitted into Holland: I say, if such a
Project were feasible, the Benefits to us would be unspeakable, whereof that I
may Enumerate a few: First, this great Sum would then Circulate within Our
selves. Secondly, Our Naval Strength would be augmented by a third part more
than it is at this Day; whereby our Line of Battle would be stronger by the
Union and Consistence of our own Native Strength, and we should have to spare
to cover our Commerce from that Desolation that has hitherto afflicted us; and
by securing especially our Plantation-trade, which is our Mines of Gold and
Silver, we should taste the relief which that Trade would afford us to our much
greater profit. Thirdly, Trade, which now languishes and is at deaths-door,
would by this means revive among us; so many more hands would be set a work in
every Profession, and so many Species of things of our own growth would be
uttered and spent, that I am persuaded if such a difficulty could be overcome,
it would give a new and cheerful face to our Affairs here at home at least.
Lastly, by thus increasing our Maritime, which is our Native Strength, we shall
shine brighter in our own Orb, and grow stronger, as resting more on our proper
Center. We shall increase our Strength by borrowing no body from their
peaceful Trades and Business, but employ such, as when the War shall beended,
will be still in their Element and Profession, where our wide Commerce shall
with open Arms be ever ready to embrace, cherish and employ, to the Nations
best and surest Interest.

I am, YOUR LORDSHIPS Most Humble Servant, etc.
December. 1. 1695.

