THE APPEARANCE or PRESENCE OF THE Son of Man.

PSALM. 48. Thy right hand is full of righteousness, Let Mount Sion rejoice, and
the daughters of Judah be glad, because of thy Judgments.

Printed in the Year, 1650.

Even as I received of my Father, etc. He that has an ear let him hear.
ANd proceeding herewith in another place what he says, who had not concealed
it were it otherwise; That in his Fathers House were many mansions: reserved
Mysteries, all revealed not at once, as much to say, M^^ therefore left without
excuse: of the iron rod the A^^ bid beware, reiterated so: even He that has an
ear (to wit) on pain or peril of his head, etc.

Proclaiming no other then the Supreme Order or Authority, their unlimitted
Commission: The Spirit after absent so long, how (as it were) stands knocking
at the door: whereof these the sum or substance of no inferior consequence: A
greater then the Conqueror, Parliaments Prerogative not exempted: saying, To
him that overcomes, and keeps my works unto the end, I will give power over the
Nations, shall rule them with a rod of iron: His insulting Enemies necks made
his footstool.

Who speaks the word of the Lord, and done it is: Those Heathen Potentates, but
like to Potters brittle Vessels broken in pieces, scattered, suddenly a
Printers Press like. As the aforesaid herewith consenting shows expressly
(Psalm) The Lord said, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine Enemy,
etc. shall send the rod of thy power out of Sion, Be thou ruler, etc. And so
much for this the prophetical everlasting Order.

Whose Prison-commons put into the reckoning, In the days of thy trouble
(saying) shall the people offer thee free-will-offerings, etc. Bread (to say)
for the Lords sake, and runing-water: Therefore shall he lift up thy head: The
Lord thy keeper, hell gates shall not prevail against her: and clear truths as
Noon day, not unknown come to pass: Notwithstanding by you, As for this Moses
we wot not what is become of him: with one consent afraid all to come nigh him,
terrified with them, because of that lusture on his vissage, etc. The two
renewed Tables coming down with in his hand: Shadowed out directly in those
revived VVitnesses two (Revel. 11.) when supposed to have heard no more news of
them: Those lights deemed had utterly been extinguished, like to the day of
Judgment, when those rebels at the same time swept away in that cities
earthquake: And sacrificing all to your own inventions, how requisite some real
Demonstration then extraordinary, such unruly winds, where broken loose Trees
whose fruit withers: Not for ought good without applied means supernatural, not
to be tamed or ordered: Even appointed this anointing faithful and true saying:
These from her overshadowed with the same hand, as he Aarons god that was
ordained, like Beams of Divinity participating, and Oils odirefferous, an
Elixer not of man or flesh and blood: She whose Throne heaven, earth her
footstool from the uncreated, saying, I am A. and O. first and last, both
beginning and ending, by whom all things were done: Not without her any thing
done or made; Trinity in Unity, of Manhood the head: Who of Death have the Keys
and Hell: Then the Queen of the South a greater, born a greater not of Women:
Melea, by Interpretation, Queen of Peace, or She-councellor. And so much for
this without contradiction, she his Executor, Made like unto the Son of God,
the ancient of days likeness: owner of that Title of Tithes, to whom the
Patriarch offered a Tenth, from the slaughter being returned of those Kings;
preceding that Cities day of Judgment prefiguring the final; for which
interceding none might avail: Even the Lord upon her right hand, wounding even
Kings in the day of his wrath; judging among the Heathen: Heads of diverse
Countries smiting assunder: such headships of the Church, of such no more.

And weak sights moreover lest offended overcome with light, for quallifying
the said Deity, or to moderate the same. Imprimis, first and foremost saying I
am A. and O. alias, Da: and Do: by her first and last marriage so subscribes,
that beginning and ending Dowger, etc. in the next thus. Item, Daughter of
Audleigh, or Oldfield, in the Saxon Tongue, (...) no created Peership: a Saxon
Baron before the Conquest, As unto this day, preferring the act of time
Antiquity, before Titles subject to be reversd; and so far for that beginning
and ending, of Kings and House of Lords.

Also Baron Touchet of France, Castlehaven in Ireland, Douglas of Scotland:
Honors three, consisting in a fourth, Audeley: Of those Nations no obscure
Denominations, which late ruined old house of this Kingdoms fall a forerunner,
Je Le Tien its Motto, Hold fast till I come (Rev. etc.) a derivative therefrom:
like unto the Tabernacles work to a loop, and holy Garments or Coats adorned
with several precious Stones, following that pattern in their true fiery colors
displayed, consuming dross a Refiners fire, like of whose descent, Genealogy of
his noble Prophets no novelty to be kept, suffices so much in refference to the
Morning Star, usher of the day: That honor received from him, giving the seven
Stars or Plannets: The Creations coat, arms born: By virtue hereof, (ver.) He
that keeps my works unto the end, as I received of my Father, etc. whom
invincible Prophets, his followers with whom no shrinking or back-drawing, till
they have made it good: so much for their Charge.

Where lastly, by consequence, Heaven how comes to be her Ioynture, place,
being no unnecessary circumstance thus going on: Thou Bethlehem or Berkshire,
not the least, first of Counties: Even showing the word of the most high God,
at Englefield Mannor-House: That Morning-Salutation for ever blessed, where that
voice came unto her, speaking down as through a Trumpet, these words.

Saying, There is Nineteen years and half to the Judgment day, And you as the
meek Virgin.

Where farther, by way of Priority thus walking about Sion, counting her
Towers, those Right Hand years, in the first of his Reign, Ao 1625. first of
his name of these Dominions, month July, 28. so after the first Roman Emperor
called: He slain, etc. showing not to vulgar apprehensions difficult, in this
Cosmographical Table of New Heaven and Earth: How under the Gallery of the
aforesaid Englefield-House, where awakened with that unexpected Alarm in
English: The Western Road lies a Thorowfare under a high Arch for Travelers:
Also a place called Hell of old, a Mile or two distant therefrom, full of pits
within the royalties: The Harbor of such decrepid with age, and their
Associates blind and halt, craving relief nigh the Highway-side, no Critic
observation in the County of HARTFORD: whose Ioynture the Manor of Pyreton
(fire in Greek) consisting of a Tithe or Impropriation, shows Ao 48. the same
year of that Kings slaughter or execution: she restored Trinity Term put into
Possession of the said Tithe: By the Sheriff a Writ Moveas Manus, by virtue of
it, to that Patriarch, sometime appertaining Abbot of St. Albons: sold away Ao
33. in the days of her durance, not difficult a little to regain it; the oftener
Argued, the more Ambiguous, until by the Barons of Exchequer, in writing the
same appointed to be put down; so Intricate, etc. Of which holy Appurtenances
Consecrated; things too exactly which cannot be observed, Ao 1625. Since when,
not any thing acted or come to pass: From Germanies Desolations, Rochels Siege,
until Irelands Blow, and what since followed; like one waves pursuing another,
forerunners of the moments great change and general Judgment, when persons or
Sex, without such respects: even which Passages not unforeshewed by her hand,
together with the aforesaid Golden Number of Nineteen years and a half to Ao
1644. extending the (...) B* his January Account not only, but the late Charles
when became a prisoner, Nazeby, etc. That day of Judgment, Ao 45. current;
afterward tasting of the said fatal Months cold Cup: as Buckingbams August
Month, him foreshewed, whereupon (boading to that Nation a lash) she wan that
wager to his smart: The typifying Breeches of the Sotch man her Husband,
against such wimzes of hers who laid them, as he then termed it, passing not
scotfree, etc.

And these with other like, a world not able to contain them: also this for
another, 1647. by the same token that Night a bold Star facing the Moon (April.
2.) passed through her Body, at which time served that Writ, bearing dare the
second of April: I send thee to a rebellious house, etc. Ezekiel. 2. and cap. 12.
she prefixing Penticost ensuing, as when such a mighty rushing wind, to beware
them like as when they all assembled, etc. witness Southwark: That Mornings
ghests unexpected accompanied with such a Thunderclap from above, and
darkness: To the upper House a warning piece their discharge.

And lastly, a second like unto it, witness, 1650 July Jubilee, that judgment
by fire in Holborn, and other parts of the City: Instantly in the same week she
cast out of her lawful possession of Englefield, by that Counties Sheriff,
being by due course of Law put into the same: But in the VVhitson-week, the
like unheard without being impleaded: for the same Sheriff with pistols and
Weapons to break up doors, done as he said by a mighty power: All he had to
say for himself, authorized by Committees Order, for swallowing a Widows
Estate up after that manner: And fasting, under pretenses,

(...)


