A Salutation AND Seasonable Exh^rta^^^n TO CHILDREN.

By Dorcas Dole.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court, in Gracious-Street,
1700.

A Salutation TO CHILDREN.
Dear and Tender Children,
WHO are of the Seed and Offspring of the Righteous, a Salutation of my
endeared Love is to you; and my Prayers to the God of Love, and Father of
Mercy, are for you, that he may raise you up as living Monuments of his
Mercies: And as you have been brought up in the Way of Truth, by your Parents
or Friends (that have a Godly Care over you, to discharge their Duty, in Love
to God, and to your Immortal Souls) you may come into the Truth and Fear of
God, that they may have cause to sound out living Praises to the God of our
Lives, on your behalf, for the Cry of the Righteous is to the Lord for their
Children, as for their own Souls; and as they are near and dear unto them, so
their Desire to the Lord is, That they may be near and dear unto him, and that
he would give them an Inheritance amongst them that are Sanctified; which is
far better than any outward Portion or Inheritance that they can leave you, and
will stand by you when all outward Riches will fail you; for though you are Young
and Tender in Years, you know not how soon the Messenger of Death may come to
call you; then there can be no resisting of that Power that Summoneth you in,
and to Judgment calls you. Oh! therefore whilst you have a Day, prize it, for
Time is very precious to Old and Young; and the Redemption of the Soul is also
precious. Oh! therefore, dear Children, Remember your Creator in the days of
your Youth, and answer the End of the Lord, for which he made you, which was to
Serve and Worship Him; for your Believing Parents, that have born you, and
suckled you, can have no greater Joy in you, than as Samuel's Mother had, That
she had born and suckled a Child for the Lord; and as the Lord had freely given
him unto her, she freely gave him up to serve the Lord, in his Temple, all the
days of his Life.

So dear Children, wait upon the Lord, that your Strength may be renewed in
Him, and that you may feel the same Power at work in you, as sanctified Samuel,
that you may be sanctified Vessels to the Lord, and that your Bodies may be
Temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell in.

So the Desire of my Soul to the Lord for you is, That as you have begun a
Testimony for the Lord, in keeping up the Meeting, that you may hold out to the
end, and not fear what Man can do unto you; for the Lord's Care is over you:
And as you Meet in his Fear, his over-shadowing Power will be amongst you, though
you are but little Children; he will suffer you to come unto Him, that out of
the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings he ordains Strength, that he may perfect his
Praise; and he will carry his Lambs in his Arms, and gently lead those that are
Young.

So, dear Children, keep to the God of Strength, and he will be your Strength;
though you are Weak, he is Strong, and able to make you more than Conquerors,
through him that has loved you: And as you keep to the Lord, and your Faith
stands in his Power, the Enemy within nor without shall never conquer you; but
ye shall be like the little Children in the Temple, who cried Hosanna to the
Son of David; and they feared not, though the Chief Priests and Scribes were sore
offended with them: And as it was in that day, so it is now, not many Mighty,
nor of the Noble Men of the Earth, that believed in his low Appearance, because
he came too low for them; they despised him as the Carpenter's Son, and said,
That he was one that they knew from whence he came; but they did not; for to
them his Visage was more marred than any Man's, and they could see no Comeliness
in him, who said to them, If they died in their Sins, whither he went, they
could not come.

So blessed be the Name of the Lord for evermore, that has hid these things
from the Wise and Prudent, and has revealed them unto Babes. So, dear Hearts,
let us forever wait upon the Lord, and hearken to Wisdom's Voice, that we may
be kept low in his Fear; for, The Fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom;
and to depart from Evil, that is a good Understanding.

So, Dear and Well-beloved, the desire of my Soul is, That we may pass the Time
of our sojourning here with Fear, and that we may keep to the Unerring Way,
that a Wayfaring Man, though a Fool, cannot Err therein: And as we keep to the
Light, and bring our Deeds to it, they shall be made manifest whether they are
wrought in God or no; and so we shall come to know that living Faith that gives
Victory over the World; for, Without Faith it is impossible to please God; for
the Just lives by Faith. So keep to the just Principle of Life, that God has
placed in you, to Redeem your Souls from Death, that so whilst you are in the
World, you may know the preserving Power, that keeps his Children from the Evil
of the World.

And there is one thing more that lies upon me to you Disobedient Children,
that live not in an heavenly Subjection to the Lord, and to your Parents; Cease
to grieve the Spirit of the Lord, which is given to you to profit withal: And
cease to grieve your honest Parents, and do not do as Absalom did, who caused
his Father to lament over him with a sad Lamentation, because he died in
Disobedience against the Lord and his Father; and he could not be Comforted in
his Death, as he was in his other Son; When he heard of his Death, he arose,
and washed, and anointed himself, and eat Bread, and satisfied himself, in that
he should go to the Innocent Child, though it should never return to him.

So dear Children, Watch against that disobedient Nature, which keeps you in
Disobedience to the Lord, and to your Parents; and as you wait upon the Lord in
his Fear, you shall know the mighty Power of the Lord to work out that Nature
in you that is subject to Vanity, and to set up his Heavenly Government in you,
that you may order your Conversations aright in the sight of God, and all Men:
And then, when you are gathered together to wait upon the Lord, and cannot be
content with the Form of Godliness without the Power, nor with a bare Formality
of coming to Meeting, the God of Power and Life will appear amongst you, and
his Presence will be in the midst of you; and though there be no Words spoken
amongst you, yet keep to the Word of God, which is Quick and Powerful, that
That may dwell plentifully amongst you, and for ever preserve you.

So dear Children, press forward, that you may be Confirmed and Established in
the Faith that once was delivered to the Saints, and that you may be made able
to contend earnestly for it, and then nothing shall move you; yea, though the
Earth may be moved, and the Powers of Darkness shaken, yet you shall have a
sure Habitation in the Lord, and be gathered into the Ark of the Covenant,
where you shall be hid with the Lord, while he is raining down in his
Displeasure, Plagues upon the Wicked; and though they may call to the Mountains
and Rocks to fall on them, to hide them from the Fierceness of the Wrath of
God, yet they shall not save them, nor shelter them from what he has Decreed
to bring upon them: But those that have an Interest in Christ, have no need to
fear whether they Dye or Live, as to this outward Tabernacle; for, to Dye is
Gain, and to Live is Christ; so whether we Live or Dye, we are the Lord's.

So dear Children, I commit you to God, with my own Soul, desiring him, that he
would bring you, and establish, and preserve you, and me, in his Unchangeable
Truth, which never alters.

From Bridewel, the Place of my Confinement for the Testimony of Truth, as it
is in Jesus, the 30th of the 4th Month, 1682. Your Loving Friend, Dorcas Dole.

Postscript.
THis was Written to the Children who kept up the Meeting, at the
Meeting-House-Door, in the open Streets, in Bristol, at that time when Friends
there was generally in Prison for their Testimony to Truth; and now Reprinted
for an Encouragement to them to live in Faithfulness, and in the Fear of God.

FINIS.

