THE Clergies Honor: OR, THE LIVES OF St. BASIL the Great, Archbishop of
Neo-caesarea, AND St. CHRYSOSTOM, Archbishop of Constantinople. Drawn by way of
Parallel.

(...).

A Bishop then must be blameless.

1 Timothy 3. 2. (...), etc.

Chrysostom. in Epist. 1 Timothy It Is necessary for him, who governs the Church, to
shine more illustriously then the brightest Lamp; in his Conversation the least
spot must not appear: The Splendour of his Virtues, and Graces, must draw the
eyes of all persons to him, and sweetly enforce them to conform their actions
according to the pattern of his more elevated demeanor.

LONDON, Printed by Not. Thompson, for William Cooper, at the Pelican in
Little-Britain, 1681.

TO THE READER.
IT cannot be otherwise imagined, but when a contempt is cast upon Religion, a
scorn must be thrown upon those who administer Holy Offices: nay when God
himself is blasphemed, can any admire, that those who wait at his Altar, should
lie under the greatest slight, and suffer under the severest reproaches? If
they call the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of the
household! no Servant can be civilly received, when his Master is scorned. I
have endeavored to vindicate the glory of Jesus Christ, in the Treatise
called, The Triumph of Christianity. I style this, The Clergies Honor, by
giving the Lives of two excellent Greek Fathers: I entitle it a Parallel. I
have given an account of both their Grandeurs, and as God has distributed to
several persons various Gifts, so have I given my conjecture in what one
excelled the other. I present unto the Reader in a Collation, both these from
their Cradles to their Graves. I call them Archbishops; they both commanded
other Bishops, which is clearly manifested by St. Chrysostom's Journey into
Asia, in which he deposed several Bishops; and St. Basil's Letter to those
Bishops in Pontus, who had Simoniacally taken money for Ordination, in which he
alone Excommunicated them. The name Patriarch, taken from the Jews, was not
known till aftertimes. The scorn which is cast upon the Clergy, is every where
sufficiently notorious, which this Pen shall take no notice of. I shall make
some short reflections upon some passages which have come from the Press. The
Prefacer to Mr. Hobbs his Book of Necessity, thus says: If we consider the
practices of those who pretend to be the Interpreters of them, (i. e.) the
Scriptures, and to make them fit meat for the people, how that instead of
renouncing the World, they endeavor to raise themselves in the greatest
Promotions, leisure and luxury, that they make them the decoys of the People,
to carry on Designs and Intrigues of State, and study the enjoyments of this
World, more then any other people, he will find some grounds to conclude the
practice of such to be the greatest disturbance, burden and vexation of the
Christian part of the World.

This is a calumny as false as odious: it is too sadly to be bewailed, that
there are amongst the Clergy many guilty of those crimes; but must the Vices of
some be charged upon the Body of the Clergy? Did these Fathers screw themselves
into Preferment? No; they were deservedly advanced into great Dignities in the
Church, yet these Honors they declined as long as they could. Into Ease? No;
they were the most laborious persons in the World. Into Luxuries? No; they were
persons who lived in the exercises of a prodigious Mortification, and
Austerity. Into Riches? No; the Estates left by their Parents, and gained in
their Ecclesiastical Dignities, they spent upon the Poor; that when they died,
they might justly with St. Augustine when he was dying, say, Pauper Christianus
non habet unde condat Testamentum. The same may be truly averred of thousands
more almost in all Ages of the Church, who flourished in all virtue and
goodness, and rendered Christianity amiable by the admirableness of their lives;
and by the luster of their examples, and purity of Doctrine, attracted many
from a state of Impiety, into a sweet compliance with Religion, and the
practice of all good. Mr. Dryden, a Poet of no mean parts and learning, whose
Fancy is fully agreeing with a soft humor, spares not Cowley, the glory of his
age, who lies wrapped up in his immortal sheets: He will not suffer the Clergy to
pass without a lash; thus says he, Separated Beings may be better explicated
by Poets, then by Philosophers or Divines; for speculations on these are
Poetical, Fancy being in Poets sharper then in dull and heavy Gown-men. There
are Gown-men in the World neither heavy nor dull; Fancy in an excellent Divine,
is as high as in any Poet: Eloquence is the product of Fancy and Imagination,
which takes as great a flight in Divines, as in any persons of the World. The
Judgment and Learning of Dr. Beaumont, the present Regius Professor in
Cambridge, is known to the World; this may cause Mr. Dryden to rank him among
the number of the dull and heavy Gown-men: but surely Mr. Dryden will think the
Fancy of that great man equals his own. But why must the speculation of
separated Beings be the act of Fancy? indeed if with Mr. Hobbs he thinks that
Spirits, and incorporeal substances, imply a contradiction, that Miracles are
as Castles raised in the Air, there might be some pretense; yet were there no
real Spirits and incorporeal substances, it were an unjust assertion: for the
speculation of the nature of separated Beings, is the act of the Judgment, and
not Fancy, and thereby not Poetical; it belongs not to Imagination, but Reason,
that is light and airy, this ponderous and grave Imagination which makes a Poet
conform the nature of things to its own Idea; but Judgment besides Eloquence
being necessary for a Divine and Philosopher, brings its own Idea to the nature
of the things. If Mr. Dryden be appealed, can it be credited that he will
affirm Fancy to be the judge of the nature of things? There is a Gentleman who
has wrote a Tract, styled, Reflections upon the Eloquence of the Bar and
Pulpit, who has severely censured the Greek Fathers. Thus says he: The order,
their design, the matter they treat on, are very little just, and not
conformable to precepts of Art. He gives a strange and bold character of the
most eloquent persons of the World. That Gentleman, if versed in the Greek
Fathers, did not seriously consider, that most of their Sermons were
transmitted to posterity, by the care of Sermon-writers, Brachygraphy being
much used at Rome and in Greece. There is a vast difference between Sermons
revised by the Authors, and those which are published by the care of
Brachygraphers. I must averr, that those Tracts which the two Gregory's, St.
Basil and St. Chrysostom wrote and corrected, for their elegancy of style,
quickness of conceit, exactness of order, braveness of matter, power of forcing
the mind, are inferior to sew or none of the most corrected pieces of the
East. From the Pens of excellent persons something falls rude and unpolite, yet
in their careless Opera's there will be seen the lineaments of a noble Wit, and
Judgment. The like may be said of the meanest Tracts of these great persons,
which totally reproves that rash character. It Is no wonder that Spinosa should
show himself so declared an enemy to Christianity, when he reproaches all sorts
of Religions, and Humane Nature it self. Concerning Mankind thus says he; Sp.
Trac. Theol. pol. cap. 16.
Men are born to devour Men, as greater Fishes the less: which words carry in
them as great a scorn and debasement to Mankind, as can be imagined. To expose
Christianity he uses these words: I have Praefat.
often wondered that men who glory, that they are Professors of Christianity,
that they have entertained that Religion, which commands love, sweetness of
society, peaceableness of behavior, justice, and faith to all; should so
bitterly contend amongst themselves, and prosecute one another with implacable
hatred; that the Articles of Faith, which each party confesses, may sooner be
known by a contrary, then by their own Faction; and to cast an ignominy upon
all Religion, things are thus reduced; none can be discerned, whether he be a
Christian, a Turk, a Jew, or Heathen, but by his garb and mean, that he
frequents that Church, has embraced this or that Opinion, and is the follower
of some, whom he calls Master; otherwise there is the same manner of life to
all; these things being waved, the Professors of different Forms agree in the
same conversation. These imputations are untrue and invidious. Religion is in
it self not less excellent, because the Professors of it are bad; let all men
be liars, God is true. The wicked lives of men, derogate not from the glory of
Religion; the intemperance of most men, do not sully the splendor of
temperance. If Ministers of State, Judges, and Officers attending the Law, do
by bribery and delay, oppression, craft, or any evil means, injure the People;
their ill administration of Justice, does not diminish the reason and goodness
of Laws. and there is certainly nothing more evident then this, that no persons
in the World have lived lives so full of reason and goodness, as Christians
have done; none so manifested so ardent a love and affection to their Lord and
Master, and to one another, as they have: and this is certainly true, that as
the genius of Christian Religion tends to peace, to universal charity, and to
all sorts of virtues; so than Christians, none more illustriously practiced
them, nor suffered more in the exercise of them. Let any one take a view of the
Primitive Christians, and many millions of others; can they be charged with
Luxury, with Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, Cruelty? No; but on the other side,
in them were eminent a rigorous Abstinence, a profound Humility, a generous
contempt of this World, an assiduous labor, the sweetest affection toward
their Brethren, a peaceable disposition, a most intense endeavor to make all
men truly happy. But what means that false obloquy of Spinosa, Christian
Religion does teach Concord and Love, etc. Though in too many the contrary
Vices were too manifest, yet it is equally certain in many others, those
admirable Virtues were gloriously elucent. When he urges against Religion,
setting aside the frequenting of some Church, and all sorts of persons, agree
in the same manner of life; what sense does that bear other than this? All
sorts of persons eat and drink; in all sorts of Professions there are active
and contemplative men; they exercise all sorts of Arts and Sciences; but what
then? cannot there be sufficient marks or evidences given, of what Religion a
person is of, supposing the truth of Christianity? The Professors of it
acknowledge Jesus to be the Son of God, that he came into the World to give us
such Laws, and upon condition of Obedience promises such a happiness and
reward; what though they eat and drink, be employed in Arts and Trades, cannot
they give evident testimonies of being genuine Christians? If that they
regulate their eating and drinking, the management of their Trades and
Employments, according to the Laws that their Master prescribed them; entertain
the Principles of Faith, and are guided by the Commands that he has given
them; are ready to manifest their affection to their Lord, by dying in the
defense of his Faith, and for his honor; how can they give greater evidence of
their being his genuine Disciples? That the Clergy have endeavored to make
great Places and Preferments to be the Instruments of Vice, is not to be
denied, but most sadly to be bewailed: but that abundance of the Christian
Clergy, and those of such a Profession, were superior to any of the like in
any condition in the World, and have outvied them in the splendour of most
excellent actions, is with equal truth to be asserted. The World has not
produced better persons, then what the Church has: In all Professions, as in
the state of man, there are various degrees, and diversities of conditions; but
in this, the Church may justly glory, that multitudes of her Clergy have
slighted all the invitations to Honor, Riches or Ease; and that abundance of
them, who have been compelled to accept of Honors and Estates, have by their
carriages demonstrated, that in the affluence of Riches, Charity and Poverty of
Spirit to be the greatest treasures; and in the accumulation of Honors,
Humility to be their greatest glory. And it is indubitable, that the Arguments
and Reasons which the enemies of our glorious Religion use against it, are
false and frivolous, the Principles of their Philosophy are absurd and full of
contradictions, that they place their surest refuge in Calumnies and Slanders;
it behooves all Christians to study the honor of their profession, to promote
peace, to advance sanctity, and stop the mouths of all gainsayers, that Sion
may be the praise of the whole Earth, her Stones may be laid with Saphirs, and
her foundation with fair Colors.

These glorious Prophesies, which have not yet been accomplished, will
certainly be performed. When the beauty of the house of the Lord openly
appears, then the honor of them that administer Holy Offices, will not be
obscured. That Earl, great for his vast Wit, rendered ignoble by his Crimes,
through the grace of God made illustrious by his remarkable Conversion, in the
career of his Impieties, cast a scorn upon the Clergy; being enlightened by the
Rays of Heaven, acknowledged how unworthily heretofore he had treated that
Order of men, reproaching them that they were proud, and prophesied only for
rewards; but now he had learnt how to value them: That he esteemed them the
Servants of the most High God, who were to show to him the way to Everlasting
Life.

The reproaches cast upon those, who wait upon the Altar, are not to be
attributed to Religion, or the Doctrine, which they are engaged to preach.
There is a vast difference between the product of vicious passions, and evil
habits: We do justly reproach our Adversaries with this great wickedness, that
by an immediate consequence from their Sentiments, no worship can be given to
the ever-glorious and Eternal God, no obedience or faithful subjection to the
Supreme Magistrate, no justice between man and man. The same great person thus
laments: The absurd and foolish Philosophy, which the World so much admired,
propagated by the late Mr. Hobbs, and others, had undone him and many more of
the best Parts in the Nation. The wickedness of our Opponents cannot charge the
Commandments of the blessed Jesus with the least error. For the preservation
and flourishing of Christianity, we will put up our prayers to Almighty God,
that nothing may separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus.
Ordain, O Lord, a Lamp for thine anointed; deck thy Priests with Salvation, and
make thy Saints sing aloud for joy. Amen.

THe Compiler of this Tract has not given the particular account of each
Author, out of which he has collected this History; but he assures the Reader,
that he Traded not with any fabulous Writer: he durst not trust Chrysostom's
Biographers, but the Books out of which he has taken this Parallel, are,

St. Basil, Graece: Ed. Froben: Basileae 1551: Nazianzen, Graece: Ed. Herbagi:
Basileae 1550. Chrysostom, Graece: Ed. Saviliana: Aetonae 1612. Socrates,
Sozomen, Theodoret, Graece: Ed. Steph. Paris. 1544. Photii Bibliotheca, Gr. and
Lat. Ed. Rothom. 1653.
ERRATA.
PAge 11. lin. 6. dele the Snow of, p. 17. l. 26. set the colon point after
Grave, p. 63. in the marg. for Appeals, read Fraternal Addresses, p. 64. l. 27.
when the East was so dreadfully tormented, are a Parenthesis, l. 29. r.
Bishops, and dele the comma.

The PARALLEL Of the LIVES of St. Basil the Great, AND St. John Chrysostom.
HElenopontus, a mean City of the The Birth and Parentage of St. Basil.
Cappadocian Pontus, had for ever been obscured in the Charts of Geographers,
had not the Birth of Basilius given it a perpetual luster; whose Parents were
of ancient and great Nobility. His Grandfather was one of the Nobles of
Cappadocia, and made more Honorable by the Christianity which he gloriously
professed.

The Maximinian Persecution occasioned his flight into the Deserts of Pontus;
whither he, with some brave persons, his Friends, and some of his Family,
retired; and there for seven years he lived: That wild Desert afforded no other
meat than what his Prayers obtained from Heaven, the Beasts and the Fowls that
fed him, were Prisoners of his prayers, they being caught by no other Snares or
Nets, than those his Ejaculations had prepared. Yet supposing men might afford
a greater liberty, and show a more fair civility, than the Beasts of the
Pontick Wilderness, he ventured again into the open Air of Cappadocia; where,
though his expectation was cheated, his Faith was permanent; and what the
savage Beasts did not act, the devilish Pagans perpetrated; by whom he
received a cruel, but glorious death; the Annals of the Church perpetuating the
day of his Martyrdom.

The Parents of Basil were Basilius and Emmelia: Basilius his Sanctity advanced
him to an Episcopal Dignity, which he managed with great piety and prudence.
Emmelia survived her Husband many years, who had the unusual felicity of the
prosperous holiness of ten Children, (five of whom were Sons, three of which
were Bishops of eminent wit and holiness) the glory of that present and
succeeding Ages. At her death, which happened in the 90th. year of her age,
Macrina her eldest Daughter, and Peter her youngest Son were present; before
they closed her eyes, that heavenly Widow laid her hands upon her eldest Child,
which was Macrina, and on Peter, then a Presbyter, her youngest Child, and gave
up the Ghost with these heavenly passages: O my Eternal God, in this my eldest
Daughter, and this my youngest Son, I dedicate my whole harvest of Children to
thy Divine Majesty; and in these prayers I commend my Soul unto thee; the first
fruits and tenths are thine; all, O my God, are thine, into thy hands I commit
my Spirit.

Of such a Father, and such a Mother the great Basilius was born, Anno 319.
Constantine being the fifth, and Licinianus the first time Consuls. O glorious
felicity! an aged Lady living in such an exemplary Piety, seeing her Children
to be the Pillars of the Church, and glory of their Age, thus happily in the
vigor of her parts and piety to breath out her blessed Soul.

Antioch, the Metropolis of Syria, receives an eternal honor by the Birth Of
St. Chrysostom.
of Chrysostom; which happened Anno 354 Constantius the seventh, and Gallus the
third time Consuls. His Parents, Secundus and Anthusa, were of the Noble Race
of the Senators of Antioch. Milesius the Archbishop of that See, was the
instrument of converting them from Paganism to Christianity. His Father
Secundus died, when Anthusa his Mother was but 20 years of age; who after the
decease of her Husband, lived in a perpetual Widowhood. Secundus was unwilling
to survive that glorious honor which Christianity had conferred on him,
fearing he might defile the white Garments of his Baptism, with a subsequent
viciousness. She to manifest that entire love, which Christianity had increased
in her purer breast, to her Husband, gained that honor from the Enemies of
Christianity, that Libanius the Pagan, yet Eloquent Orator of Antioch,
enquiring of Chrysostom himself the age of his Mother, Chrysostom answered, 40
years; and again asking what state of life she embraced, he returned,
Widowhood, which she had continued for 20 years: (for his Father Secundus died
when his Mother was but 20 years old) at which reply he cried with a strange
joy and astonishment to his Auditors and Pupils, See, what famous Women are
amongst Christians! The Roman Orator to that profuse Gentleman, who upbraided
him with the meanness of his Parentage, smartly replied, I give a luster to my
Family, but you have obscured the glory of your Ancestors. Of these great
Persons the question will not easily be determined, whether from their Parents
they received, or unto them gave the greater Splendour: But it is unquestionably
true, that no Parents had Children of greater Excellencies, nor Children had
Parents of higher Accomplishments. These persons of singular extraction,
remembered the Nobility of their birth, and would do nothing unworthy of so
great a descent. As China Dishes receive their perfection from a long
continuance in the Earth, and thereby are prepared for ornament and most
excellent uses; so Nobility dignified by a continued succession, is fitted for
the gallantest employments, and the greatest actions. Happy certainly were
those Ages of the Church, when Nobles offered themselves up willingly to serve
the Lord; when a Chair of State was not more valued, than an Episcopal See.
Plato rejoiced in the happiness of those Commonwealths, who had Philosophers
for their Princes: and certainly it would be a great felicity and splendour to
the Church, if the Nobility were her Prelates and Governors. The Revenues and
Dignity of the Church generally came from the Nobility, who divested themselves
to cloth the Altar; and there is nothing more reasonable, than that the Church
should confer her Honors on those persons, to whom she is endebted for them.

Basil having the great happiness of a The Education of Basil.
Noble man, and a learned Bishop to his Father, he needed for his younger years
no other School than the Bishops; where he received the first Rudiments of
Grammar and Rhetoric, with the accomplishments of Sanctified and Gentile
manners in his Education: In him Holiness and Civility sweetly met, both of
which received a luster by a learned institution. To ripen his great parts, and
to furnish him with the universal Literature, and the comprehensive knowledge
of Men and Books, he was sent first to Caesarea, the Metropolis of Cappadocia;
thence to Constantinople, flourishing then with a confluence of the greatest
Wits in the World: 'twas then the Residence of the Emperors of the West; from
thence he traveled into Athens, where he was first acquainted with the great
Nazianzen. Athens as yet continued to be the common Academy of the World, where
was the greatest number of the most Eloquent persons of that Age. And as
amongst the Greeks in former times, none was esteemed for a brave Combatant,
unless he had been victorious in the Olympic Games; so none was reputed a
great Philosopher or Orator, who in the Schools of Athens had not received the
Acclamations of Victory and Triumph. He was then but about one and thirty years
of age: his fame flew to Athens before he could there arrive, and was
sufficiently known The repute of his Learning was so great, that it freed him
from that toyish Rite and ridiculous Ceremony used in the Matriculation of
young Scholars into that Academy. That pretty Ridicule, mixed with something
serious, was after this manner: The New-comer was first amicably entertained,
and received in the house of some of his Friends, or by one or other of the
Masters of Oratory: Afterward he is assaulted with perpetual Jeers, some
impudently taunt him, others more learnedly abuse him; this Stranger as his
manners are Clownish or Gentile, Sottish or Ingenuous, is variously treated;
yet is sufficiently abused by the Wits of the Academy, which seems very
barbarous to those that are ignorant of the Rites, but to those that know it,
it is pleasant and delightful; and the end of this Tragedy is the administering
of mirth and laughter to the Wits of the Town, who entertained themselves with
the discourse of the ingenious abuses put upon this Novice, and the uncouth
replies given by him: And afterward in State through the Marketplace he is
carried to a Bath, the young Academicks going in order two and two before him;
when coming near to the Bath, they give a fearful shout, dancing and antickly
skipping as Enthusiasts; pretending they might not be admitted to the Bath, but
by their vehement knocking, and loud outcries, they terrify the young
Scholar, the doors are opened, he is admitted into the Bath, and coming out he
is received as a member of their University, their Friend, and Companion. From
this Pageantry, the Learning of Basil exempted him; who in the Schools was
assaulted by two Armenian Orators, men of great Wits, but of greater Impudence,
whom he forced out of the Schools to their eternal dishonor. From thence he
went to Alexandria, afterward to Antioch, where he conversed with as great
Orators as the World afforded. At Athens he was taught the perfection of
Eloquence, by those famous Rhetoricians Hymerius and Proaresius: his fellow
Scholats were Nazianzen, Julian and Libanius, all of great Eloquence and
Learning. Fifteen years he spent in traveling unto, and residing in the best
Schools and Academies of the World; whereby he attained a vast knowledge in
Philosophy, Rhetoric, and all humane Literature. What indeed could not be
attained by so great a Wit, enjoying so gallant an Education!

Chrysostom being born at Antioch, then the Metropolis of Syria, and the third
Patriarchal Of Chrysostom.
See, flourishing with Riches and Arts. The greatest Orators and Philosophers
of the age there opened the Schools under Andragathius: He was instructed in
the various Sciences of Philosophy under Libanius, the Eloquentest man of that
age; his natural propensity and fitness for Oratory, ripened into the highest
perfection that ever the Pews of Pagans, or the Pulpits of Christians knew. The
Admiration that Libanius had of him, engaged all the Orators of that time to
love the Sweetness of his tongue, and fear the greatness of his parts. Libanius
his Master stood in awe of his Scholars Censure. Though he needed not the
travels of Basil, by reason of those great Advantages which Antioch abounded
with above Helenopontus; yet for Curiosity sake, rather then for Necessity, to
teach, rather then to be taught, he traveled to Athens; where being admitted
to pronounce an Oration before the Senate, he was by their Decree and Suffrage
declared to be Superior in Eloquence to Anthemius, the most Renowned Orator of
that Academy.

The Divine Grace, who prompted Basil in his Study and Travels, fitted him for
brave undertakings. Heaven so prevailed upon his mind, that he designed to
spend the remainder of his Life in Religion, and Ecclesiastical Employments.
His Travel to Alexandria gave him an acquaintance with the Religious persons of
Egypt; where an Ascetick life most gloriously flourished. The Instructers in an
holy and divine life were the most admired Fathers of Egypt, who inflamed his
breast, hugely disposed to piety, with those divine ardors, which presently
consumed in him all divine affections and inclinations; so that without
intermingling with any Civil affairs, he retired for the enjoyment of God by
Prayer, Study and Meditation, into Solitude.

Chrysostom, whose prodigious Eloquence Of Chrysostom
somewhat balanced his divine Soul, imagined that he might serve the Eternal
God by the defense of oppressed persons. He therefore resolved upon so
excellent an intent to improve his Parts and Learning, to betake himself to
public Pleadings and Orations: But experience taught him, that the trouble and
diversions impeded his progress in a more Heavenly life. He therefore forsook
that employment, and retired into the Deserts of Syria; and under the conduct
of Theodorus and Carterius, he was instructed in that life which he most
desired, to wit, in imitating the life of Angels.

Basilius prepared for Ecclesiastical affairs Basils entrance into
Ecclesiastical Employment.
which he totally designed: he passed through all Ecclesiastical Orders. Happy
persons who are fitted for the Employment, before they undertake it. They
seldom fail of any business, who enter upon it with the greatest consideration.
It is the Frenzy to polish the stones in the building, after they are laid upon
the foundation. The late Author of the Contempt of the Clergy is hugely
mistaken, when he attributes it to their Poverty: for Poverty debases no man
that is virtuous, nor do Riches exalt any person that is vicious. It Is sanctity
that is the glory of the Clergy: This is the grand misery, that they must be
made fit for the Ministry after they have entered into Orders. He first became a
Reader, then ordered Deacon, afterward was made Priest of Caesarea.
Chrysostom, after he had spent three years in the Wilderness, by reason of a
violent Sickness, returns to Antioch; where he entered into Sacred Orders, and
from the lowest degree of a Reader, he ascended to the Archiepiscopal See of
Constantinople. They build the highest, who lay the surest foundation in
Humility: So great an honor was given to Religion, that the greatest wits
disdained not to be Readers in the Church of God. The best of Kings, of whom
our Lord and Savior was descended, though he changed his Shepherds Crook into
an Imperial Crown, yet he preferred the being a Doorkeeper in the House of the
Lord, to the dwelling in the Tents of wickedness.

In the Judgment of Photius, the greatest Critic in the World, the styles of
both The styles of Basil and Chrysostom.
of them were not exceeded by Plato and Demosthenes, in Purity, Significancy
and Propriety. The Greatness of their minds manifested themselves in the
Majesty of their Pens, and Tongues the constancy in their evenness. Basil had
very few Excursions; the more frequent Digressions of Chrysostom wanted not
their usual sweetness and Eloquence, or just necessity. A Virgin modesty always
appeared in their Writings, flowing from the purity of their Souls. They were
full of Humility; their language never savoured of affectation. There are no
Monuments in which the Eloquency, Copiousness, and Majesty of the Greek
language are more conspicuous, then in the Writings of these Great Persons.
Basil did more convince, Chrysostom persuade; Basil had more of the Courtier,
Chrysostom was more Popular; Basil more of a Philosopher, Chrysostom of an
Orator: Basil a better Disputant, Chrysostom the more affectionate Preacher;
Basil like a clear yet deep River, whose Majestic motions admit of no
impediments; Chrysostom like a rapid, yet pure stream, that sweeps all things
before it. Chrysostom could carry the Peoples affections as he pleased, he
could hurry his Auditors by the violence of his Oratory into any Passion; Now
he could draw tears from hearts as cruel as Tigers bred in the Snow of
Caucasus, again he could inspire the breasts of those whose Spirits were as
mean as the timorous Hare, with zeal and courage. Basil commanded in all his
Auditors so great a respect, that when he was in the Church his Auditors stood
as living Statues filled with Admiration and Reverence, which his great Reason
and Holiness, mixed with a profound Eloquence, had raised in them.

Both of them were of an invincible The Qualities and dispositions of Basil and
Chrysostom.
Courage, and Adamantine Constancy; they could not be molified with Pleasures,
Terrors could not affright them. Their Temperance was so excessive, that their
whole lives were a continued fast; they eat but once a day; they contemned the
World, as though they were Angels upon Earth; They, who would not yield to the
fury of Persecutors, or the rage of Heretics, yet were tenderly disposed
toward their Enemies, and endeavored to shelter them from any Popular fury;
They were of a vast charity, their Estate might, but their Mind could not admit
of any bounds of Liberality; They were indefatigable in Labor, as the Heavenly
Orbs, and were constantly in motion, their Prayers constant, their Sermons
frequent, they indulged no further the Necessities of Nature, then as they
might be subservient to Religion; and no business did they admit of, but what
promoted Piety. Thus they seemed as the Birds of Paradise, who though they
exercise themselves in a continual flight, live only upon the dew of Heaven. As
in the building of a Temple there are several materials of various qualities,
necessary to the Erecting of that Structure, yet all concur to the beauty and
form of the Edifice; So in Basil we find more Lenity and Sweetness, in
Chrysostom more Fervor and Austerity; in Basil more Prudence, in Chrysostom a
greater Violence; Basil the Wiser man, Chrysostom the more impetuously
Courageous; Basil disposed to win Persons by the Charms of love, and consume
them by no other fire, then that of kindness and affection; Basil when he
reflected with Anger upon the Vices, carried a respect to the Persons;
Chrysostom seems so transported against all sin, that he took no consideration
of the Persons that offended, yet the sweetness of the one, and the severity of
the other, the Courage and Piety of both give a perpetual Luster to the Church
of God. As choice Fruits that are soonest ripened with the greater fervours of
the Sun, lose nothing of their Beauty and native Excellence; So Chrysostom
having the vastness of his parts elevated by the peculiar influence of the
Grace of God, at two and twenty years of age set forth the Eternal Monuments of
Piety and Learning, the three books of Priesthood; and by then he was twenty
eight years of age, had made these Excellent Sermons, which to his Eternal
Honor are yet extant against Jews, Gentiles, and all the prevailing Heretics
of their times. Basil being of the more reserved temper, we find him not in the
Pulpit till after he was thirty years of Age.

Basil being ordained Priest by Milesius The entry of Basil and Chrysostom into
holy Orders of Priesthood.
Bishop of Antioch, performs the Priestly Office with all Sanctity, Industry,
Eloquence and Learning: and knowing that nothing conduces more to the dignity
of the Clergy, then a holy life, he excites many Persons by his own Example to
a Singular Piety. After some small space spent in so extraordinary
conversation, the Bishop of Caesarea died, the Sea became Vacant, and as in
Popular Elections there are generally contentions, so the Bishops and People
were divided in their opinions concerning the Succession of that See. Those
that lived a more retired and Religious life, and were favorers of such a
constitution, were zealous for the Election of Basil; the others who where
averse to Heresies, and being more numerous, chose one Eusebius, a Layman of a
great Sanctity, to the Episcopal Dignity. The more religious persons were
highly incensed, that not only a person of such Holiness and Learning as Basil,
was rejected, but that a Layman should be preferred before him: which
occasioned a great Contention between Eusebius and Basil. The Fewd could not
possibly be appeased, but a Schism must have presently arose in the Church, had
not the Humility and Prudence of Basil prevented it. Love and Anger both are
passions which absence removes; He therefore to appease the Indignation of
Eusebius conceived against him, and to cool the Ardors that many of the people
had for him, retires into the Pontick Wilderness; and there by the banks of the
River Iris, near the Euxine Sea, he lived in a Solitary, yet active piety; four
years he there spent in Prayers, and Studies, and Preaching to the Barbarous
people, Inhabiters of those Deserts. So our excellent Basil, like a good Jonah
would willingly be cast overboard, to prevent the shipwreck of the Church by
Schism and Sedition. In his Solitude he was blessed with the Company of Gregory
the Divine. In the society of that most admirable person, he neither wanted a
Church nor Academy. And that these Glorious persons might not be disturbed in
actions of Religion, Basils aged Mother the excellent Emmelia accompanied them
in that Solitude, and became the careful Caterer to provide them Herbs for
their late Supper. Incredible there was their pains, the wild people thought
Angels had descended to be their Gardians, and Teachers: Multitudes flockt to
their Sermons; many were Civilized and Sanctified by them. Whilst Basil in this
retirement enjoyed a perfect tranquillity, the Churches abroad were infinitely
tormented with the Arrian Persecution. Valens the Emperor had embraced that
Heresy which he endeavored by all Cruelties to propagate every where; the
faithful Christians were persecuted with Banishments, Deprivations of their
Estates, Confiscation of their Goods, Imprisonments and death it self; whilst
the Arrian Priests and Bishops took this occasion boldly to spread that wicked
opinion, by Sermons and Writings. They came to Caesarea, where they raised a
great Contention against Eusebius, and that part of the Church which adhered to
him. Eusebius was a better man, then a Divine; fitter to govern the Church,
then to dispute. Cappadocia now knew the need of two such Excellent persons as
Basil and Gregory were. Basil imagined he could not enjoy that Heavenly
Tranquillity, which he so much desired, if any disgust remained in Eusebius his
breast: he rightly conceived that the love of God, which he aspired to, could
not burn in brightest Ardours, if it had not consumed all that rancour, his
Bishop had conceived against him. Whereupon out of his beloved Deserts he
writes to Eusebius the most Pathetick Letters, that Eloquence heightened with
Humility, Affection, Sorrow, and tenderness could indite. Those very Letters
which work in the Reader strange violence of passions, moved not at all
Eusebius: the old Bishop was peevish, whereupon Basil with a profound Reverence
and Humility writes a most submissive and passionate Letter to a whole Synod of
Bishops met at Tiana, that they would intercede to his Bishop, that he would
send his Pacificatory Letters to him into the Wilderness: but still the old
Bishop continued angry; not the entreaties of Basil, nor the Authority of the
Synod could move him. But the Arrians assault him, now his Church began to be
torn, the City was pestered with the flocking of those Heretics: If the
Metropolis was subdued ubdued, the inferior Sees would suddenly yield.
Eusebius though of an undaunted Courage, yet was of meaner Learning; who like a
Pilot, not fearing the waves, yet wanted dexterity to manage the Vessel. A
General, though he is fearless of death, has a strong arm, and an active body,
and can deal blows enough amongst his Enemies, yet cannot secure his Army, if
he want Policy. Stratagems and ordering of the Battalia are equally necessary
to Victory, as Courage and Valor. In this great confusion of the Churches of
Cappadocia, with these dreadful conflicts with the Arrian Heretics, it was
easily discovered there wanted some Excellent persons, who with equal skill and
Valor must oppose the rage and fury of this persecution. And now this good old
Bishop relents, now his passion yields to Reason. The Church must be succored,
Basil is wanting. Whereupon he hastens a Messenger to him, who receives the
Message of his Bishops reconciliation with infinite resentments of joy and
kindness: and so looking upon this Message as from Heaven, he hastens to
Caesarea, where he falls prostrate at the Bishops feet; who having cast off all
his former rancour and indignation, entertains him with all the Expressions of
love and tenderness. As the Earth which has been crusted over with Frost, and
lain covered with Snow, by the Sun beams sweetly displayed on her, is freed
from those cold and uncomely garments, and presently appears in a richer gaiety
of Herbs and Flowers: So that Soul of Eusebius, possessed too long with Furies,
Indignation and Anger, being cleansed by the Angel of Heaven, is now more
gloriously inhabited by the Divine passions of love and kindness. Eusebius his
affection and endearments to Basil, infinitely exceeded his anger. Basil
cherishes these new affections with all prudence, with all vigilance, with all
tenderness and reverence imaginable; so managing his conversation, that his
very looks, his gestures, his actions, as well as his language, should speak
his love, his respect and his fidelity to Eusebius. All which he so discreetly
and constantly performed, that Eusebius was wholly turned into love and a great
esteem for Basil. By which means Eusebius retains the name of Bishop, but Basil
performs the Office; Basil reformed the Clergy, Basil commanded the Laity,
Basil withstood the Heretics, and yet paid all the due homage of obedience and
honor to Eusebius. Basil dared the Heretics to disputation; Basil constantly
preached against them; by the quickness and subtilty of the one, and the
Eloquence and Piety of the other, he settled the wavering Church, and obtained
a most glorious victory over the Arrian Heretics. The waves must now yield a
passage to that Ship that is steered by Basilius. The Army cannot but be
victorious, where Basil is the head of it. The old Bishop is drawing to the
grave with joy and a great tranquillity; he receives the message of death
delivered to him by a Fever. Happy he was to live to those days wherein he saw
his Church, as houses, when flames are about them, yet secured; as persons in
danger of the Plague, yet freed from the very fear of Infection. Basil performs
to his now dying Bishop all the offices which humanity and piety suggest: which
so possessed the good Soul of Eusebius, that when he was commending it to
Basil, he must lay his body in the arms of Basil: in the hands of Basil he must
dye; Basil must close his eyes; he would not depart out of this World, till he
had given testimonies of a perfect reconciliation and amity; that they, who
were once separated in this life, when the City received one, and the
Wilderness the other, in the succeeding and ever-glorious life might have an
eternal union: where they might be entertained in the felicity of a perpetual
joy, from the fruition of one God, in one everlasting habitation, to live for
ever and ever.

Chrysostom after he had performed The entrance of Chrysostom into the Holy
Orders of Priesthood.
the Office of a Deacon with vast applause, he enters into Holy Orders of
Priesthood, which he managed with all piety and industry. His Sermons were
constant; he drew the whole World after him; the piety of them were so
admirable, and their Eloquence so stupendous. At Antioch he devoted himself
wholly to study, and preaching, the affairs of the Church being managed by the
Bishop of that See. So business forced him not from his study, but in a great
serenity he prepared himself for exquisite, yet continual preachings. So great
a crowd of people daily thronged to the Church, that the Pulpit was altered
from its ancient place, which was in the Chancel, into the body of the Church;
where the people, standing round about him, might readily attend to that
torrent of Holiness and Eloquence. The Athenian Orator, that the noise and
tumult of the people might not disturb him, whilst he was pronouncing his brave
Orations, constantly used to repeat them on the Banks of the Haven, that he who
was unconcerned at the rouling of the waves, might likewise enjoy an
undisturbed mind amidst the clamours and contentions of the people. But this
great man commanded the people to quietness, every one fearing lest any noise
should hinder them from hearing any sentence flowing from that golden mouth.
The anger that Eusebius conceived against Basil, forced him into the
Wilderness; but the Schism between the two Bishops of Antioch, elected by two
different parties, made Chrysostom the second time try the sweetness of the
Deserts. As yet that custom prevailed of the peoples power in electing the
Bishop; a Rite which indeed was used in several Ages of the Church; which no
more vindicates the Independent Ordination of Ministers, then the Kings
nomination of Bishops to the Sees, and Patrons presenting of Clerks to their
Benefices, destroy the Episcopal Ordination. Chrysostom thought the Briars and
Thorns of the Deserts were incomparably less troublesome, then the Schisms of
the Church. But the Antiochians are impatient; Chrysostom must return; they can
endure no longer the absence of so brave a Preacher. Chrysostom returns
privately to Antioch; with what joy did this news fill the City? how tedious
was that night to them! how long seemed every hour till they saw Chrysostom in
the Pulpit! Early in the morning, did the Antiochians hasten to the Church,
expecting Chrysostom; they knew he could be no longer out of the Pulpit.
Chrysostom failed not their expectation. Chrysostom comes to Church, he hastens
first to the Altar, where he pays his devotion to his blessed and dearest Lord.
After a Reverence done to the Archbishop, he ascends the Pulpit. What passions
appeared in the Antiochians countenances? at the same time, their faces gave
the indication of Joy and Admiration: their eyes were full of tears; the sacred
pavement was slippery with that holy water; the Fountains of those Rivers was
Love and Joy: so Clouds kindly melt into gentle Rain, by the greater influence
of the Sun. Chrysostom for twelve years, which he spent during the time that he
was Presbyter at Antioch, was assiduous in preaching, prayer and study. His
honor and affection that he had for his Archbishop, was infinitely entire; he
perceiving, that the Sermons of Flavianus were not so frequented as his own,
would reprehend the peoples temerity; in the midst of his Sermons would make an
Harangue in the praise of the Archbishop, preferring the Sermons of him, to
those of his own; extolling the judiciousness, gravity and ponderous Divinity,
and reflecting with some diminutions on his own rapidness and impetuousness.
This glorious action endeared him to the Archbishop, with whom he continued a
perfect amity, and rendered himself more amiable to the multitude; who plainly
perceived that amidst the Acclamations of the whole City, nay the Applause and
honor of the whole World, he sought not his honor from men, but endeavored
to receive it from God. In the third year of his Presbytership, the dreadful
commotion happened, wherein the Citizens in a wild fury threw down the Statues
of the Emperor and Empress; which cast Chrysostom himself into such a vast
confusion of mind, that for seven days together he retired to his Chamber, as
not being able to look upon that people, who, though they had attended so long
to his admirable preaching, should throw themselves headlong into such an
inexpressible phrenzy. The seventh day recollecting his Spirit, he ascends the
Pulpit: never people wanted more an admirable Preacher, and never people
furnished with a more incomparable man. They stood in need of Lenitives and
Corrosives, no person ever knew better how to apply them. Their crime was so
great, that the very sharpest expressions, a tongue dipped in Vinegar and Gall,
sufficed not to chastise their insolent Treasons; and yet they were so filled
with the apprehensions of their guilt, the horror of so dreadful a Fact did so
terrify them, that their own consciences prepared wracks, and wheels for them,
and they were dead before the sentence was pronounced against them. The
Citizens themselves became living Ghosts. Chrysostom therefore as a most
excellent Physician, seeing a Patient lie sick of a desperate wound, which
stands in need of the most searching Corrosives, and yet of a languishing and
fainting mind, prepares his Patient by Cordials to receive sharper Medicines:
so he raises the drooping Spirits of the Citizens, and enlivens them by
Heavenly comforts, and instructions, and afterward scourges them with a most
eloquent detection of their Villainies, and dreadful denunciation of Eternal
Judgments. His Sermons he managed so piously and dexterously, that they
obtained his desired effect. Some time after a sharp reprehension of that
rebellious frenzy, he would raise some comfort in their Spirits by an Elogium
of the Emperors person, and qualities: some time promising them a happy success
from the Prudence, and Authority and gravity of Flavianus, who undertook to
intercede for them; whereby at the same time he gained a greater respect from
his Auditors, endeared himself to the Archbishop, and ingratiated himself into
the Emperors esteem: and thus for twelve years he so prudently managed the
Function of his Priesthood, that his fame flew throughout the World: his name
was so celebrated in the Emperors Court, that it occasioned his removal from
Antioch, to the Archiepiscopal See of Constantinople.

Now let us behold our Priests consecrated Bishops; now we shall behold The
entry of Basil into the Metropolitical See of Caesarea.
them with their Crosiers; now advanced to the highest dignities. But with
their honor we shall behold their persecutions and troubles. These Mountains
of Piety and Learning are now struck with Lightning and Thunder: The
Tranquillity of the Wilderness is changed into a violent storm; their
Retirements and Studies are turned into the troubles and confusions of the
Court and Church: now they are not more glorious in holiness and honor, then
persecuted by Envy and Rage. When they entered upon their Episcopal dignities,
they launched into that Sea of trouble, where they found no rest, till the
grave had prepared a Repose for them. Upon the death of Eusebius, Basil, to
avoid the Episcopal Authority, retired, and fled from Caesarea. Valens the
Emperor sent his Prefect of Cappadocia, if possible, to procure the
installing of an Arrian Bishop into that Metropolitical See. The Neighboring
Catholic Bishops, knowing of what consequence to the universal Church, the
Election of Basil would be, all unaminously hasten to Caesarea. The aged Father
of Gregory the Divine, expecting a Bier to carry him to the grave, rather than
a Chariot to bring him to Caesarea, determined to undertake that journey: the
great Zeal he had to oppose the Arrian designs, and the vast love he had for
the promoting of the purity of the Churches Doctrine, and establishing the
Churches peace, revived his drooping Spirits, and seemed to restore him to a
Juvenile vigor. The Election was managed by the Arrian party with fury and
passion. But at length the Constancy of the Orthodox Christians prevailed;
Basil is Elected, after enquiry, is found, by violence forced to Caesarea,
where the Provincial Bishops waited for his coming, being resolved not to
depart, till they had confirmed the Church against the Arrian fury by the
Consecration of Basil, Anno 369.

The Emperor Arcadius, the whole The Consecration of Chrysostom in the
Archbishopric of Constantinople.
Court and City of Constantinople, were so satisfied with the Virtues,
Eloquence, and great Accomplishments of Chrysostom, that they resolved no other
person, but he, should sit in the Archiepiscopal See. But a great question
arose, how they should procure the Assent of that person, to accept of that
Ecclesiastical dignity. And the people of Antioch, being seditious and addicted
to mutinies; it would be difficult to wrest Chrysostom (averse to
Ecclesiastical honors) out of the hands of that people, who would rather lose
their lives, then the Comfort of their lives, the brave Sermons of Chrysostom.
But Eutropius the Lord Chamberlain of the Emperors Household, acquainted
Arcadius that he would certainly by an innocent contrivance bring Chrysostom to
Constantinople. The Emperor committed the management of the Affairs to
Eutropius; who immediately dispatched some Persons of Quality to Antioch, with
Letters to Chrysostom, commanding him in the name of Arcadius, upon the account
of some important affairs, to attend him in a City called by Zozom. l. 28. 2.
Pagras, some miles distant from Antioch. Chrysostom not dreaming of Eutropius's
design, at the place and time waited on him. Eutropius at the first meeting,
roundly told him the Emperors intentions, and desires. Chrysostom refused, as
being unwilling to leave that People, over whom he had so absolute a command,
and from whom he received such an entire affection. But Eutropius was
peremptory, he commanded him to be carried into the Chariot; The Charioter must
obey Eutropius, and not lend an ear to the prayers of Chrysostom; on he drives,
and with hard journeys arrives at Constantinople: where the Emperor and the
Court receive him with all sentiments of love and honor, and the people with
all joyful Acclamations. Virtue is always dogged at the heels by Envy.
Theophilus Archbishop of Alexandria, being then at Constantinople, hugely
opposed Chrysostoms Election, and resolutely refused to be present at his
Consecration. That See, the Alexandrian Archbishop designed for a Priest of his
own Church, who had obliged him by the faithful conduct of this affair: In the
War between Theodosius the Emperor, and Eugenius the Tyrant, he entrusted him
with a noble present and two Letters, the one to Eugenius, the other to
Theodosius; with this Commission, that he should deliver neither of the
Letters, until the Victory was obtained; and to the Triumpher, who had
confirmed himself in the Imperial Dignity, the Letter directed to him with the
gifts should be presented, and the other presently consumed in the flames: But
as Treason seldom succeeds, base and treacherous actions generally are
discovered. One of the Servants of this Priest stole his Letters, and
immediately carried them to the Court of Constantinople, and delivered them
into the hands of Eutropius, who reserved them to make use of them as occasion
served. Eutropius goes to Theophilus Archbishop of Alexandria, not desires, but
commands him to consecrate Chrysostom; he peremptorily denies, and with
indignation; whereupon Eutropius shows him those unworthy and hypocritical
Letters; at which Theophilus is surprised with a trembling astonishment, and
begs pardon, and silence of Eutropius, and promised him to consecrate
Chrysostom; which he performed Anno 398.

Basil having governed the Church The management of the Episcopal Function by
Basil and Chrysostom.
of Caesarea under the power and Authority of Eusebius, the management of all
affairs being committed to him, by that aged and grave Bishop; there was no
necessity of making any alteration in that Church, which he had governed with
so much prudence and sanctity.

Chrysostom on the contrary, succeeding Nectarius in the Archiepiscopal See of
Constantinople, found a licentious Clergy, a loose and a debauched City.
Nectarius from being a Prefect, was advanced to that Ecclesiastical Throne,
and he though he was a person of a sound Faith, and of no mean Abilities, which
he bravely exercised to the depressing of Heretics; yet bringing with him the
splendor and pomp of the Court into his Palace, the Reins of Discipline, which
in a more austere sanctity bridled the manners of the Clergy and people, he let
loose by Luxury and Pomp: which ingratiated him very much into the favor of
the Court; and being a person of a sound Faith, and great resolution against
all Heresies, gave him a brave esteem in the eyes of the World. He was a great
abhorrer of Avarice, and nobly spent the revenues of the Church; but by
remitting of the severity of Ecclesiastical discipline, a way was made for the
more licentious conversation of the Clergy; which spread it self not only into
the Court, but City likewise: so that there seemed an universal defection from
those rigours which made Christianity so glorious in the World. Chrysostom
being bred up in solitude, and Austerities, knowing no other Pomp or Luxury but
a crowded Church attending upon his divine Eloquence, and being naturally
addicted to Austerities, he was more prone, by the manner of life he used, to
banish those Excrescences out of the Church. Whereupon, as soon as he entered
upon his Episcopal dignity, he betook himself to his old course of life,
constantly to preach: and that he might not seem in the least to dissemble his
intentions, he with a sweet torrent of Eloquence sharply inveighs against the
viciousness of Christians, especially of the Clergy, publicly threatening a
deprivation of those of the Clergy, who continued in a loose conversation.
This, though it procured the hatred of the Clergy, yet infinitely endeared him
to the City: now he is become their darling and favorite, now in every Shop
there are the Elogiums of Chrysostom, every Boy sings the felicity of
Constantinople: How happy was that See in an Archbishop of the greatest
holiness, industry and Eloquence in the World? What he threatened, he punctually
performed; many of the Clergy, who neglected his admonitions, were presently
deprived of Ecclesiastical Authority, and removed from the Altar. This laid the
foundation of a great odium, which the Clergy conceived against him, and of his
after-troubles. He was represented cruel, proud and arrogant. An unreasonable
passage of Seraphion, a Deacon of the Church of Constantinople, whom he dearly
loved, much heightened the hatred of the Clergy: for in the Consistory, as
Chrysostom was examining the Priests, Seraphion cries out, Holy Father, you
will never rid the Church of Impiety, till you drive them out with the Rod; a
rigorous and an ill-timed passage. But still Chrysostom is the Peoples darling,
and the Clergy that hated his Rigours, admired his Parts and Eloquence. But
Chrysostom confined not his severity to the Church, but it flew about the City;
nay, it staid not there, but it entered into the Court. There was no vicious
Citizen, let him be of never so great Authority and Riches; no vicious
Courtier, let him be of never so unlimited Power and Greatness, but felt the
sharpness of his Eloquence, and was threatened with Ecclesiastical Censures.
This enrages the Court against him, scorning that the Grandeur of the Eastern
Empire should be subject to the tongue of an Antiochian Priest, whom they had
but lately raised to the Constantinopolitan See. Whilst his severities were
confined within the Church walls, Chrysostom shined with extraordinary luster
in the eyes of the Court; but when it reached the Courtiers Luxury, Pride,
Cruelty and Avarice, all their esteem of him was turned into hatred and
indignation. So all persons love not their own concerns be touched; the Clergy
did not love that their own Vices, but the Courtiers Enormities should be
severely reprehended; the Courtiers likewise are vastly pleased with the
Reformation of the Church, whilst they remain enamoured with their own
deformities. And this corruption in the manners proceeds from the mistake of
Religion, who suppose it a remedy for others, but not for their own sins: or
from a strange partiality, whereby they are prone to magnify the Vices of
others, and lessen their own.

Basil was freed from all those inconveniences: The Court had no residence in
his City; he succeeded a devout and severe Bishop, by whose Authority he had
formerly modelled his Church. He was a person of a sweet and brave temper, and
exceedingly prudent, and so could free himself from those Rocks, on which
others perhaps might have split. But that which most conduced to the intestine
tranquillity of his See, was the continual persecutions to which it was
obnoxious. Persecution made the Church of Cappadocia severe and holy:
Persecution performed that, which Chrysostom desired to obtain by
Ecclesiastical Censures. Chrysostom came to govern that Church which was
debauched by the remisness of a former Archbishop, and degenerated into Pride
and Luxury, which a great Peace, a vast Trade and Commerce, affluence of
Wealth, the glory and pomp of the Court had occasioned. The playing of the
golden beams of the Sun, makes us throw off our Garments, when the blustering
North wind cause us straiter to bind them to us. It is easy to persuade to
Reason an afflicted mind, but difficult to reduce to sobriety a prosperous
Criminal.

The Eastern Church at that time was The contests and conflicts of Basil and
Chrysostom with the Heretics.
vexed with the Eunomians, Sabellians, but more chiefly by the Arrians. Valens
himself, a person of very great Courage, but of greater Impiety, violently
persecuted the faithful Christians. He had banished most of the Bishops from
their Sees, and instead of pious and holy Prelates, the Church was pestered and
almost ruined by wicked and misbelieving Bishops. Valens, when he had carried
Trophies of his own wickedness through most of the parts of the Eastern Empire,
was dreadfully enraged, that Cappadocia should stand so firm against all the
furies and assaults of Hell; he in his own person leads his Army down into
Cappadocia, attended with a numerous Train of the most learned of his Arrian
Chaplains, not questioning but that he should either terrify Basil into
obedience, or else rid Cappadocia of that great Prelate. But what course should
he use? what? should he order an Army of his Heretical Priests and Bishops
against one Basil? No: he had gained so many notorious and famous Victories
over the learned Opponents in the World, that none of them durst undertake
him. And it may move a pretty laughter to observe, that when the greatest
Scholars of the Arrian Faction trembled at the very thoughts of a contest with
Basil, the Emperors Cook Demosthenes challenged Basil to dispute; whom when
Basil had most egregiously baffled, not without angry smile thus says to the
people: Illiterate Demosthenes would dispute, the properest place for a Cook is
the Kitchen; Can his tongue, which is only fit for the tasting of Sauces, and
his head filled with the fume of Meat, comprehend or discourse of Spiritual
things? Valens assaulted Basil by a Prefect of his Army, who first allured him
by the promises of the greatest Preferments; and told him the glory of being
honored by the Emperor, and the great Officers of his Army was not to be
refused by him. To which Basil gallantly replied, Christianity is not made
illustrious by the dignity of Persons, but by the integrity of Faith At which,
the Prefect grew enraged, and thundered out the heaviest menaces, and thus
accosted him; Fear thou not the confiscation of thy Estate? to which Basil
presently replied, No; all the Riches I enjoy are these poor Rags I have on my
back, and a few Books. Not Banishment? No; I am a Stranger in the World; the
Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. Not Torments? No; this worn body
of mine will not endure above one stroke. Not death? No; I am almost already
dead, and you will sooner send me to the Grave. After he had thus answered the
Prefect, he ends that discourse with a passage full of sweetness and courage;
Sir, I speak nothing in contempt of your Dignity, it is not for us faithful
Christians to speak roughly to the meanest person, much less one of so great a
quality as your self; but we are obliged to profess in the Cause of our God,
all torments are a delight to us. This carriage of Basil filled the Prefect
with the Reverence of him. The Prefect hastens to the Emperor, giving this
only account of that undertaking, Basil has conquered us. This not succeeding,
Valens sends for Basil, whom he attacks by all the arts imaginable. Thousands
of profits he proposed, as many tortures and utmost extremities threatened; But
nothing moved Basil, whose hopes were Heaven, and fears Hell. Yet Valens
persisted in his determination of banishing him, which he altered on several
accounts. Valens admiring the piety of Basil, managed with so great a Prudence,
went to the Church to observe the demeanor and carriage of Catholic Christians
in the performance of Divine Offices; where coming and seeing Basil sitting in
his Chair, and the Multitude of Christians standing round about him, all in a
posture noting the highest reverence of the Divine Majesty, and hearing them
sing their Hymns and Hallelujahs with the greatest fervor, joy and devotion,
and taking cognizance of the management of all the Divine Service and Worship,
he was struck with such a horror, that he fell into an universal trembling;
that as he approached to offer his gift at the Altar, had he not been supported
by one of the Priests that assisted Basil, in a great amaze and astonishment he
had fallen to the ground. So great an influence has Religion, devoutly
performed, upon her very Enemies. Divine actions done with fervor and
devotion, carry Majesty as well as sweetness with them. The very apprehension
of the fact struck Valens with such an horror, that three times the Pen, as he
was to sign the Decree of Banishment, fell out of his hands; a great trembling
seized on him. His only Son Galates fell sick; Valens had so great an
apprehension of Basils sanctity, that he sent for him, believing his prayers
should recover his Son; Basil came and offered up his prayers for the health of
the young Prince, in whom there presently appeared signs of recovery; on which
Basil goes to the Emperor, and tells him, Sir, hinder not the efficacy of our
prayers by the supplications of Heretics, let none of that wicked Faith
approach your Son, and he will recover. At which the Emperor was angry; which
Basil perceiving, he took his leave with these words, The will of the Lord be
done. The Emperors Chaplains offered their Devotions for the young Prince, but
they wanted Basils Faith; he relapses, and dies. These singular remarks of
God's Providence, with the admirable prudence and sweetness of Basil, made such
an impression on the Emperor and Empress, that when all the Catholic Bishops
of the Eastern Empire were banished, Basil continued till his death in his See.
But how great was the calamity and vast unhappiness, that the Great Chrysostom
should be twice banished, and that, through the Enmity which Catholic Bishops
had against him, and the great indignation of a Catholic Emperor and Empress,
his austere course of life rendered him unpleasing to the Court. The former
Archbishop Nectarius was frequent at Entertainments, and did not seldom feast
the Constantinopolitan Nobility; Chrysostom so totally retired, that he never
entertained any at a Banquet, nor ever received an invitation, which rendered
him unpleasing to the Court. Chrysostom was of that Spirit, as in defense of
the meanest, he would oppose the greatest Person in the World. Eudoxia the
Empress was desirous to enjoy the estate of a Widow, whose Husband was unjustly
put to death; to preserve her Lands, and maintain her Fatherless Children, she
addressed her self to Chrysostom, who was ever ready to hear the complaints,
and relieve the necessities of miserable persons; he goes to Eudoxia, and there
in the behalf of this Widow, uses some Language which the Empress could not
bear, and raised an implacable hatred against him. Theophilus Archbishop of
Alexandria, his irreconcilable enemy, knowing the disposition of Eudoxia, that
as she was resolved, so she would ruin any man she hated, waited all
opportunities to work his designed mischief against Chrysostom, to heighten the
rage of Eudoxia. There were three Eloquent Bishops of that age who came to
Constantinople, Severianus Bishop of Gabale, Antiochus a Syrian Bishop, and
Acacius Bishop of Beraea, all Emulators of Chrysostom, who used their utmost
endeavors to alienate the minds of the Citizens from their beloved Archbishop,
which they almost effected. For Chrysostom to reduce to order the Asiatick
Churches subject to his Archiepiscopal See, took a journey to Ephesus, in which
he mightily endeavored the Reformation of the Clergy, and the settling of the
Church. He deposed fourteen Novatian Bishops, threw several of their vicious
Clergy out of their places, which made him to be esteemed cruel and insolent.
And thus his Rivals in Eloquence and Preaching, did not abstain from secret yet
intelligible traducing of him. Eudoxia favored them in these actions; But
Chrysostom returns; Chrysostom ascends the Pulpit; and in one Sermon totally
reconciles the City to him. Those Stars of Oratory could give no light, whilst
the Sun of Eloquence shined so clearly in the tongue of Chrysostom; who being
informed of the endeavors of those Bishops, and the attempts of Eudoxia, them
he threatened with suspension, and to give a public Manifesto, he took
cognizance of the design of the Empress; he took greater liberty in one
Excellent Sermon to declaim against the Vices and Impertinences of Feminine
Government. She knowing what Chrysostom aimed at, and it was her repute, that
Chrysostoms Eloquence blackned, her anger burned up to a more excessive rage,
which she politickly concealed, and endeavored to make a perfect
reconciliation between Chrysostom and Severianus; which when she could not
accomplish by any preswasions, she took her young Son the Prince Theodosius,
being but eight years of age, and laid him at Chrysostoms feet; an action which
carries as forceable Eloquence, as any words that ever flowed from the mouth of
Chrysostom; which thoroughly persuaded Chrysostom, who was entirely and
perfectly reconciled to Severianus, though he did yet retain a secret grudge
against Chrysostom.

Theophilus Archbishop of Alexandria, a great enemy of the Origenists, several
of whom were deposed by him, many excommunicated, judging Chrysostom a favourer
of Origin, thought there was a fair occasion offered to accomplish his design
against him: he goes accompanied with several Bishops to Constantinople, and
sends to Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine in Cyprus, there with the Cyprian
Bishops to meet him, to condemn the works of Origin. Some of the Egyptian
Origenists fly to Chrysostom, who received them with the communion of
strangers; for they were men of excellent lives and great learning. Theophilus,
not according to the custom of Bishops, (who when they arrived to any place,
first went to the house of Prayers) immediately went to the Empresses Palace,
where Lodgings were provided for him. No sooner was Epiphanius arrived at
Constantinople, but Chrysostom sends some of his Church to him, to invite him
to accept of Lodgings at his Palace; but Epiphanius refused, and sends to
Chrysostom this sharp message, That he would not communicate with him that had
received Origenists, and had not condemned the Books of Origin: To which
Chrysostom by another Messenger gave this modest and sober reply, That he had
received none into Communion but those who were of excellent lives, and as he
thought of a sound Faith; and that it seemed very severe to condemn the works
of so glorious a man, as Origin was, without a very serious consideration; and
therefore he still desired Epiphanius to take Lodgings in his Palace, for it
would be an infinite grief to him to see any dissension between themselves, and
so excellent a person as Epiphanius was: But Epiphanius was not to be moved. So
we see, as in the Moon there are spots, the most curious of Jewels may have a
flaw, and little imperfections in the best of men. They afterward both meet,
and are both passionate: So that flame that burned in their breasts toward
God, yielded to the worser fire of contention. But the Divine Grace who permits
the lapses of good men, preserves them from great viciousness, kept Epiphanius
from giving consent to the deposing of Chrysostom. Theophilus the Archbishop, a
man of very great fame for Piety and Virtue, and Eudoxia the Empress, a person
that had rare qualities, so represented Chrysostom to Epiphanius, that it is no
wonder his passions were so by assed, when his Judgment was so imposed upon.
Theophilus gathers a great company of Bishops together, and there all those
Bishops which the severity of Chrysostom, or the Arts of his Adversaries, or
all the powers of the Court could make, met at a place called the Oak in
Constantinople, and summoned Chrysostom to appear before them. He refused, and
with the highest reason; for what Authority had the Alexandrian Bishop over the
Bishop of Constantinople? or with what Authority or reason could they celebrate
a Council in Constantinople, without the consent of Chrysostom Arch- Archbishop
of Constantinople? Chrysostom sent two of his Presbyters to that unlawful
Convention of Bishops, and acquainted them, that their actions were destructive
of the Churches peace, contrary to the Ecclesiastical Canons; and that he
refused not to answer any crimes laid against him, but he rejected an usurped
power, and therefore appealed to a General Council. They still persist in their
determinations upon his non-appearing. At the fourth summons they pronounced a
sentence of his deposition, which being divulged in the City, filled them with
rage and indignation. The whole City is in an uproar; here the very Children
and Women cried, men raged, all hastened to the Cathedral and Palace of
Chrysostom; whom they detained all night, which was passed in Prayer and
Preaching. They could hardly be filled with a greater sorrow and amazement, if
an Enemy had been sacking their Town, then they were at the apprehensions of
the loss of Chrysostom: but Chrysostom uses all his Eloquence to persuade the
people to peace, and to behave themselves with all Reverence and obedience to
their Religious Emperor. O brave mind! provoked to excellent actions by
injuries and oppressions! So Chrysostom retires to his Palace, where for some
space he keeps himself reserved, and would not come to the Church: and now
Constantinople seems to be in a perpetual night, no joy in that City where
their brave Preacher was wanting. Theophilus seeing the affections of the
People for Chrysostom, and the rage against him, fears an attempt upon his
Person; the like possessed the rest of the Bishops, who wisely to prevent any
danger leave the City and hasten to their respective Sees. Chrysostom receives
a message from the Emperor, to retire into Exile, that the Soldiers were
ready to convey him into the place designed for his banishment; who fearing his
public departure might occasion an uproar, and endanger the Person of the
Emperor and Empress, privately delivered himself into the hands of the
Soldiers, and so unknown to the City was carried into Exile. But as soon as
ever the fame of his Banishment was spread, the people were struck with rage
and fury; the Women and children run with the greatest passion to the Emperors
gate, and there they begged and cried for Chrysostom: the men assembled in
numerous companies, nothing in this City but confusion, here a company would
cry, what Judgments waited upon that City, which was unworthy of Chrysostom!
others, violently railing at the unlawful proceedings of the Bishops that
deposed him. So pitiful were the complaints, so dangerous was the insurrection,
that Arcadius had no other means left him to quiet that tumultuous City, but
with a promise of a speedy restoration of him. Whereupon he immediately
dispatched Burso an Eunuch of the Empress, with special commands, to bring
Chrysostom back to Constantinople. He finding him at Prenetum over against
Nicomedia, brings him back to the City, where he was received with all
imaginable expressions of joy. No City reduced to the greatest extremity by a
potent Enemy besieging it, could be more filled with the highest joy at a
seasonable succor and relief, then the Constantinopolitans were, at the return
of Chrysostom. Their Acclamations were so loud, their expressions of content so
various and great, that Chrysostom's satisfaction for his return was lessened
by the immoderate honor they did unto him. But he staid in the Suburbs, and
would not enter into the City, nor go into the Pulpit, till he was legally
absolved; till his cause was legally heard, and he himself found innocent. But
this gave no satisfaction to the people; they must see Chrysostom in the
Church, they must hear him preach. Whereupon they so pressed upon Arcadius,
that he forced Chrysostom into the Pulpit, and there to pray and preach, which
he performed. In his Benediction they thought themselves all blessed, his
Prayers they concluded would pierce the Heavens, and his pious Eloquence convey
them to glory. And this course for some months, to the infinite content of the
Citizens, he continued. But over against the Church called Sophia, one of the
miracles of the World, the place where he usually preached, the Statue of the
Empress made of Silver, with a rich Mantle over her head, was erected, before
which Plays and Interludes were celebrated. Chrysostom looking upon this as a
dishonor done to Almighty God, dehorts the people from such courses, in a
great vehemence maintains the dignity of the Divine Service, with a torrent of
the richest Oratory against Plays and Interludes; that it was an inexpressible
indignity to Almighty God, that the Acclamations and noise of Plays and
Interludes, should be heard in the Church where Halelujahs are sung to God; and
so a disturbance be given to the Priest and holy people that wait about the
Altar. Which Sermon coming to the Empresses ears, the fire of her rage, which
lay smothered under the ashes of dissimulation, broke out into an open flame
against him, so that she openly threatened his second deposition; which he
receiving in great passion, enters the Church, and there makes that so famous
Sermon which thus begins: Herodias still dances, Herodias still rages, Herodias
is still filled with indignation, Herodias yet seeks for the head of John in a
Platter. At which the Empress was so incensed, that she would hear of no
entreaty for a reconciliation with Chrysostom: But immediately sends for
Theophilus, Archbishop of Alexandria, the old and sworn enemy of Chrysostom, to
summon a Council at Chalcedon, there to hear the crimes laid against
Chrysostom; who justly refused to appear, affirming that he kept himself within
his own Palace, with the company of fifty Bishops of excellent Piety and
Learning, who spent their time in prayers and tears. No crimes in that Council
were objected against Chrysostom, only he was charged, that contrary to the
Ecclesiastical Canons, he had preached, not being absolved, and restored to his
Church. For in a Council at Antioch it was decreed, that if any Bishop was
deposed, he should not be restored to any Ecclesiastical Dignity, except the
number of Bishops that restored him, exceeded the number that deposed him. To
which Chrysostom made this reply; that his deposition was unjust, unlawful, and
in it self null: and that for fear of those inconveniences which might follow a
popular tumult, he voluntarily retired into Exile; that he had not returned,
but by the Emperors command; and for fear of the least transgression of the
Ecclesiastical Canons, upon his return he staid in the Suburbs, and would not
enter into the City, much less into the Church, till he was compelled by the
Emperors commands, and by the clamours of the people; and withal being
persuaded by the suffrage of fifty Bishops, that were then with him, he
performed his Ecclesiastical Function, and that that Canon which was alleged
against him, was made by an Arrian Council in the Cause of Athanasius: and here
it seemed, a very hard measure was offered to Chrysostom, that by that Emperor
who commanded his return, and forced his preaching, a Council should summon and
condemn by an Arrian Canon. The Council was resolved to satisfy their own
indignation, and the Empresses rage; Chrysostom must be banished; Chrysostom
must be deposed; the sentence is again pronounced against him; the Emperor
brings his Army into the City: But Chrysostom, that the people, nor Court, nor
Army might be in danger, delivers himself again privately into the hands of the
Soldiers, who carry him into Banishment.

Their noble extraction entitled The great Charity of Basil and Chrysostom.
them to great Revenues: Basil was the Eldest Son, Chrysostom the only Son of
his Parents: and being both raised to great Dignities, they had opportunities
of treasuring up a large Estate, but their great Souls could not be confined by
Riches. Chrysostom at Antioch distributed his Estate amongst the poor; Basil
retained a great part of his Estate till after he was Bishop. When there fell a
great Famine in Caesarea, which threatened the consuming of most of the
Citizens; this occasion this wise person took to show his liberality: for he
sold all his remaining Revenue, to which he laid the Revenues of his
Metropolitical See: by this example, and most powerful preaching, he wrought so
upon the Nobility and Gentry of Caesarea, and the rich Citizens, that they
brought to him vast sums of money, which he so disposed on, that he brought a
plenty into Caesarea; he so husbanded his Bank, that the Markets of the City
were constantly furnished with provision. Chrysostom, when he was banished, and
in perpetual fears through the rude and barbarous Nations, yet received such a
supply from his Friends at Constantinople, and other places, that for the
Fatherless, Widows, Captives, and other distressed people he had a continual
supply. Many Captives he redeemed, multitudes of other persons he furnished
with necessaries, that in his greatest extremity he thought it his highest duty
to convert the liberality of others to him, into charity for the furnishing of
others with necessities. They both of them in their respective Sees, built
Hospitals, received Strangers, and indeed performed all acts of charity to all
sorts of persons. So much they partaked of the Divine nature, that they seemed
wholly to be made up of goodness and bounty; by which means the very Jews and
Pagans had them in very great Honor and Reverence.

Basil took the highest care for the Their great Labors for the peace of the
Church.
preservation of the Churches peace, against the Arrian Heretics: his labors
were indefatigable; and having with the assistance of his beloved friend
Gregory, Bishop of Nazianzen, (notwithstanding the power and fury of the Arrian
Heretics) quietly settled the Churches in Cappadocia, (O Cappadocia, made
odious by those proverbs, which rendered the Inhabitants the most wicked people
in the World, now became glorious by the great profession of Christianity,
which was made illustrious by three Bishops, the best Scholars and holiest
persons in the Universe:) thus the glory of Christianity turns the Briars of
the Wilderness, into the Roses of Sharon. He then betook himself to the
establishing of the Churches of the whole World, he traveled into Armenia, and
into the adjacent Countries of Cappadocia; the Western Churches enjoyed a great
tranquillity under a Catholic Emperor. To the Bishops of Italy, France, and
Spain he wrote Letters, representing the calamities of the Eastern Churches,
imploring their Aid. The brave Bishop of Millain, St. Ambrose, gave him his
greatest assistance; and with the Divine goodness and eternal Providence,
(notwithstanding all the persecutions of Valens the Emperor, and all the
oppositions of the Arrian Learning, and Arms could make against him) Cappadocia
was preserved, as a Virgin not spotted with the errors of those times.

Chrysostom so earnestly endeavored the Reformation of the East, that the
remotest parts of them were happy by the influence of his piety and learning.
He undertook, for the expelling of Heretics, a journey of some months into
Asia; he sent some of his Presbyters to convert the Goths, in which they had a
noble success. He reformed the Churches of Armenia and Palestine, he maintained
an union with the Western Bishops, and receiving an Edict from the Emperor, to
destroy the Idolatrous Temples in Phaenicia, with a command to the Lords of the
Emperors Treasury for the delivering of money to defray the expenses for that
employment, he accepted of the command, and refused the money: Out of his own
Purse, and with the charge of other Noble Persons, he performed the Emperors
Edict without the Emperors expenses. So these great persons like the Caelestial
Luminaries, emit an happy influence to those Churches, which are far distant
from them.

The great inclination that Basil had The Calumnies and slanders cast on them.
to Disputations, and the vast love he had to Learned men, was the occasion of
casting many slanders on him. In his Sermons against the Arrians, his enemies
that came to hear him, more to carp, then to learn, would snatch away some
passage, that might seem to savor of the Sabellian impiety: Preaching at other
times against the Sabellia Heresy, some sentence would drop from him, which
his Adversaries would wrest to Tritheism. In the Eucharistical Benediction,
with which he concluded his Sermons, having altered the Prepositions in and by,
though that mutation was approved of in many Churches of the East, and used by
the most Catholic Bishops of the World, yet his impudent enemies carried away
the clamours and impetuous noise of Arrianism, and Eunomianism; which
defamations, being spread abroad, alienated the affections of many of the
Eastern and Western Bishops from him. Those wicked revilers by their most
desperate slanders, had so changed the affections of the Citizens of
Neo-Caesarea, to whom he was very much endeared by his first education, that
all the Protestations of Basil to the contrary, all the Pathetical Letters he
wrote to them, could hardly reduce them to better thoughts of him. How strange
is it, that a person, who in all his Writings, in all his Sermons, in all his
Actions, nay, who vindicated himself bravely from the aspersions of any
indiscreet language, which might seem to justify the calumny of his enemies,
yet should be believed to be a great friend to those Heresies, which he made
the whole design of his life to overthrow? Yet here was Basils felicity, that
his beloved Gregory was his defense perpetually, and the Churches of Cappadocia
constantly entertained the honor for him, and the Heresies could not prevail
whilst Basil lived. Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia, was an extraordinary man,
and of a strict and severe life; Basil affected him for these excellent
qualities, and likewise being assured of the soundness of his Faith concerning
the Trinity, and not knowing of those stranger Heresies which he was broacher
of, he received him into the Sacred Communion. Apollinarius Bishop of Laodicea,
a man of very great parts, a great enemy to the Arrian Heresy, a great
defender of the Christian Faith under Julian the Apostate; who, when that
Emperor prohibited Orators to teach the Sons of Christians, turned for the use
of Christian Children the whole Bible into Greek Heroic verse, gaining a great
Fame in the World, caused Basils desire to be acquainted with him, between whom
there happened a great familiarity; Basil, as yet, being ignorant of some
desperate Opinions, which this learned Bishop had broached.

These actions being known in the World, raised such an hatred against our
great Prelate, that most of the Eastern and Western Bishops denied a Communion
with him. What grief must possess this excellent person! now with Elijah he
would lie fainting, and wish to die. What comfort could he have now in the
Church of God? that he, who so infinitely endeavored the peace, the unity, the
purity of the lives and Faith of Christians, should now be denied the communion
of the greatest, and best part of Christendom. His sorrow could not be better
expressed, then by his own Pen; his Letters written to the Eastern and Western
Bishops, which do now remain, are glorious Monuments of the greatness of his
Parts, and the sweetness of his disposition. Not one word dropped from his Pen
which savoured of anger, but only sorrow. He did not inflame his Papers with
indignation, but watered them with tears; and though as soon as ever the
Heresies of Apollinarius and Eustathius were detected to him, he Excommunicated
them, and desired of the Eastern and Western Bishops to do the same; yet they
could hardly procure an opinion of the integrity of his Faith. Eustathius to
whom he had showed a kindness, wrote a Letter invective against him; yet for
fear he should answer those vile Satyrs, he abstained three years together from
writing. O that perfection of Christian Philosophy, and height of Patience! in
these actions the meekness, the candor, the sweetness of Basils Soul were
elucent: he would not lay any imputation upon those, who had unjustly received
so ill an opinion of him, or had aspersed him with calumnies, and denied a
Communion with him; though they were men infinitely inferior to him in parts,
piety, and industry. Which procured him after his death an immortal fame; of
whom the Schools have given this Elogium, That of all the Greek and Latin
Fathers, Basil expressed himself the most warily, and with the greatest
caution, in the deepest Mysteries of Christianity.

Chrysostom contracted not an envy from his Adversaries by opposition of
Heretics, but by his severe reprehension of Vices. He was taxed with no
Heresy, only they charged him with the entertainment of some Religious
Egyptian Monks; who, for the Doctrine of Origin, were banished by Theophilus
Bishop of Alexandria: when indeed he received them not into the Sacred and
Ecclesiastical communion, but into the Foreign, the communion of Strangers. But
so great was the malice of his Adversaries against him, that they taxed him
with Pride, Insolence, and Arrogance. Basil himself escaped not the imputation
of Pride; when indeed there were great virtues in them, their solitude and
retirement was esteemed Pride, when indeed it was Religion; they shunned the
unnecessary society of men, that they might enjoy the conversation with God and
Angels. That which in Chrysostom was called Cruelty and Arrogance, was an
implacable hatred against Impiety. He was inexorable to all wicked persons, and
could not endure that polluted hands should serve at the Altar.

Eusebius Prefect of Cappadocia, Their Courage in the defense of the Churches
immunities.
had in his mind already disposed of a young, beautiful and rich Lady, (the
late decease of whose Husband had rendered her a sorrowful Widow) in marriage to
one of his kindred. The design being discovered to that Noble Person, she
totally refused, and manifested the abhorrence of a second bed. Eusebius still
persisted in his intentions, which she constantly denied. The desire of her
Estate so enraged him, that he betook himself to threats, menacing her with a
Confiscation of her Estate, and imprisonment of her person. This Lady reduced
to these straits, there was left no other Asylum for her, but what the Church
afforded; She flies to the Altar; Basil receives her into protection; which
cast the Prefect into an infinite rage, disdaining that a Bishop should
deliver so rich a Prey out of his hands. The Prefect comes with his ordinary
Guard of Soldiers to Caesarea, and goes to the Court of Judicature, where he
ascends the Tribunal, attended and guarded by his Officers and Soldiers, and
then sends orders for Basil to appear before him, which he readily obeyed: and
no other crime being laid against him, then the Protection of this Lady, was
commanded presently to deliver her into the hands of the Prefect, which he
resolutely denied; at which the incensed Prefect commands him to put off his
clothes, and his Sergeants to prepare their Scourges and Tortures; to which
Basil with a Christian smile replied, that Rivers of blood could not flow from
a body so consumed; and it was a great joy to him, that he should change those
rags for the Robes of Eternity. But by this time, the news of the Bishops
danger, and of the Praefects barbarous using him, alarmed the Citizens; so that
Men, Women and Children presently flew into Arms, and ran with violence to the
Court, threatening the Prefect and his Guard with a certain death. Eusebius,
who little dreamed of such a numerous enemy, at the expectation of death, fell
into a great trembling and astonishment; which Basil perceiving, turned to him,
and bad him be of good comfort; for the Citizens Swords should not pass through
the Praefects, but by his own breast, for Christian Bishops will not be the
Authors of the death of their persecutors. Whereupon Basil turns to his
Citizens, and began to make a Pious and Eloquent Sermon to them. But they
seeing their Bishop safe, were filled with extraordinary joy, and at his demand
promised all security to the Prefect; whom he safely led through the midst of
his armed Citizens. The Lady having this security, spent the rest of her life
with Macrina, St. Basils Sister, in the glorious performances of Charity and
Piety. So we see Infidelity cruel, but Christianity charitable and beneficent;
and those, who in prosperity swelled with pride and rage, in adversity become
sneaking and dejected. Eutropius the Eunuch, who brought Chrysostom to
Constantinople, the Emperors Lord High Chamberlain, a Pagan, had so
extraordinarily insinuated himself into Arcadius's favor, that he became the
greatest person in the Empire: The affairs of the Commonwealth were more
managed by the command of Eutropius, then the will of Arcadius; all Offices in
the Court and Army were at his disposal. One Theognostus, of Consular dignity,
falls into the displeasure of Eutropius, by whose procurement he was banished
into Armenia, and there basely murdered: his Estate was confiscated, his
disconsolate Widow had been reduced to the greatest extremities, had she not
been secured by the sanctity of the Altar, and the power of Chrysostom, who
resisted the impetuous pride, arrogance and cruelty of Eutropius: who to avenge
himself on the Bishop, caused a Law to be enacted for the removing of the
Church immunities, and annulling that security, which miserable persons had at
the Altar. In this deceitful felicity he continues, and was advanced to the
Consular dignity. But oh the unconstancy of humane affairs! when he began to
dream of the Imperial Purple, and thought himself secure in the enjoying of the
greatest honor, that the East could afford, he falls into the Emperors
displeasure, and by that, into the greatest misery. His death was decreed: to
prevent the Execution of it, and preserve his miserable life, he hastens to the
Church, and throws himself at the foot of the Altar. Thus the World suffers
perpetual vicissitudes, and the highest Grandeurs may be lessened in the esteem
of sober, and wise persons. This same person that thought himself so safe that
the Heavens could not ruin him, and was swelled with so high a pride, that he
would not suffer the very Altar to be a shelter for any against his fury, is
forced to confess the impiety of his fact by flying to the Altar; from which,
the liberty of protection by a severe Law he had taken away. The people, the
Soldiers, all hasten to the Church to tear in pieces this wretched man. There
is nothing more impotent then Popular passions. This Eutropius whom the other
day they feared, and adored as a terrestrial Deity, now they prosecute as the
monster of men. Whether the people are generally delighted in cruelty, and
through a strange impiety of mind take pleasure in the miseries of others, or
else it gives them a satisfaction in their meaner conditions, to see the ruins
and calamities that fall upon the greatest persons, is the reason, that the
Vulgar pour all their indignities and cruelties upon those, who have lapsed
from the highest honors, I am not to determine; only this is most certain,
that the Peoples darling, and the Court favorite, if once they fall from that
honor they have attained, are prosecuted by the Vulgar with the greatest scorn
and cruelty. But when Eutropius fled to the Altar, Chrysostom was in the
Church; Chrysostom seeing Eutropius lying there, and hearing the Soldiers and
People crying out, deliver us Eutropius, deliver us Eutropius, for Eutropius
must die; he presently speaks to the people, and commands silence, for he would
preach: he had a present tongue and mind, he could express what he pleased in
the most admirable Eloquence and curious Language. The people easily
acquiesced, for it might deserve a Quaere whether they more desired Chrysostoms
Eloquence, or Eutropius his death. He begins his Sermon with an Invective
against Eutropius, and upbraids him with that injury that he did the Church of
God. The Church, against whom he exercised hostility, embraced him with open
arms; the Altar now was his Sanctuary, from which he had taken away the
privilege of protection; the Altar which is glorious in its own splendor,
became more illustrious by that Lion lying bound at the feet of it. The
Theaters, which he had enriched with many Offices and endowments, had betrayed
and destroyed him; but the Church and Altar, to which he was a professed enemy,
relieved and defended him; that he had formerly reproved his Pride and
Insolence, and had told him that his Dignity and Riches were fugitive Servants,
that they would forsake and ruin him; but now his safety and happiness were
the Church and Altar of God. This would seem to argue in Chrysostom a great
pride, arrogance and cruelty, to throw such disgraces and scorns upon miserable
Eutropius; but that was not Chrysostoms design, for in that same invective, he
professed, he spoke it for the benefit and favor of Eutropius; for turning
himself to the People, with the like passionate Eloquence moves the People to
the commiseration of Eutropius, prevails upon them. What by his constancy and
courage, and his vast Eloquence, he so far prevailed that Eutropius was not
delivered into the hands of the Soldiers, till the Emperor had sworn that
Eutropius should not be put to death. Thus that Golden shower of Eloquence,
laid the Tempest of the Popular and Court fury.

Though Valens was the great persecutor Their great Loyalty and Allegiance to
their Prince.
of the Orthodox Christians, maintainers of the honor due to our blessed Lord
and Savior, yet Basil never persuaded the Christians to resist by Arms; and
the protection of Eusebius, intimates the obedience of Christians to their
Governors.

Chrysostom though he was so dreadfully persecuted by the Empresses indignation
against him, yet in his Sermons would praise the Emperor as the most holy and
religious Prince. And when the Emperor was in danger of the Gothish Army, he
stopped the fury of their Arms by his Eloquence and Piety, as appears by this
subsequent Narrative. Gaynas, a Goth of the Arrian Heresy, fell from serving
his own Prince, to the service of the Roman Emperor; under whom he performed
great and prosperous Achievements, hugely advantageous to that Empire; but
receiving some disappointments and disgraces from Rufinus, the prime Minister
of State, declined to Tribigildus the Gothish King, under whom he brought the
Gothish Army into Thrace, and wasted the greatest part of Greece; which forced
the Emperor to unhandsome Capitulations with him. The Peace being concluded,
Gaynas comes to Constantinople, and there is proclaimed General of the Emperors
Army; after which, he confidently demands the liberty of a Church for the
Arrian Heretics. Arcadius durst not deny that, which was rather a Command,
then a Petition; therefore he sends for Chrysostom, and communicates to him the
demands of Gaynas; to which Chrysostom replied, that he was totally averse from
such a concession, and prayed the Emperor, that he might confer with Gaynas,
whom he questioned not but he should either satisfy, or deter from the farther
prosecuting of such a design. Gaynas and Chrysostom disputed the reasonableness
of the demand; Chrysostom totally denies it; he adds the services he had done
the Roman Empire; to which Chrysostom said, that nothing merits the turning the
Place, wherein God is honored with Praises and Hallelujahs, into a place
wherein the Divine Majesty is blasphemed: And further adds, that he ought to
remember that the honor done him by the Emperor was superior to his merits;
and how different was his estate, from that condition he was in, when in the
head of few Troops he passed the I^er. Gaynas, confounded with his courage and
reason, desisted; yet again attempted the seizing of the Emperor, and
destroying of Constantinople. He was frustrated from those designs by the
miraculous power of God. Whereupon he flies to Tribigilaus the Gothish King,
who received him with the highest respect; and commissioned him, in the head of
an Army, to make a dreadful invasion upon the Grecian Empire; which filled
Asia with horror and blood, Greece it self trembling under his Arms The
Emperor was not provided to repel so great a force; whereupon Chrysostom is
sent in an Embassy to that Barbarian, who though he knew the affront he had
given him at Constantinople, yet undertakes the business; Gaynas meets him with
the greatest kindness, and gives him the highest testimony of respect;
Chrysostom so far prevails, that he affrights him from a further progress;
whereby the Emperor had leisure to raise such an Army, which chastised the
treachery and insolence of Gaynas, and made him satisfy for all the injuries
he had done to the Romans, in the ruin of his Army and the loss of his life.
Oh the glory of Religion! that an unarmed person could free the Roman Empire
from those dangers, from which their own weapons could not preserve them! so in
Spiritual Preaching, the verity of Christian Religion is asserted. The weapons
of our warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual through God. That one Bishop
should more prevail over the enemies of the Roman Empire, then whole Armies!
and when the City of Constantinople would have twice hindered his banishment,
and would have opposed their Arms to the Emperors Edict, that commotions and
blood might be hindered, he privately delivered himself into the hands of the
Emperors Soldiers, who secretly conveyed him into exile: Nay when
Innocentius, Bishop of Rome, would have pronounced a sentence of
Excommunication against the Emperor, and Honorins the Western Emperor in the
defense of Chrysostom would have drawn down his Army to Constantinople against
Arcadius, he hindered the intentions of both, by his Eloquence, peaceable and
quiet Letters. And to show, he retained not a rancour against the Emperor and
Empress, or his other Court or Ecclesiastical enemies at Cucusum, where he had
a space to breath in; he wrote that incomparable and excellent piece, styled,
No man is hurt but by himself. This is the glory of Christanity, to reconcile
the fear of God, and honor of the King together. They must not rifle their
duty, and yet they must not draw the Sword against their Princes. The
foundation laid by a late Philosopher of making the Princes will, the rule of
Justice and goodness, for the preservation of Government and the peace of
Societies, overthrows the whole structure of Religion, destroys the society and
order of men, and is contradictory to the reason of men. But to secure
Government and peace by Non-resistance and Passive obedience, as it is consonant
to Divine pleasure, so it secures Religion, maintains Justice, and is the most
certain defense of the Imperial power.

Chrysostom privately retiring into The Accident that happened at the
banishment of Chrysostom.
banishment, the People for some hours were ignorant that he had taken Ship for
Armenia; but no sooner the news was spread in the City, but it was filled with
confusion, terrors and cries. Men, Women, and Children of all sorts and
qualities ran to the Haven, and there cry out, the Bishop, the Bishop is gone.
They enquired of the Mariners where the last step was, that they might kiss the
very impression of his foot. Never City was more doleful then Constantinople
was then. The Governor of the City, Optatus, was a Pagan, a zealous professor
of Idolatry; he, with the greatest joy, embraced the banishment of Chrysostom,
as an occasion put into his hands to prosecute the Christians, with as great a
cruelty and rage as ever the Heathen Tyrants did; to make a Christian Emperor
by his hands the cause of inflicting as dreadful tortures on them, as a Decius
or Dioclesian. The Banishment of Chrysostom happened imediately before Easter,
the great Ternary of days; the days of our Lords being in the Grave, was the
time when these Tragedies were acted. For then the Churches were filled with
Christians of all sorts, many Men and Women were then preparing for Baptism to
be celebated on Easter Day, the Deaconesses attending upon the Women, the
Deacons upon the Men, in their distinct and several places; all which were
filled with sorrow for Chrysostom: incredible was their grief for the Decree of
Banishment, fervent were their prayers for his continuance. Optatus commands
his Troops to enter the Church, the people cry for Chrysostom, the Soldiers
answer their Petitions with their Swords. Thus the Holy Church, the Sacred
Altar, was besmeared with blood in the day of the Lords Passion. They enter the
places where the Catechumens were; to the Women they offer the basest
indignities and cruelties; to the Men, all which malice and rage could
perpetrate. The Fonts were not now filled with water, but blood; and they, who
were prepared to be consecrated to God in the waters of Baptism, are now indeed
baptized into the Baptism that Christ was baptized with. Oh dreadful passage!
what, if Chrysostom had been in some words indiscreet, must the Flock of Christ
thus suffer? and the Christian Emperor give authority for such an indignity to
be offered to Christian Religion? The Soldiers, after they had wounded the
Catechumens, poured their blood into the Fonts; stripped the Women naked; and in
a barbarous cruelty and divelish rage against Christianity, (for these were
Pagan Troops) in a scorn dipped them in their own blood, and cruelly murdered
many of them. Who can read without tears such a Tragedy, done in a Christian
City, with the Authority of a Christian Emperor, on the day of our blessed
Lord's Passion? but O Eternal God! thy ways are a great depth, and cannot be
searched out:

In the very night that Chrysostom was carried into Exile, a Fire began in the
Throne of Chrysostom, which consumed that stately Cathedral, wherein he
constantly Preached: the flames being carried by a violent East Wind, lighted
upon the Palace of the Senators of Constantinople, the Common-Council-house of
the City, a rare Pile of buildings, and laid it level with the ground. Those
flames were matter of Joy to Optatus, another opportunity being presented to
him for the reaking his malice upon the Christians. The favorites of
Chrysostom were presently clapped in prison, and laid in Irons, especially the
Presbyters and Deacons, who were faithful to him; the Constantinopolitan Ladies
not being spared, many of whom were put to cruel Torments, that the
Ecclesiastical Historian judges it best to pass by the Narrative in silence.
But in all the Tortures that they suffered, neither man nor woman confessed the
Fact, but utterly denied it. Olympias a great Lady, the Widow of Nebridius a
rich Consul, embraced a Religious life; She was a great admirer and lover of
Chrysostom, her Estate was crime enough, she is dragged to the Tribunal, accused
as an Accomplice in the burning of the Church: to which accusation she bravely
answers, That there could be no pretext of reason that she should endeavor the
consuming of a Sacred Aedifice, when she had spent vast sums of money in the
building of many; but neither a great Fine laid on her, nor the Tortures she
then endured, could any whit diminish her affections to that Excellent
Preacher; but afterward having liberty given her by the Emperor, she retired
to Macedonia, and there in solitude and Piety spent the rest of her most
glorious life. Some attribute the Fire to the favorers of Chrysostom, but
certainly the Tortures and Racks, that were inflicted on them, would have
extorted from one or other a confession; however they, who in all their actions
discovered that they had rather die then sin, would not have persisted in a
notorious lie. Others attributed it to a Miracle, as thinking without
praeternatural power, the flame could not, out of the Throne, catch the roof of
the Temple, and without a Divine designation could not have flown over so many
houses of the City, and at such a distance, prey only upon the Senators Palace.
To deny the more peculiar and miraculous operations of God, is an unpardonable
Blasphemy; but to believe every narration, is childish credulity; and to make
every thing that seems strange to require a supernatural cause, argues
ignorance and superstition. It seems the most probable, that the Heathens were
the occasion of that conflagration, that there might be an occasion given to
the Heathen Governor to inflict all sorts of punishments upon the Christians.
For under the pretense of carrying Chrysostom into Banishment, and to disperse
the Christians conventions, they seized upon the Church, and so might justly be
reputed the Authors of that fact. Chrysostom being banished, Arsatius (aged 80
years, a man of no Learning, nor Eloquence) the meanest and silliest person,
succeeds the greatest and most Eloquent person in the World. Every where the
Christians and Religious persons meeting Chrysostom, received him with all
kindness, filled the Air with these Acclamations, Let the Sun rather cease to
shine, then not Chrysostom preach. In his journey to Armenia, the place
designed for his banishment, he met with extraordinary difficulties, oft-times
in danger of the Isaurian Robbers. The Soldiers that guarded him, had in
Commission that they should tire him with continued Journeys; for he was
reduced to great weakness, and mightily obnoxious to Fevers, by reason of his
great Austerities. But at length they arrived at Cucusum, where the Bishop of
that place courteously received him, and had the happiness of peace and
quietness. To him there resorted many of his Friends from Constantinople, out
of Armenia, Syria, Asia, Cappadocia, and the Countries bordering upon the
Euxine Sea. Most of the Letters which are extant in his Works, which are brave
Monuments of his Piety and Learning, were written in the time of his
banishment. But the fame of his admirable piety in those his great afflictions
daily increasing, and the love of the City every day hastening toward him,
caused the Emperor to prohibit any commerce of Letters with him. The time of
his banishment he continually spent in Prayers and Preachings, if his Guard
permitted him any liberty of rest. The People, from the bordering Nations and
remote Countries, undertaking the dangerous and tedious Journeys to hear the
Eloquence of this great Person.

That person or Court, to whom the The Appeals of these Fathers to the Church
of Rome
last Appeal is made, is unquestionably invested with a supreme Authority.
Bellarmine, de Romans Pont. lib. 2. cap. 29. argues for the Roman Primacy from
Appeals; averring, that it was the custom of the Universal Church, to tender
her final Addresses to the Roman Bishop; which must necessarily prove that the
Church did acknowledge the Roman Bishop to be her supreme Head: he takes no
cognizance of Basils Embassy to the West, but allegdeth Chrysostoms Letters to
Innocent. Baronius ad An. Dom. 371, 372 does endeavor to maintain the Papal
Primacy from the Letters of Basil to Damasus, then Bishop of Rome. Barbosa a
late Canonist, 2 distinct. cause. 10. quest. 3. cap. Cuncta per mundum, this
boldly blasphemes: He asserts, It Is an error in the Faith, to say that an
Appeal lies from the Pope to God himself. For when the supreme Priest is the
Vicar of our Lord Jesus here upon Earth, his Consistory is the same with that
of Christ; they therefore think Heretically, who believe that they may Appeal
from the definitive sentence of the Pope, to Christ; as though the Tribunal of
Christ and the Pope were not the same. Who wonders at the impious confidence of
Parasites? Lipsius a Romanist, abhorred such sentiments; when the Master of the
Hospitallers was by the instigation of Philip the Fair of France, condemned to
be burnt by Pope Urban, he made his Appeal to Heaven, and cited them both to
appear before the Tribunal of Christ within the space of a year: in the compass
of which time, the Pope and French King both died, to give an account, as
Lipsius thinks, of their cruelties and injustices before the great Judge of the
World: Lipsii Mon. Pol. I intend not a full discussion of this Topic, but
clearly to manifest that neither of these Fathers acknowledged the Papal
Supremacy. Basil never directs his Epistles to the Roman Bishop, but to the
Western Bishops, Transmarine Bishops, or to the Bishops of Italy and France.
The occasions of which Epistles, was the Persecutions and great disturbances
that the Eastern Church suffered by the fury of the Arrians. Whilst the Western
Church flourished in prosperity and peace, the inscription of one of his
Epistles is thus, To our Brethren and Bishops in the West. How can it be
imagined, if this great man believed the Papal Supremacy, that he would so
direct his Letters? We charge the Romanists with Innovations, they require the
time in which those Innovations were introduced; they charge the Greek Church
with Schism, we may enquire, when that Church acknowledges the Roman
Jurisdiction, and when the Schism of Greeks commenced. Basil when the East was
so dreadfully tormented by the Orthodox Bishop, was chosen by reason of the
greatness of his Learning, and fineness of his Pen, to be their Secretary, at
whose instigation he in their names wrote to the Western Bishops, and sent
three several Embassies, to none of which he received any answer; this neglect
cast him into a just passion in his Letter to Eusebius Bishop of Samosatum, he
thus writes; What help can be expected from the superciliousness of the West?
for they neither know the truth, nor will endure to learn it; for being
possessed with false prejudices, they act the same things they formerly did in
the case of Marcellus; by their ambitious contending against those which
publicly maintain the truth, they themselves give a confirmation of Heresy. I
my self do intend to write to the chiefest of them, but not in usual manner, in
the name of my fellow Bishops. I will not mention any thing concerning
Ecclesiastical affairs, only I will acquaint them, that they neither will know
the truth by us, nor will entertain those means by which they may know it; and
that on no account ought they to insult over those who are oppressed by
afflictions: neither ought they to esteem Pride to be Honor and Dignity, a sin
which of it self is sufficient to render a person odious unto God. How is it
possible to imagine that these expressions are consistent with St. Basils
belief of the Roman Primacy or Infallibility? can he think those to be
infallible, whom he says neither know the truth, nor will use means to know it?
Did he believe Damasus to be the Universal Bishop, whom he calls the chiefest
of them, that is, of the Western Bishops, not of the Universal Church? Baronius
to this answers, Good men are sometimes transported with passion, but they
afterward reduce themselves within the bounds of reason. For after this he
expresses his high esteem he had of the Church of Rome, and commends the
purity, and rectitude of her Faith; by which it appears, that he did not
believe that Church Heretical, and that Good men might condemn Pride with
greater Pride; his beloved Nazianzen accuses him of that vice. Grant this, yet
it will not be conceded, that Basil's Addresses could import his belief of the
pretended Supremacy or Infallibility: he condemns not the Western Bishops for
Heresy, but for their strengthening of Heresy by the encouraging of Heretics;
which they did, by receiving Marcellus into communion, whom the Eastern Church
excommunicated. Good men may fall into passion; Basil unquestionably had a just
reason for his indignation; who can accuse his anger? he in the name of the
whole Eastern Church, then groaning under most dreadful Persecutions, writes
three Epistles to the Western Bishops, who refused to return one Letter to
signify their compassion. Did Nazianzen suspect Basil of Pride? No: he knew
him to be one of the humblest men in the World. Nazianzen was very unwilling to
accept of Episcopal Jurisdiction, which Basil enforces him thereunto; this
kind and pious violence he calls pride. It is not unworthy to enquire the
reason, why the Western Church cast such a neglect upon the Eastern, and
peculiarly upon Basil their Secretary. Baronius assigns this, That Basil and
his Associates were traduced as Heretics; for though according to the Nicene
Council, they acknowledged the Faith of one substance, yet by reason the Latin
Church used the word Persona, to express the distinction in the Trinity, and
the Greek not condemning the Latins used the word (...), the Latins that
judged that to be of the same signification with (...), did think they were
either Sabellians or Tritheits: under which Calumny Basil for a great while
lay. Let this be yielded, what to the purpose? Damasus entertained this unjust
suspicion; Basil by many Letters and Apologies vindicates himself; at last
clears himself of that Cloud; satisfies the Western Bishops; they
acknowledging, that (...) in the Greek language, and the Eastern Church, that
Persona in the Latin, did properly denote the distinction in the Trinity.
Where is the infallibility? how came it pass that an infallible Judge was
ignorant of the meaning of (...)? but is there no other reason then that? He in
his Epistles to the Transmarine Bishops, says, A great desire of waiting upon
you possesses me, but a continual sickness impedes. I have a long time
expected, to see if you would have any care of us. If you condemn us before we
are heard, and convicted, we shall not at all be injured; only we shall lose
Christian love and charity, which you will make us believe you have not: be not
hearers of Calumnies, but tryers of the Truth; let not such reasons prevail
with you; we want not the help of others, we need not the Communion of others.
God that separated Islands from Continents, unites the Inhabitants by love.
Brethren, nothing can divide us, if our own choice and proper motion makes not
the separation. If you account your selves head of the Universal Church, the
head cannot say to the feet, I have no need of thee; but if you rank your
selves amongst the Members of the Church, ye cannot say to us; we have no need
of you. We earnestly seek an union in the same opinion, we passionately entreat
your prayers. The very Heathens who know not the true God, desire prayers, they
combine together for their mutual assistance; are not we ashamed of separation?
are we disposed to suffer so great an injury? Can these lines admit of Roman
Primacy? durst Basil, if he had received such sentiments, propose that Dilemma,
either you are the Head, or Members? and may not we reasonably judge, that
Damasus was nettled at the inscription of the Letters? It Is evident, that the
Eastern Bishops did not Appeal to the Western, as to their Superious; they
desire their prayers, the manifesting their consent in the same Doctrine with
them, and give what assistance they can to them. Take it from their own
Letters; To our Brethren and Bishops in the West. How gracious is God, who
mingles joy with our sorrows? we have received comfort by those Letters which
Athanasius sent to us from you; he witnesses the integrity and soundness of
your Faith, which demonstrate your commendable union and concord with us. God
has comforted us by Sabellius, our Reverend fellow Deacon, who acquaints us
with those excellent things that he saw in your Church; and he knowing by his
own experience the miserable estate of ours, he passionately entreats you,
that with fervent and incessant prayers, you would contend with God for us. All
which intimates nothing of Primacy: This is not an Appeal to proper Judges, but
an address for Brotherly assistance. In another Epistle; We have earnestly
desired, and aloud begged for the manifesting your affection to us, by giving
us assistance, and sympathizing with us: but ye have not appeared in our
behalf, we most earnestly desiring, O most Reverend, to signify our confusions
to the Western Emperor; If that be difficult, send from you to us, to visit
and comfort us, who are so grievously afflicted, that you your selves may be
the spectators of the East; Words are not able to express our Calamities. Here
is no acknowledgement of a Jurisdiction: no understanding man can ever be
brought to believe, that the Author of such Letters submitted to the Authority
of them to whom they were directed. But Baronius says, That the Appeals of
Eustachius and Marcellus to Rome, perspicuously evince the Roman Primacy.
Eustachius was a light and unconstant person, after he had subscribed and
professed the Faith of one substance: he relapsed into Arrianism, for which he
was excommunicated. St. Basil to the Western Bishops gives this account of
Eustachius. He was Bishop of Sebastia, of the lower Armenia, who very much
molested the Church; at Alexandria he was instructed by Arrius, and esteemed
one of his chiefest Disciples; he returns to his own Country; for his impious
opinion, by Hermogenes Bishop of Caesarea, was excommunicated; but afterward,
presenting to him a confession of his sound Faith, was restored and ordained.
He relapsed, and was again excommunicated at Constantinople; returning into his
own Country, he presented a form of sound Faith, whereupon he was received and
made Bishop after that, in the Synod of Ancira; he anathematized the Faith of
one substance; his Heresy he promoted in Cilicia, and Constantinople;
whereupon in a Synod at Melitina he was deposed, for which he makes his address
to the Western Bishops; before Liberius Bishop of Rome, he makes a confession
of the true Faith, subscribes it; by him, and the Western Bishops, he was
absolved; from whom he received Letters to a Synod met at Tiana, to receive him
into the Church, and restore him into his Bishopric, which by them was
performed. All this is granted; but the Primacy not granted. It Is evident that
St. Basil wrote not only to Liberius, but to the Western Bishops. And what was
done by the Eastern Bishops, was not only upon the account of Liberius, but of
the other Western Bishops. It was a custom in the Church, to certify one
another of their agreement in the form of sound Doctrine, and of those persons
who were Heretics and Excommunicated, whereby there might be no communion held
with such persons; it was usual with these, to make their Address to other
Churches, that they might receive them into Communion with them, and by that
means to receive Letters Testimonial of the integrity of their Faith, the
revoking of their Error, and their desire that they might be restored into the
Church, from whence they were excommunicated; which was often performed. All this
did not include any Authority, but a Fraternal love, and communion; that they
agreeing in the same Faith, the persons whom they received into communion,
should be of the same Faith with them; whereupon, if any Heretic
excommunicated by his own Bishop, addressed himself to another Church, with
whom his Bishop was in communion; and he there revoked his Heresy, and made
profession of the Catholic Faith, he was received into communion; and having
obtained literas format as, with a Copy of his Faith, he was many times
restored into Communion. This is every where obvious in Ecclesiastical history.
Eustachius being excommunicated, flies to the Western Bishops. Basil in his
Epistle to the Western Bishops concerning Eustachius, Apollinaris, and
Paulinus, thinking he should be restored by them, by whom he was received and
carried Letters from them to us, to the Synod of Tyana, containing the
profession of his Faith, and the desire of his restoration; which was
performed; the Synod restored him. Liberius persuaded, it very much conduced to
the peace of the Church, for to agree in the same Faith; it tended much to the
confusion of the Arrians, to see the East and West conspiring in the Orthodox
Faith; the best and greatest part of Christians to be their enemies. Eustachius
being very inconstant, sometimes did publicly profess the Faith, sometimes
propagate Heresy; where he did this, he was excommunicated; where the other,
he was absolved. And in that very place where he was condemned, if he revoked
his errors, the condemnation was repealed. This same Eustachius, after he had
been convicted of Heresy, addresses himself to St. Basil; before whom he makes
a confession of the true Faith, and subscribes a confession which Basil himself
drew up; upon which he was received into communion. The same is to be averred
concerning the actions of Liberius, and the Western Bishops, in the case of
Eustachius. Basil therefore earnestly entreats them, that since they lived at
so great a distance, they would believe nothing, but what they received from
those persons, who lived in the East, and were worthy of credit: therefore he
gives them a Character of Eustachius after his restoration; he now destroys
that Faith on the account of which he was restored into communion, he joins
himself with them who anathematized the Faith of one substance, and is become
the Ringleader of the Pneumatomici; he uses the confidence you gave him, to
the ruin of many: since from you, he took a liberty to injure the Church, it is
necessary, that from you proceed a redress; and therefore that you would give
an account to us, for what reason he was received into communion, and why he is
now changed; and wherefore he enervates that favor granted him by the Fathers.
In all which there is not the least intimation of the Primacy. That which was
the cause of his restoration, was a form of sound Faith, which he deceitfully
presented to the Western Bishops, which with their Letters he tenders to the
Synod of Tiana, upon which by the Authority of the Synod he was restored.

Chrysostom (as I have before related) Chrysostoms address to Innocent Bishop
of Rome, and the Western Bishops.
having incurred the Empresses displeasure; Arcadius the Emperor sends for
Theophilus Archbishop of Alexandria, to come to Constantinople; who, upon the
Emperors command, attended with several other Bishops, arrived at
Constantinople. He calls a Synod, receives the Accusation exhibited against
Chrysostom, whom he summoneth before him. Chrysostom refuses to appear;
whereupon he is condemned for contumacy, pronounced guilty, excommunicated,
deposed, and by the Authority of the Emperor banished. Upon which, he writes
to Innocent, bitterly complaining of the notorious injury done to him, and of
the miserable estate of the Grecian Church; and passionately entreats, that
he and the Western Bishops would afford him what assistance they could, and use
all possible endeavors they could, to redress those grievances, with which
that Church was afflicted. That this is an Appeal to Rome, as to a supreme
Court of Judicature, is averred by Bellarmine and others; but that it is not,
appears thus: Baronius says, That Theophilus as he was Archbishop of
Alexandria, had power over the Churches of Greece, and therefore might legally
summon Chrysostom before him. An assertion which I cannot but wonder at: for
what Authority can the Archbishop of Alexandria have over the Archbishop of
Constantinople? and Chrysostom to Innocentius accuses him of unjust
usurpation; It Is not congruous, says he, that one out of Egypt, (meaning
Theophilus) should judge those that lived in Thrace. Which manifestly
renounceth the pretended Authority of Theophilus. Arcadius the Emperor then
keeping his Court at Pera, a City in Thessalonia, Theophilus with his Associate
Bishops attended him: the Emperor issues out his command to Chrysostom, that
he should appear at Pera before Theophilus, to answer those crimes that were
objected against him; he refuses in his Letter to Innocent; he gives this
reason, it is not fit for any person to appear before a Foreign Court of
Judicature; and that all things that are acted, ought to be tried within their
own Jurisdiction; all things ought to be examined within their own Province,
before their proper Court, to whom the cognizance of the Cause does belong:
which is an undoubted testimony against Foreign Appeals. Chrysostom could not
possibly think, that an Appeal to Rome was necessary, since upon the account
before-recited, he refused to appear at Pera: withal he Appeals to a General
Council, he acquainteth Innocent, that he was not guilty, and could wholly free
himself from those crimes laid to his charge; but that he would not appear
before incompetent Judges, an unlawful Judicature, which consisted of his
professed and implacable enemies, but that he would appear before a General
Council, where in the presence of 1000 Bishops he could manifest his Innocence.
By which it is evident, he Appealed not to Rome, but addressed himself to the
Western Bishops; that as much as in them lay, they would endeavor that a
General Council might be called; before whom he might appear, all grievances
redressed, and Peace to the Church restored. And, that it was not an Appeal to
Rome, appears by the Epistle it self: for though the title be to Innocent
Bishop of Rome, yet in the body of the Epistle, we find that he addresseth
himself to the Bishops of the West, whom he calls most Reverend, and most Holy
Bishops. Farther to evince that the Greek Church did not acknowledge the Roman
Primacy, we must attend to what Phocius averrs; Innocent, says he, labored
much on the behalf of John, but all in vain; he fent his Apocrisarii, who were
injuriously treated, and scornfully sent back; and what prayers so ever he
used, were to no purpose. The persons to whom the Letters and Messengers of
Innocent were sent, were undoubtedly the Emperor, Theophilus, and the rest of
the Holy Bishops. If so, this fact must needs manifest the opinion they had of
the Roman Primacy. That neither St. Basil nor St. Chrysostom did believe the
Roman Primacy, the case of Miletius and Paulinus evidently declares. Miletius
was thought to be an Arrian, he was Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia: Eudoxius the
Arrian Bishop of Antioch being dead, he was by the Arrians translated from
Sebastia to Antioch: (then in every City of the East, every Sect of Christians
in it had its peculiar Bishop; when Eudoxius governed the Arrian Church in
Antioch, the Catholic Christians had Eustachius for their Bishop.) The
Antiochian Arrians hearing that Miletius was a person of a singular life, and
of very great Eloquence, and that he was once of the same opinion with them,
they judged, that the opinion the World had of this Person, would be a means to
draw to their Party the Inhabitants of Antioch. There was so great a same of
him, that when he came to Antioch, multitudes of persons went out to meet him;
both those which were followers of Arrius, and those that were adherers to
Paulinus. When he came first to Antioch, he preached publicly the moral Duties
of Christianity; afterward he publicly taught the Faith of one substance.
There was then a Synod: the Emperor commanded the Bishops to give their
opinion: After George of Laodicea had most heretically delivered, and Acasius
of Caesarea had not so blasphemously, but not truly and Apostolically delivered
his, Miletius was commanded to make a profession of his Faith; he, contrary to
the opinions of the Arrians, according to the Nicene decree, gave his belief
with a great deal of exactness and truth; upon which by the instigation of the
Arrians he was banished. Eustachius, who from Perea in Syria, was translated to
Antioch, a person famous for constancy, soundness in the Faith and Religion,
was banished in the time of Constantius. Paulinus a Presbyter of Antioch;
governed the Catholic Church in Antioch; those of the people that were sound
in the Faith, notwithstanding the endeavors of the Arrians, he retained and
confirmed in the Catholic Doctrine. The Bishops of the Church that were
banished under Julian the Emperor, being restored, endeavored to apply fit
remedies for the redressing the disorders of the Church. Lucifer a Bishop of
Sardinia, taking to himself two other Bishops, ordained Paulinus Bishop of
Antioch. Miletius being by the Emperor Gratian recalled from Exile, went to
Antioch to take possession of his See; Paulinus, though ordained after
Miletius, would remain Shepherd of his own Flock, and Bishop of Antioch:
Miletius would not forsake that honor which his Ordination conferred on him;
nor ought he do it; for he was pre-ordained, and was a person of that holiness,
that he judged his office of more concern to him, then his dignity. This was
the great calamity, that in a City in which there were so many evil opinions,
to the encouraging of Heresy, two Catholic Bishops should contend one with
another: both were excellent persons, both of admirable fame; what cause should
be assigned of their divisions? both of them appeared, by Characters given by
excellent Historians, to be very holy persons; the Eastern sided with Miletius,
the Western Church with Paulinus: perhaps there were heats and animosities,
failings to which retired and severe persons are obnoxious. May I give a
conjecture, which may give some justification of them both: Miletius advanced
to the Sea of Antioch by the Arrians themselves, when he discovered himself to
be of a contrary opinion; his Holiness, Learning and Eloquence, converted many
of the Arrians; these would never forsake him, who was the instrument of their
conversion. Paulinus after the banishment of Eustachius being constant in the
Faith, continuing in Antioch administering the holy office to the Faithful, he
so obliged him, that they would never forsake him. Withal, his adherents were
offended with Miletius, because he was ordained by Arrians. Miletius was of so
sweet a temper, as he proffered amicable terms of reconciliation. Let what will
be said, that can be said in favor of Paulinus, Miletius had the better cause;
and the suffrage of the Western Church in his behalf, does make it fully appear
that the Western Bishops refused the Roman Primacy. The Roman Bishop, and the
West, took the part of Paulinus: the Grecian Bishops, and those of the East,
that of Miletius. If that the Eastern Church did believe the Primacy, how durst
they maintain that Bishop which was not approved by the Roman? It was against
the Ecclesiastical Canons, that two Bishops should be in the same Church: and
yet there were two Catholic Bishops in Antioch; one approved by the Western,
the other by the Eastern Church. Miletius was a man of most singular Piety, and
of equal meekness; he conversing with Paulinus, thus bespeaks him. When our
Sheep are at union, they feed in the same common Pasture, and we contend about
the right of governing of them. Let us leave off our quarrelling, and live in
mutual concord: If I die before you, be you the only Pastor of the Sheep; If
God shall call you hence before me, then to the utmost of my power, and with my
greatest care I will govern the Church of God. This moderate proposal, Sapores
one of Gratians Generals (who had in command from that Emperor, to thrust all
the Arrians out of the Churches, and to restore the banished Catholics) being
at Antioch, seeing this dissension, and knowing both of them to be Catholics,
and yet seeing the moderation of Miletius, confirmed him in the government of
his Churches, who met in the Suburbs; and Paulinus had a small Church for his
Adherents in the City. For the translation of Gregory Nazianzen to
Constantinople, a Synod was there convened, to which not Paulinus, but Miletius
was called; a sufficient testimony of the Judgment of the Grecian Church:
before the Synod was ended, Miletius died, infinitely bewailed, extraordinarily
praised; all the learned Tongues and Pens were exercised in Panegyricks: his
learning and virtues procured him so great a love and honor, that after his
death they drew his Picture upon the Walls and Hangings; they cut it upon
Rings, and engraved it on their Cups: his death caused the Council to tarry
longer then they intended; for the Antiochians chose Flavianus his successor,
whom that Council confirmed in the Sea. Paulinus being dead, Evagrius was
chosen his successor by his party. Damasus and the Western Bishops were very
angry with the ordination of Flavianus; they wrote to Theodosius to depose him;
on the contrary Theodosius defends and maintains his ordination, and
asserteth, that all the East, all the Asiatick and Pontick Churches, the
Churches of Thrace, and all Illyrium, were the Patrons of the ordination of
Flavianus. This Flavianus was that Bishop sent to Theodosius, by reason of the
sedition of Antioch, on no account could he be moved by Damasus, or the West,
to relinquish his Episcopal Authority. If the Bishop of Rome had an universal
Primacy, how durst the Eastern reject that Bishop, whom the Pope approved, and
approve of him, whom the Pope rejected. This contention remained several years:
the Catholic Christians keeping divided meetings under distinct Bishops, until
one Alexander was constituted Bishop of that See in the place of Porphyrius,
who was dead; he being famous for the admirableness of his life, Eloquence,
contempt of the World, and many Heavenly virtues, what by his persuasions and
labor, obtained his intended union in this division. To what part did Basil
and Chrysostom adhere? to the part of Miletius. Basil hugely commends him; by
his Letters is seen the value he had of him, and affection for him: by him
Chrysostom was ordained Deacon: in the commendation of him, after his death, he
made a most excellent Sermon; and that he was of the Church of Flavianus, one
of his Presbyters, plainly appears by his Sermons ad Populum. Flavianus being
gone in an Embassy to Theodosius, him he commends, and encourages them on
the account of the Excellency of their Archbishop. If Basil and Chrysostom did
believe the Roman Primacy, and made their Appeals to Damasus and Innocent, as
supreme heads of the Church, and final Judgers of controversies, how could they
take the parts of those Bishops whom the Popes condemned?

There is certainly in man a Spiritual The Heavenly-mindedness of these Fathers.
and immortal Soul; a Divine fire burns in his breast, from whence flow those
sparks which mount higher and higher, until they ascend to those infinite and
celestial flames: There are restless passions in him, after a complete
felicity, which is fully discovered by our Lord and Savior, the end of whose
coming into the World was to promote the Divine Glory, and conduct men to
Eternal happiness. In his face shined the Glory of God; he had the words of
Eternal life; by his Gospel, Life and Immortality was brought to light; the
genuine Disciples of this Lord, must have their conversation in Heaven, being
as Pilgrims and Strangers in this World, they must demean themselves as fellow
Citizens of the Saints, and Household of God. Excellently Nazianzen in his
Apology; The Soul comes from God, and is Divine; for two reasons it is united
to the Body, a substance of a worse and lower allay: 1. That by this, she
fighting with the flesh, and combating with those passions which would depress
her, she might be crowned with glory: and this happens through that infinite
love of God, who would, that Virtue and Happiness should not be the mere
product of Nature, but it should proceed from choice, and be the effect of the
motions of a well regulating Will. 2. That she might draw the body to her self,
raising it above this World, and in a short space freeing it from its weight
and ponderousness, may so prepare it, that what God is to the Soul, the Soul
may be to the Body; that having polisht by her own art and care this heavy
matter her Servant, she might be united unto God. Of this their
Heavenly-mindedness they gave three demonstrations: 1. A sincere and perfect
contempt of this World, and indeed that act of renunciation of this World,
whereby their whole Estates renounced, and Poverty chosen, carries a thousand
reasons with it. Basil when young, retires into the Pontick Wilderness; the
manner of his life he elegantly gives in his Epistile to Gregorius: the purpose
of his Soul, manifested by the institution of his life, fully evinced, that he
had a small value or esteem for any thing in this World: for he aimed at that
blessedness, which God had promised. Riches he had none, Pleasures he
disregarded: thus he says of himself. A contrite and humble mind, was always
attended with a sad and dejected Countenance. A negligent garb, horrid and
staring hair, sordid Clothes; such which on purpose Mourners wear, I out of
design and pure choice of my will do put on; a Girdle ties my garments to my
body. The only end of my Clothes, is a defense against the extremity of heat
and cold: Meat, Bread and Herbs; Drink, Water; one hour toward the end of the
day, is designed for a late Supper; I sleep leaning on a tree, not affording
too much rest to my wearied body. No one that leads such a manner of life can
be judged, either to gape after riches, or indulge pleasures. Did he affect
Honor? No: The glory that he was ambitious of, was that Honor with God; a
vein of Meekness and Humility runs through all his writing, he speaks of
himself with the greatest Humility; he was accused of aspiring to the Sea of
Neocaesarea, but how unjustly, I manifested formerly. When Bishop, his humility
endeared him to his Diocese, and terrified Valens and the Arrians. Chrysostom
says of himself, that his very enemies would not tax him with covetousness; he
was slandered as though he had been too familiar with Olympias, but most
impiously; both of them were the most mortified persons the World afforded: and
he avers, that if his body was seen, it would be a sufficient evidence to clear
himself from so foul an imputation. He indeed was accused of Pride; indeed he
was a person of a great Spirit, but free from ambition. He was very zealous for
the Divine Glory, and a severe hater of all vice; nothing could move him to
favor impiety, which caused him by some evil persons to be thought haughty and
arrogant. They were both so far from being ambitious, that they both refused
their Bishoprics, and unwillingly accepted of them; and when advanced to their
Episcopal Sees, they managed their places with all imaginable humility and
modesty. I may truly say of them both, which Nazianzen says of his Sister
Gorgonian, that Heaven was their Country; the City, of which they were
desirous, was the new Jerusalem, a City that is above, not seen by the eyes,
but perceived by the understanding, and apprehended by Faith: In Heaven was
their conversation; there they lived; to gain that, was their mainest
endeavor: they were genuine Christians; what they preached and inculcated to
others, that they practiced; to show therefore their contempt of any Worldly
thing, among a thousand passages I will pick out two, one of St. Basil, the
other of St. Chrysostom. St. Basil shows the Heavenliness of his mind, in those
Divine thoughts of his, which we find in his Sermons on the 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16, 17,
18. The design of which Sermon is to demonstrate, that a genuine Christian has
reason continually to rejoice. To perform which, he answers two objections: 1.
That a joy proceeding from an accumulated felicity, which we partake of in this
World, cannot be obtained; which objection he thus urges: Does our Lawgiver
enjoin us impossible things? how is it possible always to rejoice? no man can
find the reason of that joy in his own power; those things that raise a
cheerfulness, are without us; they are not within our own bosoms. The
prosperity of the enjoyment of our Parents and Friends; the gaining and
increasing our Revenues, a restoration unto health, a family prosperous and
flourishing. After this, he gives an account of other things necessary to
humane felicity; but then concludes, that the complexion of those things are
not attainable. 2. The best of men are subject to the greatest calamities.
Shall I rejoice, when tortured? when stretched upon a wheel? etc. Having
elegantly given an account of those miseries that humane nature is obnoxious
to; these things may seem to evince, by this Law impossible things are
enjoined: to which he rejoyns in General, That the Apostle giving this command,
cast his eye upon things future and Eternal; and thereby endeavored to elevate
the Souls of men: and that those who questioned the possibility of performing
the Apostolical command, do roll themselves about earth and flesh, as Worms do
about dung and filth. To these he returns, that the Apostolical command of
rejoicing always is possible to those, who have Christ living in them; to those
Souls, who are once inflamed with a desire of their Maker, and are accustomed
sweetly to delight themselves in those beauties, which in him are to be found;
receive comfort from those very things which are afflicting of others: Toward
the end of his Sermon, he shows, the ground of a Christians Joy is an
everlasting felicity; for, says he, if thy life is always intent upon God, the
hope of a reward shall lighten the sorrows of thy life: Art thou disgraced? Oh,
but look up to that Glory laid up in Heaven for them that are patient. Have you
sustained any damage or loss in your Estate? Oh, but look with an intention of
mind to those Heavenly Riches, to those treasures which are laid up for them
that live piously. Are you banished your Country? but thou have a Country, a
Heavenly Jerusalem. Have you lost your Children? I, but thou have Angels, in
the Quire of whom, thou shall before the Throne of God be filled with an
Eternal joy: so therefore against these Temporal Calamities, opposing those
good things expected, you shall preserve your Soul from trouble and
dissolution. For to that undisturbed mind, the Law of this Apostle invites us.
Let not the splendor and gaiety of humane things work in our mind an excessive
joy: neither let the dolorousness and pain of them deject the Soul, casting of
it down from its height, and obscuring its splendor; for he that is otherwise
instructed concerning the affairs of this life, cannot possibly live calmly and
undisturbedly; which you shall successfully attain, if you have this
Commandment, exhorting you continually to rejoice, always dwelling with you.
Let us therefore cast away all the troubles of the flesh; let us collect and
embrace the delights of the Soul; and so ascending above the sense of things
present, we may extend our understanding to the hope of Eternity; the very
imagination of which thing is sufficient to fill the Soul with joy, and to make
the joy of Angels to be the inhabiter of our Souls.

St. Chrysostom upon Genesis, Homily 35. Abraham, after a great victory he had
obtained over those Kings, which had vanquished the King of Sodom, and carried
away Lot into captivity, was upon his victorious return met with by the King of
Sodom, who desired him to keep the spoils, and return the persons; Abraham
generously refused, and Heroically saying, I have lift up my hand to the Lord,
the most high God, the Possessor of Heaven and Earth; That I will not take from
a thread even to a shoe-latchet, and that I will not take any thing that is
thine, lest thou should say, I have made Abraham rich, Genesis 14. 22, 23. upon
this, he thus discourses: Behold the incomparable virtue of this Patriarch; by
the contempt of riches, and practice of humility, he showed his Divine
Philosophy, and by this means made his victory great and glorious. I
passionately exhort that we may all imitate this Excellent Person; let us
maintain an unblamable life; let us not under the pretense of virtue, fall into
the madness of vainglory; nor of modesty, into the contempt of pious actions;
let us lay humility as the surest foundation for a holy life; no actions are
virtuous, which are not accompanied with humility: he that securely has laid
this foundation, may raise the beautiful Temple of virtue as high as he
pleases. Humility is the holy man's greatest security; It is that wall which
cannot be broken down, an invincible Tower. Our bountiful God, if he sees us,
as Abraham did, despise these present things, he will give us the enjoyment of
future blessings. Let us despise the riches of this present World, that we be
able to enjoy true and lasting pleasures. Let us scorn this empty thing called
vainglory, that we partake of Honor which is true and Eternal. Let us laugh
at the felicity of this present evil World, that unspeakable felicities may
make us happy for the future. Let us have cheap thoughts of those things that
are present, that our minds may be heightened by generous Passions, and our
Souls inflamed with Heavenly desires. If we be nailed to the things of this
life, it is impossible that we should be affected with Heavenly things. A Film
and Rheum darkens the eye, and a love of this World clouds our Reason, and
permits not to us the prospect of Eternity: but he whose Soul is touched with
the love of God, and heart wounded with arrows shot from Heaven, and in his
breast is kindled a Heavenly fire, he with true and discerning eyes, sees the
glories of the future, and the vanities of this present life. Will thou, O
Christian, learn that wisdom with which the Teacher of the World was endued?
consider how he clearly discovers, that whatsoever seems illustrious in the
World, is really nothing. Mark the Language that he uses, 1 Cor. 4. 17. The
things that are seen, say abundance of Riches, if you allege Luster, Glory,
and Majesty, if Dominion, Power, if Empires, if Thrones and Crowns, all these
things are seen, and are Temporal, their continuance is but short, and the
enjoyment of them but for a moment. If these things that are seen are but
Temporal, what things, O blessed Paul, would thou have us to pursue? He
returns things not seen, things which corporal eyes cannot behold. If any one
shall object, who is it that counsels us to neglect visible, and pursue
invisible things? Heavenly Paul replies, the nature of the things, counsel and
command; you see these things, you see them uncertain, and the continuance of
them short; but those things which we cannot see, are Eternal, they know no
end, nor admit of a Period. This he says was the subject of his continued
Labors, and daily Sermons. So that that by the Apostle pronounced concerning
the Patriarchs, may be applied to these great persons: Heb. 11. 14. They that
say such things, declare plainly that they seek another Country.

Basil having consumed his body by vast labors, as a glorious Lamp that Their
deaths and Burials.
wastes it self with its own fire, and goes out with the greatest flame: So
Basil with continual fasting, in perpetual prayers, study and preaching, cast
himself into a perpetual sickness, which caused him to study Physic. His
incessant disease made him a Physician, he scarce ever being in good health.
Recovering out of a former disease, he was very much troubled, that being near
the Haven, a contrary wind should drive him into the Sea again. But after he
had gloriously ruled the Church for 8 years and 2 months, Anno 378. he fell
into his last sickness, which was a violent Fever: it disturbed not his Reason
nor Religion; his Soul burnt with Divine ardours, and he cast the flames of
love to God in all his discourses. When he could hardly speak, and ready to
give up the last Gasp, he called for several of the Clergy and other Religious
persons, and gave them most prudent, most sacred, most religious admonitions
concerning both the guiding of their own lives, and ordering of the Church of
God; and interrupting that discourse, his strength being wasted, he breaks out
into this Ejaculation, O Lord, into thy hands I commit my Spirit; and with that
aspiration his Soul flew to Heaven, and left the Body of Basilius for the
society of Angels, expecting to receive it in the resurrection of the Just. The
news of his death being spread throughout the City, filled all with sorrow and
horror. In him the very Children thought they had lost their Parents, Wives
their Husbands, Parents their Children; the Glory, the Protection of the City
they thought was gone: and his Funeral was celebrated by the confluence of all
sorts of people. The Deserts were emptied of all their Religious persons, the
Country became unpeopled, Jews and Gentiles flocked to attend his Hearse: in so
great a crowd, many thronging to be within the shadow of the Hearse, or to touch
the Bier, perished; in so great a multitude, many were pressed to death, as
unwilling to survive that great Person; being his funeral Victims, they would
offer themselves willingly a Sacrifice to this great Saint. The memory of him
was so famous, that his very Gestures, his Speech, his Garb, his Gate, every
thing the most excellent Persons endeavored to imitate, and they thought them
admirable, who could express in themselves any thing of Basilius. Alas! these
were but faint representations of his Virtues; as Echoes rebound but the last
syllable, so scarce any could express the meanest of his Excellencies. His fame
was so glorious, that he has acquired the name of Great. Pompey and Alexander
gained the same Title by their Arms and Victories, but he by Grace and the
Triumphs of Religion. The universal testimony of the Church, has canonized him
for a Saint; his Laurels grow out of his grave, and the glory of his Memorial
shall never lose its luster,

The Emperors anger continuing still against Chrysostom, prohibited the
conversation of Letters with him, caused him to be removed from Place to Place,
that it might be unknown where he was. Arriving at Caesarea, Pharetrius Bishop
of that place, and successor of Basil, a man infinitely inferior to his
Predecessor, and of a different humor, denied him Lodgings in the City,
prohibited a Religious Lady that lived 5 miles distant from Caesarea, to
entertain him. The famous Bishop gave the foreign Communion to Strangers,
Pagans, to Heretics; but how differently contrary is Pharetrius, who permits
not an entertainment to Chrysostom, the most glorious Prelate of the World.
After one years rest and civil usage at Cucusum, he was hurried to Petiuntum;
the Soldiers having received a special command from the Emperor, that they
should not permit him any quiet, nor suffer his decayed body to receive any
refreshment by ease; in violent storms he should have no shelter, in great
heats he should not have the benefit of the shades, but be carried from place
to place. Yet in all these troubles, his mind was elevated, always comforting
disconsolate Christians. Thus he, whilst he was gloriously fighting in the
Front of the Battle, encouraged the Soldiers in the Rear. Carried to Comanum,
he, as the customs of holy men were to enter the Church, goes to the Temple of
Basiliscus to pray; after which his Fever increasing, worn with labors,
wasted by travels, in holy prayers and Ejaculations he gives up the Ghost, Anno
407. having sat in the Sea 9 years 7 months and 8 days. He entered a Temple to
pray, immediately before he was to enter into that Temple, where the Lamb is
the light thereof. A period is put to the Travels of this Pilgrim, his
banishment finds an end; now he enters into the City of God, that new
Jerusalem, and is in that place where there remains a rest for the Servants of
God. The news of his death flying into Armenia, and the adjacent Countries,
they were all struck with an excessive grief: the Inhabitants forsook their
Country, to celebrate the Funeral of this great Person. He was carried to the
grave upon the shoulders of the most Religious persons, people of diverse
Nations being attendants of that solemnity. Diverse Languages conspired in one
praise; all tongues sent up the same Halelujahs. With Prayers, Psalmodies, with
Hymns, the people of all estates and conditions, and of various Countries
celebrated that sad solemnity: and being carried to the Church of St.
Basiliscus, he was there interred. He lived with great Fame; his enemies could
never obscure, but increase his glory; his Memorial can never be buried in
oblivion. His enemies raced his name out of the sacred Dipticks, but it will
always remain in the Book of life. The consent of the universal Church has
reckoned him amongst the Catalogue of Saints. A very considerable part of
Constantinople separated from the Church, and had their conventions under some
Bishops, the favorites of Chrysostom. These were called Joannites, against
whom the Emperor made severe Edicts, for they would not be forced to
communicate at the Altar, whose Dipticks admitted not the name of Chrysostom;
and by reason of that great injury done to this famous Bishop and Saint, the
whole Western Church refused a communion with the Constantinopolitan.

Proclus, formerly a Deacon under Chrysostom, was advanced to the
Archbishopric of Constantinople. He prevailed upon that most excellent and
Religious Emperor Theodosius the younger, the Son of Arcadius, that the body
of Chrysostom should be translated from Comanum to Constantinople, which was
performed 38 years after his decease. The Corpse were received with the highest
joy, mixed with infinite shame and sorrow; with the extremest shame and
sorrow, that so great a Prelate, so admirable a Preacher, so holy a man,
Christians should banish into the remotest parts of the World. What infinite
sorrow, to conceive that a Christian City should be deprived of so glorious a
Person, and his death to be hastened by the hands of Christians, whose life
deserved to be prolonged by all possible care and industry. Yet what joy, to
see the Empire changed, the City all attending the Ship that brought the Corpse
of their banished Archbishop. Theodosius himself, an Emperor composed with
valor, and goodness; a person of the greatest courage, and sweetest temper in
the World, being the chief Mourner. And thus Chrysostom is carried with all
imaginable pomp, and with all the sacred solemnities, to the Church of St.
Sophia, his holy name is re-inserted into the Sacred Dipticks; and in the grave
of Chrysostom all contentions were buried, the Eastern and Western Churches
reconciled, no private conventions maintained, but all met in the unity of the
Spirit, and bond of peace. The works of this person are many and incomparable;
his Auditors after they came from Church would usually cry, O Golden Mouth!
While he lived, and two ages at least after his death, he was known by common
discourse and writing by the name of John, but afterward the glory of his
writings gave him the cognomen of Chrysostom: and indeed nothing can shine in
greater luster, then he in the excellency of Eloquence, piety and industry.
Thus these two great persons, as the Phoenix having made a Nest, which is her
Funeral Pile, of the odoriferous branches, which the Aromatic Trees of Arabia
afford, by an agitation of the Air through the nimble motion of her wings,
causes the Solar Beams to set it on fire, which being kindled, she lays her
self quietly in those flames, and there with great content expires; knowing
that of those ashes another more Juvenile and sprightly Phoenix shall arise: so
these great persons, having prepared for themselves by their actions (more
fragrant and sweet then the odours of the East) an Eternal Monument, are laid
in the grave in the sweetest repose; knowing that out of their ashes there
shall arise those Bodies (which are in this World embalmed with the perfumes of
a great Fame, and the odours of glorious actions) that shall be invested with
light and immortality.

FINIS.

