HER APPEAL FROM THE COURT TO THE CAMP.

Dan. 12. Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried: But the wicked
shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall understand: But the wise shall
understand.

Printed in the year 1649.

The Word of the Most High: To the Lord General, Lord FAIRFAX, From the Lady
Eleanor.
THe generality or scope of this command touching Prophecy, though ceased a
time, the Church bidden expressly, Despise it not, but to try the Spirits,
needless to be insisted on. Let it seem not therefore strange or hard what is
here desired, since nothing too hard for him whom ye serve, The Lord of Hosts,
that you the Commander of the field, prayed to send forth Harvest-laborers, to
be pleased to appoint some faithful by name, the truth of these things for to
examine, no true peace without it, concerning what she has been a sufferer so
many years for; no less then the burden of his word to Great Britain (Anno
Dom.) 1625. bearing date first of the present Reign, Three and twenty years
since; showing what year in as it were the general Judgment, speaking as
through a Trumpet from Heaven: So that the Prophets testimony, the Scriptures
which accords therewith, may no longer wait for their resurrection; that have
by Antichristian authority been crucified and buried hitherto, like that golden
wedge or tongue, hidden by him Achan, author of so much trouble: Even the
Prophet Daniel, that greatly beloved man; and John, whom he loved, that bosom
Disciple; both testifying of great Britains visitation at such a time, as from
his own mouth also (Mat. 24.) after such fearful denounced Judgments, the like
never before or again, bidden therefore, watch, etc. shows of that blessed Manna
their meat in due season, when to be given them, doubtless something to be
revealed, a forewarning plain enough.

As from the Kingdom of Heaven being likened unto those virgins, five wise, and
five foolish, shall show you a mystery, how points to the aforesaid acceptable
year 1625. begins with the blessed Virgins feast (Five and twentieth of the
month) witness when made at midnight that cry before the Bridegroom; which as
betokens the word of God in such a year so to such a Reign directed, that began
then; and his marrying with such a one, with the late hour of wedding nights,
etc. (Mat. 25.) where the five Talents account given up, a touch gives of the
same year too; and for her wisdom anointed with her lamp-oyl spent so much:
Mary likewise by name much like that, had a name, She lives, but was dead (Rev.
3.) brought with her a curse in stead of a blessing, Pestilence, never such,
and Sword Great Britains portion; as blessings great set light by,
unaccompanied with no small corrections, where again upon his Prophetical Reply
to our Savior Christ (Luke 14.) Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the
kingdom of heaven (as much to say) lives to see him reign, his foes put under
his feet for ever: also Sion, whosoever touches her, touches the apple of his
eye, puts forth this Parable, A certain man made a great supper, and bade many;
and at supper time sent forth his servant, that entrusted servant, saying, All
things are ready (to wit) the Prophets wait, their visions are awake; when the
unworthy wretches with one consent and voice, all began to make excuse, one
this, etc. another that had married a wife, could not come without her leave;
as by the five yoke of Oxen, paints too unto his being Crowned and married such
a year, in whose room the maimed bidden, etc. enough of whose company may be
had (Luke 14.) in plain English, The careless Stuart by name, justly turned out
of Stewardship, what Trust to be reposed in such a ONE? unto this day not
weighing the many Caveats entered, and sacred Statutes, Matt. 24. Noah's days,
knowing not his own house, when he sees it either: as, had the goodman of the
house known at what hour etc. would not suffered his house to be broken up, his
banqueting house especially, etc.

And again, like as in days of old what doings, when the Son of man is
revealed, thus and thus it shall be; marrying, etc. bidden Remember Lots wife
her looking back: and where Lord being asked, shall be revealed that secret,
and these things be? wheresoever the body is, thither the Eagles resort. The
body of an army, those spacious quarters; Therefore what I say unto you, I say
unto all watch, have your lights burning, loins girt, like men expecting, etc
of which Oracles not so obstruse hitherto as obvious now. His farewell the
prophet Daniels on the house top proclaims it, bidden Go thy way etc. (Dan.
12.) showing, And from the time the Daily shall be taken away; and the
abomination that makes desolate set up; Altars adored; giving to understand,
As any have eyes may see; Paul's no little one, thus computes the time, There
shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days: Blessed is he that waits, and
comes to a thousand three hundred five and thirty: whereby taking 1000. rests
(the year of grace) 1625. calling unto this Jubilee year 1649. even Behold I
stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will
come in and sup with him, and he with me shall sit, etc. By your leave Sirs,
which bars any more kneeling at the Table not only, but from those words, The
daily taken away, shows the Lords Supper how that taken away, unto the
foorenoon translated: putting no difference between his and their own Suppers:
well presaging the evening of time how discerned: what looking for and
hastening, etc. would follovv it, Pet. 3.

Resting, My Lord, The humble Servant of your Excellence, ELEANOR.
January: 1648.
FINIS.

