THE Arraignment.

By the Lady Eleanor.

MARK 9. And he said unto them, verily I say unto you, that there be some of
them that stand here, which shall not taste of death till they see the Kingdom
of God come with power. Printed in the year, 1650.

MARK 9. And whosoever shall offend one of these little ONES that believe in
me, etc.
ANd so who should be greatest, or bear the sway; this Lesson appointed for the
present, occasioned upon that dispute: Also to whom it points about a Thing, of
no little weight doubtless, where declared, A millstone better hanged about his
neck, be he whosoever, standing no better on his guard, (the safeguard of no
few) on whose behavior or vigilance depends, to whose lot the Millstone falls as
follows, even the Military or Sword profession, their judgment here called to
hold up their hand at the Bar; behold as this seals it a free passage: Verse,
And if thy hand offend thee cut it off, it is better for thee to enter into
life maimed; likewise of the foot, Better to enter halt into life, etc. Where
by the natural Body, reports the case concerning the politic, to slight the
least or lowest degree, coming in his name how perilous.

So here anatomized whose Father discern I pray: Then lose a foot, suffered his
whole body to perish, who thought little of the third or term cut off so of his
days: By means of a festred Toe, a Corn, turned to a Gangren dyed, falling into
a violent Fever, that very Ignis non extinguitur, or VVilde-fire, his doughty
heart leaving it to his heir how paterizaring, of late far and near not unknown
misled or overmaster'd when put on his trial, what metel or salt in him: Better
much had been without assistants such hands, eyes, or feet, unless more command
over himself had, whether friends, wife or followers.

From the Omnipotent General, Lord of Hosts when as sent unto, dreading neither
sacred watch words these or Alarm: These thunderings vouchsafed not so much as
to see the party, the like unparaleld in Divine presidents or other, of such
greatness stood upon or manhood notwithstanding, Quisquis scandalizaverit unum
ex his, be he never so eminent, his doom in the bottom of the Sea better to
have taken up his quarters: To whom had some great thing been commanded, To
have departed his native soil, or half his goods have parted among the poor,
how much rather, but when to lend an ear required: Even cowardice in the
highest degree, or weakness, who keeps his distance with such, thereafter from
his presence excluded as far (as much to say) Write their Epitaph on the sand,
reward them with a cup filled double, a portion let them be for fishes, all as
deaf and mute like themselves, no burier, etc.

And for such Saints, so much suffices; as his name, THOMAS DYDIMOVS, etc. and
for them also whose voice the mountains obey, or Monarchs confined them to the
ocean, Trees no small ones plucks up by the roots, whose estate blessed when
hated and cursed, in poverty rich, their cottage Heaven.

Against whom, all their Enemies can allege, for silencing the Holy Ghost
thus; or to cloak their arrogance, is because, former times as it were barren
signs and token discontinued, therefore abolished, That may affirm as well, or
maintain Hell shall prevail against Heaven, as that ordinary spirits shall
unseal the Books of Prophets, or that other Book (so styled) Revel. 20. And I
saw another book opened, etc. to be explained ever by them, The word of the
Lord enduring for ever having spoken it, Isa. 40. Whatsoever is crooked, shall
be made strait, And the rough be made plain fields, the voice of deserts
accompanying it as those waste parts at this day, though depopulated, again to
be ploughed as in days of old; proclaiming the Spirit of Prophecy opposed,
though shall prevail, The first and the last, in the mean time that begets
these distractions to destroy themselves: The Bottomless Pit witness, as they
term it (or Abyss) even when heaven opened; the other its poisonous Fogs as
free ( Apoc. 9.) That Assemblies description. Latin habens nomen exterminans.

Where lastly, after that ample admonition (of health compared to Heaven, and
languishing sickness to Hell) by way of Terror, expressing the last general day
of judgment, at hand, with ambition how seasonable; as his WIVES looking back
to Sodom, verse. as here bidden, To have salt in themselves, the spirit
judgment, without which never expect to have other rest, or to be found in
peace at his coming, even to try the spirits, etc. each thing in its season,
salt the life being of all things, quintessence of the elements, both the good
spirit resembles and the bad, the best of all things and the worst, for the
dunghill not profitable, otherwise nothing so pure, to have a discerning spirit
the sum of all.

Where touching the perpetuity of the aforesaid fire and worm: The old
explaining the other; herewith to go forward a Lesson proper for the age: And
the men that have transgressed (Isaiah the last) for their worm shall not dye;
neither shall their fire be quenched; as much to say, the latter or last day
approached: No more dry bones henceforth, whose worm shall continue or remain
in them; as moreover, They shall be an abhorring to all flesh, (to wit) their
intolerable stink able to poison man and beast, etc. also of Calenders out of
date; but from new Moon to new Moon, from Sabbath to Sabbath, like weekly Bills
of mortality.

And so much for this Habeas Corpus, or moderating the severity of such places,
concerning their enlargement one word, where serves both for the grave and
hell, supposed to be without redemption, as from this place such another Abys,
saying, Descidite Maledicti, aluding to the different seasons, the life and
death of the creature, when the Sun enters into Aries, the reviving Spring, and
in Capricorn VVinters tedious nights Decembers, preparing fuel, etc. Mat. 25.
shadowed under the sheep on the one hand, the goats on the other, lest
surprised unawares as the old world by the deluge, to have oil in their lamps
all, etc. when some taken up in the air, changd, in a moment, after the
Trumpets loud alarm, others swallowed up by sea and land.

So again, for his showing afterward Every sacrifice shall be seasoned with
salt, bidden to have Salt and peace, etc. refers to another passage in the
Levitical Law, their Peace Offerings, The Priests laying his hand on the head
of the Oblation, as it were at the bar holds up his hand, in behalf of himself
and the people, under a gross cloud of ignorance, acknowledging guilty of that
creatures sufferings, shadowing forth what they liable unto.

Also for setting at large the full meaning of these, without needless Apology,
by way of what tedious objection might require, farther to show the depth and
plenitude of this place of Scripture, like the fiery pillars light side, and
dark toward others, even of its descending to Humane Sciences, Divinities
Handmayds: a word more from the VVhale to the Worm, from the Millstone to the
peble, nothing to be despised, as commodious and useful the the least as the
greatest, even so points to our everlasting arms, that of material salt, or
sulpherous Barrels of powder to be provided that way; also the endless worm to
have match in like readiness: And that fire unquenchable, the flint for
another, as before showed, supposing to quench the Spirit by way of retaliation,
our Capernaums alarm, or caveat enterd disesteemed other, themselves to be
abased as low next door to his doom, Good for that man had he been unborn, to
exalt themselves like those rebels, gainsaying CORE and his fifties rewarded.

And thus in his name, concluding by virtue of his all-sufficent Arm, that
fasted forty days, I charge thee thou deaf and dumb foul spirit, wherewith
possessed from his infancy, etc. thou melancholic spirit, come forth of him, and
enter no more into him.

Jubilee Lent.

FINIS.

