SAMSONS FALL, Presented to the HOUSE 1642.

Kings 13. And he gave a Sign at the same time, saying, This is the sign, That
the Lord has spoken.

London, Printed in the Year 1642.

Samsons Fall Unfolded To the House, from the Lady Eleanor.
Book of Judges 16.
SAMSON become as another Man, though of his unknown Might and great strength
stripped, in a moment dispossessed, who wonders or commiserates, unhappily cameby
intrusting others, dangerous security; otherwise as what fetters of Brass had
been of force him to bind? none whatsoever: So what occupation too base for
him, sometime though the worlds no little wonder, crowned with favors not a
few, violated his Vow or solemn Obligation: The Almighties Counsel disclosed to
his Adversary, overcome by a Woman's importunity, her enchanting notes, whereby
laid in a Trance; by whom forgotten or observed not, how reserved the Angel
would not disclose his Name so much, whose Birth foretold of, no more then
notice took of his Mothers charge, she wine none to touch, discoverer of
secrets, besides abused before through like Violence, by one of the same
uncircumcised Breed.

Such a blind thing Love, Told her all his heart, the whole matter; they
brought into thraldom such, that harbor it, (nothing that can contain) with a
look of whose brow able to silence, were they whosoever; at his feet all doing
homage.

Behold how degraded, had both his eyes thrust out, his teeth gnashing or
grinding, too made in the prison house to grind, a new dance showed, to the
Mils unaccustomed Music till swet his heart out, the restless stone his
exercise; presumes upon his loving her, or doting rather, as bray a Fool in a
mortar, etc. Prove. not by any Reins or Bit restrained, sent to school to the
Horse, the last mite till spent of his vital Spirits; able to guess whose own
counsel could keep so well, what from a woman might expect, she to be trusted
whilst a Sieve or Net retains water; besides where WAITERS such in her privy
Chamber, no news either, how easy by such familiars enticed: And what renewed
forces Samson stormed by, as aforeshewed, his darling Dahlab pressed and urged
him daily, in danger of shortning his days: Moreover told him, He loved her
not; (named her His Love it seems) because jested with her, the Lie takes at
her hands.

Whereby overmaster'd, no more plays fast and loose with his Mistress, The
Philistines upon him in earnest, took him away, no false alarm, feeble became
as another man, wist not what he had done, undreamt of, puts on the Brass
shakel his Garter, aforetime had mocked them, become their game and pastime,
brought himself to a fair pass, come to be led by a Lad; after twenty years
over them, lawless vow-makers to them made an open Example, till death pays his
Ransom, confined to the Dungeon-pit all his days.

And herewith hastening away the patience of your House, lest overcharged; where
the Moral to vulgar apprehensions visible, a story no stranger to blind
Alehouses, the bare walls not without it, of Samson the prisoner, a Prince,
sometime a Savior or Defender, etc. at his presence all making way; No feigned
Atlas strength, barred never so fast, that laid on his shoulder the City Gates
and appurtenance, as a birding piece went away with all: also new cords
sevenfold for failing, and green wythes as nothing plucked asunder; likewise
whose Maiden locks, like Sun beams extending, povvther'd with Angelical
odours, fastened to a VVeaversbeam, instantly like a lace rent therefrom;
portraying forth not only our British Union, fast knit and bound, soon
dissolved after; and Irish flourishing plantation, that in a night all undone,
as those Brittle Cords and wythes, etc. By wild Boars andravening wolves
rooted out, overrun. But how befell him whose heavy fate him also foreshewed in
these barren times of ours, as Samson his Birth, the Ang^l when appeared to the
Woman and Husband both (Cap. 13.) with the seventeenth Centuries Mystery, as
what Date bears, by the multiplied number of seven, (ver. 7.) ver. 13. needless
to be insisted on, a lamb where may wade, any shallow capacity dive or
conceive, Canaans road not balkt, proceeding line by line thus, (ver. 19.)
first how awakened, found his crown bare, despoiled of his treasure by a
desperate Executioners unlucky Razer, one ready at hand: Samson (by underminers
overreached) himself disarmed, the Spirit of the Lord departed from him, so
forsaken, that after that preceding bout with her, by whose ungracious venomous
hands woven that subtle web, taken of his locks Livery and Seizin.

When at once upon his effectual prayer, had their P A Y then, avenged for his
two eyes, of both disinherited together; described in that posture, stretching
forth both his hands took hold with all his Might, etc. at a blow, by the house
falling on those Philistines, Lords three thousand, so that at his Death, the
dead exceeded, ver. or were more then had perished in his life, or suffered;
Wives and Children partakers with them, before bare all the sway; at which
Festival spectators no few: other some on the Roof, supposing as at other times
should have made them sport, the house supported on Pillars, at once swept
away; whom his Brethren of his fathers house took up and buried: that of the
Powder design matching it the nearest, showing what Trust to be reposed in
Princes or Pillars either. And thus of Samson neither spared, brought to his
Trial, found guilty, Great Britains Lion rent in pieces, shadowed out in
Samsons exploits; so much for that, when Cashiered those Revellings, Dagons
house demolished; and for these where twice voted, And there was no King, etc.
every man did what was right in his own eyes, ver. evident as this
unquestionable, Whether ever before or since, in such a space of time, so many
at once perished, as of late have done.

Where these doings Recorded withal, till this Reformation the like deformity
unknown, conjured up again, as it were, (What lack ye?) though Sentenced down,
whose owners under Condemnation, here robbed of their hair, in the likeness of
unclean Spirits set on their Stalls; the Cap as ugly as ominous, saluted with
this Neck-verse, ver. 13. If thou weavest or platest seven locks of my head,
etc. Summoned to appear at the Sign of the Gallows, by Samsons breaking as it
were the Halter.

So from him The Lord of Sabbath, holding in his Right hand the Sign of the
seven stars, This Legacy toward your young men's feastings (thus armed at all
points) thus turned into fire and sword, not unuseful for Sea and Land-service,
the Ropes, wythes, and fetters for Ship-tackling, Brass pieces and Match, that
Goliath generation to withstand, blind Monarchy and uncircumcised Priesthood,
the vail not taken off their hearts.; finished this of no common consequence
(the whole worlds Map or Survey) whereby prefigured his coming at hand, the Son
of the Most High, a greater then Samson, first a Sign given to the ungrateful
Jew, and then to the Gentile, a prototype of the Word of God; Also who as
though risen again or revived, after made their Music and Game, whose strength
again came to him, upon his solemn prayer (as that) Father, glorify me, etc.
(Ioh. 17.) also when convinced 3000 in one day, Men and Brethren, what shall we
do? pricked at the heart, etc. with Adams fall inclusive, hearkened to her proect
Eves (Heb. Chavah) for which as the man cast out: so for whose degenerate
progeny utter darkness reserved.

To the most Honorable, The High Court of Parliament assembled.
My Lords,
AS there is a Time for every thing under the Sun, and if ever for being abrupt
and brief in, it is NOW, when Time thus precious with your Lordships; So under
the Sun since there is nothing but a supernatural course to be taken, touching
the Cure of such unnatural conditioned Times: The Almighty his Word the only
Balm and Sovereign Remedy when ye have tried all: If any therefore do amiss and
miscarry Sealed with the Lord Brooks blood, immediately after slain about
Candlemas, 1642.
of you, blame your selves none but the Parliament: For I shall of no little
Burden discharge my self here, who can but say and tell you: a receipt I have
of such rare operation and virtue given me, that within few days it shall bring
him again to Himself, I mean the KING, after absent so long from his
Parliament; whose Character if ye please to observe, this is his:

He that no Chains could bind him, Mark Evangelist the 5.) That had been often
bound with fetters and Chains Which beside his unfaithfulness, includes his
imprisonment, and what ensues, as appears, who besought not tormented to be
before his time, as though the time had been foretold him.
plucked assunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces; neither could by any
man be tamed; as much to say, neither Oath, nor word, or Promise availing, or
any Reason of force to persuade with him, as the Holy Ghosts speaking plain; by
that adjuring in Gods Name, and by asking his name too, saying, LEGION, for
they were many, who spoke not with the least: Nevertheless, his great words not
more fierce then fearful of the Lords presence; This man wounding himself thus,
bidden, Go home to his Who went to the Scots, as not marvelled at a little.
friends.

And thus have made tender unto your Lordships of my service, whether or no ye
accept thereof, for to bring his Majesty to you, sitting as before time
clothed, etc. and doing withal what ye shall ask or desire.

As for the Cavaliers, what they shall do all of them, even crave a Pass hereby
to take Shipping for the Low Countries and Germany, to be gone away; the Boors
will entertain them willingly: St. Matthew. 8. gives notice of two, so exceeding
fierce that none might pass by that way; to wit, that Dutch Duke and his
Brother, Though had six months liberty to stay yet upon pain of death were
commanded to depart within ten days.
those possessed Princes, to return also without delay Home again, beyond Sea.

1642. The 3. of January. In which fatal month of January, both the Archbishop
and late King were executed afterward.
Waiting on your Lordships Commands ELEANOR.

The Holy Ghosts New-Years-Gift.
FINIS.

