For the Right Noble, Sir Balthazer Gerbier KNIGHT: From the Lady Eleanor.

Isa. 30.9, 10. This is a rebellious people, lying children, that will not hear
the Law of the Lord.

Which say to the Seers, See not; and to the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us
right things: speak unto us smooth things, prophecy deceits.

Printed in the Year 1649.

For the Right Noble, Sir Balthazer Gerbier Knight: From the Lady Eleanor.
SIr, Having Intelligence of your Academy near the City, in imitation of
Paradise, wherein of Rarities such variety; and not at all doubting, but for
his Throne there you have reserved a place, to whom we owe all our utmost
service: By your admittance, shall for an addition to those requisite Sciences
specified in print by you, present the happy place with the Book of Life, Cum
Privilegio, Blessed that reads, and they that hear the words, etc. The light
shining in darkness, and the darkness not comprehending it, the word of life;
to us testifying, If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
we lie, etc. ( Joh. 1.) or if gainsay what he affirms, we make him a liar
likewise: who although the prophet Joel on this wise, afterward I will pour out
my Spirit upon all flesh, Menservants and Maidservants, prophesying in those
days before the terrible day of the Lord come: And our Lord himself, Behold, I
am with you all days, until the consummation of the age; his last words or
farewell: Notwithstanding by them of this gross age, as if any thing too hard
for him, taught as an Article of our Creed, setting up their pillars, beyond
the Apostles days that the Spirit not transmitted extraordinary, because of
prophecy ceased, therefore extinguished, likewise of Miracles, that when those
twain, the witnesses which we expect ( Rev. xi. shall have power such, we may
fulfill the prophets, as did they, Crucifying the Prince of Life; which great
City called Spiritual Sodom and Egypt, such sinfulness for, and hardness of
heart, the Gentiles departing from the faith as declares; so cannot be the
Romish Church impeached, but only they to whom the holy Ghost sent, most like
first to visit his own, resisting true tokens and signs: the very unpardonable
trespass, to which our Church in a nearer relation, holding in his appointed
time for him any thing too difficult; in danger with those vipers, of breathing
out like vapors, confined to that Pit or Abyss, Rev. 9. those heavenly lights
obscuring with Fogs the third part of them; the Sin against the third person,
that bids of it beware: with that loud voice from the Isle of Patmos, He that
has an ear, hear what the Spirit says, etc. whilst Great Britain as though
asleep, had a pass or dispensation not concerned in any such Alarms, made their
pastime as Bedlam for entertaining the Holy Ghost, by this City, etc. such an
offense, The Word of life, the leaves whereof expels the old Serpents poison,
darkness for unchangeable light exchanges, confutes ignorance, abates lust, and
the like; like Pearls cast before Swine, etc. Such Grapes and Figs, our Thorn,
the Rose and Thistle affords; forewarnd though, Judge not, that ye be not
judged (Matthew the 7.) for Lex talionis, and what Distraction and Division of
late amongst them, that think to silence, those Cloven Tongues to quench them;
when as for prevention of which, that Allegory Supper ( Luke 14.) A certain man
made a great supper, bad many, sent out a servant at supper time; with
sleeveless excuses set light by, prophetical admonitions, so grown out of date:
whereas in truth the letter but dead, observed only in a History way, without
the Mystery going therewith understood; company none craves of his, saying,
Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in and sup with him, etc. faring thereafter: witness that
Summons issued forth, saying, Write, Blessed are they called to the Lambs
supper (Rev. 19.) expressly said to be The Spirit of Prophecy (ver. 10.) The
witness of Jesus; for contempt of which, the fowls that know their time, they
mustered, called to the supper of the great God, those birds of prey, to eat
the flesh of Kings, the flesh of Captains, and horse flesh, of small and great,
without respect of persons in that carnal estate worse then theirs lying to the
holy ghost Acts, etc. or his folly, he that offered to buy it with money of the
apostles, thus to belie and outface this, shed out again so impossible held,
professed not a man of them should so much as taste thereof, the
excommunication of the Clergies profession foreshewed, Author of all our evils.

And for this here showed, so much, such indignity offered to the holy Spirits
feast, vouchsafing to sup with us; toward which craving from your self Sir this
favor only, the table to take order may be furnished with fine linen and clean,
styled, The righteousness of Sa nts, the judgment of those Students with you;
upon this question, touching prophecy, supposed out of request, Whether
higher disobedience in the one, to credit feigned miracles, or not to believe
true ones? Also when made death to touch the forbidden, and others rejecting
these, The Spirit and the Bride saying, Come; and Whosoever will, take of the
water of life freely; which of them deserving the Name of a Church, or excluded
rather to be out of Paradise.

August, 1649.
FINIS.

