I Appoint Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, to Print this Information,
According to the Order of the HOUSE of COMMONS; And that no other Person
presume to Print the same. November. 10th. 1680.

Wi WILLIAMS, Speaker.

THE INFORMATION OF THOMAS DANGERFIELD GENT.
About the Months of September or October 1679.
WHen Mrs. Cellier and my self waited on the Lord Peterborough, to be
Introduced to his Highness the Duke of York, his Lordship enquired of me, If
the Lady Powis had given meany directions how to Discourse the Duke? I replied,
She had. Then he desired to know what they were. Upon which I showed his
Lordship a little Book; in which was contained a Scheme, and the pretended
Discovery which I had made in the Presbyterian Plot. Which Book his Lordship
carefully perused, and finding some omission therein, he ordered me to Write,
while his Lordship did Dictate to me these words, viz. That the Presbyterian
Party intended to make an Insurrection in the North, and so to join with an
Army of the Scots. Immediately after this his Lordship took us into the Dukes
Closet (at Whitehall) where we both kissed his hand: and me he took from the
ground (for I was kneeling.) Then I gave his Highness the aforementioned little
Book, which he, after some short perusal thereof* thanked me for: and also for
my diligence in the Catholic Cause: Did advise me to go on, and wished good
success to all my Undertakings: Adding in these very words, viz. That the
Presbyterian Plot was a thing of most mighty consequence, and if well managed,
would be very Conducible to the Safety of the Catholic Cause: and I do not
question but the Effects of it will answer our Expectation, especially in the
Northern parts: where I am well assured the Major Part of the Gentry are my
Friends, and have given sufficient Demonstration of their affections to me, as
also of their intentions to prosecute this Presbyterian Plot to the utmost; for
they are no Strangers to the Design.

Immediately after this his Highness ordered that Mrs. Cellier and my self (in
the hearing of the Lord Peterborough, who was privy to the whole Discourse) to
be very careful of what we Communicated to the persons who were to be the
Witnesses in that new Plot, lest we should be caught in the Subornation, and so
bring a terrible Odium upon the Catholics, and make our selves incapable of
any further Service. After this the Duke informed us, That in a Month or two's
time the Commissions would be ready: but ordered us in the mean time to bring
our part to bear with the Commissions: and particularly ordered me to find out
some persons (as there was enough such among the Catholics, as well as
elsewhere) which were fit to be Trusted, and that should accept of such
Commissions, which should be delivered them by a person appointed for that
purpose, but not to be known to them to be any other but a Presbyterian: So
that when occasion should require, they might, together with those which we
then had, be ready to swear in the Plot, and that the Presbyterians were
raising Forces against the King and Government, and had given our Commissions
to that purpose. And in order to this, I did in some short time after, procure
one Bedford, Curtice, Gray, Hill, Hopkins, and others, to accept of such
Commissions, when they should be ready: whose business in the mean time was, to
spread reports in the Coffee-houses, That the Popish Plot was a Contrivance of
the Presbyterians, etc.

Now for our encouragement in the prosecution of that Sham-Plot, the Duke
promised that he would take care that Money should not be wanting: but ordered
us to use all the expedition the thing would allow, to make a Discovery thereof
to the King. After which the Duke said, The Catholic Party would be eased of
the Charge, in regard he was sure it would be defrayed some other way.

Then the Duke made diverse Vows, and bitter Execrations, to stand by us in the
thing: and engaged on his Honor to be our Rewarder. Adding, That such
Considerable Services were not to be slighted: and further promised, that to
whose lot soever it should happen to be imprisoned, according to their fidelity
and stedfastness in the Cause, so much the more should their Reward be
augmented: and that all care possible should be used to support and preserve
them: but particularly desiring me to keep up to the courageous and active
Character which his Highness had heard of me. All which I promised to do.
Whereupon we withdrew to the Lord Peterboroughs Lodging, where we continued
till his Lordship had Introduced Sir Robert Peyton to the Duke. Which being
done, his Lordship left them together, as he said, and came to us: where among
other Discourse his Lordship told me; I had a great opportunity to make my
Fortune what I would my self, if I would but follow the advice of his Master
the Duke of York, who, as his Lordship said, would certainly be my King in a
very short time. Adding, that I must be resolute in my undertakings: For, said
he, the Duke much affects Resolution, but hates mortally the timorous man.

Then I answered his Lordship, That I valued not my Life, provided, to lose it
would be serviceable to the Duke's Interest. At which Expression he seemed
fully satisfied; and from that time called me Captain Willoughby: and at our
coming away, his Lordship gave particular order to his Servants, That at what
time soever, day, or night, either Mrs. Cellier, or my self, should come to
speak with his Lordship, we should be forthwith admitted. And then we parted.

Some short time after, I went to wait on his Lordship from the Lady Powis, at
midnight, to desire him to move the Duke, to get me with all expedition to the
King: for then I was ready.

About four days after this, his Lordship sent for me, and took me to the Duke
again (who was in his Closet at Whitehall) and the Duke told me, I must prepare
my self to wait on the King, to give His Majesty a more particular Account of
the Presbyterian Plot than what the little Book made mention of, (which Book,
the Duke said, he had given to the King) and that he had so ordered the matter,
that I should be furnished with Money, to enable me in the Prosecution thereof.
But his Highness charged me to consider well my Story, before I waited on the
King.

Then the Duke told me, I had gained, by my Diligence, a good Reputation among
the Catholics, and that I should highly merit by my Services to that Cause:
adding, That I should in a short time see the Catholic Religion flourish in
these Kingdoms; and Heresy torn up by the roots: And that he had heard of the
Proposal which had been made me by the Lords, Powis, and Arundel, about Taking
off the King, and of my refusal; as also of what I had accepted, touching my
Lord Shaftsbury, and of all my Transactions in the Presbyterian Plot: saying in
these very words, viz. If you value the Religion you profess, my Interest, (as
you say you do) and your own future Happiness, take my Advice, and depend upon
my Honor and Interest for your Advancement: For, Sir, you look like a Man of
Courage and Wit: therefore less Discourse may serve with you than another: So
that if you will but move by the Measures which I will give you, you shall not
only escape with safety, but be rewarded according to the greatness of your
Actions.

To all this I replied, I would stand and fall in the Defense of the Roman
Catholic Religion, and his Highness Service; and was not a little concerned
for my refusing to kill the King, whom I was then well satisfied by my Ghostly
Father, stood condemned as an Heretic. But this I did offer, That if his
Highness would Command me to the Attempt, I would not fail either to accomplish
it, or lose my Life.

Upon which the Duke gave me Twenty Guineys, and said, If I would be but
vigorous in what I had undertaken already, he would so order it, that my Life
should not be in the least danger: adding in these words, viz. We are not to
have Men taken in such daring Actions, but to have them make an effectual
Dispatch, and be gone, Upon which I took my leave.

Some short time after this, when I was ready to convey the Letters into
Colonel Mansel's Chamber, I went to the Lord Peterborough, who brought me to
the Duke, to whom I told, how I was ready to fix the Letters in the Colonel's
Chamber. To which his Highness answered, I must make haste, that I might be
Empowered to make a general Search of the like nature. For, said the Duke in
these words, viz. Since I saw you last, the Lady Powis has informed me, That
there are abundance of Letters and Witnesses ready: so that it is now high time
to begin. By this time there was some great Man come to wait on the Duke, so I
withdrew.

About four days after this; when I had been pressing earnestly with Mr.
Secretary Coventry, for a Warrant, and could not prevail, I went to the Lord
Peterborough's, and did desire his Lordship to make application to the Duke, to
use some means for a Warrant. To which his Lordship answered, 'Twas my fault
there was not a Warrant granted, and that the Duke was sensible of my
neglecting to make an Affidavit. So that now he did begin to doubt my Courage.

Thomas Dangerfield.

In and about the Months of June, July or August 1679,
THe Countess of Powis sent me with a Letter to the Lord Privy Seal, who was
then at his Lordships house in Kensington: but the Contents of the Letter I
remember not, more than that it was to pray some favor in the behalf of one
Anderson alias Munson, a Priest, and then in the Kings Bench, and was reported
to know something of the Plot. Which Papers contained matter of Fact, drawn up
to render Strouds Testimony invalid, in case he should make any Discovery. And
by my Ladies order I was to pray his Lordship to take the Papers: so that if
Stroud should be sent for on Examination before the Council, that his Lordship
would produce them to stop his Evidence: Which his Lordship promised to do. But
Stroud was not sent for, and so the Papers were of no use: but I suppose they
may still remain with his Lordship.

At the same time I did, by Order from the Lady Powis, inform his Lordship,
That the Presbyterian Plot would be ready for Discovery in a Months time. To
which his Lordship answered, that I should tell the Lady Powis, He was of
opinion that a Month would be too soon, in regard things then moved with too
much violence, for such an Affair to have any Success. So I took my leave.

Some short time after I went, by the Lord Powis's Order, with another Letter
to his Lorship; the Contents of which I never knew: But was ordered to acquaint
his Lordship, That the Presbyterian Plot still went on, and that we had diverse
Letters and Witnesses ready, to lay open the matter, when it should be thought
fit. To which his Lordship answered, He feared the Lords in the Tower were too
vigorous in that Design: but promised, when the rigorous Prosecution against
the Catholics were somewhat abated, he did intend to move it to the King and
Council. Adding, That if things of that nature were but well timed, they could
not fail of Success. So I took my leave.

Some time after, Mistress Cellier and my self went to wait on his Lordship at
Kensington; where we both had admittance. Then 'twas Mistress Cellier, in my
hearing, informed his Lordship, That the came in the name of her Great Master
(the Duke of York) and at the most earnest request of the Lords in the Tower,
to pray his Lordship to use some means, that the Proceedings against the
Catholics might be more easy, and that the Presbyterian Plot might be
discovered. Then his Lordship desired her to let the Lords in the Tower know,
that he was not idle in the Considering their Safety: For, added his Lordship,
in these words, I have my self discoursed lately with all the great Ministers
of our party, and my Lord Peterborough has done the same, and we both find
there is favor intended: but we must wait the time: For things of that nature
must be moved gently, or the whole Royal Party may be destroyed at once, for
there are many eyes upon us.

Then Mistress Cellier informed his Lordship, That Sir George Wakemans Trial
had broken the Ice, and of the great difficulty there was in prevailing with
the Lord C. J. to come over: and also of the Meeting that was between the Lady
Powis and the Lord C. J. To which his Lordship replied, That the Lord C. J. had
taken more time to Consider of his part, than Five other far greater men had
done (who they were I know not) and that his Lordship was forced to show the
Lord C. J. the Duke of Yorks Letter, before he would believe any thing. Nay,
said his Lorship, notwithstanding this I was forced to get a particular Letter
sent him from the Duke, before he would make any promise. Truly, Madam, said
his Lordship, it is no small pains I take to serve the Duke, and their
Lordships, and that you may assure them.

Then Mistress Cellier acquainted his Lordship, That Dugdale was come about,
and intended to throw himself at the Dukes feet, with a Recantation of all that
he had sworn in the Plot. And, said she, I am, in the name of the Lords, to
pray your Lordship he may be secured in your house, as being a place more
proper than any other. To this his Lordship answered, He was glad to hear of
Mr. Dugdale's ingenuity in that Affair, and did assure Mrs. Cellier, that
Dugdale should be entertained in his Housse, and that his Lordship's Priest
should be his Companion: so that it should be impossible for him to do any more
mischief. But his Lordship desired she would tell the Lords, They must use all
the means imaginable to get him sent beyond Sea, lest a too strict Enquiry
should be made after him. To which Mrs. Cellier replied thus; My Lord, we do
not intend he shall stay in your Lordship's House above Nine or Ten days: for
though he must do us Service by a general Recantation, yet we can never think
him safe, till we have got him into the Inquisition: for such persons are to be
encouraged, not trusted. So upon this his Lordship sent a Compliment to the
Lords in the Tower, and so we came away.

Thomas Dangerfield.
Jurat vicesimo die Octobris, 1680.
Coram nobis Will. Roberts. Will. Pulteney.



