A Door of Hope: OR, A CALL and DECLARATION for the gathering together of the
first ripe Fruits unto the STANDARD of our Lord, KING JESUS.
WE must begin with this Song, Great and mavelous are thy Works, Lord God
Almighty, just and true are thy ways thou King of Saints, Rev. 15. And if he
will breath in us the Life and Wisdom of his own holy Spirit, we will call to
mind and Rehearse the Righteous Acts of the Lord, who has been doing by mean
and despicable Instruments, a great and good work, full of wonder and
astonishment, of late years in these utmost Isles of the world, (according to
the Prophesies of the Scriptures) in order to the introducing the best
Interest, which is the desire of all Nations, namely the Exaltation of the
Throne and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ among us. And this beginning of
Reformation, and the honest Party engaged in this Quarrel, (however by far the
less number) God did abundantly own, and witness too from heaven, by opening
his Salvation, and making bare his own Arm, against the late King, who was
justly cut off as a Murderer, (see Decl. of Parl. 11. Feb. 1647.) Tyrant, and
Traitor, insomuch that Germany was not without a witness (that Learned and
Judicious Author of Clavis Apocalyptica) to the Righteousness of that
Sentence, who concludes by virtue of that clear Text, Rev. 16. 5, 7. Lord, thou
art Righteous, because thou have Judged thus, P 100.

Novertheless, God has now taken away all our bancks, and permitted this old
Enemy, to come in upon us as a flood, Isa. 59. 19. And now C. S. the Son of
that Murderer is Proclaimed King of England, whose Throne of Iniquity is built
on the Blood of precious Saints, and Martyrs, and on the Blood of all our
Brethren in the late Wars: In whom is continued from Nimrod their first Head
and Original, the succession of the same cursed Seed, and Serpentine
Offspring, which by a continued Series runs through the Veins of the Assyrian,
Persian, Grecian, and Roman Monarchies. So that now this common Enemy (the seed
of Ham) is risen up in the spirit of that Murderer Cain, in the spirit of
Esau, Pharaoh, Amaleck, Nebuchadnezzar, Haman; in the spirit of Herod, and of
the old Heathen Roman Persecutors, such as Dioclesian, (against whom the Blood
of the butchered and martyred Saints cried under the fifth Seal) at the
beginning of whose ten years most cruel savage Persecution, (as M. Mede has
observed) within thirty days about 17000. are reported to have been butchered:
In Egypt alone (how small a part of the Empire of Rome?) there were butchered
144000. men; and all the world almost was stained with the precious blood of
the Martyrs; in the spirit of the monstrous, cruel, unparalled Beast, Rev.
13. who has all the cursed properties of a Leopard for fierceness, the feet of
a Bear, to catch and hold, and the mouth of a Lion to tear and devour; in the
spirit of that Scarlet filthy Whore, Rev. 17. the Mother of Harlots, (the
Whorish Churches) who is drunk with the blood of Saints, and in her is found
the blood of Prophets and Martyrs, and all that has been slain on the Earth; we
say they are now Risen up in this spirit, against the Lord, against his Christ,
and People. This is the spirit that put to death our Lord Jesus Christ, and
that murdered all the Martyrs.

But when we seriously weigh with our selves the great and good designs God
has in this strange Providence, whereat most are confounded; to punish and
spue out of his mouth a Lukewarm People, who had not a thorough spirit for the
Work; to try the Faith and Patience of his own People as pure Gold, to conform
them to their Head, to Redeem and Separate them from all the rest by choice
distinguishing Characters, as Gold from more impure Metal, as Gideons three
hundred from the thousands, to this great Work of following the Lamb: To fulfill
the Word of God, and the Prophecies of these last days, among which those
three in that blessed Book of the Revelations, [chap. 11. 10 11, 12, 13. chap.
18, 7, 8. and chap. 17. 17.] are not the least. And to get himself a great
Name, which will be more glorious by much then that of Egypt, Jer. 23. 7, 8.
For as he raised up Pharaoh, so has he them, to show his Power in them, and
that his Name may be declared throughout all the Earth, Romans 9 17. They are
brought as Foxes into the Snare, and as Birds into the Net. We say when we
consider these things, we are so far from being dejected, that we cannot
restrain from singing and praise, knowing that this will make much for Gods
Honor, our good, and this Works advantage, and they shall not be able to touch
one hair of our head; nay, we were very much confirmed in our hopes of the
sudden appearance of this Work, by the coming in of their poor wretched King,
at whom (as the Daughter of Zion did at that great boasting Assyrian) we laugh,
and have them in derision.

And when we consider the great opinions of this year, the wonderful effects
it is like to produce, the sweet harmony and agreement of the Prophecies, the
visibility of those things therein foretold to fall in the time of the
Witnesses death, the great likelihood of the Witnesses Resurrection, the great
New Covenant-Promise of the spirit made to this Work, the wonderful undeniable
signs of the times, and how miraculously we have been cut out, and preserved
for this Work, of which we shall speak in a brief Treatise by it self: And also
having our hearts broken with the Love of Christ, and boiling over, and having
tasted through choice distinguishing grace, the Preciousness, Power and Love of
a soul-endearing Jesus; we are mightily awakend and stirred up, and that Fire
that has been hid under our Ashes will break out into Flames, and that Fountain
of the Rivers of Living Waters into Streams, as the bubbling Springs that
searches the ground, and finding entrance gusheth out. Our Lives, and every
thing else that is dear unto us upon a worldly account, we despise as a mean
thing in comparison of the glory of that Name, which is to us as precious
Ointment, and we lay all down at the feet of our Lord Jesus, resolving if we
perish to perish there.

And first, we desire to lay our selves in the dust, to have soul-abasing
thoughts of our selves, (for such is the nature and fruits both of the Grace
and teachings of Christ) and freely to admire what we have freely received,
that his preserving Grace has kept us from the defilements, soul-destroying
Iniquities, and heart-entraping snares of these perilous times, the cheats and
delusions of Satan, sin, the world, and an evil heart; that we have not
worshipped the Beast, Rev. 13. 8. defiled our Garments, and gone a whoring
after strange Interests; of which we may say as Solomon of the strange woman,
Many strong men have been slain by her, Prove. 7. 26. And we may encourage the
persevering Remnant, in the words of Moses, Your eyes have seen what the Lord
did because of Baal-Peor; for all the men that followed Baal-Peor, the Lord thy
God has destroyed them from among you: but ye that did cleave unto the Lord
your God, are alive every one of you this day, Deuteronomy. 4. 3, 3. Here is the faith
and patience of the Saints.

And indeed, we cannot but admire the grace of God, and to his praise we would
speak it; that we were preserved from the wicked Apostasy of O. C. against
which we spared not to contend to the loss of our Liberties, and to the hazard
of our Lives: the which we cannot but look on, as the door and inlet to all
this that is now come upon us, Psalm. 81. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And all those
unfaithful servants that complied with him, and his Interest, and continued in
a sinful perseverance, as highly guilty of betraying the Righteous Interest,
and Cause of Christ, and the Liberties of all the Saints; of sin against God,
and the work of their Generation: whereby they have made themselves unmeet for
any place of Power and Trust, and others must take their Crown; neither will
they any more find acceptance with the Lord, or his People, but upon unfeigned
Repentance, which they may best testify, by making themselves nothing, that
Christ may be all, and serving him in the lowest and meanest capacity. For
those that Christ will delight to honor in this work, are Virgins, Rev. 14.
who never were espoused or married to a worldly, or defiling Interest: and
except our names be found in those blessed, distinguishing Characters, as in
the Kings muster Roll, we shall never follow the Lamb with another spirit, as
Josbua and Caleb did. We conclude with David, instead of thy Fathers, shall be
thy Children (a second Generation) whom thou may make Princes in all the
Earth, Psalm. 45. 16.

We therefore freely, of a ready mind, and with a most cheerful heart
(accounting it an honor too great for us, poor worms, who are the meanest of
men, the greatest of sinners, and the least of Saints, to gird on a Sword for
Christ.) Give up our Lives and Estates unto our Lord King Jesus, and to his
People, to become Soldiers in the Lambs Army, abhorring Mercenary Principles,
and Interests. And for this works sake we desire not to love our lives unto the
death, neither will we ever (if we may speak so great a word with reverence in
the fear of God) sheath our Swords again, until Mount Zion become the joy of
the whole Earth, a Mountain of holiness and a habitation of justice, until
Rome be in Ashes, and Babylon become a hissing and a curse, the border of
wickedness, and the People against whom the Lord has indignation for ever,
there being left unto her neither Name, nor Remnant, Son, nor Nephew. For that
we are not purposed, when the Lord shall have driven forth our Enemies here, in
these Nations, and when we shall in a holy Triumph, have led our Captivity
Captive, to sit down under our Vines and Figg-trees, but to go on to France,
Spain, Germany, and Rome, to destroy the Beast and Whore, to burn her flesh
with Fire, to throw her down with violence as a Millstone into the Sea, that she
may be found no more at all, Rev. 18. 21. Jer. 51. 35. to bring not only
these, but all the Nations to the subjection of Christ, that the Kingdom may
be the Lords, and to perfect the deliverance of all the Saints, the Remnant of
the Waldenses, and all the Children of the Freewoman, who are yet groaning and
crying under the Tyranny and Persecutions of Antichrist, and to avenge the
blood of all the Martyrs, which we earnestly remember, and which is an especial
motive unto us, the cry of which is very loud in our ears, and much more in the
ears of God, unto whom vengeance belangeth And this is much more then a
National Quarrel, that which is the Test now, being the Interest of Christ the
blood of the Butchered, Murdered, Martyred, and Massacred Saints, the interest
of the good People, the Liberties of all men, and the undoing of all the sinful
oppressions and yoaks of the whole Creation.

The Controversy now therefore lies between Zion and Babylon, Christ and
Antichrist; and therefore we assert, That it is lawful for the true spiritual
Seed, the legitimate Heirs of the promises and the World, Romans 4. 13. To RISE
UP against the carnal, serpentine, accursed seed, who are the destroyers of the
Earth, Rev. 11. 18. To possess the GATE of their Enemies, to bind their Kings
in Chains, and their Nobles in Fetters of Iron. And we being called of God, and
cut out without hands, or humane contrivement, in whom is shown forth his
Power; RISE UP on Gods behalf (free from the guilt of the breach of Oaths and
Covenants upon our Consciences) to conflict with this profane persecuting
Spirit of the Dragon, and the Worshippers of the Beast that dwell on the Earth.
And we Call all that have a life to lay down for their King and Savior, to
come forth against them with the Sword, and execute upon them the Judgments
written. Are you a poor despised Remnant? why, God has formed you for himself:
As Christ was a tender Plant, and a Root out of dry ground; so may his Kingdom
arise out of a poor, obscure, illitterate, and (such as the world calls)
Fanatic People. And out of them shall come forth the Corner, the Nail, and the
Battel-bow; we look for a righteous spiritual Magistracy out of the new sharp
threshing Instrument.

And to the end we may not lay a stumbling block to shut out any (for this good
and wholesome Principle of Christ's Government is so large, that it involves
every honest Interest, and this bottom can only secure our Cause as we could
prove, but that we write not in an argumentary way) who are against the same
abominations and enormities that we are, own at least the negative part of our
Cause, and in the main are substantially and really for the same good things
with us: we also declare, that whosoever has a heart to appear for God, for his
Christ, for Reformation, Justice, and Righteousness, for the Cause of Truth,
and for the good People of these Nations, under so much reproach and
sufferings, whose Lives, Estates, Liberties, and Posterities are ready to be
made a Prey by the cruellest and worst of men (who in the Properties of their
natures are beasts) against Popery, Prelacy, Common Prayer, Organs,
Superstitions, false, profane forms of Worship, Idolatrous, Ceremonial,
Typical, Antichristian shadows and vanities, such as is Sirplices, Lawn
Sleeves, Hoods, Tippets, and such whorish trash and Trinkery, Altars, Bowing,
Kneeling, and Worshipping a piece of Wood and Bread, and a Wax Candle (a filthy
base Idol) for the true God; against Idolatrous Pictures and Images (the seeds
of Superstition and Ignorance) we say, whosoever has a heart to rise up for God
against the Pope, his Bishops, and Hierarchy, and against these Cavaliers,
whose wickedness it is not fit to name, who have already polluted the Land as
venomous and unclean Creatures; here is a call and opportunity for them.

And because we do not lay down things in the common road, but go a step above
depraved reason, and common understanding, in representing things under the
notion of the Kingdom of Christ, some may be ready simply and ignorantly, and
others wilfully, to mistake, and misapprehend us; some to malicious ends, not
knowing what we mean by the Kingdom of Christ, as if some strange thing
contrary to the sound hope of the Gospel, and Doctrine of the true Primitive
Church, and not in Scripture and reason, were intended, as that Christ should
immediately appear to head an Army. We shall therefore throw that stone out of
your way by Declaring, that by the Kingdom of Christ, or that part of it under
the Kingdom of the Stone, which respects the Government of a well ordered
Commonwealth, we mean, That we should have the best of men, of sound
Principles, of known integrity, haters of Bribes and Covetousness, lovers of
Mercy and Justice, that without Fees, and tedious vexatious delays, should
give you Justice, for our Magistrates and Governors: that we might have the
word of God for our rule, and that judgment might proceed in all cases
according to that wholesome Law, which not only God himself, the great
Lawgiver, but experience, and sound reason does approve the most excellent,
Deuteronomy. 4. 6, 7, 8. That distributive justice might be equally administered
between man and man, without respect to poor or rich, free or bond; for a
Magistrate ought to know no man upon the Bench, but respect Justice, Truth, and
Mercy: That judgment and righteousness might flow down our streets as mighty
streams: That violence and oppression might be heard no more in our Land: That
the widows heart might sing for joy, and the mournful complaints of widows and
fatherless might be turned into songs, and their tears into joy: that all
abuses and oppressions in the cases of Creditors and Debtors might be duly
reformed, with respect to Justice and Mercy: That a constant incorrupted course
of Justice might freely run down to all: that theft might not be punished with
death; but that restitution be made according to the Law, and the Malefactor
sold, or made to work out his redemption in some house of Correction, which in
few years would make us fewer Thieves then a thousand Gallowses; but that
man-stealers be punished with death: That all the poor of the Land might be set
to work, and we might have no beggars: That a due regulation be made with
respect to the Natives, in the Manufacture and Trade of the Commonwealth: That
there be no transporting of Leather unwrought, Fullers Earth, or other
Commodities that may spoil the Manufacture of the Land, and impoverish the poor
Tradesman: That Timber be preserved and increased: And whatsoever can be named
of a common or public good, we mean by the Kingdom of Christ, in the
Government of the Commonwealth, and every good thing will be the fruit of it,
the which we cannot have without it, no more then men sow Fetches and reap
Wheat. And then also will our Land yield her increase, and our fruits will not
be blasted, or hurt by wet or dry seasons, Psalm. 67. 6.

And that our brethren and friends may want no motive to incite them to such an
honorable work, of so great concernment, to common and public good; let us
lay to heart the loud crying abominations, and wickedness that every where
abounds in the Land, the open profaneness that rages in our streets, their
hellish blasphemy, drinking healths to the confusion of Zion, and her King
(daring the most high to his face) and if he be her King, let him come and save
her, their persecuting rage, which has extended to persons in their Families
and Callings, to others in their Meetings to worship God, and others to the
extreme perils of their Lives, such is the iniquity of this day, and the
implacable, biting, serpentine enmity, and rage of this Enemy, who is so both
in Principle and Interest: we see what Interest it is that flourishes, what Sun
it is that shines by its influence and effects in fostering and giving life to
cursed Popish and destructive Interests; we see the clusters of their Vine, the
fruits of their Government in all the Land; how has the greatest sins,
Swearing, Drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking, Whoredom, Pride, Laciviousness,
Stage Plays, Blasphemy, Popery, Susterstition, Idolatry been propagated and
countenanced since their coming in, as a new life given to the slain Serpent.
Do we not also consider the Diametrical opposition they stand in to King Jesus;
that the K. is a professed Enemy, a Rebel and Traitor to Christ. And if the sense
of the said sufferings and reproach of the precious Name of our dear Lord, and
the considerations of the right he has by the Oath, Covenant, and Decree of the
Father, and the Purchase of his own Heart Blood, to the Kingdom, the expiring
date of Worldly Powers, this price that is put into our hands to obtain all the
good things we have already, or shall declare for, the sufferings and
Imprisonment of our Friends, will not provoke and awaken us, yet surely the
sense of our own dangers will touch us: shall we sit still, and have our
throats cut, or dye like Fools, as Abner did? Or shall we quietly give up our
Necks to the Yoke, and suffer the Common Prayer, Organs, etc. to be imposed on
us? Is Israel a home-born Slave, that we should bore the ears of our souls and
bodies to their Posts? What can we expect from them, if we will not take their
wicked Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, the which we cannot do though we
should dye; because they are against both the Priestly and Kingly Offices of
our Lord Jesus? Are not these already pressed and enforced in the Countries?
And are not some already in Prison? For every Malignant according to his temper
and pleasure may make use of his power or strength against us, under the notion
of Fanatics. Does not the Enemy come in as a Flood, and Popery as an
Inundation of mighty Waters? Who sees not that it is coming in amain, and is
like to overrun the whole? What can we expect when the Queen comes in, who is
said to hate an English Protestant so, that she cannot endure the sight of them.

But there is sad symptoms of something worse then all this, and great ground
is there to fear, (and so wise men judge) that the old cursed Popish Party
(whose numerousness in England portends no good to us) has already laid the
design of a Butchery and Massacre of the honest Party in this Nation and
Ireland, who love the Lord Jesus Christ. The which they will assuredly put in
execution, their other Contrivements failing. For this grand design twists in
the Interests of the Pope, the King of Spain, the German Empire, as well as
those Serpents and Vipers that are in our own Bowels, who will suck out our
very heart blood, if some Remedy be not sought. The Grand Conspiracy (which we
conceive those two remarkable Scriptures does discover, Rev. 12. 17. Psalm. 83)
now on foot amongst the Popish Parties in Europe, against a poor despised
Remnant in England, ought to awaken every man from the sleep of security. For
no doubt, the Devil and the Pope has at this day a great Design upon England.
And we are very much persuaded, that there is now on foot amongst the Popish
Parties and Jesuits a very great and bloody Design, to bring in Popery in
England, to take the Gospel from us, to root out the Name and Interest of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and all the gathered Churches in the Land: And Episcopacy
and Common Prayer is but the door to someting worse. And it seems to us a thing
very rational, that this cursed design of the Papists is already formed in
England, has life, moves strongly, and is even struggling for the Birth in the
Womb of the Mystery of Iniquity; if we weigh but in the balance of Reason, the
Interest that they have in the Court, the great number of Popish Lords in the
House, some of whom have sucked in more of the Venom of the Serpent beyond the
Seas, that their Sting is the Poison of Dragons, and the cruel Venom of Asps,
to poison and destroy the precious despised Interest of our Lord; the
multitudes of Papists about the City of Westminster, even of the bloody Irish
Rebels, who cut the throats of the Protestants there, (many thousands of
innocent souls) and are now said to be many thousands. If withal we consider
the high favor those Irish Lords, who were chief Actors in the Rebel lion and
Massacre, are in at Court; the enlisting of the Papists and old Cavaliers,
whereby they are put into a capacity to act the greatest Villainy, the Popish
Queens coming over; the putting of Papists and old exasperated Malignants into
all places of Power and Command; which are as so many symptoms of a general
and bloody Massacre: for it is evident, that their design is not so much
against Persons as Interests, neither will the blood of a few particular
Persons, such as the Kings Judges, satiate their cruel, enraged, blood thirsty
minds, which is set on fire by Hell; but they thirst for the Blood of us all,
that they might drink Blood as the Desert does Rain: And their Design (which
has a deeper Original then Rome) is to give so great and effectual a Blow to
the Interest of Christ, and the People of God in England, that it may never
Revive again, which makes them prepare so great a Sacrifice, and drive all to
one head, that they make a short and through work of it. And now will not this
mighty confluence of the Papists and Popish Interests to England, as all the
Rivers to the Sea, awaken us? How can we promise our selves any security
whilst we see the most implacable, venomous, Serpentine Enemies, as Vipers
creeping into our Bowels, who cannot merit greater fame and praise from holy
Church, (as they call it) then by spilling the blood of Protestants. We see
what multitudes of the cruel bloody Spaniards, under the pretext of Attendants
on the Prince and Ambassador of Spain, is not only come into our Land, but
advantageously placed in the heart of the City of London. And what unwelcome
guests to England, the old Queen, Prince Robert, the German Ambassador will
bring, may easily be imagined. Certainly the Popish Parties have some great
design upon England. We fear the Poison and deadly Sting is in this Tail of the
Dragon; and also the coming in of these foreign Princes and Ambassadors at
this time, and with such Triumphs as some Ages past have been strangers to, we
can look at as no less, then the fulfilling of that most wonderful Prophecy,
Rev. 11. 10. We know the Papists Principle; No faith is to be kept with
Heretics: Let us remember France and Ireland, and not forget Piedmont, whose
wounds bleed yet fresh in our memories. They are making our Throats bare to the
Knives of their Butchers; and they know well, and we shall feel, if we should
longer sit still, what advantage an armed united Interest has of a naked
dispersed one. And were there no more to be said then that the Law of Nature
and Nations has ordained to fly to means of preservation in threatening and
emergent dangers, we are highly concerned at this time to take up Arms.

And if we look abroad (which is wonderful to ponder, that the whole state of
the Christian Interest should be conformed to England) upon the face of things
in all Europe, we can see nothing but the ruin and destruction of the
Protestant Cause and Reformed Interest both in France, Savoy, Bohemia, Poland,
etc. And it is very observable that every where the Popish Interest gets
ground, and the design of the universal Peace, is even now perfecting, and the
top-stone is laying, and things of late have wrought strangely (but
providentially) in order thereunto, in the death of the late King of Sweden,
and Prince of Transylvania, as also in the coming in of Stuart into England,
which can in humane probability produce nothing but bloody persecutions of the
Reformed Churches. But this consideration, that God turns a wheel within this
wheel, and that the Churches of Christ, and poor despised People of God in
other Nations, are but by this dispensation brought into a state of conformity
to, and sympathy with the death of the Witnesses in England, is a supporting
one.

And now to suffer all these things, and lose our Birth rights, and to entail
Persecution, Slavery, Popery, and Idolatry, to our Posterities for ever, which
will leave our names for a curse and stink to them, is grievous; but to suffer
them from the Cavaliers, an old beaten Enemy, and that without striking a blow,
or bleeding in the Field for that which is much better then our Lives (for as a
Roman could say, There is no necessity that I should live, but there is a
necessity that Rome should be relieved) is the Aggravation. For how did this
old Enemy come in? did he beat us in the Field? did he win it with his Sword?
is our Cause lost? or is our God dead? no! how then? why, by lies (of which the
Devil is father, and so (through divine permission) of their conquest) by
hellish plots and contrivement, clad in the robes of our dead cause, as Jacob
in Esaus Garments. Well then, it is but an old conquered Enemy; he has been
beaten in the Field times often: of whom now shall we be afraid? of a broken
serpent? of a spiritless Enemy?

We have not only, considering what we have said, a sufficiend primary,
original, special cause and call from the Covenant of God, Prophesies of the
Scriptures, and time of the end; for an offensive war, to take the Kingdom, and
bring these Nations into subjection to the right Scepter of Jesus Christ; but
we are necessitated from secondary, providential, aggravating causes, to be
defensive on behalf of Gods Name, liberties of Saints, common-safety, and
preservation of our Families, Wives, Children, Lives, Liberties, and Estates.
And whosoever loves God, his Country or his own Rights which Christ purchased for
him by his Blood, and cannot sell his Body, Soul, and Conscience, to the Devil,
to wicked men and their lusts, to commit sin with greediness, and run with them
to the same excess of all manner of filthiness and wickedness, must now take up
the Sword against this beastly crew, as the last remedy God has left us; for
such is the unparalled iniquity of this day (we hope the Devil is playing his
last game in England) that a man that has but sobriety in his looks, can
scarcely pass without the brand of Fanatic.

And these men themselves have set us free from the Bonds of Subjection; for we
have no benefit by the Government of this bloody Family, neither are we
comprehended within the Verge of their Protection: Wherefore they cannot justly
challenge any Obedience from us by the Law of Nature or Nations: For a man is
not bound to pay him Subjection who seeks his Destruction.

But although, The Children are brought to the Birth, there is no strength to
bring forth; the hour is now come, and we are traveling in pain to be
delivered, for the Name of our God, the Noble and Precious Interest of his
Christ, and the Deliverance of his Saints and People; and O how are we
straightened till it be done! We have been with much fear and trembling in this
work, and much wrestling have we had with the Lord: for so far as he has
revealed our selves unto us, we had rather suffer all things, not only to the
loss of our Names, and Estates, but even our very Lives, for his sake, who
since we believed is made precious to us, then dishonor his great and holy
Name; and our souls are sweetly quieted in the Lord, and abundantly satisfied
in the time; and certainly if we be deceived, God has deceived us. And now the
Love of Christ has constrained us to appear in the face of the greatest
perils and dangers, none of which move us so we may finish our course with
joy, and serve our Generation in the Work which God has committed to us,
according to his will. And we profess we have nothing but the naked Arm of the
Lord to trust in; and if we perish, we will perish in believing his promises, in
serving and promoting his Cause, in contending for this Noble Truth of the
Kingdom of his dear Son. And this is our joy, that our God has bound himself by
his promises (in his fear we speak it, and with Reverence) to appear for his
People: And if God should not appear for the poor Remnant of Jacob, but suffer
them for whom his precious blood was shed to fall before Papists, and
Cavaliers, and profane, drunken, damning, swearing Idolatrous, Adulterous,
wicked and ungodly men; and should suffer the Cause of the Papists, of the
bloody Family of the Stuarts, of the old bloody, Popish, wicked Gentry of the
Nation, of the drunken, dumb, Popish, scandalous Clergy, to get the upper hand
of his own Cause, and should suffer all our Reformation to be lost, then what
would become of his great Name? It was because he could not bring them into the
good Land (will the Enemy say) that he has destroyed them in the Wilderness:
What will become of his promise to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and their Seed?
How will the New Covenant sealed with the Blood of Christ, and the Oath that he
swear unto David in his holiness, be verified.

Now therefore, to come to the matter of our Declaration, that we may lay the
Groundwork of so great a Building, and stir up and provoke our Brethren in all
the Countries, as also in the City of London, to share with us in this honor,
and be partakers in this work, and now to prepare themselves, and in all points
to be ready, in order to a general rendesvouzing on Mount Zions bottom. We
Declare,

1. That we will not have one stone of Babylon for a Corner, or for a
Foundation, Jer. 51. 26. We will not have any thing to do with the
Antichristian Magistracy, Ministry, Tithes, etc. which are none of our Lords
appointments, but the cheats and counterseits of the man of sin and mystery of
iniquity. We will not make any league, or join any affinity with them, Rev. 14.
9, 10, 11. But we Declare for, and exhort unto a final and strict separation
from the National Parochial Church, Worship, Ministry, way, and Idolatrous high
places, as none of Christ's but Antichrists, as false and Babylonish, Rev. 18.
4. And we cannot but look upon the National Ministry, even in its greatest
reformation and purity, in the time of the late O. C. and his Tryers, as
Antichristian, and that which ought to be disowned and separated from by all
the true Churches of Jesus Christ, in their Foundation Call, standing in the
Parish Assemblies and Maintenance. And we contend for a righteous Magistracy,
that may be a terror to evil doors and a praise to them that do well, and for
a true Gospel Ministry with their Maintenance: And we own and declare our
Lord Jesus Christ (unto whom and whose Laws we will alone submit, as unto him
who is the Fountain and Original of all just and lawful Power) to be the
Supreme Head and Law giver of these Nations, the alone LEGISLATOR, who has
right to make and give Laws for the governing of the Commonwealth, and who is
King of Saints and Nations, whose royal Laws and Precepts must be submitted
unto in Church and State, and Tyranny, Monarchy, and Antichristianisme
destroyed and rooted up in both; his Laws and Statutes contained in the Holy
Scriptures, and remaining in force since his death, to be the Law by which
these Nations shall be governed and judged; and his Saints (without respect had
to any particular from or judgment) on whom shall rest the spirit of council
and wisdom, shall be the Administrators thereof, or shall have the executive
Power. So shall we have Magistrates like Job, that will be eyes to the blind,
and feet to the lame, and Fathers to the poor, that will break the jaws of the
wicked, and pluck the spoil out of his teeth, Job 29. And we shall be the
blessed of the Lord, whose habitations shall be full of the blessings of heaven
and earth, and full of Peace on the foundation of Truth, and we shall be the
happiest people in the world, having the best Laws and the best Governors,
Deuteronomy. 4 6, 7, 8.

And as Babylon will be destroyed, and the false Antichristian Church will be
no more; so the true Church and Spouse of Christ will be brought out of the
wilderness, from all her dispersions, darkness, and confusions, and will be
purged and purified from all her corruptions both in matter and form; and from
the rise of the Witnesses, the preaching of the everlasting Gospel, the
beginning of the downfall of Antichrist, and the setting up the Kingdom of
Christ, the Churches of Christ, and sincere professors of the Gospel, with the
addition of new converts, will begin to appear with the Lamb on Mount-Zion, in
all the Primitive Glory and Purity of the New Testament-Churches for Matter,
Doctrine, and Order. But so far as the Churches are in Babylon, and by sinful
compliance with Antichristian worship, and the evils and Apostasy of the times,
have not kept, but defiled their Garments; and so far as they have left their
first Love, owned and stood by them that held the Doctrine of Balaam, suffered
that woman Jezebel to teach and seduce, had a name to live and are dead, have
not kept the word of Christ's patience, and have been lukewarm, and lost their
favor, their Candlestick shall be removed; and the true mortified, quickened,
spiritual Members, that are in the flower of their virginity, or have kept
their simplicity, will be gathered as the precious from the vile, and with all
the poor scattered stones and dust of Zion, the living spiritual stones, be
built up the second time, the great New Testament-Temple, when also our Lord
will appear in his Glory, Psalm. 102. 13, 14, 16. For God we are persuaded has a
great Controversy with the Churches, who ought to be the ground and pillar of
Truth, for their corruption and Apostasy, and because they have not received
and contended for the great New Covenant-Truth of the Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus.

2. That all Civil Liberty, and Rights of men, (which with every man's
Property we assert) shall rise alone upon the Foundation, and grow upon the
Root of the Visible Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, which we hope, and
greatly desire, may from henceforth take place among us according to the
Prophecies of the Scriptures, and become a great Mountain filling the whole
Earth.

3. That the chief of the Spoil which shall be taken in Battle, and all the
Estates which shall be forfeited through Treason and Rebellion, shall be
brought into one common Treasury, according to the Word of the Lord, Their Gain
shall be consecrate to the Lord, and their Substance to the Lord of the whole
Earth, Micah 4. 13. That it may not feed the Fowls of Prey, or enrich and
corrupt particular persons as of late, but carry on the Work of God with the
Army of the Lamb, in which every Soldier shall be sufficiently provided for,
by a certain honorable constant Revenue, issuing out of the said Treasury,
according to his Place, Degree, Services, and Family.

And for accomplishing and attaining these great and weighty ends, we Declare
also for the Razing, Destroying, and perpetual Rooting out of the whole
Constitutions and Foundations of the Antichristian Laws and Government of these
Nations; for the Removing of Taxes, Tithes, Excise, and Customs also, so far
as Oppressive and unlawful; slavish tenures of Land, Oppressions of Landlords,
Monarthy and Lordship as well in Church as State; so also in Cities, Societies,
and Families, wherein the Rights of younger Brethren will be vindicated
according to Law, (the nature whereof is Justice, Mercy, and Equity, wherein is
no footing for such sictions as this wicked Law teaches to distinguish between
Courts of Justice and Equity) and the Nimrod spirit and Monopolies of elder
Brethren (unto whom as Kings in the Family, the younger Brethren are Slaves and
Subjects, which is one grand branch of Tyranny, and Interest of Monarchy)
pulled down, whose Interest nevertheless, by right of Primogeniture, is
asserted according to the Kings Law, to wit, twofold: For the balance of
Lands must be adaequate to the Government of the Commonwealth.

And as our great desire is to take off all yoaks and oppressions both of a
civil and spiritual nature from the necks of the poor people; so shall we
endeavor to cast the wing of protection over them, their Persons, Families,
and Interests, to preserve them from Free Quarter, Plunder, and all other
injuries, and violences whatsoever, being resolved first to offer up our own
proper Estates for our necessary maintenance. For it shall be our great and
indefatigable care to preserve an excellent and strict Discipline in our Army,
that not the least wrong of how small value soever may be done, always
respecting Propriety; so that all persons (other then such as shall oppose and
rebel against this righteous Interest) may expect the fruition thereof in
their peaceable demeanours of themselves, in their lawful occasions, and Family
concerns.

And it is not the least thing to be looked at, that hereby the Gospel will
have free access (which seems to be one of the first fruits of the Saints
rendesvouze, Revel. 14. 6, 7.) and poor sinners will be converted unto Christ,
and be enlightened with the glorious light of his salvation. And indeed that
great and general conversion both of Jews and Gentiles, which the Prophecies
speaks of, Isa. 60. 5, will be one of the greatest blessings (the
soul-blessing) that the Kingdom of Christ will bring with it, under which both
sin and Satan will receive so fatal a blow, that his Kingdom will be
destroyed; the which does commend the Excellency and Nature of this blessed
Kingdom, above the barren, and soul-destroying Interests of Antichrist, Rev.
18. 13. under whose Government poor ignorant souls are hardened and lost. And
it has been for some years past a rare thing to hear of the real Conversion of
one soul through the Ministry of the National Parish Ministers, so dead, dry,
dark, and barren has their Ministry been, so much have they desiled their
Garments, stumbled, hardened, and offended sinners, kept out the Truth of the
Kingdom from their Churches and Assemblies, so losing abundance of the Power
and Riches of the Gospel, (which nevertheless by the mouths of Babes and
Sucklings has been conveyed to poor vile sinners, so effectual has it been unto
Conversion) so little has the Gospel been powerfully and effectually preached
by them, whose hired Labors can never countervail the many Families they have
wickedly destroyed for Tithes: But the Remnant of Jacob shall be as a dew from
the Lord, when Magistrates and Soldiers shall preach the Gospel, and teach the
people knowledge, as well as those appointed unto the Word and Doctrine; for
this Cheat of the Whore of Rome, and Innovation of Antichrist, Monopolizing the
Work of the Ministry, (to make a Trade of the Gospel, and Slaves and Souls of
men) into their own hands, limiting and appropriating it unto Persons in
Ecclesiastical Offices, shall be taken away.

And finally, We most earnestly desire, and call all that love our Lord Jesus
Christ, and wait for his Kingdom, to offer themselves willingly with us in this
Work, that as in that Renowned History, Judges 5. 9 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 23. Out
of Ephraim there may be a Root of us against Amaleek, after thee Benjamin among
thy People; out of Machir shall come down Governors, and out of Zebulun they
that handle the Pen of the Writer: The Princes of Issachar with Deborah and
Barak on foot in the Valley. And if Reuben will continue in his divisions, and
abide among the Sheepfolds to hear the bleatings of the Flocks; Gilead abide
beyond Jordan, Dan remain in Ships, and Asher continue on the Seashore, and
abide in his breaches; yet Zebulun and Napthali will be a People that will
jeopard their lives unto the death in the high places of the field; and Meroz
shall be accursed, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help
of the Lord against the mighty. And our heart being toward you that among all
the People offer your selves willingly to the Work, we beseech you set all
things in order prepare your selves, and let the Rich help the Poor, that with
one mouth we may all say, Thine are we David, and on thy side thou son of
Jesse; Peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers; for thy God
helps thee, 1 Chronicles. 12. 18. And if any of the old Army which God has laid
aside, whose hearts he has touched, do quit their Interests, and come to us on
this alone lasting Foundation, they shall be willingly received.

We have but one word more, and that is unto young Converts, who (together with
those who have separated from Antichrist, in his purest Forms and Dresses, and
have been kept through rich Grace from the defilements of the Times, and the
late Apostasy) are like to be the choicest instruments in this Work. Precious
honest heart, let neither thy sins, past miscarriages, want of faith, nor any
other imperfection discourage thee from flying unto Christ's Standard but as
thou art with thy soul all broken in pieces, throw thy self down at the feet of
our Lord Jesus, and come dye for him, who spared not his own precious
heart-blood for thee, and thy life, he says and all things pertaining
thereunto shall be given thee.

Some choice Teachings and Hints of a poor despised Remnant, from that great
Prophecy of the VVITNESSES, Rev. II. Humbly submitted to Saints Consideration.
IN this three Years and half (of which Elijahs Time of the three years and six
months was a very great type) of the Witnesses death, God has been dealing with
us, as he did with that his worthy servant: we have never been without the
Bread of the Promises, and the Waters of Spiritual comfort; and this Prophecy,
since we had the Light of it, has been as a Fountatin to us, for new strength,
to corroborate us, to confirm us, and in the Promise of the spirit of Life, we
have had a salve for every sore, and strength against every Temptation. So that
although our Brooks are dried, and Ravens gone, (public Ordinances and worldly
helps) yet have we still a handful of meal, and a little oil, with the Widow
of Zareptah, (an invisible Fountain, a living store) which will last us till
the Rain comes.

We cannot but take notice of the soul-melting goodness of our God, that he
has given us this valley of Achor for a door of Hope; that he has showed us a
right way in the Wilderness, insomuch that we can say of many choice Teachings
and signal Hints, which through free Grace we have been made partakers of,
under which we have cause to be mightily humbled, this was the Spirit of God,
and this was the place of Loves. Of all which in particular, if the Spirit
bring them to our Remembrance, as also of the manifold Grace of God, we trust
we shall talk at the Rendezvous on Mount Zion, among the Virgins to his Praise.
And now we cannot but admire the wonderful Providence of God; that he has
called us into our secret Chambers, Isa. 26. 20. wherein he has brought us to
a state of near conformity and resemblance to himself, and the first fruits of
the Primitive Saints, who (when the Shepherd was smitten and lay in the Grave,
and the cloud was so black, that of all the thousands that were wont to hear
him and follow him, were left but 120 Names, as the fruits of all his Preaching
and Miracles) were privately together in an Upper Room for fear of the Jews,
waiting for the great New Testament-Promise. And surely now God has some great
thing for his People that he calls them so near unto himself.

Now we shall show our Opinion of these things, and with submission give our
judgment of the present state of Affairs. In the doing whereof we shall omit
many things, and but name the rest.

1. That the two Witnesses are that precious, select, separated Remnant of
Christ in the Churches, who in every Age and Generation, are witnessing too,
and to the death contending for the great truth of their Age, ver. 3, 4. 2.
That these two Witnesses are at this day slain, and lie dead. Proved,
1. From the great probability there is, and ground we have to judge from what
those worthy and famous men, German Author and Tillinghast, and other Authors
of no small authority have writ; That the 1290 days, Dan. 12. 11. which of
necessity must be headed (according to the Character of the Vision) with that
remarkable Act of Julian, A. D. 366. And the 42. months (or the Dominion of
the Power of darkness and of the night, which is not measured by days
according to the motion of the Sun, as the Witnesses Prophecy is, but by
months, after the motion of the Moon which rules the night, so Mede) of the
Beasts Tyranny and Persecution, (which is headed by his rise, A. D. 396. for
thirty years must pass between the heads of these two Numbers, because they
expire at one and the same time, so Tilling.) Rev. 13. 5. (in which it is
observable that the utmost continuance of the Beast is not measured out, but
only the time of his Commission unto blood, limited) ended with that
remarkable year, 1656. according to their computions of the mystical Numbers.

But some will dislike this opinion, and disallow these heads of account, (the
which nevertheless if we let go, we shall be quite lost in our Enquiry) because
the time then must be expired, and yet the fruit does not appear. And how (say
they) will you bring the mystical Numbers and their computations to a harmony
and agreement?

To such we thus answer,

That the time, times, and an half, Dan. 12. 7. which are not the whole time of
the Vision, (for that is particularly expressed afterward) but are laid down as
a Mark and Character of the end of wonders, are not to be reckoned for a part
of the 1290. days, ver. 11. but are a time distinct, and to be added thereunto.

That the three days and an half of the Witnesses lying dead, Rev. 11. 9. are
not to be taken for any part of the forty two months, ver. 2. or the 1260.
days, ver. 3. for they are to Prophecy so long, but we must put a difference,
because the Scriptures does so, between their Prophesying time, and the time of
their lying dead. But the three years and an half are to be added into the
thousand, two hundred, and threescore, to complete the time of the whole
Captivity.

That the time, times and half of the woman's flight into the Wilderness, Rev.
12 14. is no part of the 1260. years v. 6. For the holy Ghost has put a
manifest distinction For 1. Between these two flights of the woman into the
Wilderness, there is a great War, wherein the Dragons Cause suffers much
detriment, v. 7. 8, 9. 2. There is a wonderful Triumph among the Saints, the
woman begins to put off her mourning weeds, and to come out of the Wilderness,
and the Witnesses begin to lay their Sackcloth aside, supposing now all the
Winter Storms to be gone, and a glorious spring of Salvation to be come, v. 10,
11, 12. But 3. the black Cloud of the Witnesses slaughter, over-spreads the
beautiful face of all their hopes, and that sunshine summer day is turned into
blackness, threatening no less then a storm of blood, v. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
4. The different phrase or manner of speaking notes a great change in the
Vision; in the first station in the Wilderness, during the 1260. days, they
(to wit the Witnesses) feed her there, v. 6. i. e. she has more sensible
helps, as Elijah had from his Ravens, and Brook, the beginning of his three
years and an half, (in which he was a Type of this 12. of the Rev.) But in her
second station, during the time, times and half, (the same with the three years
and a half of the Witnesses death) she is nourished, i. e. but just kept alive
as Elijah was afterward when the Famine grew sore, with the widow of Zareptab,
and after that again in the wilderness: It will be a time of great dearth and
barrenness; a cold winter season with Grace, a time of Autumn with public
Ordinances and holy Duties; yet a Principle of Grace will be kept alive, and
that is all, v. 14.

And without this distinction in the times, we shall confound and destroy the
Harmony of the Mystical Numbers, and make such a jar, that it will be hard to
reconcile things.

This Seal was never opened until of late, being reserved for this very time,
Dan. 12. 4. It is a Door into the inner most Closet of the mystical Numbers; a
Key to unlock the great Treasures of the time.

And indeed we have sometimes thought, that some great mystery was in this
number: For 1. It is the ending-time, Dan. 12. 7. the great Character which
Christ himself lays down of the end of Wonders. 2. God has in all those three
famous Prophecies made it a distinct Period. 3. It is most famous for the
dealth of the Witnesses, and other wonderful things. It is a time of all other
times remarkable, wherein the least time is allowed the greatest things: a time
of the greatest sufferings and dangers, yet without Blood.

Now let us make a plain Application, by adding this number of years unto the
1290. and 1260. days, which ended (according to the best Judgment we can
make) with 1656. and it brings us to this very year 1660. In which if the Work
begin, what those holy men have writ will be verified.

2. From the Visibility of those very things, the Prophecies foretold should
occur within the three years and a half of the Witnesses lying dead. Thus
also Tilling have, Know l. Times, page 90, 91, 92. We shall instance in a few
things, which are as plain signs of the time of the end, as Herod's Reigning in
Judah was that the Messiah was come, or as those that went before the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans.

1. In the time of the Witnesses death, in the place or Nation where their dead
Bodies lie, there shall be a People that shall favor the Witnesses, and withal
be so potent as to awe the Beast, and keep him from open persecution, that he
shall not be able to come to blood, neither at the beginning, nor at the end of
the three years and a half; who yet setting themselves (to use M. Tilling hasts
very words) upon a worldly Interest as their highest aim, shall neither openly
declare for the Witnesses Cause, nor against the Beast, ver. 9.

2. This people who are a moderate civil kind of People, pretending to
Reformation in matters of State, will have a Principal hand in the Government
of that Nation for the most part of the three years and a half, until about the
last half year as it seems to us. At what time not being able longer to
secure their own Cause through the deficiency of their bottom, they unwillingly
give way unto another Party in the next verse, whom they had once Conquered,
and now long kept out.

And this Party is called the dwellers on the Earth, v. 10. A Character that
describes them to the life, and what their very nature is; They are the old
carnal, Cavalier, Popish Party, who as the Earth is the grossest part of all
the Elements, so are they of all others, that ever had a hand in the Government
during all that Reformation that had been made through the Witnesses
Prophesying. And these shall come in upon the Witnesses and their Cause as a
Flood, to overflow all our Reformation again with Popery, Prelacy, and
Superstition, as the Prophet Isaiah has it Chap. 59 19. Our Banks that we had
by means of that Commonwealth Party, being all broken down, through the
impetuous Violence and Potency of the waves of that party, whose threatenings,
great boasts, and Blasphemies are like the raging of the sea, but come to very
little: For it seems to us, that the Cavaliers from their first coming in, have
but about six months time.

So that in the Nation where the Witnesses lie dead there will be toward the
very end of the three years and a half a very great and astonishing change in
the Government of that Nation, and a strange returning, and bringing of things
about to the old Center, where yet they will stand but few months.

3. In this time there will be laid and driven on the design of a General and
Universal Peace, and just about the very end of it, will it be accomplished;
so that when they shall think the day is their own, the blackest storm, and
greatest woe will suddenly come upon them, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. And one of the main
ends of the coming in of this Party, is to effect this thing, and bring that
Nation to a Conformity and Agreement with the rest which otherwise would stand
out, by reason of the seed of Reformation which the Witnesses had sown in it.
There is three Prophecies point at this thing, and are now fulfilled very
wonderfully upon us, this of Rev. 11. 10, and chap. 18. 7, 8, with chapter 17. 17.
which is the plainest of all.

4. There shall be among the Dwellers on the Earth a wonderful Triumph over the
dead and surpressed Witnesses, supposing them and their Cause to be now dead
and sunck for ever, and themselves so fast and secure, that they shall not be
moved for ever, ver. 10. Nevertheless, it seems to us they shall not effect, or
accomplish any great or weighty matters; but the greatest part of their little
time, will be spent in Rejoicing, Feasting, taking pleasure, making merry, and
sending gifts one to another for their supposed new and great Victory, and that
until the fatal day come upon them.

5. Toward the end of this time (which the Lord has every where set a mark
upon, as that which shall period the Sufferings and Captivity of the Gentile
Churches) some bloody and cruel design will be laid by the Dragon against the
Remnant of the Woman's Seed, who appear for Christ and the Truth, in the time
their Brethren the Witnesses lie dead, either of a Massacre, Banishment, or
fiery Persecution, Psalm. 83. which just upon the point of the three years and a
halfs expiring, he will attempt to put in execution, Rev. 12. 17. but shall
never accomplish it, chap. 14. 1.

These signs most of them are also in M. Till. Knowl. of Times, whose Method we
have in part followed.

Now some for want of light in these Prophecies may think, that in these things
there is a great likeness of the Witnesses Slaughter; and that they do not (as
indeed they do, as will be found of him who diligently searches) immediately
go before their Rise, but is rather the slaughter of them, or something in
order to it. But that cannot be for this Reason, because then must we come to
persecution, and their death would be a corporal Death; for it is not the
Beasts clemency or mildness, but want of time that cuts him short in this
point. But that their death will not be a corporal death, but civil and
spiritual we could prove by many sound and unanswerable Reasons. And that we
are not to expect any more persecution unto blood, or suffering for Gospel
Truths after the Witnesses death, is as plain. The present distress being
rather a National Quarrel then any thing else.

And now unto these things that are transacted on the Stage, let us add these
two.

1. That these things are of great use unto the people of God that have kept
their Garments in any measure. For by these Trialls God is taking the Precious
from the Vile, blowing the chafe from the wheat, raising up a new Generation,
and making of them a new sharp threshing Instrument with teeth, and separating
some for his own service by the marks of Nonconformity; all which look very
like that Prophecy, Rev. 14. 3, 4. Christ is gathering his first ripe Fruits,
redeeming a precious Remnant from the Earth, and severing them from among all
men, that they may follow him with another spirit, as Joshua and Caleb did, and
not come short of their work through temptations of Honor, Profit, and worldly
Vanities, as some have done to their shame.

2. That this blessed, strong, lively, supplicating, wrestling, pulling,
groaning, traveling, praying Spirit among the poor dry Bones, the scattered
despised Stones and Dust of Zion, which takes hold of Gods Arm, i. e. Christ,
Covenant, Oath, Promise, Faithfulness, and Word, is a great token, and
Symptom of Deliverance, Zech. 10. 1.

Thus much to the second Point.

3. That O. C. killed the Witnesses, and that the place of their lying dead is
England.

1. That O. C. killed them, proved by two Arguments.

1. This last War of the Beast against the Witnesses is altogether different
from that which hitherto he had waged continually against the company of the
Saints, Rev. 13. 7.

1. It is not of the same kind: the former was always with sword, fire and
faggot; this a certain kind of spiritual War: in that they died corporally, in
this civilly and spiritually, (and in the latter sense lies the blackness of
the day, as Tillinghast well observes.) In the former War the Beast could never
get the Victory in a spiritual sense; for they always died Conquerours, and
triumphed over him in the midst of Flames maugre all his rage, which bred in
him a certain kind of torment; but now being more old and cunning, and withal
such a Day Star of Reformation being Risen through the Witnesses prophesying,
as made him that the durst now appear in the day, in his old bloody,
blasphemous hue; and finding himself also much weakened, through the continual
War that now had been all along between him and the Witnesses, and being just
upon the expiring of his 42. months, or Reign of darkness; and finding that
he is not able to come unto blood, he takes unto him weapons of another Nature,
which proves more effectual and advantageous to his Cause: For this Quarrel
between him and the Witnesses, being about the Finishing-Testimony, and the
Cause of Reformation, he is now enforced, unless he will lose all, to use his
utmost policy and craft.

2. This War is declared as peculiar unto the last time of the Beast, and a
special Note set upon it, to distinguish it from that which had been familiar
to him in the times of his 42. months.

3. It is one kind of War which the Beast waged universally against the
Saints; another which in his last declining estate, he shall wage with the
Prophets, which had begun now to put off their sackcloth, and to end their
Prophetical mourning. Answerable to this is that of the Woman in the 12. of
the Rev. (touched before) where at the end of the 42. months, there is a show
of coming out of the wilderness, ver. 10. But this sad and sudden, and indeed
unexpected news, of the loss of the Field, and Witnesses slaughter coming, she
is forced suddenly to fly to her old place again, her Champions being gone,
for three years and an half longer, ver. 13, 14.

4. This last War is not universally over all the Beasts Kingdom; but is
peculiar to some one place or Nation, where the Witnesses had gained upon him,
which in the Text is called the street of the City, i. e. one street or
dominion of the 10. ver. 8.

5. The event of this War, however the Cause may seem at first to go on his
side, and he may think the field won, and the day his own, is very lamentable:
In his former Wars Power was given him over all Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations,
Rev. 1. where he procures to himself a sudden and fatal ruin, and he will
never be able to rally, or make head again in that Nation, so notably is it
levened with the Witness Doctrine.

Most of these distinctions are found in Mede.

Now this last War against the Witnesses, and their Death and Slaughter being
of another kind from what was common to the Beasts Reign; it must needs
follow, that it be managed by a subtle hand, and one that can handle a
spiritual weapon well, and do it with a notable profession of Religion, and
seem to differ from the Witnesses in nothing but time. And certainly, if we
depart not from the plain sense and meaning of the Text, we must needs
conclude, that O. C. was the man; for the whole limits of the Beasts Kingdom
could not parallel him.

2. The main ground of this Quarrel is about the Finishing-Testimony. By the
Finishing-Testimony we cannot more fitly understand any thing, then the great
Truth of the Kingdom of Christ. Now that which does enrage the Beast, and
against which he makes this War, is against this precious Truth of the Visible
Kingdom of Christ, as it is the Truth of the Generation, and that which the
Witnesses in their Finishing-Testimony, was going about to cause to take place
in that Nation. The which nevertheless they shall not do; for it is said, When
they shall be about to finish their Testimony, (so Mede renders the word) the
Beast shall make War against them, and overcome them, and kill them, which
Victory of the Beast, makes the Witnesses Cause never a whit the worse.

But O. C. persecuted no Truth but this Truth of the Kingdom of Christ; and he
persecuted not that neither, but as it was the Truth of the Generation, and
that which the Witnesses would immediately have to take place; so that they
going about to finish their Testimony, he was necessitated to make this
lamentable War, unless he would have his Government over-tun.

And two things of him are very considerable.

1. That about a year and a half before his death, this Prophecy of the
Witnesses seemed to trouble him very much; and he was very earnest with two of
us, to know what we thought of the Witnesses, the which he seemed to speak with
a convinced guilty mind, and some kind of regret.

2. We have sometimes thought from the last clause of the fifth veise, And if
any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed, that this
Finishing-Testimony of the Witnesses, however he seemed to have the better, was
the death of him; gave him the wound he could never claw off.

But 2. That England is the place, is yet to be proved; for which we shall name
two Arguments, and leave it.

1. This War and Slaughter must be, where a notable Work of Reformation has
been on foot, where the pure Doctrine of the Reign of Christ is powerfully and
effectually preached, where there is a people that are the choicest and
forwardest of all others, and may be said to be the first fruits of all the
Antichristian World. But if Germany it self, or all Europe can parallel
England in this, which is as a Garden of choice Plants, then will we consider
further.

2. It is called in the Text, the Street of the City, that which is the very
Stage of Action, or Market place of the world; and whether England has not been
so for these twenty years, even in the account of other Nations, as witness
what that German writes in his Clavis, p. 100. and Manasseh Ben Israel the Jew,
in his Epistle of his Hope of Israel, to the Parliament of England, we leave to
sober and judicious men to judge.

Thus much to the third Point.

4. And lastly, In all probability, the great Day of the Witnesses Rise, will
be in this present Year, 1660. AMEN.

FINIS.

