A SIGN Given them being entered into The day of Judgment To set their House in
order.

For the High Court of Parliament assembled.

From the Lady Eleanor.

Psalm. 97. The Lord is King ( or reigns) let the earth rejoice; let the great
Isles be glad.

London, Printed in the Year 1644.

^rinted with some words of addition for the Year present, 1649.

A DISCOVERY Unto what Nation the last Day aforehand to be in the last days
Revealed: Contained in the XX. of Kings, Isaiah 39.
AS had no other assigned then The word of God, touching the Resurrections then
being at hand, but that of Jonas the prophet; so in point of like incredulity
at his return again turned Sadduces, appointed no other, but this of King
Hezekiahs days (Kings, etc.) that for a sign or assurance had, the third day of
his uprising, going up to the Lords house to seal it; that of the shadows going
back, for the third of his life out lengthned, a lease made him of thrice five
years, like a shadow when past.

Without which token, not in a capacity of obtaining so high blessing passed
not without being by the prophet Isaiah advertised (the Lord of Hosts
Ambassador) his house afterward how swept; and sons under what slavery issued
from him, not for facility such only, but difficulty of belief dangerous not a
little.

Of which days come about again, this great Revolution ushering the day of
Judgment, his coming in the Clouds; whereof as follows, of Jacobs ladder
reaching to heaven gate, thus, The express Epitomy of King James's life of
Great Britain, where beside no small plague accompanying his first coming, before
never visited so with those tokens, of his like recovery, here giving to
understand beyond expectation; such a solemn Thanksgiving for which at Paul's
Cross: which long Sermon in was related, how in his late sickness unto death,
he likewise justified his upright walking with God: and there with how plucked
off his Cap, and cast it on the ground, in such a passion professing in point
of witting Injustice, he would not so much as ask God forgiveness; by which way
of purging himself, as came not behind Hezekiah neither in some gross
failings: like that good King his harkening to those charming Babylonian
Ambassadors or Spies with letters sent to congratulate from Baladon son of
Baladan.

Also who showed them all his store and armory, coming from those Austrian
Philips, etc. overcome with like juggling slights, a few figs and junkets,
suffered that Gundamore having surveyed the Tower, to carry away as many great
Ordnance and Guns as he pleased, preserved for Truths defense, and Kingdoms
safety, in no less peril of home bred friends such, then foreign foes,
requisite with Arms and Forces to be secured: And then how sent his Son after,
forced for whose Ransom to send over All the precious things and goodly, laid
up by his Predecessors, to be bestowed amongst those insatiable Eunuchs and
Officers distributed. And lastly the good man himself, in whose days flourished
Truth and Peace, thus overreached, for all his King-craft and Learning, that
brake his heart shortly after. And the rest of his Acts, and all his might (or
greatness) and how he brought water into the City, and made a Pool and a
Conduit, that Idol the cross are they not written in the Chronicles, etc.

And thus this Hezekiah slept, and rested with his fathers, and Manasses his
son reigned in his stead; that came not short of Ahab: and he awakened thus,
for him so much suffices, become a sign himself, no inferior one, had the Suns
retiring for a sign, Obeyed Joshuahs command (no feigned Phaeton) stood (...)
Moon moving neither they ^rri^^d that longed after Rest, so now before removed,
carried thence away, shows them the way accomp^^i^^ (...) it were, sets (...)
the East: Moreover for whose additional years, fiveteen wedded to those ten
degrees, these crowning the first of his Reign, 1625. forbids any more
Coronations of Kings: No more rising or setting here of theirs.

Kings xxi. Chron. xxxiii.
ANd this Manasseh twice twelve years old, when he began to reign over Great
Britain; How he reared Altars to Baal, and set up his Roman Altars, built
Altars in the house of the Lord, adored that Babylonian Image the Crucifix,
manifest are they not on record? Beyond Heathenism abomination execrable:
Moreover to the overthrow of them and theirs, how many seduced, beside shedding
so much Innocent Blood; insomuch that the Catalogue of his sins, Manasses great
wickedness, the hateful Amorites Cup, wherewith paralleld and worse; which
Tyrants but light in comparison, weighed with this MAN'S, since 1625. the
Remonstrance of the present.

To whom the Lord spoke, and to his people likewise, but both by regard alike
improved in his Commandments; as the Suns course the contrary way gone as many
degrees astray, and so both alike whether rewarded, recomended to the
beholders, whose high looks brought down, here see whose Sons coat this?
therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, I am bringing an evil upon them, that
whose hears it, both his ears shall tingle: where thus again, whether
Jerusalems line stretched over us, CITY and Country both; And I will wipe
Jerusalem, as a man wipeth a dish, which he wipeth and turns it upside down;
as in a glass whether presents not the face of the present, spares neither
side; who not amiss deriving from Brute their denomination, from the Ass as well
who understands his owner, no such stranger to the dumb. And so much for this
Manna set at naught, these judgments of the Lord foreshewed, light by set;
notwithstanding speaking the Canaan language unto this our Age, to all
whosoever has ears, in their Native tongue, showed them their unnatural motion
gone backward how far, offended thereat or no, whereof as ensues.

This for another making up the number, he when made his supplication, how was
heard, also returned to Hampton Court; however misled by sinister Counsel, or
betrayed, not unhumbled either, unknown not unto all who agreed to whatsoever,
about two years after who slew him in his own house, attended with glowing ears
not a few, such a spectacle.

And how the people of the Land slew them again that had conspired, etc.
Rainsborough and our Holland Ambassador, taking essay of it, Drunkenness added
to blood-thirstiness, were the first saluted with which unexpected cup.

And with expedition (a few words to the wise) on this wise passing on, what
Baptism first past on his Sons, visible in the Seers book; withal how servile
on the other side to his Priests Bishops, charmed by their subtle Gospels:
whose Service book because allowed by his Father, what an Idol made of it,
where that for another, recorded in their Prophetical Remonstrance, gave
himself to them that had Familiar Spirits, bringing up whosoever named by him, the
gods and others; as Plays his night exercise.

And the rest of his folly, and other of his judgment, making his Prayerbook
also equivolent with the Alsufficient Scriptures, evident as his grove made,
daily at Ball where sacrificed his time, graced with one of his Fathers unhappy
acts, that Baals or James Chapel, prodigious Tvvins, the other his Babylonian
Theater, from James's to which fatal place made his last progress or march,
erected in Commemoration of the Ark as had been, also the seventeenth Century
current; as from Adam to the Flood so long, not unforevvarned of it by him that
was the son of Adam, that was the son of God; that as were those days before
Noah, so shall be his coming again, concerning not only Tim^^ golden vial or
glass, by which account its being at a stand: But how it stands or fares with
faith put to the question (Luke, etc.) wheth^r found such a thing as f^^^h, how
preparid then?

As for the fit time, or when. Lo, the present generation: (...) Masters, for
setting your house in order (...)here dis;charges her calling or place b^
farther giving you in the next place notice, from Manasses fifty five years
Reign, of his second coming at hand, goes hand in hand with that of Caesar
Augustus his five and fifty years, in whose Reign The Prince of Life, The
Beginning and Ending of Monarchy, came, about the fortieth year, into the
world, that began to be about Thirty years of age, in the fifteenth year of
Tiberius, (Luke, etc.) even the sum of it bids turn to those sure Chronicles,
penned by the holy Spirits command, thus says the Spirit, from the return of
Manasses days to expect his coming again, aforehand, as showed unto his
servants the Prophets, expressly pointing to the year 1655. at hand, being the
time when the flood came, 1655. from the Creation, as computed by the Ancients
and other Noah and his (Baptisms figure, at man's estate all) preserved in the
Whales womb, ten months fulfilling, before any window in the Ark opened: and
thus one deep calling to another, as when the waters prevailed, the snowy Dove
found no footing, the Raven before sent forth, no other presaging then the
Spirit of Prophecy, at such a time again though ceased long at last salutes
the nations with the Olive leaf in her mouth, so seasonable now for their
healing, without which Angelical leaves applied, an evil incurable, promised
The Tree of life, yielding its monthly fruit.

And so be it known, That the aforesaid blessed period of years 55. containing
Months 666. (Rev. 13.) called The number of a MAN (to wit) that Roman
Emperors Reign shevved before the Month of August bearing his Name; by whose
Predecessor the Calender corrected: and 666 Hours fulfilling a Month, all bids
Tyrant Time and his Generation or Offspring Adieu, subscribed with Emanuel
Jesus, its Numerals MVILV. Anno 55.

FINIS.

