A True RELATION OF THE Carriage of a Party of HORSE, At Medborne in the County
of LEICESTER: As it was given in to the COMMITTEE of Leicester, on Thursday the
9th. of April, 1646.

BY THE Minister, and Inhabitants of the said Town.

London, Printed for R. W. April 30th 1646.

A True RELATION, etc.
Upon Friday the 3. of this instant April, 1646. about eleven or twelve of the
clock in the forenoon, there came nine or ten Troopers into Medborne in the
County of Leicester, and enquired for the Constable. He not at home, they
demanded of his wife Provender and Quarter for ten horses and men: She asked to
whom they belonged; they answered, to Colonel Rossiter. She told them they
should have Provender and Quarter assigned them presently, and called for her
son to accommodate them: One of them presently replies, Come, come, we must not
stay your leisure, we will take some of these things here (in the house) and
make money of them to pay our quarters. I hope (Sir) says the woman, you will
not be so violent: Yes, said he, (bending his Pistol at her) we have a
Commission to kill and slay all Cavaliers that we find without tickets, and we
have been at Holt this morning, and if we had found any of them there without
tickets, we would have put them all to the sword. The woman, very well affected
to the Parliament, yet affrighted with such carriage and language, desires them
to have patience, and fetches them what provender they demanded, offering them
tickets to quarter at several houses, which they refused, saying they would
quarter together at the Alehouse, and the Constable should pay for it, And so
they did for an hour or two.

Anon, one of them returns to the Constables house, and demands a horse out of
the stable: she entreats them to be content with their free quarter for
themselves and their horses; But he growing violent, and preparing and trying
to break open the stable, and threatening to shoot her son that had locked the
door. She sent privately for Mr. Doughty the Minister of the Town, as one well
known to the neighboring garrison, to persuade them: the Soldier suspecting
something, ran after the man that was sent, with his pistol, as if he would
kill him, who hardly escaped through a Barn, which the said soldier searched
diligently for him. The Minister, when he came, found them all horst at the
Constables door, and saluting them after a friendly manner, asked if there were
any Officer amongst them? They begin to handle their arms, and (with other
insolent and reproachful language) said, Who made you an examiner? and, We
will know, ere we go, who made you an examiner. And being somewhat calmed with
fair words, one amongst them said he was Quartermaster, but they refused to
give any other account of themselves, then, that they were for King and
Parliament, and, Perhaps we belong to Rossiter, and perhaps have been
conveighing pressed men to Northampton, and what has any body to do with that?
The Minister desired to know whether they quartered hereabout last night, and
where the rest of their party was? they answered, They could speak to these
things, but scorned to be accountable to every one. The Minister told them,
that by virtue of an Order from the Committee of Leicester, he had power to
examine them, or any that should come in that manner, but yet desired only as a
friend to know to whom they belonged; they answer, That Is all one, we shall
desire to be excused.

A while after, news was brought to the Minister, that a horse was taken out of
his team that was at plough, by the soldiers that quartered in the town, and
that they had beaten the plough-men, and railed at their master, saying that he
was a Rogue, and they would have one of his horses, which carriage of theirs
made many believe they had been a party of Cavaliers; whereupon the Minister,
with his youngest brother and two men, took some arms and ran out on foot to
rescue the team being near the town, and in the recovery of the horse which the
soldiers had taken, they took the Quartermaster prisoner with his horse and
arms (who with some others charged those that came to rescue the horse) and
brought him into the Parsonage, without any bloodshed on either side.

The rest escaping, seized upon one whole team in the field, and part of
another, and were driving them apace toward Rockingham, whereupon the town
generally rose, and with forks and staves and some few guns pursued them, and
in Drayton field, a mile from Medborne, overtook them, where the Troopers
attempted once or twice to charge them, but the Townsmen thus bespake them;
Gentlemen, we desire to do you no wrong, and we desire you would do us no
wrong; You have taken away cattle, and we have a man of yours in the town, Let
us have our horses, and you shall have your man, if you tell us to whom you
belong; And do not you offer to hurt us, for we stand upon our own defense, and
if ye do, ye come upon your own peril. Here they came to an agreement: the
Troopers said they were Major Babingtons men, that their Lieutenant and Troop
quartered at Calcut (in Rutland, within a mile of Rockingham) that the horses
were gone thither, but they would send one of their company for the horses, and
the rest return to Medborne for their man that was at the Parsonage. Hitherto
there was no blood drawn on either side (though one pistol was casually fired,
and some stones thrown) saving only that one or two of the Countrymen that
stragled from the rest, were cut before this agreement.

And now marching in a friendly manner all together toward Medborne, (for now
some on both sides remembered one another as being formerly acquainted) within a
quarter of a mile of Medborne, a party of about twenty Horse, which they had
treacherously sent for from their Quarters (and not for the town-horses, as was
agreed and sworn) overtook them: the Country men no sooner discovered them, but
they desired one of the Troopers that were going back with them, to ride and
meet them, and tell them that all was agreed, that there might be no mischief
done. This messenger was a Scot, who when he came up to the said twenty, told
them that the Townsmen had taken their men prisoners; And saved indeed the
Ministers brother from the fury of the rest, of whom three or four fell
violently upon him (yet hurt him not) but joined with them in falling upon the
Townsmen now dispersed and scattered over the field; and without mercy stabbed,
wounded, miserably bruised and trampled with their horses, sixteen men or
upwards in the field, of which one dyed within twelve hours, and other two
within five days: diverse were thrust through, as they ran from them toward
the hedges and ricks; one had his bowels let out with a wound, other some had
their hands almost cut off, and some beaten and bruised so that they are not
likely to recover, and the rest less dangerously hurt. Of these, diverse were
grievously mangled and cut, after the Soldiers had persuaded them to lay down
their arms, and sworn to do them no harm, especially those that most manfully
defended themselves. And when all was done, the Constable James Barret coming
in (from the wood) to see what was the matter, and having told them he was the
Constable, three or four of them fell upon him and thrust him through the
body, whereof he is dead. And when as they rode up and down the field to seek
out the country men (for many endeavored to hide themselves) crying, Kill,
kill the Rogues, and some of the wounded answered, They had their deaths wounds
already: they made them open their clothes, and show where and what their hurt
was, before they would spare them; cursing and swearing all the while after a
dreadful manner: and diverse they cut with their swords as they lay upon the
ground, and as they found them in the ditches: and when some that were deadly
wounded, were set on horseback to be carried into the town, some of those
soldiers caused them to be taken down, saying, Throw them down: and when some
answered, He is wounded, he cannot go; One Mr. Mansell (not the Lieutenant, for
he was not amongst them nor any other Officer but one Corporal) said, Throw him
down, Plague on them, if he cannot go, let him not in the ditches. And after
they had wounded them, they would not suffer them to be carried into the town
of an hour or more, but made them lie in their blood and sweat on the cold
ground.

Being come into the town, they came swearing and raging after a dreadful
manner to the Ministers house demanding entrance, and their man that was there
prisoner. The Minister (who stayed at home, whilst his brother and servants
went out to rescue the Towns teams) desired them to forbear till his brother
and Townsmen were returned, that he might know what was done in the field, and
they should have their man, if withal they declared to whom they belonged, and
what they were, which the prisoner had refused to discover. They swore they
were Major Babingtons men, and would have their man and the Minister too, or
they would fire the house. The house, said another, nay fire the Town: and with
that one of them rode to the other side of the town, brake open a house, and
fetched out a firebrand, with which he rode back to the Parsonage; but one
less desperate then he, beat it out of his hand and put it out, before he
could put it into the Hovell.

When they had burst open the gate, and attempted upon the house, the Minister
brought their man to the window, that they might see he was well, and desired
him to persuade them to forbear, and he should be let out unto them, who
instead of persuading, did more incense them to violence: whereupon they cry
out with horrid oaths, No parley, no quarter, nothing but blood, or submission
to our mercy. The Minister presents a short scattering gun at four or five of
them together that were breaking a window, whereupon some of them shrunk back,
and all swore desperately, that if he made but one shot, hit or miss, they
would kill his brother and the rest of the Townsmen that were their prisoners
in the field, and then fire the house and put all therein to the sword, and one
swore, Let't go and kill them in the field, the first thing we do. And then did
one of them bring a burning firebrand of the bigness of a man's arm, and thrust
it into a hovell of Pease-straw and Pease, near the house, which being heavy
fell out upon the ground before it could kindle. And so breaking in at a window
(whilst the Minister and his wife, with M. Boheme Minister of Hallarton who was
then also in the house, escaped out at a back-doore) they brake open every door
that they found locked, to search for Mr. Doughtey, (save one door that they
attempted, but could not break) swearing they would cut the maids in a hundred
pieces, if they told not where he was, for they would have his blood if they
were hanged for it. And having plundered the house at their pleasure of such
things as they could best carry away, ransacking and breaking up diverse trunks
and boxes, and cutting some furniture with their swords in their rage; at
length they departed, and carried the Ministers brother prisoner behind one of
them to their quarters, where they kept him that night, some of them swearing
often they were sorry they had given him quarter; and others threatened, that
when or wheresoever they should meet with him, or his brother the minister,
alone, they would kill them.

Since this, they have been heard at several times to threaten and swear,
that they would kill the said Mr. Doughtey, and that the rest of the Town
should drink of the same cup, rejoicing at the death of some, and miseries of
the rest, boasting and glorying how many they had wounded.

Also upon Wednesday April 8. as one of our slain (the Ministers servant) was
carried to the grave, a party of the same men, with drawn swords at the towns
end, stood hooping and hallowing as in triumph, and challenging the Town to
come out, greatly terrifying the inhabitants.

All which Premises the whole Town of Medborne humbly refer to your
considerations, desiring that the rest of the said Party may be apprehended,
and all proceeded against according to law and justice, and the Town secured
from their further threatened rage.

And as we desire that all that Troop may be brought to examination, so, that
the innocent and guiltless among them may be speedily cleared; And all with as
little prejudice as may be to Major Babington, his Lieutenant, and other
Officers and Soldiers that had no hand in the premises.

Postscript.
THe most of this Party were apprehended in their Quarters at Lydington near
Vppingham, by a party of Leicester Horse and Dragoons, upon Thursday April 9.
1646. and the rest of them we hope will be secured ere long.

These are part of the fruits of retaining Soldiers unimployed, and unpaid.
This Troop belonged to Leicester, till in discontent they left that Garrison,
for employment under Colonel Wait late Governor of Burleigh: And since the
taking in of Belvoyr, have quartered in Rutland and thereabouts, to the great
oppression of the Inhabitants, more ways then one.

FINIS.

