A Prayer or Petition FOR PEACE.

November 22. 1644.

Behold, your house is left unto you desolate; And verily ye shall not see me,
till ye say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord. without whom
ye can Do Nothing.

Printed in the Year, 1644.

A PRAYER and PETITION FOR PEACE.
By the Lady Eleanor.
O Lord, the great and dreadful God, as we have sinned deeply and offended,
guilty of no less then open Rebellion, by excluding thee, fleeing from thy
presence with one voice (as it were) We will not have this man to reign over us
(or) He defers his coming, as others; Even departed from thy Precepts and
Judgments set before us: so here prostrate before the footstool of thy
Throne, implore nevertheless pardon and forgiveness.

For this no stolen or secret transgression committed, but with a high hand; and
so much the rather presuming on this access, because hitherto the vulgar (the
burden and heat of the day though theirs) those sheep yet not guilty or
accessory to this trespass or capital Crime, or of thy return opposed, as
manifest in harkening not to the loud voices of the Propets accomplished thy
Messengers: But to our Kings, Princes, Heads and Rulers, which appertains, so
straightly commanded, saying, What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch; the
Gentiles watchword also charged in readiness to be; and signs of the time they
not them discerning, such and such express evident Signs and Tokens, haste,
watched over them, as sinc ethis a Nation, or under the whole Heaven. the like
unknown, witness, The Irish Massacres VVinter flight, and Sabbath journey,
those bloody pestilent Vials, so violently poured out (without doubt) not since
the Flood as in this present Century.

Thus neither (awakened or) taking warning (by Foreign Nations) as Beacons
lighted our neighbors houses set on fire first, like Jacob's setting in the
front the handmaids and their children: whichalarms so lightly weighed, til
suddenly at last, like Sampsons sevenfold new Cords and green withs, all plucked
asunder when linked so fast and knit, France with Great Britain, Spain with
France, Germany with Spain; together with these late married Isles or united
Kingdoms, now in widows forlorn woeful Estate, or worse, as divorced; sometime
that as had it been a new world, with such Creations flourishing, and Titles
all new Names, even walking like days of old, also become as those, when God
repented he made Man, brought to a like Ebb or fall, as those insasciable
Giants, Great Britains Babel Towering thoughts confounded.

And now behold, O Lord, through a high and heavy hand abased and so low
brought, humbled to ashes and sackcloth, from the highest to the lowest; then
tread not on a worm, break not the bruised reed, the wounded smite them not;
but hear us out of the deep, O thou our Anchor, hope and present help, ready to
be consumed and swallowed up, if thou calm not and assuage those working
tempestuous Seas, through unruly raging winds let loose, wrought and contrived;
And so with him praying in his posture, Elijah, when as without Rain so long,
forty two Months (that prophetical Number*prest so much, of Three years and a
half) he bowing himself double, or kneeling on his head; also behold such our
Estate turned upside down, since the year 1642. defer us not these miserable
Isles and Kingdoms of ours, whose Storehouses exhausted, like those Rivers
dried up, and like the dead Trees, burnt up our Nation and Habitation, torn
between two She-bears, like those Forty two ungratious Infants.

To conclude (O forsake us not! thou of uspeakable Mercy) cause thy face to
shine upon us, for the Lords sake, our alone Savior Jesus Christ, made of the
woman's seed according to the flesh: A woman making her first witness of the
resurrection and (...) ^^^ful tidings to the (...): Let thy mighty voice be
heard, that speak sometime to the Fish, the Fig Tree, the Deaf, the Dead,
and very Devils subjects; And at whose motion the Sun and Moon moved not, stood
still, heard him; and turnest the hard Rock into standing waters, etc. also the
waters of this city, heal them; say the word and it is DONE, that henceforth
let there be no more DEATH, no more Killing and Slaying, stay thy Hand She
beseeches thee.

A Prayer or Letter for the Peoples Conversion and Deliverance from their
Distraction, June 1649.
ANd O Lord of Sabbaths, our King, the God of Hosts sitting between the winged
Cherubims, enclosing thy glorious Throne; That without delay vouchsafest to
hear the humble address of thy Handmaid, and the waters according held of our
British Jericho, witness the very next month, December. the 5th Anno 1644. a
conjuring Letter from the otherside, as would answer at the day of Judgment
the contrary, etc. to lay aside Arms, whereas about three months after, the
Enemy waxt at thy consuming presence like melting wax, calling to Rocks and
Hills, or fleeing to hide them were put to flight: He vanished in that fashion
disguised, amazing those that knew him, signed with the years of thy right arm,
1645. owing since the horrible design Anno 1605. November the 5th which faction
(he the four and twentieth of those Alban Elders, prostrating his Crown so low)
combined with.

And the Sword of War sheathed thus, as when Elias the Prophet his
Supplication presented, just three years and six months after their departing
the City, he in that manner led in a string, from 1641. January, until 1645.
June, that blow before his downfall. Notwithstanding, Justice her Sword drawn
since Kings, Princes, Head-Rulers, going to wrack, great Trees felled down, as
well as those of lower growth amended; like that restless man's Estate, taking
unto him seven spirits more unsufferable, after the House swept and adorned,
the Epilogue or End worse then the beginning, pointing to the Spiritual
Function; especially, seeking high places, earthly preferment, whereat all aim.

Then here croaching at thy blessed feet, for a blessing on the Iubiles ensuing
year: O heavenly bounty, royal mercy, greater then Solomon's exceeding fames
report, suffices we have bin and are of thy Justice, not wanting an open
example, a hissiug to all Nations, guilty of no petty Treason, thine own
Servants and Citizens, Shuting thee out, conspiring against thee; outed by
disloyal Tenants: with those Husbandman also saying, the Inheritance shall be
ours, to us and our heirs; accomplished signs and tokens when, the Creation
groaning to be delivered, accompanied with the peoples voices or distempers
restored to their old liberty: Kingdom against Kingdom, witness, brethren
Nations struggling like Esau and Jacob, one house storming the other, the Devil
the old Serpent, for his part storming too, his time because knows of no longer
continuance; a day of public Thanksgiving, deserving rather then sitting up
their own horn, or to be admired of the world.

How is it then that they do not understand, blaspheme thy name so nigh: rave
on the world; notwithstanding, What have we to do with thee, O Jesus, conjured
before the time, to torment them not, both sex discovering, like the dog
returned to his excrement, and Sow to the mire, how cleansed from filth, or in
grace growing up, how long the graceless world in these budding times, also
besotted, look back with Lots wife, to a sink of sin and corruption, with whose
incesstious Daughters the Kings of the Earth matched, for the Mothers sake
disinherited, they and their heirs referred to their salique slavish Law,
wresting that, That the Lillies spin not, etc. as the pillar displays (...).

With his Playhouse for another whether not recorded in Ahabs reign by our
Scottish Bethmite, also (as it were) execrable, Ierichos edifice Erected: The
foundation laid in his eldest Son, and the gates in his youngest son, execu^ed
at the gate; that after demolished those cages, or Monestaries of theirs, for
an acknowledgment of the powder plots escape, dedicated that Monster
everlasting like Theator, to the Devil for his Sabbath-service, and other such
like.

New Jerusalems precious foundations and gates, ought rather much to have
looked after, or to have considered the Arks building, which century the
seventeenth, we then were entered; the Ark as in length Three hundred cubits
measured out by the days of the year, so in breadth fifty, answerable to the
weeks thereof; the hight of it thirty cubits, according to the days of the
month, etc. So teach us to number ours, the sum of it.

That merciful Lord, except infused special grace: Since so it is, as derive
their Name, from BRUTE, So are they, may as well speak to the Ass and Adar to
hear, What the Spirit says unto the churches, or to cause by means of a stick
or rod, cast in an Ax to swim, grown (thou see) so brutish and blockish, well
shadowed out in seeing men like Trees walking: without which from above avails
as much, as before the Scriptures speaking in the vulgar language: That
blessing although not equivolent to the former; how hear we every man in his
own language, we born, etc. yet a door, not remote therefrom.

From whence emboldned do beg, give them leave like as when bitten by fiery
Serpents, those vipers; by another beheld in the same likeness were healed; so
by these leaves taken from a woman's hand, by them (...) (as it were) live may
for ever: They by reason of their knowledge puffed up hitherto, even of times and
seasons mystery to take their fill, not in season till the evening of time this
last ages.

And since to have knowledge of the disease, though the first step to recovery
suffices not: The Medicine if not attained, give them the Spirit of discerning,
since come to maturity the Tree of Life, a qualification for of our first
parents expedition, the tree reserved, that casting an eye upon the Map of the
world that then was, the Ark Baptisms figure, whereby to measure or parallel
the Gospels pilgrimage and the Floods age together, lifting up the same voice,
the swelling Seas sounding their alarm, climbing over Rocks and Mountains,
besides an universal flood a year or two ago, over the face of the earth, told
then before, There shall be signs in tht Heavens, in the Sun and Moon, and in
the Stars, the Sea roaring, people at their wits end distracted, etc. witness
this sign, A new Star, as seen in the East, the one 74 years before Ierusalems
destruction or judgment, so the other in Cassiopei its aspect or influence to
the great Year 1644. extended Rev. 7, 14, 21. referred to it; Which Messenger
Star likewise appeared seventy four years before our being entered into the very
day of judgment, with no ordinary apparitions in the Heavens, The powers of
Heaven and Earth shaken both.

So look upon us amended Lord, (...) b^ck-^^rd Spring with those ungrateful
graceless Lepers (asked) Where the nine, etc. cursing hitherto, where thou
blessest, such returns. O send down upon the time to come, (though have sinned
a great sin) a blessed shower of commiseration for which so much. And for this
stolen touch, as virtue when gone from thee, 1649.

FINIS.

