Of the general Great DAYS APPROACH.

To His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax General.

FROM The Lady Eleanor Da: and Do.

PSALM. The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice; Let the great Isles be glad
thereof.

Printed in the Year 1648.

A. and O.
FRom him which is, and was, and is to come, the alone peacemaker, his Majesty
expressly these the Revelation, by his Handmaid interpreted:

Showing, that as the word of the Lord, that Manna, came in the wilderness to
him, sent before from God, he first of his Name, last of the old Prophets, and
first of the new; So to his servant John again in the Isle of Patmos, sent unto
the Gentiles, to whom by way of Characters and other sacred Tokens, signified
the express time of the Lords return, the mystery unfolded: of which as follows;

Cap. 1.
Who on this wise, with no slender charge, Blessed is he that reads, and they
that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep the things written therein; for
the time is at hand (Verse) And with precious time to be short, that returns
not, the happy Reader whieh would a taste of this Angelical food have,
ministered to John by the Angel, whose Name signifies both the Grace of God, and
the Year of Grace, as Ioann Anno, etc. by these shall understand, that the
Gospels progress or pilgrimage it is to be paced out, by Noah's days, or like his
few and evil, Jacobs; which attained not to those of his predecessors: as by
this account of the Gospels coming short of the former, both before the Law and
under, fulfilling seventeen Centuries, like his seventeen years sojourning in
Egypt, before ended the tedious days of his laborious life, Sevenscore and
seven years, his Ladder reaching from Earth to Heaven.

And thus with the expedition of Churches captivity in spiritual Babylon
finished; John, with these joyful Tidings the Time at hand, salutes the seven
Churches, Grace and Peace unto you, from him which is, and which was, and which
is to come; and from the seven Spirits before the Throne, besides the familiar
Voices of Time also, personating the Holy Spirits gift; even his watchful
servants day and night, these next to eternity, about to take their leave,
remember their service to the churches, especially sabbath days, where
inclusive Times whole family, with the Anniversary day Easter, the
Resurrections feast, the year when begins and ends, those spiritual, etc. Who
all with one voice and consent cry down Times person, no more allegiance due,
or adored with superstitious Ceremonies longer:

From voices to good tokens, all to the same end and effect, verse. And from
Jesus Christ the faithful witness, etc. the first begotten of the dead: The
prince of the Kings of the earth that loved us, and washed us from our sins in
his own blood, the Lamb of God, etc. a Bathe able to contain certainly the
whole world, even from Judas Iscariot that Traitor in grain, to the Red old
Dragon, to present them in their primitive estate in his appointed time, in
whom we live, move, and have our being every one: where points to the custom of
former ages of the Church, their administering about Easter, Baptism, and the
Lords Supper.

Which seven weeks for spiritual exercise how employed before the Holy days,
too well known: And the Holy Spirit made their open pastime too, such a gift
bestowed upon them, possessed with Sodom blindeness reigning such.

Nevertheless, with the words of this prophecy, This tree of Life come to his
full ripeness; going on showing a greater Potentate then either Caesar slain,
who set the year, arrived at their sunsetting that Monarchy: or then C. R.
Defender, etc. with his monthday 27 about Easter, and priests in his presence,
in whom bleeding commiseration none such, never too soon in shortening such
Reigns hereby as shadowed out.

And so proceeding with another expression of his much love, exceeding Solomon's
to the queen of the South, which could but ask and have; (verse.) and has made
us Kings and Priests (unto God and his Father) to whom be power and dominion
to ages of ages, Amen; in the Churches old age, as much to say, Princes every
one and Preachers (...) God and the Father, etc.

Whereof Eden that parted River that became four Heads a figure, where in
those three Gold very good; The Onyx-stone, and the unknown Bdellium, the Manna
likened to it, compared to a round white seed, whence comes doubtless our
Orient Pearl, that queen of Egypts for one, as well bestowed upon a Swine, the
Gentiles Emblem; how it fares with them even to this day in holy things.

And the whole sacred current flowing this way of Old and New concurring, as
the Tabernacle for example, shows wrought wiih blue, purple and crimson, in
which the Table, the Shewbread, and the Candlesticks, those Memorials also the
significant Ark apiece, containing the Tables of the Law, he pot of Manna,
and the budding Rod: of the four winds, who may doubt too, unknown whence they
are: And the fourth part of the World, because but three formerly, or with
doubting Thomas, etc.

As witness this, Trinity in Unity (Exodus the 3.) say, The Lord God of your
Fathers, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, etc.
This is my memorial to all generations; four several times repeated, to beware
of going less, no vain repitition from the Lords own mouth, a Lesson to his
first Ambassador Moses, bare footed, before the thorny Bush, the fiery Throne,
the fourfold Aleluiah voices, saying, Amen, Revel. with that apiece virgin
City, unfolding as much, said to have the glory of God; measured (144) her
reign.

So now to return home to the matter of his coming in his cloudy chariot, thus
advertised, verse. Behold, he comes with clouds, etc. Even so, Amen: to the
greater sort, as a thief in the night welcome, or some open enemy, even wounded
by Jew and Gentile both.

Of his Name, sacred every tittle; thus, I am A. and O. the beginning and the
ending, says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come; the
Almighty, where the truth of it: the burden of the word of the Lord the
acceptable year proclaims at hand, witnesd to be with the Scriptures, the
Original Languages as pointed unto manifests, the old and New, where the first
begins the last ends (as it were) the Suns rising of the one, the others
setting, like Antipodes the Hebrew and Greek; and so of the Old-year end,
married to New Years day.

And as here by his own Example recommended, John our brother and companion;
what patience requisite in a Prophet, shows he to the Isle of Patmos confined,
situated in the Egean sea by that Tyrant, etc.

So a Revolution vvithal as the Noonday visible, and the Stars in the
firmament, directed to this Isles three, from him which is, was, and is to
come; the very voice of the present Reign, the first of his name, etc. even
this kingdom, where began the Reformation, (as it were) by several languages or
ways to them revealed, his second coming.

And these the sum of the blessed words of this prophecy, the day of
Judgments summons to Great Britain foreshewed.

Showing upon the Lord's Day how it came to pass a great voice of a trumpet
behind him heard, meditating it may be how long to the Resurrection, or about
the meaning of those, What if I will he tarry till I come? answered by the
Resurections alarm appears, saying, I am Alpha and O mega, the first and the
last; and what thou see, write in a book, etc. at which turned about that
dreadful apparition beheld, one in the likeness of the Son of man, a very book
at all points, as it were in fine paper gilded, bound and clasps: the flaming
Eyes some combustable stuff declares, not only but the sharp instrument two
edged coming out of his mouth, the cutting or opening of the leaves.

And so for his voice as the sound of many waters, even the floods voice lifted
up, as the days of Noah, the coming of the Son of man, the evening of time
come, the seven golden Candlesticks, and the seven stars in his right hand, by
whose influence John revived, dead before, unanimously the same Vision the
Prophet Daniel saw, saying, a thing wus revealed, but the time was long (as it
were) belongs to the time of the end to be understood, as referred to those one
and twenty prophetical days, when withstood so long by the Persian prince, Dan.
10. it being thereabout since Cyrus, so many hundred years since this Secret
revealed to him. And thus much for the BOOK and its Contents, with his
Commission signed and sealed with those mystical letters, and stars seven, to
remember the Church to stand on their guard and be watchful, those lights
almost extinct, Bishops about 27. in the first place.

A piece drawn in the Ancient of days likeness; a Robe girt (as it were) spurs
and sword, an ireful aspect, answerable to his confused voice, a rod in his
right hand, or scepter, endued with such power, with his age, etc. the least
touch; his watchword or Motto, verse. I am the first and the last; I am he that
was dead, and am alive to ages of ages, and have the keys of He and Death;
consisting of variety of expression, sounding the Resurrections Alarm, he
standing in the midst of those Sentinels, or walking in that solinary place,
not the least among the Isles; like his walking in the fiery furnace, beheld by
the King of great Babylon, at whose command the same was heated seven times
more then before; a forerunner of his own judgment of seven times, etc.

And from these significant things, and those his last words, Behold, I am with
you all days, until the consummation of the age (Mat. 28.) as follows, showing
the holy Spirit not in power only visible to all; but in person again sent
before the last Day, to some one even a Revolution or return to be of the
former; Also of the very time gives to understand from his standing in the
midst of so many watch-lights (to wit) about the midst of such Century, to look
about us then, with our brother John, who turning saw and heard these,
presaging too some special judgment being foreshewd then, accompanied for a
testimony of it, with no inferior persecution; And the prophecy accomplished
accordingly, this to be the day of Judgment Herald, verily to all Nations, etc.

Much more to be provided for aforehand then the years of scarcity the former
when brought forth by handfuls, where Joseph the prisoner so advanced, surely
more to looked after then tything of Rue and Rosemary, or great tithes either;
Howsoever by them the Day of Judgment passed over; From moreover, who wrote to
a Lady that loving Epistle, so He that has an ear, etc. (even which
accompanies the times general Outcries, and Nevvs cried) let him give ear to
the truth of his presence and company will enjoy, who stands without and
knocks, freely offers to sup, etc. to sit in his Throne with him.

FINIS.

