For the most Honorable STATES Sitting at WHITE HALL.

The words of Amos, etc. And the Lord shall roar from Zion, and utter his voice
from Jerusalem; and the dwelling places of the Shepherds shall perish, and
Carmel shall wither: Thus says the Lord, for three tarnsgressions and for
four, etc. And will cut off the inhabitants of B. and the Scepter shall perish
out of Beth. Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions and for four, etc.
Together with Divisions character, viz. By the same token, says the Lord of
Sabbath; When Bishops Lands sold, Rhetoricks flowers out of request, Great
Britains Union dissolved, or cut assunder, puts down their Kings, he Beheaded,
Four and twentieth from the Conquest, aged Seven times seven, in the
Seventeenth Century. Thus says the Lord, In that day I will raise up the
Tabernacle of David that is fallen down, etc. and will build it again, as in days
of old. Amos cap. 8.

London, Printed in the Year 1649.

For the Right Honorable, The Council of State.
From the Lady Eleanor, Octo. 1649.
AS known to all, the true way or touchstone, other none to try them by, but
that Salt the life of all things, All things whereby were instituted, without
which ( his word the Way and the Truth; where Legions of division the like
unknown, a like possible to expect peace one with another, as to third Needles
with a Cable, or in a day build Paul's.

And so behold, all like as when stung by fiery Serpents, were healed by
another in that likeness; also of those Legions entered into that wild man, as
ensues, a taste or trial of them tendered to these restless days, wherein every
man in his proper language, hears the wonderful word of God, as in a crystal
mirror presenting the visage of the present, extracted from that distracted
MAN'S recovery, sent hither to Preach (asked What his name was?) declaring What
God had done for him (no infant or babe) directed to the Gentiles, a light for
the last days, as though asked Great Britain, and Germany, their Names should
answer Gergesens, they both a compound of it; from Gadarens as also derived
Gallia or France (lying over against England) as that Region over against
Galilee; so Whether thence comes any good thing, like that saying of old: Also
former Marriages (what successes have had) who wots not, shall come to the
matter ( Mat. 8. c.) of our Saviors pilgrimages or weary progresses.

And when he was come to the other side of the Country of the Gergesens, there
met him two possessed with Devils, which came out of the Graves, very fierce, so
that no man might pass by that way. And the devils besought him, etc. and he
said, Go; whereof in a paraphrasing way thus proceeding, verily their pass for
Gravesend those twain Rup. and Maurice, returned to Grave Maurice, Cosen
Germain with the Boors, issue of the late Palsgrave of the Rhyne, that German
Prince turned out of his Country, making in the Low Countries his abode, whose
Offspring those furies or fiends broken loose here, sent home again: To this
day which Family are constantly visited with a Spirit before the death of them,
a thing known to all; and thus as though a Babe new born should speak the
hardest Names.

Mark 5. on this wise going on with it, of the aforesaid unclean spirits
baptized in the lake, etc. certainly emblem of the Gentiles being returned to
wallow in the mire, as waters of troublesome times giving warning; where thus,
And when he was come out of the ship, there met him incontinently out of the
Graves a MAN that had an unclean spirit, who had his abiding amongst the
Graves, bound with fetters and chains, etc. neither could by any man be tamed,
his Ghost (as it were) that Bear Canterbury, brought so often to the stake or
Bar on his knees; where beside his Habitation, where those Monuments in
Cathedrals, whose House at Lambeth with its situation not only pointed to,
but of its denomination borrowed from the house of Bethlam, otherwise called
Bedlam: As his Name withal whence derived from the Grave-maker or Sextons
Office, their digging or opening vaults, not unlike to be one of his
Godfathers; so much of his raving fit, that bad our Savior avoid: foreshewing
had those times been in his, had given him that oath of forswearing himself, or
his own accuser to be, as forced no few in that undue kind, his own Obligation
so well observing, questioned not his spirit of continency, any more then
whether the name Puritans a persecutor of, or given Judas pass, gone to his own
place, Canterbury the last of his name on a Friday executed, the day on which
our Lord was buried for his long service, that in a field Gules gives the
Halter or rope, from henceforth a chain left to hang their Keys in. And so much
for him and them both answering, For we are many friars, whose twelve
Godfathers withal besought, (as it were) Him not to torment he adjures them;
which concerns more then any Lord Majors Oath, or his Show on the water.

So each in his order, where follows Great Britains last King, or Englands late
Tyrant, into whom many Devils were entered from several parts; but one above the
rest (no short time) vexed with most, whereof Luke 8. thus, And when he WENT to
land, there met him a certain MAN out of the City, which had a Devil a long
time, and he ware no clothes, neither abode in house, but in the Graves, and he
commanded the foul spirit to come out of the man, for oft-times it caught him,
etc. therefore he was bound in fetters, as the cause of his binding shows; so
from those words, that it came out of the man, as much to say, a woman, his
Vasthi put away or departed, bereft of the Breeches, etc. in recompense Crowned
by her Servant German. And so much for this misled Man, went away from his
House of Parliament and Hampton Court, turned out of City-houses and Country
both, took up his restless Lodging among the slain in the field, afterward in
(...)


