POSTSCRIPT TO HUSBANDRY Anatomized OR, An Addition to the Enquiry into the
present Manner of Ordering, Dressing, and Manuring the GROUND in SCOTLAND For
most Part; Whereby it is further Explained and Applied, and several good
Effects that may follow thereupon hinted at. By the Author of the first.

Edinburgh, Printed by John Reid, at his Printing House in Bell's-Wynd School.

Courteous READER,
NOthing under the Sun is more the Desire of my Soul, than the Universal Good
of all Men living, and for those of this Kingdom in particular, being fully
persuaded of the Truth of that Maxim, No Man is born for himself; But the
Sense of my own Weakness, has long obstructed my undertaking any thing in a
Public Manner, pursuant to my Inclinations: But of late having maturely
considered the many mistakes this Kingdom does generally ly under, both in
Relation to Husbandry, and several other Things, I have adventured to make an
Enquiry into the Manner of Ordering and Dressing the Ground in Scotland, and
has Essayed to give some Directions, for further Improvement thereof, and
further to explain and apply what is said, I have now added these following
Sheets. The Sum of all that I have both first and last said, does terminat in
this, That if every one would take such Measures as easily they may, the
Honor, Wealth and Power of the Kingdom, may in a short time be advanced to
double of what it is at present; This may seem a very incredible Assertion, but
at prosent I shall no further insist in proving thereof. The Calculation being
made already, and a brief Hint given of the Means and Ways how it may be
Effected: But in the mean time, (I say) if it be True, it is worth the
noticeing, and if it be false, it may easily be demonstrated to be so, Such as
have any thing to object against what is said, or would have it farther
explained, I shall endeavor to satisfy. So long as I abide in Town, I shall
attend at the Flanders Coffee-house for that end, betwixt the hours of 10 and
12 in the Forenoon, and 5 and 6 at Night. I could gladly wish every Propriator
and Possessor of Lands in Scotland, had Copies of this Treatise, which you may
have at the foresaid Coffeehouse, at a reasonable Price, but to give all of you
Copies gratis, my Circumstance do not allow, neither know I any Obligation on
me so to do. But that I may go as great a length this way as possible, without
manifest prejudice to my self, I shall leave two or three Copies of this
Postscript, for Public Use, at every Coffee house in Town; And in what you can
further desire of me in Reason, your Commands shall be willingly obeyed.

Farewell.
Postscript
SINCE I published these foregoing Sheets, I had occasion to discourse with
severals on that Subject, and partly have learned what Entertainment they are
like to meet with: Some indeed seem to favor my Opinion beyond my Expectation,
and none that I have yet met with, do disprove of any thing I have therein
proposed, except that concerning Housing of Sheep; And to tell the truth, any
Arguments they have yet adduced to prove their Point, are so far from making me
alter my Opinion, that I am rather thereby confirmed in the Truth of what I
have said: Nevertheless I find I am not fully understood by any, nor the
Project received with that Applause I humbly conceive it deserves. This may
seem a great piece of Vanity in me to assert, however I hope to make it
manifest beyond Contraversie: For I doubt not to assert by following the
Measures, I have proposed, the Honor, Wealth and Power of the Kingdom, may be
thereby doubled at least.

Perhaps it may be asked, why I did not assert as much in the preceding
Sheets? My Reason was, I know Landlords are generally too severe upon their
Tenants, and if they see them in a thriving Condition, they either heighten
their-Rent, or oblige them to remove, so that Farmers are altogether
discouraged to make any Improvement whatsoever; Wherefore I thought it needless
for me to mention the Landlords profit by this project, that being a thing that
he would see to of his own accord; And I endeavored only to show in general,
what benefit may be made by this Project, leaving the Landlord and Tenent to
share it betwixt themselves. Yet in the 43 page, I gave an oblique hint at the
Landlords profit, but I find General Doctrine is not the best; I humbly
conceive, it may contribute more to the propagating of this Project, to speak a
little more particularly to the point, and that not only by improving of
Ground, but also the Effects that may follow thereupon, this being a feasible
Way for making a Stock, its certain that Stock may be improven also.

But I say, seeing Landlord and Tenent must concur in the prosecution of what
is here proposed, both must share of the benefit, otherwise it cannot be
expected they will unanimously push it on; Therefore in the first place, I
would advise the Landlord to give the Tenent good security, that he nor his
shall not be obliged to remove for some three, four or five score years, if not
to all Generations, hereby the Tenent has Encouragement, to make what
Improvement he pleases, the benefit is his own: On the other hand, I would
have the Tenent obliging himself, and his Heirs and Successors, to pay at the
end of every seven years, one years Rent be way of Entry or Fine, over and
above the yearly Rent he now pays. I fancy at this the Tenent makes answer
for himself, protesting this is too hard for him to do; But I Am afraid the
Landlord be of another Mind anon: However good Tenent, I would advise you to
give the Landlord no less, providing you get security for continuing as above
said, (on other Terms I will not desire you) And I promise, if you follow my
Direction, you shall not repent it. When I desire you to give out a Sixpence,
if it bring in half a Crown, you sustain no loss: But so it is, every Sixpence
you give out this way, shall profit you no less, after the first seven years
are over.

In the 27 page, I suppose a Farmer possessing a Room of sixty Aikers, to have
alwise forty of it in Corn, on half Croft, the other half Out-field and other
20 Aikers in Grass. By the Corn he must pay his Rent, for according to the
common way of keeping Cattle on Dale Ground, little or no profit is had of
them, as is showed page 29; Now if by the profit of forty Aikers of Corn, you
are able to pay 300 Merks of Rent, then by the profit of 26 or 27, you may pay
200 Merks: Therefore leave one third of your Corn-Land Grass, and you shall pay
no [more but 200 Merks for the said two thirds you have in Corn, unless I let
you see a Visible Way how you may get the other third hundred Merk paid, by
and attour the Increase you formerly had upon the same quantity of ground.

The first year you leave the third of your Corn-Land Grass, you save 13 or 14
Bolls of Grain, wherewith you used to sow it; You also save the Labor of as
many Aikers, which with the price of the Seed, may be reckoned as many pounds
Sterling; With this Money I would have you to make an Orchyeard, as page 34:
Then take the whole Dung you used to lay upon 6 or 7 Aikers of your Croft, and
lay it upon 3 Aikers only, this three Aikers I think may be supposed to produce
two Bolls more a piece, than what they did formerly, and in respect you are at
no more Expense of Seed and Labor of an Aiker that produces ten Bells, than
if it produced three, except Threshing, and the Straw will do more than pay
that Cost, wherefore I reckon you save 6 Boils free profit on this three
Aikers, this six Bolls 5 pound per Boll, pays 30 lib of your third hunder
Merks, so 36 lib. 13 ss. 4 d. remains unpayed for that year, which the Landlord
shall spare till you can pay it with the product of the Ground. The second year
dung other three Aikers, on which you may also have two Bolls profit a piece,
the first three Aikers continue to have two Bolls more than ordinar for four
years. so you have twelve Bolls profit this year; which pays your third hunder
Merks, except 6 lib. 13 ss. 4 d. this added to what remained unpayed last year,
makes in all 43 lib.6 ss. 8 d. The third year you take in other three Aikers
after the same manner, on which ye have the like product, which makes eighteen
Bolls this year, which pays the third hunder Merks, and 23 lib. 6 ss. 8 d.
more, so nothbing remains of your by gone Rent, except 20 lib. The fourth year
you take in other three Aikers, on which with these nine already mentioned, you
have 24 Bolls profit, which pays your third hunder Merks, which the 20 lib. of
by gone Rent, and 50 Merks more; Let this be laid by toward paying your Fine.
The fifth year dung that which you dunged the first year, and so continue to go
over the four parts of your Croft Successively. The three years that are yet to
expire before the end of the seventh year, you have 24 Bolls profit per annum
on yar 12 Aikers of Croft, whic yields 80 Merks a year more than your third
hunder Merks, three time 80 and the 50 Merks laid by the fourth year, is 290
Merks, which pays your fine all to 10 Merks, and to pay this 10 Merks with,
you have all the profit of your Orchyeard, the Roots and Kail you have in it,
may be more profitable than ten Bolls of Grain for your Family, which may be
reckoned fifty pounds; The Flay of an Aiker and half, may be worth eighteen
poiunds. A Crown a piece of twelve Sheep kept on the Stuble of your
Orchyeard, is 36 pounds. Honey worth 24 lib. this in all makes 123 lib. And
when your Fruit Trees grow up, you may have as much profit of them, beside the
Out-field all this while will be growing better by degrees, as well as your
Croft, so that by this time you may have a Boll per Aiker more on it than
ordinar: And your Grafs being both better, and much more of it, providing you
observe the Direction given page 38, You may make 200 Merks profit of your
Cattle. Moreover, your Ground is but beginning to be brought to a good
Condition, you can not expect it will be as good with once or twice Dunging, as
afterward it may be: Will either Man or Beast that is lean, be made fat by a
Meal or two. I do not think in less than 24 or 30 Years, the Ground can be
brought to so good a Condition as afterward it will be; And Tenants get not
long Tacks, never think they will Improve it for other Men: But even from the
beginning, you see there can be profit made abudance, to encourage any body to
let about it. To be Brief, I desire not to reckon every thing narrowly that may
be made of it, least the Landlords grudge; But I offer to make it evident, to
the Conviction of any Reasonable Man, That Farmers following this Method, shall
be enabled to pay their Landlords all that I have spoken off, and shall have
more profit by far, than they can have by following the present way. Tho they
did not pay one Sixpence, for when all the above mentioned profits may be made
without Hedging or Enclosures, what profit may be expected when that pains is
taken, and Manure extraordinar provided, as page 72, beside many other pieces
of Improvement. Now if this be true, as I am persuaded it is, then has the
Tenent as much Gain, as if he had his Room for nothing at all; And it is not
one Tenent, or ten or hundred, that receives this Benefit, but all and every
one through out the whole Kingdom may have this profit; I do not mean every
indevidual Farmer may make a like Advancement in their profits, for in some
places the Ground may be so much improven, that triple ptofit may be thereof
made at least; Other places cannot so well be advanced above one third part,
but complextlie considered, I am persuaded that the whole of it may be doubled.
Therefore I conclude, Farmers in prosecution of this Project, shall be as great
Profiters, as if they had another Kingdom equal to this bestowed them Gratis,
providing they changed not their Ancient Custom; And the Heritors or
Propriators of Lands, are so far from being at any loss, that they reap a
seventh part more Benefit than at present they do, beside their present Rent is
secured, so that it is most visible, that the Heritable Stock of the Kingdom,
may be more than doubled.

Now If a poor Man that cannot guide himself, may be permitted to direct
othets, I Will show you how the Moveable Stock, may be as much increasced, and
then I hope my assertion is proven. Landlords to you now I direct my Discourse,
Perhaps ye may grudge, I allow nothing but a seventh part, where the Tenent has
so much; The Truth is, Tenants have but a sorry Life of it, as Matters go at
present, and they had need of the greatest share of the profit, beside, they
are at all the pains, and run all the Risque, for tho they should not make all
the benefit I propose, still are they obliged to pay you; But I say more, You
may accept of Little, where you could expect nothing at all: I suppose your
Predecessors and your Selves, have taken the best Measures you can to advance
your Rent, and more than it is at present you could never make it. Now if I
shall lay down a way, how ye may advance it a seventh part, (which I dare
almost promise in name of all the Farmers in Scotland, providing you gave them
long Tacks) then have you so much Gain ye could never expect, and seeing their
profit is not your Loss, you have no Cause to envy them; But what if I make it
appear this Fine, atithe end of every seven years, shall be more beneficial to
you, than one third part more every year: It Is like ye may call this a Maggot,
but let me be heard before I be condemned.

Commonly all People live according to their Rent, whether it be little or
much, he that has 5000 Merks per annum, may have as much free Money at the
Years end, as he that has ten or twenty: So I say tho you had a third mote
Rent, ye would perhaps find way to get it disposed of, as well as what you
have; Yea, but say ye, then we would live so much the better or more splendid:
It Is a Question if ye would, for ye had better have an hundred Pounds well
paid, as an hundred and twenty promised, when the Tenants are not able to pay
it punctually at the Term. but this one running on in Arrier half a Years Rent,
the other a whole year, and a third two Years, and some breaking now and then
amongst hands, and Factors Accounts running on in Confusion, so that its very
hard to redd Marches with them: And in the mean time; when you might have your
Money, to bestaw to the best Advantage ye could, you are obliged to run in
Merchants Accounts, with many other disadvantages: I doubt not but an hundred
Pounds punctually paid, is better than an hundred and thirty paid after this
fashion. Beside all this a Gentleman getting the name of so much Rent, he must
keep a Table and Retinue, answerable thereunto. From all which Disadvantages he
is obliged to burden the Heir, for the providing Portions to the rest of his
Children, and that lies on his Shoulders from Father to Son, till taht Family
be extinct, or else the rest of his Children are so meanly Provided for, that
they cannot live any way suitable to their Station, and they being too gentle
to learn, or follow any honest Employment, must either go abroad to push their
Fortunes, or go up and down the Counrrey like Vagabonds, this is the Case with
many: But if it be said, this is not the Case with all, I shall readily confess
that, but that needs not hinder me to give my Advice to others, neither can
they be the worse to hear it: But I say by this Project, even theso that are in
the worst Circumstances, shall have the Rent that now they have the Name of,
well paid, tho at present it be otherwise, and shall have all their Children
honestly provided for, without burdening the Heir a sixpence, and to make this
the more plain, I shall meke a Supposition, thus.

I suppose a Young Gentleman succeeding to his Fathers Estate, in the twenty
or twenty first Year of his Age, the Tacks of his Tenants are half run, so in
the twenty fourth year of his age, the Entery Money and Grassum due be his
Tenants, is paid to him, I suppose his Yearly Rent to be 5000 Mer, the Fine he
now receives is just so much, this is all ftee profit, for if his Tenants had
followed their old way fo Labor, this he could not expect, and now his Yearly
Rent is entire beside this; Wherefore I would have him lay this 5000 Merks by
for his eldest Child, except the Heir, which perhaps is not born for half a
dozen Years to come; I would have him count it Sacrilege to meddle with it, but
let the Interest thereof be gathered for the Child's Use, and before the Child
be Marriageable, it may be doubled if not tripled. In the 31 Year of his Age,
he has another Fine paid him, which may be laid up for another Child; In the
38 Year of his Age, another Fine falls due, lay this by for a third Child; In
the 45 Year of his Age, as much for a fourth Child, in the 52 Year, as much for
a fifth Child, and in the 59, a Portion for a sixth Child: This before he be
sixty Years of Age, he has Reasonable Portions provided for six Children,
beside the Heir, if he have fewer, he may give each of them a Fine as is showed
and divide the Superplus amongst them; If he have more, (as very few has,)
then he may get the rest more easily portioned, that these are provided for
already. But say ye, Perhaps before the Father exceed fifty Years, his Eldest
Son may be married, and so long as the Father applies this fine, for the Use
of his own Children, the Son cannot have it for the Use of his; Such a thing
may fall our, but its as probable, the Father will not have so many Children,
as what I have supposed, and if he have not above 5, that which is appointed
for his sixth Child, may be settled on his Oey, but make it as ye will, it is
better to have so many provided for, as none at all.

But say ye, all this is not so good as another third more Rent, for we can be
our own Stewards, and live more splendid, and tho we lay but one half of that
third part more additional Rent by every Year, we may therewith provide our
Children more plentifully, than what is proposed.

But ye would consider, if ye had a third more Rent than what ye have, it would
be expected you should live accordingly, and if ye do it not, ye will be
reckoned Misers; And beside when your Rents are screwed to the highest. you
cannot have them punctually paid, and so run in all the Inconveniences above
said: Wherefore I Am of Opinion, tho you had 10000 lib: a year, you cannot so
easily lay 500 up for your Childrens Use every Year, as you may lay this fine
by, every seven Years once. But say ye one Tenent pays his fine this Year,
another the next, so we get not all in one Year. therefore we are at the same
pains in gathering of it, as if we had only so much more Yearly Rent. To which
I say, I would have you order it so, that you may have it all to come in at
oncs, and tho some of your Tenants should begin to set about this New Method at
one time, and others at another, when the time comes that the first are to pay
their fines, rather tako from these that have begun last, proportionable to the
Years they have followed this Method, and enter them altogether, as take it in
by parsells, for I am apt to believe it will not do so well, to come in at
several times.

Perhaps some may object, if every Landlord follow. this Method, all will have
Money. to lend, and none will need to borrow, therefore it will be impossible
to get all this great Stock; put to any profitable Use.

I wish it were come that length, to have more Stock than we know how to
dispose of, but since ye have had patience to hear me hitherto, be pleased to
hear my Answer to this also.

By the Prosecution of this Project; I showed page 32 and 33, a great dale of
people may be spared, that are now employed in Tieling and Dtessing the Ground,
except they be employed in making Enclosures, and even tho many be set to that
kind of Work, there will be abundance notwithstanding to labor in
Manufactures; There is no doubt, if people apply themselves, in good earnest
that way, Manufactures of all kinds may be much propagated in a short space:
For want of Stock, that great obsticle, being removed, all other Letts may be
easily overcome: Now, if every individual Propriator of Lands throughout the
whole Kingdom, may have a Years Rent every seventh Year, beside his ordinar
Rent, What vast Stock will this make in all? Four hundred thousand pounds
Starting, and even but a part of that is thought sufficient to advance our
African Trade: And I suppose one Years Rent of all the Lands in Scotland, may
be four or five times as much: What great Trade of Fishing and Land
Manufactures may be thereby carried on? And how much the more, considering it is
not only so much Stock advanced at first; But infallibly this may be renewed
every seven Years; And how much this may promot the Honor, Powet, and Wealth
of the Kingdom, according to my weak Judgment, may be more than can be easily
credited, until the event prove it; I doubt not but within 24 or 30 Years, the
Moveable Stock of the Kingdom may be tripled, without going to Foreign
Plantations to seek Wealth, or digging in Mines for Ore. By this project every
Man may digg. Treasure out of his own Field, for by observing the Measures
proposed, both Cattle and Grain may be greatly increased, so that we may both
live more plentitullie, and have much thereof to export, beside the uspeakable
Advantage of Manufactures: And that which makes this project the most feasible
of all others, is, That one needs no Dependence on another; except betwixt
Landlord and Tenent, and there is more Hopes to bring two to one mind than a
great Society of people. I may take my own Measures in Ordering and Dressing my
own Ground, whither others do the like or not. But in many other projects,
there must be a concurence of a Multitude, and perhaps the Managers sometimes
prove not so faithful to all concerned as could be wished, but in this it is
otherwise. And another advantage in this project. there is no Risque to run,
the worst that can befall, no loss can be sustained by the Undertakers,
wherefore I conclude, if this be not set about, we need to try none other
whatsomever.

To answer all Queries and Objections that may occur, about this project would
take more Room than can conveniently be allowed here, therefore I refer that
work to another place. But in the mean time, I shall answer some few, which I
judge may be most material; Perhaps it may demanded, What kind of Manufactures
can be propagated in this Kingdom:

To which I say; All sorts whatsoever: For I know no Reason why that can not be
wrought here, that can be fashioned or performed with Men's Hands in any place
of the World, providing we have the same Materials, and were bred too, and
taught in these several Arts and employments, and in no place without both of
these, can any thing be performed, and even tho we stand want Materials, of the
things we stand in need of, ought to be made or composed; We may get these
things unprepared, much cheaper than the made Work.

We have two universal Objections against everything that can be said in
perswadidg us to any thing we have not been accustomed to. If it be said our
Ground may be improven, and the more to convince us of this, Instance the
Example of others. It is answered, our Ground is naturally more barren than
other Kingdoms; If we be desired to set about any Handy Labor, then our Water
is so bad; that therewith we can neither Dye, Bleach, make Hats, nor Mill
Cloth,

To the first I say, if our Ground be bad, we take the wrong way to make it
better, for the best Ground in Europ, being used as commonly ours is, shall in
a short time grow little better than our own, for so long as it will bear Corn,
we plough it over and over, till the product can scarce desray the Expense of
Seed and Laboring, and then we give it a smell of Manure only, or else leaves
it Grass a Year or two, and as soon as it begins to gather a Soard, up the red
side of it again, so that in effect they will neither let it bear Grass nor
Corn.

Now say I, behold how much our next Neighbors in England manage their Ground
to advantage more than we do? Your Answer is, Their Soil is Naturally better,
and their Climat warmer. What is your inferrence? For notwithstanding the
Fertillity of their Soil, and warmness of Climat, they think it necessary to
plant Hedges to keep it warmer, as page 64. And also they find it for their
Advantage, to make but a fourth or fifth part of their Ground Corn at once,
because they cannot get all of it sufficiently kept in Manure. But because
our Ground is more barren, and Climat colder, therefore we need not use Means
to restrain External Cold, and may always have one half, or two third parts of
it in Corn. Is this your inference? Well, good enough, I think it needs no
Answer.

To that Objection anent the badness of our Water, I would fain ask a Question,
which may serve for an Answer to to this, Do ye think the badness of our Water
has any Influence upon a Man working in Iron or Wood, that his Workmanship is
not so good perhaps as else where it may be had?

Then say ye the people in this Kingdom must be much duller than others, and
therefore they can never attain to the like Dexterity in any Curious Art, or
Mechanic Operation, with these of other places.

This I will be very loath to grant, for the contrar I firmlie believe, but
indeed I will confess, That commonly our Mechanics are not so Dexterous or
Expert as others; But the Causes may be one or all of these. First, We have not
the Instruction or Education of several others, and can it be expected a Man
that has not been Taught or Instrusted in such or such an Art, can be an equal
Proficient to him that has had that Help, providing they are of equal parts,
take a Man of any of these Nations you pretend are most Expert and capable of
Instruction, and put him to do a piece of Work he never did or saw done, can be
perform it as one that is experienced with that sort of Labor? Secondly, It is
the Vulgar Opinion, Nothing that is made within the Kingdom, can be so good as
that which is brought from Abroad, Nor will they give so much for it, although it
be really better, so the Seller knowing he cannot have a price for it, if he
should bestow Labor upon it, makes it his Study how to afford his Ware cheap,
seeing the Buyers will not bestow a price upon good Ware, and that only because
it is our own Home ward Making. Another Cause why our Mechanics are not so
Dexterous as perhaps others are, is, They abide not closs at one kind of Work,
but from one thing to another, so that they cannot be so expert in several
things as they might, and undoubtedly would be in one thing: But in may other
places, Mechanics abid closs at one sort of Work, so that they become not only
expert as to the making of the Work good, but also a far greater quantity of
it; I remember I heard a Nailer, that is a Nail-maker tell. He knew a Man that
was accustomed to work in nothing but Sparrowbills, a sort of short Nails
wanting heads, he used to make a very considerable number of them, he said to
the number of 7 or 8 thousand a day. and yet if he had been set to make common
Nails, he neither could make them good, or any considerable number of them: I
doubt not but a Man abiding still at one kind of Work, may both attain to a
greater Dexterity in making of it fine, and do much more of it, than another
that from one thing to another, is continually turning.

But says some, We have had Mechanics from abroad, and we have tried to make
several things, and particularly Hats, and Broad Cloth in this Kingdom, and
yet we cannot make our Ware so good, as what we can have from abroad.

Who knows whether these Forraigners be the most expert of their Employments,
in these places from whence they came, or perhaps they may be subborned to
conceal the Art of their Calling, or perhaps their Masters find it not for
their Advantage, to bestow the Expense that is required in making the finest
Ware, because we have sucked in that Tenet, It cannot be fine enough, if it be
our own homeward making. Moreover tho there be some few skilled in these
Employments to direct, yet they cannot do all the Work with their own hands,
and till these that assist them, come to some measure of Dexterity, it cannot
be expected their Ware can be so good, as otherwise it may be. These that would
propogat any new Manufacture, must lay their Account to labor under several
Disadvantages at first; For instance, when Soap Manufactures were first set up
in this Kingdom, their Soap was not so good as what we had from abroad by far;
These at Glasgow gave it over, as a thing they could not accomplish, these at
Leith continued to work on, and now have acquired so much knowledge in that
Art, that their Soap is better than that we have brought from abroad; From
whence I conclude, if these in Leith had given over, as these at Glasgow did,
it had been thought our Water in this Kingdom was so bad, that Soap could not
be therewith made, whereas we see the Falsehood of that Conjecture: My Opinion
is, that what ever any may object against Water in other Cases, its altogether
groundless.

I should think if Strangers were encouraged to set up here for themselves, or
some of our own Country Men sent abroad, to be instructed in the knowledge of
these Arts, wherein we have least Knowledge, it might be a Mean to propagat
Manufactures; And especially Fishing and Woolen Manufactures, might prove to
the Kingdoms Unspeakable Profit, if they were promoted: Yea there is no kind of
Art or Employment, but what we might acquire Knowledge in, if we had Means of
Instruction; And because formerly the great Cause of our living at home in
Penury, was Poverty and Want of a Stock, once to set about any Fru ga litie
(for a poor Man is still kept poor, because he has nothing once to put him in
Capacity to do for himself) I say by this Project that Malady is removed, and
we are put in a Capacity to propagat Manufactures, build or buy Ships, and do
many other things that may advance the Honor, Pouer and Wealth of the Kingdom.

But says some, Fine Cloth cannot be made here, because our Wool is course;
Grant it is, We may buy as much Wool, as may be sour Else of Cloth, for the
price of one Ell, and beside if our Sheep were kept, as is proposed Chapter
5, our own Wool may be much improven, then we save the other three parts of the
Expense, it would cost ns. I know it will not be for a fourth part of the price
to the Wearer, but I mean the fourth part of the Money or Ware, that is
exported forth of the Kingdom, to bring home Cloth may be saved, and a great
dale of People, that are at present employed in Tovling their Lives out,
working in the most industrious Way that can be invented to run out the Ground,
may be employed in making the said Cloth, and other profitable Employments;
And because I told you, I had met with some Opposition, concerning the way of
Stock keeping I have proposed, I shall let you hear the most material
Arguments, any have yet adduced to prove the contrar.

Some acknowledge Housing of Sheep, may be practicable in a few, but not in
great numbers, others foresecing, granting the first, is the high way to
overturn the latter, manfully dispute against both, the strength of their
Arguments are these, viz: To put Sheep in houses, makes them scab, and the
great difficulty of getting Litter or Bedding to them, and also the Expense of
build-Hutts will be great.

To the first I say, if it be true, then I confess its a very pungent
Objection, and because some bring in matter of Fact as a proof, I shall show
what I know of Matter of Fact to the contrar, I have known 5 or six score
sheep, for a dozen or sixteen Years together, put in Hutts every Night, and not
one of them was scabbed, during that time; Now if a hundred can be lodged so
conveniently, as may prevent this bad effect, then a hundred thousand may also
be preserved the same way, providing the like Care and pains be taken on every
hundred of them. But I Will tell you where the Mistake lies. Some Stock-keepers
that have tried the Experiment, to save a little Expense in building Hutts,
have crammed them so throng, that one could not conveniently ly beside another,
neither did they take Care to have them lying clean and dry, from whence this
bad Effect followed: When I desire a Man to hold out of a Mire on his Right
hand, I bid him not leap into a Ditch on his Left, when I complain of letting
Sheep ly out wanting Food, amongst Frost and Snow, page 94, I do not desire
they should be used after this fashion, but page 97, I recommend building of
Hutts so large, that the Sheep may ly at ease, and have free Air, and page 99,
by all means to lay them clean and dry.

Others say, when they buy Cattle to put in their Parks, for fatning these that
are accustomed to ly without, take on flesh much sooner than these that have
been housed.

To Answer this distinctly, I will give you this Similitude; Let a Highland Man
that is accustomed to go through Bogs and Glens, with only a loose Played about
his Body, his Buttocks altogether bare, and his Brogues that defend him not
from one drop of Water. Now I shall readily believe, this Man in the beginning
of a Campine, shall endure more Hardship than another that has been accustomed
to good Keeping and warm Clothing; Yet I shall scarce be persuaded to follow
his Example. No doubt Cattle that accustomed to ly in a warm house, will not at
first agree so well to ly without in a Park, as other accustomed thereunto; But
let them be put in a house all night, and feed with the other all day, I doubt
not but they may be as soon fat as the other.

Now to the building of Sheep Cots, I say, if Stones can be easily had, you may
make the walls of stone, if not, Sods or Turffs may serve, the form I judge
most convenient, and least expensive, is a square of 50 foot each way, 4 foots
in hight will be enough, then within this build another wall ten foot from the
other, the inner square is 30 foot in length each quarter, but in stead of this
inner wall, let there be only pillars made for the support of your Roof: The
Reason why I recommend leaving one side of the House open, is to let the Sheep
have Air, but if the side of a single house were left open in all Weather, it
could not defend from Storm and Snow; The breadth of your House being only the
distance betwixt the inner and outer wall, viz: ten foot, Cuples of 7 or 8 foot
length may serve, and in regard they are short, they will not need to be very
thick, about the thickness of good Care polls may serve, which being placed at
6 or 7 foot distance, about 30 Cuples will serve the whole Square. The outer
wall of 50 foot each side, being builded of Sods, or with some few Stones mixed
with the Sods, will not cost above ten Shillings of Expense, the Cuples may be
had I suppose for ten pence a pair, which is 15 pounds, small Sticks will serve
for Cabers or Ribbs: But geant they are as dear as the Cuples, both make but 30
pounds, say the Thatch cost as much as the walls, all make but 42 pounds, and
this Square will contain 12 or 15 scores of Sheep with ease: But call them but
12 score only, the Expense is but 3 ss. 6 d. for every Sheep, not the price of
two years smearing; This House kept in Thatch, may last 30 Years, and the
Thatch I reckon nothing at all, for grant you put Divets on it every two Years
once, they are worth all your pains for Manure.

As to the beding of your Sheep, I say, if ye have Corn, as is supposed page
100, ye have Straw enough for that use, if not, Rushes, Bent, dry Sand, or any
thing that may keep them dry and clean will serve; But if none of these things
can be had, then can you not want Divets; And because this is the most
expensive, I shall reckon how far your profit may go beyond your Cost in this.
A Man may cut or cast ten Cart load of Divets in a day, that is six pence, say
the drying and bringing of them home cost twice as much, you have them cheaper
than two pence a Cart, every Cart of Divets, will be 2 or 3 of Dung, because
the Piss and Dung, add both to the weight and bulk, the Cart of Dung is worth
14 pence, as was showed Chap. 5. When your Sheep begin to ly any thing wet, lay
a new course of Divets over the whole floor, with the green side up, or if you
have Straw or Rushes, ye may bed them whiles with the one, and whiles with the
other; The profit you have by this Labor, is more than ye readily can believe,
for your Sheep being provided in Food, and preserved from cold and wet, they
are in a much better Condition, Especially that time of the year, when they are
with Young; And I am of Opinion, that any Creature receiving wholesome and
plentiful Nourishment, when it is in the womb, is thereby more strengthened,
and brought to a wholesome Constitution, than by any so long time feeding,
during the time of its Life; And tho severals of our Stock-keepers may feed
their Cattle pretty well in Summer yet very few provide for them in Winter, as
the Schamles can bear Witness.

Perhaps it may be said, these Divats being cut upon the Pasture, will spoil a
great dale of Ground. To which I say, you cannot in Reason expect much Benefit,
but you must be at some loss; I do not propose this as a thing that may be done
without any Cost at all, but I endeavor to make it evident, that your Profit
shall be more than your loss; And if you will consider the Benefit your other
Ground receives by the Sheep Dung, you will find all the prejudice ye sustain by
the loss of so much of your Pasture fully repayed with Interest.

To insist in speaking to every thing that may be for the further explaining
and applying of the whole Project, and touching of many things concerning
Husbandry, I have not yet spoken to all, would take up thrice as much as all I
have yet done: And to be plain, I have no great inclination to engage my self
in the Expense that will be required to finish such a Work, until I see further
what Entertainment that which I have done already meets with. I have said as
much as I can in few words, and for ought I know, am the first in this Kingdom
that has essayed any thing on this Subject. But I Am of Opinion, there may be
several Directions given, concerning the Ordering and Dressing the Ground, more
useful to the Inhabitants of Scotland, than what has yet been proposed by any
that ever wrote upon Husbandry.

I know severals have written perhaps as well as any Man can in general But
none of these being particularly acquainted with the Nature and Constitution of
Ground in this Kingdom, nor with the particular mistakes the people generally
ly under, their Directions cannot so exactly answer our Case. A skilful
Physician may prepare Physic or Medicine, very good for many Diseases; And yet
a far less accomplished Physician, may prepare Physic that is fitter for the
particular use of one whose Constitution and Disease he knows: I doubt not
but particular Directions may be given in Relation to Husbandry, more exact to
our Case than any yet proposed by Strangers. Ploughing too much of the Ground,
Leaving it without Fence, And overlaying their Pastures: These three being the
grand Mistakes People ly most under, I have endeavored to persuade them to
Reformation therein, which is a quite other Theme, than is usually insisted on
by others.

But before I close, I shall take notice to one Objection, that perhaps may
seem of great Moment to many, and yet in Reality is of no force at all; The
thing here proposed is very great, viz: That if every one would take such
Measures, as easily they may, the Honor, Wealth and Power of the Kingdom, may
soon be advanced to the double of what it is at Present; The Means by which so
great a Matter is to be accomplished, being so easy and very common, (whereas
the Means for prosecuting so great a Work, would be expected to be very
wonderful and extraordinar) therefore no such Effect can follow the
prosecution of this Project.

How weak so ever the Means are, to me they seem to prove effectual if
followed, and if the Calculation made already, serve not to persuade you to the
like thoughts, I must know your Objections before I can satisfy you: But it is
not the first time great Things have been accomplished by weak Means, and the
less that can be expected from the instrument or Means, there seems to be the
more of an Overruling Providence in it; And to tell you my own thoughts,
several Providence seem to concur in the prosecution of this Project, viz:
The long continuance of the Frost, which does oblige People to a Compliance
(for this year) to one special Point I have proposed: To wit, To take less
Ground into Tillage, and keep'd in better Condition. And then again by this, a
great dale of Seed may be saved, which will come very seasonably this Year: In
respect of our-present Scarcity of Grain. And now beside, upon the Conclusion
of a Peace, People may apply themselves thereto the more effectually, together
with several other Things that I have not Room here to insert.

FINIS.

