TWO SPEECHES spoken in the house of the LORDS, By the Lord Viscount Newarke.

The first Concerning the right of Bishops to sit in Parliament, May 21, 1641.

The second about the lawfulnes and convenience of their intermedling in
Temporal affairs, May the 24th. following.

London, Printed 1641.

The first Speech Concerning the right of Bishops to sit in Parliament, May 21.
1641.
My Lords,
I Shall take the boldness to speak a word or two upon this subject, first as
it is in it self, then as it is in the consequence: For the former I think
he is a great stranger in Antiquity, that is not well acquainted with that of
their sitting here, they have done thus and in this manner, almost since the
conquest, and by the same power and the same right the other Peers did, and
your Lordships now do, and to be put from this their due, so much their due,
by so many hundred years strengthened and confirmed, and that without any
offense, nay, pretense of any, seems to me to be very severe; if it be jus, I
dare boldly say it is summum. That this hinders their Ecclesiastical vocation,
an argument I hear much of, has in my apprehension more of shadow then
substance in it: if this be a reason, sure I am it might have been one six
hundred years ago.

A Bishop, my Lords, is not so circumscribed within the circumference of his
Diocese, that his sometimes absence can be termed, no not in the most strict
sense a neglect or hinderance of his duty, no more then that of a Lieutenant
from his County, they both have their subordinate Ministers, upon which their
influences fall, though the distance be remote.

Besides, my Lords, the lesser must yield to the greater good; to make wholesome
and good Laws for the happy and well regulating of Church and Commonwealth, is
certainly more advantageous to both, then the want of the personal execution
of their office, and that but once in three years, and then peradventure but a
month or two, can be prejudicial to either. I will go no further to prove
this, which so long experience has done so fully, so demonstratively.

And now my Lords, by your Lordships good leave, I shall speak to the
consequence as it reflects both on your Lordships, and my Lords the Bishops.
Dangers and inconveniences are ever best prevented e longinquo; this president
comes near to your Lordships, and such a one, that mutato nomine devobis.
Pretenses are never wanting, nay, sometimes the greatest evils appear in the
most fair and specious outsides, witness the Shipmony, the most abominable,
the most illegal thing that ever was, and yet this was painted over with
color of the Law; what Bench is secure, if to allege, be to convince, and
which of your Lordships can say then he shall continue a member of this House,
when at one blow twenty six are cut off. It then behooves the Neighbor to look
about him cum proximus ardet Vcalegon.

And for the Bishops, my Lords, in what condition will you leave them? The
House of Commons represents the meanest person, so did the Master his Slave,
but they have none to do so much for them, and what justice can tie them to
the observation of those Laws, to whose constitution they give no consent, the
wisdom of former times gave proxies unto this House merely upon this ground,
that every one might have a hand in the making of that, which he had an
Obligation to obey: This House could not represent, therefore proxies in room
of persons were most justly allowed.

And now my Lords, before I conclude, I beseech your Lordships to cast your
eyes upon the Church, which I know is most dear and tender to your Lordships,
you will see her suffer in her most principal members, and deprived of that
honor which here and throughout all the Christian World ever since
Christianity she constantly has enjoyed; for what Nation or Kingdom is there
in whose great and public assemblies, and that from, her beginning, she had
not some of hers if I may not say as essential, I am sure I may say as
integrall, parts thereof, and truly my Lords, Christianity cannot alone boast
of this or challenge it only as hers, even Heathenisme claims an equal share.

I never read of any of them, Civil or Barbarous, that gave not thus much to
their Religion, so that it seems to me to have no other original, to flow from
no other spring than Nature it self.

But I have done, and will trouble your Lordships no longer, how it may stand
with the honor and justice of this House to p^sse this Bill, I most humbly
submit unto your Lordships, the most proper and only Judges of them both.


