Mr. Dowdall's Just and Sober VINDICATION, In opposition to several INJUSTICES
Practiced against him, by some of his Fellow Prisoners IN THE Gate House Prison
OF WESTMINSTER, Although Reputed Priests, Jesuits, and Sufferers for Christ's
sake.

London, Printed for Gerard Dowdall, in Westminster Gate House, 1681.

THE Epistle Dedicatory.
To the most Virtuous, most Pious, and most charitable Ladies, the Relievers of
poor Prisoners, during the late Troublesome times, for Religion.
NOthing appears more Splendent in this World, then the Heroic Actions of Men,
by which they Conquor Nations, Destroy their Enemies, and consequently, free
themselves from Slavery and Thraldom, becoming thereby, not only an
everlasting Glory to Posterity, but also to the Countries and Nations from
whence they descend.

All those, most Virtuous, most Pious, and most Charitable Ladies, you have far
surpassed by your unparalled Goodness, Piety, and Liberality. Alexander, the
Great Conqueror of the World, has owned the same, saying, That who overcomes
himself, is more Praise Worthy, then he who takes by force of Arms the
strongest Towns or Cities.

It is known to those that have Traveled most parts of Europe, that none has
practiced all the degrees of Virtue more than you these three Years last past;
and this is to overcome ones self. You boar your Crosses cheerfully; you
thanked God as well in your Adversities, as in your Prosperities; you succored
your distressed Neighbors; you Comforted the Comfortless; you Visited the
Sick; and you did not abhor the noisome Smells of Goals, but afforded your
Alms as showers of Gold to poor Prisoners; and the Dead you Buried with Joy:
These are the Works of Mercy, recommended by our Savior Jesus Christ, the
which acquired unto you more Honor and Glory, then ever Conquerors deserved;
for what does it avail one, to gain the whole World, with the loss of his Soul?
By these good Acts, your Memories ever remain, both in this, and in the World
to come. By these you are a Mirror to future Ages, and which is more, you have
by these prepared to your selves an everlasting habitation with God and his
Angels in Heaven: For as Water quenches Fire, so your Alms and good Deeds have
extirpated the Root of your Sins. Now you will find verified the words of
Christ, That what you have done for one of these little ones in Prison, you
have done it for Him. All this while it is to be believed, that all these
forementioned great and ample works of Piety, has been grounded on true
Charity, which is understood to be done for Gods sake alone; For what is
practiced on other respects, as for kindred, friendship, or for any other
worldly Interest sake, or out of a natural pity, carries its whole reward of
good Name or Fame along with it. For my part, I am fully persuaded, your
Intentions in bestowing your Charities, are sincere and real, for the Love of
God only; as a certain Widow I knew, who had but an hundred pounds per annum
Jointure, gave forty thereof to Relieve poor Prisoners. Pray give me leave to
tell you, that your will and pleasure in the distribution of your Charities, is
much abused; You have one end therein, and some of your Servants or Trustees
another; You intend doubtless, that your Charities be divided to the Honor and
Glory of God, according to the Prisoners necessities and Qualities; But on the
contrary, your Trustees, resolves to give the same to those they love and fancy
most, but whether that be well or ill grounded, God and their own Conscience
must be Judge. There are some detained Prisoners for want of Monys to procure
their Habeas Corpus, and to pay their Chamber Rent: but you had rather
contribute so much a week for the Release of such Prisoners, then allow them a
maintenance in Prison; but your Trustees wholly reject such proposalls, by
which they hinder the Prisoners Liberty, and put you to unnecessary charges for
their Maintenance: One or two of them gave your Moneys freely to discharge the
expenses requisite for the Release of a Stranger they had a kindness for; and
another at the same time and place, and on the same account, although well
known to most Catholics in Town, could not prevail to have a penny from them.
Happy is he in these days, that is young and handsome, which some of your
Trustees regard more than the fulfilling of your pleasures; yet to justify
themselves in their Extravagancies, must needs allege some unjust reasons for
what they do, to the great disparagement and damage of the Prisoners, whose
grievances (and what else they can say for themselves) cannot be heard, so that
they are often censured, even by their best Friends, though without any just
Cause, or the least shadow of Truth, contrary to the precepts of true Charity.

Now, least by somes neglect in a work you undertook so grateful to God, you
should loose any part of your expected Reward from him, I thought it worth my
labor, and your knowledge, to give you a particular account of some passages
concerning certain Prisoners, and the mannagers of your Charities. Men and
Women while they live in this world have their failings, and where you find
either of them to transgress, be pleased in your accustomed Bounty, to be
impartial in your Judgments, and let right take place: If you Judge charitably,
(as I hope you will) and commiserate their weakness, God will deal with you
accordingly, and your works will shine on Earth, as it does in Heaven: In both
which places, wishes you and yours from his heart, the greatest Joy and Comfort
that can be.

Most Virtuous and Pious Ladies, Your ever obliged, and most thankful Servant,
Gerard Dowdall.

Mr. Dowdall's JUST and SOBER VINDICATION, etc. For the Satisfaction of all
Impartial CATHOLICS.
CHAP. I.
Beloved Friends,
It Is no Scandal to the Catholic Religion, to have the Vices of some pretended
Members thereof discovered. The only way to Refine the Church of God, is to
separate the good from the Evil; it is by that the destructive Members are
distinguished from the sound ones, otherwise the one would corrupt the other,
as one scabby Sheep does the whole Flock. The best Experienced Artists are
often deceived in the trial of Gold by Fire and the Touchstone, the same also,
if it be very good, must be malliable, and endure Aqua fortis: So it is not a
sufficient motive to believe men true Priests or Jesuits, because they wear
Priests or Jesuits habits, and say Mass, showing outwardly signs of Devotion
(as Hypocrites do) It Is therefore necessary that their Lives and Conversations
witness what they pretend themselves to be, otherwise they are to be supected
as Seducers, and disturbers of the Peace of honest Men; such were some
Companions of mine in the Gate House Prison of Westminster, although reputed
Sufferers for Jesus Christ's sake, when on the contrary, they have practiced the
greatest Injustice that could be, more becoming Heathens than Christians, more
suitable to Infidels than Catholics, and much less to reputed Priests and
Jesuits, as the impartial Reader may judge by this following discourse.

Now, that every one may know the necessity of this Relation, they must yield,
that the Laws of God and Nature, obliges every one to defend himself, yea, to
Kill, rather than be Killed: If then it be lawful for every one to defend his
Body, much more is it just to vindicate his Reputation from Calumnies and
Detraction, which renders a man odious to the Word, and in a worser condition
than if he had been quite out of it. I hope then none will be scandalized at
this my Defense, although I touch my Adversaries to the quick, and make them
Shameful to the world, for their little Charity, and great Injustice, grounded
altogether on Lies, Calumny, and Detraction.

The first grounds of prejudicing me, was a difficulty propounded to me by a
Person of Quality about seven years ago, concerning God and Christian Religion:
besides the satisfaction I gave him then, I directed to him one Father
Patuillet, an Eminent Preacher then in St. James's, belonging to Don Francisco
di Melos, the Portugal Ambassador, and I my self argued the whole matter with a
Religious man, a stranger then in Town, for to give a greater satisfaction to
the said Nobleman next time I saw him; the aforesaid stranger, as I was
informed, held a dispute with an Irish Priest to the same purpose, who
afterward acquainted one Melchior Power his Countryman, and a reputed Priest,
of what passed; this Melchior envying my Prosperity, a year before those
Troublesome-times, assures my friends, underhand, that the said Noblemans
difficulties, to me propounded, were my own Principles and Opinion, although I
never conversed with him half a quarter of an hour at once in my life, no, nor
ever was under the Roof of an house with him that I know, unless in a Chapel
or this Prison, and yet by his undermining me, I lost my employment with the
Marquess of Montecuculi, and an expectation of a Preferment by his means, worth
one hundred pounds a year, being actually employed therein; and as one Evil
commonly follows another, there was no ways to deprive me of this Preferment,
but by getting the Elector of Cullens Resident to persuade me his Master
recalled me to my former Employments in his Court; after I went thither, I
found no such thing; but the Resident having incurred thereby his Highness
displeasure, was forced, in his own defense, to write the whole circumstance,
how he was set on: By which Relation (although the greatest Lie imaginable) the
Prince is so incensed against me, that I lost all future expectation in that
Court, having formerly had therein two considerable Employments, the Reward of
which, was usually a Chanonry of two or three hundred pounds a year during
life; I being only at first retired from thence for health sake. I lost by
this Journey all the Moneys I had, four Suits of Clothes, and fifteen changes
of Linen, and all my Friends at home and abroad. Afterward, for a livelihood,
returning to my Native Country, I came to London, where the said Melchior Power
was so succesful by his calumny, and framed! Lies, in robbing me of all honest
Reputation, that among all my former Friends, one only excepted, I could not
obtain six pence to bear my charges in the rest of my Journey; and therefore by
tarrying long on the Road for want of Moneys to go with convenience, I lost all
good opportunity of Wind and Weather, so that at last these troublesome times
suddenly coming on, I was taken Prisoner on suspicion of being one Ireland, a
Lancashire Gentleman, and afterward brought hither to the Gatehouse, where
charitable Catholics relieved me bountifully, which the said Melchior Power,
there also in custody, suddenly prevented, by relating to other Prisoners,
reputed Priests and Jesuits, the former Calumny of my Principles and Opinion in
matter of Faith, who living also on Charity, and therefore as jealous as he of
my Gains, joined with him in confirming the same to our Benefactors; upon which
false Information I lost them all on a sudden, so that afterward I scarce had
a penny from any I ever knew before; insomuch that those who sent me word at
first, they had Gold and Silver at my service, would now have no correspondence
with me, or so much as accept my Letters. Among others, a certain Lady sent to
me, that such a day she would send me three Guinnies, the which my Companions
understanding, presently got the Lady to be informed of their Calumny and Lies
of me, to which the Lady giving credit, sent them the three Guinnies, who gave
me not one penny thereof. Another Lady I served three years, who has bestowed
Eighteen pounds on me since my Departure from her house, understanding the said
false Reports by the said Melchior Powers means, would not now in Prison give
me one penny to Relieve me.

Neither was it to be admired, that Strangers flinch'd of, when two Gentlewomen
of my own Country, and of old acquaintance, with another special Friend, coming
to see me, being prepossest of Mr. Powers Calumny, did so suspect I should do
them a Prejudice, that they seemed to tremble in my presence, so that one of
them was always sure to stand between me and the Door, least I stepped a side to
have them apprehended. Thus my Friends being alienated from me, the report of
my bad Principles and Opinion, in matters of Faith, began to die, so that at
the Years end, there was not a word heard thereof, until the Countess of A.
understanding I was the only Prisoner for Religion that lay on the Boards,
offered not only to pay my Chamber Rent while I was to be a Prisoner, but also
what Debt I owed until then, which so gal'd my companions, that fearing I was
coming again to favor, they put their heads together how to clip my Wings.

First, that Evening they sent to me one Mr. O Cullane, (who owned himself
publicly to be a Priest) letting me to understand, that he was sent by the
other four of my companions, to acquaint me, how by Writing my necessities to
Friends abroad, I robbed them of their shares of what I was to have from the
aforesaid Countess. I desired him to assure them, that in the Faith of a
Christian, to the best of my Memory, I did not write of my necessities to any
whatsoever, in a quarter of a year at least: That the said Lady was altogether
a stranger to me, that I never sent to her directly or indirectly; that I was
then ignorant of her Name and Quality, yet this did not give them any
satisfaction, for the Night following, they employed the same Messenger, with
other Instructions to the same purpose: At this I was not a little offended,
answering, that I would discourse the matter before them all: The next day I
told them, I was much concerned at their incredulity, after the Oath I took:
That in case I should have acquainted some abroad of my necessities, that would
be no unjustice done them, being a whole year before deprived of all Relief
from former friends, by their calumnies and Lies: That I was indebted for
Lodging, and therefore forced to lay on the Boards Twenty six weeks. That I was
credibly informed, that one of them got about an hundred pound gains since his
Imprisonment: That I should be glad, if he and the rest had got ten times so
much. That they also ought in Charity to wish me well, and not to be so
incensed for Gods Providence toward me. But all I said availed nothing, for
three of them, being chief Leaders, and acquainted with a great many Persons of
Quality, easily persuaded the two others to side with them: All five
unanimously, without the least ground of truth, informs the said Countess with
multitude of Lies of me, and got Mrs. Catherine Sheldon to second them; they
prevailed so far with the said Lady, that she would never afterward pay one
penny of what she promised for me. I must confess, the want of a sufficient
livelihood was no small trouble to me in a Prison, where every thing is sold at
a dear Rate, and where one cannot send for the worth of two pence, but must pay
the Messenger, and this out of six shillings a week, my whole allowance for
Meat, Drink, Firing, Candlelight, Washing, and the repairing of Clothes, the
rest I give for my Chamber Rent, or else I must have layn on the Boards in the
Common side: In truth, all this was the least of my troubles, knowing well, the
more my Body suffered for Gods sake, the greater my Reward in Heaven would be
hereafter: the consideration thereof, made me rather Glory, then to be any ways
troubled at my Imprisonment; but to be back-bited by inhuman Tongues, sharper
than Raizors, who have no more Mercy than the worst of creatures, perplexes me
more, then by any human Art I am able to bear, especially when I consider, that
my Reputation, which I ever preferred before all the happiness of this world, is
unjustly stained by the calumny and malice of the forementioned reputed Priests
and Jesuits, who persecuted me for lucre of Monys, and self Interest sake; as
the Impartial Reader may judge, since they never attempted any thing against
me, but when they believed I had extraordinary Releif from Friends or was in a
likelihood of obtaining some, which happened to me but twice, to wit at my first
coming to the Prison, as I said before, and a twelve month after when the said
Countess promised to pay my Chamber Rent, the only two times they vented their
Malice against me.

To prevent for the Future the like abuses occasioned by the too much
credulity of the Female Sex, especially to Churchmen, or so reputed, let them
know, that these are Men as others are, Subject to all human Frailties, as if
they were never such, although by their Profession they ought to overcome their
passions, but to say they all do so, is too much presumption, therefore we must
yield some bad among them, and every of them to have their impefections, to
wit, one has one failing, and another other failings. Who then is of so little
Sense or Reason, as to believe that all these Frailties are to be approved off,
because committed by such Men? If one of them be Naturally self Interested, or
Passionate, or Revengful, or inclined to any other particular Vice, ought we
then to side with them, and maintain their (...) because they have other good
qualities, as some graceless Women have done much to my prejudice: No, God and
the Catholic Church hates Vice, and the Upholders thereof, for certainly it is
no small Sin to defame unjustly a man that bears the Characters of honest
Principles: I do not doubt but such evil Mouthed Creatures incurs the wrath of
God more then Robbers and Murtheres in the high ways; It Is certainly better for
one to loose his Life, then his good Name. My adversaries by stayning my
reputation bereived me of my livelihood, and of all future preferments
hereafter: All this while I do not deny but I have been to blame in some
things; I know being highly provoked, the effect of Passion moved me to say
that which I did not my self approve of soon after, for one Mr. O. Bryan, (of
whom we shall speak at large hereafter) being in great distress, entreated me
to beg some assistance for him from my Companions, who upon motion thereof,
willingly condescended, excepting Mr. Melchior Power, who answered, he needed
as much as any in Prison; I only said, if it was so, he was much belied, for
the common report was, he had Forty Shillings a week settled on him by four
Persons whom I named to him, as I was informed, but his answer was, I invented
the same my self, and consequently I was a Babbler. I must confess I was so
vexed thereat, that I did not know whether I ought rather to Bridle my hands
more then my tongue, but I did not indeed touch him, although it had been
according to his deserts. I own it was my destiny to be unjustly persecuted by
some Churchmen, but that the impartial Reader may be as well a Judge of the
occasion thereof, as my self, I will set down some Examples.

Of Mr. PARSONS.
The Second of my Companions in the Gatehouse Prison who persecuted me, was one
Mr. Parsons a reputed Priest: This Gentleman setting his Passion a side, is a
good natured man, but is so transported with Natural Pride, or rather a Lofty
Mind, that he is impossible to be pleased by some, unless they yield wholly to
his humors; let others be ever so well quallified, these dispositions I
discovered in him from the very beginning; and therefore judged it most
necessary to comply with him, as with one Born in this Kingdom, and extremaly
well beloved, especially by Ladies Gentlewomen, who commonly brought what
Charity we received. It Is true indeed, he was a proper handsome man, in the
prime of his Age, more agreeable to some in his own Person, then in that he was
reputed to be, which was no small advantage to him in the said distribution of
Charities.

The first distaste he took at me, was discoursing of ordinary matters, as
about the Mathematics, and the Customs, Fashions, Education, Judgment, and
common Breeding of all sorts of People in most Countries of Europe, in all such
occasions, he seemed much offended, if contradicted in the least, although I
might presume in some difficulties to be his Master, I mean as concerning the
Mathematics, in which he was altogether ignorant; yet he used to side with
others, as unknowing as himself, against me in such Subjects, although I taught
that Science for some years; so that rather then to hear me prove the matter by
clear Demonstrations, he was wont to fall into a passion, calling me a
wrangling fellow; but what ever the reason was, from that time forward, he boar
me an antipathy: he was sure afterward, on all occasions, to snap and correct
me, as if I had been a Boy: I could justly say, I hardly Dined five times
afterward in his company without some affront: he was not ashamed to tell me
to my face, that I seemed never to have frequented any Gentleman's company: That
I did not know to cut my meat; that he was forced to teach me my manners; all
that while I never showed any displeasure, but put it off with a Jest, only
once I replied, that it was strange that one who was seventeen years Governor
to Earls, Lords, and Knights Children, and had two considerable Employments in
the Prince Elector of Cullens Court, did not know how to behave my self in his
presence; besides, I had my Education among the best Gentry in Spain, France,
Germany, and Italy, and more in years then any of that company, yet he
compacted so with others of my Companions, that a whole years time I was forced
at Meals to sit at the lower end of their Table; but finding neither there any
quietness, I abstained wholly from their Dinners, losing thereby my share of
above 40 bestowed on us in common; at last I sent to him, that since I could
not eat with him in peace, I should have my share a part, the which he denied
for a quarter of a Year, at last he ordered me some of their Reversions, which
I could not eat.

All this while he had constant visits from the said Women and others, all
which he dissuaded so much from me, that they would not afford me one civil
word, some attacking me with unbeseeming Language for concerning my self with
their ordinary discourse. It Is hence to be conjectured what prejudice he has
done me in the distribution of the Charities, since all were delivered, either
by his Favorites, or given him to be divided as he thought fit, although the
intentions of the Donors were otherwise, and that every one should have
according to his necessities and quality, but things were carried on otherwise.

The holy Scriptures assures us, that as we treat others, in like manner shall
we be dealt with also. Behold how God has permitted this Gentleman, one of the
principallest Authors of my misfortunes, to be confounded. To defame and
prejudice me, he took hold on every groundless and silly report he heard of me
by any sorry creature whatsoever. These he has set forth in the best colors he
could invent, in confirmation of what he persuaded folks of me. Afterward
getting out of Prison on Bail, he went to one Mr. Hyens his house in
Hereford-Shire, whose Maid being with Child, declares him to be the Father
thereof: And although I really believe him to be wrongfully accused, because I
hear both he and his Friends recant their rash Judgments of me heretofore, not
doubting, but I was calumniated then, as well as he is now. Yet none can deny,
but God afflicts him in the same measure as he did me: But since he ownes his
fault, I forgive him, although I shall never be able to rub off what prejudice
I received by his means.

It was my general Remark, that whosoever were his friends (although ever so
great mine before) became at last my Foes, no, nor would they afford me a good
look: What Character then has he given of me, but the worst that could be? and
often in my own presence, though not hearing, he made his calumny of me a
Subject of Laughter to his company. About this time he procured license to
converse daily with other Gentlemen Prisoners on the same score in another
apartment, called, High-Park, from some of whom, I had some times relief, but
by his going thither, they became as a verse to me as he, which I learned
afterward by woeful experience; for having also liberty to frequent the same
place, I renewed my acquaintance with one Mr. Turner a reputed Jesuit, formerly
a Scholar in the same College I studied in; I offered him all the kindness I
could express as to one belonging to those places I had part of my Learning and
Education from; the which he seemed much to slight, being already corrupted by
the said Mr. Parsons. The second time he took more notice of me, but the third
time I was sent for to his Chamber by the foresaid Countess, who promised (as I
said before) to pay my Chamber Rent. She was pleased to persuade me to take my
Lodging among the rest, until I gave her Ladyship reasons to the contrary, with
which she was so satisfied, that she wished me agree for my lodging where I
pleased, and she would see it paid.

Of Mr. TVRNER.
After her departure, I returned to the said Mr. Turners Room, who told me, my
discourse with that Lady was not either like that of a Christian, a Gentleman,
or a Philosopher, alleging there was no Truth in what I said, and that all
the Prisoners could justify the same: I answered, that I would forfeit my
life, if every word I said was not true, to wit, that tho Chamber proposed to
me, had a most noisome smell, when the wind was on a certain side, the which
would prejudice my health. That it would be a great mortification to me, and an
hindrance to my Studies, to lay in an open place, the receptacle of all comers
and goers. That I naturally delighted to live retiredly. That I was offered one
of the best Rooms in the house to me alone for the same rate: His answer was, I
had Maggots in my head; that I was totter-headed, with other reproachful words:
and to be brief, he told me, if I did not remove willingly to the place the
Lady mentioned at first, I should be haled thither: I desired to know for what,
which he said was not expedient to tell me, and therefore I must resolve to
concur. I replied, that I never made profession in any Religious Order, and
consequently was not tied to the Vows of obedience. That by his discourse I
conceived there was some evil aspersion cast on me; that it behoved me to clear
my self thereof before I removed, least by condescending first to their
demands, I seemed to the world, I owned my self guilty of I know not what. That
I was the oldest of all the company, excepting himself: That I was come to
years to know my own convenience better than any of them could direct me. I
pressed both him then, and the rest afterward, to let me know what they had to
say against me, with protestations, that if I did not clear my self of what
ever was to be laid to my charge, I would submit to what they pleased, and beg
them pardon on my knees for my resistance, they all answered, both generally
and particularly, they had nothing to say against me.

Why then have I been mangled and torn alive in a thousand pieces a whole years
time, by the venomous Tongues of so shameless a Generation of men? who by the
same mouths uttered hundreds of calumnies against me in private, now to my face
publicly disowns the same. Where are those Proselites whom they have employed
to aggravate their wickedness all the Kingdom over? Behold the Knavery of those
you honored so highly, and loved so dearly: You have sided with their
Iniquity, and also justified their Calumnies with flourishes of hundred lies,
which God will never forgive you without restitution to me first of my
Reputation.

To proceed further in the Malice of my Companions, the aforesaid Countess,
according to her promise, came with the Moneys I was to have for discharging my
debt in Prison, but the Gentlemen, notwithstanding they assured me they had
nothing to say of me, as I declared before, yet they gave such a bad character
to the Lady of me, that they caused her to carry back the Moneys again,
alleging that it was first necessary I remove my Lodging to the foresaid
stinking Room; on this resolution they employed Mrs. Catherine Sheldon thrice
to me in an hours time, to let me know what was concluded; I told her, if the
occasion of my removal was the flying reports spread of me by my Companions, it
behoved me to justify my self, least by complying to their humors, I might
give occasion to the world to think me guilty of their false aspersions. That
if it was to the end we might live all together, I would condescend to remove
in an hours warning. The third time I said I would yield to what she pleased;
with this she brought the foresaid Countess with Moneys for me, which she gave
Mr. Church our head Jailer, assuring him, in the presence of four more, she
would pay my Chamber Rent for the future while I was to be a Prisoner. The same
day I removed my things to the place appointed, thinking to lodge there that
Night: No sooner did I get among them, but I found it was not my company they
looked for, nor any thing else but a pretense to hinder me of the Ladies
favors; so that on a sudden they set Nic-names on me, making me also believe
Mr. Turner would speak with me, when at the same time he was asleep, and had
not asked for me. Forthwith I concluded it was impossible for me to enjoy peace
among those that designed to cross and abuse me, therefore I resolved to tarry
where I was: Yet conversing with them daily in the common Room, when there was
no offensive smell, I was no small Pastime to Mr. Turner for some days; who
finding no other object of his Jests but me, made use of my Name above forty
times in each hour; adding, that Women in England that never left their
Chimny-corner, spoke better than I do after all my Travels. That none in the
house were such great Hoggs in their Clothes as he and I: That the rest were
well versed in Philosophy and Divinity, but he and I were the only moams in
the Prison, with an hundred other like sour Jests: But in this we were ill met,
for although I forbore with his doings for quietness sake, yet I thought often I
never met with so undiscreet a man of the Society before; I wondered at the
Man's little prudence, or rather great impudence, to press familiarity on one
that never spent an hour in Recreation with him in my life time. I could not
imagine wherein a man I knew to be of no Parts, no Traveller, no Linguist, no
Historian; and scarce worth the Name of a Scholar, should ground such
confidence, for Lattin he durst not speak, the Mathematics he knew not, and
for any other knowledge, I am sure he has but little. I composed on a Pious
matter some Latin Verses, wherein I left on purpose some notable faults, to see
his correction; but his opinion was, they were all very good, much admiring I
could make them without the assistance of Books.

To be brief, when I found at last no end of his insolent Jests, I spoke to him
one day in a very moderate manner, telling him, I admired at his little wisdom,
in breaking his Jests on one of my Age and calling, as if I were not compos
Mentis. That if he did but reflect on himself, he would find Beams in his own
Eyes, for the Mors he perceived in mine: at which he started, suddenly asking,
how is that? I told him ingeniously, without the least sign of Passion, that the
second time I entered his Chamber, I took notice, that it was his disorderly
drinking occasioned his tedious Sickness, which was enough to kill a Hogg; for
in the Morning fasting, he called first for a Glass of Canary, next a Glass of
Rhenish Wine, after that a Glass of Claret, all which overheating his Stomach,
he called at last for a Glass of Beer, a Medicine indeed that would Kill me in
one Months time; hereat he retired to his Chamber, two days after he sent to me
the forementioned Mr. Cullane, advising me to ask him pardon on my knees, and
to tell the standers by, what I said to him were Lies, or else he would write
to all my Benefactors, not to send me a penny Relief. I answered, sure Mr.
Turner is in his Jesting humors again, and so took no further notice of it.
The next day he desired one Mr. Maccarty, now condemned for a Priest in
Newgate, to bring me the same Message: I answered, since he is in earnest, I
will speak to him, so going to his room, I said, Mr. Turner, why would you send
me such Messages for a thing I did not offend God venially, and although I said
nothing but the Truth, yet I concerned my self in that same against my
inclination, only to divert you from making me the Subject of your Laughter.
Then he replied, Mr. Dowdall, you stand to what you said, I advise you to ask
me Pardon on your knees, and to declare openly, what you said of my Drinking
was false, or else I will write to all your friends not to send you a penny
maintenance. I asked him, if he would have me tell a Lie, or if he thought the
world was to be ruled by one Jesuit, and so departed; but my Gentleman was as
good as his word, for ever after I scarce received any assistance toward my
livelihood, but what one Lady sent me weekly, whom he endeavored to dissuade
also from Relieving me.

Now to accomplish his design the better, he made use (among others) of the
said Mrs. Catherine Sheldon, one of the best Friends I had before, as I owned
it to her and her Sisters by two or three Letters I writ to them; on suspicion
had of their displeasure with me, but the instructions of Mr. Turner, and my
other companions, wrought so much on the former, that my Letters (although the
most obliging I could Pen) were not accepted as good enough for waste papers;
so that she did not only retract from me the usual Charities given her by
others as well for me, as any else; but thence forth made it her business to do
me all the prejudice immaginable, as if she was the chief party concerned;
although she her self cannot tell what I did to disoblige her, unless she took a
pett I did not remove my Lodging when my Companions would have me. Yet she
caused the foresaid Countess, that promised to pay so solemnly my Chamber Rent,
not to give me one penny ever after. I may dare lay there is no Catholic Lady
of any Quality in London, whom she did not, either by her self or by others,
incense against me.

Once a certain Lady of my acquaintance sent her five Guinnies to be given me,
and having soon after writ again to the said Lady for some assistance, toward
my Bayling forth, she sent to me her Woman, to know whether I did not receive
the said five Guinnies from Mrs. Catherine Sheldon, I answered, not a penny,
and while the said Lady sent me some more Relief, the said Mrs. C. S. or her
Sister, went to her, railing at me in such a manner, that the Lady said, she
wished she had thrown her moneys in the Thames, before she sent it me. One of
her objections was, that I fiddle faddle my moneys away, because I gave 50
shillings for a Morning Gown I wore instead of Clothes I wanted, but she
thought so much monys well spent by one of my Companions; she wished well for a
Silk flowered Wastcoat, although he was but a Servingmans Son, and that my
Father has had a considerable Estate.

Neither was she satisfied to make what use she could of her own tongue, but
employed her Sister Francis, Maid of Honor, who was altogether a stranger to
me, to incense the Q and her R. H. against me, to the one I was recommended by
a special Letter from the Prince Elector of Cullen, my former Master, and to
the other by the Marquess of Mountecuculi, Resident from the Duke of Modena.
All this while I knew no better Remedy, than to take a Hair of the same Dog
that bit me. I therefore applied my self again to Mr. Turner, declaring, that
if he did not Reconcile such Friends as he alienated from me, to me again, I
would complain of his Injustice, to others of the Society.

Before I sent away either of the two Letters I writ to that purpose, I
acquainted him therewith, desiring we might be Friends, which he rejected,
saying, Do your worst; but imagining him to be in a passion, I kept one of the
said Letters in my Chamber about three weeks, and the other near six, pressing
him also by others to a Reconciliation: Then indeed he seemed to be so well
satisfied with the Information given him by one Mr. Parsons an Inferior Officer
in Prison, of the Injuries done me by the Lies of Envious persons, that he
said, He would never give credit to any evil said of me any more; yet
afterward, when Mrs. Catherine Sheldon assured me, that if my Companions would
give it under their hands, that they were satisfied, I should Lodge where ever
I pleased; she would procure the said Countess to pay my Chamber Rent,
according to promise. Whereupon I writ this present Certificate in their Names.

We whose Names hereunder Written, do think it most just and reasonable, that
Mr. Dowdall lays in what Room soever Mr. Church our Jailer affords him for
his better convenience. And although I added underneath, that by subscribing to
this, all our differences would be at an end, and without this, I should be
again forced to lay on the Boards, yet Mr. Turner and Mr. Parsons, denied to
set their hands to it, without giving me any reason thereof, only Mr. Parsons
said to his Namesake the Turn-key, that by thus subscribing, all the blame of
our differences would be laid on them.

Let then any indifferent Person be judge, if this be a Christian like answer;
do not we know that a Sin is never forgiven without restitution of Honor and
Goods, if it be in our power. Are those fit to guide other Men's Souls that
maintain and practice such unjust Principles? They Persecute the Innocent, they
rob him of his Reputation and Livelihood, and yet at no times will they do him
Justice, least themselves be found guilty of an Error.

But why do I wonder at those proceedings? when I often said, that in all my
Travels, in most Kingdoms of Europe, I never was Eyewitness to more tricks and
knavery then I have seen practiced by the forenamed Companions of mine in this
Prison, although reputed Priests and Jesuits. I often said, if I knew no more of
Christianity then I learned from them, I would choose rather to be a Turk than
a Catholic. I always compared them to so many Mountebanks in a Market place,
where each one makes the best of his Druggs: how jealous then may we justly
suppose is each one of the others gains? Even so were my five Companions, or
rather Adversaries, concerned at the distribution of Charities, when Ladies, or
their Women, frequented more one than another; but with this distinction, that
the Mountebancks have more Grace than to defame one another Credit or
Reputation, although they may exclaim at each others Druggs: But my Companions
made it their whole business, to Defame, Back-bite, Detract, and Calumniate
each other, drawing thereby all the profit to themselves. There was one of them
so ingenious, that whilst he and I walked in a certain Room, a Gentlewoman
called (to my hearing) for my Name, but he being next the door, said to her,
Madam, I am also on the same score, will you please sit down, and although I
told him in another Language, I heard her call for me, he answered, I will tell
you another time; but then he played his part so well, that in my own presence,
he got the Moneys brought for me. He was indeed a pretty young man, but let me
tell you, no Mountebanck could deal more cunningly. I could have easily
forgiven him and the rest such small faults as this, or any Money business, if
they did not prejudice my Reputation and good Name: They knew well there was
but little to be done, unless I was quite out of favor, which could only be,
by giving very bad Characters of me. In this Mr. Turner was a very great
Instrument: Among other Lies divulged of me, he affirms, that when I went to
School at Liege, I had my Diet at Citizens houses for Charity, when I take God
to witness, I never eat or drunk with any of them, no, not upon any occasion
whatsoever, to the best of my memory, but what I or my Companions paid for. He
also says, he gave ten shillings to one of the English Society for me. I own I
got some monys from one of them, for coppying two Books in vacant times, which
I earned well, without any obligation to him, a man I never spoke a word to,
but in this Prison. There was lately in this Kingdom, one of that College
that boarded in the same house I did, who can testify, that there were not
three of twelve English boarders then in that Town that had better Meat, Drink,
and Lodging, then I have had, and yet I must be calumniated to my face by the
said Mr. Turner. It seems he makes no scruple in such things, for one day
discoursing of a certain matter, I might lawfully Swear, he told a dozen Lies,
and the day following, he absolutely denied he ever said any such thing; you
may guess his little Conscience by this. A certain Gentlewoman having moneys to
bestow among those that were most in want in the Prison, addressing her self to
the before named Melchior Power, who it seems told her, that Mr. Turner had
what moneys he wanted from his own friends, at which he was so incensed against
the said Power, that he said to one Mr. B. a Prisoner, that he would never have
any Charity or kindness for him: Whosoever desires to be further informed of
him, let them but enquire his manner of life in Derby-Shire, and they will be
further satisfied, although some certain Women here in Town now honors him as
an Oracle; who much condemn me, that when he removed from this Prison, to the
Masters own house, I refused to approach him, never considering, that his
pretense of taking leave with me then, was only a fained Complement; he having
a whole quarter of a year before rejected all proposalls of a Reconciliation,
or any satisfaction of Honor or Damages. If they had but the discretion after
hearing one party, to give ear to the other, certainly I could not be so abused
as I was. In this a certain Gentleman, that brought me the only allowance I
had for my livelihood, behaved himself wisely, for after Mr. Turner made use of
all the arguments he could invent, to have this same Charity taken from me, the
said Gentleman desired to hear what I could say in my own behalf, which so
confounded all the former Calumny, that he seemed to be much scandalized
thereat, saying to me afterward, must we for trifles seek another
destruction, and defraud him of his Livelihood?

Of Mr. THORN.
But while I was clearing my self, one Thomas Thorn a Catholic, heretofore
both Groom and Butler to a Gentleman in the Country, and then a Prisoner for
Treasonable words, was extreme insolent in his discourse to me, denying also
that he told me what moneys Mr. Parsons got in Prison, although I took God to
witness several times, he assured me that great Charities were brought to
Prison, and detained by some particulars, that he himself saw with Mr. Parsons
in one paper Twenty five Guinnies, and in another Thirty four or Thirty five
Broad pieces, besides several heaps of Silver, carried away by his Sister the
Shoomakers Widow; all which the said Thorn denying, I confirmed by an Oath on
the Bible, that he told me so, but whether he said true, I did not know: This
fellow likewise took his Oath on the same Bible, he told me no such thing,
treating me besides with very uncivil Language; and the more I wished him to be
quiet, the more impertinent he was: I rose up with an intention to box him, but
Mr. Parsons being in the way, held me in his Arms, which the said fellow
perceiving, and that one hand could not assist the other, most treacherously
gave a snak at my little finger, and turned it quite backwards, the use of
which, I am like never to enjoy: I would not have blamed him to use me worse in
his own defense, had I but once touched him. This fellow at his first coming to
Prison, was counted an harmless Fool, but before his departure, became a
cunning Knave, and as greedy of gathering moneys, as a Hawk is at his Prey. I
could declare some other notorious and unheard of misdemeanors he committed in
Prison, but I judge it a subject not worth my labor.

I beseech all good Catholics to take notice, that this Fellow has ever since
boar me so great a spleen, that he makes it his business, being now at Liberty,
to invent most horrid Lies of me, without any cause, or the least shadow of
truth, as God of Heaven is my witness; yet I do not at all think strange, if
such an ignorant fellow as he is, should do worse, being instructed a whole
year in the like practices, by such as by their profession ought to do well.
Happy then are they that are born of Honorable Parents, whose Sons would scorn
to be Authors of such shameful doings, as my companions practiced against me,
for the sake of such inconsiderable gains; contrariwise, the best of these, I
believe, never saw better days then in Prison; Mr. Turner is known to be a
Ministers Son, Mr. Parsons's Father was only Servant to a Lord, Mr. Power was
a common Soldier in France, and at London, and so silly a one, that a Soldier
that went to relieve him, finding him a Sleep at his Sentry, persuaded him that
one of the great Guns was stolen, which as is said, Power apprehending a great
deal of danger he was in, gave the other Soldier money to be Silent.

The two others were strangers in the Kingdom, and opposed me, as I suppose,
only to comply with the rest, both of them of a most obscure generation, which
one comprehending, and believing himself more obliged to Nature then to his
Birth, borrowed so much credit of his Neighbors, as to make himself not a
little looked on.

Now that the Reader may be satisfied, that others (as well as those already
mentioned) have the like failings, I will add some few Examples. At my first
coming to London from his Electoral Highness of Cullens Court, I undertook a
preferment at the Venetian Ambassadors, I being well versed in his Language:
who thereupon suddenly entertained me, which four or five Friars of that Family
envying, went thrice against me to have me out of my employment; The Ambassador
acquainted me therewith, also asking what particular knowledge I had with them,
and how long, I told him, I was not above three weeks in Town, all which time I
never was in either of their Companys, nor did I believe they ever saw me but
in his house, yet said he, they bear you malice, but you shall not fare the
worse for that, contrariwise, you shall have Authority over them whilst they
depend on me.

When these could not prevail with the Ambassador, they employed others of
their own profession to one Doctor Warren a very honest Gentleman, who alone
was to give Testimony of my good behavior while I was in Town, being a
stranger to all the rest; desiring him not to countenance me, but rather to
have me out of Town, as he told me afterward; Adding also, how he inquired
what they had to allege against me, and that they replied, I was a stranger
to them, and therefore not fit to be preferred in such considerable Employments
as I enjoyed: some years after I happened to be a Governor to a Young Lord,
which also gal'd them much, for one of them acquainted my Lord Almonor of an
Arch-Lie, to wit, I left the Maid of the house I lived in with Child, upon
which the said L. A. went straight ways to my Young Lords Mother, desiring her
Ladyship to Banish me out of her house for the reasons aforesaid. The Lady
admiring that he should know the concerns of her house better then her self,
presently examined the matter, and found that his Lordship was as guilty as I
was of what he said, and that the Maids she then had, were never suspected
before of any dishonesty: I desired reparation of honor and good name of my
Lord, but he begged my pardon, assuring me he would never any more believe
stories of me, being twice before guilty of wronging me, in prefering his own
Friends to my Employment, for which he was once checked by the Q. but he came
off as ill as he begun, declaring I had dependancy of a Lady of ill repute, yet
his Lordship preferred one of his best Friends to such an other preferment with
a Lady of a far worse report.

I could mention many other like Examples, touching my self, which I leave out
for Brevities sake. Let us then conclude with the Scriptures, that whosoever
thinks himself no sinner, is a Liar: If therefore all men be breakers of Gods
holy Commandments, since the just offends him seven times a day, why then
should any justify them in their evils? as many tatling Women publicly
maintained what Calumny soever my Companions reported of me, out of some
Natural kindness, or some good opinion they conceived of them. I know love and
hatred perverts most Men and Women's judgment; I know the love some of the said
Women boar to my Adversaries, and the hatred they conceived of me for their
sakes, made them do me all the prejudice immaginable; and now I am forced to
stoop under the weight of so great a burden, languishing for the wounds their
Lies and Calumnies gave to my Reputation; the which I ever preferred before my
Life, wishing rather to dye, then to be defiled.

Some judicious men understanding how many Rivalls I have had at all times,
(began as they told me) afterward to conclude among themselves, that surely I
must be a man of great parts that was so much envyed; as if one of little
capacity would not be regarded or taken notice of, much less fit to be preferred
before them; I only told them in my own behalf, that I would undertake to teach
Mr. Power and another of my Adversaries, as yet two years their Lattin, and to
instruct all the five in the Mathematics, and in three Foreign Languages, yet
they were to me as so many Dogs in a Manger, neither minding themselves of any
Studies all the year long, nor permitting me to divert my self according to my
inclinations therein; having before I was crossed and tormented by them,
composed three Books in Prison, one of Heraldry, another of the Mathematics
and the third a History Book, notwithstanding it was resolved, unless I forsook
all conveniences of Studies, and was controlled, or rather led by the Nose by
them, I should be deprived of the payment of my Chamber-Rent, and loose my
share of the Charities gathered for Prisoners; all which was afterward
punctually observed by calumniating and belieying me all the City and Country
over.

The Reason I have so often accused them of Lies, is, because if they told but
truth, they could do me no harm. They are also guilty of Calumny, Detraction,
and Backbiting, although what they invented of me was true, because none can
discover another Man's crimes, unless publicly known without a Mortal sin; for
the holy Scripture says, If your Brother or Neighbor offend you, admonish him
of his faults between him and you privately; if he amends not, correct him
before Witnesses; if he rejects also this, complain of him to the Church, or
his Superiors; if then he is not Penitent, let him be to you as a Reprobate.

Not one of my Companions followed this Precept, although I put them in mind
thereof, begging for Gods sake they would tell me what it was they heard or
believed of me; each of them answered, as I said before, Nothing; upon this I
entreated a certain Lady of Quality to reconcile me to the foresaid Countess,
but she sent to me, that nothing could be done; for the five reputed Priests
and Jesuits (my companions) had given so bad a Character of me, that she was
wholly incensed against me. It Is true indeed, before this honorable Countess
promised to pay my Chamber Rent, I lay on a Quilt on the Boards, but with this
satisfaction, that the Master of the Prison knowing my little ability, said he
would be satisfied with eighteen pence a week; but the said Countess having
promised him the payment of my Chamber Rent, in what Room soever I lay, I am
ever since engaged in five shillings a week, without any likelihood of payment,
or to have the advantage of my said Quilt on the Boards without three and six
pence a week; so that the promise of the said Lady, is no small prejudice to
me: All which is contrary to the good opinion I had of English Catholics, whom
I have heretofore extolled above all others I knew, both for their Piety,
Charity, and good Examples, especially in these times of Troubles, which I
really believed were sufficient motives to appease the Divine Wrath, and
manyfold afflictions they lay under. But now, what construction can I make of
these precedent virtues, when on a sudden I see them decline their good
Principles, as if not well grounded therein.

I sent to some Ladies of Quality, a brief account of the former transactions
against me, the which they did reject with a great deal of indignation and
unbecoming Language, not believing one word I writ. One was so offended with my
defense, that she sent my Letter open to me back again, but seeing there was
nothing therein but what concerned me to let all Catholics know; therefore I
directed her Ladyships Letter to her Butler and Cook-Maid, desiring them to let
others, their fellow Companions, know the Contents thereof, and how the
Unjustice of my Companions were countenanced by most Catholics in Town.

How then can they expect that God will hear their complaints and grievances in
the times of Sorrow, since they are Upholders of Injustice and Wickedness
themselves. They pretend to be much injured by the false accusations of their
ill Wishers, and yet make no scruple to justify the Calumny maintained against
their Brother. They blame their Neighbors for giving credit to the false
Reports of their Enemies, and themselves are as willing to believe for Truth,
any Lies invented against him, whom God and the World knows to be Innocent in
what he is accused. They seem to have Faith, that God will confound the first
Authors of their Sufferings, but do not think it Damnation to themselves to Rob
an other of his good Name and Reputation.

For my part, I commiserate the weakness of these Catholics, who think it
lawful to do any thing which Churchmen persuades them. Yet I am rather of
opinion, that they are led by some natural kindness, or some other Interest, or
else they would never be so blinded, as to prejudice him that never did them
the least diskindness, either in thought, word, or deed. Now I begin to
consider, that one of the Gentlewomen that opposed me so highly in a thing
which did not concern her at all, was so passionately in Love with one of my
Adversaries, that whenever he appeared, her countenance changed into diverse
colors, using Congies more becoming a Court then a Prison, and much less to a
reputed Priest. I wish they were both where they listed, an hundred Miles off,
and that I had never seen either of their faces. I am the more confirmed in
this opinion, by a late example of a certain Widow who contracted extraordinary
friendship with one of our fellow Prisoners for Religion, and who bestowed on
me also part of the Charities she gathered; but her friend understanding I was
much offended with him for writing underhand to Mrs. Catherine Sheldon,
something to my prejudice, as I believe, only to curry favor with her, he and
I being intimate friends, declared to the said Widow the displeasure he
conceived of me, by which I am sure to loose her friendship for the future,
having thereby already lost twice or thrice my share of the Charities she
collected. I know from an Eyewitness how their intimacy is grounded, but I
will omit that, and such like causes of my sufferings, as not becoming Cage or
Goal-Birds (as we are) to foul their own Nests. This I assert for Truth, there
was not one Saint among them, and that each of their failings did balance what
ever they could justly accuse me of from first to last.

It Is with me as with a great many, who fare worse by looking over a Hedge,
then others do by stealing either Horse or Mare: I have been from a Child as
sober as any could be, being never once half fudled in my life time. All that
knows me can witness, I never drink but when I eat. I never was inclined to
Swearing, Cursing, or Wrangling; but so far from that, that I naturally
delighted in solitariness, insomuch, that very seldom I walked with a
companion, or was seen in an Ale house, Tavern, nor at a Club above thrice as
yet; having never taken either Snuff or Tobacco; when I am in my Chamber, I
must be employed in something. It was always natural to me, to do as I would be
done unto; yea, to serve others beyond the bounds of true Charity, having an
hundred times, out of a natural pity, given to the needy what I wanted for my
self. I esteemed it cruelty to deny my good word or labor, where I could serve
my Neighbor. I could have counted once Forty that lived by my Recommendation,
when I instructed Gentlemen's Sons in their houses; and now I cannot find one to
go in an Arrand for me. I had such an abhorrence for Lying, that I never
esteemed so much any ones Friendship, as to tell a Lie to gain his favor, or
to shun his displeasure; esteeming those that are subject thereunto, not fit
for Human conversation. Honest and Just dealing, was a natural Principle in me,
never desiring in buying the Seller should loose his gains. I ever fancied to
pay my Creditors before I went to Bed, when I had it, as every one that knows
me can testify. I preferred a good Repute before any worldly happiness, in
order thereunto, I kept no company but those who were fit for the best sort of
Gentry. Perhaps in this I was somewhat too shie or nice, for which I got ill
will, especially when I lived in Families, where I never eat at any ones second
Table, unless in the Prince of Cullens Court, where all Noblemens Sons were my
Companions, and that eight of his Highnesses Livery men were to wait daily on
us at Meals. As for my inward Conscience, I leave that to be decided by God
alone. This I know, if I dissembled and played the Hypocrite, as some of my
companions did, I should have a hundred times more Moneys and Credit than I
have; most of my Companions being famous in both, could act what they listed
without exceptions.

Each of them could with Authority Nobly Treat one Young Woman or other, of
very ill repute, all day long in their Rooms: It was not worth taking Notice
of, if one of them sent for more Bottles of Wine and Brandy in one day, then I
drank Beer or Ale in a whole Week: Either of them might lawfully call two or
three of their young Devotes, their Wives, and as many more their Misses, who
used to call them Husbands and Gallants in like manner; the rest of the young
Women must be their Sisters, and such as were elderly their Mothers. Yes, our
holy Patriarck Mr. Power himself took the Liberty to look himself up daily in
his Chamber for some hours with a young Woman he pretended to be his Niece,
although a condemned Priest in Newgate, his own Countryman has openly assured
there is no such Relation between them. A Gentleman of good Credit did assure
me that one of the Women this Godly man used to have commonly looked up in his
Chamber, boar a Bastard to one of his acquaintance, who kept her for his Miss
some years. Notwithstanding all this while I do not accuse either him or the
rest of any evil, although they defamed me publicly without quarter such
occasions given; one would think that those who took such Liberty themselves,
ought to be the more indulgent in censuring others: But what can be expected
from People of no conscience, but cruelty: they made a God of their pleasures,
the which they knew they could not enjoy without Moneys, and therefore they
resolved to have my share between them, which would be considerable, by reason
of my great acquaintance in Town: And because, in my Passion, I threatened to
bring them and their Calumny to question, nothing must satisfy them but my
Life, or a perpetual Imprisonment; as it will appear in this following Treatise.

The Second Chapter. How my Companions endeavored to Bereave me of my life.
It Is a general Remark throughout the World, that the worst of Men, are those
who formerly practiced virtuous Principles, and afterward decline from the
same; the reason is very plain, for some are Naturally so proud, and have so
good an opinion of themselves, that they scarce give glory to God for the
graces they receive, as if all the good Deeds they did, were properly
attributed to themselves; and therefore in place of pitying their Neighbors
failings, or giving thanks to God, that they were not so destitute of his
graces and favors as they, they scoff at their weakness, censuring them often
beyond their Deserts, when in Charity they ought to Pray for their Conversion.
By this presumption, and other faults annexed thereunto, they incur God's
displeasure; and thus loosing part of the superabundant graces they enjoyed
before, presently they fall from one sin to another, until at last, God leaves
them wholly to themselves, and then being destitute of all grace, they plung
into all manner of Vice, not unlike to a Thunderbolt, devouring where ever it
comes. Thus by Pride and Presumption, the bad Angels were thrown out of
Paradise, and becoming Devils, are made instruments to punish the Offenders of
Gods holy Laws.

I know none more fit to be compared to them, then my forementioned five
Companions; their Education doubtless was Virtuous, their Breeding could not be
otherwise, they being instructed as Scholars, and received (as is supposed) to
Dignity, which did so puff them up with Pride and Presumption, that they forgot
not only the former Slavery of their Birthright, but also to render God
thanks for their present condition. God then having abandoned them, there is no
Evil but they are ready to embrace: Behold then how they aim at my Life, for
saying, I would Prosecute some of them to the utmost of the Law, unless they
gave me satisfaction for what Injuries they did me.

Nor was Satan wanting to their endeavors; for a certain Woman I kept in
Prison from Starving, together with her Sucking-Child, she being at Liberty,
begged me for God's sake, to continue my Charity, until she and her Sick Husband
recruited themselves of their losses and damages; I told her, when she or her
children wanted Bread at home, they should, as formerly, have a share of my
Dinner: her eldest Daughter, about Eight years old, I sent with my Arrants,
until at last, I took notice of her growing too confident among the Prisoners,
throwing ones Hat, and another Periwig off, and that I could not get her away
when I desired it, always pretending, she durst not go home, without bringing
something to her Mother: upon which, I warned her said Mother, in presence of
Neighbors, to keep her Daughter at home, which being some hindrance to her,
doubtless provoak'd her to do me what prejudice she could, unless I presented
her with some Moneys. There passed seven or eight weeks without any
disturbance, until at last she heard I was to be Bayl'd out, so that very day I
was to give Bail at a Judges house, she sent her said Daughter a purpose to
Trapan me, whom I met as I was going forth, I said only to her, I am going
abroad, I cannot speak to you now. From this day forth, until about three weeks
after, she never came to my Chamber alone: That day being Monday, she told me
they wanted Bread at home, and that her Mother wished her to come to me, that
she might not also go fasting to School in the Afternoon: I gave her the
remainder of my Dinner and a penny, wishing her to call me a Neighbor she
knew, without expecting to see her any more, but within an hour after, I met
her in the passage to my Chamber, letting me know, that the Woman I sent for,
went away by Night, leaving the Key under the door, enquiring besides
(laughing) what I thought became of the penny I gave her, then she told, how
her Mother eating nothing all the day before, took it from her, and bought
therewith Sheeps Trotters for her dinner; I pitied her so much, that I
borrowed a Groat of a Woman that cleans'd my Room, and sent the Child
immediately therewith to her Mother, without entering my Chamber all the while.
The Thursday following, being the last day she ever came to me, both she and
her Sister came to Dine with me, alleading they had nothing to eat at home:
After Dinner they were so unruly in the Prison, that some wondered I would
countenance such Brats, but having relieved them so long, I would not desist
now I was to depart; but the wicked Mother intended to stop my design, for the
Saturday following, she came to my Chamber, declaring I intended to Ravish her
Child, being not a little astonished at her Impudence, and dissembling
countenance, I wished her be gone like a wicked creature as she was. I
presently concluded, that this Woman, having once said such a thing, might
perhaps have the Impudence to design the proof thereof, and might on purpose do
her Child an Injury to put it on me. To prevent which, I entreated the Master
of the Prison to get a Justices Warrant for the Mother and the Child, that the
latter might be searched by a Midwife; all which was performed in an hours
time: The Midwife, after a full view of the Child, declared to the Justice,
that there was nothing on her, but what was usual to hundreds, even from their
Birth: That it was no more then any Child might have by running up a pair of
Stairs, or at Play, of which the Justice made so little account, that he openly
said, it would come to nothing. To be sure, I made preparations for the worst,
the which Mr. Church our Keeper understanding, often said to me, that for a
Groat he would stand Trial for me, wishing me not to trouble my self about any
thoughts of that nature. Yet I imagined that in a matter of such importance, I
could not be too sure, I therefore employed one Mrs. Carpenter a Catholic, (by
chance then in Prison) to procure another discreet Midwife, of long Practice,
and good knowledge, to view the Child for more Evidence, who instead thereof,
got a Young Woman, called Mrs, Ascu, and only a Deputy Midwife, to behold the
Child, without letting me speak to her before hand, contrary to my directions;
both these began to persuade me to give my Adversary a piece of Moneys to quiet
her, in hopes to get a share to themselves, being both extreme needy. I told
them, it was not the opinion of such a young Midwife I looked for, and as for
my Adversary, I would expect satisfaction from her for the Injury she had done,
and knowing my self Innocent, would rather Die than give her one penny to be
Silent.

I desired also another Catholic Woman, by name Mrs. Tent, to find me out
another experienced Midwife to inspect the Child, and to witness what she
ayled; this told me she knew one Mrs. James also a Catholic (a very ingenious
Woman) who took the Oaths, only to dissemble with the Times, and therefore
might be very serviceable to me: My answer was, that if ever she, or any
belonging to her, expected any kindness from me, it would be on condition, that
that cunning creature should not have any thing to do in my affairs, which she
promised very often she would not: yet as if Mrs. Carpenter and she were agreed
upon it to do me a prejudice, so that Mrs. Tent also, contrary to her promise
and my will, brought the said Mrs. James to my Adversary, being also but a
Deputy Midwife, and afterward had the confidence to bring her to my Chamber,
and to wish me give her half a Crown for her pains, although she was not
suffered to behold the Child, I asked them by whose direction they were
employed, and so dismissed them.

Now I began to believe for certain these Women were hired a purpose to ruin
me; they intruded themselves in my concerns what ever I did to hinder them:
Yea; the said Mrs. Carpenter, after all the warnings I gave her not to meddle
any more in any thing belonging to me, brought me, notwithstanding about the
same time one Mrs. Ogle a Catholic, who by all means would have me compound
with my Adversary; I prayed her to take no care thereof, for that I was advised
to the contrary by an able Counsel; but seeing she would not desist encouraging
my Adversary with promises of procuring her a Reward to be silent, I writ to
Mr. Aston her Brother in Law, entreating him to pray her forbear meddling in my
concerns, but all in vain; for some days after, this Mrs. Ogle, and Mrs.
Carpenter, came to my Chamber, acquainting me that they sent the two
forementioned Deputy Midwives, Mrs. James and Mrs. Ascu to my Adversary, to
bring her to composition, I much admired their confidence, enquiring by whose
Authority they did incroach so much on me, letting them know, that what they
did, was enough to find me Guilty, though the most Innocent in the World:
whereupon I desired a certain Woman I met in Prison, to recall the said
Midwives, and to declare to my Adversary, that I renounced any composition
offered her in my Name; the two Deputy Midwives then came to my Chamber to meet
the other two that employed them, where I rayl'd at their impudence, in meddling
with my affairs without my own consent; Mrs. Ogle (after all) wished them
return back again, and compound the matter without me, since I was not to
contribute a penny to what was to be given, adding besides, I was fit for
Bedlam for refusing such offers; little, as I suppose, immagining that my
Adversary was engaged to Prosecute me, and would have brought their moneys as a
Testimony, to condemn me, and thereby to have my Life.

I thought it to no purpose to oppose any longer these obstinate Women's
Resolutions; I then began to reason the case with them, and how it behoved me
rather to bring my Adversary to just Punishment for scandalizing me, since God,
my own Conscience, and many Men and Women were Witnesses of my Innocence. And
for their further satisfaction, I desired God to show no Mercy to my Soul, if
ever I entered that Child's Body a hairs breadth, as was reported, or ever
intended any such thing. The two Midwives being pitiful poor, as also Mrs.
Carpenter, who lives on Charity, knowing, that if they came to composition,
themselves would go snacks with my Adversary. They were going by Mrs. Ogles
directions to know the least she would accept of: I followed them untiI they
came to the Common side, where I desired all the Prisoners to take notice, that
those two Women were going to compound with my Adversary without my consent;
upon this they returned in a fury to my Chamber among the rest, where I did not
go until they departed.

Mrs. Ogle after all, being persuaded with these three Indigents, lost no time
to encourage my Adversary with hopes of some moneys, the only thing she aimed
at; who thereupon made it her business daily to get part thereof in hand. How
they agreed I do not know, only I was told, that my Adversary in presence of
Mrs. Ogle desired the Justice that issued out his Warrant against me, to
withdraw her Action, and that some body in Malice persuaded the Child to accuse
me, but it seems the Justice engaged her to a Trial.

Now, the two Midwives, mad I did not yield to a Composition, assured my
Adversary, if she Prosecuted me, they would be both Witnesses for her at my
Trial, where none besides them two and the Child, with her Mother, appeared
against me, that ever saw my face before; yet I was cast upon the sole Oath of
the said Mrs. James, a Catholic Deputy Midwife, brought to be my Witness by
some pretended friends of my own Religion; all the rest only said, They saw
the Child in such a manner; which less reflected on me, then on any else, she
being abroad among all sorts of people. Mrs. James took her Oath, I owned the
Fact to her, in presence of four more, and that I offered Ten pounds to smother
it, although the said four, to wit, Mrs. Pennay, Mrs. Ogle, Mrs. Carpenter,
three Catholics, and Mrs. Ascu a Protestant, could witness her to be Perjured;
as also five or six Prisoners, having never spoken to her but twice, once when
Mrs. Tent brought her to my Chamber, wishing me to give her half a Crown, and
the second time in the presence of the said Gentlewomen and Prisoners, yet none
appeared at Court to justify the Truth. The Prisoners could not, without so
many Habeas Corpus's, which the Justices of the Peace had no Authority to
grant, nor was it in my power to be at the expenses thereof: The Gentlewomen
pretended they durst not be seen, least they should be put to trouble for their
Religion, although I took my Oath I would not call for their Names before I had
obtained a Promise from the Court not to molest them, so that I was brought in
guilty of a Trespass.

And thus I had lost my life by mrs. James, if the Grand Jury had found the
Bill to be Felony, of all which, I conceive the said Catholic Gentlewomen to
be as guilty as the said Mrs. James, since they engaged her in my concerns
against my will, and that they refused to justify the truth of what I said.

On my side there were above twenty Protestant Witnesses besides Catholics.
One Mistress Watson the most reputed Midwife in Westminster, and who viewed the
Child, the very first day by order of a Justice of Peace, with two Women more
of very good credit and repute, and very Skilful in Midwifry, took their Oaths
before the Bench, that the Child as far as could appear to the best experienced
Midwives was never touched by man, that what was seen on her was incident to
hundreds of Children by Playing or running up stairs.

I had in Court four Certificates under the hands of four different Parties,
who examined the Child in the beginning a part, quite different one from the
other: At my Trial she learned another Lesson contrary to all the rest; She
added, that Striving with me, she tor'd my Ruffles, although there was in Court
the Seamster from whom I bought them, and my Wash-woman; the one was ready to
Swear that she made me but the Ten payers then produced in Court; and the
other, that the said Ten payers, which she washed often, were all the Ruffles I
had, which never wanted the mending of one stitch with a Needle.

The said Child was taught to say, that a certain Woman heard her cry, when I
offered violence to her, which the same Woman not only denied, being not in my
Chamber in six or seven months before this Report, but also told in Court, that
my Adversary, with her Husband, offered her moneys to say so.

The Child being demanded by the Court, how often did I attempt to abuse her,
she said only twice, to wit, the Monday before her Mother accused me, and about
three weeks before that. Now every one may see the wickedness of this Child's
Mother, who, contrary to my orders, sent her Daughter to me, as I have reason
to believe, purposely to Trapan me: It Is true, the Child came twice to my
Chamber alone in Eleven weeks time, that is since I warned the Mother to keep
her at home. The first time was the day I went to give Bail before a Judge,
but then she did not enter my Room, as seven Men and Women were ready to
Witness, whom I left in my Chamber going out when I met the Child by the way,
but had not leisure to ask what she came for.

The second time was the Monday before mentioned, when I gave her the penny,
for which her Mother bought Sheeps Trotters, and afterward a Goat, as I said
before, out of pity, and this in another Room, in presence of a Prisoner, at
which time this Child went away as waggish as ever. Her coming with her Sister
the Thursday following to Dine with me, being the last time I spoke to her, and
their unruliness before many Prisoners, justifies she was not offered any
violence the Monday before, yet the Saturday following her Mother vented her
malicious designs of prejudicing me, unless she got the moneys demanded.

Behold the ungratefulness of this generation of Vipers: I relieved with part
of my Dinner about ten weeks this Child's Mother, whom I saw was starving in
Prison, and sucking of Bones I set aside for a Dog, during which time, I
allowed to buy food for her Sucking Child, a penny, two pence, or three pence
daily; after her being at Liberty, I assisted her whole Family, every other
day, for near a years time; I bestowed on her Husband an old Suit of Clothes,
Hat, Shoes, Stockings, and Gloves; and on both her Daughters, moneys for the
Clothes they wore; and for their Schooling half a year; they having not a Shift
to their backs, nor Shoes to their feet, but what I bought for them. And
because moneys grew scarce with me, that I could not continue my Charity, I
must be rewarded with Iniquity; I must be accused to offer violence to her
Child the only two times she came alone to me, and against my will in eleven
weeks space, having never offered any such the whole year before, as the Child
owned it in open Court, although she came to me every other day. Besides, what
likelihood there is, that I had the least thought thereof, when I could have
had her every day in my Chamber at a words speaking, and that on the contrary,
I forbid her coming at all; but the matter was, the Mother was set on by my
companions friends, and was promised moneys, which she was willing to accept at
any score; believing, if I were once at liberty, she should never see me any
more, as she often said.

This wicked Woman being asked by several, why she pretended her Child was
abused, when she ran and played all day long, and looked as well as ever she
did; to which she answered diverse times, as was justified in Court by her
nearest Neighbors, that her Child ayl'd nothing, but that she would have
moneys from the Papist Rogue. Yet although she had scarce one witness for her,
but was known in the Parish, to be either a Whore, a Thief, or Perjured
Creature; as I was creedibly informed; and that none of them ever saw my face
but in Court, excepting the two Midwives, that were brought by Catholics to be
for me, notwithstanding upon the false Oath of one of them, a Woman of a very
bad Repute, I was cast, as I said before.

All being considered, it is not to be doubted, but this evil befell me by the
instigation and malice of the five Reputed Priests and Jesuits, my
forementioned companions; for first, my Adversary being pitiful poor, and
wanting Bread, could not Fee a Counsel, and Prosecute me without having
assistance from others: Who then would encourage her, but those who saught all
occasions to prejudice me, whose Pentioners in Prison, gave my Adversary every
day a full account of what preparations I made for my own defense.

Of Mr. O BRYAN.
They employed one Mr. O Bryan, a Prisoner, whilst I relieved him with Money and
half my Dinner, as often as he told me he wanted Bread, to corrupt my
Witnesses, and keep correspondence with my Adversary, who thereupon got into
favor among Catholics, being before in bad repute with them; this man being
well versed in such Subtilties, as appeared in his conspiracy against the Duke
of B. for which he stands charged in ten Thousand Pounds damage, and to stand
in the Pillory, as also while he wrote under Doctor Tongue as a pretended
Protestant, making now profession to be a Roman Catholic, getting the
opportunity in my Chamber to Steal from me some old Letters, by which he
Learned so well to counterfeit my hand, that he writ a Letter in my Name to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, railing at the Catholic Religion, by showing which
to Catholics, he got to himself great esteem for discovering a thing I never
did, either by Letter or Petition, or any other means: Afterward understanding
I confirmed the same by a Solemn Oath to Friends, then he adds, I writ for
certain such a Letter, but I did not send it. To which I answer, that I take
God to Witness, I never writ any such Letter to the said Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, nor ever intended as yet to write. But this is but part of his
Malice and Subtilties. Now understanding I am Writing a Book in my own
Vindication which reflects on him, and on the rest of my Adversaries, he is
taken up in new inventions against me, for which he is rewarded by my
Adversaries, and the upholders of their Calumny; especially by Mrs. Catharine
Sheldon and other mannagers of the Charities: among other Lies, he Publishes
that there are several Points in this Book (which he never saw as yet) against
the Catholic Religion. That I lost my Employment with an Ambassador, for being
found by him and his men, making use of a Woman at Night in the open Streets. I
leave the examination of the Truth thereof to the Earl of Fingale, and an
hundred others that can testify the contrary, as also the unprobability of the
thing.

It Is not to be questioned, but that this man was the first Inventer of the
Child's Mother Stratagem, thereby to ingratiate himself with my Companions, and
consequently with other Catholics, otherwise, who can believe that one I never
once offended in the least, and whom I endeavored to oblige to the utmost of
my power, by offering him half my Dinner while we continued Prisoners; by
recommending him to every one I knew, having procured him above Twenty
shillings at once, besides what moneys I bestowed on him of my own, should take
an opportunity, while I sent for some things for his Eating, to Steal old
papers from me to learn to counterfeit my hand; and this before the Child's
Mother accused me, unless he designed this evil to me. This appears clearly by
the following circumstances; for the third day after this Stratagem was
divulged, a certain Catholic Woman being some days before Released out of
Prison, knowing every thing that passed in my Room, which she kept clean daily,
offered of her own accord, to justify several things about the Child to my
advantage, which the foresaid Mr. Bryan understanding, got the opportunity to
call her privately to another Room, and to dissuade her from being my Witness,
as she self told me afterward, declaring to her, I was to forsake my Religion,
and that she would incur the Catholics displeasure; so that when I desired her
to give me in writing, before Witnesses, what she could say; I could not get a
word out of her mouth; at last, she said, I know what you write down is true,
yet I do not desire to be concerned. All this while I thought this Mr. Bryan to
be my special friend, therefore I had chosen him for one of my Witnesses of
what she could say; but whilst twelve lines were a reading, he interrupted me
five times, alleging he was then busy, he could not stay, he must go to
Dinner, and so departed, although I invited him to Dine with me, and that I told
him that what I was about concerned my Life. Being afterward told by the
Prisoners (to my great amazement) how I was betrayed by him, and how he
diswaded the Woman from being my Witness, as she her self told me afterward,
believing no Gentleman would do as he did, or betray his Friends without any
occasion of displeasure, I inquired of his old acquaintance what he was.

One Mrs. Tent a Tailors Wife did truly assure me, she knew him fourteen or
fifteen years ago in Dublin, where she kept an house of entertainment, and when
he used frequently thither playing at Cards, and getting his livelihood by
false Dice, his name then being not O Bryan.

Item one Turner from the County of Wexford in Ireland, wherein he had Thirty
Pounds a year of his own inheritance formerly, being known in London to all
those that knew him about St. James in the quality of a Porter, to be a most
honest and harmless man, did declare unto me, that the said O Bryan was Born in
the same County of Wexford with him: That he knew his Father and his Mother,
but of another Name, and a Farmer. That their Sons Christian Name is indeed
Bryan: That all the considerable Towns and Villages, this Bryan divulged, did
belong heretofore to his Predecessors, were to his knowledge the Lands of other
Gentlemen, who had the Inheritance thereof from their Forefathers. Others that
knew his Sister in Town here above ten years, can Witness she never went by the
Name of O Bryan. It Is certain himself told me, how my Lord O Bryan, who
countenanced him in Holland as his name sake, being there informed he was not
the man he pretended himself to be, gave orders to forbid him his house, yet he
said he justified himself afterward in England.

The said Bryan being asked by me, before we fell out, what he did up so
excessive late every night, his answer was, he Studied designs. Well may I now
be discredited, since all his Inventions against me are rewarded with Moneys,
and asserted for real truth to every one by Mrs. Catharine Sheldon, and the
rest of the Upholders of my Adversaries Calumnies. My comfort is, that he is
only countenac'd by those who regard his Person more then his Honesty, he being
a proper well Lim'd man. Others, as he on the like account, having occasioned
before the rest of my Troubles.

All being considered, I was not only deceived in him, but also the Duke of B.
and several others: Having persuaded me that he was Heir to 4000 Acres of Land,
I relieved him as aforesaid: he assured me, that his Grandfather and Uncle
were both Knighted by the particular favors of this Duke of B. father; a
cunning device to persuade this Noble Duke not to Prosecute him for his
foresaid late Conspiracy against his Grace. Item, understanding from me the
name of the Lady that sent him the Guinney on my request, he presently told me,
he was near related to her Husband, although an Englishman, and doubtless he
had since considerable Relief on that account, the Gentleman himself being not
in the Kingdom to contradict him. A brave man to be employed to persecute
honest men!

It Is no wonder he was so extraordinary skilful in his own Petegree, since he
made it his Trade to justify (by his ingenuity) those he never knew but by
chance. One Mr. King heretofore Servant to the Duke of Gl. and very well known
to all the Irish in London, did assure me in this Prison, that the forenamed O
Bryan, made it his Practice, being at Liberty to counterfeit Attestations for
several Women, who make it their business to go a Begging all England over,
some as pretended Ministers Wives, and others of other concerns, whose houses
were destroyed and burnt by Tories, etc. I know by experience in my Travels
abroad, that the Kingdom of Ireland has sufficient occasion to bemoan the
Injustice done to it, by the Practitioners of such false Attestations and
Commendations. I know that pitiful mechanic people, whose Predecessors never
had one six pence Revenue, betook the names of the greatest Noblemen in that
Kingdom in their Letters of Recommendations, gathering under that Notion, great
sums of Moneys in France, Spain, Germany, and Italy, having their own
Commorades, their Pages, Footmen, and Vale du Chambers. I know they used that
Trade so often in them parts, that the name of an Irishman among them is most
odious; admiring that pretended Gentlemen, and persons of Quality, did not know
common Breeding, and were all Beggars. English men can testify part of these
Cheats, if they will but call to mind their old acquaintance Claucy, most
notorious in such subtilties: If Catholics did but consider any of his
devices, they would not so fluently reward the foresaid O Bryan for every lying
Letter sent to some of them against me, unless they designedly countenance him
in what he does, as certainly the upholders of my Adversaries Calumny have
often done, who understanding I intended to bring some of their Friends to
question for what they machinated against me; nothing then must satisfy them
but my Life, of which they might have easily deprived me, by the assistance of
certain Women they made use of to that purpose, had the Grand Jury no more
Conscience than they; for the said Women forced on me two Midwives, with design
to take away my Life, for otherwise, would any ordinary creatures, as they
were, deny to justify the Truth to save ones life, and especially of a
Catholic as they were, if they did not purposely design my Death: Also, can
any one believe, if they did not resolve to have my Life, but they had so much
command on these two Midwives they choose to be my Witnesses, as to dissuade
them at least from Prosecuting me, which they might have done by once speaking
to them. Furthermore, can any believe that the said Mrs. James would dare
justify by a false Oath in open Court, what the said four Gentlewomen besides
seven or eight Prisoners, could witness to be a Lie, unless it was concluded
upon before hand, that none of them would appear against her, and that the
Prisoners could not.

One Mrs. Gray a Catholic, being familiarly acquainted with my Adversary, and
one of those that first took the Child's Examination, would not justify the
same at Court, because I told, it contradicted what the said Child said to
others, least she should do me any service therein; but contrariwise, both she
and her Companion Mrs. Cottee a Catholic, did aggravate the matter to excess
in all Companies, and this only out of malice, because this Greys Brother was
Married to one of my Adversaries Sisters.

Item, one Mrs. Martha a Catholic, and an old Servant to the Lady St.
understanding from one of my Protestant Witnesses, what she could justify in
my behalf, said, without considering what I had to say for my self, I deserved
to be Punished, which discouraged so this Witness, that she did not declare a
word of what she promiss'd, and this only because one of my Adversaries Father
was her fellow Servant.

You may see what Roman Catholics we have in these days; and how can we expect
them to be otherwise, when those who ought by their profession to instruct them
in Virtue and Truth, are themselves the chief Instruments of Evil, and the
promoters of Calumny and Lies, as I have justified in the above five reputed
priests and Jesuits, besides others already mentioned.

It pleased God, after all their malice, that the Court only Fined me to the
Head Bailiff of Westminster, who understanding my Poverty, was willing to
forgive me his Fine, but my Adversaries to detain me a Prisoner, least I
brought them to an account (as was Reported) of their misdemeanors, employed
one Nicholas Crouch a Catholic to divulge of me that I was a Wealthy man,
although they knew in their Conscience (if they had any) that I could not pay
one penny in an hundred of the sum set on me. This Scholar of theirs a
Solliciter by calling, writ me a dozen Letters that he would do me a prejudice,
unless I satisfied him in a most unjust demand, although he borrowed of me
about three pounds, and never paid me as yet: such are the grievances Prisoners
are liable to.

The true description of Wicked Women.
Two against one is hard measure, but half a dozen to one is insupportable; yet
I believe it is easier to resist the fury of twenty Rational men, then of one
Incensed woman. Malice and Envy is the last gasp of her departing Life, and if
she Sounds or falls into a trance, her first thoughts are after her recovery.
Obstinacy is the ground of her Fury, and Reason the least of her thoughts. Self
will is the best of her understanding, and Justice is an horror to her
Interest. The desire of her friend is her Law, and whom he hates is her mortal
Enemy, although her constancy is guided by the Weathercock. Vanity is the
fruits of her labors, and to be flattered is her great delight. Reconciliation
is so beneath her, that the very motion thereof incenses her the more; so that
woe to him that is entangled in her Hooks. It Is certain all the Devils in Hell
can never prejudice man more than a wicked Woman. Saint Peter after denying
Christ, by the malice of such a Creature, is said to have given this
description of her: A Woman is more Pitiful than Man, more Envious than a
Tyrant, more Malicious than a Serpent, and more deceitful than the Devil. But
this does not in the least reflect on Virtuous and good Women.

It was my misfortune to be ensnared by one I never offended in the least, and
yet to comply with her Friend, she has done me all the prejudice imaginable: I
must confess Mrs: Catharine Sheldon in the beginning of her rage against me has
compelled certain thoughts in my Head, the like I never harbored before, nor
since; for all my Adversaries together could never do me the hundredth part of
the prejudice I received, had she not backed them She never saw but in Prison,
which cannot but reflect much on her reputation, in forsaking one she knew for
twelve years before, and in countenancing the greatest Injustice that can be
for strangers sakes, although she was not concerned therein in the least; and that
I never gave her, or any belonging to her, except these my just complaints, as
yet any occasion of displeasure: She can only say I would not yield to some
extravagant propositions of my Adversaries, her Friends; and that I said I
would bring some of them to account for their Injustice to me, and yet there is
no evil but She has practiced against my Reputation, my Body, and my Livelihood.

It Is evident there is nothing She wished more then my Death, and since God I
hope has given her no power thereon, she is resolved to hinder my Liberty by
diswading Catholics from bestowing me any Relief toward my Release out of
Prison; assuring them, I intend as soon as I am at Liberty, to impeach as well
other Catholics, as my Adversaries, so that she has done what lay in her Power
to detain me always in Prison, or to Starve me therein.

My only request to the managers of the Charities given weekly for the
maintenance of Catholic Prisoners was, that since I could be at Liberty any
time this half year by paying an inconsiderable Sum of Moneys I owe, They would
be pleased to allow my share of the said Charities to my Creditors in the same
manner it is paid me, until my Debts was satisfied. Who doubts but the Doners
or Bestowers of such Charities would rather Grant their Moneys to release
Prisoners, then to maintain them in Goal, as one of our best Benefactors has
intimated to me already? yet Mrs. Catharine Sheldons bad Character of me has
sent such a terror in the Hearts of the Distributors of the said Charities, that
they have rejected all such Overtures.

After this, a certain Lady of Quality was pleased to Collect among her
acquaintance near the Sum demanded for my Release, the which Mrs. Catharine
Sheldon also hindered to be given me, by Publicly divulging that this Book is
full of Invectives against the Catholic Religion, and that I am a deserter
thereof: Whosoever Peruseth the same, will find no such thing, and therefore
may justly conclude how false the rest of her Accusations be. Behold what a
Scourge She is to me among my other afflictions! If she was asked from whence
she had this Information, she cannot deny but she got it from the foresaid
Bryan, a most Treacherous Man; or from Mr. Power a most notorious Hipocrite, or
from some others of my Adversaries; which shows a great deal of Malice in her
to me, and very little Discretion or Wisdom, for giving credit to the
Calumnies of my Adversaries, since the World knows there is no belief in the
words of an Enemy.

I wonder she is so Subject to credit Flying reports, unless She knows her own
Reverend Brother to be guilty of what was said of him, to which I never gave as
yet any Faith. It would be expedient for her Reputation to be able to justify
one truth among hundred of Lies She divulged of me these thirteen months past,
I being now a Prisoner two years and a half, all which time I never saw her
face. I am confident she will never find out one Lawful and just Proof in
confirmation of any one of her Scandalous reports of me; although I can find five
hundred to confute her and her consorts, notwithstanding I suffer as if what
she Published of me was as true as the Gospel. I do not know to whom better to
compare this Gentlewomans cruelty to me (that never gave her any just distaste
in my Life) then to those Women who Munder their own Flesh and Blood, the
Fruits of their Womb, their dear and harmless Children, whom neither the fear
of God, nor of the Laws of the Land could dissuade from so inhuman an Act, no
more then my most civil Letters, my present condition and quality, could
prevail with the said Mrs. Catharine Sheldon not to prosecute me, one of her
best Wishers in the Land.

Hence is clearly to be understood, that the Mrs. Catharine Sheldon was the
Principal Instrument for procuring those Catholic Women that brought the two
Midwives to be my Witnesses, and afterward persuaded them to Swear against me
at my Trial.

But since God and my own Conscience are Witness of the wrongs done me, I
thought it most necessary for the satisfaction of the World, to commit the
whole Circumstance of every particular to the Press; not doubting but the
Impartial Reader will comprehend as well the Injustice done me, as if he had
been an Eye Witness to all my Actions, nothing being contained in this Book,
but what I might leave on my Death to be true.

I was forced, for want of Moneys to bestow the whole sale of the Coppies to
the Printer; And whosoever blames me for Printing the same, would undoubtedly
do worse themselves in the like occasion. If any one of them was Robbed of his
whole Store or Patrimony, or was falsely accused of any Fellonious Action, by a
pretended Priest or Jesuit, and was denied Restitution of Goods and Reputation,
would he not Prosecute him, without any regard to the Scandal of his Religion?
I have been Robbed of my Reputation, of my Livelihood, and of all future
expectations of considerable Employments by the Calumny of my Adversaries, and
their supporters; and who can justly find fault with me for putting the Saddle
on the right Horse?

Fiat Justitia, vel ruat Caelum
FINIS.
London Printed, and are to be Sold by W. Downing in Bartholomew-Close Printer,
1681


