The Lady Eleanor Douglas, Dowger, Her Iubiles Plea or Appeal, Ao etc.
EVen she a Prisoner so many years that has been for the Kingdom of Heaven;
shows this Prisoner called to the Bar, Sir John Stowel Knight, He the Herald
appointed for displaying her Title, as in this Looking-glass presented or
appears; in the West Parts one of no mean Quality or Means: Four and twenty
Knights since the Conquest, he the last of them: His Mother the only Daughter
in being of that Queen, bears that Virgin Name, Eliz. The said Prisoner aged
November last, Fifty years; moreover well known, whose Grandfather Sir John
Stowel, unhappily that had his hands in blood, etc. Had two wives living at
once, begetting no Common Suits at Law, between the Divorced's Suing for Dower
after his Decease, and others of the Name to carry the Inheritance, etc.

Thus paraliz'd here with the Stuarts Line, the late Charles aged Novembr. 48.
Anno redempti, 1648. He since the Conquest the four and twentieth Crowned of
these VVestern Isles, whose father (that made it death in like case) King Ja:
had himself his Leah and Rachel also, two Wives, lived with both; the first,
she Daughter of one Sir Peter Young: His Son Charles about a Month younger then
Sir Archibald Douglas deceased, etc. to one of his own name, who married her as
K. Ja: ever disclaiming that of Stuart, etc. always Stiling the said Sir Peter
his Father with due reverence every way; whose eldest Son the Dean of
Winchester, K. James his Executor made, etc. about a month before his death,
appointing out of his Revenues about 10000 per annum for the said Sir A:
Douglas; with no pleasing Aspect by the Buckinghams looked upon.

And how it has succeeded, witness such slips what root have taken: His eldest
Son Henry at full age cut off: His eldest Daughter a Fugitive: Her eldest
drowned, etc. as better for him too, then his person prostituted so to the Iron
rods lash: That token bequeathed his Son a Millstone in the place, even he and
his extirpated, with William Conqueror, Bastard as began, concluded with
Charles, etc. By whose unseasonable Elevated thoughts, others bidden be wise:
The Germain Empires Ebb, for his forewarning who had, and superfluous many
words. Lastly, But put it their proper Case; likewise in those Courts of
theirs, whether require not of Tenants, an Oath of Fealty, without questioning
Possessions, Title of those owners (as whereunto referred) suffices point of
Law; so for deciding other-like doubts: Bars striving with that of Justice, one
or the other, the Sword with two Edges.

December, etc.
FINIS.

