JE LE TIEN: The general RESTITVTION.

Who then is a faithful and wise Servant, whom his Lord has made Ruler over
his household to give them their meat in due season.

Printed in the year, 1646.

Of the general Restitution.
AS no few deceiving themselves, because of the day and hour no man knows, not
Angels of the very day of judgment: conclude or conceive therefore the time
unknown of the Lords coming, not possible to be revealed to any, in regard of a
watchword given out, to keep such on their guard: otherwise, which would fail;
or like the unwise Virgins, should let their lamps go out, etc. So this other
mistake, upon parables or proverbs unnecessary now to be continued any longer,
such sour sauce out of season: The sayings of old time (namely) That out of
Hell is no redemption: Of which heavy sentence here revoked, the deadly
pottage healed as follows; this stone (the evening come of Time) from the well
of Life its mouth rolled away, held not unuseful heretofore; but like the back
parts, beheld in comparison of his reserved countenance, so full of grace and
glory, first making known only, J will be gracious to whom J will, etc. And
such passages or straits, setting forth his prerogative, as with the potters
power over the clay compares his: Though in another place thus, As wide as East
is from the West, so far sets our sins from us; and not ours only, but the
sins of the whole world; knows whereof we be made, remembers we be but Dust.

And where Mercy and Goodness so immeasurable, and we but a grasshopper, a
shadow, etc. how stands it with so much equity, to make such bare near measure,
even world without end, without compassion, out of remembrance to cast the
world, the workmanship of his hands.

As by this attainder of Adams house supposed irrevocable, O far be it from
him, after such deep protestations of old, and Heaven and Earth promised to be
renewed; so to forget him, Man, for whom they were made, to have dominion over
them, for the first offense of our first parents deceived, no better knowing
good from evil in their minority.

Through a sleight of the evil angel, by his subtilty beguiled, not of dust
made, as man, whose doom to eat dust, yet believed they forsaken, who without
number, like as the sand of the Sea, so many millions of Legions, because
over-reacht in state of Innocence, not only utterly cast out of sight, but left
to exquisite torments, such as no pen able to express them, or tongue to utter,
much less to number or measure, the bounds of that so far beyond all Ages and
Times.

Even this proverb yet continued, The childrens teeth set on edge for the
fathers default, so expressly prohibited; as supposed impossible for God to
change or alter it, as it were the Decree of the Medes and Persians, whereas
the Lions mouths stopped, and the sevenfold heated furnace its furious flames of
no force qualified.

And in that manner also forewarned, how incredible soever in the sight of men,
as for a Camels going through a needles eye: that very point no more difficult
with God in his appointed time, then for them to third a pack-needle, or to
cast a wedge of Iron into the fire, taken forth again, and the like, all things
with him as easy.

Whereas intolerable sinful Sodom, for so few their sakes had been spared
pressed, Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right?

As by such a qualification admitted, which may be merciful as he pleases,
rather then unjust in the least.

And pardoned Ninivchs great City, where like Hell out of the belly of that
great fish, he was heard and delivered: Also in tender consideration because of
so many, the right hand not knowing from the left, for the childrens cause the
fathers preserved, lucky Babes, the state of Innocence, such respect had
thereunto.

And here spreading his bleeding hands and arms, extended from paradise to
hell, a greater then Jsaac or Abraham either, saying, Before Abraham was J am:
His only begotten offering up himself, so did no Isaac, saying, Here Is the
fire and wood, but where is the Lamb?

And to be so well pleased in him, and so exceedingly displeased with them, The
world, for whom he here prays; not for those given him out of the world,
saying, Father, forgive them, they know not what they do: But all them in state
of Ignorance, they who do they know not what. And therefore between them
crucified, as it were, those two Thieves in paradise, which robbed the garden of
God, even forgave all the world at his death; that before knowing the power
given him over all flesh, made that solemn prayer to his father, and
thanksgiving for them which believed, etc. whose prayer Steven borrowed, Lord,
lay not their sin to their charge, and fell asleep.

Who them told before, Jf J be lifted up, J shall draw all men to me; so to the
one as saying, This day thou be in paradise with me; another day infers for the
other: Howsoever, the contrary passes for current, like that mistake touching
that Disciple, that He should not dye: from some reserved meaning of our
Saviors, misunderstood by the standers by.

As from this doubtfully given out, likewise of no inferior quality or
consequence, concerning the fire not extinguished; where it follows not, their
pains of like nature to be endless: the punishment, though granted inevitable,
not avoided to be, yet the perpetuity thereof in suspense, uncertain how long
to continue: as indeed the word For ever signifies but during pleasure, and so
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, in the original, to wit, length of days,
or a long time.

Which mystery of their restitution, The worlds general pardon, inferior not
to their being made fellow-heirs the Gentiles, these Sacred Olive boughs
(sayings of the Prophets and Apostles) make bold to go over them again, for the
going forward with it, how impossible held soever, any such gleanings or
multiplied Fragments belongs to them, because long lay hidden, as taken here
from the Tree of Life.

Proclaimed, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world;
also the Angels first salute, Behold, tidings of great joy to all people: and
of like healing nature, that He the propitiation of our sins not only, but of
the whole worlds: and thus as at the first, Behold the world made whole; as,
God saw every thing, and behold it was very good that he made: so returns to
their former or first estate; as, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return:
confirmed by the Apostle Paul, Jf the first fruits and root holy, also the lump
and branches.

And again, Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time: of
which time Peter not unmindful gives command, Therefore gird up the loins of
your minds, and hope to the end for the grace to be brought unto you, at the
revelation of Jesus Christ; in whose Sermon, Act. 3. Whom the Heavens must
receive at the restitution of all things. And concerning which grace of general
Redemption, and the Lords second coming to be revealed, as expressly showed from
good witness, to be waited for, and to prepare for it; moreover our Saviors
charge, Therefore be ye ready also, for in such a time as ye think not the
son of man comes, (Matthew 24. Mark 13.) And as to the days of the unexpected
flood, points to the same time, three periods and a half, a time and times and
half, sworn in Daniel and the Revelation, as it were with him but evening,
midnight, cock-crowing and morning, for his coming, then to expect it, saying,
Truly Eliah the Prophet first shall come and restore all things, before the
great and dreadful day of the Lord, in whose sight a thousand years as
yesterday.

According to Malachi, Behold J will send you Eliah, etc. And in another place
bears date thus, Behold your house is left unto you desolate: and ye shall not
see me till ye say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord, namely
Eliah so called, one after his spirit; for convincing them of their hard sayings
and opinions; Who shall render them meat in due season, Mat. 24. and by the
same token how then it fares with them, even the priesthood; And in the day
that J shall do this, says the Lord of Hosts, J shall leave them neither root
nor branch (to wit) the Gentiles Church also cut off departed from the Faith,
except a remnant that have not bowed the knee, or have declined their
Antichristian Tenants, as this for one, That the gift of Prophecy is
extinguished; and that for another, the root of Heresies, That there is no
restoration from the second death, which begat the popish purgatory, which
begat the Manichees error which begat Arrianism, Pelagianism.

Besides the abominable eating of blood authorized, against that so solemnly
inacted by the apostles, Acts 15 after such deliberation, and a thing observed
for a long time after, verily procreating that inhumane opinion of
Transubstantiation of the very Blood communicated in the Sacrament; otherwise
which never had bin broached such an Abomination, standing on the Lords Table
adored: So Rev. 16. Worthily ye drink of the bloody Vials your fill, poured out
now if ever.

Now unto the aforesaid, what more may be said or added, then this, If I be
lifted up, J will draw all men to me; Though our Doctors prophesying out of
their own Envious Spirit, would have it, as if the number of them to be heald,
stung by the old Serpent, in comparison of the rest: But as those in the last
age which taste not Death, such a handful to the dead since the world began, or
as some Eight persons as it were saved by Faith: Or like her household spand
alive, destroyed not with the accursed City; yet Jericho built again, its
foundation laid, and gates set up that lay waste.

Though granted shadows forth, how few the number of the faithful to others
going the broad way, whose Antichristian plots prosper not, shall not be able
to stand in the Judgment that hold, Notwithstanding the root our first Parents
franckly forgiven, Luke, yet for their offense their posterity cut off; the
branches suffered never to grow again, against Law and Justice, whereas
recorded of that King concerning the murderers of his Father, the children not
put to death, 2 Kings 14. and Deuteronomy, etc.

He then which much more pardons, leaves not so much as a hoof in Egypt, the
very Beast the old Serpent sets him at liberty: Satan in process of time
unbound, reserved until the last day in chains of despair, though supposed
Sodoms captivity and her sisters never returns from endless exile, much less
those infernal spirits.

Because before the Tree of life tasted of, their future happiness made known,
gives them a touch of the tree of knowledge, the Law.

Lets them know what he is able to do, as the Apostle Paul shows, What if God
willing to show his wrath, and make his power known etc. So after Joseph's way,
before making himself known, saying I am Joseph to his unnatural Brethren: who
notwithstanding foreshew'd how they should all bow before him: yet possessed
with such spirit of misbelief, whom they sold into Egypt knew him not.

Lest presumption, which knows no measure, take advantage of unlimited mercy, a
main point, for a long time permits them to wander in like ignorance, Having
sworn in his wrath, first suffers fieryserpents to vex them.

Much like the mist cast before their eyes, because their task increased who
mutin'd (Exodus) answerable but to that in the Gospel, by his Disciple being
desired to send her away, answered, J am not sent but to the lost sheep of the
house of Jsrael. Where she called dog, the Canaan woman, which would not take it
for an answer, but after him still cries out, partakes of the childrens bread,
afterward the devil cast out of her daughter; The Gentiles forerunner and
figure not only, but those gone into perdition.

And this his Kingdom, like David's, reduced by degrees, made wait for his
promises; and that every one may come to the knowledge of the Truth. Which
Army a refuge for the distressed and discontented, as Solomon's kingdom a
pattern, after Judgment executed according to his fathers command, of our
expected rest. The peaceable new Heavens and Earth, who though commanded a
sword to be brought him, thought not to take the Infants life; the standers by
put in a doubt notwithstanding, and the mother of it much more.

But leaving him, that knew what he had to do with Joab and Shimei, who excused
not his own Brother Adoniah in such a nice point, for the first fault, which
was winked at by the Father.

For prosecuting of this nicety of the word For Ever and Everlasting, such a
stumbling block to them so blockish, that make us believe, beyond these pillars
or periods there is no passing or going farther, not as much as a possibility
of it will allow for this new Wine to drop down, or to be drawn forth,
reserved till the last, Joel the third and 18. v. such a gift in misconstruing
of Mysteries, have attained unto, with the Jews, so stumbled about their
abolished Ceremonies and Ordinances, because said they, Stand fast for ever
(Psalms etc) do not un^^^st^^^ ^^^ch way God is able to disavow or disanul them
for the better: for example, because Circumcision called an everlasting Covenant,
Genesis together with the promised Land passed or given unto his seed for an
everlasting possession: And yet so long kept out of possession, strangers
there: no more strange then that for another, where such an express Deed
canceld (saying) J said indeed, Thou and thy Fathers house should walk before
me for ever, but now far be it from me.

So farther now for the aforesaid, in the Original signifying but for Ages, and
likewise for Ever and Ever, for Ages and FARTHER, or Et cetera, as it were (to
wit) with God during pleasure: The burden of that gracious Psalm, For his
mercy endures for (...)

And yet this burden continued, supposed out of Hell there is no Redemption or
Restoration, which also signifies The Grave (Psalm 16) one word expressing
both.

Though elsewhere, as the Holy Ghost where he pleases able more abundantly to
express it: In our Saviors being parareld with Melchisedeck, Heb. 7. mentions
an endless life; in the Original (to wit) indisolvable; And again, But this man
because he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood (or) which passes
not away to another; And to that end such passages.

So concerning the ability of our Savior, inferior not to Adam, with whom he is
paraleld too; with Adam the first man, Romans 5. As sin entered into the world by
him, and death by sin, which passed upon all men, for that all hrve sinned.

And by one man's obedience much more came upon all, Justification to life, so
much pressed by the Apostle.

And if ye will receive it, Rev. 14. resolves it, ordered by a voice from
Heaven to be written, where shows as there smoke ascends For Ever and Ever,
that day and night that have no rest: so they that dye in the Lord from
Henceforth rest from their labors or pains: The which besides useful for
demolishing the aspiring walls of Purgatory, for any Saints ever coming there,
to be partakers of such sulpherous smokes.

This Text of the Angels commanded to be preached upon, farther informs, styled
The Everlasting Gospel, that the true meaning of it, even For Ever and Ever, it
signifies but From Henceforth, a time determinable, and not infinite or
unlimited, if credit may be given to the holy Spirit ( Revelations the
fourteenth, saying, Yea or Content says the Spirit; so what spirits soever
resists it, or says No, touching those disobedient Spirits cast out of his
presence, as if for those prisoners, ringleaders of rebellion, remains no hope
or mercy; whereas Lucifer not excepted, confined though to extreme darkness, of
whom Jude shows, The Archangel Michael DURST NOT bring railing accusation
against him, being against the Law of prisoners to revile them, as indeed Hell
no other then a prison, implying a Release thence, like as death called sleep in
respect of the Resurrection, to which end is showed by Peter (3.) He went and
Preached to the Spirits there imprisoned; and therefore saying, If I go down to
Hell thou art there also, Psalm, etc.

That each in his order; The first fruits redeemed from among men, for so The
everlasting Gospel informs us: Then the latter Fruits or Harvest which follows,
reserved for the hour of his Judgment, even 1600. bearing date, paced forth by
time; howsoever expressed by the space of so many Furlongs for Centuries ( Revel.
14.)

As hereof ( Luke 16.) testifies where that distance between them termed a
space fixed (or a Gulf) so much by our Adversaries insisted on; whereas the
verity of it, a space of time prefixed, because otherwise (since time moves not)
but an improper or unnecessary Speech; with that of Abraham's Bosom concurs, or
like those Corn Ears interpreted so many years to come: Likewise his own Dream
of The Sheafs of Corn doing obeisance, and the like.

Where touching his pedigree the RICH (man) SON, styled by Abraham, some
PARSONS SON, as is probable by that Reply, They have Moses and the Prophets; so
without contradiction bids beware of lying, by his scorchd tongue inflamed,
testified Psalm 120. Thou false tongue, etc. So again a material point from
Abraham's calling him SON, even points or refersus to her Story, after the
Bottle spent, who had her eyes opened, saw a well of water, bidden Fear not,
called unto from Heaven, lift up the Lad Ishmael, named so of the Angel,
namely, God shall hear, when she again, Thou God see me.

Where farther of what profession or Fraternity, he lifting up his eyes saw
afar off Lazarus in his Bosom: whom he again calls, Father, whose last motion,
that Lazarus then might be sent to his Fathers house to testify and and
forewarn them ( Lest his Brethren, etc. (to wit) Besides Arch. B. other
Bishops, 25. in number, how they come there to have a care, as here in their
formalities, that Brotherhood not alone, but those of the Law, their Coat
displays herewith a chief Judge, who call Brothers too: This Stone or Bone cast
amongst them, saying, They have the Law and the Prophets, let them hear them.

So then no ordinary Beggar taken up into Heaven, but one of the Prophetical
order granted, who was to persuade them, coming in the Spirit of Eliah the
Tisbet, DOUBTLESS, whom they did not or would not know: And since he in Hell
received no absolute denial, who knows but that it was obtained (to wit) a line
of mercy from his finger top, as it were never so little of the water of life.

And herewith the Prophetical Date shall proceed, which belongs to the
preceding Parable to unfold, containing his discharge, showed, he might be no
longer Steward, accordingly whose Stewardship was resigned; where the measures
of Oil anointing him, for no common Steward either, but how it shall come to
pass in some wastful unjust reign, for his pass given him serves.

And so much for the testified present evil time, with the quaif degree, and
those of the Lawn sleeves, their fine Linen, without doubt visited, holding it
enough to have Moses read and the Prophets, though understand them not at all,
so all watching thus with one consent, stopping their ears as their forefathers.

And thus it fares with this Lazarus whose ulcers Allegorical, those evil
things received in his life time, viz. Imprisonments, Excommunications, and
such like entertainment, by some forlorn suitors only licked or visited, of
whom well the blessed Virgin prophesying, shows how it shall fare with them in
those rebellious days, He has showed strength with his Arm, and he has put
down the mighty from their seat; with whom the Apostle accords, Corinthians 15.
Puts all his foes under his feet before his coming: And as this no news to him
that has ears, so this opinion as strange, for which serves the parable of
that envious elder Brother that would not be persuaded either to see his lost
Brother, or enter the house; of like evil nature bids others beware, lest like
that Servant that obtaind mercy himself, yet so unmerciful showed none at all
to his fellow Servant, they be also rewarded with him (till the debt
discharged, every farthing accounted for.) And for the same purpose as Peter
forbidden such remission by measure, Not to pardon until seven times, but until
Seventy times seven,; likewise in Luke 17. Seven times a day to forgive; where
the Apostles replying, Lord increase our Faith, being by our Theologers termd a
certainty for an uncertainty, what they please, yet not only points to very
Easter, those weeks bebefore it, when sent forth that first pardon, The.
Messiah offered, proclaimd Lord of Sabbaths; but as gives notice of this last
pardon for the space of 1700. years hidden, so shows by the 70. times seven
which amounts to the sum of Four hundred and ninety, the set time between the
Prophet Daniels Visions and our Lord the Son of God his tasting death for every
one, The Lamb slain, etc. without exception praying for all, a greater then
Daniel praying then.

Which Four hundred and ninety years, seventy weeks, of years that fulfill, by
seven years allotted to a week, after Daniels computation agreeing with Jacobs,
said to accomplish her week too, (Gen.) in his seven years service for her.

And so the sum of the matter since by Scripture confuted this erroneous
opinion, by breaking open Hell gates, or opening the meaning of such an
intricate case, beyond any case in Law ever reported, consisting of such
niceties, where since proved to be but prison, follows their remaining there no
longer, but till the Debt satisfied, according to all Law and Justice imposed:
As to him belongs only the mystery of Times and Seasons, reserved in the power
of the Father, revealed to whom he pleases, ( Acts 1.) Therefore what he
appoints determinable, let none extend it to be without limitation, since Rev.
14. declares it; where the everlasting Gospel clears the mistake of the word
Everlasting, viz. so long as day and night lasts.

And now moreover of the Book of the Revelation too, a word or two more, such
an eye-soar to the Clergy; where too manifest what rottennes and Antichristian
Abuses of late crept in, requisite to be purged out; as first, in our Bibles,
where like Jeroboams policy, who made Jsrael to sin, in this sinful Age have
under color of disburthening the congregation, testified and ordered by like
Authority, That the New Testament shall be read over every year once, with
this proviso, Except certain Books which be least edifying, and may best be
spared, and therefore left unread, as the Revelation.

And if he that shall think little of any jot or tittle of the Law, was to be
least in the Kingdom of Heaven, what shall they be worthy of that have cast
such a flood of Iniquity out of their mouth, as the days of Noah not guilty of
the like.

Having excluded that blessed book directed to the Churches, with Blessed is he
which reads, and they which hear the words of it, and as thus opened, so closed
with these, For the time is at hand, Behold I come quickly. Doubtless the days
of the flood pointing unto, by the seven Vials poured out, filled with the
seven last Plagues, in the seventeenth Century, so long after the creation,
when as the world drowned.

And so seven times cried, He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit
says. And last of all, He that shall take away from the words of that Book,
God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life. Also, he that shall add
(as much to say) shall say in his heart, The Lord delays his coming, not
remembering the Flood time, God shall add to him the plagues of Egypt, the
waters turned into blood, etc. ( Revel. 11.) And yet this Book by name cast out
of the Church, under color of being obscure, though assured nothing so covered
or hidden which shall not be proclaimed or preached on house tops: And thus his
promises waited for, the Holy Ghost knocking at the door, made to wait and
stand without: which Antichristian Scoffers (in our days) without doubt peter
testifies comes not short of them, 2 Pet. 3. in their proper colors of
unbelief displayed, saying, Where is the promise of his coming, etc.

Even of the breed of the lawless seven-headed Beast with the Ten horns (to
wit) in his head or Frontispiece, Anno Dom. 1700. who have annexed such open
Blasphemy to the Bible. Nor this done in a corner, for a second of these
unsufferable doings against the third Commandment, although all Heathenism
Repetition forbidden, Notwithstanding by a noise of Boys, that name rent in so
many pieces in Churches where the Schools kept, indeed better much deserving to
be whipped out then those defiling but the Temple, where that dreadful name taken
in vain so, babbling at every word, J pray God, and God grant, and Would to God
we love, etc. or have this or that, etc. upon any lascivious Lines of Heathen
Poets their amorous Poems, when those children unlucky ones, not held guiltles,
so lesson'd for their mocking of him, by unshorn Bears torn so many of them in
pieces.

And moreover for a third course or piece of unsavory service; witness Paul's
Churchyard, under the Noses of those reverend Masters, how close stools, those
seats sir-reverence lined clean through with the Bible, from Genesis to the
Revelation, those precious leaves for the healing of the Nations, polluted in
that most base unmanerly manner, worse far then if burnt by the hangman: More
sacred then Saul's Garment, when he coverd his Feet, (the modest Scripture
phrase also worthy the observing) and was but cut off by David, that man after
Gods own heart, if his heart smote him for so doing: And Moses bidden to put
off his shoes, because the very ground was sacred: And Josuah likewise: How
comes it to pass no scruple made, by these Scorners, who fleeing Superstition,
run upon gross contempt such profanation: questionles then privilege of
Parliament being subverted, or infringed more material these which endure for
ever, purchased with his Blood, any thing destructive thereto: a liberty far
from that preached by our Savior, in observing his severe style, who styles
himself The Preacher, (Eccles.) that well blesses the day of death before the
day of ones birth and mourning.

So where a rash word and a look awry extended to Murder and Adultery:
referring us to the blessed Prophets before us Antipodes to the world in such
contempt ever held, even blesses such and no other, who chooses the foolish
things, and the weak, the Base, to confound and confute the Mighty.

But returning now to the former matter of his abundant love to all; by these
men, how much so ever envied, beheld with such an evil eye this light
extraordinary: So then for proving the Affirmative, (to wit) there is
redemption for the Damned; confirmed though sufficiently by the Apostles
Spirit, Romans 2 Cor. 15. showing as all dead in Adam, so all made alive again,
etc. yet this for an addition, Rev. 20. touching those that lived not again,
being not unbound until such a space fulfilled of time, as known times bounds
set also; where they that lived and reigned with Christ, whose part in the
first Resurrection, as with them Antichristians no partakers; but of the second
Death, implying a second Resurrection for those Children of Perdition; so shows
like the lost Son, styled so but in respect of being found.

Lastly notwithstanding the dreadful word for Ever and Everlasting, as
mentioned by Jacob at his death, Unto the utmost bound of the everlasting
Hills, etc. (Gen.) and Jonas in that danger, crying, The Earth with her bars
was about me for ever; So for the doubling of it for ever and ever, howsoever
may serve sometimes to show the thing established, as Pharoahs Dreams, or where
he in stead of smiting five or six times, because came short, was showed lost
his pains by the coming shortly again of the Enemy.

Yet the truth of it, but like a Key that opens and shuts, serves also to give
warning of some remarkable passage appertaining to the future for the most
part, by him having the keys of Death and Hell, in due time made known: And
hereof being ignorant unobserved, because of the unknown day and hour only
mentioned, hold themselves not bound to wait for that time to be revealed.

Like as in the days of Noah, observe neither signs nor forerunners of it. As
not without some mystery included ( Rev. 20.) where several times a Thousand
years sufilled, repeated no less then six times; like that of the
inextinguishable fire ( Mark 9.) translated, Shall never be quenched, with the
worm, etc. only (as much to say) Better there to endure any pain a long space,
then to have had no being at all; where compared to some gangrened member,
Better cut off then the body perish: Instanced though in the case of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and as explained that place here for the sin against the
Holy Ghost, punished here and hereafter, where a possibility of escape, as the
word Danger imports, He shall be in danger, etc. so concludes even Judas,
though good had he been unborn, yet extends not to annihilate him.

Otherwise no such abounding blessing added to Abraham, without number to have
a Seed or Generation as the Stars above, and the Sand of the Sea, if his mercy
exceeded not much his Justice, Merciful unto Thousands; whereas but to a few,
the third Degree, or fourth Generation, showing hatred.

And as this relation thus concluded of the whole creation, accompanying the
present Age, in the sufferings of late, groaning for so many Ages under the
burden of the word signifying but for Ages, or from Henceforth; so let this
Amoveas manus serve: This Olive leaf for sinister constructions, such illegal
extent of unwarrantable words to make them accursed and void.

Forasmuch as should it repent God he had made man, etc. yet that ever he
should reverse his own Judgment, God forbid, which no ordinary Judge can or
will do, without a Writ of Error brought, since nothing but confusion brings;
which Writ either upon any terms not feisible now as the state stands, a thing
observable; so having pronounced every thing created and made was very good;
then he which is the Word, not to make good his word, far be it from the Judge
of all the Earth, the God of all Gods, and let every one say to this
confession, Amen; yea says the Spirit, by reason of the Law and several
Statutes, since the world has fallen in DANGER of such penalties and
forfeitures: The King of Kings, the grand Creditor, sends forth his Pardon, yea
to the whole Creation.

Je Elen: Ti:

I hold it.

FINIS.

