DON PEDRO DE QUIXOT, OR IN ENGLISH THE RIGHT REVEREND HUGH PETER'S.
The Names of the RUMPS Twelve Chaplains extraordinary.
Doctor John Owen Mr. Peter Sterry Mr. Lockier Mr. W. Sedwick Mr. John Cann Mr.
Ironmonger Walker Mr. John Goodwin Mr. Dell Mr. Philip Nigh Mr. Feak Mr. John
Rogers Vavasour Powel.
Hugh Peter's:


WE here present to your view, the grand Canale or common-shore of all
Phanatical principles, Geneva's Calvinisme, Munsters Revelations, Amsterdams
Toleration, New-Englands Preciseness, all bound up in one volume, and abridged
in this Epitome.

He has had the luck to outrun all his companions that started with him, he
has left Mr. Case but just in sight, which is as much as he desires or
deserves. Roaring Marshal he quite out-breathed, and to say the truth was the
better Bull of the two, for he could low the full udder'd pursed Kine, the
zealous women, into Guildhall mint, while Marshal rambled up and down the large
field of Rebellion, with strained and wrench'd Divinity, not minding the
fruitfulness of the Parliaments Cattle, nor could make uses and Applications
from Votes of the Houses.

It were impossible to match him. Peter Sterry can blaspheme, and aver it on
his Knowledge, that Oliver was on the right hand etc. when Peter's by his
Familiar was ascertained he dwelt at the sign of the Left handed Goat, and sung
a Dirge to Old Nick for his Patrons requiem; Saltmarsh had also an excellent
faculty of principling and persuading the Army, and rose to a very great Credit
and Authority among them, even to be taken for a Prophet, but when the time of
Olivers appearance came, he made room, and gave place to this venerable
Emissary the Apostle St. Peter's.

This Reverend Gentleman, has been a great fundamental maker, a Searcher of
the rubbish of the three ruined Kingdoms, to which his immense parts made him
very useful, as did his other large geer commend him, and qualify him for the
holy Zealous sisters.

He quarrelled with the Presbyters, first, because they were madder then
himself, and knew not what they would have, when his bent was to have no
Government, and yet every good thing beside; and secondly, because they had no
more plate, nor rings, nor jewels, to sacrifice to Bell and the Dragon, the
Good old cause, that his Priesthood might be maintained, and the Parliament
Gospel and Ministry propagated.

Mr. Foxely of Sepulchers Parish, was his most bosom Friend for they two would
lie and tell Stories by one and the same instinct, and the one was second to
the other in all their juggles and impostures, if the one Romanced of a Victory
a Sunday, at 40. miles distance, the other would give you the particulars at a
repetition that night, and so a lying Spirit was put into the mouth of Civicus
the Scout, Dove, Post, all the Mercuries, the puny Chroniclers of the times,
which did highly advance the credit and reputation of the Arms and strength of
the Rebellion.

Certainly he was the bravest Ambodexter of his time, and this blinded age, or
that ever was among us dull Northern people; and among the multitude of his
Tricks, I shall commend to the Hocusses of Bartholomew Fair, for their
information and edification, this Legerdemain (for it is supposed it will
hardly be practicable any more in the Pulpit;) That Is this, His great mission
from the Parliament, (when he had done his utmost here with the Londoners) was
to stir up all the godly and well affected in the several Countries, to a
liberal contribution for the defense and support of their cause; to compass and
effect his errand, he see there was no better way then by provoking them (by
way of emulation) with other places large and signal gifts and loanes: To which
purpose, when he preached, which was always on that Subject of matter of
money, he wore a pair of Breeches without Pockets, only the holes were cut in
them, (and his Auditory being most women, after he had thundered at the
Cavaleirs, and frighted them with the terrible characters he gave them) out at
length comes a whole bunch of rings, which he had hung on his cod-peice button,
and my beloved quoth he, these Rings the Women of such a Town gave me, and
after he had shaked them a while in one hand, then pretending he put them up,
standing upright in the Pulpit, he took them through his Breeches in the other,
and dearly beloved Sisters quoth he, these the godly zealous Women of another
Town gave me, to subdue the wicked ungodly Cavaliers: and this Country cheat
brought in a great deal of grist to his Mill. Such a through paced shaver too,
that he never fell into any disgust with any of the usurped powers, all the
time of his late horrid Anarchy, but what was merely pretended and out of
design, viz. when Oliver had a pique at any of the swarm of Sects, that
multiplied during his time, and were the right hand of his power; for then Hugh
was to be in disgrace; and his disfavour at that barbarous Court, was trust
enough with any of the prickeard Brethren, to admit him into their Counsels,

He went (for the Character of his Religion) under the general notion of an
Independent, a Neuter betwixt Feake and Simpson, and Philip Nigh and Sterry,
while the aforesaid Feak began to bandy against Oliver, for then he screwed
himself into high favor with fiding with his Highnesses Nose, and was made
Chaplain Errant or in Ordinary to him.

He was one of the pretended Judges for probate of Wills, and granting
administrations, at the same time the greatest Solicitor at Whitehall, and
upon the business of Hispaniola and Dunkirk, was employed to preach Courage
into the Soldiery. A most indefatigable maker of Addresses to Snout from the
Army and other well affected people, which were well repaid him in several
grants to Petitions which he managed, so that he lickt his fingers sweetly, and
if he did any thing for the Female Sex, which were often his clients, he would
be sure to have a feeling.

He was an absolute Ubiquitary before his late Confinement, a fellow of a very
capacious intellect, and by his Travels, and the help of a good memory, well
versed in any thing but Honesty and Conscience.

His Caprichio's and Whimseys in the Pulpit where he played Presto with the
Bible, were certainly out of design to scandalize Learning, and make that
sacred place of the Oracle a la mode to Stage Play, He was the first that ever
made a Sermon out of a News Book.

He had also an extraordinary Faculty of modelling, and was very much for that
manner of Government, which the Jews used under the Law (and He and Philip Nigh
were great Sticklers by Commission from Cromwell for the readmission of them
into England, as being excellent Spunges for Nolls Necessities.) To which
purpose he writ a Book called Good Work for a good Magistrate, full of Chimera's
and strange invention, but the main drift is the Suppression and abolition of
all manner of Learning, as in p. 33. (This being done (says he) it is very
advisable to burn all old Records, yea even those in the Tower, the Monuments
of Tyranny:) no doubt this Gimcrack maker, would willingly all the late Records
were burnt also, wherein his good name has had such often occasion to be
mentioned and registered.

That sixth of December 1648. when Pride secluded 40. Members of the House of
Commons, and carried them into Hell at Westminster, where they lay upon, the
bare boards, Hugh Peter's took a List of them standing by the Door, as they past
into the Room, with a Sword under his Arm. And the next Lords Day, in a place
in Northamptonshire (for he flew up and down like wildfire to promote the
murder of the King) to vilify the Honest Patriots of the Parliament, who
opposed that detestable Design, in one of his Freakes diving into the Pulpit,
he told the people he had been in Hell, and there was a number of Parliament
men there, and that they might believe it to be as true as this Gospel, showing
a Table Book, bound up like a Testament.

It is impossible to recite or remember half of his feats of Activity, had they
been harmless ones, and not polluted with blood, they had outdone Scogan or
Cottington. Such a Mercurial piece of Mischief our Annals afford not. There is
not a place of note in the Three Kingdoms, where this Priest Errant has not
been; as for Wales, Vavasour Powel and he, had measured it out in two halfes
for themselves, only an Ecclesiastical Tribute reserved to Major General
Harrison the Deputy to the fifth Monarch, out of those Mountains of Moab.

He is now run to the end of his rope, he has trampled so long upon the Crown
while the thorns of it (of his and his Accomplices grafting) have pricked his feet
to the quick. So desperate a thing it is, to kick against the pricks. So e'n
take him Derrick, and set up his whimsical head for a Weathercock upon
London Bridge.

London, Printed for T. Smith 1660.


