A dangerous and BLOODY FIGHT Upon the Coast of CORNWALL Between The English and
the Dutch, On Thursday last; with the full particulars thereof; the manner of
their engagement; the great execution done on both sides; and 17 of the
Hollanders sh^ps brought into Plymouth.

SEnt to the High and Honourale Council of State, on Sunday last, October 24.

Together With a Narrative of the King of Denmarks proceedings against the
English: the raising of a great army in France their resolution and design, and
the landing of the Dutch near Yarmouth; the rising of the Country with Clubs,
Fowling-pieces, and Longpikes; a bloody fight thereupon, and the pursuing of
the Dutch to the Seacoast, and the number killed and taken prisoners.

LONDON: Printed for George Horton, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1652.

The Proceedings of the King of Denmark Against the English, and a Message from
the English to the Governor of Elsinore.
Honored Sir,
ON Thursday the 9 of September, we set sail to proceed on our design for the
Sound, and came to an anchor the 20 following, betwixt 6 and 7 at night, two
leagues short of Elsinore Castle, we sent the Greyhound up before us with
letters to the Governor of Elsinore, and the Admiral which rode near the
Castle, that they might acquaint the King of our approach, and to what purpose:
with another letter to the Merchants, and Masters of the English ships at
Copenhagen, to make their address to his Majesty, for their more speedy
procurement of their ships, which were 22 in number, all shut up within the
Booms at Coppenhagen; but the Greyhound was stopped a league short of the Castle,
next morning Captain Ball went up with his boat, and delivered his letters; but
while he was gone, the Dutch came and seized his man which kept his boat, and
cast him overboard, and carried her away: but the Governor of the castle made
them deliver his boat again; we left no means unattempted to get those ships
out; for we sent another letter to the Merchants to Petition the King, and a
messenger of ours likewise to him, but all proved fruitless, for he would not
be seen, but sent two Lords to Elsinore, which I conceive was under a color;
so then was Capt. Adams and another twice sent, but could effect nothing, for
they instead of answering our demands; demanded of us, why their Ambassadors
had not audience in England, and that they expected ^ur Ambassadors from us,
and whether we had any letters from the State to their King, and why we so
boldly came so near his Majesty's hope and Castle, upon their streams, without
three weeks warning, all which being impertinent to our business, we urged for
a positive answer, and the 26 we received a letter from the King, intimating,
that he would secure them for the Merchants as carefully as he had done, and
was resolved not to deliver them to us.

The Englishmen belonging to those ships, when they saw no hopes of their ships
releasme^t, let them, and came away to us; so the 27 we left the Sound, to
return to give an account of our proceedings past, but by the way God was
pleased to make us pertakers of a sad accident, which happened Thursday the last
of September, about 3 of the clock in the morning; the Antelope, commanded by
Capt. Ball, ran ashore on the coast of Jutland, and by reason she carried the
light, we followed so near the shore, that it was a wonderful providenceany of
us escaped, but blessed be God, we all got off, except the said Antelope which
is sunk, but all her men saved, so had that ship likewise, had they steered the
course that honest Captain Ball shaped them: soon after we fell among the Dutch
Fishers on the Dogger bank, and have taken 16 sail together, with a man of war,
carrying 22 guns, with little loss.

A Letter from Paris.
SIR,
THe 15th of this instant October thus, his Majejesties answer made to the
Colonels and Officers mentioned in our last, who were gone from hence as
Commissioners, the substance whereof was, that his Majesty having resolved to
go to one Province of his Kingdom where it was requisite; yet upon the humble
addresses of his said City he had condescended to their request for returning
to his good City of Paris, which he had appointed to be the monday following.

Mademoiselle had order to quit her lodgings in the Louvre, which were made
ready for the Duke d' Anjou. Crussels Governor of the Bastile delivered up his
keys and charge to an exempt de gards sent thither by the King for that end.
The King of Scots has been complemented by the French Court. The Lord Digby is
made Governor of the said Bastile of Paris.

The 19 the Parliament being sat the Duke of Orleans, acquainted the house,
that he had received a letter from the Duke d' Anvilie, intimating that his
Majesty did purpose to be in Paris the monday following; whereupon it was
ordered, that most humble thanks should be returned to his Majesty, but withal
to entreat that he would be pleased to bring with him an Amnistia in a due
form, and confirmed by this Parliament. The same day in the afternoon, returned
the said Colonels and other Officers from St. Germans, and with them came also
the Marshal de Hospital, late Governor of Paris, with Monsieur Le Fibure, late
Provost of Merchants, and altogether met in the evening at the Town house,
where, in the full Assembly there was read the Kings Letter concerning his
Majesty's coming to Paris, as also the dismissing of the Guards that were kept
at the City gates; which was accordingly executed on the twentieth.

The 20 the several Presidents and Counselors of the Parliament, all except
eight or nine, received express order from the King, to repair to the King at
the Louvre upon the 22, where his Majesty would be in his seat of Justice. The
Duke of Guise is also gone to the Court, having made a long speech to the King
in protestation of his service, which has fallen out against all expression.
The 21 the Duke de Anville came from the Court, and went to the Duke of
Orleans, acquinting him that it was his Majesty's pleasure that he should go to
Limours, and withal to sign a dissertion from the Prince of Conde, for having
more to do with him or his party; which if he refuse, to depart the City in 24
hours; and in default thereof, that his Majesty would send a Regiment of the
Guards to force him to obey that order: his Highness absolutely refused to sign
any thing against the Prince, choosing rather to accept the second, and so
departed that afternoon, and went with a great number of followers to his house
at Limours: there went our with him, the D, of Beaufort, Rohan, la
Rochefaveant, with many other persons of great rank, who were all commanded to
depart the City.

The same day (21) the King came to the City about 8 of the clock in the
evening, where he was received with great joy and acclamations of the people,
with ringing of bells and Bonfires, as is usually accustomed. The 22 all things
were made ready in the the Louvre for the sitting of the King in that Gallery
called of the Pictures, the Parliament of Paris, except some nine Members, came
up one pair of stairs, and that of Pothoise another; the King sat there but
little time, and spoke less: only four remarkable things were there enacted.
First, the Amnistia or Pardon, then the excluding some Members from sitting;
thirdly, that the Princes of Conde, Conti, and ot^ers of their party to appear
within three certain Law, or fixed days, as also to lay down Arms, and bring in
his Army to his Majesty to serve according to his command, and upon default
thereof, to be declared Rebel, Traitor, and criminal, la sa Majestatis,
injoyning all his loving subjects to apprehend him with his accomplices,
wheresoever they find them: Lastly, a Cessation or annulling of what had been
acted by the Parliament of Paris, since the King went from hence, and
confirming what had been done by that of Ponthoise, and withal forbidding the
Parliament for the future to meddle with any States affairs, either concerning
his person, counsel, or treasury, but only to do justice to the public,
according as their place required. The Prince of Conde is now at Stenay, and
the new Spanish Army at S. Quintin, the Duke of Lorrain also with his Army not
far from hence, they intend to join in a body, and to that add the forces under
the Duke of Wittembergh, and the Earl of Warsowitz: altogether will make an
Army of 30000 fighting men. The Regiment of Valois, who was quartered at
Charenton, is now gone to Limours for the security of his Royal Highness. The
Duke of Anville is there also, sent from the Court to persuade his said
Highness to forsake the Prince and his party, the which as yet he will not do.
The princes army is toward Soissen, Turene betwixt him and Paris, at Stenlis.

Paris, October. 25. 1652.

His Excellency General Blake, having sent a squadron, of ships to coast the
Channel, soon received some opposition from the Hollander, (being 17 in number)
who resolved to fight out their passage and freedom, rather then be taken; but
after some fiery salutations, and a bloody dispute, the English boarded them,
seized upon the Captains, and others, and cast them overboard that were slain;
and on the 22 instant brought them into Plymouth Harbor, from whence an
Express came to the Council of State, on Sabbath day last, signifying, That God
was pleased to honor them with another victory, and that they had taken 17 of
the Hollanders, but not without some loss. Diverse of these ships were laden
with Pitch, Tarr, and Masts, singular commodities for our Naval design; Yet
notwithstanding all their losses, Mr, Hans is still somewhat too imperious; for
on Thursday last, diverse of them made an attempt even up to our English shore
near Yarmouth, and were so bold as to land; but the Country receiving the
Alarm, immediately rose, and with Fowling-pieces, Clubs, long Bills, and other
weapons, fell upon them, forcing them to their Boats faster then they landed,
killed 7, and took 5 prisoners, with the loss of one man, and another wounded.

FINIS.

