EZEKIEL THE PROPHET Explained as follows.
His writ served of Rebellion, Lamentation Mourning and Woe
SO many having attempted the straits or passages of this Labyrinth, and lost
their labor who went about it, could not but drop a word, have thought it not
amiss or unseasonable, as wise as they are that missed their mark, a taste or
touch to give them, of the tree of Life, otherwise called the mystery of Times
and Seasons, reserved for the last time, this Sacramental little Roll, with
such a solemn protestation bound touching times being no longer, which precious
Manna, the Prophet Ezekiel and John the Evangelist both tasted of, not longed
for a little ( Acts 1)

But hastening on Cap. 1. now in the Thirtieth year, etc. And I looked, and
behold a Whirlwind came out of the North, a great cloud, etc. where those
winged living creatures four, etc. represented by the Tabernacle; also the
Lamp, etc. as it were those Curtains, every one of one measure joined one to
another with so many loops or eyes, and rings above so high, besides their
running sideways, like those swift creatures who went on their sides when they
ran, their displayed wings sending forth such a noise, of a spherical work,
etc. And so much for these Curtains of his Pavilion, typifying the four
Evangelists agreeing in one, said to kiss or touch, etc.

Whereof Apocalypse the Fourth thus, of the aforesaid four Beasts, and the
Lightning proceeding out of the Throne, shows first of the Lamp; And there were
Seven Lamps of fire, which are the Seven Spirits of God, etc. Cap. 5. The Seven
Spirits and Seven Eyes sent forth into all the Earth, as their Characters read
through the world.

So to show the truth of it, even the full Moon described its paleness in the
Saphir-like Firmament, and no other likened to the Amber, and Fire its
brightness, when this conception or gift of the holy Ghost, etc.

Giving withal to understand, received or rejecting it, notwithstanding how
Prophecy ceased not, nor the Spirit (as the world would have it) totally is
quenched; But the Writ or Label of this little sealed Roll being first served
on them, called a house of Rebellion, or a rebellious house so often; afterward
to be served again, reserved even for our days, as if any be pleased to
observe, directed to our seventeenth Century, by the slain Lamb, Redemptions
figure, Cap. 5. having seven Horns, and as many EYES; also witness the grand
Jury, those Twenty four Crowned Elders, so many times mentioned, and as showing
since the Conquest Four and twenty Crowned, so Seven hundred years ago
thereabout.

And thus going on when this sacred Writ to be served, how it came to pass;
how distasteful to them, honey in the mouth, bitter in the belly; compared to a
woman's travel, or as fares with Officers earning a Fee venture their lives upon
Arrests, even the sum of this Vision restless Prisons description, clouded
under the glory of the Tabernacle, sets forth a Chamber-Bedsted and
appurtenances, the Gatehouse prison, in the year of Redemption, 1634. September
24. full Moon the everlasting Lamp, prisoners fire and candle, who from the
Angel sent thither the Holy Ghost, that by the space of an hour, the Bed his
throne rested thereon, from his mouth for a farewell received a salute; and for
another farewell, that had on his right hand an Amber glove, left such an
odoriferous scent when he was gone, all oyled with Ambergreece, the spirit
thereof proceeding from the Leather, so far beyond expression, as it were
invisible food, like when as said, Cause thy b^lly to eat, and fill thy bowels,
the hand being sent to him with the Roll or Book spread, etc. a Holy, holy,
holy day, by whom observed ever since.

And for Lamentations, Mourning and VVoe, such cried up and down: So much for
this time cried unto, O Wheel, cap. 10. besides proclaims winged Times reign
includes years, containing the four Seasons, Months, VVeeks, Days and Hours,
not returning restless time, with the Clock wheel its motion, likewise Rings
out the Abbey Bells, those mounted wheels, Verse 18. Verse 19. like these
living creatures likened to burnished Brass, with their ascending and
descending; and for the dreadful Rings so much, etc. Cap. 1. ver. 18. that were
so high, their sound or noise like great waters, the Voice of the Almighty
coming from Heaven, as it were: And so farther for that spacious round VVindow,
the glass its curious work compared to the Beril of a Seagreen color, as the
dreadful Christaline Heaven all with one voice proclaim the dreadful Judgment
day reveald at hand, to a City most rebellious.

Given under the hands of those Cherubs, under their wings that had hands, with
that hand sent, etc. seals and signifies it, rings out Times farewell: And for
the word of the Lord expressly so much. Rev. 1. Write the things which thou have
seen, and the things which are, and the things which shall be hereafter. April
2. 1647. Eleanor.

FINIS.

