THE DVE RIGHT OF TITHES EXAMINED: In a LETTER from a Gentleman to his friend,
wherein is proved that Jesus Christ did not work as a Carpenter, nor did ever
command his Apostles or Ministers to work for a livelihood: By way of answer to
some passages in Mr. Fishers Baby-Baptism.

By an aged Gentleman, who cannot long expect to have the comfort of Ministers
or their Ministry.

Mal. 3.10. Bring ye all the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat
in mine house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will
not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing.

depiction of sun

London, Printed for Thomas Pierrepont, and are to be sold at the Sun in Paul's
Churchyard. 1654.

A Copy of a Letter from a Friend.
LOving friend, amongst the many thoughts which these times does cause within
me, nothing does so much tronble me, as that the Adversary of mankind, who
transformeth himself into an Angel of light, thereby even to deceive the Elect
of the Lord, if it were possible: who has stirred up, in my apprehension, many
men of parrs and gifts, to set themselves against a settled and constant
Ministry, which God and Christ Jesus has appointed and promised unto his
Church and people, for to teach them to observe and do all things whatsoever I
have commanded you, and said, Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the
world, Matthew. 28.20. And this has lately been attempted, by petitioning to the
Supreme Power now in being, for the taking away of all means and maintenance
from those they call Ministers: hoping thereby to destroy and put down that
Calling, which I am persuaded the Lord himself did first institute and ordain:
And will continue and uphold it, even unto the end: notwithstanding all their
machinations and devices: for I am given to understand, they are confident that
if they can prevail, to have all the means taken from them, whereby they may
have a livelihood, that the Ministry will fall of it self, that then all
gifted men may exercise themselves in their places, at pleasure, which being
but duly considered of all such as truly fear the Lord, though themselves at
present do not, what woeful distractions and divisions will follow thereupon, my
heart even trembles to think on: for if once Maintenance and Encouragement be
taken from the Ministry, and every man suffered to teach what himself pleases
and approves of, then may not men teach Atheism, Heathenism, Turcism,
Judaisme, Arrianisme, Libertimsme, Idolworshipping, and what else man's corrupt
and sensual wills may prompt them unto? and will not thereby be a fair
opportunity given with liberty for Jesuits and all Sectaries calling
themselves gifted men, for to draw Disciples after them, and also thereby
making men to be factious, and causing divisions amongst the people: causing
thereby disturbances to arise, whereby it may be feared, but little peace will
follow such courses? For how can the Lord give a blessing to such disordered
doings? for God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace: And the Lord
never appointed, but one order and worship to his Church and people, at one
time, as the whole Scripture testifies; and that the Lord would have men to
bestow in his service such temporal things, as he had freely given unto them
for their use and sustentation; wherefore the Lord himself commanded and taught
his people at the beginning, even before he appointed a Ministry or Ministers,
for to offer Sacrifices unto him of those clean beasts and fruits of the earth
which he had given unto them, thereby to manifest themselves his servants, and
to show forth their faith and obedience unto him their great Jehovah and
Creator: as Genesis 4.3, 4. and 8.20. Also Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and the rest of
the Patriarchs offered Sacrifices to the Lord, accordingly, long before they
became a Nation or Commonweal; but after that they were multiplied and grown
by the blessing and promise of the Lord made unto Abraham, that his posterity
should be a great people and Nation, which was accomplished in Egypt, from
whence the Lord brought and delivered them by his great and mighty power: Now
the Lord having brought them forth by the conduct of his faithful servant
Moses, from out of Egype to the Mount Sinai, Exodus 19. And the Lord came down
upon the Mount Sinai, on the top of the Mount. And the Lord called Moses up to
the top of the Mount; and Moses went up. And unto Moses the Lord delivered his
Law, the ten Commandments, which are to be kept by all people, with the
Ceremonial Law appertaining to the Jews: And also appointed and commanded Moses
to make a Tabernacle, with all the utensils thereof, and the manner of the
Sacrifices and offerings which the people were to offer, and to give out of
their own proper goods and estates for the maintenance of the Tabernacle, and
also the Tithes, with part of the offerings, and forty eight Cities with their
Suburbs, which the Lord gave and appointed for the Priests and Levites for the
maintenance and subsistence of them and theirs. Now if that order and
Priesthood of Aaron, which was to be abolished had such great maintenance, then
shall not that order of Ministers, which our High Priest Christ Jesus has set
up, and appointed over his Church and children, have likewise means and
subsistence provided for them and theirs in as great a measure, they being
Ministers under Jesus Christ of his Gospel, which is far more glorious then
that of the Law? And therefore to be provided for, as the Gospel teaches,
notwithstanding the clamours and petitioning against it by diverse, who profess
the fear of the Lord, and seeming to be very forward promoters of the worship
of God in the purity thereof: but I fear their zeal is not according to
knowledge, but for their own ends, and to set up themselves: no, nor yet the
Gospel-way: and let such men declare or show from Scripture, where ever Christ
commanded that his Apostles, Disciples, or Ministers ought not or should not be
provided for with means and mainteance, if they can: or that Christ ever
appointed, or commanded them, to sustain themselves by their own labors or
occupations, or that Christ Jesus himself ever wrought as a Carpenter. And let
all such blind zealous persons take notice what Christ Jesus himself said and
did, Matthew. 4.18, 19, 20. and Mark 1.17, 18. where Christ called Peter and
Andrew: and said unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men; and
they followed him: And can those Zelotes find in Scripture, that ever after
that they used the trade of fishing for the maintenance of themselves and
theirs, but followed their Ministerial office or Calling, Preaching and
saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. And likewise will it not plainly
appear to all men, except wilfully blind, that the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ Jesus ought to be provided for by those to whom they preached, as is
evident by Christ Jesus his manner of sending them forth to preach the Gospel?
Matthew. 10.7, 8, 9, 10. and Luke 10.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. For the labourer is worthy of
his hire: or did Christ ever forbid tithes to be paid to the Pharisees, which
was for their maintenance, but approved thereof? for does not Christ say, Luke
11.42. For ye tithe Mint and Rue, and all manner of herbs, and pass over
judgment and the love of God; these ought you to have done: and not to leave
the other undone* where they may observe how our Lord Jesus Christ reproved the
Pharisees for their passing over judgment and the love of God, wherein they
should have instructed the people, but not for their tithing those small
things, which lawfully they might, but in subordination to the weightier
matters of the Law; neither can those men who are so earnest to have all
Maintenance taken from Ministers, show that either Christ Jesus or his Apostles
and Ministers have any where in Scripture forbidden their successors and
followers, either the taking of Tithes, or other Maintenance for to be allowed
unto them: Nay, may it not be said unto those men, that Christ Jesus received
Tithes? The reason, for that Abraham gave Tithes unto Melchisedeck of all, Genesis
14. which was long before the Lord appointed them to be given unto Aaron and
his successors: for Christ Jesus was not an High Priest after the order of
Aaron, but of Melchisedeck, unto whom Abraham gave a tenth part of all, of whom
it is said without father, without mother, without descent, having neither
beginning of days nor end of life, but made like the Son of God, abides a
Priest continually: and in Psalm. ^^0. and Heb 7. The Lord has sworn and will
not repent, Thou art a Priest for sever after the order of Melchisedeck. Now
for that it plainly appears that Melchisedeck was a Priest, figure and type
of Christ Jesus; And his Priesthood, unto whom tithes were paid by Abraham the
father of all the faithful; Let those Zelots from Scripture prove that neither
tithes nor other maintenance ought to be given unto the successors of Christ
Jesus, but that they ought to labor, working with their own hands for a
livelihood, as those men say: but I affirm, that I never read, neither shall
those men ever in Scripture read, that although Christ Jesus, our Lord and
Savior, was called, Matthew. 13.55. Is not this the Carpenters son? Is not his
mother called Mary? and Mark 6.3. Is not this the Carpenter, the Son of Mary?
but yet that he ever wrought as a Carpenter, the Scripture no where testifies,
but the Scripture says, That at twelve years of age he was found in the
Temple, sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them and asking them
questions, Luke 2.42.46, and 48. And his mother said unto him, Son why have
thou thus dealt with us? Behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing.
Now will any man but a blind one from these words of Mary say, that Joseph her
husband was Christ's father? I believe not: but hear Christ his answer, Verse
49. And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must
be about my Fathers business? and they understood not the saying. Now if Christ
Jesus was thus early about his heavenly Fathers business, can any man that has
his understanding, believe or think that ever he followed his supposed fathers
calling, a Carpenter? And I would have such men as are so earnest against
Maintenance for Ministers, and that say they ought to labor with their hands;
to declare unto the World what outward trade, calling, or secular employment
John Baptist had, or that he wrought with his hands to get a livelihood. What
Scripture Proof they can produce; or that any one of the Apostles, Evangelists,
or Ministers did work with their own hands, save Paul and Barnabas, who did it
of their own voluntary accord? for they had neither precept nor command from
Christ Jesus so to do: for if they had, surely it would have been mentioned in
Scripture. And (no doubt) had there been any, but that Paul would have charged
Timothy and Titus whom he calls his sons, and those other Pastors and
Teachers of the Churches, whom he charge to feed the flock of Christ Jesus,
also to have labored with their hands for a livelihood, had there been any
such precept or command. Nay, Paul does evidently testify the contrary in
sundry places of Scripture, for he says, he had power, and might have been
chargeable, as well as other the Apostles of Christ. And let all men consider,
and read seriously what Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, and 14 Verses; how many arguments does the Apostle there use to
prove that Ministers ought to be maintained? as first, from the power that
Christ has given. Secondly, from warfare. Thirdly, from the planter of a
Vineyard and feeder of a flock. Fourthly, from the Law of God. Fifthly, from
Equity. Sixthly, from the example of those that served at the Altar. Seventhly,
because The Lord has ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel. Eighthly, from 2 Cor. 5.20. They are called Ambassadors for
Christ; and was it ever known but that Ambassadors and Soldiers were provided
for? and does not the same Paul, 2 Cor. 11.8. say, I robbed other Churches,
taking wages of them to do you service? and 1 Thessalonians. 2.6. he says, Nor of men
sought we glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when we might have been
burdensome, as the Apostles of Christ. And I pray God that the same mind might
be in those men, who are so eager against all Maintenance for Ministers, that
was in Saint Paul: Not to seek glory from men, nor their followers or admirers
by so doing. And let these men consider what Paul says, Gal. 6.6. Let him that
is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that teaches in all good things.
Therefore I say to such men as the Apostle in the next Verse says, Be not
deceived, God is not mocked, nor will not be mocked. For whatsoever a man
sows, so shall he also reap: and 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. and 1 Timothy 5.18. For the
Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treadethout the corn; and
The labourer is worthy of his reward: and Philip. 4.10. Paul says, I rejoiced
greatly, that now at last your care for me has flourished again, wherein ye
were also careful, but ye lacked opportunity: by all which abovesaid, I am
fully persuaded, that it is the will of God the Father, and of Jesus Christ our
Lord, Redeemer and Savior, and of the Holy Ghost our Sanctifier, that the
Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel should be provided for with a competent
means and allowance: whereby they may cheerfully perform the work of their
Ministry and calling without grief of mind and spirit, or their working with
their own hands for a livelihood: although Mr. Fisher in his great book lately
set forth against Infants-Baptisme, the Ministry and Ministers of all
Christendom, page 598. says, You plead, That the mouth of the Ox must not be
muzzled, that treads out the corn: that it is the will of God, that such as
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: I answer, it is most true, there
is a power and liberty allowed for such as serve the Church to eat and to drink
and to subsist (in case they cannot subsist otherwise) at the charges of the
Church; but it is most commendable and thank-worthy in the Ministry to serve
the Church and preach the Gospel freely: and as far as it is possible not to be
burdensome in this kind at all, as namely in case they have any estates of
their own, or can improve themselves in any such outward employment, labor, or
lawful calling whereby to obtein a competent livelihood. And thus the Apostle
Paul, and the first Ministers of the Gospel did, they labored, working with
their own hands, as often as they could conveniently, and their own hands
ministered to their own necessities, and they had some honest outward
occupation, as also Christ himself had, and followed too till he was wholly
taken up in travel to preach the Truth. Therefore Mark. 6.3. Is not this the
Carpenter?) wherein they wrought at all times, saving when they were actually
employed in some service of preaching to the World, writing, disputing,
visiting, etc. as is plain to him that consults these Scriptures, Acts 18.3, 4,
and 20.33, 34, 35. 2 Cor. 11.7. and 12.12, 13, 18. 1 Cor. 4.11, 12. 1 Thessalonians.
29. 2 Thessalonians 3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Thus far Master Fisher: To all which I
briefly thus say, and hope that which is above written will satisfy all men
whose understandings are not blinded, and whose judgments are free and
unprejudicated, does not fully confute what Mr Fisher has there written, and
likewise cited by me: and I must needs further say, that Mr. Fisher did not do
well for to leave out in his allegation of Mark 6.3. the Son of Mary: Shall I
say he was blind and did not see it? or that he did it wilfully to deceive his
simple followers? I leave all men to judge as they please: for I am persuaded
that Mr. Fisher knows full well, being so well acquainted with the
Scriptures, as himself pretends to be, that those speeches and sayings were
only used by such as could not endure Christ his teaching and doctrine,
thereby to disgrace both him and it, as is plain in Matthew and Mark in the
Verses before and after above-alledged. And may not I truly say, that some
formerly, and that some men there were and are of latter times, even in our
memories, that have spoken against the faithfullest and painfullest Ministers
and Preachers that have boldly reproved sin, hoping thereby to draw men to
repentance, have they not been scoffed at and called, one the son of an
Oatmeal-man, another the son of a Smith, another the son of a Carpenter; and by
other names according to their fathers Trade or occupation, thereby to disgrace
them and their Ministry: now because they were so called, did they therefore
labor in their fathers calling? surely no. Secondly, to his proofs out of the
Acts, how does it thereby appear, that Paul was either by precept or command to
labor in some Trade or Occupation to get his living, more then the rest of the
Apostles or Disciples? As for Mr. Fishers proofs out of the Corinth. examine
his and mine, and approve of them which are most agreeing to the mind of the
Spirit of God, and the practice of Christ Jesus himself and of his Apostles,
Disciples and Ministers, declared and set down in the New Testament. And for
Mr. Fishers text 1 Thessalonians. 2.9. I desire you to compare mine with his taken out
of the same Chapter 6 Verse, and that out of Chap. 5.12, 13. as also that out
of 1 Timothy 5.18. by all which places I hope it will clearly appear that
Ministers ought to have maintenance. Now concerning Mr. Fishers last proof,
viz. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, Verses: I say, that the Apostle there
speaks not of Ministers, but of such that professed themselves to be
Christians, and yet would live idly upon the Churches charge: if you will but
duly read and consider the said Verses. Lastly, I desire all such men as are so
opposite against a Ministry or maintenance for Ministers, to consider
seriously with themselves, what judgments the Lord in Scripture did not only
threaten, but brought upon those places and persons who have contemned his
faithful Ministers and Messengers, taking from them their maintenance which was
due unto them from the Law and Gospel, or ever did those places and persons
enjoy peace and quietness from the Lord, till they repented, and till the Lords
worship was first restored, and his Ministers and messengers provided for: Let
these men declare from Scripture, if they can; and may not such men be termed
worse then Pharaoh, for he allowed a portion for the Priests of Egypt, Genesis
47.22. Neither did the Heathen Monarchs that ever I read of, suffer their
Priests to labor for their livelihood, but allowed maintenance unto them: And
will Christians, professing the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, labor to
deprive his Ministers and Messengers of maintenance, forcing them to labor for
a livelihood? God forbid: but, I trust, the Lord, by his Providence, has
raised up these men that now are the Supreme Power of this Commonweal, to
perform the Lords will, for the settling of a competent maintenance for his
Ministers or Messengers, to the rejoicing, I hope, of the hearts of all that
truly love and fear the Lord. And that they may so do, the good God of heaven
and earth make them as so many Zerubbabels, and Nehemiahs, for the setting up
of his worship in purity among us, and the upholding of pious, able, and godly
Ministers in the Commonweal, over which the Lord has set them; that so not
only we, but our posterities may bless and praise the Lord therefore: Now
leaving what I have written to your self, and all others that fear the Lord;
and whose consciences are unbiassed to judge of what I have written. And if it
be not according to truth, let them not approve of it; but if not, rather
reprove it; Farewell.

From my house the 11th. of the sixth Month, 1653.
FINIS.

