A Dreadful Account of a Barbarous Bloody Murder: Committed on the Body of one
Mr. Cymball, ^t his own House, in Old Soho; On the 31st. of January, 1694. by a
Person, who under pretense of coming to pay him a Visit, and after having been
very well Treated, Surprizingly gave him diverse Mortal Wounds; in the presence
of his Wife and Sisters, (of which he immediately Dyed,) and then made his
Escape: The whole Proceeding on this Bloody Act, being very Cruel and Inhumane;
As will appear in the Relation of it.
1. Febr. 1694/5 Licensed according to Order.

SUCH Is the wicked Inclinations, and Depravity of some Men's Nature, that the
Bloody mindedness of diverse Persons in their Mischiefs, and Tragical dealings,
even Startle Understanding Men in their thoughts, and Consideration of a
Reposing a Trust, as not being able ^o look into the Intentions of such as
Guild over a plausible Friendship, with Flattering Protestations; whilst Fraud,
or the Rankest of Malice, ^ike a Poisonous Serpent Lurks under their feighned
Smiles. Such was ^he Misfortune of this Gentleman, who instead of Entertaining
a Friend, ^urprizingly met with a Death, he little suspected from such a Hand.

This Gentleman (of whose Name we are yet Ignorant) on the 31st. of January,
coming to Visit Mr. Cymball, at his House in Old Soho; and ^eing known to him,
he was welcomed, with all becoming Civility; Ac^mmodated with Wine and other
Treatments, so that in a kind of a ^erryment some Hours passed till it grew
very Late. The Concern of ^^eir Meeting seems to be about Business, as appears
by a Writing, said to be Signed by the Deceased; and the Common Discourse is,
That it was a Will, but as to that particular we determine not, without better
information.

But to come nearer, and open the Tragical Scene; whether about affairs of
Business, some Heats might arise that might carry the Edg of ^atal Mischief in
them; or otherwise is not greatly Material to our En^uiry, so we leave it to a
more Judicial Scrutiny, and proceed to Mat^er of Fact.

After the Watch had passed by the Door of this Gentleman, and were not very
far distant from it; some People that were Neighbour^ heard a Confused Voice,
supposed to be that of the Mu^ther'd Party* and the Women present Crying,
Murder, Murder, and Implorin^ Help.

The Watch upon this were Alarmed, but before they could com^ up, or Enter the
House, Mr. Cymball, too Fatal Guest was Flayed and left him Gasping his Last:
His Life hastily passing away, through many Mortal Wounds; which nothing but a
Cruel, or Enraged Han^ could have so often Repeated; when a far less Number in
all probability would have sent him to his Grave, and there needed not s^ many
Gaps to let in Death. Therefore to Enumerate them shows the Inhumanity of the
Inflictor of them.

Weltering in his Blood, they could not be particularly distinguished but the
Body being Cleansed from it, and Exposed to View, His Righ^ Shoulder was found
to have a Wound, that seemed to be torn with the Sword, as if a piece of Flesh
was Cut out. Two Wounds were made in his Breast, one on his Right Side; his
Left Arm pierced almos^ through: Another Wound he had on the Left Side his Left
Hand* Run through his Right Hand; supposed in Defending his Body, or Extended
to Implore Mercy from his pretended Friend, but now Merciless Enemy was Cut
between the Finger and Thumb, and otherways very much mangled; his Chin
received a part of Dire Execution, and amidst these many Wounds he Breathed his
Last; and was Exposed as a Misserable Spectacle of Cruel usage, the following
Day to the pitying Spectators; whose Tears at such an Object of Compassion
could hardly be Restrained.

Upon this, those that were present. Viz. The Women (the Party who is held
Actually to do it, being Escaped, as far as we can hitherto have any Account of
him) are secured in order to their further Examination before the Corroners
Inquest; or what other Matters may be Objected to them in this Matter: Nor is
it doubted but the Grand Agressor, may in a little time be brought to Answer
for so Monsterous a Crime of Late, without Parrallel or Precedent.

Some say, he has sent by an unknown Hand, a Letter to the New Widow, to
Condole the Loss of Her Husband, and Express his Sorrow* but whether so or no,
so Great a Guilt deserves Floods of unfeighned Tears, to Atone Heaven's
Impendent Vengeance.

FINIS.
London, London Printed for B. Lyford. 1695.


