MORAL INSTRUCTIONS OF A FATHER TO His Son, UPON HIS Departure for a long
VOYAGE: OR, An Easy way to guide a Young Man toward all sorts of VIRTUES.

With an hundred MAXIMS, Christian and Moral.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, near
Devereux Court, 1683.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir Thomas Grantham, Knt.
SIR,
HAving accidentally met with a small French Manual, newly printed in France; I
found it fraught with such excellent Advice and uncommon Instructions, not only
for all Young Men in general, but more especially for a Young Person upon his
going a great Voyage by Sea, that I esteemed it well worthy (for the Benefit of
our young Noblemen and Gentlemen every Day vying who shall go first to Sea,) to
be rendered into our Tongue; and that it may have the more Credit and
Reputation with those hopeful young Seamen (or with any other that shall happen
to peruse it,) I have been bold, Sir, to offer it up to you, to be protected by
your Name, under whose Patronage and Protection my Father has now put me,
during your present Expedition to visit all the considerable Ports and Havens
in the East Indies; humbly begging you to take in good part this small Token of
my great Respect toward you, You who have deserved the Respect of all Loyal
English Men, and whom his Majesty has so far respected, as lately, Sir, to
name you Commander of the best Merchant Ship that ever was built in England;
and to confer the Honor of Knighthood upon you at the same time, as part of
your Reward for the Signal Service you did his Majesty and this Nation, not
only in the Year 1676 at Virginia, by reducing to their Allegiance that
rebellious Colony, who had ravaged all the Country, burnt the City of
James-Town, and driven away the Governor, whom you re-settled in his
Government; for which his Majesty (always bountiful to his faithful Servants)
gratified you with a considerable Sum of Money; but also in 1678, for your
incomparable Valor, and admirable Success, against that potent Pirate Canary
Admiral of Algier in the New Rose, who attacked your sole Merchant Ship of but
twenty two Guns, and forty Seamen; with his Man of War of forty eight Guns,
and six hundred Men; whom, after seven Hours Fight, you forced to stand away,
with the loss of two hundred Men, there being killed of yours not above seven
or eight; for which Service his Majesty was pleased to give you the best Medal
and Chain that he ever yet bestowed upon any Man: so that his Majesty accounts
it a part of his Happiness that he has such a Wise, Valiant, and Able Seaman.
And you cannot, Sir, but esteem your self exceedingly happy in the Favor and
Service of such a Prince, who knows better than any other Prince in Europe, and
consequently in the World, how to value and reward the Merits of all brave Sea
Commanders and Officers; who knows better than all his Royal Predecessors, that
the chief Interest of England is to maintain the Empire and Sovereignty of the
British Seas, and for that Reason, has made it his constant Business and
Delight in Maritime Affairs, in Building, Rigging, Victualling, and Sailing of
Ships; in understanding all our Ports, Harbors, Roads, Coasts, Seas, Flats,
Sands, and above all, the best way of Naval Battles; in cherishing and
encouraging all ingenious and expert Men for building of Ships, for casting the
best Guns, for making the best Tackle, etc. in favoring and encouraging all
Young Noblemen and Gentlemen, who have any Desire to serve their King and
Country at Sea; in providing for the Education of Youth in Navigation, and
other Mathematical Sciences; in taking Care for poor maimed Sea Soldiers and
Mariners; and lastly, (to the great advantage of this Nation) in making choice
of Captains for His Majesty's Ships, who for Wisdom, Conduct, Courage, and
other Abilities, excel all others in the World; such as the Right Honorable
Lord, the Baron of Dartmouth, the Vice Admiral Herbert, Sir Richard Haddock,
Sir John Norborough, Sir John Berry, Sir John Wetwang, Sir John Wybourn, and
many more stout, able, experienced Commanders. Sir, it is but just that all the
World should be sensible of the Benefits and Advantages which his Majesty has
brought with him into England, and that the Sea as well as the Land should
rejoice thereat. This Kingdom was never so rich, so potent, so glorious, nor
every way so flourishing, nor so happy (maugre all the wicked Designs and
Hellish Conspiracies of those ambitious, revengeful, mutinous Spirits amongst
us,) as in this Kings Reign, for above these twenty three Years; nor was there
ever owing so much to any of our Princes as to this: the Consideration whereof
is, I believe, the chief Motive which induces you to quit a Country quiet Life
and plentiful Estate, and at his Majesty's Desire, to undertake this long and
long-lasting Voyage, which, Sir, I pray God to prosper, and incline you to
continue your Favor to him who is both by Inclination and Obligation,

SIR, Your most Humble, most Devoted, and most Obedient Servant, Peregrin
Clifford Chamberlayne.

Moral Instructions of a Father to his Son, upon his departure for a long
Voyage.
YOU earnestly entreated me, my Son, to agree to your desire of taking a Voyage
into the East Indies, and to be absent for some Years. I did so little expect
such a Proposal from you, that it wholly surprised me, and I had several
Reasons persuading me you could not be capable of making a Resolution of this
nature. So many things ought to concur thereto, that at first Thoughts I
imagined, that either the Youthful and Ardent Desires (inherent in those of
your Age) of traveling into Foreign Countries, had made you take up this
Resolution; or that it was perhaps only to try that Paternal Affection which
has ever been toward you most indulgent. Whatever it be, it is convenient that
I put you in mind how I have acted all along in this Affair, and you ought to
approve of my Proceedings. You know that while I endeavored to dissuade you
from this Design, I did not only make you recall to mind all those sweet and
pleasant hours you have spent hitherto under the Roof of a loving Father, and
rendered you sensible of the Cares and Toils you were to undergo during your
whole Voyage, instead of that Tranquillity which lay in your power to enjoy: But
I also demonstrated to you, how many several Reasons did oblige you not to
abandon me; yet seeing you esteemed these Reasons of too little force to make
you change your Resolution, I opposed it by the consideration of the great
Hazards in your Passage: In order thereunto I laid before you the danger of
Shipwreck, Pirates, and Inconveniences both infinite and unavoidable in such a
long Voyage, principally to a Young Man bred so tenderly, and educated with
that Care as you have bin. All this was not sufficient to dissuade you, so that
I was forced at length to yield to your request, whereto the assurance you gave
me did not a little contribute, that the impatience of becoming more worthy of
my singular Care in your Education, did prompt you to this, besides your
mentioning what Joy you should conceive to share the Pains I take to increase
your Fortune. The Protestations of this truth made to me in private, and
reiterated in the presence of our Relations, who I was willing should be
witnesses of my Carriage toward you in an Affair of this importance, prevented
my making use of an absolute Authority, (given to me as a Father) to force you
to comply with my Will; and that for three Reasons, which I shall the more
gladly impart to you, because I am presuaded the knowledge of them will excite
you to acknowledge my Kindness.

The first is, That although many Fathers will admit of no Limits in Filial
Obedience, and their claim thereto being of Divine Right, yet I can say I never
took such advantage over you by this Right, as to use it in it is utmost Rigor:
Of this I have given you more than one Proof, and you may remember, that as
often as your Conduct brought upon you my Correction, in the greatest and most
lawful Causes I had of being incensed, I always allayed the heat of those
Provocations, caused through your Indiscretion, with the Fondness of a tender
Father. You know I have Contracted the Bounds of your obedience, and extended
those of my Kindness to whatsoever you could pretend; and in putting you in
mind of your Duty, by these words of St. Paul; Children, obey your Parents in
all things, for this is well-pleasing unto the Lord; I was exhorted to mine, by
the words following: Fathers, provoke not your Children to Anger, least they be
discouraged.

The second Reason, which obliged me not to withstand absolutely your
Intentions, was to avoid the Reproaches which you might reflect upon me
hereafter, that my refusal had bin an Obstacle to your Fortune.

And the last was, the Fear I had lest you should have made use of that very
refusal for a Pretext to justify ever after all defects in your Proceedings.

These Reasons, my Son, were the Cause of my complying so easily with your
request. I could have wished you would have altered your Intentions, to please
me; but seeing that you could not conform to my Sentiments, and that you still
persist in your design, after having implored the Almighty to grant you his
Grace, and to Shower down the most precious of his Blessings upon your Soul,
your Person, and your Actions, I think it is absolutely necessary, (for to
satisfy my Inclination and Duty) not to let you go without some peculiar
Instructions, which may be as a Guide to your Manners, and which most certainly
will be convincing Proofs of my Kindness, as also inexhaustible Springs of
future happiness, in your Conversation both Spiritual and Civil, if you will
apply your self to them, which I exhort and command you to do. However let what
will happen, these Instructions will remain as so many irrefragable Witnesses,
how zealously I endeavored to do my Duty, if unhapily you should be wanting in
yours.

By telling you, my dear Son, that these Instructions which I am about to give
you, are the Effects of my Inclination and Duty, I have inverted that order
which Reason requires: I should rather have said, these Effects proceeded from
my Duty and Inclination, and so have preferred Duty before Inclination, because
the first is governed by Reason, whereas the latter is but an Incitement of
Nature, who is not seldom blinded by those tender Impulses which Proximity of
Blood inspires. But I was overcome by a Weakness, common to most Fathers, which
I do not stick to confess, to the intent you may be persuaded, that in this
following Discourse I rather fell into a great Indulgence, than that I
maintained a Severity too Austere.

It Is also not without some Mystery, my Son, that in wishing you the Blessings
of God, I would have them applied to your Soul, your Person, and your Actions.
The order of these Words is one of the Duties whereon I shall give you some
Instructions, which I enjoin you to observe and practice. I divide it into
three parts, Spiritual, Personal, and Civil Duties: the first shall teach you
your Duty to God; the second, your Duty to your self; and the last shall
instruct you in your Duty to your Neighbor. If I should go about to treat of
this Matter to an extent as great as it is Importance, I ought, instead of a few
Pages I intend for you, to write several Volumes: but this being wide of my
Design, as also far above my Abilities, I shall rest satisfied in being as
concise as this matter can possibly allow. God grant through his Grace, that I
may be inspired with Arguments, both so clear and strong, as to equalize the
greatness of my Enterprise; and that through his Goodness, he may incline you
to put them in Practice for his Glory, for your Salvation, for my Satisfaction,
and for your Profit and Advancement.

Of Spiritual Duties.
YOU learned in your Childhood, my Son, that God created you to know him, and
to serve him. These two Obligations which bind you from your Birth, have
Relation to the two chief Faculties of the Soul. The Knowledge of God belongs
to the Understanding, and the Service of him to the Will; but the Light of our
Understanding has too narrow limits ever to arrive to the perfect Knowledge of
his Divinity, and the Will of Man is too perverse to be capable of serving him
as we ought. These Impediments which grow out of the abundance of our
Corruption, must nevertheless not discourage us; A bruised Reed God shall not
break, and smoking Flax shall he not quench: He fulfils his Power in our
Weaknesses; he supplies our Wants; he helps our Infirmities; and he, knowing
that of our selves we cannot ascend to him, out of his Divine Goodness is
pleased to come down to us. He not only makes use of his Word and his Works to
imprint in our Minds some kind of Idea of his Greatness, which we may not
wholly conceive; but also, through the Communication of his Holy Spirit he
corrects our Inclinations; and when he has made them to will what naturally
they would not, he also forces them to act it by a sweet sort of Violence which
we cannot resist.

My Son, read this Word, and that as often as possibly you may; but read it
with great Respect and Attention: It Is the Voice of God: This Reason must
oblige you to the Respect; and it is for your Instruction you read it: this
should force you to the Attention I demand of you. Set apart some hours for
this sacred Study, which on Sunday ought to be two at least, and one upon each
other Day. Be careful that upon no account you neglect this Duty. The greatest
of all Considerations is that of your Salvation: quit all others that you may
not fail in this; and let not any interest or pleasure here upon Earth make you
forget those Joys of Heaven. The World, and all worldly Desires pass away, but
he whose Desire is the Will of God shall live eternally. This Will you may
learn in his holy Word. Yet what will signify the Knowledge of it, but to
render your self more guilty, unless you use your utmost Endeavors to be
conformable thereto? That Servant who knows the Will of his Master, and does
it not, shall be beaten with more Stripes than he who never knew it. Remember
this with Fear and Trembling. However, all your Care would be in vain if God
himself did not help you to bring to pass what he requires; therefore always
beg that Grace of him. It Is a very great benefit that he permits us to speak to
him; yet it is a benefit much greater, that not only he vouchsafes to let us
speak to him in our Prayers, but also promises through his Mercy to hear us;
Call upon me, says he, in the Day of Trouble, and I will deliver thee. Implore
him then, my Son, but let your Prayers ascend upon the Wings of Faith and
Fervency; for God can no more love those who want Zeal, than those that
mistrust his Goodness. Ask earnestly of him that he accomplish in you, by his
Virtue omnipotent, whatsoever he commands; and be not weary of performing so
holy an Exercise. Beseech him earnestly to direct your ways, that you may
follow after him. Implore him incessantly, that he would raise you from that
Sepulcher of Sins wherein you lie buried. These are they, who by their Prayers
storm the Kingdom of Heaven, and take it by force. Follow the Example of Jacob,
who by a holy Importunity gained a Blessing from God. Without such a Blessing,
all your Labor, Care, and Diligence, will be employed in vain. Except the Lord
build the House they labor in vain that build it. Begin and end the Day with
Prayer, and be constant in your Morning and Evening Sacrifice. If you hope to
obtain what you ask of God, let your Heart pray rather than your Lips; with a
devout Zeal, and not for Fashion-sake. Begin your Prayers with Joy and
Gladness, go through with them cheerfully, and do not end them without a
sorrowful Reluctance that you must leave off. But above all, let this
Beginning, this Continuance, and this End, be without any wandering of your
Mind. Frighten away those Birds which come to trouble your Sacrifice; that is,
put far from you those Thoughts which may be the least hinderance to your
Devotion. To pray to God without Attention, instead of pleasing does offend
him; it is a Sacrilege rather than an Offering. Our being seldom disposed for
heavenly things renders this Attention difficult. Yet it is most certain, that
from thence we have most reason to derive the Success of our Prayers; for God
cannot grant our Requests unless he hear us, and how should we expect to have
those Prayers heard which we our selves do not hear? Upon this very Account,
God may apply to us what he said in time past to the Jews; This People draw
near me with their Mouth, and with their Lips do honor me, but have removed
their Hearts far from me. Judge therefore, my Son, if we have not great reason
to search diligently after the Means which will bring us to this Attention.

I have here set down some few Rules or Means, the Practice whereof I take to
be very advantageous, and consequently not to be neglected.

We may pray to God in all Places, but all Places are not equally proper for
this Duty. When thou prayest, says our Savior, enter into thy Closet, and
when thou have shut thy Door, pray to thy Father which is in secret. This
Advice which the Savior of the World gives concerning Prayer, teaches us that
we must retire our selves when we Pray, and must be so far from making our
Prayers the Subject of Humane Applause, that we must pray secretly; which not
only our Divine Master did confirm by his own Example, but also before he gave
his Apostles that Counsel of withdrawing in private, he told them: When ye
pray, be not as the Hypocrites are: For they love to pray standing in the
Synagogues, and in the corners of the Streets, that they may be seen of Men.
Observe these Maxims, and when you would offer up your Prayers, let it be in
Private; for going to an Exercise which obliges you to fly the World, let not
any thing that is worldly accompany you at that time. Do not imitate the
Example of Rachel, who leaving her Fathers House carried with her those Images,
which were the Object of his Idolatry. Follow rather that of Elijah, who, when
he drew near to God, in the Chariot wherein he was carried from this World, let
fall his Mantle, that he might have no Earthly thing with him. Draw not nigh
hither. Put off thy Shoes from off thy Feet, for the place whereon thou
stand is holy Ground, said the Eternal to Moses, when he spoke to him out of
the burning Bush. This Voice is also directed to you. When at any time you have
a mind to pray, the place you choose out for that purpose you must suppose to
be sanctified with the presence of God. Put off then your Shoes, that it may
not be defiled; that is, relinquish all your Thoughts which savor of the World
or the Flesh. Depart from Sodom, without looking behind you; and having
disposed things in this order, fall down upon your Knees before you begin your
Devotion, spare some small time to think upon the infinite Greatness of him you
are about to implore, and to consider your own extreme Meanness. If such a
Meditation as this is serious, it must of Necessity redouble your Zeal, and
render you more fit to approach the Divine Majesty. One great Reason why our
Mind is too often alienated at Prayer is, the Diversity of Objects which our
Eyes meet with, therefore to prevent this great inconvenience, I think it
Necessary to keep them shut. This Advice, my Son, is not of the least Moment,
fail not to try it, and then make use of it according as you find it succeed.

I do not prescribe you the use of any particular Prayers; your Discretion
ought to make choice of such as are suitable to the Subject which occasions
your Prayers. However I think it will not be amiss, that all the Requests you
make to God be comprised in this one, that of his Love. This is the way to have
all; for he who has God with him can want nothing. Solomon asked of him only
Wisdom, and God said to him, Because that thou have asked this thing, and that
thou have not asked for thy self long Life; neither have asked Riches; nor the
Life of thine Enemies; but have asked for thy self Understanding: It shall be
given thee; and I will give thee that which thou have not asked, both Riches
and Honor. Plato, although a Pagan, may be an Example to many Christians to
teach them for what things they ought to pray. It was his custom in his Prayers
to say thus: O God grant me those things that are good, when I ask them not,
and deny me, when I ask for those things that are evil. God often favors us by
not hearing our Prayers, and sometimes punishes us by granting our requests,
when we pray for that which is pernicious to our welfare; as we commonly do,
for as our Lord JESUS CHRIST said, we often know not what we ask.

Physicians order those who have a weak Stomach, to eat little and often. If it
be hard for you to keep up your Attention, (which is the Soul of Prayer,) do
you after the same manner, and following the Counsel of our Blessed Savior,
when you pray, use not vain repetitions as the Heathen do; for they think they
shall be heard for their much speaking. If therefore your Prayers must be
short, let them be the more frequent, but chiefly, I shall once again exhort
you to this; Let neither your Zeal nor your Faith be wanting.

My Son, if you remember, I said we might pray to God in all Places, though all
places were not equally Proper for this Exercise; Yet if we consider Prayer to
be (as we must not doubt) a darting forth of our Soul toward God, to unite it
with his Holy Spirit; why cannot we do this every Hour, if not every Moment in
the Day, wheresoever we are, at home or abroad? And why cannot we often turn
our Hearts to God, though in the midst of our most important Affairs, and in
walking, whether it be in the City, or in the Country? To do thus, is to pray
to him. The Heart of Man is a moving Closet, a Place of Retirement; a holy
Solitude, where we may enter every Moment, and from thence send such fervent
(though short) Ejaculations as shall penetrate Heaven, and be more acceptable
to God, than those long Prayers which too often want Attention. These
Ejaculations are without doubt what the Evangelist means, when he exhorts us to
pray always. And why, my Son, should you not observe this good Custom, of
praying to God, and praising him in your Bed, whenever you happen to awake,
since Prayer is so much the principal part of Divine Worship, that the
Scripture comprehends thereby all Religious Duties.

This, my Son, is the chiefest of what I had to say to you concerning Prayer in
particular: But take notice you cannot pray to God without putting your Trust
in him, neither can you put your trust in God without loving him. Love him then
if you expect his Love. Fear him if you desire to be wise; for the Fear of the
Lord is the beginning of Wisdom. This fear, as Solomon said, is to hate and
avoid all evil, and consequently to do good. If you fear God, you will love
him, and if you love him, you will keep his Commandments: my Son, you know all
those Commandments; let nothing then be an Obstacle to your Practice of them.

God is a Spirit, and the Truth, and he will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth.
This Religion, wherein (through his goodness) you was born, for the full and
perfect Knowledge whereof, I have thoroughly cultivated your Understanding;
This, I say, is the only natural Worship which he requires. Adhere to this
Worship, and you will find it more advantageous to you, than the Star was to
those Shepherds whom it guided to Bethlehem; for that only led them to JESUS
CHRIST in his lowest Estate, whereas this Worship shall conduct you to him in
his Glory. This Divine Savior of the World, speaking of himself to St. Thomas,
said, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. And it is the only way through
which we must go to the Father. Stray not from it, my Son, whatsoever may
befall you: For instead of Springs which you will find in this Way, flowing
with living Water, every where out of it you shall meet with puddles of Water
both impure and loathsome. You cannot go out of this Path wherein you have
entered without departing from God, and consequently from all those Joys whereof
he is the Center. Let neither Wealth, Honor, nor Pleasure lead you aside; and
though you suffer the most rigorous Persecutions, yet be not disheartened.
Esteem it as a great Honor to bear the Cross after your Savior; it would be
an honorable Reproach to you, to have your Body marked and bruised for the
sake of Christ. This is the way, through which all the Martyrs have passed, to
enter into those heavenly Joys. If God should call you to such Proofs, turn not
away, for the least Thron falling from our Savior's Crown upon your Head, will
affix thereto a Crown of Glory: If therefore you happen to suffer for Christ's
sake, be not ashamed, but rather praise and glorify God for it.

Sickness, Loss of Persons dear to us, Loss of Goods, Wealth, and an infinite
number more of unwelcome Accidents, compose generally the Series of our Life.
My Son, do not think you can avoid them. The Afflictions of this World are most
certain Characters of the Children of God, wherewith he corrects those he
loves, as a Father uses a rod to chastise the Child whom he tenderly
cherishes. It Is true the Flesh takes no delight in being chastised, neither
are we to hearken to Fleshly Sentiments when we would put in practice what is
necessary to our Salvation. If it is God's good Pleasure you should undergo
Afflictions, of what nature, or how sharp soever, murmur not. Take heed when
you suffer, it be not deservedly: And remember in your sufferings, though
exceeding great, that they cannot be equal to the Glory, which will be your
reward hereafter. These afflictions (which if the right use be made of them
immediately pass away) will produce in your Mind the Brightness of that
transcendent Glory. Moral Philosophy teaches us, that Vices of all sorts
spring from Passions disordered, whereas from regulated Passions do proceed all
Virtues; And Christian Divinity does verify by experience, that afflictions,
which in Reprobates occasion nothing but Despair, are to the Faithful so many
inexhaustible Fountains of Joy.

The Rods which God makes use of to punish the Wicked, are like that of Moses,
which turned into a Serpent; and those wherewith he chastises his Children,
have a resemblance to that of Aaron, which brought forth Flowers and Fruit.
Make good use of them, My Son; Kiss those Rods wherewith he corrects you; adore
the secret Virtue in them, and, even in the most Severe Chastisements,
acknowledge his Divine Goodness in raising you out of that heavy Sleep wherein
Sin may have cast you. If they are more sharp than Flesh could wish for,
believe that it is for your good to be thus afflicted for a little time, that
the trial of your Faith being much more precious than of Gold that perishes,
tho it be tried with Fire, might be found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory,
at the appearing of JESUS CHRIST.

My Son, you ought to have observed, that I have reduced under four Heads all
the Duties of a Spiritual Life; viz: Reading the Word of God with Attention;
frequent and ardent Prayers; a constant Perseverence in the Faith; and a
perfect and entire Resignation to the Will of God, tho he expose you to be
tried by the most bitter Calamities. If you had still remained with me, I
should have given you these very Instructions, the two first whereof I have bin
very careful in making you practice as soon as your Age would permit it:
Therefore I could not but think them more necessary to you when you are from
me, and chiefly in a Country, where, far from having the Comfort of a public
Exercise of your Religion, you will scarce ever see an Example of the least
Piety; which ought the rather to oblige you to practice most exactly the Advice
I have now given you. I do exhort you to it by the Bowels of Mercy of our Lord
and Savior; I require it of you by the Care you ought to have of your
Salvation; and I do entreat you to do it by that Complaisance which I have
reason to expect from your Gratitude. If you follow this Counsel, you will
render to God what is due to him, you will accomplish the demands of your
Father; and thereby you may discharge that Duty you owe to your self; wherein I
shall instruct you in the second Discourse, which, according to the method I
prescribed, must treat of Personal Duties.

Of Personal Duties.
I Have been more concise in the first Part, which treats of your Duty toward
God, than I shall be in this, which concerns your Duty to your self, or in the
next following, which comprehends your Duty to your Neighbor: and it is no hard
matter to justify my Proceedings in this Point: I have followed the Example of
God himself; for, of the Ten Commandments, whereof his Law is composed, there
are but four which have immediate Regard to his Service, whereas there are six
to guide us in our Duty toward our Neighbor. There is no Nation so ignorant
or brutish but believes in some God, and at the same time prepares a form of
Worship whereby to show their Obedience; so true it is that the Belief of a God
does imply a Duty of serving him not to be dispensed with: and this is so
absolutely necessary, that although some Men might be so irreligious as not to
acknowledge it, they must nevertheless be convinced of it in their Conscience.
Your Mind, my Son, is replenished with this Knowledge, let it then pass from
thence into your Will; and with those Lights, wherewith it has pleased God to
enlighten your Understanding, rectify whatsoever is amiss in your Affections.
Discharge your self of the Duties that are inseparably joined to your Knowledge
of God; that is, to fear, to love, and to serve him. I do not question but you
would have done this tho I had not exhorted you to it; which will be a matter
of great Comfort in my Sorrow for your Absence. Upon this Belief I abridg'd my
Thoughts, and suppressed much of what I could have said upon this Subject,
which being so abundant, would have rendered this Discourse at least as long as
both those which are to follow.

To being with our second Subject, which is, concerning your Duty to your self,
I think it very convenient to put you in mind of that moral Dialogue which in
your tender Years I made for your Instructions; wherein you may have remembered
that I treated of Christian Virtues, which are, Faith, Charity, and Hope; which
three, guide us in our Duty to God: Faith makes us submit to him in all Things,
Charity makes us cleave to him at all Times, and Hope carries us to him to all
Eternity. You ought also to remember that there are Moral Virtues; viz:
Prudence, Fortiude, Temperance, and Justice: These are to teach us our Duty to
our selves, as also our Duty to our Neighbors. The first of these four Virtues
is like a Salt to season the other three: Fortitude and Temperance have a
relation to each individual Person; and Justice is the Bonds of Humane Society,
without which Men must live together like Wolves, not being capable of any
Converse for the Public Good, which, next to the glorifying of God, ought to
be our chief Aim: So that in this second Article of Instructions which, my Son,
I do now lay down before you, I must speak but of the three first Virtues;
Prudence, Temperance, and Fortitude. Prudence ought to be the Rule of your
Actions and Conduct. Temperance will instruct you how to govern your self in
Prosperity, that you may not be poisoned with it is delicious Pleasures: And
Fortitude will so guide you, that you shall not be overcome with the Bitterness
of Adversity. I will reduce all I have to say to you to as few words as I can
(although the Subject be very copious) that you may only receive the Pith and
Juice of it, whereby you may be nourished without being overcharged.

Man was born for Society, and I may say, without that Society Virtue would
have no Followers, Man's Life would be unpleasant, and in this World there
would be no Content. God, after he had created Man, said it was not good that
he should be alone: Therefore through his extraordinary Goodness, he made him a
Help meet for him, and formed a Person with whom he might live in Society. Now
this Society is nothing else but a reciprocal Communication made between diverse
Persons, who by mutual Services to one another endeavor to render their Lives
as pleasant as they can, and to avoid vexatious Cares and Sorrow. According to
the Humor of the Persons which make up this Society, it will be good or evil;
for, as Solomon says, He that walks with wise men shall be wise; but a
Companion of Fools shall be destroyed. Evil Communication corrupts good
Manners; therefore, my Son, you ought diligently to take heed in the choice of
those Persons with whom you design to be acquainted. Hearken not to Nature
herein, who (following her Inclination to what is evil) might lead you into bad
Company; be rather attentive to true Piety, which will tell you, Enter not into
the Path of the Wicked, and go not in the way of evil Men. Consult Prudence,
and she will teach you to choose your Friends, which is a thing of the highest
consequence; because we acquire generally the Habits and Passions of those whom
we frequent: This was so well known to our Forefathers, that they did not
scruple to pass their Judgment upon any Man when they were once acquainted with
the Temper of his Companions; according to this old Saying of theirs, Tell me
what Company you keep and I will tell you what you are. Frequent then, my Son,
as much as you are able, Persons of Honor and Integrity, or at least those who
are esteemed such; and out of this Company choose one of the most virtuous whom
you must endeavor to make your particular Friend. Let not this single
Expression of one Friend surprise you, for it is not an easy matter to obtain
many true Friends; nay, I take a true Friend to be a thing almost as rare in
Humane Society, as the Philosophers Stone is in Chemistry. Several People have
made it their business all their Lifetime to find a true Friend, and yet at
last have missed their Aim. Use your utmost Endeavors to procure one; you will
be happy if you can bring it to pass: Do not spare Complaisance, Respect, or
any Service, provided you do not descend to what is low and infamous; which
cannot be, if you choose a virtuous Person, as I have prescribed you, to bind
your self with, in a tender, sincere, and strict Friendship. Kindness must be
repayed with Kindness: If you would be beloved, love. It is most certain, that
a Correspondence of Humors contributs extremely to our being beloved;
therefore if you desire the Friendship of a Man of Honor and Virtue, imitate
his Virtue and that will facilitate your Desire. When you have acquired this
Friendship, be careful to avoid whatsoever may occasion the loss of it. Be
before hand with him if you can, in Services, and in kind Respects toward him:
If you have convincing Proofs that he has given you his Heart, and if you have
likewise yielded yours up to him, withold not your Purse from him in his
Necessity. If unhappily your Friendship upon any occasion should wax cold, and
that out of Prudence you must part with him, let it not be a sudden Rupture,
but retire by degrees. There is scarce any thing so just and frequent an
Obstacle to the procuring or preserving of Friendship, as Pride: This Sin was
the cause that the first Angels were transferred from Heaven to Hell, and
became the first Devils. Take great care not to be tainted with it; and if you
expect the Love of those with whom you keep Company, be humble toward all.
When Pride comes then comes Shame: but with the Lowly is Wisdom, says the
Wise Man: God scorneth the Scorners; but he gives Grace unto the Lowly. Every
one that is proud in Heart is an Abomination to the Lord. The Proud have this
misfortune to displease every Body but themselves. It Is impossible that a vain
Man should love to be blamed, and it is almost as impossible for a Man to be a
Reasonable Creature while he hates Reproof. Solomon assures us of it, in
saying, Whosoever loves Instruction loves Knowledge: but he that hates Reproof
is brutish. Poverty and Shame shall be to him that refuses Instruction; but he
that regards Reproof shall be honored. If you desire to be respected make
your self worthy of Respect; this must be done not only by shunning Pride;
avoid also Covetousness, Gluttony, Sloth, Uncleanness, Anger, and Envy; these
are the Vices against which all the World cries out, and which nevertheless
reign in all Parts of the World. In the same Order as they are mentioned I will
lay down their respective Reasons which should provoke your Hatred of them.

Covetousness is the Root of all Evil, and as St. Paul said to Timothy, it
causes Men to err from the Faith. It makes them fall into Temptation, into the
Snares of the Devil, and into several inordinate and unsatiable Desires, which
at length plunge them into the Abyss of Damnation. Our blessed Apostle did not
rest satisfied with this dreadful Description, but in his Epistle to the
Colossians calls it Idolatry; because it cannot possess any Heart without
first expelling from thence all Fear of God, and setting up in the Room the
Love of the World and of Riches. Take heed, and beware of Covetousness, said
our Savior Christ, in St. Luke; for a Man's Life consists not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses. Covetousness takes all
opportunities to heap up Riches; and tho the means are most unlawful, yet to
her they always seem commendable enough: I say, her Design is to lay up Riches;
for the covetous Man takes good heed not to make any use of them. He lives all
his Lifetime Poor, to have the Satisfaction of dying Rich; and instead of
making them a Cause of his Salvation, through his prudent management of them
and Contribution, they become through an ill use the Occasion of his Damnation.

Before I proceed to speak of the other Vices, (whose Deformities I purpose to
discover to you to stir up your dislike of them) I must put you in mind, that
how great soever is Man's Inclination to Evil, yet he endeavors to hide that
Vice to which he is inclined, under the Mask of some Virtue that has a
resemblance with it. This Example shall serve for all the rest. The Covetous,
tho he be deeply engaged in that sordid Passion, cannot but acknowledge the
Vileness of it, yet in himself he makes it pass for an honest Thriftiness; this
he first persuades himself to believe, and then his Neighbors. All that are
much tainted with any Vice, follow the same Rule for their Justification: Of
this, my Son, I have given you notice, that you may avoid the falling into so
unreasonable a Conduct; and that so you may not be reduced to cover a vicious
Inclination with the Veil of what is truly Virtuous.

After having given you this Advice, (which I thought expedient to be done) I
shall speak of Gluttony, as it follows next in course after Covetousness. These
two in their Means are something contrary, but their Effects do resemble much.
The Covetous picks up all things to increase Riches that are pernicious to him;
and the Glutton lets all fly to procure those Pleasures which must be
prejudicial to his Happiness. The first, to content his raking Desire, will
abstain from what is necessary; and the other, to satisfy his Sensual
Appetite, will not abstain from what is superfluous. One locks up his Reason in
his Chest with his Gold and Silver; and the other drowns it in Wine and Dainties.
What can be hoped from such a Man? God ordained us to eat that we might live,
and the Glutton imagines that he lives only to eat; whereof he is so fully
persuaded, that it is impossible for him to apply himself with pleasure to any
Duty which is requisite in a civil Society; nay, how can he do it with
Pleasure, he that knows no other Pleasure than that of the Taste, whose
Kitchen is his Church, and who of his Belly makes his God. Avoid then this Sin,
whose Effects are so pernicious; and in following my Counsel you will obey the
Command of the Holy Scripture, viz. Be not amongst Wine-bibbers, amongst
riotous eaters of Flesh: For the Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to
Poverty; and drowsiness shall clothe a Man with Rags. The Spirit of God joins
Sleep with Gluttony, to show us, that it is impossible to be a Glutton without
being slothful. The heaviness of Meats communicates it self to the Stomach, and
the heaviness of the Stomach reaches the very Brain: No wonder then that by
these several heavinesses the Soul becomes heavy, and less apt to perform the
Functions to which she is designed. The Slothful Person has but just the Sense
and Motion of a Man; and of that he has so little, that there is not much
difference between him and a Statue. This never stirs but when he is carried;
and he never acts without being spurred forwards. The slowness of all his
Actions both Spiritual and Corporeal, is a sort of Lethargy both of Soul and
Body, whereof he would not be cured tho it might be done, because his delight
is in a slothful Ease; and the thoughts of a moderate Labor, which is a
pleasure to others, to him is a torment. St. Paul may cry out long enough to
him, that he who will not work must not eat: there must be something more
rigorous than the bare Exhortation of the Apostle; for Necessity it self (tho a
thing so prevailing) can scarce rouse him out of that Idleness, whose sweets
are more sensible to him than all the Advantages that might accrue from an
honest Employment. He does not act with more Zeal for his Interest in Heaven
than for that upon Earth; whereby you may judge, that if he is not a good
Citizen, he is as ill a Christian; and you may believe that as the Glutton has
not made Temperance a guide to his Actions, so neither has the Sluggard
consulted Fortitude to govern his. One of the chief Motives of your Voyage (as
you protested to me) was, that you might increase your Fortune through your own
means; but you see Sloth cannot contribute to a Design so honest and
reasonable. He becomes poor that deals with a slack Hand; but the hand of
the Diligent makes rich. If you would have me believe your Intentions to be
sincere, be diligent; and therefore in the first place, do your utmost
endeavors to master that great sweetness and pleasure which you find in Sleep.
Never stay to be importuned to follow your Employment; yet if you must be
called upon, let it be done by your own Honor, which leading you every Morning
to your Business, may also keep you to it the greatest part of the Day, with an
assiduity worthy of Praise. You need not wonder, my Son, that I do encounter so
obstinately this Sin of Sloth with all the Arms that the Kindness I bear to you
can lend me: I am incited thereto not only by that Reason I have already told
you, but also because it is the Path to another deadly Sin, whereto we are
naturally very much inclined; to wit, Uncleanness, the most foul of any Sin,
which changes our Bodies that ought to be the Temples of the Holy Ghost into
stinking Jakes. I will describe it to you in few Words, not to keep you long
upon the consideration of what is so loathsome, the Name whereof St. Paul would
not have to be pronounced among Christians, and which he terms the blackest of
Sins, because, says he, every Sin which a Man does is without the Body; but he
that commits Fornication sins against his own Body.

I would have you observe, my Son, that from these two last Vices Uncleanness
proceeds, as I intimated to you above: It Is begot by Gluttony, and hatched by
Idleness. It will not seem strange to you that such evil Parents engender so
wicked a Child. It has it is Inclination from the Authors of its Birth, and even
improves their noxious Qualities; for this Vice alone procures us more mischief
than both the others together. In Gluttony and Sloth, our Bodies suffer before
our Minds; but Uncleanness seises and prevails upon our Minds before it subdues
our Bodies; and having made it self Master of that which was given for our
Guide, it hurrieth us along to dishonest, and shameful Desires, by a Tyranny
both absolute and inevitable, although in the fulfilling of those Desires we meet
our utter Destruction. This Enemy is so much the more dangerous, seeing that
the means wherewith it uses to destroy us are Pleasure and Delight, which lead
us aside from Virtue, and strangle us in their Embraces. By their Cunning they
seduce us; they charm us with their Complaisance; and so straightly engage us
to them, that of our selves it is impossible we should break the Chains
wherewith they fasten us. They are so many Dalila's who lull us asleep, that
they may first deprive us of our Strength, and then tumble us into the
bottomless Pit of all Vices. They draw us and entice us to our everlasting
Ruin, if we do not prevent them by a serious Repentance, which if too late,
might be in vain. Shun then such Guides under whose Conduct the Event will be
so unhappy. Fly from them with more speed than you would from Robbers on the
Highway; for these will be contented with your Money and Clothes, but the
others aim directly at your Soul and Body. My Son, you may observe these
Directions with much more ease, if you do but consider, that all Pleasures
taking advantage of our weakness, fasten us to them with a promise of the
sweetest Satisfactions, which at last prove to be but bitter Sorrows. In this
they are like Laban, who perceiving Jacob's Affection, engaged him to serve
seven Years for beautiful Rachel, and when that term was expired gave him only
ill-favored Leah. These Directions, I say, you may more easily follow, if you
will diligently observe how filthy, base, and infamous are these very Pleasures
which our Uncleanness makes use of to seduce us; how soon they pass away; what
Mischiefs attend them; and lastly, the Pains we must undergo to all Eternity,
for those Pleasures that lasted but one Hour, or perhaps but one Moment.
Temperance will make you avoid these Dangers, if you take its Advice, and after
that it has demonstrated to you that whilst they command you they are full of
danger; it will make you also confess that they are innocent and harmless when
you can command them, and purge them from the Venom they contracted with the
Impurity of their Birth; for having taken away all the Means whereby they might
be hurtful to us, we may make them to be serviceable against their own Nature,
to our honest and lawful Recreations.

There remains yet behind, my Son, the two Sins of Anger and Envy. The first of
these casts a man into the greatest excess of Disorder. It drives from our
Minds all manner of Reason; and as soon as ever it seizes the Heart, it
fills it with Motions so violent and tempestuous, that it is very fitly
termed a short Madness. Fury and Brutishness are the two chief Branches that
spring from it: And I think you need but behold the Actions of a Man enflamed
with Anger to acknowledge this Truth; they are so many irrefragable Proofs of
it; for if his Words did not speak him a Man, there is no Body but would take
him for some fierce Wild Beast. His Soul which is tossed to and fro with those
violent and unruly Motions, does express her Agitation so plain in the Features
and Lineaments of his Countenance, that it is no hard matter to know by these
outward Characters what vexatious Disorders he undergoes within. By such
innocent Means as these, a Learned Man in our time found what he had vainly
searched after in all the Secrets of Philosophy; the way to diminish the
Inclination which one of his Disciples had toward this Vice, in whose virtuous
Education he was very much concerned. He showed him in the Countenance of a Man
agitated with this Passion so great a change, and so vastly different from what
it was wont to be, that from the Effects running up to the Cause, it was not
difficult for him to make him understand that a Stream so infected must needs
proceed from a poisoned Spring; whereby he brought him to be so averse from
this Vice, that it even diminished extremely the Inclination he had toward it.
The Lacedaemonians did heretofore use the like device to make Drunkenness
odious to their Children: They made their Slaves drink to Excess, and then they
were brought before them in that Condition, who seeing them reel and stagger,
and act like Men deprived of their Senses, conceived so great a hatred for this
loathsome Vice, that they would never after be reconciled to it. Do you, my Son,
take the same Method to oppose and conquer that Passion of Anger, which is a
sort of Drunkenness that assaults our Understanding and clouds our Reason with
Fumes more dangerous than those of Wine, because they are of a longer
continuance, and they produce more direful Effects. In a word, to give you an
easy and infallible Remedy against Anger, tho you have never so great
Provocations thereto; practice the Advice of a great Person of this latter Age,
who exhorts us to yield betimes to Reason, that which in a little while we
cannot but yield to Time. To this wholesome Advice add Fortitude, that Heroic
Virtue, and the support of the rest, whereof Prudence is the Guide, and it will
not be difficult for you to succed.

Envy is the last Vice I have to mention, whose Picture I am going to draw. Of
all Vices it is the most rampant. It incited Man to a Crime which being directed
immediately against God and Nature, made him fail in his Duty to one and
the other; and in one Act made him commit Sacrilege and Murder, by stirring up
Cain to deface the Image of God in the Person of his Brother whom he killed.
It Is a Passion which after having poisoned the Mind, spreads also it is Poison
all over the Body; which corrupts the whole Mass of Blood, and casts its
Venom through all the Veins; which renders the Countenance meager, ghastly,
hideous, and which notwithstanding all Endeavors to lie hid, does manifestly
expose it self by disfiguring that Person whom it possesses: And we may very
justly say, that if Anger is a Fire which enflames us, Envy is one that dries
us up, and carries along with it the Punishment of the Envious, seeing that
neither Night nor Day does it suffer him to take any Rest. It Is like a Hecktick
Fever which consumes a Man's Body by degrees, and which is difficult to drive
away, when through Negligence one has suffered it to take Root. The Envious Man
strikes directly at God. He derives his greatest Misery from the just
distribution God makes of his Benefits to other men. Another's Calamity is his
Joy. The good Health of his Neighbor diminishes his own, and his Neighbor
falling sick makes him well again. His Draughts are then sweetest when mingled
with the bitter Tears of his Neighbor. His private Sorrows arise from the
Satisfaction and Content of the Public. He looks upon that Gain or Profit that
does not help fill up his Bags, to be a great loss to himself; and he is never
happy but in the misery of those of his Acquaintance. The moderate Harvest of
another makes his own unacceptable, tho it be abundant; and the greatest
Prosperity in this World would be unwelcome to him, if he were forced to share
some part of it with his Neighbors. You may easily perceive, my Son, that a
Man of this Temper can have Peace with no body, and that generally he must be
at War with God: judge thereby of the Tranquillity of his Body and Soul. Others
comprehend their Unhappiness within their own Calamities; but the Envious,
besides their own peculiar Misfortunes, procure to themselves an infinite
number from the good Fortune of others. Shun therefore this Vice which is so
pernicious and detestable, that it is impossible for any one to be guilty of it
without becoming both a Punishment to himself and his own Executioner. And be
assured, that after it has furiously tormented in this Life those who are
possessed with it, in the next it will lead them into that Place which Divine
Justice has set apart for all those who have not a submissive regard to
whatsoever is ordained by Providence.

The Description I have made to you of these Vices has been something longer
than I should have imagined. God grant the Style may be not only so clear as to
excite in you that Hatred which you ought to have against them, but also so
persuasive as to encourage you in the Love and Practice of their opposite
Virtues. There is not any thing can be thoroughly known until it be compared
with its contrary; if therefore you have apprehended the Reasons which should
move you to hate Pride, Covetousness, Gluttony, Sloth, Uncleanness, Anger, and
Envy; you will easily be persuaded for the Welfare of your Soul and Body, to
love Humility, a liberal Frugality, Sobriety, Diligence, Chastity, Moderation,
and Charity; and to possess these Virtues you must take your Measures from the
Dictates of Prudence, Fortitude, and Temperance, whose Counsels cannot but be
advantageous to you, if you will thereunto acquiesce. Among all the Benefits
that you may receive from these Virtues, I would to God, my Son, they would
inspire you with as much Love for Truth, as young People have Inclination for
Lying. Have in Horror this Vice; and to do this easily, remember that JESUS
CHRIST took upon him this Quality of True, only to signify to us that he loved
those who loved the Truth: And why (think you) is the Devil termed in the
Scripture the Father of Lies, unless it be to show that all Liars are his
Children? The love of this Vice is an undeniable Character upon all those who
practice it through Inclination, (and from this Inclination acquire a Habit)
that they are the Children of the Devil. I know very well that they who are
willing to excuse it, say, that a secret Shame which they have, to acknowledge
themselves guilty of the Fault imputed to them, does not seldom drive them
against their Will into a Necessity of Lying. It is an ill President that Adam
has left to his Posterity: But what signify all these Prevarications
wherewith we dissemble the Truth? They are but like so many Fig Leaves through
which the Truth will be discerned in spite of all our Endeavors to the
contrary. The Hopes of a more regular Conduct hereafter does somewhat comfort
those who are concerned for their present Indiscretion; but daily Experience
teaches us, that when a Man has committed a Fault, and that he endeavors to
evade it with a Lie, he is less sorry for being guilty than for being so
reputed. I do not pretend, my Son, by exhorting you never to lie, to publish
and declare whatever you know to be true; this in many Cases would be a great
Imprudence; yet Lying is a Crime in all: the best way to avoid it is to speak
little and live well. A Man needs not use Dissimulation if his Conduct is good;
and he is always sincere in his Discourse that considers first what he is about
to say, and then consults Prudence, the Definition whereof will convince you of
it. It Is a Habit of the Understanding which prescribes to our Desires, means
both honest and convenient to attain a favorable and happy End. You may easily
perceive then, that how profitable soever are the Ends you propose to your self
in your Undertakings, the means cannot be honorable if you make use of Deceit
and Lying to compass them. Your Hatred toward this Vice will not only cause
you to be more reserved in your Speech, it will render you also more
circumspect in all your Actions, and (by grafting Sincerity in your Heart) will
make you abhor Detraction and Calumny, two general Plagues, whence spring most
of our Troubles, they being often the Cause of our Quarrels. Sincerity is
always attended with Probity; and one and the other are as absolutely necessary
in Pious Duties, as in those of Society. You cannot be a good Christian without
being an honest Man, neither can you be an honest Man if you are deceitful.
Dissimulation is a Sacrilege in Religion, and Lying is almost as great a Crime
in Conversation.

My Son, whatsoever Profession you follow, let Virtue and Industry be your
Guides, and not Pleasure and Idleness. The Idle and the Voluptuous, from Men
are transformed into Beasts, and by a Metamorphosis so much the more shameful
as that they willingly consent to it. My Son, if you would have your Affairs
succeed, never undertake what is above your Capacity, nor what you do not
thoroughly understand. Moreover, let the means, whereby you intend to obtain
your Ends, be most honest and just: yet how just soever those means are, and
how exact your Knowledge in what you undertake, begin nothing till you have
begged God's Blessing upon your Enterprises; your Cares and Industry, tho never
so great, would be needless, and perhaps a hinderance to your Affairs, if this
Blessing did not intervene and render them happy. If notwithstanding all these
Precautions, Providence is not pleased that the Success should answer your
Desires, fail not however to praise his Holy Name, and submit to his Will with
a respectful and implicit Faith; assuring your self that it had not so
happened, if otherwise, it might have been better for his Glory, or your
Salvation.

Take hold, with a judicious eagerness, of all favorable Opportunities which
your Good Fortune offers you: They are rare nowadays, and much searched
after; be careful that you let them not slip when you meet any, lest when they
are gone, you follow after them to no purpose.

Make good Use of your Time, for what you lose thereof can never be recovered.
New Gains may over and above supply old Losses, but the Loss of Time is
irrecoverable.

By exhorting you to apply your self to your Business, I do not mean that you
should give up your self so entirely to it, as to receive no Diversion. I am
sensible that as the Body cannot long undergo Labor, so neither can the Mind
be engaged in a moderate Study, if a reasonable Relaxation of their Functions
yield not to both of them the Means to repair the Strength and Spirits which
they lost. For this Reason I shall be so far from forbidding you Recreations,
that I advise you to use them, nevertheless with this restraint, to choose, as
near as you can guess, such as are the most honest and innocent. I take those
Diversions whereby the Body is moderately exercised to be the more proper of
the two for a Christian and an Honest Man, than Gaming, which depends upon much
Hazard. But as in this Case, Choice depends upon Inclination, you would do well
to make yours (as much as you can) subservient to your Duty, which will put you
in mind that, let the Game be what it will, you ought to be very careful in
this Occasion, not to render Principal what should be but Accessory. Let your
Game therefore be a delightful Recreation, and not a vexatious Trouble, such as
might be occasioned by a great Loss, if you hazard any considerable Sums. Never
put it to the venture to quit that with a Grudge which you began for your
Diversion; and this cannot be, if you play but for Play-sake, that is, if you
play but for a Small matter, and with the intent only to refresh your Spirits,
which an Excess of Business and Study had tried: However let the Sum be never
so inconsiderable for which you play, take heed it be with such as you know,
that they may not first Cheat, and then Deride you.

Ignorance and Presumption have possessed the World almost from the Creation:
Avoid both with Care. Seek therefore my Son, to be instructed, and be not
ashamed to ask the Council of those who know more than your self. Be always
mistrustful of your own Parts, and never take it ill from those who give you
their Advice, but rather receive it with all imaginable Sweetness and Respect,
reserving only to your self the Freedom of following it, if you find it
consonat to Reason and Prudence.

Love Reading; it is that which strengthens the Judgment, enriches the Memory,
and enlightens every Day more and more the Understanding. It Is that which will
teach us to express our selves in a Style sublime, tho both Smooth and
Charming: so that we may say, it is that alone procures us all the Advantages
necessary, either in Meditation or Converse. Yet do not read only to be
rendered more knowing, read chiefly to become better; and to that End make
choice of good Books, applying your self most commonly to such as treat of
Piety, in the reading whereof, set before you the Example of the Be, which
gathere the sweet Dew out of Flowers to make Honey in it is due Season. Now to
profit by this Example, observe that when you read, (whether they be Books of
Devotion, Morality or History) you do not neglect the reducing under Heads in a
Commonplace, the excellent Notes and Observations that you will collect: that
will ease very much your Memory, and in many occasions will save you the
trouble (which must otherwise lie upon you) of searching after Expressions,
whereof you may stand in Need.

Do not employ your Time in reading Romances: They only heat the Imagination,
and not nourish the Understanding; for although they represent Virtues in their
highest Degree, nevertheless there lies a great deal of Venom hid under those
lovely Flowers, especially for young People. You will do well to let alone the
Reading of such Books, which are Snares so much the more difficult to avoid, as
being in appearence not dangerous, tho in reality they are much.

Take special heed, my Son, that the desire of Riches does not force you upon
evil Means to obtain them, nor excite you to Actions Mercinary, Base and
Unjust. Use not diverse Weights, and diverse Measures; both of them are alike
Abomination to the Lord. Better is a little with Righteousness, then great
Revenues without Right. And remember, that Godlyness with Contentment is great
Gain.

Shun Ambition, tho some only call it an Error of great Minds. I always
considered it as proceeding from Minds vain and defective. It Is a Monster most
unsatiable, whose Designs are without Limits as well as his Hopes, and how
successful soever is the Ambitious in his Enterprises, the Success does rather
puff up his Desires than content them. His Advancement to an eminent Employment
which he expected, discovers to him another more Eminent, without which his
Happiness seems to be imperfect. As fast as his Honor and Grandeur increases,
his Hopes and Pretentions multiply: The whole World can scarce satisfy him:
Like Pompey, he will have no Equal, much less can he endure a Superior. His
Life passes in a perpetual Hurry of Body and Mind. Tranquillity and Repose are
Terrae incognitae to him; and it often happens, that the Care he has been at to
place himself so high, serves to render his fall the more irrecoverable. Come
not therefore near a Road so dangerous, where instead of reposing your self you
will find nothing but dreadful Precipices.

If any one spread an ill Report of you, and that it comes to your knowledge,
examine it impartially; and if you find your self guilty of that which is
imputed to you, mend, and be thankful to him who did you this good Office. If
you are blamed wrongfully show no Anger or Displeasure; for Experience makes it
manifest to us daily, that the Contempt of Calumny makes it die, whereas
nothing but a Resentment can keep it alive.

A learned Man of these Times said, that all Virtues were swallowed up in
Interest, like the Rivers in the Sea. Avoid, my Son, this selfish Humor, which
aiming so much at our own Advantage, makes us forget what in Justice is due to
others. Accommodate your Interest to Reason, and to that Law of Nature, which
was an ancient Maxim among Pagans; Do not to others, what you would not that
they should do unto you; or rather to this Christian Doctrine, do as you would
be done by.

Be careful not to take Exceptions; of a Trifle do not make a Business of
Moment, no more then of a Business of Moment a Trifle. Labor to be in Peace
with all Men; and rather relinquish something of your Right, than to enter into
a Contest with any one. What another in this Case would call, parting with his
Possessions to satiate the Greediness of his Neighbor, do you consider as an
Instrument to conserve the Tranquillity of your Mind, and the Repose of your
Body, which you ought to esteem beyond all Wealth and Possessions.

Never put off to a Future Time, that which you can do at the Present. Do every
thing in Order, avoiding all Confusion, and let this Order be seen as well in
your Clothes, as in your Books; as well in your smallest Papers, as in your
most considerable Affairs.

Regulate your Expenses by your Estate, and if that Estate will permit, do not
deny your self any thing that is Fitting, but have a Care you delight not in
what is Superfluous, lest insensibly you become unable to provide for your self
things absolutely Necessary.

Although the Necessity of Clothing was one Consequence of the first Sin of Adam,
there are not a few Persons that make it one of the chief Subjects of their
Vanity, and one of the most painful Cares of their Life. Garments, which are
only to preserve our Bodies from the injury of Weather, and which for this
Reason ought to be ordained to no other Use, are least of all for that Use
among those sort of People: They have them to satisfy their immoderate
Desires, as well as to shelter their Bodies from the Intemperance of the
Seasons. This is a Weakness in either Sex, and it is Intolerable in both;
however, it is much more to be condemned in Men then in Women, because most
Women making their Merit consist in an exterior Comeliness, you need not
wonder if they seek to make themselves prized by the Magnificence of their
Habits, and by the Beauty and Excellency of their Trimmings, whereas Men, who
ought to be more reasonable, should despise (as below them) these vile sordid
Means to make themselves be taken notice of; and only render themselves
considerable by Virtue, and their Excellent Qualifications. To this I must
exhort you with all earnestness; however, in the Order you observe for your
Apparel, I would wish you to advise with your own Estate, to consider what is
decent, and chiefly to have regard to what is most reasonable. If you do this
your Habit will be always farthest from Extremes; you will be neat and not
affected, well Clothed and not extravagant.

Be neither the first nor the last in following the Mode; too much Compliance
with all Fashions is ridiculous, as on the other side too be always thwarting
the Mode, is to be obstinate and Fantastical. Shun alike both these extremes,
and by observing a Mean, let People rather applaud your Modesty than condemn
your Conceitedness. Be esteemed rather for your personal Qualifications, than
for your external Ornaments; in a Word, be more diligent in beautifying your
Soul with good Qualities, than in adorning your Body with rich Apparel.

Whatsoever you speak, or whatsoever you write, let it be in Words few but
comprehensive, so that much may be contained in a little; yet not withstanding
you have free, smooth, and graceful Expressions in your Discourse, let it be a
Pleasure to you when you are in Company to hearken attentively to their
Discourse, and to answer them appositely and to the purpose, that you may gain
their good Will and Affection: Therefore remember this, that Conversation is
not like a Monarchical Government, where one has only a right to speak; but
rather a kind of Democracy, where each Member has a Freedom of declaring their
Minds in their turn.

Secrecy is the Soul of a Design, and not seldom the sole occasion of it is
Success: The more important are your Designs, the greater ought your Care to be
in concealing them from others; yet if they are never so inconsiderable, it is
best to make no Body acquainted with them. Without this Precaution, me thinks
you should be afraid lest it happen as it does often to Mines, whose Effects
terminate but in Smoke when once they have taken Wind.

Fly from Idleness; it is a sort of Spiritual Lethargy, so much the more
dangerous, as that the End of it is generally the Beginning of some Disorder.
Man was created to be always acting; and of necessity he must always be
employed; therefore if his Actions are not good, they infallibly tend to Evil:
And Idleness has this Resemblance with Standing Waters, that if these breed
Serpents the other breeds Vices.

There are many People who are extreme eager to know what is done in their
Neighbor's House, and at the same time are ignorant of most things that happen
in their own. This Curiosity has always seemed to me to be pityful and base,
and unworthy of an honest Man: Therefore to avoid it, consider with your self
that he into whose affairs you are prying is either a Friend, or else is
indifferent to you: If he is indifferent, what satisfaction can you propose by
knowing what he aims at? And if he is your Friend, why would you search into a
Secret, which his Silence signifies he has a Mind to keep from you?

It belongs only to Kings to say that he who cannot dissemble knows not how to
reign. Dissimulation, tho sometimes a Virtue in a Soverain Prince, is always a
Vice in the Subject. Yet there are some Cases wherein it is a part of Prudence
not to publish and make known all we think. But upon such like Occasions as
these, be so much reserved, that by your speaking you may not be taxed with
Indiscretion, nor by your Silence with Dissimulation.

When you happen into Company where there are some that you don't know, be
careful not to fall into that vulgar Error of passing your Judgment upon the
Merit of Persons by their rich Clothes, or the fine Style of their Discourse.
These Appearances are very doubtful, and it is often manifested by Experience,
that those Persons are not the most worthy because they are the best clothed,
nor are the most Virtuous always the most eloquent: Therefore, my Son, in such
a Case let not your Mind be anticipated; let your Judgment decide nothing
without your Knowledge, and be sure you Penetrate beyond the outward Parts of a
Man before you judge well or ill of him.

Flattery is the same to the Mind as Poison is to the Body, with this only
difference, that all People hate Poison, yet they all love Flattery. The
passionate Love that every one bears toward it, is a sort of Leprosy which has
infected all the Earth. You shall find it in Shepherds poor Cottages as well as
in the Palaces of Kings. It Is true it reigns among Kings and Princes with more
Ostentation then among the People, which produces Events so much the more
pernicious, according to the Power of that Person whom it affects. Prosperity
is the Mother of Flattery as Interest is the sole Object of Flatterers; and for
this Reason alone there are more in the Courts of Princes than among private
Families, who yet are not wholly exempt, the most miserable of all Men having
at least one who keeps hin company all his Lifetime, and who becomes so
Familiar to him, that insensibly he ushers in all foreign Flaterrers. My Son,
I find that you eagerly expect to know the Name of this Flatterer; I will tell
it you then: It Is Self-love; who introduces all our Errors, who corrupts our
Judgment, darkens our Understanding; and lastly disfigures Truth so strangely
that it is impossible for us to know her. Let therefore this Description I have
given you of the Effects produced by Flattery, cause in you a mistrust as well
of the Domestic as the Foreign Flatterrer; let this foreknowledg of them
break all their Measures, and thereby preserve you from being enchanted with
those poisoned sweets which being once instilled into you, will infallibly
carry it is Venom to your very Heart.

I am now, my Son, come to an Article delicate, important, and difficult to
handle, which I would not willingly omit, that it might not be said I had
passed over in Silence any thing that could contribute to your Instruction.
It Is then concerning, how you must carry your self, if in unlucky and
unexpected differences you are obliger to declare your self of any Party. If I
went about to treat of this one Point to it is greatest Extent, it would require
a Volume much larger than the whole Treatise I design for you, which is
contrary to the Purpose I intended, of rendering you rather an Honest than a
Learned Man. It Is enough for you to observe these two or three Rules which I am
going to give you. The Differences of this Nature are either public or
private; of which sort soever they are, it is best for you not to meddle if you
can choose, unless you see apparently that you can be so happy as to contribute
toward a Reunion. But if you cannot possibly stand Neuter, and that an
unavoidable Necessity obliges you to side with a Party; in that Case I
earnestly exhort you to take this Counsel I now give you. If the Business in
question be public, and that the Prince's Interest is concerned, adhere
immediately without any manner of Scruple to his Party. You preserve God's
Right in defending the lawful Authority of Kings, who are his Vicegerents; and
the Holy Ghost has so interwoven the Interests of those that reign with the
Interests of him by whom they reign, that he says, Whosoever resists Power
resists God. It is far better to dye for your Prince, than by usurping to
reign in his Place. In this Case fail not to follow your Duty, without
reflecting in the least upon what would be most for your Advantage; and venture
all that you have in the World, if there is any Probability that it will
produce advantageous Effects for the Royal Interest. But if on the other side
it is only a private Grudge or Animosity between some few; before you declare
your self for either Party, consider impartially whose Cause is most just:
which you may easily perceive; for without any doubt the Right is on their Side
with whom the greatest Number of Persons of Honor, Integrity, and Discretion
take part. Espouse therefore that Cause: nevertheless keep within the Bounds of
Moderation, and be not too forward in meddling with their Affairs, especially
when they proceed to Heat and Violence, and have no Hand in any Disorders or
injurious Attempts, which they might possibly commit: But rather labor all you
can to mollify those passionate and turbulent Spirits, to allay their Heats,
and to reduce them to such a Temper of Mind as might prevent the evil
Consequences which would infallibly follow from their Disunion with the
opposite Party. I am sensible that neither your Birth nor Merit can make a
Party any whit the more considerable, but as Accidents may occur wherein we
shall be constrained (of what Quality soever we are) to declare our Intentions
tho never so much against our Will: I thought in such a Rencounter these
Instructions would be not a little necessary.

One of the most pleasing Satisfactions that we can have in this World is to be
in good Esteem and Reputation with those of our Acquaintance. This is all we
can aim at; for therein is Honor, Profit, and Pleasure.

Be discreet and sincere in all your Words, honest and prudent in all your
Actions, obliging and affable in all your Behavior. Never construe ill what
others say or do, unless they come to be publicly so censured.

Take great heed of being revengeful. Revenge pierces and teareth the Heart
that is filled therewith. The Grounds that make you desire Revenge are either
just or injust; if injust, then you are injust to desire it; and if just, then
by endeavoring to revenge your self you become injust; for you encroach upon
the Prerogative of the King of Heaven, who has said, Vengeance is mine.

To avoid Perjury or false Swearing, which amongst Men is scandalous, and
abominable in the sight of God; I advise you to swear not at all. If you once
get a Habit of speaking always Truth every one will easily believe you, without
any need of affirming it with an Oath.

Among all Vices, there is none more base and yet more ordinary than
Ingratitude; this is the general Opinion and Complaint of the World: and if all
those who thus complain were free from it, no body would use it; for every one
complains thereof. The Ancients by a special Mystery have limited the Graces to
the number of three, to intimate, that if one of them had received a good Turn
from the other, the third was to return it to her. Make hereof a Law to your
self, and an urgent Endeavor to follow this Lesson, and never to be ungrateful
for any, at least considerable, Benefit received.

If you intend my Satisfaction, or your own Quiet, be careful never to become
Surety for any Man, for any Cause whatsoever. If your Friend has need of you,
serve him with your Purse and Advice, with all your Power and Interest; but
keep your Liberty, and engage for no Man. If you have a mind to help a Friend
in necessity, and that you are well able to do it, do it quickly; but if you
are not well able, why will you bind your self to do it hereafter, when perhaps
you shall be less able? Therefore be not bound for any unless you care not to
be rid of your Money, your Quiet, and your Friend. In other things, my Son, I
have been contented to advise you, to exhort and persuade you; but herein I
make use of all Authority which the Quality of Father gives me, and do
absolutely forbid this thing. Take heed of refusing my Command, as you will
avoid the Punishment which your Disobedience shall justly deserve.

Perhaps this may seem somewhat strange and hard to many Men; yet it is drawn
from the Advice of a Great King, who was the wisest Man in the World, 22 Chap.
of Prove. Be not thou one of them that strike Hands, or of them that are
Sureties for Debts: If thou have nothing to pay he may lawfully take thy Bed
from under thee. My Son, by his Opinion I can justify the Severity and
Unkindness that some would impute to mine for absolutely forbidding you to
become Surety for any Man.

You depart hence, sufficiently grounded in the Truth of our Religion, being
able to render a Reason of the Hope that is in you to all that shall ask it;
which I would have you do upon all Occasions with Respect and Reverence, as St.
Peter exhorts; yet following the Advice of St. Paul, avoid always all Disputes
about Religion, for that rather makes more averse than persuades; and the
earnest desire of confuting, or the fear of being vanquished, transports very
moderate Men sometimes to dangerous Extremities: Hereby Charity is almost
always wounded, and Truth never cleared, which makes appear that it may well be
said at this time of Controversies, what the Apostle said heretofore of Fables
and Genealogies, which are endless; that they beget rather vain and curious
Questions than Godly Edification, which consists in the true Faith the
Foundation of Christian Virtues, as Charity is the Perfection, and Hope the
Crown thereof: Whereof the first has none but God for it is Object, the last
aims only at our Selves, and the middlemost contains our Duty to God, to our
Selves, and to our Neighbor; for by Charity we learn all the Duties of a
Spiritual Life, as also of a Corporeal, which the Apostle St. Paul prefers
before the other two Christian Virtues, where he says, that there abides
Faith, Hope, and Charity, these three; but the greatest of these is Charity.
God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. The
other Virtues draw us nearer unto God, but this renders us like unto him in
some manner, seeing that he accounts it one of his chiefest Attributes, that of
Charity; which is also the inexhaustible Spring of all the Benefits he bestows
upon Man: So that, my Son, as often as you are charitable, you will imitate God
in one of his most frequent Actions, who is never weary of doing good to us,
tho we are so unworthy of it. Do good therefore to all, especially to those who
are of the Household of Faith: Yet make not that a Pretext to withhold your
Charity from all those who are not of the same Communion with you. All Men are
your Brothers in God; which Quality alone should suffice to engage you to help
them in their Need, to comfort them in their Afflictions, and chiefly to let
your Assistance be as speedy and effectual as their Necessities are urgent.
This will be an infallible Means to draw the Blessings of Heaven upon your
Soul, your Person, and your Actions. He that gives to the Poor lends to the
Lord: But whosoever stops his Ears at the Cry of the Poor, he shall also cry
himself, but shall not be heard, says Solomon. You may therefore see what is
generally the Fruits of Charity: However, let not Self-interest be the Motive
which inclines you to be charitable; this Virtue would thereby lose its
excellent Quality; and you might expect in vain the Effects of it, if you
pretend to make a Bargain with God Almighty. It Is in Charity that all Christian
Virtues terminate, and it shall be with the Description of this Divine Quality
that I will end this Chapter, which contains the Instructions that I was to
give you about Personal Duties, after which there only remains, that I should
say a Word or two concerning Civil Duties.

Of Civil Duties.
HItherto, my Son, I have represented unto you your Duty to God; as also what
you owe to your self for his sake, seeing that in him we live, and move, and
have our Being; and that all our Thoughts, Words, and Actions ought to tend
toward God, as to their Center. It is now time I should make you consider what
you owe to Mankind, to whom you are fastened with the Bonds of a Civil Society.

For I would not have you imagine, that you was born for your self alone, there
lies an Obligation upon you of being a Help to your Neighbor. Solitariness is
not natural to Man, nay, it is even contrary to the Will and Design of the
Creator, who placed him in the World for Society-sake. Reason was given him to
no other Purpose but to make use of it. He has Virtues; he ought to put them in
practice: Which he cannot do but with those of his own kind, and in a civil
Converse. In this Converse, I would have you use the subtlety of the Serpent,
and yet act with the simplicity of the Dove. Be just and sincere, and have
always in your Mind this excellent Law of Nature which I cited once before; Do
not to others, what you would not that others should do to you. This Law is not
only a Dictate of Nature, and received generally throughout the Universe; but
God himself makes it a part of his Law, when he commands us to love our
Neighbor as our self.

My Son, observe this, that God does command you not only to love your
Neighbor, but to love him as your self, that is to say, as heartily, as
sincerely, and with an Affection as ardent as is possible. This Obligation (as
you may see) is of a great Extent; but the Goodness of God extends much
farther: he relinquisheth part of his Right for our sakes; for tho he has
required our Affection entire to himself, yet he loses that Obligation, and
is willing we should have for one another part of that which he had demanded
from us, and retained wholly for himself. Here he cease his Jealousy, he
that takes upon him so often the Name of Jealous, and through an Excess of Love
which he bears toward us, he is so far from being angry that our Neighbor has
a share in our Affection, that he commands it, and is well pleased to create
himself Rivals upon this Account. Man is not sensible enough of this Goodness
which is infinite, (as well as the Essence from whence it proceeds,) for of the
three kinds of Affections prescribed to us by the Law of God, Man for the most
part maintains that which has a Relation to himself, taking no Notice of the
other two, and by an Excess of Self-love he fails in that which is due to God
and his Neighbor, by which Vice he becomes in this World a Complice with the
Devil, and therefore cannot but expect to share with him his Punishment in the
next: Therefore to avoid this, love others as much as you would have them love
you. To this Duty you ought to apply your self very much, as well for your
Advantage as to render your Life sweet and pleasant. Who speaks Love, speaks
Service, Esteem, Honor, in a Word, speaks all obliging Condescensions, which
Man's Heart always inspires for those Persons that are dear to him. My Son, all
Men should be dear to you, and he whose House touches yours is not more your
Neighbor than he that dwells in another Country. Be officious toward all:
Lose no Opportunity of serving any one. Add to the Courtesies you bestow, a Way
altogether obliging in bestowing them, which increases their Merit; and though
the Person be never so much unknown to you that demands any thing, if you are
not in a Capacity of satisfying him, do not increase his Discontent occasioned
by your Refusal, with harsh and unkind Language; but rather diminish his
Trouble, by that which you should express in not being ca^able to content him.
This Conduct will not only gain Esteem, but also a general Love and Affection
wheresoever you happen to be.

Great Persons are to us as the Flame of Candles are to Flies. We must have a
great care of approaching them too familiarly, lest we run in danger of burning
our selves. There is nothing so alluring (and yet so full of Deceit) as their
pompous Equipage and their splendid Entertainments. My Son, be not dazzled with
it; and whether they derive their Greatness from their Birth, or from their
Fortune, let only their Virtue and Personal Merits guide those Sentiments of
Respect and Veneration which you think is owing them. Among several Reasons
which persuade me to give you this Advice, I will here lay down some of the
most important.

First of all, consider this as a Truth, that although among Great Persons
there may be found some, whose Inclinations and Conduct answer exactly to their
Character, the Number is infinitely the greater that derogates from it.
Remember that they are for the most part like the Trees in Forests, which
sometimes yield Shade, but very rarely any Fruit; unless it be like those Trees
near the Dead Sea in the Holy Land, which proffer very fair Apples to
Passengers, but within side are nothing but Dust and Rottenness. Almost all the
Great ones entice us after the same manner, oblige and gain us with large
Promises, and by an excess of Civility, whereby we are too often caught; and
never undeceived, till an unhappy Experience in our Necessities convinces us
how little Reason we have to rely upon the Hopes or Expectations of what they
promise. Besides, if you should be so fortunate as to be favored by some Great
Person, (which will scarce happen unless his own Interest forces him to it) in
a small time you will begin to perceive, that his Friendship has not only the
false glittering of Glass, but also it is Brittleness; for generally the least
Oversight makes them forget the greatest Service: Therefore, if you will be
persuaded by me, make no Addresses to Great Persons or so much as come at them,
unless you are obliged to it by a Duty not to be dispensed with.

Behave your self with great Respect toward your Superiors, with civil
Compliance among your equals, and always courteously toward your Inferiors.

Take heed how you speak ill of any one, especially in his Absence? there is
nothing more unworthy of a Man of Honor; and you will be so far from living in
Peace with others, (which is the chief end of Society,) that of Necessity you
will be at odds with all. If you have privately perceived the vicious
Inclinations of any Person of your Acquaintance, do not Publish, but rather
forget them, after you have done your utmost Endeavor to cure him of his
Faults.

One of the most considerable Services that we can render to a Neighbor is, to
make him perceive the Errors of his Conduct: And to do this successfully, so
that he may see it is the Advice of a Friend; let Prudence guide you, least he
disdain your Counsel instead of profiting thereby.

You would become ridiculous, if you should be stained with the same Vice which
you reprove in another, and you will sooner pass for an impertinent Censurer
than a sincere Friend: Take heed therefore to that, and mend that Fault in your
self which you intend to cure in your Neighbor.

Avoid the Baseness of those who delight in raising false Reports; and hearken
not to those who go about to scandalize others; If you do, you seek thereby an
Occasion to fall out with your Neighbor; and if you your self create a Scandal
upon him, it will be a sufficient Reason for his falling out with you.

Never praise to an Excess those of whom you speak, especially if they are
present, for although it is but what they deserve, yet in their very Opinion you
will be esteemed a Flatterer, suspecting that the Intent of such excessive
Commendations is more to exhibit the Elegancy of your Wit, than to manifest the
Greatness of their Merit.

Civility and Complaisance are the Spirits that keep up Society, whosoever is
void of these is a trouble to all the World; whereas he that can make use of
them opportunely, may boldly flatter himself that his Company will be
unacceptable to none. However, let Reason rule your Com^laisance; let it not
condescend to what is criminal, nor yet to what is base. Stubbornness is not
only a deadly Enemy to Complaisance, but it also acts for the most part
contrary to Reason and Sense. A Person that is stubborn can never be so happy
as to comply with others, whereby he falls into the Misfortune of being shunned
by all company, and at last becomes a Burden to himself. Endeavor therefore to
be complaisant with Prudence, and firm in your Resolutions with Justice.

Jeer No body, if you would not run the Hazard of being jeered in your turn,
and rendering that Person whom you jeer, your Enemy: Not but that innocent
jesting may be lawfully used in Conversation; but the Abuse of it does not
seldom produce Quarrels and Animosities, which too often cool the most fervent
Affections; and rarely do we see Raillery carried on without some sharp, and
stinging Expressions.

Never put off till to morrow what you can do to day. Be exact toward all Men,
and in all things, but principally in paying your Debts. Observe your measures
so rightly, that the Presence of your Creditors may not be tedious to you; and
be always more ready to persuade every Man to take his Due, than they to ask it
of you. In the mean time do not you exact with the utmost Severity what is due
to you: This would be contrary to the Religion of JESUS CHRIST, as also not
consistent with that Civility and Condescension which we ow to one another.

How deformed soever any Person may be in his Body, be sure that you have a
great Care not to make it a Subject of Derision and Laughter; but rather render
thanks to God, that he has bin pleased to favor you more then him. It Is out of
his pure goodness that he has given you all those Advantages of Body and Mind
which you possess; Why then should you boast of what has bin given you
undeservedly? The more you have received, the more you have to answer for.

Here, my Son, I bring you another sort of Neighbor, your Domestic Servant: I
would not have you think, that his Quality can discharge you from your Duty
toward him. The chiefest part of your Duty, is to let your Carriage toward
him be mild and easy, whereby, mitigating the Discontent which his hard
Fortune might have raised in him; he may be induced to serve you joyfully:
which if you desire; recede so far from the Right of a Master as to come within
the Bounds which Christianity prescribes, that is, consider him as a Brother in
God; behave your self toward him as such, and then you need not question but
he will become sensible of your Kindness. St. Paul says, forbear Threatening:
How much more ought we to forbear Blows: Yet whenever he gives you a just
Cause of Anger, be not too apt to listen to those Reasons which condemn him;
let him rather have cause to praise your Forbearance, than to complain of your
Rigor. Seneca says; if we intend to gain our Servants so far, as to make them
be entirely devoted to our Service, we must behave our selves toward them with
all Mildness and Familiarity. Make trial of this Counsel, and if (when all is
done) your Servants become not more punctual in performing their Duty, (you
having omitted no part of yours which might tend to their Satisfaction,)
dismiss them quietly, without Anger and without Noise.

I cannot say, my Son, whether I have not forgot some considerable Point
touching your Duty to your Neighbor; however, if it were so, I have this
Comfort left, That if you do justly put in Practice my Instructions upon this
Subject, your Neighbor will have no great Reason to complain of you. It would
tho be a Cause sufficient for you to complain of me, if I should conclude these
Instructions designed for the Conduct of your Life, without making you sensible
that nothing in the World can so much facilitate the Means to practice them, as
frequent and serious Meditations on Death. I do confess, it is of all things the
most terrible, especially if we behold it in our Worldly Thoughts; for then it
is more proper to precipitate us into Despair than to inspire us with the Love
of Virtue and Piety. But it is far from being so full of Terror to those who
behold it with the Eyes of Faith. This Divine Virtue, which is a true Character
of a Christian, makes Death appear to us already conquered and disarmed by the
Second Adam, and sent by him himself, as a welcome Messenger to open our
Prisons upon Earth, and introduce us into a Celestial and Glorious Liberty.
It Is true, in a State so corrupt and imperfect wherein we now are, I believe it
is a hard matter for the most Regenerate to suffer the Approaches of Death
without some kind of Fear. But if once you can force your Weakness to admit of
a Familiarity with Death; besides the Joy and Comfort you will reap from
thence, it will change that familiar Habitude into a second Nature; and then
instead of those vicious and corrupt Inclinations wherein you are born
according to the Flesh, it will inspire such as are truly virtuous, which will
be the Signs as well as the Effects of your Spiritual Regeneration. My Son, be
sure you do not procrastinate this Meditation, under the Pretext that you are
as yet very young. A Glass newly blown is not a Jot less brittle than one that
has been made several Years. A new Ship may be split against the Rocks as soon
as an old one: and how can you tell? Perhaps that very Minute which you employ
to drive out of your Mind the Thoughts of Death, shall be your last in this
World. Since therefore this Thing is of such moment, and yet so uncertain, be
always prepared. Watch and pray, for ye know not at what Hour the Lord comes.
Repent the Day before you die; and as there is no Day in your Life which may
not be that of your Death, let not so much as one slip without thoroughly
Repenting. Live just as you will wish to have lived when you are at the Point
of Death, that is to say, religiously, soberly, and justly. This will not only
have some Resemblance with the three Blessings I mentioned at the beginning of
this Treatise, upon your Soul, your Person, and your Actions; but also 'twill
be a Testimony irrefragable that you have performed the three Duties which I
prescribed to you; for you cannot live religiously, without doing your Duty
toward God; nor soberly, without observing what is due to your self; nor
justly, without discharging what you owe to your Neighbor. The Father of Grace
and Mercy grant that you may fulfill my Directions as a good Christian, for the
sake of his Glory, your Salvation, and the Edification of your Neighbor.

That you may consider and meditate upon these Instructions with more delight,
and render them more familiar and ready to your Memory, I have extracted the
choicest Matter, and reduced it under Heads more compact; whereby it will make
the deeper Impression upon your Mind. You will find it in the Maxims following,
in all a hundred, which as many times would I have you read over, that you may
be sensible how important they are, and consequently how necessary the Practice
of them. Believe this, my Son, that whatsoever you can expect from me besides,
it cannot come near the Worth of these Instructions. God preserve you, prosper
your Voyage, and bring you back in all Happiness. To conclude, my Son, let the
Fear of God be the Star to lead and guide you in all your Ways; let it be the
Center whereto all your Actions tend; and let it be the sole Object of your
Meditation.

Christian and Moral MAXIMS.
I. BE devout without Affectation: Beware of seeming so if you are not, for
that is Hypocrisy; which being directly against God, is a kind of Sacrilege.

II. He that goes about to disguise himself in the sight of God, takes Pains to
cheat himself.

III. To pray to God without Attention is to pray without Hope.

IV. He that prefers the Pleasures of his Body before the Salvation of his
Soul, suffers a Man to be drowned whilst he runs to save his Cloak.

V. If you have not more care to adorn your Soul with virtuous Qualities than
to adorn your Body with fine Clothes, you offer to an Idol and abandon God.

VI. He that delights in his Sins makes his Pleasures his Executioner.

VII. An habitual Sin is a Serpent nourished in their own Bosom.

VIII. He that goes slowly in the practice of good Works runs swiftly in the
way to Hell.

IX. If you would have God hear your Requests, do you hear the Prayers of the
Needy.

X. He that is afraid to think of Death will run into Despair when Death comes.

XI. There is no better School for a good Life than the frequent meditating
upon a Holy Death.

XII. A serious Meditation of Eternity will cause you to make good use of your
Time, and will take away the greatest part of the bitterness of Death.

XIII. A Man is not fully convinced of the Importance of his own Salvation,
when he knows his Sins and yet will defer his Repentance.

XIV. He that passes his Life without Devotion shall not end it without
Despair.

XV. If in your Prosperity you will not hear the Voice of God, you may well
fear, that in your Adversity he will not hear yours.

XVI. He that has no fear of God in this Life may well fear his Judgments in
the next Life.

XVII. Be obliging toward all men, familiar with a few, but be intimate with
no more than one alone.

XVIII. He that takes Pleasure to keep Company with naughty men, is in Pain
whilst he is among the good.

XIX. He that confides without Knowledge, will repent not without Reason.

XX. He that begins a Business without Judgment need not wonder if it ends
without Success.

XXI. That which you undertake above your Strength must needs produce Effects
below your Hopes.

XXII. In a glorious Undertaking, he that is discouraged by the bare
Contemplation of the Difficulties, neither understands the value of the Honor,
nor does he at all deserve it.

XXIII. If Haste in designing, and Slowness in executing, produce good Success,
it is by more chance.

XXIV. If you make your Work a trouble to you, you will make your Duty a
Punis^ment to you.

XXV. He that in a low Fortune has too high Designs, undertakes with waxen
Wings to fly up to the Sun.

XXVI. He that falls by aspiring too high, needs not seek for any other Reason
of his Fall than his own Extravagance.

XXVII. Those who show themselves over-earnest and eager in small Businesses,
declare their Unfitness for great ones.

XXVIII. If by Justice you are guided in the pursuit of Gain, Tranquillity
shall accompany you in the enjoyment thereof.

XXIX. If with an envious Eye you look upon the Good of others, you will render
your self unworthy to possess your own.

XXX. If the Soul be given to Man only for Action, and those who by continual
Sloth keep the Soul from Acting, they show that the Soul in their Bodies is but
like a little Salt to preserve their Bodies from putrefying.

XXXI. Pride is a swelling of the Spirit, which does as much corrupt all the
good qualifications of the proud Man, as the swelling of the Stomach alters the
good humors of the Body.

XXXII. Although Anger be but a short Madness, yet the Effects thereof many times
prove long Follies.

XXXIII. Avoid great Meals if you will avoid long Sicknesses.

XXXIV. He that spoils his health by Excesses and Disorder, has no Reason to
complain of the Excess of his Distempers.

XXXV. An able Cook is more to be feared in time of Health, than an ignorant
Physician in time of Sickness.

XXXVI. Temperance and Exercise are the best Cooks in the world.

XXXVII. The Fumes of Wine troubles the Brain, the Fumes of Pride troubles the
Understanding, and the Fumes of one in Love troubles both.

XXXVIII. He that fills his Heart with the Love of Women, turns a Sanctuary
appointed for the Holy Ghost into a Temple of Idols, the Worship whereof will
lead to Hell.

XXXIX. Divine Love is a Torch to light us; but profane Love is one to blind us.

XL. Humane Love cannot have Bounds too straight; but if Divine Love be at all
bounded it will be deficient.

XLI. Love is painted naked; not only to represent Impudence, but to advertise
us, that usually it strips naked all those who follow it.

XLII. The Covetous Man spares things necessary to provide Superfluities for
those who will never thank him for them.

XLIII. Those who in their Actings consult only self Love shall walk blindfold,
and have as many Falls as Steps.

XLIV. Who spends too much upon his Pleasures; deprives himself of the Means of
providing for Necessaries.

XLV. If you submit your Judgment to your Pleasures, you will Burn your self
with the Light which was given to direct you.

XLVI. He that consults not his Reason for his Pleasures, ought not to expect
help in his pains.

XLVII. He that suffers himself to be governed by his Passions, abandons his
Liberty to the Fancy of his Slaves.

XLVIII. Too great desire after things Superfluous often throws a Man into
extreme want of Necessaries.

XLIX. He that fills his Heart with his Passions leaves no room for Piety, and
changes his condition of Christian into that of an Idolater.

L. Since Passions are the Diseases of the Soul, nothing but Temperance is fit
to be the Physician.

LI. He that excessively delights in Play, must count that he shall dye in
Poverty.

LII. Winning at Play is the Bait which Fortune makes use of to undo us.

LIII. Those who Play to recover what they have lost, add to the loss of their
Money, the loss of their Reason, and often times the loss of the rest of their
Money.

LIVE. Much Sleep and much Play fill the Stomach with Crudities, and the Purse
with Wind.

LV. Think a little before you Speak, think more before you make a Promise.

LVI. In diverse affairs you may choose if you will make a Promise, but having
made a Promise you cannot dispense therewith.

LVII. Never discourse of things whereof you are ignorant, and discourse but
little of what you know, and whether you speak or are silent do all with
discretion.

LVIII. Jesting sometimes upholds Conversation but generally disunites the
Jesters. They that desire to avoid quarrels and live in quiet let them avoid
Jesting as a Snare.

LIX. If you do not easily bear with the failings of others you will render
your own failings unsufferable.

LX. He that carelessly regards the misfortunes of other Men, ought not to
think it strainge if others look upon his misfortunes without compassion.

LXI. If you think to oblige Men to be civil and courteous toward you, give
them Example by your carriage toward them.

LXII. The Favors which you do to other Men place under your Feet, the Favors
which others do to you place at your Heart.

LXIII. He that forgets favors received deserves no more.

LXIV. Be not slow in serving others if you would have them quick in doing
Pleasures to you.

LXV. If you are not generous enough to prevent your Friend by good Turns, be
not slow to requite his to you.

LXVI. A sincere Intention, although unprofitable, better repays a good Turn
than a forced Acknowledgment.

LXVII. He that brags of a Favor that he has done, does much diminish the
merit thereof; for by his Indiscretion he makes it appear, that he is divided
betwixt his Vainglory and his Friend.

LXVIII. He that gives to receive, of a generous Act (which is one of the most
commendable Qualities of a man of Honor) makes it to be one of the most dirty
Trades in the World.

LXIX. If you take Pleasure in Lies, Truth will become a Pain to you.

LXX. He that excuses his Fault by a Lie condemns himself two ways.

LXXI. If Lying be usual with you, you mistrust all that others tell you.

LXXII. He that makes use of Cunning and Lying to get his Neighbors Goods,
imitates the Devil, who made use of both those Qualities to rob our first
Parent of his Innocence.

LXXIII. The ill using of our Goods in this World will be one of the principal
and most just cause of our misery in the next.

LXXIV. He that is not content with a moderate Fortune, often times takes great
Pains to lessen it by endeavoring to augment it.

LXXV. He that regulates his Desires by the necessities of Nature, aims but at
a few things; but he that is led by his Lust gives no Bounds to his Desires.

LXXVI. Be not eager to know other Men's Secrets. Be very reserved in
communicating your own; you are no longer Master of them so soon as you have
imparted them to any Person; and your Example seems to justify his
Unfaithfulness in discovering them to a third Person.

LXXVII. He that boasts of his good Qualities, loses the merit of them by his
Pride; and he that hides his good Qualities, gives them a higher esteem by his
Modesty.

LXXVIII. High Places make their Heads turn who have but weak Brains, and
extraordinary Fortunes trouble the Spirit of those who have not good Judgments.

LXXIX. A Man has need of great Constancy in Adversity, that he may not be
wanting to himself, and of great Moderation in Prosperity, that he may not be
wanting to others.

LXXX. Prosperity makes others know truly what we are, and Adversity makes us
know who are our true Friends.

LXXXI. Those who haunt us for our Wealth are like Hawks that fly only for the
Prey.

LXXXII. He that will not know his Friends in his Prosperity deserves to meet
with none in his Misery.

LXXXIII. He that leans overmuch on the Friendship of Great Persons, will
find, sooner or later, that he leans upon a broken Reed.

LXXXIV. God by his extreme Bounty recompenses with extraordinary Favors the
least Duties which we render to him, but the most part of great Persons who are
earthly Gods, make account that they have over rewarded our greatest Services
by a few kind Words.

LXXXV. He that takes great care to preserve the friendship of great Men, shall
know when he has need of them, that he has taken much pains to cultivate Land
that will prove barren.

LXXXVI. A Man who has excellent Parts and great Learning yet makes no use
thereof; is like a good Sword never drawn out of the Scabbard.

LXXXVII. He that advises others to be virtuous has thereby the more reason to
be so himself.

LXXXVIII. He that praises and commends only to please his complaisance, draws
his judgment in question.

LXXXIX. The forwardlyness of a Man to advise others is oftener a mark of his
Presumption then a proof of his Friendship.

XC. He that thinks it enough to bewail our Evils when he can Cure them, is not
touched at the Heart, but sheds only Crocodiles tears.

XCI. In our great displeasures our first Tears may be just, the second may be
handsome, but those after that are neither reasonable nor honorable.

XCII. He that weeps only because he thinks he ought to weep may have tender
Eyes and yet not touched at the Heart.

XCIII. He that employes his Authority to do ill things or to maintain them,
cuts his Throat with his own Knife.

XCIV. Trust not Flatterers and great Talkers, both of them usually aim by the
wind of their words to drive thy Money out of thy Purse.

XCV. Physicians by their Medicines often Poison our Bodies, and Flatterers
always Poison our minds by their Discourses.

XCVI. He that makes use of a much studied Discourse to persuade us to an evil
Design, employes a perfumed Poniard to stab us at the heart.

XCVII. The infection of the Pestilence is not so much to be feared for the
Body as the Poison of evil Company for the Mind.

XCVIII. If you desire to dye like a righteous Man, live as a Reprobate would
wish to have lived when he comes to dye.

XCIX. He that by his extraordinary complaisance draws off his Friend from a
bad Business by being Surety for him or bayling of him, usually draws himself
into a worse Business, which at length will make him understand his own want of
Judgment.

C. He that reads for his own instruction, and reads good matters without
profiting thereby, has the taste of the Mind as much depraved, as the bodily
Taste is to a sick Man who sits at a well furnished Table and not able to eat.

My Son, I having at the beginning of these Instructions made use of one of the
Proverbs of Solomon, I will make use of another for the end. 3 Prove. 1, 2, 3,
and 4 ver: My Son, forget not my Law, but let thine heart keep my
Commandments, for length of Days, and long Life, and Peace shall they add to
thee, so shall thou find favor and good understanding in the sight of God and
Man.

FINIS.
Books Printed for William Crook, Bookseller, at the Sign of the Green Dragon
without Temple Bar, nigh the Passage into the Temple, by Devereux Court, 1683.
DIVINITY.
1. BRevis Demonstratio, being the truth of the Christian Religion, proved by
Reason, 12o. price bound 10 d.

2. The Primitive Institution, showing the antiquity and usefulness of
Catechizing, together with its suitableness to heal the distempers of the
Church, by L. Addison, D.D. price 1 s. 6 d.

3. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of a sober Religious Man, found drowned in
a Pit, in 8o. price bound 1 s.

4. Mr. Howel's Visitation Sermon before the Bishop of Chichester, 4o. price 6
d.

5. Dr. Hascard's two Sermons on the 5th of November, and the other before the
L. Mayor of London, in 4o.

6. Mr. Manningham's two Sermons before the L. Mayor of London, and at St.
Mari^s in Oxford. in 4o.

7. A Sermon preached at the Savoy in French, and since printed in French and
English. 12o. price bound 8 d.

8. A modest Plea for the Clergy, wherein is considered the reasons why the
Clergy are so contemned and neglected. By L. A. D. D. price 1 s. 6 d.

9. Hugo Grotius his Catechism, Greek, Latin, and English; with a Praxis of all
the Greek words therein contained, in 8o. price bound 2 s.

10. The Spirit of Prophecy, proving, that Christ and his Apostles were
Prophets: written by the direction of, and recommended to the Press, by the
Right reverend Father in God, Peter, Lord Bishop of Ely, in 8o. price 3 s.

11. The King-Killing Doctrine of the Jesuits, in a sincere discourse to the
French King: written by a Roman Catholic, in 4o. price 1 s.

12. Justifying Faith; with the excellency of the Common Prayer Book, in 8o.
price bound 1 s.

13. Mercy Triumphant, or the Kingdom of Christ enlarged beyond the narrow
bounds which have been wont to be set to it. By Ed. Lane.

14. Du Moulin's Reflections reverberated, being a full answer to the damning
Doctrine of Dr. Lewis Du Moulin: also, a Confutation of Edmund Hickeringill's
railing against the Ecclesiastical Courts. By E. Lane, in 4o. Price 1 s. 6 d.

15. Responsio Valedictoria ad secundam Sandii Epistolam, etc. per Sam.
Gardener, S. T. D. in 8o. price 1 s. 6 d.

16. Introductions to the Sacrament, being more easy and plain Rules for the
Holy Communion than any yet Extant. By L. Addison, Dean of Lichfield; price 6
d.bound.

LAW.
1. THE Jurisdiction of the Authority of Court-Leets, Court Barons, Court
Marshalsea, etc. together with the most necessary learning of Tenures, and all
their Incidents of Essoyns, etc. with the Return and Forms of several Original
and Judicial Writs, now in use, relating to Writs of Error, Writs of false
Judgment, and other proceedings of frequent use in the Courts of Westminster:
by J. Kitchen of Grays Inn Esquire To which is added Brevia selecta, being a choice
Collection of Special Writs; the fifth Edition, in octavo. price 6 d.

2. Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae, Author Francis Clarke, in 12o. price 1
s.

3. The Reports of Sir Henry Hobart, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, folio.
price 10 s.

4. Formulae been placitandi, a Book of Entries, containing Variety of Choice
Precedents: by W. Brown, in two Parts, folio.

5. The 2, 3, and 4th. Parts of the Institutes of the Laws of England; by Sir
Ed. Coke, folio. price 30 s.

6. Officina Brevium: Select and approved Forms of Judicial Writs, and other
Process, with their Returns and Entries in the Court of Common Pleas: as also
Special pleadings to Writs, folio.

7. Young Clark's Guide, in four parts, or an exact Collection of choice
English Presidents, octavo.

8. A Dialogue betwixt a Student and a Philosopher about the Common Law of
England; by Thomas Hobs of Malm^bury, in octavo.

9. The Reports in the Kings Bench, Checquer, and Common Pleas, by the late
Lord Keeper Littleton, in folio; printed 1683, not one Case printed in any
other Book of Reports: price 12 s. 6 d.

10. The Complete Solicitor, Entering Clark, and Attorney, fully instructed in
the Practice, Methods, and Clarkship of all his Majesty's Courts, etc. 8o. 1683.

HISTORY.
1. AN Institution of general History, or the History of the World; being a
complete body thereof, in two Volumes, by W. Howel, now Chancellor of Lincoln,
in folio.

2. Historical Collections, being an account of the Proceedings of the four
last Parliaments of Qu. Elizab. by H. Townend Esquire; in folio.

3. Scarron 's Comical Romance, being an Historical account of a company of
Stage Players, full of variety of Novels, rare Adventures, amorous Intreagues,
etc. being both witty and pleasant, in fol.

4. Popish Cruelties, being an account of the Treasons of Dr. Purry against Qu.
Eliz. with his Confession of it at his Trial, and his denial at his Execution;
folio, price 1 s.

5. The Life of Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury, written by himself in Latin; since
translated into English, in folio, price 6 d.

6. An Historical Narration of Heresy, with an account of the Punishments
thereof, by Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, in folio, price 6 d.

7. Megalopsichy, being a particular and exact account of the last 17 years of
Qu. Elizabeth's Reign, both Military and Civil; the first written by Sir W.
Monson, one of the said Queens Admirals; the second written by H. Townsend Esquire
a Member of her last Parliament. Wherein is a true and faithful Relation of all
the expeditious attempts, designs, successes, and errors, both of the English
and Spanish, in the Wars from the Year 1585, to the said Queens Death. With a
full account of the eminent Speeches and Debates, etc. in the said Time. To
which is added, Dr. Parry's Trial in the Year 1584. All written at the time of
the Actions by Persons that were eminently acting therein, folio, price bound
10 s.

8. A Voyage into the Levant, being a Relation of a Journey lately performed
from England to Grand Cairo, by Sir Hen. Blunt, 12o. price 1 s.

9. A Description of Candia, with an exact account of the last Siege and
Surrender of it to the Turks, in octavo, price bound 1 s.

10. A Discourse of the Dukedom of Modena, containing the original Antiquity
etc. of that Dukedom, in 4o. price 6 d.

11. The Travels of Ulysses, how he went to Hell and came back again, etc. by
Tho. Hobbs, price 1 s.

12. The Present State of London, containing the Antiquity, Fame, Walls,
Rivers, Gates, Churches, Bridge, with the Customs and Infranchizements: by J.
Bridal, Esquire. price 1 s.

13. The Life and Death of Mahomet, being the first estate of Mahometism,
showing all the designs that that Impostor Mahomet had to carry on and settle
the Turkish Religion; written by L. Addison, D.D. price 1 s. 6 d.

14. The Connection, being Collections of some principal Matters in the Reign of
King James, being the time that nothing of this Nature is printed, being
betwixt the end of Megalopsichy, or the last seventeen years of Qu. Elz. and
the beginnings of Mr. Rushworth, Heath, Nalson, Whitlock, and others, price 1
s. 6 d.

15. The Moors baffled, being a discourse of the Government of Tangier, under
the Earl of Tiviot; showing the Subtilty and Policies of both Parties, written
by Dr. Addison, who lived there many Years: price 6 d. 4o.

The whole Series of the Plot; being the Journal Book of the House of Lords in
the time of the last Popish Plot. 8o.

17. All the Works of Homer, both Illiads and Oddyses, translated out of Greek
into English, by Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, price 5 s. 6. d.

18. Considerations on the Loyalty, Religion, Manners, and Reputation of Tho.
Hobbs, 8o. price bound 1 s.

19. The Memoires, and rare Adventures of Henrietta Sylvia Moliere, a great
Lady in France, now living: written by her self, in six Parts, in French, and
now translated into English. price 4 s.

20. Tho. Hobbs Angli Malmsb. Vita, being an account of Mr. Hobbs, of the Books
he wrote, of the Times when, and the occasion thereof, of the Books and Authors
against him, of his Conversation, Acquaintance, etc. part wrote by himself, the
rest by Dr. B. in octavo, printed 1681.

21. Behemoth, being the History of the Civil Wars of England, and the Councels
and Artifices by which they were carried on from 1640 to 1660, printed now from
his own perfect Copy, in which is many Pages more than was in the former
Counterfeit Editions, none of which Editions before this, had less than a
thousand Faults in them, whole lines left out in a hundred Places, which did
extremely pervert the sense of the Author Tho. Hobbs.

22. The Tracts of Mr. Tho. Hobbs of Malmsb. in 2 Vol. in oct. gathering Nine
of his Treatises together, which are also to be had single, viz. 1. His Life,
in Latin. 2. His Considerations on his Loyalty, Religion, etc. 3. His Art of
Rhetoric, in English. 4. His Dialogue about the Common Law of England. 5. His
ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy. 6. His Civil Wars of England, the perfect
Edition. 7. His Historical Narration of Heresy. 8. His Answer to Bishop
Bramhal in Defense of his Leviathan. 9. His seven Problems, with an Apology for
his Writings to the King, price bound 12 s.


