Dreadful NEVVES From Wilsthire and Norfolk. Read in the House of Commons
upon Saturday last.

Wherein is declared the proceedings of the Marquess of Hartford and the Lord
Seymore, in the County of Wiltshire: and the resolution of the Inhabitants
concerning the said Lords.

Also the resolution of the Earl of Lindsey, Lord General of his Majesty's
forces, concerning the raising of forces in Norfolk.

With the Parliaments determination therein.

Aug: 6 HEN. ELSING. Cler. Parl.

Printed for John Smith, 1642.

Dreadful News from Wilsthire and N^rfolke, read in the House of Commons upon
Saturday last. Wherein is declared the proceedings of the M^^qu^sse of
H^rtford, and the Lord Seymore, in the County of Wiltshire, and ^he resolution
of the inhabitants of that County concerning the ^a^d Lords.
Also the resolution of the Earl of Lindsey Lord General of his Majesty's
forces, concerning the raising of forces in Norfoke: with the Parliaments
determination therein.
THe distractions and distempers of this Kingdom are now more apparently
known then ever they have been formerly, and begin to claim things which
formerly would not b^ granted: they do^ also b^gin to (...) mo^e and more over
the distressed inhabitants, which strikes terror and amazement to the
beholders. This is the malignant party which began these dreadful times, whose
hearts seek and thirst after blood, and whose alms tend to no other then to
ruin them, the upholders and wel-wishers of Gods true Religion, and to bring
in their own popish and idolatrous ceremonies. They never sought the
destruction and ruin of this Kingdom so much till the Pillar of the
Commonwealth assembled together, I mean this our happy and worthy Assembly,
which by Gods divine providence were called together, and united in body, and
have since their sitting discovered many hell-bred plots and conspiracies, and
have found out many delinquents which were enemies to the Commonwealth.

This malignant party has so far prevailed with his Majesty, that they have
raised diverse troops in a warlike manner, and have endeavored to put the
commission of Array in execution in diverse Counties in this Realm, as for
example may appear in these following particulars.

Upon the twenty eight of July, there a Messenger came to the House of Commons
informing them that the Marquess of Hartford, and the Lord Seymor, have made
great disturbance in Wiltshire by endeavoring to get the Commission of Array
in execution, and in attempting to seize upon their Magazine, but they were
opposed and most courageously resisted by the greatest part of the County.
Therefore there is no question but the ordinance of Parliament will be obeyed
in that County, by reason they stand generally affected to the Common weal,
and will by no means give way nor suffer the Commission of Array shall be put
in execution.

Therefore it is thought that his Majesty will go in person to that county,
and put the same in execution: for it is credibly reported that he is resolved
to come.

News from Norfolk.
THere was also news brought from Norfolk to the House of Commons, informing
them that the Earl of Lindsey Lord General of his Majesty's forces has sent a
Gentleman with a warrant to lie in Norfolk, to beat up drums for the raising
of Volunteers which pretends they are entertained for the s^f^ty of his
Majesty's person, and both Houses of Parliament, whereupon the Houses taking
into consideration the great danger that might ensue thereby, resolved, and
ordered that the said Captain should be sent for as a delinquent, and the
County to have information not to raise any men upon such summons.

They have also had information that there have been great disturbances in
diverse other Counties about the said Commission of Array, being endeavored to
put in execution in some other places where the Ordnance to the Militia has
a^re^dy too^e ^l^c^ they (...) time in debate thereof, ordered, that the Members
of the house o^ Commons, serving for the Counti^s where such disturbances have
been, should go down^ and take order for the putting of the Militia i^
execution, to preserve the peace of the Counties against all that shall oppose
them, according to the Order of both Houses.

FINIS.

