Sacred Chronology, Drawn by Scripture Evidence al-along that vast body of
Time, (containing the space of almost four thousand Years) From the Creation of
the WORLD, to the Passion of our Blessed SAVIOR.

By the help of which alone, sundry Difficult Places of Scripture are unfolded:
and the meanest Capacity may improve that holy Record with abundance of delight
and profit: being enabled thereby to refer each several History and material
Passage therein contained to its proper Time and Date.

By R. D. M. D.

1 Pet. 1.10, 11. Of which Salvation the Prophets have enquired and searched
diligently, who prophesied of the Grace that should come unto you.

Searching what or what manner of Time the Spirit of Christ which was in them
did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the
glory that should follow.

LONDON, Printed by James and Joseph Moxon, for Stephen Bowtell, at the Sign of
the Bible in Pope's Head Alley. 1648.

To the Worshipful My much Honored Father Roger Drake, Esquire. My Honored
Uncle Tho. Burnell, Esquire.

Worshipful and much Honored,
ITs not the desire of Protection (the common Theme of such Epistles) but sense
of duty and the bond of gratitude puts me upon this Inscription. Truth needs
no Patron, Error deserves none. To wave therefore such complements; My design
in this Prologue is a thankful acknowledgement of that great debt brought upon
me by each of you, which I can never satisfy. To the one I owe (under God) my
being, and well being; to the other, the dearest Companion of my Life; to both
my Name and Posterity. Unworthy were I either of life or name, should I not
endeavor (according to my poor model) to perpetuate their being and memory,
to whom I am an eternal debtour for both. This only were motive enough to
extort a public acknowledgement. But I cannot smother in silence an other
Favor (shall I say not inferior to either of the former? Gods blessing upon
poor and unworthy endeavors may make it far superior) that in the last
great turn of my Life, wherein I seemed unto many a sign and a wonder, by
relinquishing that Honorable Profession of Physic, to attend upon an higher
Calling (though very mean in the eyes of the World) neither of you did
interpose to divert me from that design, though carnal arguments were not
wanting to have made each of you improve your utmost Authority for the
stifling of such a motion in the very birth. I am not ignorant under what
extreme contempt and discouragement the Ministry lies at present: Nor can I be
so stupid as not to apprehend how my own credit lies at the stake, as if
Consciousnes of inabilitie in the practice of Physic made me digress to the
function of the Ministry. For the answering of which cavil I am not very
solicitous, but willingly in this point lay my credit at their feet who excel
in that faculty both at home and abroad, and upon former trial made, know best
what to judge. But certainly had consciousnes of inabilitie diverted me from
Physic, I should have had but very poor encouragement to the Ministry, which
as it is far more difficult than Physic or any other Faculty in its own
nature, so considering the infinite discouragements both from without and
within, I had little ground to hope it would prove more easy or advantageous
than the practice of Physic, especially since this and other callings gain
much credit and profit by faithfullnes and diligence; but the Ministry never
looses more with the world than when its exercised with most pains and
faithfulness. For my own part, as the former pomp and splendor of the Clergy
did not entice me, so the present outward baseness thereof does not discourage
me; but silencing all carnal Objections, I desire to be faithful unto him that
has called me, and so to walk in this weighty employment, as at lust (through
Gods mercy) I may give up a comfortable account; for which I beg your earnest
Prayers, and rest

From my Study this 14. of June. 1648. Your dutiful and loving Son and Nephew,
ROGER DRAKE.

THE PREFACE.
AS all the Promises, Prophesies, Ceremonies, Genealogies, etc. had a special
reference unto Jesus Christ, as their body, center, end, accomplisher; so does
this our Chronology, which begins in the first and ends in the second Adam: To
him we desire to conduct the Reader, and there to leave him, even with Christ,
who is the only aim, hope, and rest of all true Believers.

The design of the Author was as much as may be, to find out Truth, for his
own satisfaction, and to clear up truth unto the meanest capacities, who by the
help of this poor little piece, may in the cast of an eye find out almost
infinite Truths, which without the help of these parallel Tables will happily
puzzle the best Chronologers, and be almost impossible for meaner capacities to
collect by their own industry.

By this it will appear, that innumerable (and that most solid) consequences
may be enforced from Scripture grounds, which yet appear not in the surface of
the Text, but may be dug out of the Mine of the Scriptures by pious study
and industry. And in a word, By virtue of this help, thou may read the
whole Scripture with abundance of delight and profit, as being able to refer
every remarkable passage to its proper time and Date. Who knows not how
necessary Chorography and Chronology are to History, from which, if you
abstract Time and Place, it seems to be without Head or Tail, and sounds more
like a Fable then a true Narrative.

For thy better understanding and improving the ensuing Chronological Tables,
know that the Norma or Compass, by which we steer in measuring that vast
body of Time, from the Creation unto Christ) is the lives of the Patriarchs,
Kings and Prophets, as they ly single or parallel together: (which indeed are
well styled, by learned Broughton, The Day star of the Narration,) and
afterward, the years of captivity and Daniels seventy weeks of years, which
we fully believe do expire with the death of Christ. Every page contains seven
weeks, that is nine and forty years, in which, where the lives are single or
thin, we note the succession of them, two, three or four times in the same
page: yea in the first page, the line of Adams life is noted five times; one
hundred and thirty years of his life being past before any Patriarch is joined
as parallel with him. In the next column to their lives, (either single or
parallel) are noted the Sabatical years, or the weeks of the world, the letter
[S] being affixed to the top of the colume: and in the same colume, immediately
under the letter [S] are noted the Jubilies of the World; and afterward of
Canaan, which run parallel with the Jubilees of the World. In the third colume
noted at the top with the letter [W] you have the years of the World, marked at
every ten years distance.

The hundred and twenty years of Gods patience to the old World spoke of in
Genesis 6.3. is noted page 25. in a distinct colume, to page 27. then follows a
new Era or Period of time from the Flood, which happened Anno Mundi 1657. and
page 36. a New period of the Promise, and another of Circumcision in the same
page: and page 45. is noted the Era of the Lamb or Passover: and in the next
page the Era of Canaan entered. Page 54. is noted the Era of Salomons Temple:
and page 55. the Era of the division, when the Kingdom was rent from Solomon
in Rehoboham, and ten Tribes were given to Jeroboam. All these seven periods of
time, (besides that of the Creation,) are famous in Scipture; and are noted
distinctly in their several columns, as they fall in one after another, being
prefixed before the columns of the Patriarchs, etc. Besides those three great
Aeraes or Periods, so famous in profane Chronology, namely, Era Olympica,
Vrbis conditae and Nabonassaris, noted page 59. and 60.

These things being premised, it will not be difficult for the Reader to find
out, in what year of the World, or in what year of those famous Periods, any
remarkable passage fell out in Scripture: yet the better to help the Reader, I
have given him a view of altogether in the ensuing draught.

W. Adam 130 130 Seth 105 235 Enos 90 325 Kenan 70 395 Mahalaleel 65 460 Jared
162 622 Enoch 65 687 Methusalah 187 874 Lamech 182 1056 Noah 502 1558 Shem 100
1658 Arphaxad 35 1693 Selah 30 1723 Eber 34 1757 Peleg 30 1787 Reu 32 1819
Serug 30 1849 Nahor 29 1878 Terah 130 2008 Abraham 100 2108 Isaac 60 2168
Jacob 91 2259 Joseph 110 2369 Void 59 2428 Moses 120 2548 Joshuah 17 2565
Othniel 40 2605 Ehud and Shamgar 80 2685 Deborah 40 2725 Gideon 40 2765
Abimelech 3 2768 Tolah 23 2791 Jair 22 2813 Jephtah 6 2819 Ibsan 7 2826 Elon 10
2836 Abdon 8 2844 Samson 20 2864 Eli 40 2904 Samnel and Saul 40 2944 David 40
2984 Solomon 40 3024 Division 390 3414 Captivity 51 3465 Daniels weeks 490
3955

Add to these the seven famous Aeraes, mentioned in the Scripture.

W. From the Creation to the Flood, 1656 1656 Promise 422 2078 Circumcision 29
2107 Passover 401 2508 Canaan 40 2548 Temple 440 2988 Division 36 3024

The Reader may happily wonder, why in this Table I note but fifty one years of
the captivity of Babylon. The reason is, because nineteen years current of
those seventy years run parallel with the nineteen last of Ezekiels three
hundred ninety years, containing the space from the division, to the Captivity
of Zedekiah, and the burning of Solomon's Temple. See Ezekiel, 4.5. Substract
nineteen out of seventy years, there rests fifty one years, the just space of
the Captivity, from the 11. of Zedekiah ending; which indeed was the third
Captivity: the first happening in the fourth of Jehoiakim: the second, about the
11. of Jehoiakim ending.

Take one or two instances to clear the use of the foregoing directions, for a
right understanding of the parallel lives in the Chronological Tables.

Adam lived to see eight Patriarchs, namely till Lamech was fifty six year old.
I would know how old each of the Patriarchs were, when Lamech was born. For
answer, turn to page 12. You shall find that at the birth of Lamech, Adam was
eight hundred seventie and four years old. Seth, seven hundred forty and four
years old. Enos, six hundred thirty and nine years old. Kenan, five hundred
forty and nine years old. Mahalaleel, four hundred seventy and nine years old.
Iared, four hundred and fourteen years old. Enoch, two hundred fifty and two
years old. Methuselah, one hundred eighty and seven years old. All those years
of their lives lying in one parallel line, (from the left hand to the right)
with the year of Lamecks birth, which fell out toward the end of the hundred
twenty and fifth week of the world, each week containing the space of seven
years. By the same rule you may find out the concent of any of their years, and
that in effect, as certainly as if the Scripture had said in express terms,
that when Lamech was born, Adam was eight hundred seventy and four years old,
etc. Which yet must not be understood to a month and day, (since it is not
probable all the Patriarchs were born in one and the same month and day of the
year) but that a great part of each of their years ran parallel; as happily,
nine, ten, or eleven months. And this Latitude must needs be granted us,
because the Scripture notes only the year, not the month and day in which
each Patriarch was born, and where the Holy Ghost is silent, we must not be
curious. Its enough for us to be as wise as God would have us; Nay, I am
confident, not all the skill of all the men in the world, from the beginning to
the end of the world, will be able to find out all Truths contained in
Scripture, either directly, or by consequence: but the full opening of the Book
of Scripture, and the Book of Providence, will be a great part of the Saints
work and happiness in Heaven. So that we may well conclude with David, Psalm.
119.96. That Gods commandment is exceeding broad. If the Chronology of
Scripture, (one of its meanest parts) contain almost infinite consequences;
what shall we think of the whole Scripture? which though never so often read,
yet still (like God the Author) affords us new varieties, so as at every
reading you shall observe some thing which you knew not before. Express places
are like ripe fruit that may be eaten presently, but consequences are like the
fruit in the seed, or like fire in the flint virtually, not formally in the
Text: yet as sure as that which is in express terms, so the deduction be right.
For instance, Genesis 5.3. the Scripture says expressly, Adam was an hundred and
thirty years old, and begat Seth: from whence I infer that if Adam were an
hundred and thirty years old at Seths birth, then he was an hundred thirty and
five years old, when Seth was five years old; and a hundred forty and five
year old, when Seth was fifteen years old, etc. because five years being added
to an hundred and thirty make just a hundred and thirty five years, and fifteen
years being added to 130 make an hundred and forty five years. Yet its no
where said in Scripture, that Adam was an hundred and five years old, when Seth
was five years old, etc. only its proved by consequence, by way of syllogism,
whereof one Proposition is grounded upon express Scripture, the other upon
sense and experience; from both which infallible premises the conclusion must
flow of necessity, and cannot be denied. I clear it thus by an hypotheticall
syllogism. If Adam were an hundred and thirty five years old when Seth was
born, then he was an hundred and thirty five years old when Seth was five years
old. Adam was an hundred and thirty years old. when Seth was born, Ergo, he was
an hundred thirty and five years old when Seth was five years old. The minor or
antecedent is express in Scripture, only its noted under the phrase of
begetting; whence we may probably guess, that Adam begat at the beginning of
his hundred and thirtieth year, and Seth was born about the end of the same
year: and so for the rest of the Patriarchs. Now to prove that all the perallel
lives of the Patriarchs are set right, substract the years of the Son out of
the Fathers age in the same line, and the remainder will be the just age of the
Father, when he begat that Son. To take the former instance of Lamechs birth,
Methuselah was a hundred eighty and seven years old when he begat Lamech; at
the same time ( Enoch Methuselahs father) was two hundred fifty and two years
old. How prove I that will you say? Why, substract a hundred and eighty seven
out of two hundred and fifty two years, there rests sixty five years, the just
age of Enoch when he begat Methuselah. Again, substract two hundred fifty and
two years, (the age of Enoch) out of four hundred and fourteen, (the age of
Jared at the same time;) there rest a hundred sixty and two years, the just age
of Iared when he begat Enoch. There is the same reason of all the Parallel
lives that run in a straight line from Father to Son. By this rule I conclude
the Parallels are set right, and a man but meanly versed in Arithmetic, may
with abundance of delight upon occasion prove any of them.

There is the same reason of the eight famous periods mentioned in Scripture;
to wit, Of the Creation, Flood, Promise, Circumcision: The Paschal Lamb, the
entrance of Canaan, the Foundation of Solomon's Temple, and the division or
rending of the ten Tribes from Rehoboam. For by virtue of these Tables you may
in the cast of an eye know in what year of any of these periods, any memorable
accident fell out; If you can but tell in what year of a Patriarch, King,
Priest or Prophet it happened. To instance in Iosiahs Passover, which was kept
in the eighteenth year of his reign; at which time also Ezekiels forty years
begin, mentioned Ezekiel 4.6. and end with the fourth or last captivity in the
three and twentieth year of Nebuchadnezzar, Ier. 52.30. see page 62. f. you
shall find it fell out three thousand three hundred seventy and nine years from
the Creation; one thousand seven hundred twenty and three years after the
Flood; one thousand three hundred and one year after the Promise; one thousand
two hundred seventy and two years after the Circumcision; eight hundred seventy
and one year after the Passover; eight hundred thirty and one years after the
entrance into Canaan; three hundred ninety and one year after the foundation of
the Temple; and three hundred fifty and five years after the division. Now to
prove that Iosiahs Passover happened in those very years of the forenamed
periods, substract the latter and lesser number from the greater number
immediately foregoing, and you have the just space of time between it and the
Era immediately preceding, which may assure you they stand right. To clear
this by the former instance, Iosiahs Passover happened three hundred fifty and
five years after the division: this may be proved by ocular demonstration from
the several weeks of years, or ten years spaces of each period reaching unto
that date rightly observed and reckoned; and so may all the rest: In which you
may be further confirmed by substracting the lesser period out of the greater
immediately foregoing, which leaves the just distance between those two
periods: Substract then three hundred fifty and five out of three hundred
ninety and one, there rest thirty six years between the Temple and division.
Again, substract three hundred ninety and one out of eight hundred thirty and
one, there rest four hundred and forty years between Canaan entered, and the
Temple founded. Yet further, substract eight hundred thirty and one, out of
eight hundred seventy and one, there rest forty years between Canaan entered
and the Passover: and three hundred ninety and one, out of eight hundred
seventy and one, there rest four hundred and eighty years between the Paschal
Lamb and the Temple founded. 1 Kings 6.1. A very memorable period, and of great
use in sacred Chronology.

Again, substract eight hundred seventy and one out of one thousand two hundred
seventy and two, there rest four hundred and one years between Circumcision and
the Passover. And if yet you substract one thousand two hundred seventy and
two, out of one thousand three hundred and one, there rest twenty nine years
between the Promise and Circumcision. Substract yet further, one thousand three
hundred and one, out of one thousand seven hundred twenty three, there rest
four hundred twenty two years between the Flood and the Promise made to
Abraham. Lastly, substract one thousand seven hundred twenty three out of three
thousand three hundred seventy nine, there rest one thousand six hundred fifty
six years between the Creation and the Flood, which happened Anno mundi, 1657.
current: but I reckon these great periods by complete years, which periods are
so exactly noted in every page, as upon strict examination thou shall find they
fail not one year in observing their true distances one from another. Consult
then, but the Table of those great periods set down for thy ease in the second
page of the Preface, and then to prove the true site of every Period, substract
the lesser (as before) from the greater; thou will find the just distance of
years between each of them so punctually observed; as will not only discover
their truth, but also breed in thee abundance of delight and profit. And in
truth, if but one year in any of these parallels be set false, all that follow
after it in the same connection, must needs be false also. By these Tables thou
may perceive that Shem, Arphaxad, Selah or Eber, (though most probably Shem)
any of them might be Melchizedeck, since every of them lived beyond the birth
of ishmael; and one of them, namely Eber outlived Abraham himself. Now Ishmael
was not born till after Melchizedeck met Abraham, and that probably some years.
In a word, almost infinite varieties of Truth may with ease be found out by the
help of these Tables, which without them would be very difficult for the best
Chronologiers to fathom.

One thing more I cannot pass without honoutable mention, namely that famous
and most artificial Julian Period, made up of the three Cycles multiplied one
by the other. The whole Period contains seven thousand nine hundred and eighty
years. Let us suppose it to be a solid body of time, having three dimensions;
the length twenty eight, which is the circle of the Sun: the breadth nineteen,
which is the circle of the Moon, or the Golden Number: The thickness fifteen,
which is the circle of the Indiction. Multiply twenty eight the length, by
nineteen the breadth; and the product of both these (five hundred thirty two,
the Dyonysian Period) by fifteen the thickness, the total is seven thousand
nine hundred and eighty, the Julian Period. The use of it is excellent in
Chronology; for by it alone being rightly set, you may find out the year of
the world, or any or all of the three Cycles: And the three Cycles being given,
you may find any year of the world, or of the Julian Period. Chronologers
suppose it to begin seven hundred sixty four years before the Creation. The
reason is, because they take it for granted, that our Saviors Conception or
Birth, happened Anno. Mundi 3949. In which year of the world the Cycle of the
Sun was nine, the Golden Number one, the Roman Indiction three. Now these
three Cycles concur in no year of the Julian Period, but the four thousand
seven hundred and thirteenth, which therefore runs parallel with Anno Mundi,
3949. which being subtracted from four thousand seven hundred thirteen, their
rest seven hundred sixty four years, the just date of the Julian Period when
the world began. Happily upon this supposition of our Saviors Birth, Anno Mundi,
3949. do our Almanack-makers ground the change of the three Cycles every year,
as they may find out the Epact, by multiplying the Golden Number by eleven, and
dividing it by thirty the common age of the Moon, the remainer after division
is the Epact, and if naught remain then the Epact is thirty. For example, This
year of our Lord being 1646. the Golden Number is thirteen, which multiplied by
eleven, the Product is one hundred forty three, and this being divided by
thirty, there rest twenty three, the Epact for this year, according to the
Julian Account. In like manner to find out the three Cycles; Suppose for
present our Savior was born Anno Mundi, 3949. add to it the year of our Lord,
1646. and 764. the date of the Julian Period before the world began, the total
is 6359. which year of the Julian Period runs now parallel with the persent
year of our Lord, 1646. and with the present year of the World, 5595. according
to the former supposition. Now to find out the three Cycles; Divide six
thousand three hundred ninety five, the present Julian Period by twenty eight,
your remainder is three. Again, divide it by nineteen, your remainder is
thirteen: Once more divide it by fifteen, your remainder is fourteen; so that
you have three for the Cycle of the Sun; thirteen for the Cycle of the Moon,
and fourteen for the Cycle of the Indiction this present year, according to the
ordinary account. Now because we conceive that our Savior was born, An. Mundi
3919. ending, thirty years sooner than the ordinary account; we must of
necessity either alter the three Cycles, or begin the date of the Julian Period
thirty years sooner than the ordinary Account, namely, four hundred ninety four
years before the Creation: which as it is easy and safe, so its warranted by
the example of the best Chronologers, who alter the date thereof, as themselves
think best. Nor is there any absurdity in it (so they keep to that date they
set themselves) since this Period is not Natural, but Artificial: which is one
reason I note it not in my Chronological Tables. Let us then take it for
granted, that our Savior was born Anno Periodi Iul. 4713. Let the year of our
Saviors Birth be what it will in regard of the age of the World; whether 3949.
or 3919. or any other, be sure to fasten it and make it run parallel with the
four thousand seven hundred and thirteenth year of the Julian Period, and the
three Cycles will be still the same without variation, as they are now in the
ordinary Account, and have been reckoned to be from the Birth of our Savior:
And better a great deal alter the Julian Period, than the three Cycles, which
might happily breed great confusion in the notation of Time: It being in this
case, as it is in diverse terms of Art, which though very improper, yet must be
kept; least by loosing the terms, we confound our selves, and lose also the
sense of Authors.

But to pass this, and to draw to a conclusion. The Weeks and Years of the
World, as well as the Jubilees, may be proved (as the rest) by ocular
Demonstration, and likewise do mutually prove each other. For instance, page
73. f. The first year of our Saviors life runs parallel with Anno Mundi, 3920.
and with the last or Sabatical year of the five hundred sixtieth week of the
World immediately foregoing the eightieth Jubilee. Now to prove they are set
right; multiply 560. by 7. which is a weeks of years, or 80. by 49. which is a
Jubilee containing 7. weeks of years: the Product of each is 3920. years, the
just age of the World when our Savior was one year old. Or divide that year of
the World by 49. the Quotient is 80. the Jubilee which immediately followed our
Saviors Birth: As also if you divide that week of the World in which our
Savior was born, by 7 which makes a week of years, the Quotient is still
eighty as before: whence you may certainly conclude they are all rightly set.
The same reason is there of any year, week, or Jubilee of the world, which by
this means may in like manner be proved with no less certainty, then delight,
by any who has but so much skill in Arithmetic as will enable him to add,
substract, multiply, and divide.

This I conceive may be sufficient for the right understanding and use of the
Tables, the benefit whereof thou will better value by thy own experience in the
study of Chronology, then I have either leisure or pleasure to instruct thee.
What truth thou findst in them, own it as a beam of Light sent from the only
Fountain of Truth: what errors, excuse and pardon them in the Author, who did
his honest endeavor with no mean pains to find out Truth, though he neither
can nor dare exempt himself from the common condition of man, namely to be
subject to error: nor does he desire thee any further to trust him in this
particular, then he is able to make good from solid Stripture grounds every
parcel and link of this Chronological chain, from the first to the second Adam,
with whom he leaves thee, as the only center of rest and happiness; and who,
after all the labors and sufferings of his people, will give them Eternal
Rest, and Immortal Glory.

POSTSCRIPT.
THe Reader may happily think me overconfident in my assertions about Points so
intricate and controversal: To which I shall answer only thus much. First,
that the grounds upon which I build, upon serious and impartial consideration,
seem to me irrefragable; besides the harmony of all the Parcels one with
another, and especially the perfect consent of the seventie years captivity,
and Daniels weeks with the weeks of the World. Secondly, for the
superstructure: if the foundation fall not, I have reason to be confident
thereof, since its evident both by ocular Demonstration, and by the common
Principles of Arithmetic, by which it may be proved as firmly and clearly, as
any sum or total may by examining the particulars; yet do I not presume to
bind any by my poor judgment, but he may by the help of these Tables follow
what date he please, by adding or substracting the just difference of years
between his and my Era. For example, He who believes Abraham was born when
Terah was seventie years old, Let him substract sixty years out of my date of
Abraham's birth, and he has the just year of the World, according to his own
account. Again, he who believes the Promise was made to Abraham, being seventy
five years old, Let him add five years to my date of the World, and he has his
own account, So of the rest. Its Truth I seek, and shall be willing to learn of
any, nor desire further to be credited than Truth shall bear me out.

DIFFICULTIES IN SACRED CHRONOLOGY, CONTROVERTED BY THE LEARNED.
1. SHem was neither Noah's firstborn nor youngest Son, as appears by comparing
Genesis 9.24. and 10.21. He was born then when Noah was (not five hundred but)
five hundred and two years old, as appears by the birth of Arphaxad, Genesis
11.10. Noah was six hundred and two years old two years after the Flood: At the
same time Shem was one hundred year old: substract one hundred out of six
hundred and two, there rest five hundred and two, the just age of Noah when
Shem was born. Japhet was the eldest, Shem the second, and Cham the youngest,
Genesis 9.24. Only Shem is first named for dignity, Genesis 5.32.

2. The Promise was made to Abraham in Vr, and not in Haran; when he was
seventy year old, and not seventy five. That it was not in Haran but in Vr,
appears by Acts 7.2, 3. that it was not when Abraham was seventy five year old,
is as evident; because he was but seventy five years old at his departure from
Haran, where yet he dwelt till his Fathers death, Acts 7.4. Genesis 12.4. Whence
by the way, note that Abraham was born (not the seventieth, but) the hundred
and thirtieth year of Terah at the soonest. He was seventie five year old when
Terah was two hundred and five year old at his death; substract seventie five
out of two hundred and five, there rest an hundred and thirty, the just age of
Terah when Abraham was born. Abraham then was not Terahs first born, but is
named first (as Shem was) for dignity, Genesis 11.26. Now to prove the Promise
was made when Abraham was seventie years old; Note that the Israelites went out
of Egypt (precisely to a night) at the end of four hundred and thirty years.
Exodus 12.40, 41. All which time Abraham and his seed sojourned in strange
Lands, and were afflicted. Four hundred years of this his seed was a
sojourner. Genesis 15.13. that is, Isaac and his Posterity. Acts 7.6. Isaac was
born (and so began to sojourn) when Abraham was an hundred years old. The four
hundred years then began at the end of Abraham's hundredth year, and end at the
going out of Egypt, at which time also the four hundred and thirty years
expire; and therefore must begin thirty years before the four hundred years,
that is, thirty years before Abraham was an hundred year old. Substract then
thirty out of an hundred, there rest seventie, the just age of Abraham when
the Promise was made to him in Vr: Whence its further evident the Promise was
made to him at Spring; namely, the fourteenth or fifteenth day of the Month
Abib. They who begin the four hundred years at Ishmaels mocking, besides a
plain error, leave us at great uncertainties, since there is no
Scripture-evidence at all when Ishmael mocked Isaac; and supposing (as they
would) five year after Isaacks birth, it makes but a difference of five years,
and the Era of the Promise five years later.

3. Concerning the Era or beginning of the Babylonish captivity. Note there
were four captivities: First, in Nebuchadnezzars first year which concurred
with the third and fourth year of Jehoiakim, Jer. 25.1. and Daniel 1.1. The
second, in the seventh year of Nebuchadnezzar. The third, in the eighteenth
year of Nebuchadnezzar. The fourth in the twenty third year of Nebuchadnezzar,
Jer. 52.28, 29.30. The Nations were to serve him, his son and his
grandchild, Jer. 27.7. That is, Nebuchadnezzar, Ev^lmerodach, and Belshazzar.
I see not then why the first captivity should not begin the seventie years, at
which time diverse of the Princes, and part of the Holy Vessels were carried to
Babylon, Dan. 1.2, 3. The desolation of Jerusalem, Dan. 9.2. then began, as
also of the whole land, and was at last accomplished under the fourth captivity
after the death of Gedaliah; so that the whole land lay waste not above forty
seven years, God in mercy so moderating that great affliction of his people.
They who begin the captivity at the carrying away of Iechonias, must of
necessity conclude, that some of the Vessels and Princes were held captive
above seventy years. And they who begin it not till the eleventh of Zedekiah,
go likewise against the words of the Prophet, Jer. 29.10. who foretold but
seventie years captivity to them that were carried away with Jechonias, of
which indeed about seven or eight years were past when they came to Babylon,
Jer. 25.1. and 27.6, 7. and Daniel 1.1.3.

4. The greatest controversy is about the beginning of Daniels seventy weeks.
Had not profane Chronology contradicted, none I think would have doubted but
that the seventy weeks of years began when the seventy years of captivity
ended. But the great difficulty is how to reconcile sacred and profane
Chronology. To me the Scripture seems to carry it strongly, that the seventy
weeks immediately followed the seventy years: which method ccordingly I have
followed in this Chronology, and that upon these grounds.

1. From the age of those who saw both Temples finished, Ezra 3.12. compared
with Haggai 2.3. Suppose they were but ten year old at Zedekiahs captivity, add
to that at least sixty two years of the seventy years captivity, beginning
eight years before, and to this an hundred and eleven years, from the first of
Cyrus, to the sixth of Darius Nothus, when the second Temple was finished.
These men must be at least an hundred eighty and three years old, and so exceed
the age of Isaac.

2. It appears further from the age of Ezra. his Father Seraiah, was slain by
Nebuchadnezzar in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, 2 King. 25.18.21. compared
with Ezra 7.1. and he with his brother Jehozadac went into captivity, 1 Chronicles
6.14, 15. Suppose now Ezra to be a posthuma proles, and that he was carried
captive in his mothers belly in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, you must make
him at least sixty two years old at the end of the captivity; (and according
to some sixty nine years old) after which he lived at least to the twentieth of
Artaxerxes Mnemon, as is evident by his being present at the dedication of the
wall Nehem. 12.36. For the building whereof, Nehemiah got leave of this King in
the twentieth year of his Reign, Nehem. 2.1. The same Ezra also preached under
the government of Nehemiah, Nehem. 8.1, 2. whose government lasted twelve
years, Nehem. 13.6. compared with Nehem. 2.1. to the 32. of Artaxerxes. Now in
what year of Nehemiah the wall was finished is uncertain. Suppose therefore
Ezra lived but to the end of the twentieth year of Artaxerxes (which is the
least can be imagined) from the first of Cyrus, to the twentieth of Artaxerxes
Mnemon is 136. years at least: to which add sixty two years of Eraes age under
the captivity, its apparent he lived at least an hundred ninety eight years,
which how probable, let any indifferent man judge.

3. From that speech of the Jews to our Savior, John 2.20. [ Forty and six
years was this Temple a building,] which answers patt with that of Daniel 9.25.
That from the Decree of Cyrus to Messiah should be seven weeks of years; which
cannot be understood of Messiah coming personally, but Typically. Now the
Temple being a principal Type of Christ, was finished in the midst of the
seventh week that is in the forty sixth year after the return, as Messiah,
whom it Typified, did both suffer, and was glorified in the midst of the
seventieth or last week, Dan. 9.26, 27. Others, who make it to be about an
hundred and eleven years from the foundation to the finishing of the Temple,
have no way to salve that speech of the Jews. John 2.20. but by flying to
several intervals wherein the building of the Temple laid dead, and so would
make us believe that forty six years were spent in actual building of the
Temple, which to me is improbable. For as they were laying the foundation, Ezra
3.8.10. and 4.1. The adversaries, whose malice would suffer them to loose no
time, began betimes to hinder them, partly by weakening their hands by suits of
Law, and partly by complaining to the King against them. Ezra, 4.4, 5.7.16. And
verse 24. its expressly said, the work ceased till the second year of Darius,
which agrees with Haggai 1.1. and Ezra 5. 1, 2. so that it is probable, the
work ceased from the laying of the foundation till the second year of Darius,
in whose sixth year it was finished Ezra 6.15. and so probably about five or
six years in actual building. And so by consequence that speech of the Jews
must be took in this sense, that from the foundation to the finishing of the
second Temple was but forty six years: and by proportion from the first of
Cyrus, to the sixth of Darius Nothus were not above forty seven years by
sacred Chronology, which yet by profane Chronology is an hundred and twelve
years. And in truth the Olympiads themselves, by which Historians measured the
raigns of their Kings, are much doubted and questioned by Plutarch in the very
beginning of his Numa p. 60. B.

4. From the answer of the Angel Gabriel to Daniel, Dan. 9.25. For first, the
Angel coming to instruct Daniel, certainly would speak to Daniels apprehension.
But Daniel could understand this command to build Jerusalem to proceed from no
other King but Cyrus, being well acquainted with the Prophecy of Esaias about
him: and had not Daniel undoubtedly understood it thus, he might well have
objected to Gabriel. I understand thus much indeed, that seventy weeks after
the going forth of the commandment, Messiah shall accomplish our redemption:
but unless you further satisfy me at what time precisely and from what King
this Decree shall be issued forth, I am little or nothing the wiser. To clear
it by another supposed instance, should the Spirit of God reveal to any that
precisely 40-years after the ruin of Antichrist the Turk shall be destroyed:
unless he be pleased withal to reveal in what year Antichrist shall be
destroyed; I could neither inform my self nor others directly when the Turk
shall he ruind. So it was in this case. The Angel came not to deceive Daniel,
but to inform him. Secondly, to prove from the Text that this must needs be the
command of Cyrus; The words in the original run thus. Understand that from the
going forth of the word to cause to return and to build Jerusalem, etc. The
word, (...) in Hiphil signifies properly to cause to return. From hence then I
argue; That Decree which at once commanded the captivity to return and to build
Jerusalem, that and that only began Daniels seventy weeks. But there was no
Decree of any King, but only of Cyrus that at once commanded both these. Ergo,
nor indeed could Daniel understand it of any other; that no other King
commanded both these is evident. Darius commanded to build the Temple, but
neither to return the captivity, nor to build the City. Artaxerxes gave
Nehemiah a Commission to repair the City, but not to return the captivity: The
same Artaxerxes gave Ezra Commission to return some Captives, but neither to
repair the City, nor to build the Temple. For proof of these three, see Ezrah
6.6, 7. Nehemiah 2.3.8. Ezra 7.13. Of all the Persian Kings (only Cyrus)
except Artaxerxes Mnemon, to whom yet the date can not agree, made a Decree,
First for returning the captivity: Secondly, for building the Temple, And
thirdly, for building of the City also. Ezra 1.2.3. Esaias 44.28. and 45.13. And
though no Decree of Cyrus be extant for building of Jerusalem, yet it is
evident by the Prophet in the forementioned places, that he did make a Decree
for the building of the City, as well as of the Temple: otherwise how could it
be said, He shall build my City: And that he should say of Jerusalem, thou
shall be built. No man is so mad to think Cyrus built it himself, but it was
built by his order and direction, as the Temple was built by Solomon. By all
which I think it may appear, that Daniels weeks began at the end of the
seventie years, and with the first of Cyrus.

I might add how improbable it is, that the Scripture should discover every
thing about Christ, save only the time when he should come into the world, etc.
(which yet is so material a circumstance) but we must be beholding to profane
Chronology for which as I showed before is doubtful, and might have been lost.
Had a Jew, or any other come to Daniel after his conference with Gabriel, Dan.
9. and asked him when Messiah should suffer. The answer had been ready out of
Daniel 9.25.27. in the midst of the seventieth or last week. But had the Jew
further replied, in what year of the world? (Let us only suppose now that the
first year of Cyrus, ran parallel with Anno Mundi, 3466.) The fourth year being
the midst of the last or seventieth week, that the four hundred eighty seventh
year current; I should conceive that Messiah was to suffer Anno Mundi, 3952.
Might not Daniel well have answered, I pray pardon me there, for to tell you
the Truth I know not whether the seventy weeks begin the first year of Cyrus,
or in the reign of some other King: and am still to seek in what year of the
world Christ shall suffer. By all which its apparent, That either the seventie
weeks began with the first of Cyrus, and the last of the Babilonish Captivity:
or else for all Gabriels vision, he was still ignorant when Christ should
suffer, as knowing not when the seventie weeks were to begin.

The next or fifth difficulty is about the Jubilees; which some make to contain
forty and nine, others fifty solid years. To me it seems probable they
contain but forty and nine solid years a piece, so that the fiftieth (or
Jubilee) year is the last of the preceding Jubilee, and the first of the
following Jubilee, and that upon this ground, because otherwise the course of
the Sabbatical years must needs be broken once every fifty years, by a year
added to every seven weeks of years (which make just forty and nine years) so
that the seventh week of the Jubilee must contain eight years, which is as
absurd as to say, a week contains eight days. Now whereas there are two sorts
of Jubilees, namely the Jubilees of the World, and the Jubilees of Canaan: the
question is, when the Jubilees of Canaan begin. Ordinarily they are reckoned
from the Conquest of the Land by Joshuah, that is about seven years after they
entered Canaan. To me it seems far more probable, they rather began the
September after Canaan was entered, Levit. 25.2. The Scripture says not when
you have Conquered, but when you come into the Land which I shall give you,
then shall the Land keep a Sabbath unto the Lord. The first Sabbath of years,
then began the Autumn after their entrance into Canaan (which they entered in
the Spring) in the tenth day of the seventh month. Seven of which Sabbaths
made forty and nine years, and so the fiftieth year, (or the year of Jubilee)
began on the tenth day of the seventh Month, and was proclaimed by sound of
Trumpet throughout all the Land in the very day of Atonement, Levit. 25.9, 10.
I conclude then that the fiftieth year after they entered Canaan, was the year
of Jubilee, and not the fifty seventh year (as some would have it) And after
this rate (as appears in my Chronology) the Jubilees of Canaan run parallel
with the Jubilees of the World, and are noted in the top of the Column that
contains the Sabbatical years. Yet to give satisfaction, I have noted in the
Column containing the years of the World, the Jubilees that contain fifty
solid years; and in the Column of the Sabbatical years, I have noted both the
Jubilees that began at their entrance, and also seven year after they entered
Canaan. Thus p. 53. in the top of the Column for the Sabbatical year, the
fifty ninth Jubilee of the World, and the seventh Jubilee of Canaan concur
with the eight and twentieth year of Elies government after my account: but
after the ordinary account the seventh Jubilee concurs with the thirty fifth
year of Ely. If we reckon fifty years to a Jubilee, the seventh Jubilee concurs
with the first year of Saul, as is noted in the same Column; the reason is
clear, because every Jubilee gains a year; and therefore the seventh Jubilee
must needs fall seven years later. In the same page my fifty and ninth Iubilee
concurs with the twenty eighth of Ely: but if we reckon fifty years to a
Jubilee, then the fifty eighth Jubilee of the world concurs with the thirty
sixth of Ely, 9. year later then the former: the reason is because a year is
gained in every Jubilee: and so the fifty eighth Jubilee containing fifty
years, falls later than the fifty ninth Jubilee containing but forty nine
years.

The sixth Difficulty, is about the Expiration or end of Daniels seventy weeks,
which some terminate with the death of Christ; others with the destruction of
Jerusalem: Daniel seems clearly to terminate them with the death of Christ,
Daniel. 9.24. by which he made reconciliation for sin, brought in everlasting
Righteousness, etc. Of which their return from Captivity was but a type and
shadow. Nor does it follow that the seventy weeks reach to the destruction of
Jerusalem, because mention thereof is made in this Prophecy. For besides that
the twenty fourth verse determines, the seventy weeks, in the Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension, of Christ: Its further evident by the several
parcels of the seventie weeks. verse 25, 26. seven weeks and sixty two weeks,
after which Messiah was to be cut off: seven and six two make sixty nine after
which, namely in the midst of the seventieth week, verse 27. Messiah by
offering up himself should cause the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease virtually,
they being of no force after the death of Christ, though they were in use (as
well as other Ceremonies) till the destruction of Jerusalem.

And though the Translatours divide the seven weeks, ( Daniel, 9.25.) by a
Colon from the 62. weeks in the same verse (following therein the custom of
the Hebrews, who usually make the Accent Athnac to serve for a Colon) as if the
seven weeks had proper reference to Messiah, and the sixty two weeks to the
building of the street and wall. Yet besides that this sense cannot agree with
the History; its evident that in diverse places of Scripture, the Accent Athnac
cannot express a Colon, nay scarce so much as a Comma: for proof whereof I
offer these places to the judgment of the Learned. Psalm 70.3, 4, 5. If you
count the Title of the Psalm for the first verse as the Hebrews do. Ps. 71.14.
and 79.6. and 84.4. and 86.2. and 72. last. and 1 Kings 8.17. And why then
should we in this place (namely Dan. 9.25.) take Athnac from a Colon, when as
the sense can as ill bear it here, as in any of the forementioned places? and
without a Colon, the sense is clear and direct, that from that Decree (as
before) to Messiah should be seven weeks, and sixty two weeks, that is just
sixty nine weeks, namely to that time in which he should begin his
Ministerial Office, in which he continued the first half of the last or
seventieth week; that is, three years and an half, and then by his death took
away the daily Sacrifice in its significancy and virtue: confirming the
Covenant the last half of that week by his Apostles, and after that rejecting
the Jews for contempt thereof, as learned Mede observes.

Let us then suppose (which to me seems to come nearest the Truth) that Daniels
weeks begin where the seventy years of Captivity ended. That is (according to
my Chronology) Anno: Mundi, 3466. Add to this four hundred and ninety years
contained in Daniels seventy weeks of years: The sum is three thousand nine
hundred fifty and five. Out of which substract three years and an half, there
rests just three thousand nine hundred fifty and two current, in which year of
the world (according to us) our Savior suffered.

Now because Chronologers place the death of Christ in the year of the world
3982. and the 202. Olympiad, or the 808. Olympic year, just thirty year later
then our date: the great difficulty will be how to reconcile this difference.
For salving whereof we must desire the Reader to take especial notice of that
grand error committed by many in sacred Chronology, who make the birth of
Abraham to fall out sixty years sooner than indeed it did: As supposing him to
be born in the seventieth year of his Father Terah; whereas indeed he was not
born till Terah was an hundred and thirty year old, as I have evidenced in the
second difficulty. Secondly, note that of this sixty years they loose five year
in the date of the Promise, which was made when Abraham was seventy, and not
seventy five year old (as I have cleared in the same Paragraph) and so with
them it falls five year later then with us. Thirdly, note further, that out of
this sixty they loose eight years more in the date of the Babylonish
Captivity, which with them falls out in the reign of Iechonias, but with us in
the third year ending, and the fourth year beginning of Iehoiakim, namely eight
year sooner with us then with them: to which add two years more, wherein we
differ from them occasionally in the raigns of the Kings, who sometimes reign a
few years with their Fathers, sometimes begin not their reign till after their
Fathers decease (as in the Chronology it self, we shall make plainly appear,
and desire no further to be credited, then we bring Scripture grounds for every
branch of our Chronology) I say, these five eight and two years being added
together, make fifteen years, which being subtracted from sixty, there rest
forty and five years, the just difference between their and our date of the
Babylonish Captivity: The Captivity falling with us, five and forty years
later then with them, and their date of our Saviors death falling thirty years
later then with us, Both which being added together, make up 75. years, the
space from the first year of Cyrus his universal Monarchy, and the 10. year of
Artaxerxes Longimanus, from which year to the death of Christ, they reckon 490.
years, and others reckon from the 7. year of the same Artaxerxes, who they
suppose gave Commission to Nehemiah, in the twentieth year of his Reign,
Nehemiah, 2.6.8.

Our return from captivity. An. M. 3466 Thence to the 10 of Artaxerxes
Longimanus. 74 Thence to the end of Daniels weeks, 490 Total] 4030

About which year or 4027. (if the half week be subtracted) our Savior
suffered, if their account be right: and therefore to make it even with our
account, substract the former 75. which contain the 45. years difference about
the captivity, and 30. years difference, about Christ's death, and three years
and a half for the last half week. There rest just 3952. being the year of the
world, in which according to us our Savior suffered. According to some these
75. years, should reach but to the seventh year of Artaxerxes Longimanus.

Their return 45. years sooner then ours. 3421 To the 10. of Artaxerx. Long. 74
To the end of Daniels, 70. weeks. 490 Total] 3985

Out of which, substract 3 years and a half from Daniels last half week. There
rests 3982. the year of the World, in which our Savior suffered according to
Chronologers, being just thirty years later then our account, which falls out
3952.

Our return from captivity. An. M. 3466 Thence to the 6. of Darius Nothus. 110
Thence to the end of Daniels weeks. 490 Total] 4066

About which time they who begin Daniels weeks at the 6. of Darius, should
make the destruction of Jerusalem, to fall out; or at least Anno Mundi, 4063.
current, supposing it happened in the midst of Daniels last week, but the former
111. being subtracted (the parcels whereof are 45. years difference, of the
capivitie. 30. years difference, of the death of Christ, and 36. years after
Christ's death to the destruction of Jerusalem) together, with 3 years and a
half for the last half week as before.

There rests just 3952. the year of the world, in which our Savior suffered,
according to our account.

Their return 45. years sooner then ours. 3421. Thence to the sixth of Darius
Nothus. 110. Thence to the end of Daniels 70. weeks. 490. Total] 4021.

Out of which substract 3. years and a half for Dan. last half week. there
rests 4018 current, in which year of the world Christ should suffer according
to them who begin Daniels weeks at the sixth of Darius, when the Temple was
finished; out of which 4018 substract 66. years, (the parcels whereof are 30.
y. difference about Christ's death, and 36. years after, to the destruction of
Jerusalem) There rests 3952 the just year of the world in which Christ suffered
according to our account.

With them, if Daniels weeks immediately succeeded the captivity, our Savior
should suffer An. m. 3907. (as is evident by adding 490. to 3420.) that is. 43.
year sooner then out date; if you substract from 3910. being the total, the 3.
years and a half for Daniels last half-week that is the twentieth year of his
reign with his father, but the tenth year of his sole reign. But how
unprobable this opinion is let the impartial Reader judge, and that because
Artax. Longim. was an enemy to the Jews and hindered the building of the Temple
Ezra 4.7.23. which to make good I argue thus. There were but three Kings of
Persia who had the name of Artaxerxes. First Ahasuerus the Husband of Queen
Hester, mentioned Ezra 4.6. and in the book of Hester: he was the same with
Xerxes: with this man's reign the date of Daniels weeks cannot agree. Secondly
In the twelfth year of his reign he plotted with Haman the ruin of the Jews,
Hoster 3.8. Thirdly, he reigned not full twenty one years; whereas its apparent
that he who gave Nehemiah commission reigned at least thirty two years, Neh.
13.6. The second was Artaxerxes Longimannus son to Xerxes mentioned as
before, Ez. 4.7. by whose means the building of the Temple was hindered till the
reign of Darius Nothus, Ezra. 4.23.24. But before his days (I mean before his
twentieth year) who gave Nehemiah commission the Temple was builded, as is
evident, Neh. 6.10, 11. and 13.4.9. where express mention is made both of the
Temple, and the chambers of Gods house. And therefore Nehemiahs commission must
needs be given by Artaxerxes Mnemon who was the third of that name, and
together with Darius Nothus, his father was piously affected toward the Jews
and furthered the building of the Temple, Ezra 6.14. and after the Temple was
built, he gave commsssion to Ezra in the seventh year of his reign, Ezra 7.1.
and lastly to Nehemiah in the twentieth year of his reign. Its remarkable of
this man as well as of Cyrus that he gave, First commission to build the
Temple, Ezra 6.14. Secondly to return part of the captivity Ezra 7.13. Thirdly
to build the City Jerusalem, Neh. 2.5.8. at least the wall of it. Yet from him
the date of Daniels weeks cannot be reckoned, since from the sixth of Darius
his father to the destruction of Jerusalem, (the utmost period of Daniels weeks
by all interpreters) there were but four hundred ninety years or at fathest
but three years and an half after, supposing Jerusalem was destroyed in the
midst of Daniels last week (as some would have it) So then we cannot reckon
Daniels weeks, either from the twentieth of Artax. (...) or Artax. (...) and if
any date hold it must be from Darius Nothus his decree Ezra 4.24. and Hag. 1.1.
or from the time of finishing the Temple in the sixth year of his reign Ezra
6.15. which yet cannot well stand upon the former ground in the beginning of
this difficulty, where its proved, the angel determined the seventy weeks upon
the death of Messiah: and besides in the same place he begins the seventie
weeks at the decree to restore and build the City, but makes no mention of
building the Temple, Dan. 9.25. Yet because generally authors begin the date
of Daniels weeks in the reign of Art. Longim. and end them at the death of
Christ, or begin them in the reign of Darius Nothus and terminate them with
the destruction of Jerusalem, I have noted both, though very uncertain and
improbable, and leave it to the Readers judgment whether it be not far more
agreeable both to Scripture and truth, that Daniels weeks begin where the
seventy years of captivity end (as has been formerly cleared, if I mistake
not) and end in the death of Christ, and our redemption purchased thereby. By
what has been spoken may appear.

First that it seems more agreeable to Scripture that Daniels weeks begin where
the seventy years of captivity end. Secondly, that they who begin them with the
tenth or twentieth of Artaxerxes, Longimanus, differ from our date about
seventy five years. Thirdly, They who begin them with the sixth of Darius
Nothus differ from us about 111. years. The parcells whereof are forty five
years of the captivity falling sooner with them then us; thirty years of our
Saviors death falling later with them then us, and thirty six years after that
for the destruction of Jerusalem, which they place in the midst of Daniels last
week: which supposition (if true) does of necessity cast the last year of
Daniels seventy weeks upon the year of the world four thousand sixty six, and
the destruction of Jerusalem, upon An. Mundi 4063 current, being the fourth or
middle year of Daniels last week, and the death of Christ being thirty six
years before that, upon An. Mundi 4027. and not upon An. Mundi 3982. as they
would have it, as may appear by what follows. The Babylonish captivity ended
An. Mundi 3465. Thence to the sixth of Dar. Nothus (according to them) 111.
Thence to the end of Daniels seventy weeks [490] [Totall 4066] out of which
substract for three yeeers and a half of Daniels last week, and thirty six
years from the death of Christ to the destruction of Jerusalem (in all 39. and
a half] There rests just [4027] current, the year in which according to their
supputation our Savior Christ should suffer, which yet they affirm to be Anno
Mundi 3982. The main ground of which error arises from the mistaking of the
true date of Abraham's birth, as I have formerly showed.

Another error arising from the mistake of Abraham's birth, etc. is the
misdating of the three famous Aeraes or Perieds of time, namely, era olympica,
Vrbis conditae, and era Nabonassaris, each of which fall out with them fifty.
four years sooner then with us. The first of them with us falls out Anno Mundi
3228. in the thirty third year of Vzziah's reign. The second Anno Mundi 3252.
the fifth year of Jothams reign, and twenty four years later then the former.
The third Anno mundi 3258. in the eleventh year of Jotham and six year later
then the era Vrbis Conditae. All these three aeraes falling together within
the space of thirty years at such a distance as he that knows the true date of
any one of them may easily find out the other two. But ordinarily Chronologers
place the Olympiads in Anno mundi 3174. The era Vrbis Con. Anno Mundi 3198.
and era Nabonassaris Anno Mundi 3204. which periods to find out, they reckon
backwards from the death of our Savior falling out in the last year of the two
hundredth and second Olympiad or the 800 and eigthth Olympic year, which being
subtracted from three thousand nine hundred eighty two (the year of our
Saviors death according to them) there rests three thousand one hundred
seventy four, the first year of their first Olympiad, each of which contain the
space of four years, and are called Tetraeterides. The same course they take to
find out the other two periods; and what is this, but to build one uncertainty
upon another, for the Olympiads in their date are uncertain. And secondly, were
it out of question that our Savior suffered in the eight hundred and eighth
Olympic year, yet in what year of the world to fasten their era would be
difficult because of the different date of Daniels weeks. It were worth the
while to enquire whether we can find any better soopsteps of their beginning
out of the Old Testament. First therefore, we must take for granted that those
three great aeraes or periods fall together within the space of thirty years.
Secondly, that they fall within such a precise distance the one from the other,
that he who knows one of them, may infalliby find out the other two. These two
postulata being granted (which I think both sides cannot but assent unto) I
shall pitch upon era Nabonassaris the last period of the three; of which there
is very probable evidence in the Old Testament by comparing profane history
with sacred: and if profane historians reckon the reigns of their Kings right
the evidence is irrefragable. Note then that Berodach, alias Merodach Baladan,
mentioned 2 Kings 20.12. and Esaias 39.1. in the seventh year of his rule over
Babylon, sent Letters and a present unto Hezekiah. The occasion whereof was the
wonder of the Suns going ten degrees backwards for the confirmation of
Hezekiahs faith about his recovery. Now the Babylonians being great Astronomers
could not but take especial notice of the Suns retrograde motion: and
withal hearing that it was upon occasion of Hezekiahs sickness, as may appear
by comparing 2 Kings 20.12. with 2 Chronicles. 32.31. he could not but send Letters
to Hezekiah to enquire about the ground thereof. These Letters were sent in the
seventh year of Merodach Baladans reign which ran parallel with the fifteenth
of Hezekiah, as is evident by the promise of adding fifteen years to Hekiahs
life, 2 Kings 20.6. which fifteen years being subtracted from twenty nine
years, the space of Hezekiahs reign, 2 Kin. 18.2. leave just fourteen years,
in which fourteenth year therefore both Hezekiahs recovery, and the ruin of
Sennacherib fell out; God delivering both the King, Church and State in the
same year, 2 Kin. 18.13. according to his promise 2 Kin. 20.6. Let it be
granted then that the fifteenth of Hezekiah and the seventh of Merodach Baladan
ran parallel. The great question now is how long before this time era
Nabonassaris began. Before this Baladan, there reigned over Babylon, Dulilaeus,
alias Dilulorus five years; before him Chinzerus and Porus, five years; before
them Nassius two years; and before this last, Nabonassar reigned fourteen
years, who in the beginning of his reign did institute this Epoch, commonly
called era Nabonassaris in memorial of the Chaldean liberty then asserted,
which era is much in use with Ptolemy and other Astronomers. Now supposing
Hezekiah fell sick precisely at the end of his fourteenth year, (as the promise
of his living fifteen years longer makes good) the news of his recovery coming
to Baladan, together with the sending of Baladans Letters, require some good
space of time (happily five or six months, Babylon being far from Judea)
therefore his seventh year must run parallel with Hezekiahs fifteenth year. Now
add all the reigns of the forementioned Kings of Babylon to these seven years
of Merodach Baladan, they make up just thirty three years: the first of which
thirty three years jumps with the eleventh year of Iotham. Anno Mundi 3258.
according to our account, and the era Vrbis Conditae being six years before
that, falls out Anno Mundi 3252 in the fifth year of Jotham: and era Iphiti or
Olimpica (beginning 24 years before era Vrbis Conditae,) falls in with the
thirty third of Vzziah, Anno Mundi 3228. according to my account: the
difference of both which accounts that it may the more easily be observed, I
have set them both together in the ensuing draught.

Nostra. Vulg. Era Olympica. Anno Mundi 3228 3174 Vrbis Conditae. 3252 3198
Nabonassaris. 3258 3204

The distance between ours and theirs, is the space of fifty four years, ours
falling later then theirs, just so many years.

The seventh difficulty is concerning the time of the year in which the world
began, which probably was not in Spring but Autumn the Sun entering Libra the
fourth descending sign of the Zodiac. And that upon these grounds.

First because formerly the year began in September, till it was changed upon
occasion of the Passover Exodus 12.2. It also began the civil year, and the
year of Iubilee, Lev. 25.9, 10.

Secondly from the ripeness of fruits, etc.

Thirdly from the beginning of the flood which fell out in the second month of
the civil year, Genesis 7.11. that is the month October toward the end of it
about which time twelve month only ten days later) he came out of the Ark,
Genesis 8.14. as may appear.

1. Because by this means there was a whole summer to dry up the waters of the
flood, which could not be, had the flood began in May, I take Summer here for
the whole space between the Vernall and Autumnall Equinoctial.

2. From the necessity of sowing the earth. For probably Noah stored not the
Ark with much more then for present necessity, and therefore had not much corn
to spare; now had he come out of the Ark in the Spring, both himself and family
must have lived of the old store almost a twelve month, since the seed time
fell not out till winter following at the soonest. But coming out of the Ark in
winter, he immediately fell to sowing of the ground and waited no longer then
till the Spring and Summer following for a new crop.

4 As the world began in the evening of the the day so probably also in the
evening of the year, namely to those that live on this side of the line, for
otherwise at the same time Spring began on the other side of the line, where
yet at the beginning of the world there was neither man nor any other living
creature, Eden being on this side the line.

5. God might in providence order it so of purpose the more to humble man for
his sin, with acold and dark winter succeeding his ejection out of Paradise:
which could not but be a sad affliction to him being left with his wife alone
to the wide world, and both heaven and earth lowering upon him presently after
his fall, in which respect they needed raiment to shelter themselves from the
injuries of heaven, as well as to cover their nakedness: and these garments
probably were made of the skins of the beasts that were offered in Sacrifice,
Genesis 3.21. for till after the flood we read of no commission man had to eat
flesh, Genesis 9.3.

I might add as an eighth difficulty, in what part of the natural day, the
Lords day begins. That it begins not at one precise point of time all the world
over I think is without controversy to all who understand any thing either
about time or place. The reason is evident, for whether it begin at Sun rising
or Sunset, or midnight etc. since all these vary according to the distance of
places East or West, the beginning of the Lords day, and so of the Jewish
Sabbath must vary in proportion. For example, suppose the Meridian of Jerusalem
differ from the Meridian of London, two thousand seven hundred miles that is,
forty five degrees, that lying so far East of this? its apparent the Sun will
rise and set three hours sooner at Jerusalem, then at London, and that because
every nine hundred miles or fifteen degrees East it rises one hour sooner then
West, as appears by dividing twenty one thousand six hundred by nine hundred,
the quotient is twenty four, and just so many hours there are in the natural
day, so that 900 miles being the twenty fourth part of twenty one thousand six
hundred miles (the just compass of the earth) makes the Sun vary in its rising
and setting every nine hundred miles the twenty fourth part of a natural day,
which is just one hour. By which it is evident that if the Sabbath or Lords
day begin at Sunset in Jerusalem, it must begin three hours before Sunset in
London, and so at the Equinoctial, the Sun sets with them when it is but
three in the afternoon with us: And at the Antipodes it sets and rises twelve
hours before it set and rise with us, whence by proportion their Lord's Day
should begin twelve hours sooner then with us. Whence its apparent that begin
the Lords day when you please, if you begin it at one precise point of time all
the world over, you must vary the hour of the day all the world over every
fifteen degrees and every fifteen miles East or West the beginning of the Lords
day varies one minute.

Next, that neither the Lords day nor Jewish Sabbath (namely, the first and
last day of the week) fall precisely upon the same point of time they did in
the creation, is as evident as the former; because the Suns standing still in
the time of Joshua, and going back ten degrees in the days of Hezekiah have
made a manifest alteration, and in probability at least of twenty four hours
or thereabouts. For though the Sun and Moon stood yet time stayed not, and
though afterward the Sun went backwards, yet still time went forwards,
fourteen hours probably in Joshuahs time (supposing the Sun stood an
artificial day which with them in Summer was about fourteen hours) and ten
hours in Hezekiahs days; so as that day being fourteen hours longer then any
former day, made all the following Sabbaths till Hezekiahs time to fall
fourteen hours later then any former Sabbath, and after Hezekiahs recovery,
the Jewish Sabbath fell ten hours later than all the Sabbaths from Joshuahs
time, and twenty four hours later than all the Sabbaths from the beginning of
the world till the days of Joshuah, that is just an whole natural day later
than before. So as in truth after Hezekiahs recovery, the Jewish Sabbath fell
punctually upon the first day of the week, and our Christian Sabbath by
proportion falls on the second day of the week, by reason of those twenty four
hours extraordinary inserted in the days of Joshua and Hezekiah.

But when then must the Christian Sabbath or our Lords day begin?

Answ. To me it seems far more easy to speak to the Negative than the
affirmative, and to tell when it begins not, than when it begins. Certainly a
seventh part of time is to be kept, and that seventh part must be the first of
the week on which our Savior rose, and which upon the former grounds seems to
be in preciseness of time rather the second then first day of the week. But
at what hour this day ought to begin is the great question. I have been apt to
think and easily should be persuaded with diverse eminent for Piety and
Learning, that it ought to begin at Sun set, were I not staggered with that
text, John 20.19. being compared with Luke 24.13.29.36. From which places being
compared I clearly draw these conclusions.

First, that it was the first day of the week when our Savior appeared to the
ten Apostles, (for Thomas was not with them till the Lords day following John
20.26.)

Secondly, that on that very day he appeared to the two disciples, going to
Emam and supped with them, it being so late before Supper as they would not
suffer our Savior to go any further that night, Luke 24.29.

Thirdly, That these things fell out at the Equinoctial, when the Sun
always sets at six in the Evening, and so probably it was toward Sunne-set
when they went to Supper, at which time it was dangerous to travel, not only
for robbers, but also for wild beasts, Psalm 104.19.22. which (I suppose) was
the ground why they constrained our Savior to abide with them.

Fourthly, that after Supper the two Disciples returned again to JERUSALEM
being distant from EMAUS seven miles and an half, every mile containing eight
furlongs, Luke 24.13.33. Now suppose they had supped by Sunset, and withal
that they footed it after the rate of four mile an hour (for no doubt they
went to JERUSALEM with a good will to carry the news of our Saviors
resurrection) they came thither toward eight at night, and as they were
relating the good tidings to the ten Apostles, our Savior himself appeared
amongst them Luke, 24.36. Suppose then it were but eight at night when Christ
appeared, its apparent that it was two hours after Sunset (though others
think it was far later) and so could be no part of the first day of the
week; if the first day of the week end at Sunset. But John says expressly
that the Evening of the first day of the week Christ appeared, John 20.19.
whereas the first day of the week was past two hours before, with them who
begin the first day at Sunset. Nor can this argument be solidly evaded by
those who say, that here John reckoned the day after the Roman account from
midnight to midnight.

For first, (granting the Romans reckoned so) it will be a very hard task for
them to prove that John intended here to follow their acount, and we can as
easily deny it as they affirm it.

Secondly, as fear scattered the Apostles at our Saviors death, so probably
conscience of the Lords Day made them keep so late together, (otherwise they
had been safer from the Jews danger, being asunder than together, which was
the ground they now shut the doors upon themselves, John 20.19.) This is
further confirmed by their meeting again the Lords Day following, verse 26. as
also by Paul's preaching on the first day of the week till midnight, Acts 20.7.
And though his Sermon might be longer then ordinary, because he was to leave
the Disciples of TROAS yet the ground of his preaching that evening was the
conscience of the Lords Day, nor did he probably begin his Sermon till after
the celebration of the Lords Supper, which in those times was at night, 1 Cor.
11.20, 21. and after Supper (in imitation of our Savior) though this custom
has ceased with us, for the most part (as well as dipping in Baptism) because
of the inconveniency of meeting so late, especially in many places where the
people live further off from the place of Assembly. And I think either place or
time does bind, unless there be an express command for it. Otherwise we
should be bound to receive the Lords Supper in an upper room, as well as after
Supper.

By all has been said appears very probably, that the latter as well as the
former Evening is part of the Christian Sabbath. Let who will interpret John to
speak after the Roman account, I must crave liberty to adhere to that rather
then the Jewish account, especially since Paul himself has confirmed this
interpretation by his own practice, Act. 20.7. And why the time of the day may
not be altered as well as the day it self: and that by the same authority, I
see no clear evidence to the contrary.

Nor see I any convincing strength in that maine argument so much insisted upon.

The first day of the week is the Christian Sabbath; Evening and morning are
the first day of the week; Ergo, Evening and morning are the Christian Sabbath.

For first grant the whole Syllogism, it makes not against us. For since the
Evening is put for night and the morning for day, our Christian Sabbath still
begins at Evening if it begin at midnight, and so still Evening and morning are
the Christian Sabbath.

Secondly, to the Major we answer that the denomination is taken a Majors
part, and therefore the Christian Sabbath is truly said to be the first day of
the week, and contra; because the greatest part of it falls on the first day
of the week.

Thirdly, we deny the Minor if affirmed de praesente as the terms carry it in
their sense. We deny not but before Christ's Resurrection the day began in the
Evening about Sunset; but our Savior after his Resurrection altered the hour
of the day, as well as the day of the week, as has been proved.

Nor do I conceive it such an inconvenience to affirm that the six or nine
hours from the end of the Jewish to the beginning of the first Christian
Sabbath were suffered to lapse and be vacant upon so extraordinary an occasion,
and every Lords Day afterward to begin at midnight or the morning watch: and
upon this ground Paul might preach till Midnight, though he discoursed
afterward till break of Day, Acts 20.

Nor need it seem more strange, that Christ should change the hour of the
day, than the day of the week. If the beginning of the year was changed upon
a far less occasion, Exodus 12.2. why may not the beginning of the day be
changed upon a far greater occasion? That Christ might change it no man
doubts; that he did change it, we have proved by Scripture evidence drawn from
two pregnant examples. Only, I leave it in medio to every indifferent man's
judgment and conscience, whether the Lords day begin at Sun set, or midnight,
or at the precise minute of our Saviors Resurrection which is uncertain: only
with this proviso that at what hour soever we begin it, it must last the space
of twenty four hours, namely, a natural day as well as any other day.

In this as well as other cases where we want clear Scripture evidence, we
must suffer every man to enjoy his own judgment and conscience so he be not a
Stickler to make a Party and cause Divisions in the Church. What a madness
were it for me because I judge the Lords day begins in the Evening or midnight,
to separate from those who differ from me in opinion, and make a Church only
of such as are of my judgment: I wish this were not too frequent in these
times amongst Gods own People. Otherwise how comes it to pass that one Church
cannot hold us because we differ in judgment about Church Government;
especially when no subscription is urged, nor approbation of the Presbyterial
Government: and upon the like conditions we would not stick to join with
them, were their way stablished by Authority as ours is? The bare settling under
a Government is no approbation of it, so we subscribe not to it nor be forced
under it to practice any thing contrary to our consciences. But I must crave
pardon for this digression, which I ventured upon the rather to persuade some
erring Brother into the way, and that if possibly we might all unite in one
heart and one way, though happily we cannot in one judgment, nor one principle:
and I must confess this whole section does not so properly belong to a
discourse of Chronology; yet it may give further occasion to the godly learned
to seek out the truth in this as well as in other particulars: which the Lord
give us all grace to do in love, gentleness, and humility.

Since I have transgressed thus far I think my self bound to add this
caution, least weak or ill affected persons, should hence take occasion to
curtalize the Lords day, and sacrilegiously to rob him of his due, beginning
the Lords day happily at Sunrising, and ending it at Sunset. I wish too many
did not worse, spending the day it self in sin and vanity, as if that of all
days in the week were a time of licentiousness.

The Jews formerly had a saying, Let my Soul be in their case who begin the
Sabbath with them of the VALLEY, and end it with them in the MOUNTAIN:
intimating thereby that they thought them in the best condition who begin the
Sabbath soonest, and end it latest.

Whenever the Lords Day begins, certainly an antecedent preparation is
necessary, and they do much wrong their own souls, who by busying themselves
in worldly employments late over night do indispose themselves for the Lords
Day following, and are sitter to sleep then to attend upon Gods service. Yet if
I might presume to guess, I should be apt to think, that either at midnight
or about three of the clock in the morning the Lords day begins.

The First of these I ground upon Paul's preaching till midnight, Acts 20.7.
probably because the Lords Day lasted so long, which seems the more likely
because in the same verse he says he was to depart on the morrow, which morrow
in verse 11. is interpreted to be break of day, and this all know is before
Sunne-rising: where then I pray should that morrow begin unless it were
immediately after midnight, or about three in the morning? And at this time we
reckon the day to begin at midnight as is apparent by the hours of the day,
for with us the twelfth hour of the day is at noone, but with the Jews it was
at Sunset.

If we say the Lords day begins about three in the morning it may well agree
with the time of our Saviors Resurrection who is expressly said to rise (...)
that is in the fourth and last watch of the night, as is evident by Mark 16.9.
compared with Mark 13.35. for the night was divided into twelve lesser hours
and four watches, each containing three hours a piece. In like sort the day
had twelve lesser and four greater hours.

Thus our Savior is said to be crucified about the sixth hour Luke 23.44. but
about the third hour Mark 15.25. that is about twelve of the clock which
ended the sixth lesser hour and began the third greater hour: so that between
three and six in the morning our Savior rose, and therefore some make this
time of his Resurrection to be the beginning of the Lords day, as well as his
Resurrection to be the ground or occasion of the Lords Day. But these
differences may easily be reconciled by charity. If thou have faith, have it to
thy self, Romans 14.22.

Errata.
In the DIFFICVLTIES Controverted. etc. Page 6. line 28. read for it, which. l.
ult. r. that is the four hundred. p. 8. l. ^2 r. the fifty eight Iubilee: p. 9.
l. 18. r. Athnac for a Colon. p. 10. l. 6. r. Chronology. l. 22. r. to the
10th year. p. 21. l. 21. r. neither place nor time.

In the Chronological Tables. p. col. ult. l. 13. r. 12. Jub. fol. 26. p 2. l.
18. r. Embolimaeus. fol. 36. in the column of the Promise, r. Genesis 12.4.

Sacred CHRONOLOGY.
Adam. S. W. 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 2 10 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 3 20 16 17 18 19 20 21
22 4 23 24 25 26 7 28 29 5 30 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 6 40 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 7
44 45 46 47 48 49 50 1 Jubi. 50 51 8 52 53 54 55 56 57 9 60 58 59 60 61 62 63
64 10 70 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 11 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 12 80 79 80 81 82 83 84
85 13 90 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 14 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 2 Jubi. 2 Jubi. 100 15
100 101 102 103 104 105 106 16 110 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 17 114 115 116
117 118 119 120 18 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 19 130 128 129

Adam. Seth Genesis 5.3. S. W. 130 19 130 131 1 132 2 133 3 134 4 20 140 135 5 136
6 137 7 138 8 139 9 140 10 141 11 21 142 12 143 13 144 14 145 15 146 16 147 17
148 18 3 Jubi. 3 Jubi. 149 19 22 150 150 20 151 21 152 22 153 23 154 24 155 25
23 160 156 26 157 27 158 28 159 29 160 30 161 31 162 32 24 163 33 164 34 165 35
166 36 167 37 168 38 169 39 25 170 170 40 171 41 172 42 173 43 174 44 175 45
176 46 26 180 177 47 178 48 179 49 180 50 181 51 182 52 183 53 27 184 54 185 55
186 56 187 57 188 58 189 59 190 60 28 190 191 61 192 62 193 63 194 64 195 65
196 66 197 67 4 Jubi. 4 Jubi. 198 68 29 200 199 69 200 70 201 71 202 72 203 73
204 74 30 210 205 75 206 76 207 77 208 78 209 79 210 80 211 81 31 212 82 213 83
214 84 215 85 216 86 217 87 218 88 32 220 219 89 220 90 221 91 222 92 223 93
224 94 225 95 33 230 226 96 227 97 228 98 229 99 230 100 231 101 232 102 34 233
103 234 104 235 105

Adam. Seth Genesis 5.3. Enos. Genesis 5.5 S. W. 236 106 1 34 237 107 2 238 108 3 239
109 4 35 240 240 110 5 241 111 6 242 112 7 243 113 8 244 114 9 245 115 10 246
116 11 5 Jubi. 5 Jubi. 247 117 12 36 250 248 118 13 249 119 14 250 120 15 251
121 16 252 122 17 253 123 18 37 254 124 19 255 125 20 256 126 21 257 127 22 258
128 23 259 129 24 260 130 25 38 260 261 131 26 262 132 27 263 133 28 264 134 29
265 135 30 266 136 31 267 137 32 39 270 268 138 33 269 139 34 270 140 35 271
141 36 272 142 37 273 143 38 274 144 39 40 280 275 145 40 276 146 41 277 147 42
278 148 43 279 149 44 280 150 45 281 151 46 41 282 152 47 283 153 48 284 154 49
285 155 50 286 156 51 287 157 52 288 158 53 42 290 289 159 54 290 160 55 291
161 56 292 162 57 293 163 58 294 164 59 295 165 60 6 Jubi. 6 Jubi. 296 166 61
43 300 297 167 62 298 168 63 299 169 64 300 170 65 301 171 66 302 172 67 44 303
173 68 304 174 69 305 175 70 306 176 71 307 177 72 308 178 73 309 179 74 45 310
310 180 75 311 181 76 312 182 77 313 183 78 314 184 79 315 185 80 316 186 81 46
320 317 187 82 318 188 83 319 189 84 320 190 85 321 191 86 322 192 87 323 193
88 47 324 194 89 325 195 90

Adam. Seth Genesis 5.3. Enos. Genesis 5.5 Kena^. Genesis 5.9. S. W. 326 196 91 1 47 327
197 92 2 328 198 93 3 329 199 94 4 330 200 95 5 48 330 331 201 96 6 332 202 97
7 333 203 98 8 334 204 99 9 335 205 100 10 336 206 101 11 337 207 102 12 49 340
338 208 103 13 339 209 104 14 340 210 105 15 341 211 106 16 342 212 107 17 343
213 108 18 344 214 109 19 7 Jubi. 350 345 215 110 20 50 346 216 111 21 347 217
112 22 348 218 113 23 349 219 114 24 350 220 115 25 351 221 116 26 51 7 Jubi.
352 222 117 27 353 223 118 28 354 224 119 29 355 225 120 30 356 226 121 31 357
227 122 32 358 228 123 33 52 360 359 229 124 34 360 230 125 35 361 231 126 36
362 232 127 37 363 233 128 38 364 234 129 39 365 235 130 40 53 370 366 236 131
41 367 237 132 42 368 238 133 43 369 239 134 44 370 240 135 45 371 241 136 46
372 242 137 47 54 373 243 138 48 374 244 139 49 375 245 140 50 376 246 141 51
377 247 142 52 378 248 143 53 379 249 144 54 55 380 380 250 145 55 381 251 146
56 382 252 147 57 383 253 148 58 384 254 149 59 385 255 150 60 386 256 151 61
56 390 387 257 152 62 388 258 153 63 389 259 154 64 390 260 155 65 391 261 156
66 392 262 157 67 393 263 158 68 8 Jubi. 394 264 159 69 395 265 160 70

Adam. Seth Genesis 5.3. Enos. Genesis 5.5 Kena^. Genesis 5.9. Mahal. Genesis 5.12. S. W.
396 266 161 71 1 57 397 267 162 72 2 398 268 163 73 3 399 269 164 74 4 400 270
165 75 5 58 8 Jubi. 401 271 166 76 6 400 402 272 167 77 7 403 273 168 78 8 404
274 169 79 9 405 275 170 80 10 406 276 171 81 11 407 277 172 82 12 59 410 408
278 173 83 13 409 279 174 84 14 410 280 175 85 15 411 281 176 86 16 412 282 177
87 17 413 283 178 88 18 414 284 179 89 19 60 420 415 285 180 90 20 416 286 181
91 21 417 287 182 92 22 418 288 183 93 23 419 289 184 94 24 420 290 185 95 25
421 291 186 96 26 61 422 292 187 97 27 423 293 188 98 28 424 294 189 99 29 425
295 190 100 30 426 296 191 101 31 427 297 192 102 32 428 298 193 103 33 62 430
429 299 194 104 34 430 300 195 105 35 431 301 196 106 36 432 302 197 107 37 433
303 198 108 38 434 304 199 109 39 435 305 200 110 40 63 440 436 306 201 111 41
437 307 202 112 42 438 308 203 113 43 439 309 204 114 44 440 310 205 115 45 441
311 206 116 46 442 312 207 117 47 9 Jubi. 443 313 208 118 48 64 444 314 209 119
49 445 315 210 120 50 446 316 211 121 51 447 317 212 122 52 448 318 213 123 53
449 319 214 124 54 65 9 Jubi. 450 320 215 125 55 450 451 321 216 126 56 452 322
217 127 57 453 323 218 128 58 454 324 219 129 59 455 325 220 130 60 456 326 221
131 61 66 460 457 327 222 132 62 458 328 223 133 63 459 329 224 134 64 460 330
225 135 65

Adam. Seth Genesis 5.3. Enos. Genesis 5.5 Kena^. Genesis 5.9. Mahal. Genesis 5.12. Iared.
Genesis 5.15 S. W. 461 331 226 136 66 1 66 460 462 332 227 137 67 2 463 333 228
138 68 3 67 464 334 229 139 69 4 465 335 230 140 70 5 466 336 231 141 71 6 467
337 232 142 72 7 468 338 233 143 73 8 469 339 234 144 74 9 470 340 235 145 75
10 68 470 471 341 236 146 76 11 472 342 237 147 77 12 473 343 238 148 78 13 474
344 239 149 79 14 475 345 240 150 80 15 476 346 241 151 81 16 477 347 242 152
82 17 69 480 478 348 243 153 83 18 479 349 244 154 84 19 480 350 245 155 85 20
481 351 246 156 86 21 482 352 247 157 87 22 483 353 248 158 88 23 484 354 249
159 89 24 70 490 485 355 250 160 90 25 486 356 251 161 91 26 487 357 252 162 92
27 488 358 253 163 93 28 489 359 254 164 94 29 490 360 255 165 95 30 491 361
256 166 96 31 10 Jubi. 492 362 257 167 97 32 71 493 363 258 168 98 33 494 364
259 169 99 34 495 365 260 170 100 35 496 366 261 171 101 36 497 367 262 172 102
37 498 368 263 173 103 38 72 500 499 369 264 174 104 39 500 370 265 175 105 40
501 371 266 176 106 41 502 372 267 177 107 42 503 373 268 178 108 43 504 374
269 179 109 44 10 Jubi. 505 375 270 180 110 45 73 510 506 376 271 181 111 46
507 377 272 182 112 47 508 378 273 183 113 48 509 379 274 184 114 49 510 380
275 185 115 50 511 381 276 186 116 51 512 382 277 187 117 52 74 513 383 278 188
118 53 514 384 279 189 119 54 515 385 280 190 120 55 516 386 281 191 121 56 517
387 282 192 122 57 518 388 283 193 123 58 519 389 284 194 124 59 75 520 520 390
285 195 125 60 521 391 286 196 126 61 522 392 287 197 127 62 523 393 288 198
128 63 524 394 289 199 129 64 525 395 290 200 130 65 526 396 291 201 131 66 76
530 527 397 292 202 132 67 528 398 293 203 133 68 529 399 294 204 134 69 530
400 295 205 135 70 531 401 296 206 136 71 532 402 297 207 137 72 533 403 298
208 138 73 77 534 404 299 209 139 74 535 405 300 210 140 75 536 406 301 211 141
76 537 407 302 212 142 77 538 408 303 213 143 78 539 409 304 214 144 79 540 410
305 215 145 80 11 Jubi. 540 541 411 306 216 146 81 78 542 412 307 217 147 82
543 413 308 218 148 83 544 414 309 219 149 84 545 415 310 220 150 85 546 416
311 221 151 86 547 417 312 222 152 87 79 550 548 418 313 223 153 88 549 419 314
224 154 89 550 420 315 225 155 90 551 421 316 226 156 91 552 422 317 227 157 92
553 423 318 228 158 93 11 Jubi. 554 424 319 229 159 94 80 560 555 425 320 230
160 95 556 426 321 231 161 96 557 427 322 232 162 97 558 428 323 233 163 98 559
429 324 234 164 99 560 430 325 235 165 100 561 431 326 236 166 101 81 562 432
327 237 167 102 563 433 328 238 168 103 564 434 329 239 169 104 565 435 330 240
170 105 566 436 331 241 171 106 567 437 332 242 172 107 568 438 333 243 173 108
82 570 569 439 334 244 174 109 570 440 335 245 175 110 571 441 336 246 176 111
572 442 337 247 177 112 573 443 338 248 178 113 574 444 339 249 179 114 575 445
340 250 180 115 83 580 576 446 341 251 181 116 577 447 342 252 182 117 578 448
343 253 183 118 579 449 344 254 184 119 580 450 345 255 185 120 581 451 346 256
186 121 582 452 347 257 187 122 84 583 453 348 258 188 123 584 454 349 259 189
124 585 455 350 260 190 125 586 456 351 261 191 126 587 457 352 262 192 127 588
458 353 263 193 128 589 459 354 264 194 129 12 Jubi. 590 590 460 355 265 195
130 85 591 461 356 266 196 131 592 462 357 267 197 132 593 463 358 268 198 133
594 464 359 269 199 134 595 465 360 270 200 135 596 466 361 271 201 136 86 600
597 467 362 272 202 137 598 468 363 273 203 138 599 469 364 274 204 139 600 470
365 275 205 140 601 471 366 276 206 141 602 472 367 277 207 142 13 Jubi. 603
473 368 278 208 143 87 604 474 369 279 209 144 605 475 370 280 210 145 606 476
371 281 211 146 607 477 372 282 212 147 608 478 373 283 213 148 609 479 374 284
214 149 610 480 375 285 215 150 88 610 611 481 376 286 216 151 612 482 377 287
217 152 613 483 378 288 218 153 614 484 379 289 219 154 615 485 380 290 220 155
616 486 381 291 221 156 617 487 382 292 222 157 89 620 618 488 383 293 223 158
619 489 384 294 224 159 620 490 385 295 225 160 621 491 386 296 226 161 622 492
387 297 227 162

Adam. Seth Genesis 5.3. Enos. Genesis 5.5 Kena^. Genesis 5.9. Mahal. Genesis 5.12. Iared.
Genesis 5.15 Enoch. Genesis 5.18. S. W. 623 493 388 298 228 163 1 89 620 624 494 389
299 229 164 2 90 630 625 495 390 300 230 165 3 626 496 391 301 231 166 4 627
497 392 302 232 167 5 628 498 393 303 233 168 6 629 499 394 304 234 169 7 630
500 395 305 235 170 8 631 501 396 306 236 171 9 91 632 502 397 307 237 172 10
633 503 398 308 238 173 11 634 504 399 309 239 174 12 635 505 400 310 240 175
13 636 506 401 311 241 176 14 637 507 402 312 242 177 15 638 508 403 313 243
178 16 13 Jubi. 640 639 509 404 314 244 179 17 92 640 510 405 315 245 180 18
641 511 406 316 246 181 19 642 512 407 317 247 182 20 643 513 408 318 248 183
21 644 514 409 319 249 184 22 645 515 410 320 250 185 23 93 650 646 516 411 321
251 186 24 647 517 412 322 252 187 25 648 518 413 323 253 188 26 649 519 414
324 254 189 27 650 520 415 325 255 190 28 651 521 416 326 256 191 29 13 Jubi.
652 522 417 327 257 192 30 94 653 523 418 328 258 193 31 654 524 419 329 259
194 32 655 525 420 330 260 195 33 656 526 421 331 261 196 34 657 527 422 332
262 197 35 658 528 423 333 263 198 36 659 529 424 334 264 199 37 95 660 660 530
425 335 265 200 38 661 531 426 336 266 201 39 662 532 427 337 267 202 40 663
533 428 338 268 203 41 664 534 429 339 269 204 42 665 535 430 340 270 205 43
666 536 431 341 271 206 44 96 670 667 537 432 342 272 207 45 668 538 433 343
273 208 46 669 539 434 344 274 209 47 670 540 435 345 275 210 48 671 541 436
346 276 211 49 672 542 437 347 277 212 50 673 543 438 348 278 213 51 97 674 544
439 349 279 214 52 675 545 440 350 280 215 53 676 546 441 351 281 216 54 677
547 442 352 282 217 55 678 548 443 353 283 218 56 679 549 444 354 284 219 57
680 550 445 355 285 220 58 98 680 681 551 446 356 286 221 59 682 552 447 357
287 222 60 683 553 448 358 288 223 61 684 554 449 359 289 224 62 685 555 450
360 290 225 63 686 556 451 361 291 226 64 687 557 452 362 292 227 65 14 Jubi.
690

Adam. Seth Genesis 5.3. Enos. Genesis 5.5 Kena^. Genesis 5.9. Mahal. Genesis 5.12. Iared.
Genesis 5.15 Enoch. Genesis 5.18. Methus. Genesis 5.21. S. W. 688 558 453 363 293 228 66
1 99 690 689 559 454 364 294 229 67 2 690 560 455 365 295 230 68 3 691 561 456
366 296 231 69 4 692 562 457 367 297 232 70 5 693 563 458 368 298 233 71 6 694
564 459 369 299 234 72 7 100 700 695 565 460 370 300 235 73 8 696 566 461 371
301 236 74 9 697 567 462 372 302 237 75 10 698 568 463 373 303 238 76 11 699
569 464 374 304 239 77 12 700 570 465 375 305 240 78 13 701 571 466 376 306 241
79 14 101 14 Jubi. 702 572 467 377 307 242 80 15 703 573 468 378 308 243 81 16
704 574 469 379 309 244 82 17 705 575 470 380 310 245 83 18 706 576 471 381 311
246 84 19 707 577 472 382 312 247 85 20 708 578 473 383 313 248 86 21 102 710
709 579 474 384 314 249 87 22 710 580 475 385 315 250 88 23 711 581 476 386 316
251 89 24 712 582 477 387 317 252 90 25 713 583 478 388 318 253 91 26 714 584
479 389 319 254 92 27 715 585 480 390 320 255 93 28 103 720 716 586 481 391 321
256 94 29 717 587 482 392 322 257 95 30 718 588 483 393 323 258 96 31 719 589
484 394 324 259 97 32 720 590 485 395 325 260 98 33 721 591 486 396 326 261 99
34 722 592 487 397 327 262 100 35 104 723 593 488 398 328 263 101 36 724 594
489 399 329 264 102 37 725 595 490 400 330 265 103 38 726 596 491 401 331 266
104 39 727 597 492 402 332 267 105 40 728 598 493 403 333 268 106 41 729 599
494 404 334 269 107 42 105 730 730 600 495 405 335 270 108 43 731 601 496 406
336 271 109 44 732 602 497 407 337 272 110 45 733 603 498 408 338 273 111 46
734 604 499 409 339 274 112 47 735 605 500 410 340 275 113 48 736 606 501 411
341 276 114 49 15 Jubi. 740 737 607 502 412 342 277 115 50 106 738 608 503 413
343 278 116 51 739 609 504 414 344 279 117 52 740 610 505 415 345 280 118 53
741 611 506 416 346 281 119 54 742 612 507 417 347 282 120 55 743 613 508 418
348 283 121 56 107 744 614 509 419 349 284 122 57 745 615 510 420 350 285 123
58 746 616 511 421 351 286 124 59 747 617 512 422 352 287 125 60 748 618 513
423 353 288 126 61 749 619 514 424 354 289 127 62 750 620 515 425 355 290 128
63 108 750 751 621 516 426 356 291 129 64 15 Jubi. 752 622 517 427 357 292 130
65 753 623 518 428 358 293 131 66 754 624 519 429 359 294 132 67 755 625 520
430 360 295 133 68 756 626 521 431 361 296 134 69 757 627 522 432 362 297 135
70 109 760 758 628 523 433 363 298 136 71 759 629 524 434 364 299 137 72 760
630 525 435 365 300 138 73 761 631 526 436 366 301 139 74 762 632 527 437 367
302 140 75 763 633 528 438 368 303 141 76 764 634 529 439 369 304 142 77 110
770 765 635 530 440 370 305 143 78 766 636 531 441 371 306 144 79 767 637 532
442 372 307 145 80 768 638 533 443 373 308 146 81 769 639 534 444 374 309 147
82 770 640 535 445 375 310 148 83 771 641 536 446 376 311 149 84 111 772 642
537 447 377 312 150 85 773 643 538 448 378 313 151 86 774 644 539 449 379 314
152 87 775 645 540 450 380 315 153 88 776 646 541 451 381 316 154 89 777 647
542 452 382 317 155 90 778 648 543 453 383 318 156 91 112 780 779 649 544 454
384 319 157 92 780 650 545 455 385 320 158 93 781 651 546 456 386 321 159 94
782 652 547 457 387 322 160 95 783 653 548 458 388 323 161 96 784 654 549 459
389 324 162 97 785 655 550 460 390 325 163 98 16 Jubi. 790 786 656 551 461 391
326 164 99 113 787 657 552 462 392 327 165 100 788 658 553 463 393 328 166 101
789 659 554 464 394 329 167 102 790 660 555 465 395 330 168 103 791 661 556 466
396 331 169 104 792 662 557 467 397 332 170 105 114 793 663 558 468 398 333 171
106 794 664 559 469 399 334 172 107 795 665 560 470 400 335 173 108 796 666 561
471 401 336 174 109 797 667 562 472 402 337 175 110 798 668 563 473 403 338 176
111 799 669 564 474 404 339 177 112 115 800 800 670 565 475 405 340 178 113 801
671 566 476 406 341 179 114 802 672 567 477 407 342 180 115 803 673 568 478 408
343 181 116 804 674 569 479 409 344 182 117 805 675 570 480 410 345 183 118 16
Jubi. 806 676 571 481 411 346 184 119 116 810 807 677 572 482 412 347 185 120
808 678 573 483 413 348 186 121 809 679 574 484 414 349 187 122 810 680 575 485
415 350 188 123 811 681 576 486 416 351 189 124 812 682 577 487 417 352 190 125
813 683 578 488 418 353 191 126 117 814 684 579 489 419 354 192 127 815 685 580
490 420 355 193 128 816 686 581 491 421 356 194 129 817 687 582 492 422 357 195
130 818 688 583 493 423 358 196 131 819 689 584 494 424 359 197 132 820 690 585
495 425 360 198 133 118 820 821 691 586 496 426 361 199 134 822 692 587 497 427
362 200 135 823 693 588 498 428 363 201 136 824 694 589 499 429 364 202 137 825
695 590 500 430 365 203 138 826 696 591 501 431 366 204 139 827 697 592 502 432
367 205 140 119 730 828 698 593 503 433 368 206 141 829 699 594 504 434 369 207
142 830 700 595 505 435 370 208 143 831 701 596 506 436 371 209 144 832 702 597
507 437 372 210 145 833 703 598 508 438 373 211 146 834 704 599 509 439 374 212
147 17 Jubi. 840 835 705 600 510 440 375 213 148 120 836 706 601 511 441 376
214 149 837 707 602 512 442 377 215 150 838 708 603 513 443 378 216 151 839 709
604 514 444 379 217 152 840 710 605 515 445 380 218 153 841 711 606 516 446 381
219 154 121 842 712 607 517 447 382 220 155 843 713 608 518 448 383 221 156 844
714 609 519 449 384 222 157 845 715 610 520 450 385 223 158 846 716 611 521 451
386 224 159 847 717 612 522 452 387 225 160 848 718 613 523 453 388 226 161 122
850 849 719 614 524 454 389 227 162 850 720 615 525 455 390 228 163 851 721 616
526 456 391 229 164 852 722 617 527 457 392 230 165 853 723 618 528 458 393 231
166 854 724 619 529 459 394 232 167 17 Jubi. 855 725 620 530 460 395 233 168
123 860 856 726 621 531 461 396 234 169 857 727 622 532 462 397 235 170 858 728
623 533 463 398 236 171 859 729 624 534 464 399 237 172 860 730 625 535 465 400
238 173 861 731 626 536 466 401 239 174 862 732 627 537 467 402 240 175 124 863
733 628 538 468 403 241 176 864 734 629 539 469 404 242 177 865 735 630 540 470
405 243 178 866 736 631 541 471 406 244 179 867 737 632 542 472 407 245 180 868
738 633 543 473 408 246 181 869 739 634 544 474 409 247 182 125 870 870 740 635
545 475 410 248 183 871 741 636 546 476 411 249 184 872 742 637 547 477 412 250
185 873 743 638 548 478 413 251 186 874 744 639 549 479 414 252 187

Adam. Seth Genesis 5.3. Enos. Genesis 5.5 Kena^. Genesis 5.9. Mahal. Genesis 5.12. Iared.
Genesis 5.15 Enoch. Genesis 5.18. Methus. Genesis 5.21. Lamec Gen 5.25. S. W. 875 745
640 550 480 415 253 188 1 125 870 876 746 641 551 481 416 254 189 2 126 880 877
747 642 552 482 417 255 190 3 878 748 643 553 483 418 256 191 4 879 749 644 554
484 419 257 192 5 880 750 645 555 485 420 258 193 6 881 751 646 556 486 421 259
194 7 882 752 647 557 487 422 260 195 8 883 753 648 558 488 423 261 196 9 18
Jubi. 884 754 649 559 489 424 262 197 10 127 885 755 650 560 490 425 263 198 11
886 756 651 561 491 426 264 199 12 887 757 652 562 492 427 265 200 13 888 758
653 563 493 428 266 201 14 889 759 654 564 494 429 267 202 15 890 760 655 565
495 430 268 203 16 128 890 891 761 656 566 496 431 269 204 17 892 762 657 567
497 432 270 205 18 893 763 658 568 498 433 271 206 19 894 764 659 569 499 434
272 207 20 895 765 660 570 500 435 273 208 21 896 766 661 571 501 436 274 209
22 897 767 662 572 502 437 275 210 23 129 900 898 768 663 573 503 438 276 211
24 899 769 664 574 504 439 277 212 25 900 770 665 575 505 440 278 213 26 901
771 666 576 506 441 279 214 27 902 772 667 577 507 442 280 215 28 903 773 668
578 508 443 281 216 29 18 Jubi. 904 774 669 579 509 444 282 217 30 130 910 905
775 670 580 510 445 283 218 31 906 776 671 581 511 446 284 219 32 907 777 672
582 512 447 285 220 33 908 778 673 583 513 448 286 221 34 909 779 674 584 514
449 287 222 35 910 780 675 585 515 450 288 223 36 911 781 676 586 516 451 289
224 37 131 912 782 677 587 517 452 290 225 38 913 783 678 588 518 453 291 226
39 914 784 679 589 519 454 292 227 40 915 785 680 590 520 455 293 228 41 916
786 681 591 521 456 294 229 42 917 787 682 592 522 457 295 230 43 918 788 683
593 523 458 296 231 44 132 920 919 789 684 594 524 459 297 232 45 920 790 685
595 525 460 298 233 46 921 791 686 596 526 461 299 234 47 922 792 687 597 527
462 300 235 48 923 793 688 598 528 463 301 236 49 924 794 689 599 529 464 302
237 50 925 795 690 600 530 465 303 238 51 133 930 926 796 691 601 531 466 304
239 52 927 797 692 602 532 467 305 240 53 928 798 693 603 533 468 306 241 54
929 799 694 604 534 469 307 242 55 930 800 695 605 535 470 308 243 56

Seth Genesis 5.3. Enos. Genesis 5.5 Kena^. Genesis 5.9. Mahal. Genesis 5.12. Iared. Genesis
5.15 Enoch. Genesis 5.18. Methus. Genesis 5.21. Lamec Gen 5.25. S. W. 801 696 606 536
471 309 244 57 802 697 607 537 472 310 245 58 19 Jubi. 803 698 608 538 473 311
246 59 134 804 699 609 539 474 312 247 60 805 700 610 540 475 313 248 61 806
701 611 541 476 314 249 62 807 702 612 542 477 315 250 63 808 703 613 543 478
316 251 64 809 704 614 544 479 317 252 65 135 940 810 705 615 545 470 318 253
66 811 706 616 546 481 319 254 67 812 707 617 547 482 320 255 68 813 708 618
548 483 321 256 69 814 709 619 549 484 322 257 70 815 710 620 550 485 323 258
71 816 711 621 551 486 324 259 72 136 950 817 712 622 552 487 325 260 73 818
713 623 553 488 326 261 74 819 714 624 554 489 327 262 75 820 715 625 555 490
328 263 76 821 716 626 556 491 329 264 77 822 717 627 557 492 330 265 78 19
Jubi. 823 718 628 558 493 331 266 79 137 824 719 629 559 494 332 267 80 825 720
630 560 495 333 268 81 826 721 631 561 496 334 269 82 827 722 632 562 497 335
270 83 828 723 633 563 498 336 271 84 829 724 634 564 499 337 272 85 830 725
635 565 500 338 273 86 138 960 831 726 636 566 501 339 274 87 832 727 637 567
502 340 275 88 833 728 638 568 503 341 276 89 834 729 639 569 504 342 277 90
835 730 640 570 505 343 278 91 836 731 641 571 506 344 279 92 837 732 642 572
507 345 280 93 139 970 838 733 643 573 508 346 281 94 839 734 644 574 509 347
282 95 840 735 645 575 510 348 283 96 841 736 646 576 511 349 284 97 842 737
647 577 512 350 285 98 843 738 648 578 513 351 286 99 844 739 649 579 514 352
287 100 140 980 845 740 650 580 515 353 288 101 846 741 651 581 516 354 289 102
847 742 652 582 517 355 290 103 848 743 653 583 518 356 291 104 849 744 654 584
519 357 292 105 850 745 655 585 520 358 293 106 851 746 656 586 521 359 294 107
20 Jubi. 852 747 657 587 522 360 295 108 141 853 748 658 588 523 361 296 109
854 749 659 589 524 362 297 110 855 750 660 590 525 363 298 111 856 751 661 591
526 364 299 112 857 752 662 592 527 365 300 113

Enoch was a most eminent man for holiness. Had this privilege with Elias,
not to see death, Genesis 5.22, 23. Heb. 11.5. He was the seventh from Adam, and a
Prophet, Jude verse 14. was born above the beginning, and was translated at the
end of a Sabbatical year: and lastly, lived on earth just as many years as
there are days in the year.

Seth Genesis 5.3. Enos. Genesis 5.5 Kena^. Genesis 5.9. Mahal. Genesis 5.12. Iared. Genesis
5.15 Enoch. Genesis 5.18. Methus. Genesis 5.21. Lamec Gen 5.25. S. W. 858 753 663 593
528 301 114 142 990 859 754 664 594 529 302 115 860 755 665 595 530 303 116 861
756 666 596 531 304 117 862 757 667 597 532 305 118 863 758 668 598 533 306 119
864 759 669 599 534 307 120 865 760 670 600 535 308 121 143 1000 866 761 671
601 536 309 122 867 762 672 602 537 310 123 868 763 673 603 538 311 124 869 764
674 604 539 312 125 870 765 675 605 540 313 126 871 766 676 606 541 314 127 20
Jubi. 872 767 677 607 542 315 128 144 873 768 678 608 543 316 129 874 769 679
609 544 317 130 875 770 680 610 545 318 131 876 771 681 611 546 319 132 877 772
682 612 547 320 133 878 773 683 613 548 321 134 879 774 684 614 549 322 135 145
1010 880 775 685 615 550 323 136 881 776 686 616 551 324 137 882 777 687 617
552 325 138 883 778 688 618 553 326 139 884 779 689 619 554 327 140 885 780 690
620 555 328 141 886 781 691 621 556 329 142 146 1020 887 782 692 622 557 330
143 888 783 693 623 558 331 144 889 784 694 624 559 332 145 890 785 695 625 560
333 146 891 786 696 626 561 334 147 892 787 697 627 562 335 148 893 788 698 628
563 336 149 147 894 789 699 629 564 337 150 895 790 700 630 565 338 151 896 791
701 631 566 339 152 897 792 702 632 567 340 153 898 793 703 633 568 341 154 899
794 704 634 569 342 155 900 795 705 635 570 343 156 21 Jubi. 1030 901 796 706
636 571 344 157 148 902 797 707 637 572 345 158 903 798 708 638 573 346 159 904
799 709 639 574 347 160 905 800 710 640 575 348 161 906 801 711 641 576 349 162
907 802 712 642 577 350 163 149 1040 908 803 713 643 578 351 164 909 804 714
644 579 352 165 910 805 715 645 580 353 166 911 806 716 646 581 354 167 912 807
717 647 582 355 168

All the ten Patriarchs from Adam to Noah, were Progenitors of all Nations, as
well as of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: so as the stock of mankind
ascended in a straight line for ten Generations together, and about the 500th
year of Noah began to spread it self into three great branches in Noah's three
Sons, who were the Fathers of all Nations: (all the rest of the World but only
those four with their wives being drowned in the Flood, nor any other child of
Noah recorded in holy writ but only those three.)

Its a very probable and charitable opinion of Divines, that all the natural
Progenitors of the Lord Jesus were saved.

Noah was contemporary with 15. Patriarchs, 6. before, and 9. after the Flood:
He dyed two years before the birth of Abraham.

Enos. Genesis 5.5 Kena^. Genesis 5.9. Mahal. Genesis 5.12. Iared. Genesis 5.15 Methus.
Genesis 5.21. Lamec Gen 5.25. S. W. 808 718 648 583 356 169 809 719 649 584 357
170 150 1050 810 720 650 585 358 171 811 721 651 586 359 172 812 722 652 587
360 173 813 723 653 588 361 174 814 724 654 589 362 175 815 725 655 590 363 176
816 726 656 591 364 177 151 21 Jubi. 817 727 657 592 365 178 818 728 658 593
366 179 819 729 659 594 367 180 820 730 660 595 368 181 821 731 661 596 369 182

Enos. Genesis 5.5 Kena^. Genesis 5.9. Mahal. Genesis 5.12. Iared. Genesis 5.15 Methus.
Genesis 5.21. Lamec Gen 5.25. Noah Genesis 5.28. S. W. 822 732 662 597 370 183 1 151
823 733 663 598 371 184 2 152 1060 824 734 664 599 372 185 3 825 735 665 600
373 186 4 826 736 666 601 374 187 5 827 737 667 602 375 188 6 828 738 668 603
376 189 7 829 739 669 604 377 190 8 830 740 670 605 378 191 9 153 1070 831 741
671 606 379 192 10 832 742 672 607 380 193 11 833 743 673 608 381 194 12 834
744 674 609 382 195 13 835 745 675 610 383 196 14 836 746 676 611 384 197 15
837 747 677 612 385 198 16 154 838 748 678 613 386 199 17 839 749 679 614 387
200 18 840 750 680 615 388 201 19 841 751 681 616 389 202 20 842 752 682 617
390 203 21 843 753 683 618 391 204 22 844 754 684 619 392 205 23 22 Jubi. 1080
845 755 685 620 393 206 24 155 846 756 686 621 394 207 25 847 757 687 622 395
208 26 848 758 688 623 396 209 27 849 759 689 624 397 210 28 850 760 690 625
398 211 29 851 761 691 626 399 212 30 156 1090 852 762 692 627 400 213 31 853
763 693 628 401 214 32 854 764 694 629 402 215 33 855 765 695 630 403 216 34
856 766 696 631 404 217 35 857 767 697 632 405 218 36 858 768 698 633 406 219
37 157 859 769 699 634 407 220 38 860 770 700 635 408 221 39 861 771 701 636
409 222 40 862 772 702 637 410 223 41 863 773 703 638 411 224 42 864 774 704
639 412 225 43 865 775 705 640 413 226 44 158 1100 866 776 706 641 414 227 45
867 777 707 642 415 228 46 868 778 708 643 416 229 47 869 779 709 644 417 230
48 870 780 710 645 418 231 49 871 781 711 646 419 232 50 22 Jubi. 872 782 712
647 420 233 51 159 1110 873 783 713 648 421 234 52 874 784 714 649 422 235 53
875 785 715 650 423 236 54 876 786 716 651 424 237 55 877 787 717 652 425 238
56 878 788 718 653 426 239 57 879 789 719 654 427 240 58 160 1120 880 790 720
655 428 241 59 881 791 721 656 429 242 60 882 792 722 657 430 243 61 883 793
723 658 431 244 62 884 794 724 659 432 245 63 885 795 725 660 433 246 64 886
796 726 661 434 247 65 161 887 797 727 662 435 248 66 888 798 728 663 436 249
67 889 799 729 664 437 250 68 890 800 730 665 438 251 69 891 801 731 666 439
252 70 892 802 732 667 440 253 71 893 803 733 668 441 254 72 23 Jubi. 1130 894
804 734 669 442 255 73 162 895 805 735 670 443 256 74 896 806 736 671 444 257
75 897 807 737 672 445 258 76 898 808 738 673 446 259 77 899 809 739 674 447
260 78 900 810 740 675 448 261 79 163 1140 901 811 741 676 449 262 80 902 812
742 677 450 263 81 903 813 743 678 451 264 82 904 814 744 679 452 265 83 905
815 745 680 453 266 84

Kena^. Genesis 5.9. Mahal. Genesis 5.12. Iared. Genesis 5.15 Methus. Genesis 5.21. Lamec
Gen 5.25. Noah Genesis 5.28. S. W. 816 746 681 454 267 85 817 747 682 455 268 86
164 818 748 683 456 269 87 819 749 684 457 270 88 820 750 685 458 271 89 821
751 686 459 272 90 822 752 687 460 273 91 823 753 688 461 274 92 824 754 689
462 275 93 165 1150 825 755 690 463 276 94 826 756 691 464 277 95 827 757 692
465 278 96 828 758 693 466 279 97 829 759 694 467 280 98 830 760 695 468 281 99
23 Jubi. 831 761 696 469 282 100 166 1160 832 762 697 470 283 101 833 763 698
471 284 102 834 764 699 472 285 103 835 765 700 473 286 104 836 766 701 474 287
105 837 767 702 475 288 106 838 768 703 476 289 107 167 839 769 704 477 290 108
840 770 705 478 291 109 841 771 706 479 292 110 842 772 707 480 293 111 843 773
708 481 294 112 844 774 709 482 295 113 845 775 710 483 296 114 168 1170 846
776 711 484 297 115 847 777 712 485 298 116 848 778 713 486 299 117 849 779 714
487 300 118 850 780 715 488 301 119 851 781 716 489 302 120 852 782 717 490 303
121 24 Jubi. 1180 853 783 718 491 304 122 169 854 784 719 492 305 123 855 785
720 493 306 124 856 786 721 494 307 125 857 787 722 495 308 126 858 788 723 496
309 127 859 789 724 497 310 128 170 1190 860 790 725 498 311 129 861 791 726
499 312 130 862 792 727 500 313 131 863 793 728 501 314 132 864 794 729 502 315
133 865 795 730 503 316 134 866 796 731 504 317 135 171 867 797 732 505 318 136
868 798 733 506 319 137 869 799 734 507 320 138 870 800 735 508 321 139 871 801
736 509 322 140 872 802 737 510 323 141 873 803 738 511 324 142 172 1200 874
804 739 512 325 143 875 805 740 513 326 144 876 806 741 514 327 135 877 807 742
515 328 146 878 808 743 516 329 147 879 809 744 517 330 148 24 Jubi. 880 810
745 518 331 149 173 1210 881 811 746 519 332 150 882 812 747 520 333 151 883
813 748 521 334 152 884 814 749 522 335 153 885 815 750 523 336 154 886 816 751
524 337 155 887 817 752 525 338 156 174 888 818 753 526 339 157 889 819 754 527
340 158 890 820 755 528 341 159 891 821 756 529 342 160 892 822 757 530 343 161
893 823 758 531 344 162 894 824 759 532 345 163 175 1220 895 825 760 533 346
164 896 826 761 534 347 165 897 827 762 535 348 166 898 828 763 536 349 167 899
829 764 537 350 168 900 830 765 538 351 169 901 831 766 539 352 170 25 Jubi.
1230 902 832 767 540 353 171 176 903 833 768 541 354 172 904 834 769 542 355
173 905 835 770 543 356 174 906 836 771 544 357 175 907 837 772 545 358 176 908
838 773 546 359 177 177 909 839 774 547 360 178 910 840 775 548 361 179

Mahal. Genesis 5.12. Iared. Genesis 5.15 Methus. Genesis 5.21. Lamec Gen 5.25. Noah
Genesis 5.28. S. W. 841 776 549 362 180 842 777 550 363 181 843 778 551 364 182
844 779 552 365 183 845 780 553 366 184 178 1240 846 781 554 367 185 847 782
555 368 186 848 783 556 369 187 849 784 557 370 188 850 785 558 371 189 851 786
559 372 190 852 787 560 373 191 179 1250 853 788 561 374 192 854 789 562 375
193 855 790 563 376 194 856 791 564 377 195 857 792 565 378 196 858 793 566 379
197 25 Jubi. 859 794 567 380 198 180 1260 860 795 568 381 199 861 796 569 382
200 862 797 570 383 201 863 798 571 384 202 864 799 572 385 203 865 800 573 386
204 866 801 574 387 205 181 867 802 575 388 206 868 803 576 389 207 869 804 577
390 208 870 805 578 391 209 871 806 579 392 210 872 807 580 393 211 873 808 581
394 212 182 1270 874 809 582 395 213 875 810 583 396 214 876 811 584 397 215
877 812 585 398 216 878 813 586 399 217 879 814 587 400 218 880 815 588 401 219
26 Jubi. 1280 881 816 589 402 220 183 882 817 590 403 221 883 818 591 404 222
884 819 592 405 223 885 820 593 406 224 886 821 594 407 225 887 822 595 408 226
184 888 823 596 409 227 889 824 597 410 228 890 825 598 411 229 891 826 599 412
230 892 827 600 413 231 893 828 601 414 232 894 829 602 415 233 185 1290 895
830 603 416 234

Iared. Genesis 5.15 Methus. Genesis 5.21. Lamec Gen 5.25. Noah Genesis 5.28. S. W. 831
604 417 235 832 605 418 236 833 606 419 237 834 607 420 238 835 608 421 239 836
609 422 240 186 1300 837 610 423 241 838 611 424 242 839 612 425 243 840 613
426 244 841 614 427 245 842 615 428 246 26 Jubi. 843 616 429 247 187 844 617
430 248 845 618 431 249 846 619 432 250 847 620 433 251 848 621 434 252 849 622
435 253 850 623 436 254 188 1310 851 624 437 255 852 625 438 256 853 626 439
257 854 627 440 258 855 628 441 259 856 629 442 260 857 630 443 261 189 1320
858 631 444 262 859 632 445 263 860 633 446 264 861 634 447 265 862 635 448 266
863 636 449 267 864 637 450 268 27 Jubi. 1330 865 638 451 269 190 866 639 452
270 867 640 453 271 868 641 454 272 869 642 455 273 870 643 456 274 871 644 457
275 191 872 645 458 276 873 646 459 277 874 647 460 278 875 648 461 279 876 649
462 280 877 650 463 281 878 651 464 282 192 1340 879 652 465 283 880 653 466
284 881 654 467 285 882 655 468 286 883 656 469 287 884 657 470 288 885 658 471
289 193 1350 886 659 472 290 887 660 473 291 888 661 474 292 889 662 475 293
890 663 476 294 891 664 477 295 892 665 478 296 194 27 Jubi. 893 666 479 297
894 667 480 298 895 668 481 299 896 669 482 300 897 670 483 301 898 671 484 302
899 672 485 303 195 1360 900 673 486 304 901 674 487 305 902 675 488 306 903
676 489 307 904 677 490 308 905 678 491 309 906 679 492 310 196 1370 907 680
493 311 908 681 494 312 909 682 495 313 910 683 496 314 911 684 497 315 912 685
498 316 913 686 499 317 28 Jubi. 914 687 500 318 197 915 688 501 319 916 689
502 320 917 690 503 321 918 691 504 322 919 692 505 323 920 693 506 324 198
1380 921 694 507 325 922 695 508 326 923 696 509 327 924 697 510 328 925 698
511 329 926 699 512 330 927 700 513 331 199 1390 928 701 514 332 929 702 515
333 930 703 516 334 931 704 517 335 932 705 518 336 933 706 519 337 934 707 520
338 200 1400 935 708 521 339 936 709 522 340 937 710 523 341 938 711 524 342
939 712 525 343 940 713 526 344 941 714 527 345 201 28 Jubi. 942 715 528 346
943 716 529 347 944 717 530 348 945 718 531 349 946 719 532 350 947 720 533 351
948 721 534 352 202 1410 949 722 535 353 950 723 536 354 951 724 537 355 952
725 538 356 953 726 539 357 954 727 540 358 955 728 541 359 203 1420 956 729
542 360 957 730 543 361 958 731 544 362 959 732 545 363 960 733 546 364 961 734
547 365 962 735 548 366

Methus. Genesis 5.21. Lamec Gen 5.25. Noah Genesis 5.28. S. W. 736 549 367 29 Jubi.
737 550 368 204 738 551 369 739 552 370 740 553 371 741 554 372 742 555 373 205
1430 743 556 374 744 557 375 745 558 376 746 559 377 747 560 378 748 561 379
749 562 380 206 1440 750 563 381 751 564 382 752 565 383 753 566 384 754 567
385 755 568 386 756 569 387 207 757 570 388 758 571 389 759 572 390 760 573 391
761 574 392 762 575 393 763 576 394 208 1450 764 577 395 765 578 396 766 579
397 767 580 398 768 581 399 769 582 400 29 Jubi. 770 583 401 209 1460 771 584
402 772 585 403 773 586 404 774 587 405 775 588 406 776 589 407 777 590 408 210
1470 778 591 409 779 592 410 780 593 411 781 594 412 782 595 413 783 596 414
784 597 415 30 Jubi. 785 598 416 211 786 599 417 787 600 418 788 601 419 789
602 420 790 603 421 791 604 422 212 1480 792 605 423 793 606 424 794 607 425
795 608 426 796 609 427 797 610 428 798 611 429 213 1490 799 612 430 800 613
431 801 614 432 802 615 433 803 616 434 804 617 435 805 618 436 214 806 619 437
807 620 438 808 621 439 809 622 440 810 623 441 811 624 442 812 625 443 215
1500 813 626 444 814 627 445 815 628 446 816 629 447 817 630 448 818 631 449 30
Jubi. 819 632 450 216 1510 820 ^33 451 821 634 452 822 635 453 823 636 454 824
637 455 825 638 456 826 639 457 217 827 640 458 828 641 459 829 642 460 830 643
461 831 644 462 832 645 463 833 646 464 31 Jubi. 1520 834 647 465 218 835 648
466 836 649 467 837 650 468 838 651 469 839 652 470 840 653 471 219 1530 841
654 472 842 655 473 843 656 474 844 657 475 845 658 476 846 659 477 847 660 478
220 1540 848 661 479 849 662 480 850 663 481 851 664 482 852 665 483 853 666
484

The Jews first month Ecclesiastical, namely Abib or Nisan, answers for the
most part our March: their seventh month Ethanim or Tisri, our September,
(their Ecclesiastical year beginning at the Vernal, as their Civil year at the
Autumnal Equinoctial, which with us happen about the eleventh of March and
September,) But after the Foreign or Gregorian account, those two months
answer for the most part April and October, because they begin their months
ten days before ours, whence with them the Equinoctials fall upon the 21. of
March and September.

The Flood happened Anno Mundi 1657. in the beginning of the year, namely the 17.
day of the second month, that is about our 27. or 28. day of October, Genesis
7.11. and the rain fell till about the 7. of December with us, or their 26. of
the third month, for forty days together: that is fourteen days of the
second month, and six and twenty days of the third month. Their first month
beginning the 10. or 11. of September at the Autumnal Equinoctial, and ending
about the 10. or 11. of October, and so by proportion every month of theirs
contained part of two of our months, and always thirty days apeece, which was
the reason of their [Veader] or [Mensis Embolimeus,] namely a thirteenth month
added after the return of a certain space of years (as we add one day to the
year every Leap year) to make up the defect of five days loss every year,
their twelve months making but just 360. days, whereas a year contains
ordinarily 365. and sometimes 366. days. Now though the Flood fell out
precisely Anno Mundi 1657. yet I have noted it An. M. 1656. because this year
runs parallel with the 600. year of Noah's life, as is evident by the text, Genesis
7.11. from which I durst not vary: but this difference may easily be
reconciled. Suppose Noah's 600. y. began in the third month, Anno 1656. the
Flood happening in the second month, Anno 1657. fell within the compass of Noah's
600. year, and yet at the same time light at the beginning of the 1657. year of
the world: for we must not think that the years of Noah's life ran parellel with
the years of the world to a month and a day, but that the 600 year of Noah's
life contained part of the 1656 and 1657. year of the world, so as the Flood
happened in the latter end of Noah's, 600. y. and the beginning of the 1657. y. of
the world: And had I set the Flood in 1657. the Reader might have concluded it
fell out in the 601. y. of Noah's life, which is false and clear against the
Scripture, Genesis 7.11. This I thought fit to note for prevention of mistake.

Withal the Reader may note that Methuselah dyed but few months before the
Flood came, his last year running with the 600. y. of Noah's life, and the 1656
y. of the world: which thing the Prophet Enoch foretold in his very name; which
verbatim signifies [Mortuo hoc missile,] that is, This man being dead a dart:
meaning that after his death immediately God would send that dart or arrow of
his vengeance, the Flood. The same word signifies both [a Dart,] and [to
send,] only one is a root, the other a derivative.

Lamech dyed five years before his father Methuselah.

Methus. Genesis 5.21. Lamec Gen 5.25. Noah Genesis 5.28. CXX S. W. 854 667 485
V^^^^s of Gods p^^im^e. 221 855 668 486 10 856 669 487 857 670 488 858 671 489
859 672 490 860 673 491 861 674 492 222 1550 862 675 493 863 676 494 864 677
495 865 678 496 866 679 497 867 680 498 31 Jubi. 868 681 499 20 223 1560 869
682 500 870 683 501 871 684 502

The 120. years of Gods patience to the old world began (Genesis 6.3.) with the
480. year of Noah's life.

That Shem was born, not when Noah was 500. but 502. year old, See in the
Preface: compare Genesis 5.32. and 11.10.

Methus. Genesis 5.21. Lamec Gen 5.25. Noah Genesis 5.28. Shem CXX S. W. 872 685 503
1 20 223 1560 873 686 504 2 874 687 505 3 875 688 506 4 30 224 876 689 507 5
877 690 508 6 878 691 509 7 879 ^92 510 8 880 ^93 511 9 881 694 512 10 882 695
513 11 32 Jubi. 1570 883 696 514 12 225 884 697 515 13 885 698 516 14 886 699
517 15 887 700 518 16 888 701 519 17 889 702 520 18 40 226 1580 890 703 521 19
891 704 522 20 892 705 523 21 893 706 524 22 894 707 525 23 895 708 526 24 896
709 527 25 50 227 897 710 528 26 898 711 529 27 899 712 530 28 900 713 531 29
901 714 532 30 902 715 533 31 903 716 534 32 60 228 1590 904 717 535 33 905 718
536 34 906 719 537 35 907 720 538 36 908 721 539 37 909 722 540 38 910 723 541
39 229 1600 911 724 542 40 912 725 543 41 913 726 544 42 914 727 545 43 915 728
546 44 916 729 547 45 32 Jubi. 917 730 548 46 70 230 1610 918 731 549 47 919
732 550 48 920 733 551 49 921 734 552 50 922 735 553 51 923 736 554 52 924 737
555 53 80 231 925 738 556 54 926 739 557 55 927 740 558 56 928 741 559 57 929
742 560 58 930 743 561 59 931 744 562 60 33 Jubi. 1620 932 745 563 61 232 933
746 564 62 934 747 565 63 935 748 566 64 936 749 567 65 937 750 568 66 938 751
569 67 90 233 1630 939 752 570 68 940 753 571 69 941 754 572 70 942 755 573 71
943 756 574 72 944 757 575 73 945 758 576 74 100 234 946 759 577 75 947 760 578
76 948 761 579 77 949 762 580 78 950 763 581 79 951 764 582 80 952 765 583 81
235 1640 953 766 584 82 954 767 585 83 955 768 586 84 956 769 587 85 957 770
588 86 958 771 589 87 959 772 590 88 110 236 1650 960 773 591 89 961 774 592 90
962 775 593 91 963 776 594 92 964 777 595 93

Methus. Genesis 5.21. Noah Genesis 5.28. Shem CXX S. W. 965 596 94 33 Jubi. 966 597
95 120 237 967 598 96 968 599 97 969 600 98

Noah Genesis 5.28. Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Flood S. W. 601 99 237 602 100 603 101 1
604 102 2 10 238 1660 605 103 3 606 104 4 607 105 5 608 106 6 609 107 7

Noah Genesis 5.28. Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Flood S. W. 610 108 8 611 109 9 34 Jubi.
1670 612 110 10 239 613 111 11 614 112 12 615 113 13 616 114 14 617 115 15 618
116 16 20 240 1680 619 117 17 620 118 18 621 119 19 622 120 20 623 121 21 624
122 22 625 123 23 30 241 626 124 24 627 125 25 628 126 26 629 127 27 630 128 28
631 129 29 632 130 30 242 1690 633 131 31 634 132 32 635 133 33 636 134 34 637
135 35

Noah Genesis 5.28. Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Flood S. W. 638 136 36
1 639 137 37 2 40 243 1700 640 138 38 3 641 139 39 4 642 140 40 5 643 141 41 6
644 142 42 7 645 143 43 8 646 144 44 9 50 244 34 Jubi. 647 145 45 10 648 146 46
11 649 147 47 12 650 148 48 13 651 149 49 14 652 150 50 15 653 151 51 16 245
1710 654 152 52 17 655 153 53 18 656 154 54 19 657 155 55 20 658 156 56 21 659
157 57 22 660 158 58 23 60 35 Jubi. 1720 661 159 59 24 246 662 160 60 25 663
161 61 26 664 162 62 27 665 163 63 28 666 164 64 29 667 165 65 30

Noah Genesis 5.28. Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Flood
S. W. 668 166 66 31 1 70 247 669 167 67 32 2 670 168 68 33 3 671 169 69 34 4
672 170 70 35 5 673 171 71 36 6 674 172 72 37 7 80 248 1730 675 173 73 38 8 676
174 74 39 9 677 175 75 40 10 678 176 76 41 11 679 177 77 42 12 680 178 78 43 13
681 179 79 44 14 249 1740 682 180 80 45 15 683 181 81 46 16 684 182 82 47 17
685 183 83 48 18 686 184 84 49 19 687 185 85 50 20 688 186 86 51 21 90 250 1750
689 187 87 52 22 690 188 88 53 23 691 189 89 54 24 692 190 90 55 25 693 191 91
56 26 694 192 92 57 27 695 193 93 58 28 100 251 35 Jubi. 696 194 94 59 29 697
195 95 60 30 698 196 96 61 31 699 197 97 62 32 700 198 98 63 33 701 199 99 64
34

Noah Genesis 5.28. Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Peleg
Genesis 11.16. Flood S. W. 702 200 100 65 35 1 252 1760 703 201 101 66 36 2 704
202 102 67 37 3 705 203 103 68 38 4 706 204 104 69 39 5 707 205 105 70 40 6 708
206 106 71 41 7 709 207 107 72 42 8 110 36 Jubi. 1770 710 208 108 73 43 9 253
711 209 109 74 44 10 712 210 110 75 45 11 713 211 111 76 46 12 714 212 112 77
47 13 715 213 113 78 48 14 716 214 114 79 49 15 120 254 717 215 115 80 50 16
718 216 116 81 51 17 719 217 117 82 52 18 720 218 118 83 53 19 721 219 119 84
54 20 722 220 120 85 55 21 723 221 121 86 56 22 255 1780 724 222 122 87 57 23
725 223 123 88 58 24 726 224 124 89 59 25 727 225 125 90 60 26 728 226 126 91
61 27 729 227 127 92 62 28 730 228 128 93 63 29 130 256 1790 731 229 129 94 64
30

Noah Genesis 5.28. Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Peleg
Genesis 11.16. Reu Genesis 11.18. Flood S. W. 732 230 130 95 65 31 1 130 256 1790 733
231 131 96 66 32 2 734 232 132 97 67 33 3 735 233 133 98 68 34 4 736 234 134 99
69 35 5 737 235 135 100 70 36 6 140 257 738 236 136 101 71 37 7 739 237 137 102
72 38 8 740 238 138 103 73 39 9 741 239 139 104 74 40 10 742 240 140 105 75 41
11 743 241 141 106 76 42 12 744 242 142 107 77 43 13 150 258 1800 745 243 143
108 78 44 14 746 244 144 109 79 45 15 747 245 145 110 80 46 16 748 246 146 111
81 47 17 749 247 147 112 82 48 18 750 248 148 113 83 49 19 36 Jubi. 751 249 149
114 84 50 20 259 1810 752 250 150 115 85 51 21 753 251 151 116 86 52 22 754 252
152 117 87 53 23 755 253 153 118 88 54 24 756 254 154 119 89 55 25 757 255 155
120 90 56 26 758 256 156 121 91 57 27 160 37 Jubi. 1820 759 257 157 122 92 58
28 260 760 258 158 123 93 59 29 761 259 159 124 94 60 30 762 260 160 125 95 61
31 763 261 161 126 96 62 32

Noah Genesis 5.28. Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Peleg
Genesis 11.16. Reu Genesis 11.18. Serug Genesis 11.20. Flood S. W. 764 262 162 127 97 63
33 1 1600 260 1820 765 263 163 128 98 64 34 2 170 261 766 264 164 129 99 65 35
3 767 265 165 130 100 66 36 4 768 266 166 131 101 67 37 5 769 267 167 132 102
68 38 6 770 268 168 133 103 69 39 7 771 269 169 134 104 70 40 8 772 270 170 135
105 71 41 9 262 1830 773 271 171 136 106 72 42 10 774 272 172 137 107 73 43 11
775 273 173 138 108 74 44 12 776 274 174 139 109 75 45 13 777 275 175 140 110
76 46 14 778 276 176 141 111 77 47 15 779 277 177 142 112 78 48 16 180 263 1840
780 278 178 143 113 79 49 17 781 279 179 144 114 80 50 18 782 280 180 145 115
81 51 19 783 281 181 146 116 82 52 20 784 282 182 147 117 83 53 21 785 283 183
148 118 84 54 22 786 284 184 149 119 85 55 23 190 264 787 285 185 150 120 86 56
24 788 286 186 151 121 87 57 25 789 287 187 152 122 88 58 26 790 288 188 153
123 89 59 27 791 289 189 154 124 90 60 28 792 290 190 155 125 91 61 29 793 291
191 156 126 92 62 30

Noah Genesis 5.28. Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Peleg
Genesis 11.16. Reu Genesis 11.18. Serug Genesis 11.20. Nahor Genesis 11.22. Flood S. W. 794
292 192 157 127 93 63 31 1 265 1850 795 293 193 158 128 94 64 32 2 796 294 194
159 129 95 65 33 3 797 295 195 160 130 96 66 34 4 798 296 196 161 131 97 67 35
5 799 297 197 162 132 98 68 36 6 37 Jubi. 800 298 198 163 133 99 69 37 7 200
266 1860 801 299 199 164 134 100 70 38 8 802 300 200 165 135 101 71 39 9 803
301 201 166 136 102 72 40 10 804 302 202 167 137 103 73 41 11 805 303 203 168
138 104 74 42 12 806 304 204 169 139 105 75 43 13 807 305 205 170 140 106 76 44
14 210 38 Jubi. 808 306 206 171 141 107 77 45 15 267 809 307 207 172 142 108 78
46 16 810 308 208 173 143 109 79 47 17 811 309 209 174 144 110 80 48 18 812 310
210 175 145 111 81 49 19 813 311 211 176 146 112 82 50 20 814 312 212 177 147
113 83 51 21 220 268 1870 815 313 213 178 148 114 84 52 22 816 314 214 179 149
115 85 53 23 817 315 215 180 150 116 86 54 24 818 316 216 181 151 117 87 55 25
819 317 217 182 152 118 88 56 26 820 318 218 183 153 119 89 57 27 821 319 219
184 154 120 90 58 28 822 320 220 185 155 121 91 59 29

Noah Genesis 5.28. Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Peleg
Genesis 11.16. Reu Genesis 11.18. Serug Genesis 11.20. Nahor Genesis 11.22. Terah Genesis
11.24. Flood S. W. 823 321 221 186 156 122 92 60 30 1 269 1880 824 322 222 187
157 123 93 61 31 2 825 323 223 188 158 124 94 62 32 3 826 324 224 189 159 125
95 63 33 4 827 325 225 190 160 126 96 64 34 5 828 326 226 191 161 127 97 65 35
6 230 270 1890 829 327 227 192 162 128 98 66 36 7 830 328 228 193 163 129 99 67
37 8 831 329 229 194 164 130 100 68 38 9 832 330 230 195 165 131 101 69 39 10
833 331 231 196 166 132 102 70 40 11 834 332 232 197 167 133 103 71 41 12 835
333 233 198 168 134 104 72 42 13 240 271 836 334 234 199 169 135 105 73 43 14
837 335 235 200 170 136 106 74 44 15 838 336 236 201 171 137 107 75 45 16 839
337 237 202 172 138 108 76 46 17 840 338 238 203 173 139 109 77 47 18 841 339
239 204 174 140 110 78 48 19 842 340 240 205 175 141 111 79 49 20 272 1900 843
341 241 206 176 142 112 80 50 21 844 342 242 207 177 143 113 81 51 22 845 343
243 208 178 144 114 82 52 23 846 344 244 209 179 145 115 83 53 24 847 345 245
210 180 146 116 84 54 25 848 346 246 211 181 147 117 85 55 26 38 Jubi. 849 347
247 212 182 148 118 86 56 27 250 273 1910 850 348 248 213 183 149 119 87 57 28
851 349 249 214 184 150 120 88 58 29 852 350 250 215 185 151 121 89 59 30 853
351 251 216 186 152 122 90 60 31 854 352 252 217 187 153 123 91 61 32 855 353
253 218 188 154 124 92 62 33 856 354 254 219 189 155 125 93 63 34 260 39 Jubi.
857 355 255 220 190 156 126 94 64 35 274 858 356 256 221 191 157 127 95 65 36
859 357 257 222 192 158 128 96 66 37 860 358 258 223 193 159 129 97 67 38 861
359 259 224 194 160 130 98 68 39 862 360 260 225 195 161 131 99 69 40 863 361
261 226 196 162 132 100 70 41 275 1920 864 362 262 227 197 163 133 101 71 42
865 363 263 228 198 164 134 102 72 43 866 364 264 229 199 165 135 103 73 44 867
365 265 230 200 166 136 104 74 45 868 366 266 231 201 167 137 105 75 46 869 367
267 232 202 168 138 106 76 47 870 368 268 233 203 169 139 107 77 48 270 276
1930 871 369 269 234 204 170 140 108 78 49 872 370 270 235 205 171 141 109 79
50 873 371 271 236 206 172 142 110 80 51 874 372 272 237 207 173 143 111 81 52
875 373 273 238 208 174 144 112 82 53 876 374 274 239 209 175 145 113 83 54 877
375 275 240 210 176 146 114 84 55 280 277 878 376 276 241 211 177 147 115 85 56
879 377 277 242 212 178 148 116 86 57 880 378 278 243 213 179 149 117 87 58 881
379 279 244 214 180 150 118 88 59 882 380 280 245 215 181 151 119 89 60 883 381
281 246 216 182 152 120 90 61 884 382 282 247 217 183 153 121 91 62 290 278
1940 885 383 283 248 218 184 154 122 92 63 886 384 284 249 219 185 155 123 93
64 887 385 285 250 220 186 156 124 94 65 888 386 286 251 221 187 157 125 95 66
889 387 287 252 222 188 158 126 96 67 890 388 288 253 223 189 159 127 97 68 891
389 289 254 224 190 160 128 98 69 279 1950 892 390 290 255 225 191 161 129 99
70 893 391 291 256 226 192 162 130 100 71 894 392 292 257 227 193 163 131 101
72 895 393 293 258 228 194 164 132 102 73 896 394 294 259 229 195 165 133 103
74 897 395 295 260 230 196 166 134 104 75 39 Jubi. 898 396 296 261 231 197 167
135 105 76 300 280 1960 899 397 297 262 232 198 168 136 106 77 900 398 298 263
233 199 169 137 107 78 901 399 299 264 234 200 170 138 108 79 902 400 300 265
235 201 171 139 109 80 903 401 301 266 236 202 172 140 110 81 904 402 302 267
237 203 173 141 111 82 905 403 303 268 238 204 174 142 112 83 310 40 Jubi. 906
404 304 269 239 205 175 143 113 84 281 907 405 305 270 240 206 176 144 114 85
908 406 306 271 241 207 177 145 115 86 909 407 307 272 242 208 178 146 116 87
910 408 308 273 243 209 179 147 117 88 911 409 309 274 244 210 180 148 118 89
912 410 310 275 245 211 181 149 119 90 282 1970 913 411 311 276 246 212 182 150
120 91 914 412 312 277 247 213 183 151 121 92 915 413 313 278 248 214 184 152
122 93 916 414 314 279 249 215 185 153 123 94 917 415 315 280 250 216 186 154
124 95 918 416 316 281 251 217 187 155 125 96 919 417 317 282 252 218 188 156
126 97 320 283 1980 920 418 318 283 253 219 189 157 127 98 921 419 319 284 254
220 190 158 128 99 922 420 320 285 255 221 191 159 129 100 923 421 321 286 256
222 192 160 130 101 924 422 322 287 257 223 193 161 131 102 925 423 323 288 258
224 194 162 132 103 926 424 324 289 259 225 195 163 133 104 330 284 927 425 325
290 260 226 196 164 134 105 928 426 326 291 261 227 197 165 135 106 929 427 327
292 262 228 198 166 136 107 930 428 328 293 263 229 199 167 137 108 931 429 329
294 264 230 200 168 138 109 932 430 330 295 265 231 201 169 139 110 933 431 331
296 266 232 202 170 140 111 285 1990 934 432 332 297 267 233 203 171 141 112
935 433 333 298 268 234 204 172 142 113 936 434 334 299 269 235 205 173 143 114
937 435 335 300 270 236 206 174 144 115 938 436 336 301 271 237 207 175 145 116
939 437 337 302 272 238 208 176 146 117 940 438 338 303 273 239 209 177 147 118

Noah Genesis 5.28. Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Reu
Genesis 11.18. Serug Genesis 11.20. Nahor Genesis 11.22. Terah Genesis 11.24. Flood S. W.
941 439 339 304 274 210 178 148 119 340

Noah Genesis 5.28. Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Reu
Genesis 11.18. Serug Genesis 11.20. Terah Genesis 11.24. Flood S. W. 942 440 340 305 275
211 179 120 340 286 2000 943 441 341 306 276 212 180 121 944 442 342 307 277
213 181 122 945 443 343 308 278 214 182 123 946 444 344 309 279 215 183 124 40
Jubi. 947 445 345 310 280 216 184 125 350 287 948 446 346 311 281 217 185 126
949 447 347 312 282 218 186 127 950 448 348 313 283 219 187 128

Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Reu Genesis 11.18. Serug
Genesis 11.20. Terah Genesis 11.24. Abrah Flood S. W. 449 349 314 284 220 188 129 450
350 315 285 221 189 130 451 351 316 286 222 190 131 1 452 352 317 287 223 191
132 2 360 41 Jubi. 2010 453 353 318 288 224 192 133 3 288 454 354 319 289 225
193 134 4 455 355 320 290 226 194 135 5 456 356 321 291 227 195 136 6 457 357
322 292 228 196 137 7 458 358 323 293 229 197 138 8 459 359 324 294 230 198 139
9 460 360 325 295 231 199 140 10

Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Reu Genesis 11.18. Serug
Genesis 11.20. Terah Genesis 11.24. Abrah Sarah Flood S. W. 461 361 326 296 232 200
141 11 1 289 2020 462 362 327 297 233 201 142 12 2 463 363 328 298 234 202 143
13 3 464 364 329 299 235 203 144 14 4 465 365 330 300 236 204 145 15 5 466 366
331 301 237 205 146 16 6 370 290 2030 467 367 332 302 238 206 147 17 7 468 368
333 303 239 207 148 18 8

Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Serug Genesis 11.20.
Terah Genesis 11.24. Abrah Sarah Flood S. W. 469 369 334 304 208 149 19 9 470 370
335 305 209 150 20 10 471 371 336 306 210 151 21 11 472 372 337 307 211 152 22
12 473 373 338 308 212 153 23 13 380 291 474 374 339 309 213 154 24 14 475 375
340 310 214 155 25 15 476 376 341 311 215 156 26 16 477 377 342 312 216 157 27
17 478 378 343 313 217 158 28 18 479 379 344 314 218 159 29 19 480 380 345 315
219 160 30 20 292 2040 481 381 346 316 220 161 31 21 482 382 347 317 221 162 32
22 483 383 348 318 222 163 33 23 484 384 349 319 223 164 34 24 485 385 350 320
224 165 35 25 486 386 351 321 225 166 36 26 487 387 352 322 226 167 37 27 390
293 2050 488 388 353 323 227 168 38 28 489 389 354 324 228 169 39 29 490 390
355 325 229 170 40 30 491 391 356 326 230 171 41 31

Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Terah Genesis 11.24.
Abrah Sarah Flood S. W. 492 392 357 327 172 42 32 493 393 358 328 173 43 33 494
394 359 329 174 44 34 400 294 41 Jubi. 495 395 360 330 175 45 35 496 396 361
331 176 46 36 497 397 362 332 177 47 37 498 398 363 333 178 48 38 499 399 364
334 179 49 39 500 400 365 335 180 50 40 501 401 366 336 181 51 41 42 Jubi. 2060
502 402 367 337 182 52 42 295 503 403 368 338 183 53 43 504 404 369 339 184 54
44 505 405 370 340 185 55 45 506 406 371 341 186 56 46 507 407 372 342 187 57
47 508 408 373 343 188 58 48 410 296 2070 509 409 374 344 189 59 49 510 410 375
345 190 60 50 511 411 376 346 191 61 51 512 412 377 347 192 62 52 513 413 378
348 193 63 53 514 414 379 349 194 64 54 515 415 380 350 195 65 55 420 297 516
416 381 351 196 66 56 517 417 382 352 197 67 57 518 418 383 353 198 68 58 519
419 384 354 199 69 59 520 420 385 355 200 70 60

Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Terah Genesis 11.24.
Abrah Sarah Flood S. W. 521 421 386 356 201 71 61 522 422 387 357 202 72 62 430
298 2080 523 423 388 358 203 73 63 524 424 389 359 204 74 64 525 425 390 360
205 75 65

Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Abrah Sarah Flood
Prom S. W. 526 426 391 361 76 66 430 Gal. 3.17. Gen.12.40. 527 427 392 362 77
67 528 428 393 363 78 68 529 429 394 364 79 69 10 299 2090 530 430 395 365 80
70 531 431 396 366 81 71 532 432 397 367 82 72 533 433 398 368 83 73 534 434
399 369 84 74 535 435 400 370 85 75 536 436 401 371 86 76

Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Abrah Sarah Ishm Genesis
16.16 Flood Prom S. W. 537 437 402 372 87 77 1 440 20 300 2100 538 438 403 373
88 78 2

The promise was made to Abraham being (not 75. but) 70. year old when he was
in Ur, (not in Haran) as is proved from Acts. 7.2, 3. See the second Difficulty
in the Preamble.

Isaac was born in a year of Jubilee, and precisely 30. year after the
Promise: An especial type of Christ, who in his thirtieth year entered upon his
Prophetical Office. His love was such to Rebeckah, that he is not recorded to
have any wife or concubine but only her. As Christ, so he, was obedient to his
father even unto the death, though he had strength enough to resist, being (as
is supposed) about that time between twenty and thirty year old, (Genesis 22.9,
10.) yea, by some he is thought to have been then above thirty year old. His
very name (signifying laughter) shows the great Joy shall come unto the Church
by Christ, who for our sakes was a man of sorrows and wept often, but is never
recorded in Scripture to laugh. And whether Abraham's laughter upon the promise
of Isaacks birth (Genesis 17.17.) (as a type of Christ) were not his rejoicing to
see Christ's day, (Joh. 8.56.) (at least in part) I leave it to the judgment of
the Godly learned.

Sarah is the only woman whose age is mentioned in Scripture, Genesis 23.1.
Broughton.

Isaac being forty y. old marries Rebeckah three years after his Mothers
death. Genesis 25.20.

Shem Arph Genesis 11.10. Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Abrah Sarah Flood
Prom. S. W. 539 404 374 89 79 3 440 20 300 2100 540 405 375 90 80 4 541 406 376
91 81 5 542 407 377 92 82 6 543 408 378 93 83 7 450 301 42 Jubi. 544 409 379 94
84 8 545 410 380 95 85 9 546 411 381 96 86 10 547 412 382 97 87 11 548 413 383
98 88 12 549 414 384 99 89 13 550 415 385 100 90 14

That Shem might be Melchizedek is probable enough, since he lived to the 150.
year of Abraham's life: whereas that fight (Genesis 14.) happened between the 75. and
85. year of Abraham's life. Genesis 12.4. and 16.3.

Suppose Rebeckah were but 15. y. old when Isaac married her, she could not be
less then 112. y. old when Jacob fled to Laban, as appears by adding 20. y.
after her marriage to Jacobs birth, and 77. years of Jacobs life when he went
to his Uncle, to the age of Rebeckah when she was married. In all probability
she dyed before Jacobs 20 years service expired, else at his return she must
needs be 132 y. old, and 5 y. older than Sarah her mother in law was at her
death.

Abraham died not till Jacob was 15. year old: which explains that place Heb.
11.9. how Abraham dwelt with Isaac and Jacob.

Eber was the seventh from Enoch (as Enoch was from Adam,) yet with this
difference, that Enoch was the seventh from Adam inclusively, Eber the seventh
from Enoch exclusively, but the fourteenth from Adam, as Isaac was the seventh
from Eber and the one and twentieth from Adam, an especial type of Christ, and
the child of the Promise, Gal. 4.28. Heb. 11.17.18. All these (if I may so
call them) were Sabbatical persons, Enoch being the last of the first seven,
Eber of the second, and Isaac of the third: probably he was not far inferior
to Enoch in Godliness. His name continued in Abraham's posterity, who of him
were called Hebrews. Adams Language remained with them until the last Prophets,
though near lost in Babel. Eber lived 4 years after Abraham's death, and was the
longest liver of all that were born after the Flood. vid. Broughton.

Shem Selah Genesis 11.12. Eber Genesis 11.14. Abrah Sarah Ishm. Genesis 16.16 Izaak.
Genesis 17.17. and 21.5. Flood Prom Circ S. W. 551 416 386 101 91 15 1 30 43 Jubi.
2110 552 417 387 102 92 16 2 302 553 418 388 103 93 17 3 554 419 389 104 94 18
4 555 420 390 105 95 19 5 556 421 391 106 96 20 6 557 422 392 107 97 21 7 460
40 10 303 2120 558 423 393 108 98 22 8 559 424 394 109 99 23 9 560 425 395 110
100 24 10 561 426 396 111 101 25 11 562 427 397 112 102 26 12 563 428 398 113
103 27 13 564 429 399 114 104 28 14 470 50 20 304 565 430 400 115 105 29 15 566
431 401 116 106 30 16 567 432 402 117 107 31 17 568 433 403 118 108 32 18

Shem Eber Genesis 11.14. Abrah Sarah Ishm. Genesis 16.16 Izaak. Genesis 17.17. and
21.5. Flood Prom Circ S. W. 569 404 119 109 33 19 570 405 120 110 34 20 571 406
121 111 35 21 305 2130 572 407 122 112 36 22 573 408 123 113 37 23 574 409 124
114 38 24 575 410 125 115 39 25 576 411 126 116 40 26 577 412 127 117 41 27 578
413 128 118 42 28 480 60 30 306 2140 579 414 129 119 43 29 580 415 130 120 44
30 581 416 131 121 45 31 582 417 132 122 46 32 583 418 133 123 47 33 584 419
134 124 48 34 585 420 135 125 49 35 490 70 40 307 586 421 136 126 50 36 587 422
137 127 51 37 588 423 138 Gen.23.1. 52 38

Shem Eber Genesis 11.14. Abrah Ishm. Genesis 16.16 Isaac. Genesis 17.17. and 21.5.
Flood Prom Circ S. W. 589 424 139 53 39 590 425 140 54 40 591 426 141 55 41 592
427 142 56 42 500 308 2150 593 428 143 57 43 594 429 144 58 44 595 430 145 59
45 596 431 146 60 46 597 432 147 61 47 598 433 148 62 48 43 Jubi. 599 434 149
63 49 600 435 150 64 50

Ishmael the only wicked whose age is recorded in the Law, Genesis 25.17.
Broughton.

Probably Jacob married the same year he came to Laben, namely when he was 77
years old: else if we suppose he married not Leah till the end of his 7 years
service, he must be 84 years old before he married, and also must be conceived
to have a dozen children in 7 years space. Now supposing he was 77 years old at
his marriage, grant him but every year a child: Levi his third Son was born
when Jacob was 80 years old; And this only probable ground have I of Levi his
birth at that time: his age see Exo. 6.16. Esau being 40 years old marries his
two first wives, Genesis 26.34. and was at least 77 years old when he married his
third wife, namely Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael, Genesis 28.9. upon occasion
of Jacobs going to Laban in the 77 year of his age, as shall afterward be
cleared: and both the brothers being twins, who sees not but Esau must needs be
77 years old at least if he married not Ishmaels daughter till Jacob was 77
years old?

That Jacob was 77 years old when he traveled to his Uncle Laban, may be thus
cleared. Jacob was 130 years old when he stood before Pharaoh, Genesis 47.9. at
the same time Joseph was 39 years old, Genesis 45.6.11. compared with Genesis
41.46.29.30.53, 54. which appears thus: He was thirty years old when he
expounded Pharaohs dreams, Genesis 41.46. The years of plenty were 7, and as many
of famine, verse 29, 30.53, 54. of the same chapter: of these 14 years the 7
years of Plenty, and two years of Famine were past when Jacob came to Egypt,
Genesis 45.6.11. which added together make 9 years, and these added to Joseph's 30
years make 39 years, the just age of Joseph wheir his Father was 130 years old:
substract now 39 out of 130, there rest 91 years, the just age of Jacob when
Joseph was born. Lastly, out of 91 substract 14 years, the time of Jacobs
service at the birth of Joseph, Genesis 30.25, 26. compared with Genesis 31.41. there
rest 77 year, the just age of Jacob when he came to Laban.

Eber Genesis 11.14. Abrah Ishm. Genesis 16.16 Isaac. Genesis 17.17. and 21.5. Flood
Prom Circ S. W. 436 151 65 51 80 50 44 Jubi. 2160 437 152 66 52 309 438 153 67
53 439 154 68 54 440 155 69 55 441 156 70 56 510 90 60 310 2170 442 157 71 57
443 158 72 58 444 159 73 59 445 160 74 60

Eber Genesis 11.14. Abrah Ishm. Genesis 16.16 Isaac. Genesis 17.17. and 21.5. Jacob
Genesis 25.26 Flood Prom Circ S. W. 446 161 75 61 1 447 162 76 62 2 448 163 77 63
3 520 70 311 449 164 78 64 4 450 165 79 65 5 451 166 80 66 6 452 167 81 67 7
453 168 82 68 8 454 169 83 69 9 455 170 84 70 10 100 312 2180 456 171 85 71 11
457 172 86 72 12 458 173 87 73 13 459 174 88 74 14 460 175 89 75 15

Eber Genesis 11.14. Ishm. Genesis 16.16 Isaac. Genesis 17.17. and 21.5. Jacob Genesis
25.26 Flood Prom Circ S. W. 461 90 76 16 462 91 77 17 530 110 80 313 2190 463
92 78 18 464 93 79 19

Ishm. Genesis 16.16 Isaac. Genesis 17.17. and 21.5. Jacob Genesis 25.26 Flood Prom
Circ S. W. 94 80 20 530 110 80 313 2190 95 81 21 96 82 22 97 83 23 98 84 24 540
120 90 314 99 85 25 100 86 26 101 87 27 102 88 28 103 89 29 104 90 30 105 91 31
315 2200 106 92 32 107 93 33 108 94 34 109 95 35 110 96 36 111 97 37 44 Jubi.
112 98 38 550 130 100 45 Jubil. 2210 113 99 39 316 114 100 40 115 101 41 116
102 42 117 103 43 118 104 44 119 105 45 560 140 110 317 120 106 46 121 107 47
122 108 48 123 109 49 124 110 50 125 111 51 126 112 52 570 318 2220 127 113 53
128 114 54 129 115 55 130 116 56 131 117 57 132 118 58 133 119 59 150 120 319
2230 134 120 60 135 121 61 136 122 62 137 123 63

From the 17 to the 39 of Joseph, Joseph's brethren lay under the guilt of that
great sin of selling their brother, and that without remorse, namely for the
space of 22 years, Genesis 42.21, 22.

Joseph being 17 year old is sold for a slave, (Genesis 37.2.) Nourishes his
Father Jacob as many years in Egypt, together with all his family, Genesis 47.12.
and so (if ever any) made requital to his Parent, according to that rule, 1 Timothy 4.5.

Within the space of 210 years Jacobs posterity increased from seventy souls to
six hundred thousand and more, Gen 46.27. compared with Exodus 12.37. a clear
evidence of the faithfulness of Gods Promise, Genesis 13.16. and 15.5. Deuteronomy.
10.21. and the mighty power of Faith, Heb. 11.11, 12. To evidence this, note,
from the Promise made to Abraham being 70 year old, to the going out of Egypt
are 430 years, Exodus 12.40. Gal. 3.17. of this to Isaacks birth are 30 years,
thence to Jacobs birth, 60 years, thence to the going into Egypt 130 years;
all which being added together make 220 years, which being subtracted from
430, leave 210 years, the just time of the Israelites sojourning in Egypt,
where they increased so mightily.

Jacob goes from Laban being 97 years old, after 20 years hard service Genesis
31.38. About the same time he wrestleth with the Angel, and is called Israel,
Genesis 32.24.28.

About this time also Deborah Rebeckahs nurse dyed, and could not well be less
than 147. year old at her death. Suppose her but 15. year old when Rebeckah was
born, and Rebeckah but 15 year old when she was married to Isaac, she was then
thirty years old at Rebeckahs marriage: to this ad 20 years after the marriage
before Jacob was born, Genesis 25.20.26. and 97 years more the age of Jacob when
he went from Laban: Add all these together, it makes 147 years, the least age
of Deborah when she dyed: and probably she might be older, for no man knows how
long Jacob dwelt at Shechem; as also at Succoth, Genesis 33.17.19. as also how
long he stayed at Bethel before her death: for at Shechem he bought land, and
at Bethel after his journey from Shechem he built an Altar, Genesis 35.6, 7. and
there Deborah died and was buried: no doubt a Godly and very ancient Matron:
She outlived Sarah at least 20 years.

Isaac (though born of almost dead Parents) lives the longest of any after
Terah, that the strength of the Promise might appear, Genesis 35.28. Romans 4.19.20.
Broughton.

Isaac. Genesis 17.17. and 21.5. Jacob Genesis 25.26 Flood Prom Circ S. W. 124 64
125 65 126 66 580 160 130 320 2240 127 67 128 68 129 69 130 70 131 71 132 72
133 73 590 140 321 134 74 135 75 136 76 137 77 138 78 139 79 140 80

Isaac. Genesis 17.17. and 21.5. Jacob Genesis 25.26 Levi Flood Prom Circ S. W. 141
81 1 170 322 2250 142 82 2 143 83 3 144 84 4 145 85 5 146 86 6 45 Jubi. 147 87
7 600 180 150 323 2260 148 88 8 149 89 9 150 90 10 151 91 11

Genesis 46.26. only 66 persons went down into Egypt: it must be understood only
of Jacobs posterity that went with him at that time.

Verse 27. All the souls were 70, namely by adding Jacob himself, together
with Joseph and the two sons of Joseph, who were already in Egypt, and
descended virtually in their Father Joseph his loins, but were both begot and
born in Egypt; nor could the eldest of them be above 9 years old when Jacob
came into Egypt.

Acts 7.14. They are made to be 75 souls. Luke herein following the
Septuagint, who borrow five out (I Chron.7.) that were the children of Manasseh
and Ephraim, whom Joseph lived to see as his third Generation, which as an
especial blessing is noted in the Original with a great MEM, Genesis 50.23.
Broughton.

Isaac. Genesis 17.17. and 21.5. Jacob Genesis 25.26 Levi Joseph Flood Prom Circ S.
W. 152 92 12 1 153 93 13 2 154 94 14 3 610 190 160 324 155 95 15 4 156 96 16 5
157 97 17 6 158 98 18 7 159 99 19 8 160 100 20 9 161 101 21 10 325 2270 162 102
22 11 163 103 23 12 164 104 24 13 165 105 25 14 166 106 26 15 167 107 27 16 168
108 28 17 620 200 170 326 2280 169 109 29 18 170 110 30 19 171 111 31 20 172
112 32 21 173 113 33 22 174 114 34 23 175 115 35 24 630 210 180 327 176 116 36
25 177 117 37 26 178 118 38 27 179 119 39 28 180 120 40 29

Jacob Genesis 25.26 Levi Joseph Flood Prom Circ S. W. 121 41 30 122 42 31 640 328
2290 123 43 32 124 44 33 125 45 34 126 46 35 127 47 36 128 48 37 129 49 38 220
190 329 2300 130 50 39 131 51 40 132 52 41 133 53 42 134 54 43 135 55 44 46
Jubi. 136 56 45 650 230 200 47 Jubil. 2310 137 57 46 330 138 58 47 139 59 48
140 60 49 141 61 50 142 62 51 143 63 52 660 210 331 144 64 53 145 65 54 146 66
55 147 67 56

Some would have the Children of Israel to sojourn in Egypt 430 years which is
clear against the Apostle, Gal. 3.17. and is also contradicted by the Genealogy
of the Patriarchs lives, who went down into and came up out of Egypt. Genesis
46.11. Kohath was born before the going into Egypt. Now suppose him but newly
born at that time; his life and the lives of other Patriarchs added together
will not come near 430. y. as is evident by the ensuing draught.

Kohath lived, Exodus 6.18. 133 Amram -- Exodus 6.20. 137 Moses to the Exodus,
Exodus 7.8. 80 Total 350. y.

which falls far short of 430 years: and in truth they sojourned in Egypt but
210 year, as I have formerly showed. The 430 years then begin at Abraham's first
removal out of Ur of the Chaldees. That place therefore Exodus 12.40. is well
rendered by the Translators: The sojourning of the Children of Israel who dwelt
in Egypt etc. and not whiles they dwelt in Egypt, was 430 years; to which
(for explication) the Septuagint add well, Who sojourned in Egypt, and in the
Land of Canaan; for the greater part of those 430 years they sojourned in
Canaan and Haran, (at least some of them) and it is remarkable here, that
Parents are said to sojourn in their children, (for under the children of
Israel in this place, are included Abraham, Isaac and Jacob) as in other
places the children are said to do what their parents did, Heb. 7.9, 10. Romans
5.12. and thus we all sinned in our Grandfather Adam.

The space between Joseph and Moses is unparcelled, and omitted in Scripture,
yet by collection may thus be proved to be 59 years. From the Promise to the
Law is just 430 years: all the parcells of which great sum being mentioned in
scripture either directly or by just consequence, fall short of the 430 years
just 59 years. Ergo, those 59 years must of necessity make up the space between
Joseph and Moses; which space I express by the term [Voyd] in the top of the
column. The parcells stand thus.

From the Promise to Isaacks birth 30 Thence to Jacobs birth 60 Thence to
Joseph's birth 91 Thence to Joseph's death 110 Unparcelled 59 Thence to the going
out of Egypt 80

Total -- 430 years. the just space between the Promise and the Law, or the
going out of Egypt: out of which if the 59 years Void should be subtracted,
there would be just 371 years from the Promise to the Law.

Levi Joseph Flood Prom Circ S. W. 68 57 69 58 70 59 240 332 2320 71 60 72 61
73 62 74 63 75 64 76 65 77 66 670 250 220 333 2330 78 67 79 68 80 69 81 70 82
71 83 72 84 73 680 260 230 334 85 74 86 75 87 76 88 77 89 78 90 79 91 80 335
2340 92 81 93 82 94 83 95 84 96 85 97 86 98 87 690 270 240 336 2350 99 88 100
89 101 90 102 91 103 92 104 93 47 Jubi. 105 94 700 280 250 48 Jubil. 106 95 337
107 96 108 97 109 98 110 99 111 100 112 101 710 338 2360 113 102 114 103 115
104 116 105 117 106 118 107 119 108 120 109 121 110 Genesis 50.26.

Moses was born 350 year after the Promise, Anno Mundi 2428, which is thus
proved, He was 80 year old when he was sent to Pharaoh to bring the people out
of Egypt, Exodus 7.7. at which time also the date of the Promise, (a very
Famous and Memorable Era) expired, Exodus 12.40. and Gal. 3.17. (for the Law
fell out but 50 days after the Exodus, namely at Pentecost or Whitsuntide.)
Substract now 80 years out of 430 there rest 350 years, the just year of the
Promise, in which Moses was born. Aaron being three year older than Moses,
Exodus 7.7. was born An. Mundi 2425. and the 347 year of the Promise: by which
it appears that there are but 56 year Void; but in this we follow other
Chronologers who reckon Void to Moses his birth: and could we directly tell the
year of Levi his birth, the Void space of years should be reckoned from his
death, and not from Joseph's decease. And its easy to prove that he outlived
Joseph 16. years at least, and so the void space from his death to Aarons birth
is at most but 40 years, The age of Levi was 137. years: Exodus 6.16.

Moses was born 350 year after the Promise, just Noah's life after the Flood:
the seventh from Abraham, as Abraham was from Eber, Eber from Enoch, and Enoch
from Adam, Jude verse 14. A new Enoch buried of God, A new Noah, A preaching to
the world, 120 years and ever afterward. He first received and wrote Divinity
with Prophetical authority. He spent 40 years in Pharaohs Court, 40 years in a
private life, and 40 year in governing the people of God in the Wilderness, He
was one of the three great Fasters, and fasted twice forty days. The three who
fasted forty days apeece were Moses the giver of the Law, Elias the restorer
of the Law, and Christ the fulfiller of the Law. Broughton.

Levi Void Flood Prom Circ S. W. 122 1 290 260 339 2370 123 2 124 3 125 4 126 5
720 300 270 340 2380 127 6 128 7 129 8 130 9 131 10 132 11 133 12 730 280 341
134 13 135 14 136 15 137 16 Exo. 6.16. 17

Void. Flood Prom Circ S. W. 18 310 342 2390 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 740 320
290 343 2400 27 28 29 30 31 32 48 Jubi. 33 750 330 300 49 Jubi. 34 344 35 36 37
38 39 40 345 2410 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 760 340 310 346 2420 48 49 50 51 52 53
54 770 350 320 347 55 56

The birth of Joshuah fell out Anno Mund 2455. 377 year after the Promise, He
was 27 year younger than Moses; For proof of which, note, that from the going
out of Egypt to the founding of Solomon's Temple are precisely 480 years, 1
King 6.1. of which the parcels expressly noted in Scripture are, forty year in
the Wilderness, 99 years of the Judges; Ely, Saul, and David, forty years
apeece; four years of Solomon's reign: all which summed up together make four
hundred sixty three years, which fall 17 years short of the 480 years: These 17
years must of necessity be the space of Joshuahs government, though they be
unparcelled in Scripture, as without which the 480 years from the Lamb to the
Temple cannot be made up. Grant then that Joshuah governed just 17 years, (for
the forementioned parcells I shall make good hereafter by peece-meal, only for
present I desire the Reader to credit me in them.) Its evident that the 17 year
of his government runs parallel with the 110 or last year of his life, Josh.
24.29. His government began immediately after the death of Moses, who dyed just
40 years after the going out of Egypt, 17 years after whose death Joshuah
dyed, namely 57 years after the going out of Egypt, and 487 year after the
Promise. Sabstract then 110 years out of 487, there rest 377 year, in which
year of the Promise running parallel with Anno Mundi 2455, Joshuah was born.

Caleb was 15 year younger then Joshuah, and 42 year younger than Moses. He was
born 392 year after the Promise, Anno Mundi 2470 which is thus proved: His
fourtieth year ran parallel with the second year after the going out of Egypt,
at which time he was sent from Kadesh-Barnea to epsy the Land of Canaan, Josh.
14.7. compared with Deutr. 2.14. and therefore he was just 38 year old at the
going out of Egypt: Substract 38 years out of 430 the just date of the Promise
at that time, there rest 392, the just date of the Promise at Calebs birth,
which year of the Promise runs parallel with Anno Mundi 2470. This is further
prooved by his age, 7 year after Canaan was entered Josh. 14.10. his 85 year ran
parallel with the 477 year of the Promise. Substract then 85 from 477, there
rest 392. the just year of the Promise when Caleb was born.

Void. Aaron Flood Prom Circ S. W. 57 1 770 350 320 347 58 2 59 3

Aaron Moses Flood Prom Circ S. W. 4 1 5 2 780 348 2430 6 3 7 4 8 5 9 6 10 7 11
8 12 9 360 330 349 2440 13 10 14 11 15 12 16 13 17 14 18 15 19 16 790 370 340
350 2450 20 17 21 18 22 19 23 20 24 21 25 22 49 Jubi. 26 23 800 350 50 Jubil.
27 24 351 28 25 29 26 30 27

Job lived probably about the time that the Israelitas were in Egypt (and is
thought to proceed out of Abraham's family,) as may appear, partly by his long
life, few living so long after Moses his time: partly by his offering
Sacrifice, which after the building of the Tabernacle was unlawful otherwhere.
Yet some passages seem strongly to hint that Jobs troubles fell out after the
Israelites came out of Egypt. Thus Job 27.12. mention is made of dividing the
Sea, and wounding Rahab, a name in Scripture applied to Egypt. So Job 28.10.
He seems to have an Eye at Gods making waters come out of the rocks, Exodus 17.
and Numb. 20.

Bildad probably came of Shuah, Gen, 25.2. Eliphaz of Teman, Genesis 36.11. both
of Abraham.

Aaron Moses Josh Flood Prom Circ S. W. 31 28 1 32 29 2 33 30 3 380 352 2460 34
31 4 35 32 5 36 33 6 37 34 7 38 35 8 39 36 9 40 37 10 810 390 360 353 2470 41
38 11 42 39 12 43 40 13 44 41 14 45 42 15

Aaron Moses Josh Caleb Flood Prom Circ S. W. 46 43 16 1 47 44 17 2 820 400 370
354 48 45 18 3 49 46 19 4 50 47 20 5 51 48 21 6 52 49 22 7 53 50 23 8 54 51 24
9 355 2480 55 52 25 10 56 53 26 11 57 54 27 12 58 55 28 13 59 56 29 14 60 57 30
15 61 58 31 16 830 410 380 356 2490 62 59 32 17 63 60 33 18 64 61 34 19 65 62
35 20 66 63 36 21 67 64 37 22 68 65 38 23 840 420 390 357 69 66 39 24 70 67 40
25 71 68 41 26 72 69 42 27 73 70 43 28 74 71 44 29 75 72 45 30 850 51 Jubil.
2500 76 73 46 31 358 77 74 47 32 78 75 48 33 79 76 49 34 80 77 50 35 81 78 51
36 50 Jubil. 82 79 52 37 430 400 359 2510 83 80 53 38 84 81 54 39 85 82 55 40
86 83 56 41 87 84 57 42 88 85 58 43

Canaan entered.

The 52 Jubilee of the world (according to our account) fell out in the 365
week of years: answering thereby at once both the Number of weeks and days in
one year, which contains 52 weeks and 365 days. The 53 Jubilee of the world
runs parallel with the first Jubilee of Canaan, they entering Canaan at the end
of the 52 Jubilee, in a Sabbatical year.

There is some difficulty to reconcile that Text, Acts 13.20. with the times of
the Judges: the time of the Judges rule, in the book of Judges, from Joshuahs
death to the last of Samsom is but 299 years, as any who have but ordinary skill
in Arithmetic may see by adding the several years of their several Governments
together. Add to these 40 years of Elies government, 1 Samuel 4.18. the total is
but 399 years, and falls far short of 450 years, which the Apostle reckons upon
in the foregoing text. To salve which difficulty, note first, that the years of
the Judges rule (for Samuels government is included in Saul's reign, Acts
13.21.) are 399. secondly, that the Apostle (probably according to the mind of
the Septuagint) superadds to these the years wherein the Israelitos were
crushed by their oppressors, which in truth are not distinct from, but included
in the years of the Judges rule: yet being added as distinct from them, make up
precisely 450 years, according to the Apostles account, Acts 13.20. as may
appear by what follows. They were oppressed 1 By Cushan. Jud. 3.8. 8 2 By Moab.
Jud. 3.14. 18 3 By Jabin. Jud. 4.3. 20 4 By Midian. Jud. 6.1. 7 5 By Ammon.
Jud. 10.8. 18 6 By the Philistims. Jud. 13.1. 40 Total -- 111. to which add
the years of the Judges government to the last of Ely. 339.

The Sum is -- 450. the just account of the Apostle Acts 13.20. But that the
whole time of the Judges rule cannot contain 450 years is evident by what
follows 1 From the Lamb to Canaan. 40 2 Thence to Joshuahs last 17 3 Thence
(suppose) to Elies last 450 4 Thence to the last of Saul and David 80 5 Thence
to Salomons fourth in which the Temple was founded. 4 Total is -- 591 so that
by this reckoning, from the Lamb to the Temple should be 591 y. contrary to
clear Scripture, 1 Kings 6.1. Substract therefore that 111 years in which the
Israelites were oppressed, There rest -- 480 y. the just space from the going
out of Egypt, to the founding of Solomon's Temple. Whence I clearly conclude,
that those 111 years must needs be superfluous, and were included in the rule
of the Judges.

Aaron Moses Josh Caleb Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Exodus 12.3.40. S. W. 89 86 59
44 860 440 410 10 360 2520 90 87 60 45 91 88 61 46 92 89 62 47 93 90 63 48 94
91 64 49 95 92 65 50 96 93 66 51 870 420 361 97 94 67 52 98 95 68 53 99 96 69
54 100 97 70 55 101 98 71 56 102 99 72 57 103 100 73 58 450 20 362 2530 104 101
74 59 105 102 75 60 106 103 76 61 107 104 77 62 108 105 78 63 109 106 79 64 110
107 80 65 880 460 430 30 363 2540 111 108 81 66 112 109 82 67 113 110 83 68 114
111 84 69 115 112 85 70 116 113 86 71 117 114 87 72 890 470 440 40 364 118 115
88 73 119 116 89 74 120 117 90 75 121 118 91 76 122 119 92 77 123 120 93 78

We must not think that Ehud ruled 80 years; for since the shortning of man's
life to 70 or 80 years, (Psalm. 90.10.) in the time of Moses, nonev ever ruled
so long, (only Joseph is recorded to continue in authority 80 years.) But the
meaning is, that after the expiration of Othniells government it was 80 years
to the end of Ehuds affairs: part of which also included the government of
Shamgar. Broughton.

Its remarkable that the Jubilees of Canaan (according to our account) run
parallel with the Jubilees of the World. Nor need any be scrupled that we
reckon the first Jubilee of Canaan (running parallel with the 53 Jubilee of the
World) to fall out in the 51 year after Canaan was entered, (whereas a Iubilee
in the largest extent contains at most but 50 years complete) since the date of
their Jubilees was reckoned not by the Ecclesiastical year (beginning in Spring
when they entered into Canaan) but by the civil year which began in September or
Autumn immediately succeeding their entrance into Canaan, namely 6 months
after: so as about 6 months after Canaan entered must be reckoned as utterly
lapsed in respect of the first Iubilee of Canaan, which began the Autumn
following their entrance, not in the Spring of that Sabbatical year, in which
precisely they entered Canaan. For as the Jubilees of the World, so also the
Jubilees of Canaan begin in Autumn. Levit. 25.9.

That battle fought Iud. 20. could not probably fall out later then the 43 of
Ehud, though it be recorded per (...) in the end of the Judges. My ground is
because Phineas was present at it, Jud. 20.28. who being at least 20 y. old
when he slew Zimri and Cozby (otherwise he was not capable of bearing arms) at
this time must be above 120 year old, which age was rare in those times. They
who place this History according to the order of Narration, after Samsons
death, must of necessity make Phineas to be above 330 years old: which how
probable, I leave to the judgment of the impartial Reader.

Josh G. Caleb Flood Prom Circ Pasover. S. W. 94. 1 79 52 Jubil. 2550 95. 2 80
365 96. 3 81 97. 4 82 98. 5 83 99. 6 84 100. 7 85 51 Jubi.

Josh G. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 101. 8 900 480 450 50 10 366
2560 102. 9 103. 10 104. 11 105. 12 106. 13 107. 14 108. 15 109. 16 110. 17

Othniel Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 1 910 490 460 60 20 367 2 3 4 5
920 368 2570 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 500 470 70 30 369 2580 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 930
510 480 80 40 370 2590 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 940 490 371 27 28 29 30 31 32 33
520 90 50 53 1 Jubil. 2600 34 372 35 36 37 38 39 52 Jubi. 40

Ehud. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 1 950 530 500 100 60 1 Jub. 2610 2
373 3 4 5 6 7 960 540 510 110 70 374 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 375 2620 15 16 17 18 19
20 21 970 550 520 120 80 376 2630 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 980 560 530 10 90 377 29
30 31 32 33 34 35 990 378 2640 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 570 540 140 100 54 2 Jubil.
2650 43 379 44 45 46 47 48 53 Jubi. 49 1000 580 550 150 110 380 Jub 2 50 Jub 2
51 2660 52 53 54 55 56 1010 560 381 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 590 160 120 382 2670
64 65 66 67 68 69 70 1020 600 570 170 130 383 2680 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 1030
610 580 180 140 384 78 79 80

Debor. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 1 384 2 3 4 385 2690 5 6 7 8 9 10
11 1040 620 590 190 150 55 3 Jubi. 2700 12 386 13 14 15 16 17 54 Jubi. 18 1050
630 600 200 160 3 Jub 19 3 Jub 20 387 21 22 23 24 25 1060 388 2710 26 27 28 29
30 31 32 640 610 210 170 389 2720 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 Judge. 5.21

Gideon. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 1 1070 650 620 220 180 390 2730
2 3 4 5 6 1080 630 391 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 660 230 190 392 2740 14 15 16 17 18 19
20 1090 670 640 240 200 56 4 Jubil. 2750 21 393 22 23 24 25 26 27 1100 680 650
250 210 394 55 Jubi. 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 395 2760 35 36 37 38 39 40 Jud. 8.28.

Abim Jud. 9.22. 1 2 3

Tolah. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 1 1110 690 660 260 220 396 2770 2
3 4 5 1120 700 670 270 230 397 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1130 398 2780 13 14 15 16 17 18
19 710 680 280 240 399 2790 20 21 22 23 Jud. 10.2.

Iair. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 1 2 3 1140 720 690 290 250 57 5
Jubil. 2800 4 400 5 6 7 8 9 10 1150 700 401 56 Jubi. 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 730
300 260 402 2810 18 19 20 21 22 Judge. 10.3

It was but 266 year from the Entrance of Canaan to Jephtahs Victory over the
Ammonites: yet Judges 11.26. Jephtah calls it 300 year for roundnesse of
Number; it being 300 year current, but not complete.

Jephtah is the only bastard commended of God, Heb. 11.32. He only (that we
read of) was an exception against that general rule, Deuteronomy. 23.2. and teaches
that no state, be it never so base (excepting final slavery under sin) can
exclude any out of the Heavenly Canaan. He sacrificed not his daughter, but
made her a perpetual Virgin. Therefore Judge 11.40. that word run in Pihel
signifies not only to Lament, but also to Talk with; the daughters of Israel
coming four times every year to comfort her in her restraint, she being devoted
to perpetual Virginity, and so happily kept for ever from the sight of any man.
In those times perpetual Virginity or Barrenness were accounted sad
afflictions; whether it were because every one hoped the Messiah should or
might possibly at least come out of their Loins, I leave it in Medio: or
whether because Fruitfulness was a great blessing promised upon their
obedience, Deuteronomy. 7.14. and by the rule of contraries, barrenness was judged a
curse.

Iepht. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 1 2 1160 740 710 310 270 403 2820
3 4 5 6 Judge. 12.7.

Ibzan Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 1 2 3 1170 750 720 320 280 404 4 5
6 7 Judge. 12.9.

Elon. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 1 2 3 405 2830 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Judge. 12.11

Abdo^. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 1 1180 760 730 330 290 406 2840 2
3 4 5 6 7 8 Judge 16.24.

How the High Priests Office fell from Eleazar to the line of Ithamar is
uncertain, happily for their sinful compliance under the corrupt times of the
Judges: God might chastise them with this temporal loss. For Ely (who was now
High Priest) came of Ithamar, not of Eleazar and Phineas, as is evident by
their posterity, 1 Chronicles. 24.3.6. Ahimelech there mentioned, was the son of
Abiathar, the son of Ahimelech (whom Doeg slew at the command of Saul, 1 Samuel
22.11.18) the son of Ahitub (the brother of Ichabod, 1 Samuel 14.3.) the son of
Phineas, the son of Eli the High Priest and Judge of Israel, 1 Samuel 2.34. Now
that Ahimelech mentioned 1 Chronicles. 24. is expressly said (verse. 3.) to be of the
sons of Ithamar. But God again for Elies sinful indulgence, makes his House an
Ichabod, without glory: sets up a faithful High Priest in Zadoc who is of
Eleazar, and therein again remembers Phineas, Numb. 25.13. see 1 Samuel 2.35.
compared with 1 Kings 2.27.

Samo^ Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 1 1190 770 740 340 300 58 6 Jubil.
2 407 3 4 5 6 1200 408 2850 7 8 9 10 11 12 57 Jubi. 13 780 750 350 310 409 2860
14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Judge. 16.31

Eli. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 1 1210 790 760 360 320 410 2870 2 3
4 5 6 7 1220 770 411 8 9 10 11 12 S^^^el is thought to be born. 13 14 800 370
330 412 2880 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 1230 810 780 380 340 413 2890 22 23 24 25 26
27 28 1240 820 790 390 350 59 7 Jubi. 29 414 30 31 32 33 34 35 7 Jub 2900 36
415 37 38 39 40 1 Samuel 4.18. 58 Jubi.

The lives of those four, namely Salmon, Boaz, Obed and Jesse, Ruth 4.21, 22.
contained about 400. year: and for their four Ages we have 18 ages from Korah
to Samuels sons, (1 Chronicles. 6.22.28.) or there about. The sons of Korah then
dyed not, Numb. 26.11. but fled from their Father to Moses.

The Government of Samuel and Saul, are reckoned as one, Acts 13.20, 21. yet so
as Samuel is thought to judge the first 20 year, and Saul to rule the last 20
year, which make up that 40 year mentioned by the Apostle: and accordingly I
have set them both together.

From the entrance into Canaan to the birth of David, are 366 year, and yet but
four Generations, namely, Salmon, Boaz, Obed, and Jesse, Ruth, 4.21, 22. and
Matthew. 1.5, 6. Salmon could not be more then 59 years old when Canaan was
entered. For suppose him nineteen years old at the coming out of Egypt, (had
he been but one year older he had dyed among those that were numbered from 20
year old etc. Numb. 26.64.65. compared with Numb. 14.29.) he should then be 59
year old when they entered Canaan. And being probably the heir of the House, he
was not borne in his Fathers old age, who dyed in the Wilderness. But suppose
him to be born after 20 year wandering in the Wilderness; he was then 20 year
old at the entrance into Canaan; about which time suppose Rahab was 15 year
old. He is thought to beget Boaz of Rahab about the end of Othniels Government,
that is 57 year after the entrance into Canaan, being himself at that time 77
year old upon the former supposition of his birth in the Wilderness. If he
were born in Egypt, he could not be less than 97 year old at Boaz his birth.
Suppose now

From Canaan entered to the birth of Boaz 57 Thence to Obeds birth 107 Thence to
Jesse his birth 102 Thence to David's birth 100 Total 366

the just space of time between the Entrance of Canaan and the birth of David.
No wonder then Jesse went for an old man at the conquest of Goliath, 1 Samuel
17.12. when he was at least an hundred year old at David's birth. By all which
may be gathered that Naomi her sojourning happened under the Government of
Othniel, and that Obed was born in the times of Deborah, and Jesse about the
beginning of Jephthahs government, or the end of Jairs Government, and that
unhappy war with the Benjamites happened a good while before the days of
Deborah, Phineas being then alive, Jud. 20.28. who was not probably less than
20 year old when he slew Zimri and Cozby; and suppose he lived an hundred year
after that (being about the fortieth year of their journying in the
Wilderness) his life could reach but the 43 year of Ebuds Government: in whose
time therefore, or in Othniels that war happened.

Sam. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. Sam Barzill^^ Porbably born. 1 Se^
19.32. compared (...) 2 Samuel 15.7. 1 1250 830 800 400 360 7 Jub 2910 2 416 3 4
5 6 7 8 9 10

Sam. David Flood Prom Circ. Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 11 1 1260 840 810 410 370
417 12 2 13 3 14 4 15 5 16 6 418 2920 17 7 18 8 19 9 20 10

Sam. Saul. David Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 21 1 11 850 820 420 380
419 2930 22 2 12 23 3 13 24 4 14 25 5 15 26 6 16 27 7 17 28 8 18 29 9 19 30 10
20 Rebe^ and ^^d glory over the H^. 1 Chronicles. 5.10. 1280 860 830 430 390 420
2940 31 11 21 32 12 22 33 13 23 34 14 24 35 15 25 36 16 26 37 17 27 1290 840 60
8 Jubil. 38 18 28 421 39 19 29 40 20 30 A^. 13.21

David is anointed King over all Israel, exactly a thousand years before our
Lord Christ suffered and entered into his Kingdom of glory, Luke 24.26. He
reigned just our Lords age over all Israel, namely 32 year 6 months, or 33 year
current, 2 Samuel 5.5. and was an esepecial Type of our blessed Savior.

Its remarkable of little Benjamin, who by his sin was brought to 600 men only,
Jud. 20.47.48. yet by Gods blessing was afterward increased to almost 60000
men of War, toward the end of David's reign, as stands recorded by Ezra, 1 Chronicles
7.7.9.11. and that but in three of his posterity, for all the Tribe of
Benjamin was not numbered by Joab, 1 Chronicles. 21.6. yea, 2 Chronicles. 14.8. they were
increased to 280000 fighting men, and 2 Chon. 17.17, 18. there were 380000, in
the days of Asa and Jehosaphat In the plains of Moab, the greatest number of
them was but 45600. But after that great blow (probably upon their repentance)
they mightily increased out of a small handful: Sin brings low, but God upon
our repentance can quickly increase, and make our latter end better than our
beginning.

David. K. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ S. W. 2 S^^ 5 ^, 5. In He^^on over
Judah. 1290 840 421 31. 1 32. 2 33. 3 34. 4 870 440 400 422 2950 35. 5 36. 6
37. 7 38. 8 Over all Israel. 39. 9 40. 10 59 Jubi. 41. 11 1300 880 850 450 410
423 2960 42. 12 43. 13 44. 14 45. 15 46. 16 47. 17 48. 18 1310 890 860 460 420
424 49. 19 50. 20 51. 21 52. 22 53. 23 54. 24 55. 25 425 2970 56. 26 57. 27 58.
28 59. 29 60. 30 61. 31 62. 32 1320 900 870 470 430 426 2980 63. 33 64. 34 65.
35 66. 36 67. 37 68. 38 69. 39 39 Re^obo^^ born. 70. 40

Solom. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. S. W. 1 1330 910 880 480 440 K^n.
6.1 427 2 3 4 5 6 1340 61 9 Jubil. 2990 7 428 8 9 10 11 12 13 920 890 490 450
10 429 3000 14 15 16 17 18 19 60 Jubi. 20 1350 930 900 500 460 20 430 3010 21
22 23 24 25 26 27 1360 910 431 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 940 510 470 30 432 3020 35
36 37 38 39 40

Probably about the 39 of Solomon ending, Jehojadah that famous Priest was
born; which is thus proved. He was 130 year old at his death, 2 Chronicles. 24.15.
He was alive the 23 of Joash, a Kin. 12.6, 7. Now suppose he had lived three
year longer to the 25 of. Joash ending, (for after his death the King fell to
Idolatry, murdered his son, and fell into many evils, 2 Chronicles. 24.17-25.) Joash
his 25 year ran parallel with the 256 year after the Temple founded. Substract
130 out of 150, there rest 26 year from the Temples founding; at the end of
which Jehojadah was born. If you protract Jehojadahs life to the 39 of Joash
(which is the utmost) then he was born in the fourth year of Rehoboam, and 40
year after the Temple founded, as appears by substracting 130 his age, from
170, the Era of the Temple at his death, upon the last supposition.

Josiah was prophesied of about 329 years before he was born, 1 Kin. 13. 2.
presently upon the Division.

Its remarkable of all the Kings of Israel, that the age of none of them is
noted, when they came to the Crown, there being not one Godly King among them
all: and but two that are not branded for cleaving to the sins of Jeroboam, to
wit Shallum and Hoshea, 2 Kin. 15.13.15. and 17. 1, 2. They were all so naught
that God thought not their Nativity worth the noting, which yet was wont to be
celebrated, Gen 41.20. Mark 6.21.

Rehob. Ierob. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis. S. W. 1 1 Kin.
^4.21. 1370 950 920 520 480 40 1 Kin. 11.47 433 3030 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 5 6 6 7
7 8 8 1380 960 930 530 490 50 10 434 9 9 10 10 11 11 12 12 13 13 14 14 15 15 20
16 16 17 17 1 Chronicles. 12.13.

Abijam slew 500000 of Israel in one battle, 2 Chronicles. 13.17. one of the
greatest slaughters was ever read of.

2 Chronicles. 16.1. must be rendered in the 36 year of the Kingdom of Asa, to wit
the Kingdom of the Jews, which at that time stood divided from Israel just 36
year, nor can it possibly be meant of the 36 but the 17 year of Asa his
personal reign, for Baasha lived but to the 26 year of Asa his personal reign,
as is evident by 1 Kin. 15.28.33.

Upon the news of Zimri his killing of Elah, Omri was chosen King in the camp
in the 27 year of Asa: 1 Kin. 16.15, 16. The contest between him and Tibni
probably held four year at least, and therefore verse. 23. its said he began to
reign in the 31 year of Asa. He reigned then 4 years, as Tibnes Competitor, and
after his death 8 year alone.

In Ahabs days was Jericho built by Hiel, 1 Kin. 16. 34. though with the curse
of God upon the builder, Josh. 6.26.

Three Kings are in Israel at Once, beginning 42 years trouble, and infecting
Judah* whence Ahaziah is said to be a Son of 42 y. in his Kingdom, 2 Chronicles.
22.2. Broughton.

Ierob. Abija 1 Kin. 15.1, 2. 18 1 19 2 20 3 21 22

Asa. 1 Kin. 15.9. Nadab. 1 Kin. 15.25. Baasha. 1 Kin. 15.28.33. 1 2 1 3 2 1

Asa. 1 Kin. 15.9. Baasha. 1 Kin. 15.28.33. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^
Temp. Divis. S. W. 4 2 1390 970 940 540 500 60 436 3050 5 3 6 Iehosaphat born.
4 7 5 8 6 9 7 61 Jubi 10 8 1400 980 950 550 510 70 30 437 11 9 12 10 13 11 14
12 15 13 16 14 17 15 1410 40 438 3060 18 16 19 17 20 18 21 19 22 20 23 21 24 22
990 960 560 520 80 439 3070 25 23

Asa. 1 Kin. 15.9. Baasha. 1 Kin. 15.28.33. Elah. 1 Kin. 16.8. Zimri Omri Tibni
1 Kin. 16.15.23. 26 24 1 27 2 1 28 2

Asa. 1 Kin. 15.9. Zimri Omri Tibni 1 Kin. 16.15.23. Flood Prom Circ Pasover.
Canaa^ Temp. Divis. S. W. 29 3 30 Iehoram born. 4 31 5 1420 1000 970 570 530 90
50 440 3080 32 6 33 7 34 8 35 9 36 10 37 11

Asa. 1 Kin. 15.9. Zimri Omri Tibni 1 Kin. 16.15.23. Ahab. 1 Kin. 16.19 Flood
Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis. S. W. 38 12 1 1430 980 60 441

Asa. 1 Kin. 15.9. Ahab. 1 Kin. 16.19 39 2 40 3

Asa. 1 Kin. 15.9. Ahab. 1 Kin. 16.19 Iehos 1 Kin. 12.41.42. 41 4 1

Ahab. 1 Kin. 16.19 Iehos 1 Kin. 12.41.42. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^
Temp. Divis S. W. 5 2 1430 980 60 441 6 3 7 4 8 5 1010 580 540 100 70 63.11
Jubil. 3090 9 6 442 10 7 11 8 12 9 13 10 14 11 15 12 1440 1020 990 590 550 110
443 3100 16 13 17 14 18 15 19 16 62 Jubi.

Ioram the son of Iehosaphat was twice Viceroy, first in the 17 year of
Iehosaphat, as appears by comparing 2 Kin. 1.17. with 2 Kin. 3.1. where the
first year of Iehoram Ahabs son concurs with the 18. year of Iehosaphat, and
the second year of Iehoram the son of Iehosaphat. Hence I argue, if the second
of Iehoram King of Judah concurred with the eighteenth of Iehosaphat: then his
first year must needs concur with the 17 of Iehosaphat: yet at the time he
was but Viceroy, his Father living 8 or 9 year after his first admission to the
Crown. And this may solve that difficulty, 2 Chronicles. 21.12. How Elias could send
a Letter to this Iehoram, The answer is easy. Iehoram was made Viceroy in the
first year of Aha^iah son of Ahab which ran parallel with the 17 of Iehosaphat
a year or two at least before Elias his Translation, 2 Kin. 1.3. Now being a
wicked wretch and fearing therefore to be dis-inherited, he might take
advan^age in his Fathers absence (who probably made him Viceroy upon occasion
of some expedition abroad) to cut off all his brethren, thereby to make the
Kingdom sure unto himself, 2 Chronicles. 21.4. whereupon Elias might send him that
sharp letter, he being so desparate as none durst venture to reprove him by
word of mouth, 2 Chronicles. 21.12-15

He was the second time Viceroy in the 22 year of Iehosaphat which concurred
with the fifth of Iehoram son to Ahab, 2 King. 8.16. which indeed was the first
of his eight years reign for he reigned but four complete year after his
Fathers death.

Ahaviah and Iehoram Kings of Israel began both to reign before their Father
Ahabs death, the one in the 1^. the other in the 18 year of Iehosaphat, which
run parallel with the 20 and 21 of Ahab.

The two battel^ between Ahab and Benhadad hanned about the nineteenth of
twentieth ^ear of Ahabs reign, as is evident by 1 King. 22.1.2.

2 Kin^ 8.^5, 2^. and 9.29 compared, show it was the end of the 11, and the
beginning of the 12. of Ioram that Iehoash King of Judah wa born.

2 Chronicles. 22. 2. Ahaziah is said to be 42. year old when he began to reign.
This the learned refer to the Kingdom of Omri, which stood 42 years when
Ahaziah began to reign, being then himself but 22 year old, 2 Kin. 8.26.
otherwise we must make the youngest son older than his Father, 2 Chronicles. 21.20.
and 22.1. In the Original it runs thus, Ahaziah was a son of 42 year in his
Kingdom. What if we should say that in old times the age of their Kings was
writ in figures, not in words at length: and so through the carelessness of the
Scribes the letter Mem (signifying 40) might easily be put for the letter Caph,
which signifies but 20. Who knows not that change of like letters is familiar
with the Hebrews? and such a mistake is easy.

Ahab. 1 Kin. 16.19 Iehos 1 Kin. 12.41.42. Ahazi. 1 Kin. 12.55. Iehor. 1 Kin.
^^ Son to Iehossaphat, twice Viceroy. 20 17 1 Son to Ahab. Son to Ahab. 1 21 18
2 1 2 22 19 2 3

Iehos 1 Kin. 12.41.42. Iehor. 1 Kin. ^^ Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp.
Divis S. W. 20 3 4 1450 1030 1000 600 560 120 80 444 21 4 5 22 5 1 23 6 2 24 7
3 25 8 4

Iehor. 1 Kin. ^^ Ahazi. Son to Ieboiam 1, born the 6 of (...) Flood Prom Circ
Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. 9 5 90 445 3110 10 6 11 7 12 8 1

Athal Iehu. 1 Kin. 10.16 Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. 1 1
90 445 3110 2 2 3 3 4 4 1460 1040 1010 610 570 130 446 3120 5 5 6 6 1 Chronicles.
21.11.

Iehu. 1 Kin. 10.16 Iehoa. 1 Kin. 12.1. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp.
Divis S. W. 7 1 1460 1040 1010 610 570 130 446 3120 8 2 9 3 10 4 11 5 1470 1050
1020 620 580 140 100 447 12 6 13 7 14 8 15 9 16 10 17 11 18 12 1480 110 448
3130 19 13 20 14 21 15 22 16 23 17 24 Vzziah born 18 25 19 1060 1030 630 590
150 64.12 Jubi. 3140 26 20 449 27 21 28 22

Ioash. Ioahaz. 2 Kin.13.1. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W.
23 1 K. of Isr. 24 2 25 3 26 4 1490 1070 1040 640 600 160 120 12 Ju 3150 27 5
450 28 6 29 7 30 8 31 9 32 10 33 11 1500 1050 130 451 63 Jubi. 34 12 35 13 36
14

Ioash. Ioahaz. 2 Kin.13.1. Iehoa. 2 Kin. 13.1. Amazi. 1 Kin. 14.1.2 Flood Prom
Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. 37 15 1 K. of Isr. 1500 1050 130 451 63
Jubi. 38 16 2 1 39 17 3 2 40 4 3

Iehoa. 2 Kin. 13.1. Amazi. 1 Kin. 14.1.2 Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp.
Divis S. W. 5 4 140 452 3160 6 5 7 6 8 7 9 8 10 9 11 10 1510 1090 1060 660 620
180 453 3170 12 11 13 12 14 13 15 14

Iehoa. 2 Kin. 13.1. Amazi. 1 Kin. 14.1.2 Ierob. 1 Kin. 14.23. 16 15 1

Amazi. 1 Kin. 14.1.2 Ierob. 1 Kin. 14.23. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^
Temp. Divis S. W. 16 2 17 3 1520 1100 1070 670 630 190 150 454 18 4 19 5 20 6
21 7 22 8 23 9 24 10 160 455 3180 25 11 26 12 27 13 28 14 29 15

Ierob. 1 Kin. 14.23. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. 16 1530
1110 1080 680 640 200 65.13 Jubil. 3190 17 456 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26

The Kingdom of Judah was governed 11 years by states, without a King, namely
from the 15 to the 27 of Jeroboam, the first whereof concurs with the 29 of
Amaziah, and the last with the first of Vzziah, 2 Kin. 14.23. and 15.1. where
he is also called Azariah. From the 29 or last of Amaziah to the first of
Vzziah interceed 11 years complete, in all which space no King swayed the
Scepter of Judah, nor indeed was Vzziah capable of it (unless by a Protector)
being but four or five year old when his father Amaziah dyed.

The kingdom of Israel by sedition was as long again as Judah without a King,
namely full 22 years, from the last of Jeroboam to the reign of Zacharias; the
first running parallel with the 15, and the last with the 38 of Vzziah. This
Zachariah was the fourth of Iehu his generation, whereby the promise of God was
made good unto Iehu, 2 King. 10.30. and 15.12. God bringing this fourth son of
Iehu to the throne, notwithstanding all impediments that lay in the way for 22
year together. No intervening difficulties can make Gods promise abortive,
though for a while Gods providence may seem to cross his promise.

With us Christ suffered in the first year of the 182 Olympiad: with others in
the last year of the 202 Olympiad. The difference is 21 Olympiads, or 84
Olympic years current. The ground of which difference is this. They begin the
Olympiads 54 year before us, and extend Christ's passion 30 year after us. Both
which added together make just 84 years, or 21 Olympiads, the just space
wherein we differ from them. The reason why we thus differ from them has been
formerly noted.

Ierob. 2 Kin.14.23. Vzzia. 2 Kin. 15.1. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp.
Divis S. W. 27 1 1540 1120 1090 690 650 210 170 457 28 2 29 3 30 4 31 5 1550
180 458 3200 32 6 33 7 34 8 35 9 36 10 37 11 64 Jubi. 38 12 1130 700 660 220
459 3210 39 13 40 14 41 15

Vzzia. 2 Kin. 15.1. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. 16 1130
700 660 220 459 3210 17 18 19 1560 1140 1110 710 670 230 190 460 3220 20 21 22
23 24 25 26 1570 1120 200 461 27 28 29 30 31 32 33

Vzzia. 2 Kin. 15.1. Zach. Shall. Mena. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp.
Divis S. W. Olym. 34 ruled 6 months. ruled 2 months. 1150 720 680 240 210 462
3230 1 35 36 37 2 Kin 15.8. 2 Kin 15.13 2 Kin 15.17 38 1 39 1 1

Ahaz lived but 36 year, as is evident by 2 Kin. 16.2. Hezekiah his son was 25
y. old when he began to reign, 2 Kin. 18.2. Substract 25 out of 36, there rest
11, whence I conclude that Ahaz was but 11 year old at most when he begat
Hezekiah: unless we shall interpret 2 Kin. 16.2. that Altaz was 20 year old
when his Father Iotham began to reign, which sense (though it may seem to be
forced) wants not (as I conceive) a president. Thus Iehoiakin was 8 year old
when his Father began to reign, but 18 y. old when himsehlf began to reign, 2 Chronicles. 36.9. compared with 2 Kin. 24.8.

But this last interpretation will not hold, unless we suppose Iotham was 25
year old when he began to reign in his Fathers stead, who was sequestered for
his leprosy: Least we make Iotham but 5 year old when he begat Ahaz. See 2
kin. 15.33.

That text 2 Kin. 15.30. must be understood of the 20 year after Iotham began
to reign, namely the 5 of Ahaz: for Iotham reigned but 16. year, 2 Kin. 15.33.
And here again we must either make an Interregnum of 7 year, or say that though
Hosheah held the government by power and might, yet he was not accepted of the
people for King till the 12 of Ahaz, for he slew Pekah about the 5 of Ahaz, but
is said to begin his reign not till the 12 of Ahaz, 2 Kin 17.1.

Samaria probably was taken in the beginning of Hosheahs 9 year, and the end of
Hezekiahs 6 year, 2 Kin. 18.10. for Hosheahs 9 year runs parallel with
Hezekiahs 7 year: unless we suppose Hezekiah began not to reign t^ll the end
of Hoshea his third year, which is the reason I have noted the years of
Hezekiahs reign twice.

Its evident by 2 Kin. 18.1^, 11. that hezekiahs first began with the end of
Hosheahs third year, and did not run parallel with it.

The 49 of Vzziah was also an Interregnum of the Kingdom of Israel.

In the 20 year after Iotham began to reign Hosheah sew Pekah, namely at the
beginning of it, (2 Kin. 15.3^.) and took upon him the Covernment about the 5
of Ahaz, but was not accepted by the people till the 12 of Ahaz.

Vzzia. 2 Kin. 15.1. Mena. Pekahi. 2 Kin. 15.23. Flood Prom Circ Pasover.
Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 40 2 1580 1160 1130 730 690 250 66.14 Jubil.
3240 2 41 3 463 42 4 43 5 44 6 3 45 7 46 8 47 9 1590 1170 1140 740 700 260 220
464 4 48 10 49 2 Kin. 15.23. 50 5 1 51 2 52 1

Peka. 2 Kin. 15.27. Iotha^. 2 Kin. 15.32.33. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^
Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 2 1 230 465 3250 6 3 2 4 3 5 4 6 5 7 7 6 8 7 9 8 65
Jubi. 10 9 1600 1180 1150 750 710 270 465 3260 8 11 10 12 Era Nabonassaris
begins. 11 13 Era V.C. begins 12 14 13 15 14 16 15

Peka. 2 Kin. 15.27. Iotha^. 2 Kin. 15.32.33. Ahaz. 2 Kin. 16.^^ Flood Prom
Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 17 16 1 1610 1190 1160 760 720 280
240 467 9 18 17 2 19 18 3 20 19 4 10 20 5

Ahaz. 2 Kin. 16.^^ Hosh. 2 Kin. 17.1. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp.
Divis S. W. Olym. 1 6 2 7 3 8 4 1620 250 468 3270 11 9 5 10 6 11 7 12 12 1 13 2

Ahaz. 2 Kin. 16.^^ Hosh. 2 Kin. 17.1. Hezek. 2 Kin. 18.^^ 14 3 1

Ahaz. 2 Kin. 16.^^ Hosh. 2 Kin. 17.1. Hezek. 2 Kin. 18.^^ Flood Prom Circ
Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 15 4 2.1 1200 1170 770 730 290 469 3280
13 16 5 3.2 6 4.3 7 5.4 8 6.5 14 9 7.6 8.7

From the Division of the Tribes to Zedechiahs captivity are just 390 y. noted
by the Prophet, Ezec. 4.5. yet the several years of their several raigns summed
up make 393. to which add the 11 y. Interregnum, after the death of Amaziah;
the total is 404, even 14 years more than the prophet reckoned upon: which
difference is thus reconciled. Diverse of the Kings began to reign 1, 2, or 3
year before their fathers death, which may easily swallow up those 14 years.

The like may be said of the Kings of Israel; the years of whose several raigns
summed up, are 241. yet the 9 or last year of Hoshea (the last King of Israe)
falls out 258 years after the Division, 17 year later than the former
reckoning. If therefore you add to 24., the sum of all their raigns, the 22
years Interregnum after the death of Jeroboam the second, and the seven years
of Interregnum, or Tyranny under Hoshea; the total is 270 year; and 12 year
more than the date of the Kingdom of Israel: which difference of twelve years
overplus arises from a supposal that every King reigned so many years
complete, as are assigned him in Scripture, whereas diverse of them reigned but
so many years current, and one began to reign two or three years before his
Fathers death, to wit Jehoash son of Jehoahaz. But the connection and linking
together of their several raigns according to scripture, gives the precise date
of both Kingdoms: so that the Kingdom of Israel lasted after the Division, 258
years, and the Kingdom of Judah 390 years.

Nor can Ezekiels 390 year be made out, unless by a right connection of the
Synarchies of both Kingdoms according to Scripture, evidenced in this
Chronology by ocular Demonstration.

Hezekiahs 14 year is a Rest or Sabbatrical year, as appears by their eating in
it that which grew of it self, 2 Kin. 19.29. and the year following was a
Jubilee after the account of some: and so the meaning of that sign might be
this, That notwithstanding Senacherib had so plundered the Country, and that in
a time wherein for two years together they had no Seed-time, yet God both did
and would so bless the earth, that of its own accord, without their labor, it
should bring enough to maintain them for two years together and longer, namely
till the third years Harvest came in.

2 Kin. 18.13. Senacharib was overthrown in the 14 year of Hezekiah, and 20.6.
Hezekiah recovered at the same time.

Hezekiah. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 5.8 1630
1210 1180 780 740 300 260 67.15 Jubil. 3290 15 10.9 470 11.10 12.11 13.12 14.13
15.14 Hezekiah recovered 2 Kin. 20.6 16.15 Senacharib overthrown 2 Kin. 18.13.
1640 1190 270 16 Ju 16 17.16 471 18.17 19.18 20.19 17 21.20 22.21 23.22 1220
790 750 310 280 472 3300 18 24.23 25.24 26.25 27.26 19 28.27 29.28 66 Jubi.

Hezekiah. Manas 2 Kin. 21.1..29 1 Manasseh born.

Manas 2 Kin. 21.1. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 2
1650 1230 1200 800 760 320 15 Ju 3310 20 3 473 4 5 21 6 7 8 1660 1240 1210 810
770 330 290 474 22 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 300 475 3320 23 16 17 18 19 24 20 21 22
1670 1250 1220 820 780 340 476 3330 25 23 24 25 26 26 27 28 29 1680 1260 1230
830 790 350 310 68.15 Jubi. 27 30 477 31 32 33 Amon born. 28 34 35 36 1690 320
16 Ju 3340 29 37 478 38 39 40 41 42 43 1270 1240 840 800 360 479 3350 30 44 45
46 47 31 48 49 Josiah born 67 Jubi. 50 1700 1280 1250 850 810 370 330 16 Jubi.
3360 32 51 480 52 53 33 54 55

Jehoahaz was 23 y. old when he began to reign, 2 Kin. 23.31. and reigned but 3
months. His younger Brother jehojachim who immediately succeeded him, was 25 y.
old when he began to reign, verse. 36, and after that reckonning almost 2 y.
older than his elder brother. How can this hold good? Answ. Jehojakims age is
there reckoned from his elder brothers death in Egypt, 2 Kin. 23.34. till
which time he reigned as Viceroy. Or else we must say that Jehoahaz though the
younger, was by his Fathers Will or the election of the people preferred to the
Crown before Jehojakim his elder brother: As Solomon was by Gods election, 1
Kin. 2.15. and Abijah by Rehoboams election, 2 Chronicles. 11.20.22. and 12.16.
Broughton makes Jehojakim the elder brother. Happily his brother was preferred
before him for his wickedness, which might make Josiah dis-inherit him, yet
afterward by the favor of Pharaoh he aspired to the Crown, 2 Chronicles. 36.4.

That Ezekiel reckons from Josiah his Passover is apparent by Ezekiel. 1.1, 2.
that 30 y. running parallel with the 5 y. of Jehojakims Captivity) being just
30 y. distant from Josiahs Passover, inclusively.

Amon 2 Kin. 21.19 1 2

Josiah 2 Kin. 22.1 Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 1
1710 1260 340 481 34 2 3 4 35 5 6 7 1290 860 820 380 350 482 3370 36 8 9 10 11
12

Josiah 2 Kin. 22.1 Jeremiah Ier. 25.3.^^ Ezekiel. 4.6. Flood Prom Circ Pasover.
Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 13 1 1720 1300 1270 870 830 390 483 3380 37 14 2
15 3 16 4 17 5 38 18 6 (...) 19 7 20 8 21 9 1730 1310 1280 880 840 400 360 69
17 Jubil. 39 22 10 484 23 Iehojachim born. 11 24 12 25 13 40 26 14 27 15 28 16
370 17 Ju 3390 41 29 17 485 30 18 31 19

According to our account both the 70 y. Captivity, and Daniels 70 Weeks of
years run exactly parallel with the weeks of the World: The first beginning at
the end of the 485, and ending at the end of the 495 week of the World. The
last beginning at the end of the 495 week, and ending at the end of the 565
week of the World.

Some begin Ezekiels 40 year mentioned Ezekiel. 4.6. (not with Ieremiahs Prophecy
spoke of, Ier. 25.3. but) with Iosiahs Passover and renewal of the Covenant in
the 18 year of his reign, 2 Chronicles. 35.19. compared with 2 Chronicles. 34.31, 32. And
so those 40 year expired not till the fourth and last Captivity, full 23 year,
after the first Captivity, and almost 5 y. after Jerusalem was taken, and
Zedekiahs eyes put out. After which, God spared them no longer, but the Land
lay utterly desolate without any Inhabitant. This seems very consonant to the
truth.

Zedechiah was Iehojakims Uncle, 2 Kin. 24.17. yet 1 Chronicles. 3.16. he is noted
as the son of Iehojakim: the reason is because he succeeded as his heir in the
Kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 36.10 he is called Iehojakims brother, according to the
custom of the Jews, who call all their kindred Brethren. Th^s by our Saviors
Brethren, Matthew. 13.55. we must understand his kindred.

2 Kin. 24.12. Nebuchadnezzar took Iehojachim in the 8 year of his reign, Ier.
52.28. in his seventh year, probably it was at the end of Nebuchadnezzar;
seventh and the beginning of his eighth year. In the same since happily
Nebuchadnezzars first is said to be Iehojakims third and fourth year, Dan. 1.1.
compared with Ier. 25.1. And thus Zedekiahs Captivity is said to be in the 18
year of Nebuchadnezzar, Ier. 52.29. whereas Zedekiahs 11 y. wherein he was
taken captive runs parallel with Nebuchadnezzars 19 y. But upon the former
supposition the answer is easy. Zedekiah was led captive in the end of the 18
and the beginning of the 19 year of Nebuchadnezzar. See the like 2 Kin. 8.25.
and 9.29 compared.

The 4 Captivities I have noted in the next collumne to that of the Captivity.
The first happened in the third of Iehojakim, Dan. 1.1.3. the end of which third
year concurred with the first of Nebuchadnezzar. The second third and fourth
happened in the 7, 18, and 23 year of Nebuchadnezzar, Ier. 52.28, 29, 30. Its
remarkable that the 10 weeks of the 70 years Captivity, and also the 70 weeks
of Daniel run parallel with the weeks of the World. That the 70 y. Captivity
begin with the 4 of Iehojakim, I have proved before in the Difficulties
controverted.

The first Temple was founded in the 427 week of the World, and continued just
427 y. current. The second Temple was founded 480 y. after the first was
founded, and that precisely to a month, 1 Kin. 6.1. compared with Ezra 3.8. and
just so many years passed from the going out of Egypt to the founding of the
first Temple, 1 Kin. 6.1.

Broughton in the Preface to that excellent piece of his (called a Concent of
Scripture) brings a clear Testimony out of Abben-Ezra that Daniels 70 weeks
take their beginning from the Prayer of Daniel, Dan. 9. Besides evidences from
Josephus and others, in the body of his Concent.

Jeremiah Ier. 25.3.^^ Ezekiel. 4.6. Iehoa. Iehoj. 2 Kin 23.31.36. Flood Prom Circ
Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 20 3m. 1 370 485 3390 42 21 2 22 The
Chaldean Monarchy begins 3

Jeremiah Ier. 25.3.^^ Ezekiel. 4.6. Iehoj. 2 Kin 23.31.36. 70 y. Captiv. Flood
Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 23 4 1 Captiv. 1 1740 1320
1290 890 850 410 486 3400 43 24 5 2 25 6 3 26 7 4 Nebucadnezzar. 27 8 5 28 9 6
29 10 7.1. Cap. 2 30 11 8 68 Jubi.

Jeremiah Ier. 25.3.^^ Ezekiel. 4.6. 70 y. Captiv. Iehoj. Zed. 2 Kin. 24.8.18.
Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 31 9 3 m. 1 1750 1330
1300 900 860 420 380 17 Ju 45 32 10 2 487 33 11 3 34 12 4 35 13 5 36 14 6 37 15
7 1760 390 488 3410 46 38 16 8 39 17 9 40 18 Cap. 3. 10 Ezekiels 40 y. end. 19
11 Ier. 32.1.

70 y. Captiv. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 20 47 21
22 1340 1310 910 870 430 489 3420 48 23 Cap. 4 24 25 26 49 27 28 29 Cap. 5 1770
1350 1320 920 880 440 400 490 3430 50 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 1780 1330 410 70.18
Jubi. 51 37 491 38 39 40 52 41 42 6 43 1360 930 890 450 420 18 Ju. 3440 53 44
492 45 Evilmerodach. 46 47 54 48 49 7 50 1790 1370 1340 940 900 460 493 3450 55
51 52 53 54 56 55 56 8 57 1800 1380 1350 950 910 470 430 494 69 Jubi 57 58 59
60 61 62 63 9 64 440 495 3460 58 65 66 67 Belshazzar. 68 59 69 70.10 The
Persian Monarchy begins in Cyrus. 70 weeks.

Dan. 70 w. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 1 1 1810
1390 1360 960 920 480 496 3470 60 2 The second Temple founded. Ezr. 3.8. 3 4 5
61 6 7.1 8 2 1820 1400 1370 970 930 490 450 497 62 9 10 11 12 63 13 14.2 15 3
1830 460 71.19 Jubil. 64 16 498 17 18 19 20 21 3 22 4 1410 1380 980 940 500 19
Ju 3490 65 23 499 24 25 26 66 27 28 4 29 5 1840 1420 1390 990 950 510 470 500
3500 67 30 31 32 33 68 34 35 5 36 6 1850 1400 480 19 Ju 70 Jubi 69 37 501 38 39
40 41 42 6 43 7 The second Temple finished, after 46 y. time spent in building,
Ioh. 2.20. 1430 1000 960 520 490 502 3510 71 44 45 46 47 48 49 7 50 8 1860 1440
1410 1010 970 530 503 3520 72 51 52 53 54 73 55 56 8 57 9 1870 1450 1420 1020
980 540 500 504 74 58 59 60 61 75 62 63.9

Broughton in his Concent thinks Darius Histaspis to be the same with
Ahassuerus, in whose time that famous story of Hester happened. Its remarkable
that though the book of Hester contain most admirable passages of Gods
providence in delivering of his Church, yet in that book alone (of all the
books of holy Scripture) the name of God is not so much as once mentioned.

The Persian Monarchy was thought to last above 200 y. Broughton for the
establishing of Daniels 70 weeks, makes it far shorter, and that not without
just ground: of which I have handled before in the Difficulties of Chronology
controverted by the Learned. I shall not therefore note particularly the names
of the Persian Kings, because their several raigns contradict the Era of
Daniels 70 weeks which I follow exactly in this Chronology.

Both the Grecian and Roman Monarchy begin 30 year sooner with us than with
other Chronologers, because we conceive that Christ suffered 30 y. sooner than
they did, namely An. Mundi 3952. and not An. M. 3982.

In the two Registers (Ezra 2. and Neh. 7. compared together) these passages
are remarkable,

1. That the heads of both Registers differ in 19 places, whereof Nehemiahs
Register exceeds Ezraes in 12 places. Ezraes exceeds Nehemiahs in 7 places.
Thus the children of Azgad, (Ezra 2.12.) were 1222. but Neh. 7.17. they are
2322, eleven hundred more than in Ezra. How shall these differences be
reconciled? Answ. We must conceive there was a double listing, the first in
Babylon, of those who gave in their names to come up, some of whom afterward
repented through carnal fears, love of the world, and case, etc. who are
therefore branded, 1 Chronicles. 4.23. Others upon better consideration went up and
so were registered at Jerasalem. Too true an emblem of our times, in which many
seemed very forward, but now have fallen back to errors etc. forgetting (if
not sleighting) their engagements to God and man.

2. Its observable that the total of both Registers stands recorded as equal,
namely 42360. Ezra 2.64. and Neh. 7.66. God will not loose one of his number
though never so many hypocrites Apostatize, 2 Timothy 2.19.

3. Yet observe that each Register summed up falls far short of the former tot^
assigned, Ezra 2.64. For Ezraes register summed up in all the parcels, amounts
but to 29818, and Nehemiahs to 31031. both which fall far short of 42360, which
therefore must be made up by the residue of the Priests and Israelites, who
could not find out their Genealogy, Ezra 2.59.

In the catalogue of their servants and beasts both registers agree, save only
in the Singers, whereof the latter Register had 45 more than the former. Ezra
265. compared with Neh. 7.67.

Yet beware we censure not all that stayed, for some might be forced to stay
through poverty, others because they were in public employment and did the
Church more service there then bad they been at Jerusalem, as Daniel and
others. But there can be no such plea for neglect to come out of sin, the
world and spiritual Babylon unto Christ and the Church, Rev. 18.4.

Its further remarkable that diverse of those who came up with Zerubbabel as
heads of the people, did in their own persons subscribe that most solemn
Covenant, Neh. 10.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.27. and verse. 3.5.9. All which you
cannot immagine to be less then 20 year old apeece, else they were not capable
of bearing arms, much less of being heads over the people. At least 17 of them
are mentioned in the fore quoted place, that is near upon half of the heads or
Commanders, and probably therefore (if we may guess by proportion) half of the
people who came up with Zerubbabel were alive at the taking of that Covenant.
Hence it will follow, that if the Persian Monarchs reigned each of them so long
as Heathen Writers would make us believe, and upon whom Chronologers build to
alter the true date of Daniels weeks, then about twenty thousand of the people
who ascended with Zerubbabel lived to see above 160 years apeece, whereas in
Moses his time, Psalm. 90. fourscore y. was counted a very great age, which how
probable, let any indifferent Reader judge. Suppose the Covenant were taken in
the 20 year of Artaxerxes Mnemon, which is the soonest time imaginable, Neh.
2.1. and 5.14. since it was the 20 y. of this King, before Nehemiah was sent as
Governor, and under whose Government the Covenant was taken. From the first
return out of Captivity to the 20 of Artaxerxes Mnemon, (according to Heathen
Authors) passed at least 144 years, to which add 20 y. of their age who
returned, the total is 164 y. And yet so old they must be if profane
Historians count the raigns of the Persian Monarchs right: which how contrary
to the Scriptures? Certainly had Chronologers been as diligent in search of
Scripture as in tumbling over old heathen fables, they had never left both us
and themselves in such perplexity as now they have done about the true date of
Daniels Weeks. But no wonder if they wander and stumble in their paths, who
chose to follow the candlelight of Heathens rather than the clear Sunshine of
Scripture, and will bring that golden Standard to their Lesbian rule. More of
this see in the Difficulties following the Preface, namely in the fourth
Difficulty.

Yet their lying Olympiads are contradicted not only by Scripture, but also by
some of the honester heathen; witness Plutarch, who in the beginning of his
Numa affirms that Numa was 40 y. old current when he entered upon the Kingdom.
2. That he was born on that very day on which the City of Rome was built, and
so his age runs parallel with Era U.C.

3. The same Author averrs that Numa was created King in the third y. of the 16
Olympiad, which therefore must run parallel with the 40 y. of U.C. at least in
some part of it. To all which add Alsteds confession in his Thesaur. Chronolog.
p. 212. (though a maintainer of the truth of Heathen Olympiads contrary to
Scripture) that Numa was contemporary with Hezekiah; Its apparent that the 16
Olympiad fell out in Hezekiahs reign according to our date, and that the date
of their Olympiads must needs be falce who begin them 54 y. before ours. And
for my part I had rather believe one honest heathen speaking with Scripture,
then ten thousand of them speaking against it. Nor can I but wonder that
Christian Chronologers should lay that for a foundation (I mean the usual date
of the Olympiads) which is so much questioned by Plutarch an honest Heathen.
Certainly the building cannot be firm which leans upon so sandy a foundation.
The ground of mis-dating the Olympiads has been formerly proved to be that
grand mistake about the date of Abraham's birth: to which I must refer the
Reader.

There yet remains one scruple, namely how the several raigns of the Persian
Kings can be reconciled with our date of the Persian Empire. For by the
computation of their several raigns the Persian Monarchy held about 200 y. but
after our account it lasts but 126 y. and so falls 74 y. short of the common
account. Plutarch and Alsted compared together will afford some light to help
us out of this maze. Plutarch in the end of his Artax. affirms that Artax.
Mnemon reigned 62 y. Alsted in his Thesaur. Chronolog. allows him but 43 y. of
his sole reign, but confesses that the former 19 y. he reigned with Darius
Nothus his father, who at the beginning of his reign assumed Artax. into the
fellowship of his Kingdom, p. 171. We accept of Alsteds confession, and thence
infer, that as Darius co-opted Artax. so the other Persian Kings in the very
beginning of their raigns might assume their sons and grandchildren into the
fellowship of their Kingdoms. That Darius did so (besides the testimony of
Alsted) is evident by Scripture, Ezr. 6.14. else how could the Temple be
finished by the Decree of Darius and Artax. had not Artax. reigned with his
father Darius, in whose 6 y. the Temple was finished? Thus Cyrus might assume
Cambyses: Darius Hystaspis might assume Xerxes, and he Artaxerxes Longimanus
his son at the same time. Longimanus might assume Darius Nothus, and he Artax.
Mnemon, as is confessed. Then grant that Darius Ochus reigned 10 y. with
Artaxerxes Mnemon, Arsames and Codomannus reigned out their full times solely;
their several years summed up might make 200 y. though the Synarchies rightly
linked together extended the Persian Monarchy but to 126 y. And that this is no
new thing may appear by the Synarchies of the Kings of Israel and Judah
compared together: of which above. By thus linking of the Synarchies together
sacred and profane Chronology may be reconciled, Daniels weeks established,
and the Olympiads rectified according to scripture, yea though we grant that
each King reigned as many years as are allotted them by Historians. By this
means we may conceive how the Temple was building but 46 y. (I mean, but 46 y.
interceded from its foundation to its coping) John 2.20. and yet withal, that
it was not finished till the 6 y. of Darius Nothus, Ezra 6.15. As thus, Suppose
Cambyses reigned 2 y. with Cyrus, and 5 y. alone: Darius Hystaspis 36 y. and
with him as contemporaries Xerxes or Ahasuerus and Artaxerxes Longimanus
(though upon the supposition this last were crowned being an Infant Darius
Hystaspis his 36 y. reached within the 3 last of Artaxerxes Longimanus, and so
you have from the first of Cyrus his universal Monarchy to the 36 of Artax.
Longim. 7 y. and 36 y. which added together make 4 y. Suppose further Darius
Nothus were assumed by his father into the Kingdom 5 y. before the death of
Longimanus; the Temple being finished in the 1 y. of his sole reign, but the 6
of his reign with his father; you have the 3 last years of Longimanus and the
first of Darius Nothus, 4 y. more, which added to the former 43 y. make just 47
y. from return out of Captivity to the finishing of the second Temple. To
which 47 y. add 56 y. of Artax. Mnemons reign, (whereof 13 y. after Darius
Nothus his death, 10 with Ochus, and 33 alone) 13 y. of Darius Ochus alone, 4
of Arsames, and 6 ^f God mannu^, in all 79 y. the total is just 126 y.
according to our (...) the Persian Monarchy.

(...) why labor I in vain for a reconciliation with them who will not a^^^
with (...) cross that History: nor can I agree (...).

(...), Is it probable (...) Persian Kings (who wallowed in extreme Luxury, and
were so mightily addicted to Ceres, Bacchus and Venus should reign or live so
long as is affirmed by Heathen Authors? I deny not but the Lord might bestow
upon Artax. Mnemon a prerogative of singular preservation from great dangers,
of many days, and a prosperous reign, in regard of his and his Fathers great
and singular affection to the Church, Ezr. 6. and 7. But to believe that in so
much excess he should reign 62 y. and live 94 y. (as Plutarch reports upon
trust) I must confess it can scarce enter into my Creed, and may give just
occasion to Question the whole History about the extent of their several
raigns (at least 3 of them) unless the Difficulty may be reconciled by a due
linking together of their Synarchies. Its remarkable of this Artax. that his
very Surname shows how mindful and careful God was of him who was so tender
to and mindful of Gods Church and people. None shall ever have cause to
complain that God was behind-hand with him for any kindness to himself or his
people, Matthew. 10. last, and 2 Kin. 10.30. In which last place its very
considerable how Gods Promise runs parallel with his Threat. In the second
commandment God threatens Idolaters to the fourth Generation; and for
destroying Idolatry God rewards Jehu to the fourth Generation. And that God
was as good as his Word, see 2 Kin. 15. 12. True, Jehu his design was the
establishment of the Kingdom, Darius his design was long life for himself and
his posterity, Ezr. 6.10. God gives them both their penny; so abundant is he
in goodness and truth, that though no natural man can claim any Promise, yet
for his outside obedience he shall have an outward reward. Thus Artax.
complying with his Father for the service of the Church, had the blessing of
the fifth Commandment made good unto him. If God be so bountiful to hirelings,
yea enemies, how gracious will he be to his own Children for whom he
reser^es an eternal Inheritance, and thinks not himself too good a portion for
them?

Dan. 70 w. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 64 10 510
72.20 Jubil. 3530 76 65 505 66 67 68 77 69 70 10 71 11 1880 1460 1430 1030 990
550 20 Ju 3540 78 72 506 73 74 75 76 77 11 78 12 1890 1470 1440 1040 1000 560
520 507 79 79 80 81 82 80 83 84 12 85 13 1900 530 20 Ju 3550 81 86 508 87 88 89
90 91 13 71 Jubi. 92 14 1480 1450 1050 1010 570 509 3560 83 93 94 95 96 84 97
98 14 99 15 1910 1940 1460 1060 1020 580 540 510 3570 85 100 101 102 103 104
105 15 106 16 1920 1470 550 511 86 107 108 109 110 87 111 112 16 113 17 1500
1070 1030 590 560 73.21. Jubi. 3580 88 114 512 115 116 117 89 118 119 17 120 18
1930 1510 1480 1080 1040 600 21 Ju 3590 90 121 513 122 123 124 91 125 126 18
127 19 The Grecian Monarchy begins in Alexander the Greet. 1940 1520 1490 1090
1050 610 570 514 92 128 129 130 131 132 133 19 134 20 580 515 72 Jubi. 93 135
3600 136 137 138 94 139 140 20 141 21 1950 1530 1500 1100 1060 620 516 3610 95
142 143 144 145 96 146 147 21 148 22 1960 1540 1510 1110 1070 630 590 517 97
149 150 151 152 98 153 154 22 155 23 1970 600 518 3620 99 156 157 158 159 160
161 23 162 24 1550 1520 1120 1080 640 74.22 Jubil. 3630 101 163 519 164 165 166
167 168 24 169 25 1980 1560 1530 1130 1090 650 610 22 Ju 3640 102 170 520 171
172 173 103 174 175 25 176 26 1990 1540 620 521 104 177 178 179 180 105 181 182
26 183 27 1570 1140 1100 660 630 522 3650 106 184 185 186 187 188 189 27 73
Jubi 190 28 2000 1580 1550 1150 1110 670 22 Ju 3660 107 191 523 192 193 194 108
195 196 28 197 29 2010 1590 1560 1160 1120 680 640 524 109 198 199 200 201 110
202 203 29 204 30 650 525 3670 111 205 206 207 208 112 209 210 30 211 31 2020
1600 1570 1170 1130 690 75.23 Jubil. 3680 113 212 526 213 214 215 216 217 218
32 2030 1610 1580 1180 1140 700 660 23 Ju 114 219 527 220 221 222 115 223 224
225 33 2040 670 528 3690 116 226 227 228 229 117 230 231 232 34 1620 1590 1190
1150 710 529 3700 118 233 234 235 236 119 237 238 74 Jubi. 239 35 2050 1630
1600 1200 1160 720 680 23 Ju 3710 120 240 530 241 242 243 244 245 246 36 2060
1610 690 531 121 247 248 249 250 122 251 252 253 37 1640 1210 1170 730 700 532
3720 123 254 255 256 257 124 258 259 260 38 2070 1650 1620 1220 1180 740 76.24
Jubil. 3730 125 261 533 262 263 264 126 265 266 267 39 2080 1660 1630 1230 1190
750 710 24. Ju 127 268 534 269 270 271 272 273 274 40 720 535 3740 128 275 276
277 278 129 279 280 281 41 2090 1670 1640 1240 1200 760 536 3750 130 282 283
284 285 131 286 287 75 Jubi. 288 42 2100 1680 1650 1250 1210 770 730 24 Ju 132
289 537 290 291 292 133 293 294 295 43 2110 740 538 3760 134 296 297 298 299
300 301 302 44 1690 1660 1260 1220 780 539 3770 135 303 304 305 306 136 307 308
309 45 2120 1700 1670 1270 1230 790 750 77.25 Jubil. 3780 137 310 540 311 312
313 138 314 315 316 46 2130 1680 760 25 Ju. 139 317 541 318 319 320 140 321 322
323 47 1710 1280 1240 800 770 542 3790 141 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 48 2140
1720 1690 1290 1250 810 543 3800 132 331 332 333 334 143 335 336 337 49 2150
1730 1700 1300 1260 820 780 25 Ju 76 Jubi. 144 338 544 339 340 341 145 342 343
344 50 790 545 3810 146 345 346 357 348 147 349 350 351 51 2160 1740 1710 1310
1270 830 546 3820 148 352 353 354 355 356 357 358 52 2170 1750 1720 1320 1280
840 800 78.26 Jubil. 149 359 547 360 361 362 150 363 364 365 53 2180 810 26 Ju
3830 151 366 548 367 368 369 152 370 371 372 54 1760 1730 1330 1290 850 549
3840 153 373 374 375 376 154 377 378 379 55 2190 1770 1740 1340 1300 860 820
550 3850 155 380 381 382 383 384 385 386 56 2200 1750 830 26 Ju 77 Jubi. 156
387 551 388 389 390 157 391 392 393 57 1780 1350 1310 870 840 552 3860 158 394
395 396 397 159 398 399 400 58 2210 1790 1760 1360 1320 880 553 3870 160 401
402 403 404 161 405 406

The probable grounds why Christ was not born in December are these,

1. From the wise men, Matthew. 2, who cannot be thought so unwise as to dispose
their journey to and from Christ in the winter, which they might far better
take in Summer. 2. From the Taxation, Luke 2. Surely Caesar was not so hard put
to it for money, as he must needs force such multitudes of people to travel to
their own Cities in the depth of Winter. 3. From the Shepherds watching in the
open field all night, Luke 2.8. which may be doubted whether they used to do so
in Winter, or rather to drive their flocks to house. 4. I might add, that our
Savior being baptized precisely at the time of the year he was born, must
according to the common opinion be baptized in the depth of winter; which how
probable let indifferent men judge.
That Christ was born about August or September I prove thus, He was thirty
year old at his Baptism, Luke 3.23. (whither entering into his 30 y. or
completely 30 y. old it matters not) He ministered 3 y. and an half, and was
either 32 or 33 y. and an half old-when he suffered, (which fell out precisely
at the Passover:) This is evident by the four Passeovers he was at, and by the
Prophecy of Daniel, Dan. 9.26, 27. Substract the last half y. from the last
Passover, falling out about the end of March, Its manifest Christ was
precisely 33 y. old in the preceding August or September; and so might happily
answer the type, by pitching his Tabernacle amongst us, Joh. 1.14. about that
time of they. when the feast of Tallernacles was kep^.

Its a pious conjecture of Divines that God of purpose concealed the time of
Christ's birth, Quid si addoremus, ita forsan di^posuisse divinam providentiam,
ut partus tam Augustus con^ingeret, non tantum sub imperio Augusti, sed etiam
in ipso mense Augusti: atque ita Trinitas Augustorum in uno nosire Immanuele
concurreret.
as he did the body of Moses, as well foreseeing how it would have been
abused to superstition, etc. had it been exactly known.

Only Jesus Christ is the true Melchizedek, being without Mother as God,
without Father as Man: and without beginning or end of days: A clear
testimony of his Divinity, Heb. 7.3. For who but God alone is without
beginning or end? He is both to his Church in general, and then to every member
in particular, first Melchizedek, King of righteousness, and then
Melech-Salem, King of peace. Nor is he ever our peace before he be our
righteousness.

Note further, Melchizedek was a King and a Priest; David a King and Prophet,
Jeremiah a Priest and Prophet, so Ezekiel; But never any except Christ, was
both King Priest and Prophet: which dignity yet he confers in some measure
upon his people, making them spiritual Kings, Priests, and Prophets.

We note both the Conception and Birth of Christ in one column. He was born at
the beginning of a sabbatical year immediately foregoing the Jubilee according
to our account: yet the year of the Lord is reckoned rather from his
Conception, which probably fell out (not at our Lady day according to the
vulgar account, but) in November or December: so as that time we used to keep
for his Nativity, was nearer the time of his Conception, nor was he born till
August or September following in the beginning of a Sabbatical year: His first
year then was a sabbatical year, his second year a year of Jubilee. And it is
remarkable, that reckon the Jubilees how you will almost, they all come within
the compass of Daniels 5 last weeks in which our Savior lived and died: the
spirit of God thereby teaching us that he only is the true proclaimer of
Jubilee to poor undone man (as well as the true (...) or kinsman that does
redeem us) Isai. 61.1, 2. Luke 4.18, 19.22.

Broughton places the death of Christ in An. M. 3960. I in An. M. 3952. the
difference is but 8 years, and arises hence, because I cast the Promise upon
Abraham's 70 y. and 5 y. sooner than he, as also the death of Christ upon the
midst of Daniels last week; 3 y. sooner then Broughton, who places it in the
last y. of Daniels or 70 week. The reasons that moved me to differ from him
are formerly mentioned, the weighing whereof I refer to the Readers
judgment, and then let him pick and choose.

If a Jubilee contained 50 solid years, then according to our account the first
of second year of Christ's ministry was a year of Jubilee, and so he
literally fulfilled that prophecy, Isa. 61.1, 2. by preaching Gospel liberty
in a year of Jubilee.

Neither Joseph nor Mary did lineally descend from Solomon; but both of them
from Nathan Solomon's brother. Jechonias was the last of Solomon's race, and dyed
childelesse, Jer. 22.28.30. Salathiel then was his son, not by natural
generation, but by right of succession in the Kingdom, 1 Chronicles. 3.17. where
observe, that Assir is no proper name, but signifies Bound, or lying in bonds:
and the verse should be rendered thus, The sons of Jechonias lying in bonds, or
being a prisoner, Salathiel his son etc. The same word is used Isa. 42.7. To
bring the Prisoners out of Prison. In the Original it is, To bring Assir out of
Prison. Our Lord Jesus then neither by his Fathers side (as was supposed) nor
by his Mothers side, came of Solomon: for Joseph came of Abiud, and Mary of
Rhesa, both sons of Zerebabell, Matthew, 1.13. Luke 3.27. the son of Salathiell
the son of Neri, who came of Nathan, not of Solomon, Luke 3.27.31. So that
Solomon was his legal Progenitor only for right of the Kingdom; Abiud his legal
Progenitor in respect of his supposed Father Joseph; but Rhesa was his natural
Progenitor in respect of the blessed Virgin his Mother. Matthew notes his
legal, Luke his natural Progenitors.

Our Lord being about 30 y. old, was baptized of John, in Jordan. Luke 3.1.23.
in Autumn, not in Spring.

Christ by his death caused the daily Sacrifice to cease in the midst of the
week. Dan. 9.26, 27.

Dan. 70 w. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^ Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 407 59 The
Roman Monarchy began in Julius Caesar. 2220 1800 1770 1370 1330 890 850 79.27
Jubi. 162 408 554 409 410 411 412 413 414 60 860 27 Ju 3880 163 415 555 416 417
418 164 419 420 421 61 2230 1810 1780 1380 1340 900 556 3890 165 422 423 424
425 166 426 427 428 62 2240 1820 1790 1390 1350 910 870 557 167 429 430 431 432
168 433 434 435 63 2250 880 27 Ju 3900 169 436 558 437 438 439 440 441 78 Jubi.
442 64 1830 1800 1400 1360 920 559 3910 170 443 444 445 446 171 447 448 449 65
2260 1840 1810 1410 1370 930 890 560 3920 172 450 451 452 453

Dan. 70 w. Jesus Christ C.B. Augustus Caesar. Flood Prom Circ Pasover. Canaa^
Temp. Divis S. W. Olym. 454 65 1. 173 455 2.1 456 66 3.2 2270 1820 900 80.28
Jubil. 174 457 4.3 561 458 5.4 459 6.5 460 7.5 175 461 8.7 462 9.8 463 67 10.9
1850 1420 1380 940 910 28 Ju 3930 176 464 11.10 562 465 12.11 466 13.12 467
14.13 468 15.14 469 16.15 470 68 Tiberius C. 22 y. 7 m. 7 d. 17.16 2280 1860
1830 1430 1390 950 563 3940 177 471 18.17 472 19.18 473 20.19 474 21.20 178 475
22.21 476 23.22 477 69 24.23 2290 1870 1840 1440 1400 960 920 564 179 478 25.24
479 26.25 480 27.26 481 28.27 180 482 29.28 483 30.29 484 70 31.30 930 565 3950
181 485 32.31 486 33.32 487 34.33 488 182 489 79 Jubi. 490 28 Ju

FINIS.

