Draught of an ACT FOR TOLERATION WITH A few short REMARKS thereupon.
THe Queen's Majesty taking to Her serious Consideration, That a great and
considerable part of Her Subjects in this Her ancient Kingdom, have been
Baptized and Educated in the Communion of the Episcopal Church, and are of the
Episcopal Principles and Persuasion, and averse from the joining with the
Presbyterian Government, according to the present Establishment and the
Exercise of it. And Her Majesty being desireous to give just and due Ease to
all Her Subjects, does therefore, with the Advice and Consent of the Estates of
Parliament, Statute, Enact and ordain, that from henceforth it shall be Lawful
for all Her Majesty's Subjects of the Episcopal Persuasion, to hold Meetings
for Divine Worship with, and to hear God's Word and receive the Holy Sacraments
from, Ministers of the Episcopal Persuasion, in all Towns and Parishes of this
Kingdom, without any Let or Impediment whatsomever. As also, That it shall be
lawful for such Parishes as are now, or hereafter shall be vacant, where in the
plurality of the Heretors, Liferenters, and Tenants having standing Tacks, are
of the Episcopal Persuasion, to call Episcopal Ministers for to Preach the
Gospel, to Administer the Sacraments, and to Exercise Church Discipline in
their respective Parishes and Stations to which they shall be called. As also,
to have full Right and Title to their respective Manses and Gliebs, and to the
legally settled Stipends, Maintenances and Benefices, appointed and settled by
Law upon such Ministers as serve in the said Parishes, according to Law and
Custom, certifying all such as presume to Interrupt or Disturb such Ministers,
either in Meeting Houses or Parish Churches, in the exercise of their Function,
that they shall be punished conform to the good and wholesome Laws made by Her
Majesty's Religious Predecessors, for the Protection of the Ministers of the
Gospel, and appoints all Her Majesty's Judges to decern accordingly. And in
case any such Episcopal Ministers shall be found to Preach any Seditious
Doctrines tending to Disloyalty, or to the Disturbance of the public Peace and
Government, or contrary to the Protestant Religion, that they shall only be
convented before the Privy Council, or such as shall be appointed by them, and
punished according to the demerit of their Crime and Offenses. And it is hereby
Statute, Enacted, and Ordained, That the foresaid Indulgence and Toleration
shall have full Force and Effect from the Day and Date of these presents, and
that notwithstanding of any former Acts of Parliament, which from henceforth
shall make no Derogation from the Force of this present Indulgence and
Toleration. Finally, It is hereby Enacted and Appointed, That the Lords of
Privy Council and Lords of Session, Sheriffs, and all others Her Majesty's
Judges, shall interpret this present Act of Indulgence and Toleration, in the
most Benign and Favorable Sense, in behalf of the said Indulged Ministers, and
see it put to vigorous Execution, in all points.

REMARKS upon the foregoing Draught.
THis being the Second Embrio or Specimen handed about by the Promoters of the
Toleration-Project, we may take it as the Result of their Riper Thoughts, and
be allowed briefly to consider it.

1. Among the many Arguments given against any Toleration to Prelatical
Dissenters, in our present Circumstances, this is one never yet Answered; That
as it is the Civil Interest of every Nation to have but one established
National Church Government, Discipline and Worship; so also, that every Person
within the Nation should conform themselves thereto: And that never yet did any
Wise People grant a legal Toleration to Dissenters, where the Dissent was not
sounded either upon doubtful and scrupled Terms of Communion, or upon the
Hardships of external Force. But neither of these can be alleged in the
present Case; and therefore all Toleration must tend to cherish a Pernicious
Party, and soment a Wicked Design of overturning the present Quiet and Happy
Establishment.

2. This Toleration, being only for Episcopalians, does most directly set them
up in competition with, and in some respects preserably to Presbytry; to try
their skill and strength in overthrowing the legal Church.

3. The Ministers Indulged or Tolerated, are by this Draught to give no
Evidence either of their Loyalty or Orthodoxy; so that their Principles, both
contrary to the Confession of Faith, and against Her Majesty's Succession and
Government, as declared by the Meeting of Estates, are reserved and secured;
and they are at liberty (though not ^o Preach, yet) to Traffic and Practice for
the Pretender at St. Germains, according to their known Inclinations. By the
Former Draught, they were to swear the Allegiance, and to sign the Consession
contained in the Test and enacted in the Reign of K. Ja. 6. Which Condition,
though derogatory to the Act of Parliament 1690, ratifying the Westminster
Consession, and in so far a Retrograde step to the Rudiments of our
Reformation, and consequently backwards to Popery; yet it was better than
nothing at all. But it seems, though some have Latitude enough for Swearing and
Signing, in subserviency to Designs of greater Service; yet it is found upon
after-Thoughts, that even that Consession is of too hard Digestion to others,
as containing some Principles of Liberty, and against Arbitrary Courses, and
such like Tenets as are not for their purpose.

4. This Draught founds the Dissent from Communion, upon being Baptized and
Educated in the Communion of the Episcopal Church. That their Education hinders
not their peaceable joining with the National Worship, is plain from the
Experience of several Years since the Revolution, till within these few
Months, that some have been practiced inro a contrary Bias. And it is no less
plain, that their Educators, the Ministers, can never have the Brow to pretend
the least Pinch or Qualm of Conscience in this Matter; Since their own
Addresses to King William, and to his High Commissioner the Earl of
Tullibardine, as likewise those to the General Assembly 1692, upon the Formula
sent from Court, are standing Witnesses against them. But that their being
Baptized in the Episcopal Communion should be mentioned as a Ground of their
Dissent, is altogether surprising; As if the Episcopal Baptism were not that
one Baptism of the Catholic Church, which the Presbyterians hold their Baptism
to be: For whatever Grounds Presbyterians give for separating from Prelatical
Communion, yet they never gave their Baptism for one. But it seems, by this
Scheme, that the Episcopal People are taught to reckon themselves Baptized unto
Prelacy, and not unto Christ. And unto what then are their Children Baptized
since the Revolution? Or unto what were the Conformists of the late times
Baptized, before Prelacy came in? This is an Insinuation of the last Disgrace
among Protestants, and only fit for the Dragoon-Conversions of France, where,
it a Popish Surgeon or Midwife Baptized a Child, that Child was ever after to
be held as a Roman Catholic.

5. What makes any of the People of this Nation averse from joining with
Presbyterian Government and Worship, but either, 1. Downright Threatening and
Violence used by some Masters unto those, over whom they have Influence and
Power, of which there are diverse Instances. Or, 2. That Men's Vices are galled
by Presbyterian Discipline, and their Libertine and Popish Designs obstructed.
And, 3. That they have of late got great Encouragement to expect a Change. We
challenge the Wit of our Adversaries to assign any other Reason of this
pretended Aversion, which was not heard of nor known among any of the People,
till of late some have taken vast pains viis and modis to procure it.
The Nation was in Peace and Quiet, and well disposed to comply with the
Establishment; till some who delight in Contention, threw their Fire balls and
told People, that they should be gratified in their unreasonable Demands; and
now that they have raised the Flame, they must have Oil, instead of Water, to
quench it.

6. The Draught sets forth, That the Design is, To give just and due Ease to
all the Subjects; That is indeed flat Licentiousness without control. For this
is an Ease which no Body needs, and the granting whereof by a Law, would prove
the greatest Disquiet and Dis^ease to Her Majesty's best Subjects. For,

1. It con^ains a Toleration in every Parish, without exception, contrary to
the Laws against, Intruding into planted Congregations, and which in many
places (as appears already by the Example of the Tumults in G^asgow) can never
be attempted without Blood, and the most fatal Discontents and Disorders.

2. It contains a Comprehension, which carries both the Overturning of the Laws
of our Settlement, and most horrid Confusion in the bosom of it; the Nullifying
of Discipline, the Impunity of Immoral Practices, the Exercise both of
Erastianism and Independency, a restoring of Prelatical Jurisdiction and Power,
and a transmitting (at best) of incurable Schism to Posterity: Beside, a most
grievous Hardship upon such as Own and Adhere to the National Worship, where in
any Parish they happen to be the lesser or weaker part: For, it were hard
enough, that they should be obliged out of their own Purses to Maintain a
Presbyterian Minister, or else to want the Ordinances of the Gospel; yet even
for this, there is no Provision of Toleration made by this Draught, for them.

3. It opens a Door to p^^secure Presbyterians for insisting upon their legal
Privileges, and testifying the least Dis-satisfaction with the Intrusions of
Prelatis^s; for they must be punished according to the good and wholesome Laws
made by Her Majesty's Religious Predecessors (viz Charles 2. and James 7.) for
the Protection of the Ministers of the Gospel: By which Title, these whom the
Country call Curats, are plainly understood. So that, this is evidently to
Revive the Caroline and Jacobite Persecution against Presbyterians, upon every
pretext that may be interpreted an Interruption or Disturbance of the
Prelatists, though acting never so much against Law: And indeed Prelacy can never
be Tolerated, far less Supported in this Land, without Blood and a standing
Army.

4. For Sedition, Disloyalty and Heresy, they are only to be convented before
the Privy Council, or such as shall be appointed by them. One would think in
all Reason, that the Council before whom they are to be convented, should be
very Presbyterian and Orthodox, as well as Loyal, otherwise there can be no
Security from the Tolerated Party, nor can the Delinquents be under any Fear or
Restraint, in appearing before Judges of their own Principles and Persuasion.

5. That the Indulgence and Toleration shall have full Force and Effect from
the Day and Date of the Act, notwithstanding former Acts of Parliament, is in
effect a dispensing with these Acts for the time past, and an Indemnity for the
Transgressions already made. And this carries in it a plain and short Answer to
all the Complaints and Grievances given in to the Council by the General
Assembly, and their Commission, of Encroachments and disorderly Practices
already committed contrary to Law, of which no Redress is henceforward to be
expected.

6. The Appointment of Interpreting this Act in the most benign and favorable
Sense in behalf of the Ministers indulged, and of seeing it put to vigorous
Execution, is in other Words, as Matters are now stared, a full abolishing of
Presbytry, and an establishing of Prelacy by Law, These things are so plain,
and the Legislative at this time, we hope, entrusted into so honest Hands, that
as he must be a bold Man, who dares present such an Act to a Scots Parliament,
after the late happy Revolution, so let the Tolerators vary their Projest as
they will, we cannot doubt, but that it shall prove abortive.

To conclude, Pamphlets being at present much in fashion, it may not perhaps be
amiss to subjoin a Citation or two out of one.

The Interest of England considered, Page 25. -- Places must be filled with
these, who never Qualified themselves by Civil Tests, till Honor, or
Advantage, or deeper Designs, engaged them, -- who were against the Abdication
of the late King James, the Association to support King William, and the
Abjuration of the pretended Prince of Wales, in order to maintain Her Majesty's
unquestionable Right to the Throne, and the Succession in the Protestant Line.
Page 29. The Whigs have been a firm Rampart to the Liberties of the People,
against ^ll the Assaults of Arbitrary Power; and have so heartily opposed the
Designs of ill Reigns, as to get the Names of Commonwealths Men: But who, to
show they were through Friends to our Constitution, and for defending (...)
Prerogative vested in a good Prince, who, they knew, would use it to their
Advantage, and who dese^v'd the Marks of their Gratitude, have gone so far on
the obliging side in the late Reign, as to be termed Countiers in Reproach.
Page 38. The Protestant Interest is attacqu'd by the Devil heading an Army of
Libertines and Practical Atheists at Home, and a Confederacy of Papists Abroad;
-- and when they have dared to make such Progress in a time of Action and
Business Abroad, what Attempts are we not to look for from them, when they come
to enjoy a Peaceful Leisure for perfecting their Designs. Page 74. The
depriving the Protestants in France of their Offices and Places of Trust, which
had been confirmed to them by the Edict of Nantes, was one of the first Steps
taken to repeal that Edict, and extirpat the Reformation.

Christi, infer Lupos, qui vult in ovile, voraces;
(...)Simulans cudere, cudit (...).

