THE Quakers Folly Made manifest to all men: Or a True RELATION of what passed
in Three DISPUTATIONS at Sandwich, April, 12, 13, 19, 1659. between three
Quakers, and a Minister, viz. Mr. Samuel Fisher, George Whithead, Richard
Hubberthorn, and Thomas Danson. Wherein many Popish Tenants were by them
Maintained, and by him Refuted. OCCASIONED By an imperfect and (in many things)
false Relation of the said Disputations, Published by R. Hubberthorn, one of
the Three Quakers, which said Relation is also Censured and amended. Together
with a brief Narrative of some remarkable Passages.

By Tho. Danson, late Fellow of Magd. Coll. Oxon, and now Minister of the
Gospel at Sandwich in Kent.

The Second Edition.

London, Printed by J. H. for John Allen at the Rising Sun in Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.

Imprimatur,

Joseph Caryl.
June 3d, 1659.
THE EPISTLE TO the READER.
Reader,
PErhaps thou will wonder, that I should meddle with such a Generation, as the
Quakers, and thou may be apt to think, that my time hangs on the Lug (as we
say) and will not off at any considerable rate: But that thy wonder may cease,
and thy mistake be rectified, I refer thee to the Narrative hereto annexed;
which I hope will give thee satisfaction: The reason of my appearance in Print,
the Title Page does truly inform thee of. I can assure thee, it never was my
ambition to appear so publicly, and had I considered the likelihood of the
Quakers Printing, which would necessitate mine, I think I should have waved any
discourse with them. But repentance is now too late, and perhaps unmeet, for
God can serve himself by the meanest Instruments, among which I willingly rank
my self: I verily hope thou will see the men out of their disguise, and wilt
find cause sufficient to think and speak of them with pity and compassion; and
of their opinions, with hatred and detestation. I promise thee Reader, no more
then shall be performed (viz.) a true account of our discourses, I mean so much
of them as was Argumentative, and pertinent to the Questions under debate. For
thou must know, that the Quakers, like wantons, would have their vagaries ever
and anon, and then I must say somewhat to them, or let them have all the talk,
which by the ignorance of common people, would have been a prejudice to the
cause of God which I defended. And I therefore chose rather to out-word them
(which is the reason why my Answers are oftentimes so large and laxe.) Many
excursions they made into Arminian points, which I was fain to permit, and to
defend the Truths they opposed: All which I shall either wholly omit, or
mention very sparingly; because they are not Errors of so high a nature, as
those which are the natural Members of that deformed Monster, we call Quakerism.

The Names of Gentlemen, Ministers, and others in the Margin, are a few (of
very many) witnesses of the Terms of the Questions agreed to by the Quakers,
and of other remarkable passages, and matters of fact, who will free me from
the suspicion of a partial Relator. That these men may proceed no further, but
that their folly may be manifest to all men, 2 Timothy 3.9. And that we henceforth
be no more children, tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine, by the
sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive,
but speaking the Truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is
the Head, even Christ, is the earnest Prayer of,

Thy Servant for Jesus sake, Tho. Danson.
Sandwich, May 24, 1659.
An ACCOUNT of a DISPUTE April 12th between three QUAKERS, M. S. Fisher, G.
Whithead, R. Hubberthorn, and Tho. Danson.
AFter a brief account of the occasion of our meeting, and a short prayer for a
blessing upon it, we began with this Question, Whether every man that comes
into the world be enlightened by Christ?

R. Hubberth. I bear witness to the Truth.


T. Danson. But what light is it you intend? we grant that every man has some
light, by which he discerns (though dimly) many sins, and duties, and several
Divine attributes, but the mystery of godliness, as it is summed up, 1 Timothy 3.
ult. God manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, etc. we deny that all
men have the knowledge of.


R Hubberthorn. The light is but one, and that I testify.


T. Danson. The lights mentioned, viz. natural and supernatural light, are two,
and though all have the one, yet but few have the other.


R. Hubberthorn. Thou speak out of thy dark mind, because the true light
has not come over and comprehended thee.


T. Danson. Your judgment of me I value not, but pray forbear your censures,
and let us speak to the business. If your meaning be that the knowledge of the
Gospel is vouchsafed by Christ to every man, I shall either expect your proof,
or shall prove the contrary my self. Here the man was silent.


T. Danson. I take your silence for consent to my offer of proving against your
Doctrine. And thus I prove it false, Psalm 147.19, 20. He shows his Word unto
Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel: He has not dealt so with
any Nation, and as for his judgments they have not known them. It Is plain from
Scripture that by the Word and Statutes and Judgments, are meant the
supernatural light or knowledge of the Gospel. And the Psalmist does assert
that no Nation besides the Jews had this knowledge at that time; which
overthrows your assertion, for you speak of a light which every man has in all
ages and generations. And I shall add another plain Scripture, Ephesians. 2.12. where
speaking of the state of the whole body of the Gentiles before Christ's coming
in the flesh, he says, they were without Christ, strangers from the Covenant
of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. Observe, they who had
no hope, that is, no ground o^ hope of salvation, were ignorant of the promises
the g^ound of hope, and so of God in Christ the object of hope, and so of the
sum of the Gospel, or light of Christ.


G. Whithead. Thou bring a place out of Ephesians. 2.12. to pr^ve that Christ
enlightens not every man that comes into the world, and thou have given us thy
meaning contrary to the Scripture, which says the Gentiles have the Law in
their hearts, Romans 2.15.


T. Danson. You prove not my interpretation of either of the Scriptures I urged
unsound, but bring me another Scripture, and I must let you go your own way.
As for that Scripture, Romans 2.15. it is spoken of the natural light, for it is
opposed to the knowledge of the Jews. And the words are not the law, but the
work or effects of the law written in their hearts, such as accusing and
excusing mentioned in the latter end of the verse; and there is a great deal of
difference between the law and the work of it, though you do not (it seems)
understand it. And it is besides my business to inform you.


G. Whithead. Thou say it is meant of a natural light, whereas it is said to
be the knowledge of whatsoever might be known of God, Romans 1.19.


T. Danson. The Apostle intends that what might be known of God, without the
preaching of the Gospel, was known to the Gentiles, v. 16, 17. it is by the
Gospel that the righteousness of God is revealed, and John 4.22. Christ tells
the Samar^tan woman, that the Jews (exclusively) knew what they worshipped, and
that salvation was of the Jews. And in respect of this knowledge revealed by
the Gospel, the Scripture says that the Gentiles have their understandings
darkened, Ephesians. 4.18.


G. Whithead. That place says that the Gentiles were not so enlightened as
afterward: For it is said that Christ was given for a light to the Gen^iles.


T. Danson. You give your meaning of the Scripture which you will not allow us
to do. But as for that Scripture which is Isa. 49.6. it proves not that Christ
was a light to the Gentiles in every age and generation, but the contrary, in
that Christ was not to be a light to them till his coming in the flesh, and it
was fulfilled, Acts 13.46, 47. Lo, we turn to the Gentiles. For so has the
Lord commanded us saying, I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles. As for
the place in the Ephesians, it denies that the Gentiles had been at all
enlightened by Christ (unless you mean as God) chapter 2.13. The Apostle says in
that estate before Christ's coming, they were afar off, viz. from God and
Christ spoken of, v. 12. and the knowledge of them. And Ephesians. 4.18. he says
that they were alienated from the life of God, which imports that their
understandings were no more capable of the knowledge of God, then creatures of
one kind of life to converse with those of another. Gods understanding is his
life, as he is a reasonable being, and these Gentiles wanted what some have by
especial gift, 1 John 5.20. an understanding to know him that is true; and
could no more converse with spiritual objects, than bruit beasts can with such
rational objects as man's understanding does: So that those Scriptures put
together do assert that the body of the Gentiles, for ages and Generations
wanted the light of the Gospel, and light in their understandings, the
difference of which you may conceive by the light of the Sun which is external
light (and so the Gospel) and the light in the eye to which answers an
understanding to know him that is true, and both of them are necessary, or else
a blind man might see when there is light, and the seeing man when there is
none.


G. Whithead. Thou make the Gospel to be an outward light (in the darkness
of thy own reasoning) but the Scripture says it is an inward light, 2 Cor. 4 6.
the Apostle says it shines out of darkness in their hearts.


T. Danson. You show much ignorance in your interpretation. The Apostle speaks
of material light, and argues from the effect of one creating word to another,
that by the like word of command he had the light or knowledge of Christ in his
understanding, which was given not for his own use only, but to be communicated
to others. As for the phrase in their hearts, it imports but the same thing
with that expression, Ephesians. 1.18. The eyes of your understanding being
enlightened. The light by which the Gospel is discerned is inward, but that
makes not against the Gospels being an outward light. But what is this to the
enlightening of every man by Christ? Reply to the Scriptures brought against
that assertion.


G. Whithead. The Apostle says the light of the knowledge of the glory of God
in the face of Christ shined in their hearts, 2 Cor. 4.6.


T. Danson. In whose hearts? nor of all mankind, but of the Apostles, and some
others, a small number in comparison of the rest who were not enlightened; and
therefore the Apostle says, that the Gospel was hid to them that are lost, v.
3. and that there are some, to whom the light of the Gospel does not shine, v.
4. And it is elsewhere spoken of as a distinguishing mercy to know the mysteries
of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 13.11. It was given to the Disciples, not to
others. And to the same effect, Luke 10.21. Christ gives thanks to his Father,
that whilst he hid the secrets of the Gospel from Scribes and Pharisees, he
revealed them to others.


G. Whithead. The Scripture says that the Kingdom of God was in the Pharisees,
Luke 17.21. and therefore it denies not but that they did know the mysteries of
the Kingdom.


T. Danson. That expression may import that the Kingdom which they did upon
mistake look for without them, was indeed a Kingdom within them. [To which I
shall add, that upon second thoughts, I judge the most genuine interpretation
to be (...) among you (so the prepos. may be rendered) Mat. 21.43. meaning of
the preaching of the Gospel by Christ in person and his Disciples, and this
threat of taking away the Kingdom of God from them, is directed against the
Pharisees, v. 45. The Pharisees perceived that he spoke of them.]


R. Hubberthorn. The form of ^ound words is, that Christ enlightens every man
that comes into the world, John 1.9.


T. Danson. The mean^ng of those words cannot be as the letter of them does
import, for then the Scripture would contradict it self; but it must be either
that Christ inl^ghtens every man that is inl^ghtened, or else that he
inlightens some of every Nation, kindred, tongue and people, as the phrase is,
Rev. 5.9.


R. Hubberthorn. The Scripture says every man, and thou say but some, who
shall be believed, thou or the Apostle? Thou make John a liar.


T. Danson. No such matter, I make not the Apostle a liar. For the indefinite
phrase has a restrained sense, as elsewhere in the Scripture, Christ tasted
death for every m n, Heb. 2.9. when as he died but for a certain number, as
appears by that very place, v. 10. In bringing many so^s to glory. Those whom
Christ brings to glory are those for whom he tasted death, but the former are
but many sons, and therefore not the latter: the every man for whom he died
must be limited by the many sons whom he brings to glory.


R. Hubberthorn. Then it seems thou deniest that Christ died for all.


T. Danson. Yes, that I do, and it is more than you can prove.


G. Whithead. I witness according to the Scripture, that Christ died for all,
2 Cor. 5.14. If one died for all, then were all dead.


T. Danson. It Is spoken of those who were converts and believers, whose
sanctification was the end of Christ's death, and for whom Christ rose, and who
therefore did ri^e with him. As for the meaning of the words it is this, that
the necessity of Christ's dying imported the misery of their condition, in that
they were dead spiritually, and obnoxious to eternal death, and the love of
Christ which made him come in at a pinch, to help when none else could, is a
great constraint to obedience upon all the dead for whom Christ died. That
place is fully parallel and opens this (putting but Christ in stead of God into
the former clause) God commends his love toward us (speaking of believers, v.
1, 2.) in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us, Romans 5.8.


G. Whithead. Still thou pervertest Scripture by thy meanings.


T. Danson. I pervert it not, but I reconcile the Scripture to it self.


G. Whithead. The Scripture is at unity with it self, and needs not thy
reconciling. It Is said, the Scripture cannot be broken.


T. Danson. I say so too, that the Scripture is at unity with it self, but
withal that it seems to disagree, and cannot approve it self to our
understandings, without the mediation of a meaning or interpretation. It was an
usual thing with Christ to speak words of a doubtful sense, as John 3.19.
Destroy this Temple, which they understood of the material Temple (he being in
it at the time, v. 15. and likely enough speaking with his eye as well as his
tongue) v. 20. but he meant of the temple of his body, v. 21.


G. Whithead. Thou art such a giver of meanings as they were, who gave it
contrary to Christ's meaning


T. Danson. Whether I be such a one or no is not for you to judge in your own
cause, ^ leave it to the understanding hearers. But in the mean while the place
serves my purpose, viz. to prove that Christ's meaning may be mistaken, when
his words are taken in the most ordinary and literal sense, and so it would be,
if by every man, we should understand every individual man; so that it is your
self, and not I that am such a giver of meanings as the Jews.


G. Whithead. How can thou prove that thou art to give meanings to Scripture?


T. Danson. I do not pretend to power to give meanings to Scripture (as your
phrase is) if you mean thereby, adding any thing to the Scripture which is not
in it, but to find out what already is, by causing the Scriptures with the
Cherubims to face one another; that is my duty and all other men's. This the
Scripture warrants, Neh. 8.8. So they read in the Book, in the Law of God
distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading. And
I should be glad to know of any of you who are against meanings, how you can
understand such Scriptures as these without a meaning, God is not a man that he
should repent. It repents me that I have made man. God tempted Abraham. God
tempts no man. Answer not a fool according to his folly. Answer a fool
according to his folly. And once more, Paul and James* The former says, that a
man is justified by Faith without the works of the Law, Romans 3.28. And the
other flatly contradicts him in terms, that by works a man is justified, and
not by Faith only, Jam. 2.24. When as any of these do sweetly consent, if the
ambiguity of phrases be once removed: As for instance in Paul and James, the
one speaks of being formally justified, the other declaratively. Justification
in Paul is opposite to the condemnation of a sinner in general, and
justification in James is opposite to the condemnation of an hypocrite in
particular. In Paul's sense a sinner is absolved, in James's sense a believer is
approved. [So Diodat whose words I used, but forgot to name him in the
discourse] Here the two disputants had nothing to say, but what was absurd and
impertinent; and thereupon I desired we might leave what had been spoken to the
hearers judgment, and to go on to another Question, which at length was agreed
to.

The Second Question was, Whether in this life the Saints attain to a state of
perfection or freedom from sin? This they held in the affirmative.


T. Danson. Your Doctrine of perfection is against the tenor of the Scripture,
let us hear what you can say for the proof of it.


R. Hubberthorn. 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin.


T. Danson. That cannot be meant of freedom from sin; but either there is an
emphasis in the word sin, intending under that general term one kind or sort of
sin, which is spoken of, 1 John 5.16. There is a sin unto death. Or if not on
the Substantive, on the Verb (...) which notes to make a trade or business of
sin, as it is explained, v. 8. where he uses the same verb, for the Devil
sins from the beginning. He has never ceased to sin since he began, thus
indeed the Saints sin not, but a course of sin is broken of^, and there is not
such a free trade between the soul and sin, as in the state of unregeneracy,
whereof this is given for one character, that cannot cease to sin, 2 Pet. 2.14.


G. Whithead. Thou wrestest the Scriptures to thy own destruction.


T. Danson. No, I wrest them not, if I do, show wherein. And if you will
observe, either it must be meant of all Saints or none, for the New birth
agrees to all, if then the phrase excludes the being of sin in some, it must in
all; and mark the reason given, because his seed remains in him, and he
cannot sin, because he is born of God: Now the seed remains in all, as well as
any; now lest you should be so mad as to assert all Saints to be free from sin,
pray read 1 John 1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
this is spoken of such persons, as of whom it is denied that they commit sin,
persons that had fellowship with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, v. 3.


Mr. Fisher. Pray do not multiply words to no purpose, but read, v. ult. If we
say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar. The born of God should lie if
they did deny themselves to have sinned, before they were in the new birth.


T. Danson. Sir, you must not think to put us off so, v. 8. it is (...), and the
other is, (...). Suppose the latter verse were to be understood of the sin,
which preceded the new birth, yet the former is expressly de praesenti, that we
have (not have had) no sin; and yet I see nothing to the contrary, but that we
have not sinned, v. ult. may relate to particular acts of sin in the state of
the new birth, denied either in whole or in part.


G. Whithead. Phil. 3.15. As many as he perfect let us ^e thus minded.


T. Danson. For the phrase upon which you ground your notion, it is used in a
comparative sense, 1 Cor. 2.6. speaks of grown Christians, who could fancy the
Gospel in a plain dress, whom he calls perfect in comparison of others, as he
calls Babes in Christ, carnal in respect of those who are more spiritual, Chapter
3.1. And often in Scripture perfect is put for upright, and made synonymous, or
of the same import, Job 1.1. that man (mean^ng Job) was perfect and upright;
that perfect is not meant in your sense, appears by c. 9.20. If I say I am
pe^fect (...) (his mouth) shall also prove me perverse. Sinceri^y Job all along
avouched, but perfection such as he might j^stifie h^mself by, he denies. But
to return to the place, Phi^. 3.12. He denies that he was yet perfect, whilst
in a breath he affirms himself so. The perfection he denies, is the
resurrection of the dead, v. 11. that is by an usual Metonymy of the subject
for the adj^nct, that measure of holiness which accompanies tha^ state, which
we shall find to be exclusive of sin, 1 John 2.2. We shall be lik^ him, meaning
Christ, when he appears. But how shall Christ appear, Heb. 9. ult. appear the
second time without sin. Put it together, and the perfection Paul denies, is
the state of the resurrection, which is to be without sin. The perfection he
^ffirms, is comparative, in respect of Christians of lower seize, who
could not assent to all the Doctrines of the Gospel, v. 15. If in any thing ye
(i. e. some of you) be otherwise minded.


M. Fisher. I will prove from the Scripture such a state of perfection, Psalm.
119. Blessed ^re the undefiled in the way, v. 1. They also do no iniquity, v.
2. Do you mark every word?


T. Danson. Yes Sir, we mark the words, but I might expect a reply to what I
have urged against the Scriptures brought by your friend. As for the phrases,
they are hyperbolical, v. 6. Then I shall not be ashamed when I have respect to
all thy Commandm^n^s, in respect of design and endeavor, though falling short
in accomplishment, that v. explains the other two you brought. [I shall add,
that David excludes himself out of a blessed state, if undefiled, and doing no
iniquity be meant strictly. His wish, verse. 5. and other passages ^n the
Psalms, show, that he was not free from sin, which su^e David did not intend;
for Psalm. 32 2. he pronounces the man blessed which has no guilt in his
spirit, or sincere, which himself was at that time, though under the guilt of a
great sin, verse. 5. which is by interpreters supposed to be the same sins,
for which Psalm. 51. was composed.] But Mr. Fisher can you produce one single
example of a perfect Saint in your sense.


Mr. Fisher. Yes (Thomas Dans^n) that I can. It Is in Luke 1.6. And they
(Zachary and Elizabeth) were both righteous before God (not before man only,
but before God) walk^ng in all the Commandments (nor in some few o^ many, but
all) and O^dinances of the Lord blameless.


T. Danson. Methinks Sir, you bring in this Scripture with pomp and ceremony,
yet it will not do: For first, how does it appear that righteous before God, is
meant a perfect inherent righteousness? seeing a believers person with his
works are accepted with God, though his works be not perfect, Heb. 11.4. By
Faith Abel offered to God a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain, by which he
obtained witness that he was righteous, etc. And secondly, how do you prove
blameless to be meant otherwise than comparatively, Phil. 2.15. Blameless,
without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye
shine as lights in the world. In the same sense may Luke understand the phrase.
And if you mark, the very same phrase is used of Paul's external conformity to
the Law; when he was so far from perfect, that he had no Grace at all, Phil.
3.6. Touching the righteousness which is in the Law blameless. v. 5. Touching
the Law a Pharisce. Now how they were blameless, you find by instance, Luke
18.10, 11. Not as other men are, I fast twice in the week, etc. I bring this
instance to let you know that the phrase simply considered, will be so far from
importing perfection of Grace, that it will not import any Grace. But in a
word, to put it out of doubt, Zacharias of whom these words are used, whence
you gather him to be free from sin, is found guilty at the very time that this
description agreed to him, of unbelief, and was with dumbness punished for it,
Luke 1.10. Behold thou shall be dumb, and not able to speak, until the day that
these things be performed, because thou believe not my words, etc. It Is the
message of Gabriel the Angel to Za^harias, v. 19. You see Mr. Fisher, your pomp
in the bringing in of this Scripture was mere wast.


Mr. Fisher. But Tho. Danson, there is no such thing m^ntioned of Elizab^th,
and if there be one instance, it suffices.


T. Danson. But Sir, your Argument is drawn from the import of the phrases, and
if the phrases are applicable to him though guilty of actual sin, then they
will not argue her to be more free from sin than him, though there be no
mention of any of her sins. -- Pray Sir, seeing you have nothing to reply, but
God has stopped your mouth, let me hear what answer you can give to that
Scripture which has run much in my mind against this Doctrine, Eccles. 7.20.
There is not a just man upon earth that does good and sins not.


R. Hubberthorn. It cannot be meant as thou would have it, for the man Christ
then were not a just man, which I think thou will not say.


T. Danson. I desired Mr. Fishers answer, and not yours. But seeing he is
silenced, I will answer you: What a wretch are you to make such an Inference?
was not Christ God as well as man? And could a nature tainted with sin be taken
into a personal union with the Divine Nature? The place I urge excludes any
mere man from perfection in this life.


Mr. Fisher. I will give thee an answer Tho. Danson, We grant the truth in that
Scripture, the just man there spoken of, is not on earth, for he is redeemed
from the earth, and in the Revelation he is said to be a dweller in Heaven,
whereas the wrath of God is said to come upon the Inhabitants of the earth.


T. Danson. Mr. Fisher you run very low at last, this is a mere evasion, I
verily believe in your own judgment and intention, because you think you must
say somewhat. Can you possibly think that the j^st man's being in Heaven in
respect of his disposition and affection, and in his Head Christ, excludes his
local abode on earth? We say indeed that no such just man as Solomon speaks of,
is to be found on earth, but in Heaven, which is a place of abode, as well as a
state of bliss.


R. Hubberthorn. In Heb. 12.23. Spirits of just men made perfect; this is
spoken of them to whom the Apostle writes.


T. Danson. The pl^ce does not import the perfection of any men on earth, but
sp^aking of the state we are advanced to under the Gospel by Christ, he says
we are one body with them in Heaven, and have the same title with them in
possession.


R. Hu^berthorn. Thus with thy meanings thou pervertest Scripture.


T. Danson. I leave it to the judgment of judicious hearers, whether I have
perverted Scripture or no, and so pray do you.

The third Qu^stion debated on was (though with much ado) at length stated in
these terms; Whether our good works are the meritorious cause of our
justification? And Mr. Fisher held it in the Affirmative.


Mr. Fisher. Thus I prove that our good works are the meritorious cause of our
justification, by a rule that you own, Contraria contrariorum ratio, whence I
argue thus; If our evil works are the meritorious cause of our condemnation,
then out good works are the meritorious cause of our non-condemnation or
justification; But our evil works are the meritorious cause of our
condemnation, therefore our good works are the meritorious cause of our
non-condemnation or just^fication.


T. Danson. Now you show your self a rank Papist indeed. We deny your
consequence, because our evil works are perfectly evil, but our good works are
but imperfectly good, and any one evil is a violation of the Law, and deserves
the penalty of the Law, but any one or more, good work is not the fulfillin^ of
the Law. [Let me add, that there is no consequence in that Popish Argument,
notwithstand^ng that Canon, because our good and evil works are not absolute
contraries, the one being perfectly evil, the other but imperfectly good, Mulum
oritur ex quolibet defectu, Bonum fi^^ex integris causis, which latter appears
by Isa. 64.6. All our righteousnesses (not our unrighteousnesses only) are as
filthy rags. And again, thus the rule will allow to argue; Evil works which are
the violation, of the Law deserve damnation; Ergo, good works which are the
fulfilling of the Law deserve salvation. And we know no good works such, but
Christ's. And once more in respect of the subject, the Rule will not hold,
being one who owes all his good works to God, and is a finite creature, now
those works which merit must not be due, and they must be of infinite value, or
else there is no proportion between them and the reward. And thus we might
argue a contrariis. If his evil works from whom only good works are due, as
from a finite creature, to an infinite Creator, do truly deserve damnation,
then his good works who owes none, and is an infinite person, do truly deserve
non-condemnation. But verum prius, ergo et posterius. And to understand this,
we must know that the desert of disobedience arises chiefly from the dignity of
the Object against which sin is committed; when as the desert of obedience
arises from the dignity of the subject by which it is performed.]


Mr. Fisher. I will prove my consequence from Gal. 5.18. But if ye be led of
the Spirit, ye are not under the Law. Whence I argue, If they who are led by
the Spirit are not under the Law, then the leading of the Spirit is the
meritorious cause of their not being under the Law, but they who are led by the
Spirit, are not under the Law, Ergo.


T. Danson. Sir, you are very silly your self, or take your hearers to be so,
that you think this to be a proof of your former consequence, or that there is
any consequence in this Argument. You should have proved that there is par
ratio for the merit of good and of evil works. And surely Sir, the leading of
the Spirit, or Sanctification is a fruit and effect, not a meritorious cause of
not being under the Law, that is obliged to its penalty.


Mr. Fisher. I will prove by another Scripture that leading by the Spirit is
the meritorious cause of our Justification, 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of
you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Observe, here the Co inthians
are said to be justified by the Spirit.


T. Danson. I might say that perhaps the clause should be referred to
Sanctification, which is in a more appropriate manner attributed to the Spirits
efficiency, as if the order of the words had been, but ye are sanctified by the
Spirit of our God, and such transpositions are not without instance in the
Scripture, as, Mat. 7.6. Give not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast ye
your Pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn
again and rent you, where turn again and rent you, is to be joined to the dogs,
for as swine do trample under their feet, so dogs do fly upon a man, and tear
him down. Or else justified by the Spirit may be meant of the Spirits
application; I mean the third Person in the Trinity, not of the work of Grace,
whereof we are the Subject


Mr. Fisher. In the 8th of the Romans v. 2. The Law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of sin and death. Now it is the same
Law of the Spirit of life that is in Christ and the Saints.


T. Danson. That place is much against you: For the Apostle asserts the
Holiness of man's Nature as a work of the Spirit conforming it to the Law, to
be the merito^ious cause of ou^ freedom from sin and death; but mark withal,
it is not that which is in us, but in Christ. And though it is true that the same
spirit is in Christ and the Saints, yet neither does the spirit in us conform
us fully to the Law (notwithstanding your vain assertion of perfection) nor if
it did, were that conformity the merit of J^stification. [Let me add, that the
Law of the Spirit of life here spoken of, is not only the meritorious cause of
our freedom from death, but from the Law of sin, or obeying of sin as a Law;
now I would fain know what precedent holiness in the Saints merits subsequent
holiness; or whether the exercise of what they have, is the meritorious cause
of what they have not, or of perfection, especially if the law of sin intends
the corruption of nature, as the Law of the Spirit of life does holiness of
nature: I would be instructed how a nature in part corrupted can deserve total
freedom; and I am sure the first work of the Spirit renews our natures but in
part.]


Mr. Fisher. Pray read on, Romans 8.4. That the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. This place
says the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in the persons of the Saints.


T. Danson. Sure Sir, you never read v. 3. which tells us that the Law was weak
through the flesh; that is unable to justify us, in regard of our inability
(through corruption) to fulfill it which were untrue, if we are able to fulfill
it; and what follows, God sent his own Son to give us what we could not attain
to by our own obedience to the Law; and as for the 4th v. it imports the end
for which God sent Christ, that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us; not in our own persons, but in Christ, his righteou^nesse
imputed to us, as if it had been inherent in our selves.


Mr. Fisher. That is thy meaning, but not the meaning of the Apostle.


T. Danson. Yes, but it is the Apostles, as I have proved. But pray Sir, let me
ask you a question (though it may seem besides, yet it will be to the purpose)
it is this: whether there be any true believers who are not perfect?


Mr. F^sher. I must acknowledge that there are degrees among believers, as the
Apostle says, 1 John 2.13, 14. Little children, Fathers, Young men.


T. Danson. I suppose you mean, that some of these have a mi^ture of sin with
their Grace. But let me ask you but one question more, whether the children
(for instance b^ in a justified estate or not?


Mr. Fisher, I Will tell thee Tho. Danson, there are but two estates.
Justification, and condemnation.


T. D. Now Sir, you are caught in a manifest contradiction and absurdity, for
before you maintained that our justification was by a personal fulfilling of
the Law, and now you grant some persons to be justified who never did fulfill
it personally. That end I proposed in asking you the questions, and I have
obtained it to make your folly manifest to all men. [Reader, observe that
though it concerned Mr. Fisher to wind himself out of this contradiction, yet
he did not reply, but sat down on the top of the seat like a man astonished,
and under the Heretics judgment, I mean self-condemned, Tit. 3.11.] After a
while we fell upon an Arminian point, whether a man that is justified may be
unjustified? which Mr. Fisher affirmed, and I would have omitted all the
discourse, but for the strangeness of one medium, by which he endeavored to
confirm it.


Mr. Fisher. Take the instance of David, Psalm 51.4. That thou might be
justified when thou speak, and clear when thou judge. Whence I argue, if
David was unjustified in his own conscience, he was unjustified before God,
(and consequently a man may become unjustified after he has been justified
before God) But David was unjustified in his own Conscience, Ergo, he was so
before God.


T. D. I might deny your minor, for it does not appear to me, that David was at
this time unjustified in his own Conscience, but the contrary, for he spoke
these words after the Prophet Nathan had come to him, Title of Ps. 51. And we
find, 2 Samuel 12.13. The Prophet told him, the Lord has put away thy sin. He
might lose much of his joy, and yet retain the sense of his interest. And for
the words, David either acknowledged Gods righteousness in the temporal evils
threatened against him, 2 Samuel 12 11. or the desert of condemnation. But I choose
to deny your Sequel.


Mr. Fisher. I prove it, 1 John 3.20. If our hearts condemn us, God is greater
than our hearts, and knows all things. Here the Apostle argues to Gods
condemnation, from that of our own hearts, which is always according to the
light of the Spirit.


T. Danson. Your place proves nothing about David's state; but to take it as it
comes, nor does it prove your assertion in the general; the place speaks of
such a sentence as is passed by a Conscience not erroneous, but rightly guided.
[I shall add to what was spoken, but these Scriptures against that tenent,
Psalm. 77.8, 9, 10. Joh. 8.54. Compared with v. 44. T t. 1.15. Their conscience
is defiled. Of which latter Scripture, I say but this, that one of Consciences
Offices being a Witness, its defilement as such* in the wicked, is to lead
them into a wrong opinion of their estares, and Conscience in the Saints, being
but in part cleansed, as a witness, it testifies falsehood to them also, in
that th^^ estate is bad, when it is good, as to the wicked, that it is good,
when it is nothing less.]


An Account of a Discourse April 13 between three QUAKERS, Mr. S. Fisher, G.
Whitehead, R. Hubberthorn, and T. Danson.
T. D. Mr. F^sher, because you urged so hard for another Conference, I have
granted your desire, yet not for your sake, so much as the hearers, that they
may be convinced of the damnablenesse of your Doctrine, and may loath and
detest you, as you well deserve. And against it, I shall urge one irrefragable
Scripture, which I should be glad to hear your answer to, or else you shall
oppose, and I will answer, which I rather desire: The place is, Romans 11.6. And
if by Grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace. But
if it be of works, then it is no more of Grace, otherwise work is no more work.
The Apostle having spoken of the efficient cause of Election, and effectual
calling, he here excludes works from being any cause of them. And this he does
by an argument taken from the opposition between immediate contraries: And I
apply it to the case in hand, thu^, that if Justification be of works, as you
assert, then Grace is excluded from any hand in Justification, which is
contrary to the Scripture, which says, we are Justified by Grace. Our
Justification cannot be a debt and a free gift, I mean not both in respect of
us. [To this no reply was made.]


T. D. I will name another Scripture, Romans 10.3.4. For they being ignorant of
Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have
not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. For Christ is the end of
the Law for righteousness to every on^ that believes. The Apostle here makes a
distinction between our own righteousness and Gods, and finds fault with them,
who neglect^ng Gods, went about to establish their own. And be makes our own
righteousness to be a personal conformity to the Law, and Gods righteousness
to be Christ made ours by faith, you are therefore guilty of this sin, who make
your own righteousness your justification.


G. Whitehead. We do not make our own righteousness our justification, but the
righteousness of God is that we testify, being made manifest in us.


T. D. Do not ye delude your hearers with doubtful words? Ye did yesterday
assert that the righteousness which we are enabled to perform, or our good
works are the meritorious cause of our justification.


G. Whithead. We witness to the righteousness of God according to the
Scripture, Phil. 3.9. Not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law,
but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of
God by Faith.


T. D. You could not have brought a Scripture more full against you. The
righteousness which is of Christ, and of God by Faith, is called Christ, verse.
8. That I may win Christ. And how he is our righteousness, 2 Cor. 5. ult. tells
us, as Christ was made sin for us, so are we the righteousness of God in him,
but the former was by imputation, not inherence, and therefore so the other. So
that the Apostle by his own righteousness understands his personal conformity
to the Law, and by Christ's righteousness that which is in Christ, made his by
Faith.


G. Whithead. Then it seems you make two righteousnesses of Christ, whereas the
righteousness of Christ is but one.


T. D. Yes, so I do, what of that? Do you think that the ri^h^eousness which
the Apostle calls his own, was not Christ's? Had he any righteousness which he
had not received? and yet that righteousness which was in the Apostle, never
was in Christ as the subject, but was wrought in him by Christ, as an efficient
cause. And Christ had an inherent righteousness, in respect of which he is said
to know no sin, and to be a Lamb without spot and blemish. Are not here then
two righteousnesses? and they serve for two different ends, the one for our
just^fi^ation, the other for our sanctification; the one gives us a right to
the inheritance of the Saints in light, and the other makes us meet for
possession.


G W^itehead. Let me ask thee a question then, are not we just^fied by Christ
within us?


T.D. I answer, no, but by Christ without us.


G W^itehead. If we are not justified by Christ within us, then by another
Christ, and so thou preachest two Christ's, whereas Christ is not divided, and
thou do that which thou chargest upon us, preach another Gospel.


T. D. I did foresee the catch you intended ^n your question, and answered you
the more carelessly, that I might see how you could improve your supposed
advantage by i^. But now I will answer you more punctually. The Scripture by
Christ w thin us, understand^ not the person of Christ, but h^s operat^ons, the
cause is put for the effect by a Metonymy (a word too hard for your capac^ty)
Compare Col. 1.26. ^r st in you, with Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your
hearts by Faith. And therefore it follows not that we make two Christ's. For we
acknowledge that one and the same person just^fi^s us by a righteousness
inherent in himself, and sanct^fies us by a righteousness which he works in us
by his Spirit. So that when I deny justification by Christ within us, however
the words may sound to your ears, yet to the judicious the meaning is obvious
(viz.) that we deny our justification by that righteousness in us, whereof
Christ is the author, but not that I make two Christ's. Two things are indeed
expressed by the name of Christ, his person, and his operations in us, and I
deny the latter, but assert the former for our righteousness to justification
[The Scripture speaks of two Christ's, Christ personal, and Christ mystical, if
I should say, not Christ mystical, but Christ personal is our Savior, would
you not speak wisely think you, to say, oh you make two Christ's. This
distinction you may find, Christ pe^sonal, Col. 2.8, 9. -- not after Christ.
For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Christ mystical, 1
Cor. 12.12. As the body is one, and has many members, etc. so is Christ;
meaning the Church, which v. ^7. he calls the body of Christ.]


G. Whitehead. I will prove by the Scriptures that we are justified by our
sanctification, which thou say does but make us meet, not give us a ^itle,
which thou shall see it does to the i^heritance, Acts 20.32. And now Brethren,
I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you
up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified. Gods
grace gives an inheritance. [Here there was some disturbance among the people,
which occasioned VVhiteheads address to them, and though I called to him often
to take an answer, he would not; but at length Mr. Fisher started up, and urged
another Scripture, and so this was omitted; to it therefore I shall now return
a brief answer, That the Participle (...), cannot refer to grace as this man
would have it, (or if it did, yet grace in^ends not sanctification, but the
favor of God, which is the subject matter of the word which the Apostle calls,
v. 24. the Gospel of the Grace of God) but it refers to (...) God, and should
be read, who is able, etc. and so it is nothing to his purpose.]


Mr. Fisher. I will prove we are justified by grace or sanctification, Tit.
3.7. that being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to
the hope of eternal l fe. The grace by which we are said to be justified, is
the same with that which is called washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost, v. 5.


T. D. You are much mistaken Sir, the grace v. 7. is not meant of
sanctification, but of the favor of God, which is manifested in the donation
of his Son to us, imputation of his r^ghteousnesse, and acceptance of us as
righteous in him.


G. Whitehead. I shall prove that we are justified by Faith as the cause of
our justification, by the plain words of the Apostle, Rom 4.3. Abraham believed
God, and it was counted to him for righteousness.


T. D. But pray observe how well this agrees with your former Doctrine, that we
are justified by a personal conformity to the whole Law, and now you will prove
that a conformity to one part will suffice. You interferr and cut one leg
against the other, and are not sensible of it, Does not the Apostle oppose Faith
and Works? Now if Faith be considered as a work, there is no opposition between
them. And does not that opposition exclude Faith as a work? Yes surely; and is
boasting excluded in justification by Faith as a work? no but there is more
ground of boasting in the virtue of Faith, were that equivalent to universal
obedience. Read Romans 3.27. Where is boasting then? it is excluded. By what Law?
of works? nay but by the Law of Faith; and chap. 4.5. To him that works not,
but believes, etc. which plainly int^mates, that Faith is opposed to it self
as a work, in the business of Justification; and as for the words of the Text,
the act is put for the object to which it relates, as if it had be^n in
express terms. Christ whom his Faith laid hold upon, was imputed to him ^or
righteousness; But that Faith is imputed to us, a^ being nstead of a perfect
righteousness^ personal, or that it is the meritorious cause of our
justification; I utterly deny.


G. Wh. Thou do darken counsel by words without knowledge; and pervertest the
Scripture by thy meanings.


T. D. That Is your usual charge, but I deny it; the Scriptures attribute our
just^fication to the righteousness of Christ, in the same since that they deny
it to works. Receiving of Christ, and remission of sins, is the Office of
Faith, and not to merit them. (...) [Here we fell into a discourse very
abruptly, about several Arminian points, which for the Reasons mentioned in the
Epistle, I omit.]


An Account of a Discourse April 19th. between two Quakers, Mr. FISHER, R.
HUBBERTHORN, AND THOMAS DANSON.
THe first Question debated on was, Whether the Scriptures are the Word of God?

T. D. Mr. F. You promised to discourse upon this Question, I desire to know
what you hold about it.


Mr. F. if you mean by the Scripture the (...) the writing, or the paper and
ink, we deny it to be the Word of God.


T. D Sir you cannot believe us so simple (surely) as to affirm the Scriptures
in that sense the Word of God, but we mean the matter contained in the writing,
whether that be our rule of faith and life.


Mr. F. This I affirm, that there are several Books which are as much a rule
(as those you call the Scripture) which are not bound up in your Bibles.


T. D. This is not to the purpose, yet I should be glad to hear your proof.


Mr. F. 1 Cor. 5.9. I wrote unto you in an Epistle, etc. But now I have written
unto you, v. 11. Here you find an Epistle of Paul, which was written before
this which in your books is called the first.


T. D. Sir, you fall short in your proof, you should prove that the Epistle
there mentioned was intended as much for our rule, as these we have in our
books, and you prove only that such an Epistle was written by Paul.


Mr. F. If this Epistle was written to the same end with this you have, viz. to
instruct the Corinthians how to carry themselves toward gross sinners, then it
was intended as much for a rule as this; But it was written to the same end,
Ergo.


T. D. I deny your consequence; Sermons, private religious discourses have the
same common end with the written Scriptures, yet the latter only are our
standing-rule, the former our rule, but so far as they agree with the latter
in the Scriptures.


Mr. F. What other evidence or character have you of this Epistles being a
rule, which the other wants, that is not in your books.


T. D. Pray let me ask you one Question, and I will answer yours. Have you or
any of your friends this first Epistle to the Corinthians, or do you know that
it is exstant?


Mr. F. No.


T. D. Then I have a signal distinction between that and these we have, viz.
that God has preserved these two for our use, but not the first, whereas had
God intended the first for a standing rule to us, as he has the other two, his
providence which watched over these, would also have watched over that.


Mr. F. But I will give you an instance of a Book which ye have not, but we
have, Col. 4.16. And that ye likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea.


T D. Though it is certain that God intended not that for a standing rule,
which is lost yet all that was written by holy men, and preserved for our use,
is not therefore our standing rule, for then the discourses of holy Ministers
in former and latter times should be our Rule, which they are not, but to be
brought to the written Word, as the Rule and Test. But pray Sir, what is the
Title of that Epistle you have?


Mr. Fisher. The Epistle of Paul to the Laodiceans.


T. D. So I thought; such an Epistle I know there is that go^s under the name
of Paul, but the place you bring speaks not of an Epistle to Laodice^, but from
Laodicea: And for ought you can prove to the contrary, we have the Epistle Paul
did intend, 1 Timothy Postsc^ipt. The first to Timothy was written from Laodicea.


Mr. Fisher. Do thou own the Postscripts to be Canonical (as ye call it.)


T. D. As Canonical for ought ^ppears yet to me, as your Epistle to the
Laodiceans. W^ know well enough that your Brethren of the Popish party, have
laid many such brats at the Apostles doors, which they will not father. And you
show what you a^e, in abetting their wickedness. [I shall add, that some
learned men judge that Epistle mentioned from Laodicea, Col. 4.16. to be not an
Ep^stle written by Paul either from or to Laodicea, but by the Laodiceans, to
Paul, which he would have read amon^ the Collossians, that they might
understand the case of their Si^^e^ Church, and how suitable the matter of the
Epistle to them, was also to the Laodiceans. Vid. Rev. Daven. in locum.] And to
make the business short, Mr. Fisher, suppose we should grant you there were
such an Epistle legitimate, yet it will not follow that it was intended for a
rule to us. For we have already as much as God thought sufficient, read John
20.30, 31. And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his
Disciples, which are not written in this book, but these are written that ye
might believe, etc. Suppose that we had the signs which are not in the Gospel,
faithfully recorded in writing, yet were they not our Rule, because God did not
give order for them, but has assured us as much as is sufficient to create and
preserve Faith in the Gospel which we have. Let us come to the Question, which
I propose to you in these terms, Whether the Books commonly called the Old and
New Testament, were appointed by God for a standing Rule of Faith and life?


Mr. Fisher. I deny those books to be a standing Rule of Faith and life.


T. D. Now you have spit your venom, which I knew you were big with. And I will
say to you (as the Apostle) If any man bring any other Gospel than what we have
received, let him be accursed.


Mr Fisher. I am sure the Gospel you preach will never bring men to heaven.
Indeed people it will not.


T. D. Then friends, you hear his acknowledgement, and how well he deserves the
curse denounced against him.


Mr. F. If there be another standing Rule, then the Scripture is not it, but
there is another standing Rule, therefore the Scripture is not it.


T. D. I deny your Minor; there is no other standing rule but the Scripture.


Mr. Fisher. I prove there is, from Gal. 5.16. This I say then, walk in the
spirit: We are commanded to walk in or by the Spirit, and therefore that is our
rule. The Scripture it self sends us to another for our rule.


T. D. That phrase does note the principle, not the rule of our obedience in
that place.


Mr. F. You suppose the Letter to be antecedent to the Spirit, whereas the
Spirit is antecedent to the Letter, and none can walk in the Letter, till they
walk in the Spirit.


T. D. The Spirit is antecedent to the Letter in respect of the revelation of
the Letter, but the Spirit is subsequent to the Letter in respect of assistance
and ability which he gives to obedience. And whereas you affirm, none can walk
in the Letter, till they walk in the Spirit, if walking in the Spirit be meant
of special assistance it is false, for many walk in many things according to the
Letter, without the Spirits in-dwelling, as Paul, while a Pharisee* was
touching the righteousness of the Law blameless, Phil. 3.6.


Mr. F. I will prove the Lette^ of the Scripture is not our Rule: if there was
a rule before the Scripture was written, then that is not our rule; but there
was a rule before the Scripture, Therefore.


T. D. Your Argument concludes nothing against us, for we assert the matter
contained in the Scripture is a standing Rule, your argument proves but that
there was a rule before this writing, we grant that God revealed himself by
visions, dreams, etc. yet it was the same matter: Since the Gospel preached to
Adam, there have not been any increase of truths quoad essentiam, sed tantum
quoad explicationem (as the Learned speak of the Articles of our Faith) The
manner of conveyance is different then and now, but the matter or doctrines
conveyed still the same. All this while you go about to delude the simple, as
if you denied only this way of writing to have always been the only way of
conveyance, and you magnify the Spirit, that with more security you may throw
down the Letter of the Scripture. And if you would speak out plainly, as some
of your friends (as you call them do) that which you call the Spirit would be
found to be the dictates of your own Conscience (blind and corrupt, as they are
the Lord knows) and you are no further bound to obey the Letter of the
Scripture than you are willing to obey it.


Mr. F. I am sure your Scripture is not the Word of God, for that is within,
but your Scripture is without. This I prove out of R^m. 10.8. The Word is nigh
thee, even in thy heart.


T. D. You read not all, it is in thy mouth too, so that it is without as well as
within.


Mr. F. This is meant of the Light which is in every man's Conscience. It Is a
word which every man ha^h heard, v. 18. But I say have they not heard? yes
verily, their sound went into all the earth.


T. D. It seems then the Light within is the Spirit you pleaded for to be the
Rule, in opposition to the Scriptures. But it is plain enough that v. 18. speaks
of the Gospel, for it relates to the Preacher spoken of v. 14, 15. who were
Prophets and Apostles. And though the words are taken out of Psalm. 19.4. yet
they intend not that n^tu^al knowledge of God which David speaks of, but the
Apostle would intimate that the knowl^dge of Christ by the Gospel should be of
as large extent in the publication, as the knowledge of God by the Ministry of
the heavens and Firmament, which are David's Preachers, Psalm. 19.1. And it is
evident that the word spoken of in the heart, Romans 10.8. is meant of the
matters contained in the Scriptures, for the Apostle says ^xpresly, That is
the word of Faith which we preach, and Acts 26.22. We say none other things
than those which Moses and the Prophets did say should come; which sayings are
contained in the Old Testament. And as for your odd notion of the Words being
within not without, I say but this, that it remains without when it is within,
as the matter in a Book does to instruct others, when the Reader has thoroughly
digested it in his memory and unde^standing. And that as to the Saints somewhat
of the word is always without, when some is within, that is, the Word prevails
but in part over their corruption, and so far as it does prevail, it is within,
so far as it prevails not, it is without.


Mr. F. In Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly; that which is
the word of Christ dwells within, whereas that which ye call the Word is
without.


T. D. The Word spoken of was without, or it was the Letter of the Scripture,
and his exhortation was to get acquaintance therewith, and he prescribes means
to that end, in teaching and admonishing one another, and singing Psalms which
were part of the Word of Christ, as the subject matter and author of them.


Mr. F. Now thou talkest of sing^ng Psalms, it is a fond custom you get to make
the people sing David's conditions, who have not his spirit, as to make a proud
man sing, O Lord I am not puffed in mind.


T. D. Though it be besides our business, yet I shall answer to your cavils
against our practice in a word. Your objection holds as strongly against the
use of them in the times of the Old Testament, as against our use of them; for
the matter of them was no more all the singers conditions then than now, and
yet they were part of public Temple-worship, 2 Chronicles. 29.25, 30. and the
matter of many of them is doctrinal, and prophetical, and such as cannot be
sung with particular application; and I know no particular application
necessary to singing that 131 Psalm. more than to reading of it, nor is it more
a lie to sing than to read them.


Mr F. Whereas thou say Thomas Danson that the teaching and singing was a
means of the words dwelling in them; therein thou art out (as in many other
things) for the word of Christ dwelt richly in them, and thence they teached,
admonished, and sung.


T. D. The words are an exhortation to get the word of Christ dwell richly in
them, or to grow in the knowledge of Christ (as elsewhere it is expressed) and
there is none that has so much of the knowledge of the word, but it may admit
of increase; and therefore though they might teach and admonish from a stock of
the word, that hinders not but that the use of it in those duties might be the
means of adding to it.

In the next place Richard Hubberthorn undertook to prove his Call in a
discourse which you have in his own Book, to which I refer you; the main
thing he insisted on was his Infallibility in teaching, and the falsehood of
our Ministry, who are not Infallible.


T. D. You are much mistaken in thinking you are infallible, it appears
otherwise to us by the false doctrines which you teach; and as for your
participation of the infallible Spirit (if that were granted, which we cannot
grant) that infers not a participation of the spirits infallibility, for that
is as incommunicable, as omnisciency or omnipotency.


R. Hu^berthorn. The Apostles had a power of working miracles in them.


T. D. That i^ d^nyed; God himself was the sole subject of that power by which
they were wrought, and their faith was the means or sign of exerting it, Acts
3.16. His Name, through faith in his Name has made this man strong, etc.
Matthew. 21.21. If ye have faith and doubt not, etc. ye shall say to this
mountain be removed, and it shall be done.


Mr. Fisher. The man Christ Jesus whom ye call Godman, was omniscient, Joh.
2.24. Jesus did not commit himself to them, because he knew all men, etc.


T. D. Pray sir, Do not you call the man Christ Jesus God-man too? -- Your
silence is not consent, but dissent. Omnisciency agreed not to Christ as man
(for he says elsewhere, the son of man knows not when the day of judgment
shall be) but as God. You know well enough what communication of Idioms means.
And the Apostles themselves did not partake of that divine property of
Infallibility, for then they would have been infallible at all times, and in
all things, which they were not, as appears by the instance of Peter, Gal.
2.11. But in the delivery of what was to be a standing rule to us, they were so
guided that they d^d not err, as you may find. 2 Pet. 1. ult. The prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost. -- As for our want of infallibility it is no valid plea
against our Ministry, Acts 20.30. the Apostle speaking to the Elders of
Ephesus, ^.17. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse
things, to draw away Disciples after them. And yet he says the holy Ghost had
made these fallible men Overseers over the Church, v. 28. 1 Thef. 5. Quench not
the Spirit, verse. 19. Despise not prophesying, verse. 20. Prove all things, hold
fast that which is good, v. 21. The connection of these verses imports, that
that prophesying must not be despised, nor can be, without neglecting the
Spirit in it, which may teach us somewhat which is not good, an^ not to be
received. And both these instances are of an ordinary Ministry, which is set in
the same universal Church with the extraordinary, 1 Cor. 12.28. and for the
same end, viz. to convert and build up, Ephesians. 4.12. [Note that when we had gone
thus far, I gave a brief account of my Call, for which you are referred to
Hubberthorns account of the Conference, and my answer hereto annexed.]


A short ANSWER to a trifling Pamphlet entitled, The Difference of that Call
of God to the Ministry, etc. published by R. Hubberthorn.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, the Questions debated on are falsely stated, as
will appear by the Narrative hereto annexed.

In the Book it self, you have his Call to the Ministry, which is not worthy a
further Reply than I made by word of mouth. And an account of my Call, which
except two or three passages, was the sum of what I spoke.

One passage is, He said, I said it is non sense to say that a man is made a
Minister by the gift of grace.

Reply. My words were, that he had spoken a great deal of nonsense in his
discourse, not that that particular passage was non sense. Yet I said, and do
still stand to it, that if by gift of grace he means qual^fications for the
Ministry, more is r^quired to a mission than them.

Another pass^ge is, That I said, my qualifications were such, that I might
have been clothed in Scarlet.

Reply. I said not so of my self particularly, but in general, that many of us
who had chosen the Ministry for our calling, were capable of other callings,
and had opportunities of entering into them, which might have clothed us with
scarlet, as they did other men who followed them.

Whereas he says, that T. D. provoked his Church to laughter, rudeness, etc.

Reply. I confess the Assembly did laugh oftentimes at their sorry shifts, and
poor evasions in our discourse, but that I did compose them, I have many
witnesses: And I deny not but that now and then I could not forbear smiling at
them, which I presume as justifiable in me, as Elijah the Prophets scoffing at
Bauls Priests, 1 Kings 18.27.

Whereas he says, that none of my people can set to their seal that my
Ministry has brought them to a perfect man, etc.

Reply. It Is readily granted, nor was the Ministry intended for that end, but
only to br^ng the Saints to that degree of Grace in this life, which might make
them immediately capable of perfection in the next life

Note that R. H. brings in several passages as mine, some of which I own, and
others which I own not, I shall name them briefly.

That every individual man is not enlightened by Christ; and he complains that
I brought two meanings of that Scripture, and know not which is the meaning of
the holy Ghost.

Reply. I still affirm the Proposition mentioned; and I would have him to know,
that both the meanings are the Holy Ghosts, though but one is intended in that
place: the phrases will bear either senses, and either of them cross his
Interpretation.

That the whole body of the Gentiles was not enlightened.

Reply. He leaves out what I added, viz. by Christ, or with the knowledge of
salvation. As for his answer, I refer you to the dispu^e upon that principle.

That the Gospel is an external Light, and not invisi^le, and that it is not
the Light within.

Reply. My wo^ds were that the Gospel is an external L^ght, as that of the Sun,
and that there is an inward Light created in the soul (c^ll'd an understanding
g^ven us etc. 1 John 5.20.) which is as the Light in the eye; and that the
light of the Gospel is not the light which every man naturally has with in him.

That Christ is a propitiation but for the world of believers intend^d, 1 John
2.2.

Reply. I expla^n'd my meaning when I so interp^eted the ph^ase, by c^mparing
it with Romans 3 25. Whom God has set for^h to be a Propitiation through Faith
in his blood; the ph^ase Prop^tiation intends not the price, but the actual
atton^ment, and this latt^r is not without the intervention of Faith: So that
John intends as Paul, that the terms of actual reconciliation with God are the
same to all the world, viz. beli^ving in the blood of Christ.

That we must reconcile Scriptures, and he says I gave two contrary meanings
of one Scripture.

Reply. I have said enough to this in the D^spute, the Scriptures are not at
variance among themselves, but they s em so to be, and it is part of our wo^k to
let people see how well they are agreed. And I dare leave it to any Reade^s
j^dgement, whe^h r these two interpretations which R. H. intends be contrary to
one another, viz. that Christ enl^ghtens every man who is (spi^itually)
enlightened, or that he enlightens a number of every Nation, which were the two
meanings (to use his phrase) of John 1.8.

That the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ, was not the Law of the Spirit in
the Saints, but that they were two Laws, etc.

Reply. My words were, that by the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8 2. was not meant our personal righteousn^sse, but Christ's imputed to us,
and that though the righteousness in Christ, and in us, are of the same kind
yet they have not the same use, the former being alone our justification, the
latter our sanctification.

That there are two righteousnesses of Christ, the one without the Saints to
justify them, and the other within the Saints, that did sanctify them.

Reply. My words were, that there is a righteousness whereof Christ is the
subject and the efficient ( viz. that of his Humane Nature) and a
righteousness whereof he is the efficient, but not the subject, nor was it
ever formally existent in him (as the spirits were in the brain, which are
communicated thence to other parts of the body) and that is the righteousness
in the Saints, and that these are two righteousnesses (though of one species)
in respect of the subjects, and use of them.

That I denied, that the Saints were justified by that Christ hat was in them.

Reply I may say to thee, R. H. as David to Doeg, Thou love lying rather than
to speak righteousness, Psalm. 52.3. I denied that the Saints are justified by
Christ within them ( i. e. by the works of Christ within them, which have in
that phrase the name of the efficient given to them by a metonymy) but not that
they are justified by that Christ that was in them; and when one of the Quakers
prated to the same purpose with this man, that I made two Christ's, I expressly
told him my meaning to be not by Christ as in the Saints; but as far were the
words from my mouth, as the thoughts from my heart, to say that it was not one
and the same Christ that justifies and sanctifies.

That David when he was guilty of adultery and murder, was not in a condemned
state, but in a justified estate.

Reply. I grant the whole, and have said more for the proof of it, than this
man or any of his Brethren can answer.

That I said the passage Heb. 12.23. Spirits of just men made perfect, was
meant of them in Heaven, not on earth; which says R. H. cannot be, because the
Apostle wrote to them on earth, and did not write to men after they were
deceased.

Reply. The Apostle intends, that it is the privilege of the Saints on earth,
who are unperfect, to be one body and society with them in Heaven, who are
perfect, and this he might say, though the persons he wrote to were living.

That any creature that holds that principle of being Justified by a
righteousness within, living and dying in that principle, cannot come to Heaven.

And against this R. H. urges that Christ is the Justifier of them that
believe, and his Doctrine is I in them, and they in me, so Christ and his
Righteousness is in the Saints.

Reply. Put in any man instead of any Creature which was not my phrase, and add
to within, but us, and I acknowledge the whole sentence, and to your argument
from the union between Christ and the Saints, I say but this, that if it makes
us to be the subject of whatever Christ was the subject, because he is in us,
then I hope it will make Christ the subject of whatever we are, because we are
in him: and then Christ is a sinner by inherent defilement, (unless all who
are united to him, be from the first moment of that union free from sin) which
is a Doctrine as false as falsehood can make it.

That that which fitted men for the inheritance of the Saints in Light, did not
entitle to the inheritance, which says R. H. is contrary to the Apostles
Doctrine, Col. 1.12. And the Father both fitted them for the inheritance, and
did entitle and give them a part in the inheritance.

Reply. See the baseness of this man, he would make the Reader believe, that I
denied the Fathers giving right and possession, and making meet for it, when as
I spoke of things, not of persons, of the cause of our title, and of that which
made us meet for possession (without which Heaven would not be a place or state
of bliss) and that the righteousness in Christ as a subject, was the cause of
our title, and the righteousness wrought in us by Christ, makes us meet for
possession.

That we cannot contain an infinite righteousness in us. To which R. H.
replies, then you cannot contain the righteousness of God, for it is infinite,
and then you cannot contain Christ in you, who is Gods righteousness, and who
is infinite.

Reply. The righteousness which God works in us, is but finite, as well as
other effects, and the mystical union between Christ and the Saints by Faith,
does no more conclude their participation of incommunicable attributes, than
the hypostatical union between Christ's humane and Divine Nature does infer that
what was before such union proper to one, should be common to both natures; as
Omnipotency, Omniscience to the humane, weakness, mortality to the Divine
Nature.

That it was false Doctrine to say that a man must first partake of the
righteousness which justifies, before it can be imputed to him as his. To which
R. H. replies, that the Saints did partake of Gods righteousness through Faith,
except that this Dr. would count that to be a man's, which he has no right to,
nor part in.

Reply. Mark the juggling of this fellow, who would intimate that I denied a
participation of Gods righteousness through Faith, when as that was the thing
I contended for, and which they denied, that we did partake of Gods
righteousness by Faith to justification. That which I affirmed to be false
Doctrine, was, that the righteousness which justifies is in us, and I asserted
that we being justified by the righteousness of another, there can be no way of
conveying such ri^hteousnesse, but by imputation, and thereby the benefit of
another righteousness may redound to us, as if we were the subjects of it.

That God offers salvation to all men, but he intends it only to a few, which
Doctrine says R. H. makes the offers to no purpose to thousands, and is a
belying of God, and makes God a respecter of persons, and how then is Christ
given to be salvation to the ends of the earth, etc.

Reply. I did not affirm that God offers salvation to all men, for many ages
and generations never had one offer of it, 1 Timothy 3. last. The Apostle makes
Christ preached to the Gentiles, one part of the mystery of godliness; but I
affirmed, and do, among those who hear the Gospel, salvation is offered to more
than to whom it is intended. And as for your cavils, I answered them in my
discourse with Mr. Fisher: The offer is to some purpose, to the same with
natural light (viz.) to leave men without excuse, Romans 1.20. So that they
cannot say (as we may suppose Heathens might) had we known of a remedy for our
misery, we would have used it; and to other purposes, but one instance shall
suffice; you belly our Doctrine, in saying it is a belying of God, for God does
not pretend, to intend the benefit offered to all to whom it is offered, R^m.
11.7. The El^ction has obtained it, and the rest were blinded. And besides, he
offers it to all upon condition of acceptance, and could you suppose that all
would take him at his word, and accept his offer, they should have the benefit
thereof. And this last answer will suffice (though other considerations might
be added) to that Objection of making God a respecter of persons. Did God give
salvation to some who accept not of it out of particular fancy to them, but
exact of others that acceptance, and for default of it deny them salvation,
then there might be some ground for the cavil; but now that it is offered upon
equal terms, there is none. And for Christ being given for salvation to the
ends of the earth, that imports not so much as that the offer, much less the
benefit should be of such extent in all ages and generations (as I showed
before) but the fulfilling of that prophecy bears date from the Apostolical
Commission, Mat. 28.19. and it intends that no Nation how remote soever from
Judea, should want the offer, nor some of it the benefit of salvation.

That a Minister of the Gospel does not know who are elected. And to this R. H.
says, there he has belied the Ministers of the Gospel, for they could discern
the elect from the world, as it is written, Ye shall discern between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not, and these Teachers who know not the
elect, and yet exhort all their hearers to believe, their preaching is in vain.

Reply. I see you are hard put to it for a Scripture, to bring that Mal. 3.
ult. I could have fitted you with one that would have been more specious, 1
These. 1.4. Knowing Brethren beloved your Election of God. As for Mal. 3. ult.
it is not strictly true till the day of judgment: Solomon says, No man knows
love or hatred by all that is before him. I should rather think our preaching
is to more purpose because we know not who are elect, for the ignorance of that
gives us a ground to hope well of any man; and indeed it were to no purpose to
preach to those who are not elected (unless that of leaving them inexcusable)
did we certainly know who are elect, and so who are not, for the latter would
have no ground of hope (which now they have in the indefinite promise, made of
none effect through their unbelief) did we let them know they were excluded out
of Gods purpose of salvation.

That the sword of the Spirit is ineffectual without the Letter. To which R. H.
says the sword of the Spirit is the Word of God, which was effectual before the
Letter was.

Reply. This man is so used to speak nonsense himself, that he can understand
it as well or better than good sense. I did not say as he relates, but that the
Spirit was not wont to be ^ff ctual without the Letter, or that he wrought upon
the souls of men in and by the Letter of the Word, and I gave that instance,
Romans 10.17. Faith (which is the Spirits work) comes by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of God. As for what he says, that the sword of the Spirit is the Word
of God, if he means like a man in his oppositions, he must mean Christ (who but
once is called the Word of God) Rev. 19.13. And Christ cannot be intended, Ephesians.
6.17. because he is not the sword of the Spirit, but the Spirit his sword
rather, for by the Spirit he works in the hearts of men, and therefore Genesis
6.3. he says, My Spirit shall not always strive with man, which is meant of
the holy Ghost, as will appear by comparing it with, Act. 7 51. where Stephen
tells the Jews, Ye do always resist the holy Ghost. Christ by the common
operations of his Spirit strives with men, and by the special operations
thereof prevails with them.

That there was no Scripture written, but what is extant, and in the Bible.
Against which assertion R. H. produces the book of Nathan, Iddo, etc. mentioned
in the Bible, which he says were written for the same end and use.

Reply. It does not appear that any of the Books mentioned in the Old Testament
and to which we are referred for further satisfaction in historical matters,
were of Divine Inspiration, but we may rather conclude, that the Holy Ghost
mentioning no more of History than was necessary for our Instruction, refers us
for the rest, which was not of the like necessity to books of humane original.
And though they are the Books of Prophets, yet it follows not that they were
divinely inspired: For they might as well write from their own spirits, or upon
humane credit, as sometimes speak from their own spirits, 2 Samuel 7.3. Nathan
told David, when he spoke of building a Temple, Go, do all that is in thine
heart, for the Lord is with thee, whenas God for bad him by the same Prophet,
which prohibition is called, the word of the Lo d that came to Nathan, v. 4.5.
plainly enough intimating that the encouragement he gave David before, was but
the word of man. And indeed 2 Pet. 2. last. speaking of the motion of the Holy
Ghost to write the Scriptures, seems to limit it to that which was intended for
a sure word of prophecy, whereunto we should do well to take heed, etc. v. 19.

That there was no Scripture appointed of God to be a Rule of Faith and
manners, but what is bound up in the Bible.

Reply. That was my assertion, and besides what I spoke I shall add, that it is
not enough, if it could be proved that other writings besides those we have
were of Divine Inspiration: For besides such Inspiration, to make a Rule, is
necessary Gods appointment of a writing to that end. Hence it is observable that
John is bidden to write what he saw and heard in the Book of Revelation, no
less than twelve times; and some things of the like inspiration he was
forbidden to write, because not intended for the same end, Rev. 10.4. And when
the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write, and I heard
a voice from Heaven saying unto me, seal up, etc. and write them not. John
20.30.31. And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his
Discipl^s, which are not wri^ten in ^his book, but these are written that ye
might bel^eve, etc. Those things which were not written might have been us^ful
if they had been wr^tten, for they were done for the same end with those which
are left u^, yet because God thought that suffi^ient which we have, we can look
upon no more wi^h such regard as we do upon that.

That the letter does antecede the Spirit in all that walked in the Spirit.

Reply I opened my own meaning (as you may find in the dispute about the
Scriptures,) and it is this, that the Spirits act of r^veal^ng the letter of the
Scriptures, antecedes the Spirits assistance, in walking according to it.

That the works of Christ in some respect are not perfect. To which R. H. says
that is false, for every gift of God is perfect.

Reply. I spoke those words with reference to the work of sanc^ification, which
I affirmed to be imp^rfect in this life, in comparison of what it is in the
life to come. For which I produced Phil. 3.12. Not as though I had already
attained either, were already perfect, which he ^ntends of the resurrection
from the d^ad, v. 11. (as he calls the holin^sse of that state by a Metonymy of
the subject for the adj^nct.) I also quoted 1 ^or 13.10. When that which is
perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. And for the
Scripture he quotes, intending I suppose, James 1.17. Every good and perfect
gift is from above, are the words of the Holy Ghost, not every g^ft of God is
perfect; and I suppose it is spoken of special grace, which is still in g^owth;
every least degree of grace tending to perfection.

That the Law requires more strict and exact obedience then the Gospel. To
which R. H. replies nay, the Law says, Thou shall not commit adul ery, but the
Gospel says, Thou shall not lust, etc and so the Gospel r^q^ires more strict
obedience than the Law.

Reply. I spoke those words with reference to what the Law req^ires of us, as
it is a Covenan^ of works, and to what the ^osp^l accepts of us as it is a
Covenant of grace; though the Law g ves not life without perfect obedience, the
Go^pel gives it upon imperfect ob dience. The words were not intended of the
Leg l and Ev ngelical disp^nsations, as R. H. seems to understand them in his
Socinian interp etat^on. And as for his interpretation, I affirm that Christ
intended not to add any th ng to the spirituality of the Law, for that under
Mos^s was spiri^ual, as Paul speaks. Rom 7.14. for under the prohibition of the
outward act, was also prohibit^d inward aff ct^ons, desires, which appears by
Gods p^omise, of ci^cumcising the heart, D^ut 30.6. and his comm^nd to w^sh
their hearts from wick^dn^ss^ that they might be sav^d. But our Lord Christ
v^^d^cates the Law from the cor^upt glosses of the Pharisees, who interpreted
those proh^bitions to extend no fu^ther than the letter, which is but to the
outward act, as w^ll appear by the contex^, especially v. 18.19.

That Christ chose a devil to be one of his Ministers in choosing Judas; and his
pro f, says R. H. was, That the Divine nature did not see it good to
commu^icate the knowl^dg of all things to the hum^ne nature, ^n^ therefore al
hough he was a devil when he chose him, yet he k^ew it not, which says R. H.
is a charging of Christ with ^gnorance, contrary to John 2.24 25. and Christ
says Judas had the spirit of the Father in him M^t. 10.20.

Reply The oc^asion of my words was a little discourse I had with Mr. F sher
about falling from grace; who urged that Judas had the Spirit of the Father in
him, as well as the rest. To which I answered, that seeing he appeared to be a
devil in the end, he was so from the beginning, according to 1 John 2.19.
speaking of Christians, They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if
they had been of us, no doubt they would have continued with us; but they went
out, that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us And that
Christ spoke so to him, because he was a visible Christian; and it app^ars not
that from the first moment of Christ's choice he knew him to be a Devil, and
thereupon I urged the principle abovenamed, and instanced in the Son of man's
ignorance of the day of judgment. But whether Christ's humane Nature did know
him or not, he was not openly scandalous, as appears by the Disciples suspicion
of themselves rather than him, and therefore might be treated as one that had
the Spirit.

That the Spirit of God may ^ccompany a Ministry, and the Minister not have the
Spirit. Which R. H. says he never read in the Scriptures, and bids me prove it
when and where it was so at any time.

Reply. It is no great matter what you read in the Scriptures, for it appears
by the dispute about them, that you care not for them, but only to beat us (as
you think) with our own weapon; and to obey your command, I have an instan^e,
Mat. 23. The Scribes and P^arisees sit in Mos^s seat, (i. e. sustain the place
of Teachers) all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe, and
do; but do not ye after their works, for they say and do not, v. 2, 3. This
command imports as much as the Apostle elsewhere expresses, viz. to obey from
the heart the form of Doctrine which was delivered to them, Romans 6.17. and to
be sure the Pharisees had not the spirit of holiness, though they had his
blessing upon their Ministry.

That the power that went forth in the Apostles Ministry, was in God, not in
them, but as they have it communicated to them by the exercise of faith.

Reply. You abuse me in the repetition of what I spoke, either through
ignorance or wilfulness, for my words were, that the power by which the
Apostles wrought Miracles, was not inherent in them, but that their exercise of
Faith upon the promise of ^x^rting it for confirmation of the Gospel, was the
sign of the time when God put forth act, of Omn^potency. This appears by the
places before quot^d, Mat. 21.21. ^cts 3.16. To which I add, v. 12. Why look ye
so earnestly on us, as though by our own power, or holiness^ we had made this
man to walk? He calls the power their own, not in resp^ct of the Original (for
all things are of God) but in respect of the subject of it.

Thomas Rumsey said, that we preach a Doctrine of Devils, in saying, that men
may be free from sin in this life. To which R. H. answ^rs that the Apostle Paul
then preached a Doctrine of Devils, Romans 6.2, 7, 18, 22. And Christ preach^d
the Doctrine of perfection, Mat. 5.48. 1 Pet. 1.16. And Paul preached wisdom
among them that were perf^ct, 1 Cor. 2.6. And David pr^ached that Doctrine,
Mark the perfect man, Psalm. 3^ 37. Now David did not bid them mark such a man
as ^here was not.

Reply. You Quakers a^e an unmannerly Generation. You might have given a
Magistrate the Title of Mr. As for Mr. Rumsey's speech he desires me to let you
know that he is confirmed in his Opin^on, notwithstanding the Scriptures you
allege (which being unlearned and unstable, you wrest to your own destruction)
and he desires me to return you an answer to each. As for Romans 6. The
expressions of freed from sin, do not note freedom from the being, but the
dominion, verse. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, v. 12. Let not sin
reign in ^our mortal bodies, etc. And that it cannot be meant simply, will
appear by c. 14.10. Why do thou judge thy Brother? or why do thou set at
naught thy Brother? The Apostle speaks of judging as the sin of weaker
Christians, and setting at naught his brother, as the sin of stronger
Christians. And if sin was consistent with that freedom from sin before
affirmed of them, then the phrase denotes not freedom from the being of sin, as
I have told you. As for Mat. 5. ult. The command intends the rule, not the
degree of Grace attainable in this life, for this is reserved for our reward in
Heaven, (as I have proved in the dispute) 1 Pet. 1.16. urges Gods Holiness as
an argument to enforce our endeavors after it; but that is no proof of your
assertion. As for 1 Cor. 2.6. I have already answered it in the dispute And for
David's Doctrines, the second clause, and behold the upright, is exegerical, or
explanative of the first. Had David bid them mark a perfect man in your sense,
he had bid them mark a man that was not (as you speak) for he himself was a
Saul for spiritual stature in his generation (as appears, because he is made a
pattern to new Testament Saints, Zech. 12.8.) and yet he was not free from the
being of sin, but a sad instance of the power of it in real Saints. But take
the meaning of it as I have given, himself was one of the men he spoke of.

THE NARRATIVE.
Reader,
THou may please to understand, that these Quakers, who like the Scribes and
Pharisees, compass sea and land to make one Proselyte, came to our Town, March
15, 1658. and made a challenge to the Priests (as they term Ministers of
Christ) to defend their own Doctrine and Call, which they came to oppugn;
whereupon I was much urged by some good people, Inhabitants of the Town, to
appear at their place of meeting, which at first I was somewhat unwilling to,
partly because I was informed that the men who intended to speak were such as
the Apostle describes, unreasonable and wicked men, 2 Th. ^2. and partly
because of the usual unsuccessfulnesse of disputes, especially with men who
cannot feel the stresse of an argument. But at length I resolved to gratify
good peoples desire, having given this solution to my own obj^ctions; to the
first, that though the men would not admit of any orderly dispute, yet somewhat
might in a more loose discourse be spok^n, which might be an antidote to
preserve from the malignity of their venom cast abroad at a venture, and so the
devil might be beat at his own weap^n, and out-shot in his own bow, and a less
rational way of argu^ng might God use for good, as the Devil did for hurt. And
I did hope that ^f I did thus answer a fool ^cco ding to his folly, I should
escape the censure of being also like him, P^ov 26.4. To the second Objection I
replied, that want of success was no more cogent an argum^nt against disputing
than preaching; and I added, that God had not left disputes without witness of
his approb^tion (if that must needs be measured by the event) Acts 6.9, 10.
Then there arose certain of the Synagogue, which is called the Synagogue of the
Libertines, etc, dispu^ing with Stephen, and they were not able to resist the
wisdom and spirit by which he spoke. And seeing the Quakers were Libertines (or
worse) though I was not Stephen for like measure of wisdom and spirit, I need
not altogether despair of his success. And besides these, other considerations
offered their service, viz. that they are a people who triumph and brag when we
decline dispute, forgetting the wise caution of King Ahab, a favourer of their
way (I mean enmity against the true Prophets) Let not him that girdeth on his
harness, boast himself as he that puts it off, 1 King^ 20.21. And many
simple people are apt to suspect our Call and Doctrine, when we seem unwilling
openly to m^^ntain them against opposers. And me thought that Scripture (which
came to mind) did import a liberty, if not a duty. Answer a fool according to
his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit, Prove. 26.5 And I mu^t confess
that the example of so R^verend and Lea^n^d a person, as Mr. Richard Baxte^,
who yi^lded to a v^rb^l d^^course with an unreasonable railing fell^w, wa^ not
without its influ^n^e upon me, betwe^n whom and the Quakers, I was to deal with
(though i^norant and un^e^rned men) the inequality is very inconsiderable, in c
mparison or what it is between him and them. But esp^cially the rea ^ns which
he gives of printing against them, in his Epistle to the Quak^rs Cat^ch^^m, as
al^o against other like wr^tches, in the Preface to the Defense of t e
Wo^c^^tershire Petition, did master my understanding, and he^p^d to fix my
wavering thoughts, in a resolution to discourse with them. When I came among
them, they asser^ed that there is a Light in every man, which is Christ; that
in this life men may be perfect, and free from sin, that m^n are ^u^tified not
by Christ without, but wi hin them. They al o urg^d several trivial arguments
against our Minist^y, as, ^ king hire, being called Masters, wearing lo^^
robes, add^ng meanings to the Scripture. To every which assertions I said
somewhat, and ^eplied to ^hei^ a guments against our Ministry (as their
unmannerly clamor would give leave) for they would ^ndeavour to drown my vo^ce
by theirs, when I sp^ke anything that pinched them; and parti^ularly when I
urged 2 Cor. 5. ult. That look as Christ was made sin for us, so were we made
the righteousness of God in him, but the former was by im^utation, not by
inherence, Christ knowing no sin (by ^xperience of its working ^n himself) and
therefore so the latter: I was interrupted by the two ^peakers, Luke Ho^^rd,
and Stephen Hubberdy, with such rude langu^g^, as thou lie^t, thou l^est, and
they did not once offer any other confutation, though I u^ged them to the
attempt, and ^eld my tongue in exp^ctation, but in stead of a reply, lo^ked
upon one another like men astonish^d, and made so long ^ pause that many of the
hearers cried out, they are silenced, they have nothing to say. At length they
recovered themselves, and talked on in a discourse so impertinent and
independent, that I began to admire the men, for ordering their words so
warily, as that they were all birds of a feather, and not one bird of another
feather such as reason and pertinency to be found in the whole flock. At the
end of the day, the former of the two men above mentioned (being conscious to
himself how little he had done for his cause) made an open challenge of dispute
between me and other of their friends (meaning their fellow-Quakers) to whom I
replied that I would not appoint a time for discourse with such ignorant and
railing men as himself and his companion, but if Mr. Fisher would undertake it,
I would enter the lists with him. This Mr. Fisher (lest thou be ignorant
Courteous Reader of the reason why I singled out him from the rest) was
sometime a Minister, and well reputed of for his gifts in this County. And I
had a little hope, that seeing he had more reason than the rest of that way, he
would not let it lie dormant, but awaken it into exercise, and make some use of
it. And according to my desire the chalenger promised to procure Mr. Fisher to
come and debate their Tenants that day month, being the 12th of April, 1659.
(a time which he pitched, because his friends occasions (as he pretended) would
not admit them to come sooner. The day being come, Witnesses, Mr. Oldfield, Mr.
Foxton, etc.
Mr. Fisher appeared at Peter's Church in our Town, but pretended that he knew
not whether the Lord would open or shut his mouth, and therefore declined any
discourse; and I was fain to wait his leisure, and to talk with one Richard
Hubberthorn, who needed a bridle as much as the other did a spur, and made good
the Proverb, whosoever bold as blind Bayard? A right Quaker, whose discourse wanted
all the ingredients that should have made it savoury, viz. truth, sense, and
pertinence. And when he was silenced, came in for a reserve one G^orge
Whitehead, a man that seemed to have more mother wit, than the other, but as
little of the Spirit of God (unless that be a Spirit of error and
contradiction, and then I judge he had a plentiful measure.) At length Mr.
Fisher came in to help him at a dead lift, and with him I discoursed till
night. And though they had made themselves naked to their shame, especially by
the Doctrines of perfection and justification by works, yet to set a good face
on the matter, they urged for another dispute, which I granted them the next
day at the School house. And the Saturday following, April 16. I received a
challenge from Hubberthorn (who looked upon himself as contemned the other two
days, because the people after they had heard him a while, cried out to him to
hold his tongue, or speak to the purpose) to defend my own Call to the
Ministry, and hear the proof of his, which I would not answer, but upon
condition, that Mr. Fisher would also debate those two questions, Whether the
Scriptures he the Word of God? and whether the righteousness of Christ God-man
be satisfactory to the Justice of God for the sin of man? Which I confess I
desired the people might hear their judgment in, that they might see them in
their colors, and not mistake them for better men than they are. And
accordingly we agreed to m^et at the Schoolhouse the Tuesday following April
19. I presume thou art now listening to hear the issue, and I will tell thee
truly what it was, that many blessed God for the caution they received against
their Principles, which now they understood plainly (though not without much
ado, did I get them to speak, as that every one might know their meaning.) And
some good people who formerly had a favorable opinion of them, and thought
that they and we differed but in terms, in the Doct^^ne of Justification, and
the Scripture^ being the Word of God, do now loath and d^rest them, as men that
preach another Gospel, which y is not another, and would p^^vert the Gospel of
Christ, Ga. 1 ^. 7 8. And the truth is, we have reum confitentem, the
Malefactors own Confession, for Mr. Fisher did op^nly declare to the people,
Mr. S yli^rd, (...) D ^^le, Mr. Fox on Jur^^^.
the ^ast day of our dispute, that the Gospel which I preached, would never
br^ng them to H^aven plainly enough intimating ther^by, that he preached
another Go pel. And it is a passage not to be omitted, that as often as Mr.
Fish^^ had occasion to mention the N^me of our Lord Christ, Mr S^yli^^d. Mr. A
^ ^^^y Oldfield. Mr. Fox^on.
h^ wo^ld call him The man Christ Jesus whom you call (speaking to me) God-man;
and being often a^ked whether he did not call him lo too, I could never g^t an
answer, and truly hi^ si ^nce may well be interpreted consent to the horrid
A^ian Blasphemy. It Is al^o observable that Mr. Fisher would not discourse the
point of Christ's satisfaction, M^. Seyli^rd, Mr. Rumsey.
but put me off w th general terms, that all that Christ did was pleasing to
God, and so s^te down, and ^ave way to his comp^nion. And we h^v^ j^st ground
to b^liev^ that he denies it, for many o^ them do (as we find ^n many of their
printed Papers) and they p^etend to have no d^fferences in opinion among
themselves. And thou c^nst not be ignorant that the denial of it in conjunction
with their justification by works, does not only lop the branches, but grub up
by the very roots the Gospel, which thou have received. I cannot omit another
remarkable passage, and it is this, that in the midst of our discourse, April
13. one of the Quakers (whose name I cannot learn) cried out for audience, Mr.
Domsel, Mr. Tho Foxton, Mr. Tho. Rumsey.
pretending that he had somewhat to say from the Lord, and varying h s phrase,
In the Name of the Lord, but he was denied liberty, because he was none of the
Disputants, but the man was so o^streperous, that upon promise of speaking br
efly, we were glad for quietness sake to hear him. But what would thou think
was his message from the Lord? It was to accuse a godly Minister there present,
of sl^ndering Samuel Fishe^, Mr. Peter Domsell,
by affi^ming that the said S. Fisher had been at Rome, and received ^ Pension
from the Pope, and the accuser pretended to have a witness ready to prove it.
The Minister stood up at the accusation, and demanded when and where he spoke
these words? It was answered, the last night (meaning April 12.) between
Sandwich and Staple (a Country ^arish about 4 miles distant.) To the answer,
the Minister replied, that he was at that time in Sandwich, and was not out of
Town that night. And (to save further trouble ab^ut defending and proving) the
Quakers witness of his own accord cried out that it was not the Minister
accused, Mr. Rob. Wilkinson.
but the Ministe^ of Staple, that spoke the words a^ the time and place
mentioned. (...) suppose good Reader, thou will be ready to ^xcuse the accuser,
and to say, it was but a mistake of one man for another, and truly I should
join with thee, if the man were of any other persuasion then Quakerism, for
these men pretend to be immediately sent by God about trivial things, which if
they really were, they could no more mistake in the persons to whom, than the
message whereabout they are sent. And surely had God sent this Quaker to
convince a man of slander, he would have sent him to the right man. And I think
we may well conclude them as sar from infallibility in Doctrine, as in matters
of fact. And it is worthy thy consideration, that when the accuser had nothing
to say for himself, Mr. Foxton, Mr. Oldfield, Mr. Rumsey, Jurates.
but slunk down among his fellow Quakers, M. Fisher holp him with a Lie, and
told us that the man did not say from the Lord, or in the Name of the Lord, but
in the fear of the Lord, which the man hearing, plucked up his Spirits, and
stood up again, boldly affirming the latter words to be his. When as he had no
such plea for himself, till it was put into his mouth; and the generality of
the people did then hout at Mr. Fisher, for a liar, and did then and do still
affirm that the man spoke the former words. And as for the matter whereof Mr.
Fisher was accused, part of it he denied not, namely, that he had been at Rome,
but that he received a Pension from the Pope, he utterly denied, which yet that
is probably as true, for I have it from very good hands, that in his late
travel to Constantinople and thence to Rome, he had as good Bills of exchange,
as most Gentlemen that travel, and yet it is well known that he has no visible
estate. And the Quakers who came to hear the dispute (who I suppose would not
belly him) did report, that he did bear his witness against the Pope and
Cardinals at Rome, and yet they suffered him not to be meddled with, which how
unprobable it is, let all men judge, but how much more probable, that the true
cause of his safety was his compliance with them, the Doctrines which he
broaches among us, and (as he says) in all other places, being theirs, and a
fair inlet to their Bag and Baggage. And to assure the Reader of the likelihood
of his compliance with the Antichristian Faction, thou may please to know,
that the 12. instant ( English account) two honest, and credible men of
Sandwich had some discourse with Mr. Fisher at Dunkirk, Mr. Tho. Foxton Jurate,
Tho. Barber, Cooper.
and he told them that he looked upon the Jesuits and Friars there, to be
sounder in Doctrine than those we call the Reformed Churches. This they are
ready to testify at any time upon call.

Another passage I have to acquaint thee with, viz. that the aforesaid Mr.
Fisher, in conference with the abovenamed Sandwich men at Dunkirk, Mr. Tho.
Foxton, Jurate, Tho. Barber, Cooper.
May 12. English style, did affirm that he himself is above Ordinances, and
that there is no more use of them in this life, to many persons, than there is
of a Candlelight, when the sun shines, and he gave instance in the uselesnesse
of Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

And the same witnesses were credibly informed at Dunkirk, that Mr. Fisher has
great Bills of Exchange from a Quaking London Merchant, and may take up four
hundred pound if he will.

And hundreds of people can testify how light he made of the charge of Popery,
on the first day of the Dispute, John Boys Esquire; Mr. Chapter Nichols, Mr. Th.
Foxton, etc.
when I plucked Amesius 4 Tome against Bellarmine, and offered to read part of
it out of the Latin into English; and with a gesture of derision he replied,
that Bellarmine held many Truths which must not be rejected because he held
them, and he gave for instance that Christ was the Son of God. And as for the
state of the Qu^stions, two of them, viz. The light of Nature, and Perfection,
I need not produce any witnesses to prove, because they constantly affi^m them,
but as for the rest, they are wont to juggle and equivocate about them. Henry
Oxenden, John Boys, Esquire; M. Nath. Barry, Mr. Tho Seyliard, Mr. Chapter Nichols,
Ministers.
The terms of the third Question were, Whether good works be the meritorious
cause of our Justification? which was expressly affirmed by them.

And this being so gross and Popish, Luke Howard one of the Quakers present at
the dispute, Mr. Nath. Barry.
has since denied that they did so affirm. And in the Fourth question Mr.
Fisher denied that the Books commonly called the Old and N^w Testament were
appointed of God for a standing Rule of Faith and Life. Henry Oxenden, Esquire; M^
Tho. Seyliard, Mr. Chapter Nichols, Min. Mr. Antho. Oldfield, Mr. Tho. Foxton, Mr.
Tho. Rumsey. Jurates.


And for the last, the infallibility of their Ministry the three Jurates of
Sandwich in the Margin, will testify that they did affirm their Ministry to be
infallible.

To conclude all, I shall give thee a taste of the craft even of the female Sex,
in evading Scriptures. One of them was challenged for breaking the rule, 1 Cor.
14.34. Let your women keep silence in the Church, for it is not permitted to
them to speak, etc. To which challenge she replied, that is spoken of the women
that have husbands at home to learn of, v. 38. but I have none, but am a maid.

Another (who was a wife) being also challenged for preaching publicly, Mr.
Tho. Foxton.
and that Scripture urged against her, I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to
usurp authority ov^r the man, etc. 1 Timothy 2.12. She readily replied, that was
spoken of the woman who was in the transgression, but I am not one of them,
(meaning it seems that women who are perfect, had the liberty of teaching,
which was denied to other women.) And I had some private discourse with a
Gentlewoman a Quaker, Mrs. Dor. Gudderson.
and ^ging her with that Scripture, M^rk 7.13. M^king the Word of God of none
effect, which is spoken of the fifth Commandment, v 9, 12. (part of the wri^ten
Word) to prove that the Scripture calls it self by the name of the Word of God;
and perceiving her at a loss, I p^ess'd her for an answer, in stead whereof
she put me a question, Mrs. Mary Paramour.
would thou not have ^e imitate the man Christ in ^ll things? To which when I
answered, yes, in such things as are intended for our imitation, she replies,
the man Christ did not always answer such cavilling questions as were asked
him, neither will I ^nswer thee. And when she was urged with those Scriptu^es,
Romans 16 and other Epistles, which enjoin Saluta^ions, she pretended that she
not being a Roman, nor Corinthian, what Paul wrote to them, was nothing to her,
unless the Spirit within her did prompt her to do the same things. And that
thou may see how great a str^sse they lay upon small matters, I will tell
thee a true story (which perhaps may move thy laugh^er) that a Kinsman by
marriage of the same Gentlewomans making offer to salute her at his own house,
April 12, 1659. she went two or three steps back with these words, I have
renounced the Devil and the Flesh long since, prithee forbear that custom of
the World.

These things I thought good to add (at the desire of some worthy persons)
which else I had omitted, that the world may take notice not only of the
wickedness, but of the absurdity of these peoples Principles.

FINIS.
BOOKS sold by John Allen at the Rising SUN in Paul's Churchyard. Viz.
Mr. Caryl's 5th. Vol. 7th. Vol. 8th. Vol. 9th Vol.
on Job.

Beza Novum Testamentum. Fol.

Mr. Allens Scripture Chronology. 4o

Mr. Baxters Call to the unconverted. 12o.

Mr. Lukins practice of Godliness. 12o.

A Catechism of the chief Heads of Christian Religion, by Mr. Davenport and Mr.
Hook of New England. 8o

The Faith and Order owned and practiced in the Congregational Churches in
England, agreed upon and consented unto by their Elders and messengers at their
meeting at the Savoy, October. 12, 1658.

Mr. Cottons Treatise on the Covenant of Grace.

Johannes Becoldus Redivivus, the English Quaker, the German Enthusiast revived.

A Defense and Justification of Ministers Maintenance by Tithes, and of
Infant Baptism, Humane Learning, and the Sword of the Magistrate, which some
Anabaptists falsely call four sandy Pillars, and Popish Foundations of our
Ministry and Churches; written by Immanuel Bourne Pastor to the Congregation at
Waltham in the County of Leicester.

Pre^bytery and Independency vindicated in answer to Mr. John Tympsons Treatise
of a free admission to the Lords T^ble. Its now in the Press.

Mr. Gatt ker against judi ial Astrology.

The vanity of judicial A^^rology, written by Gassandus Mathemetical Prof^ssor
to the King of France.

Several Case^ of Conscience concerning ASTROLOGY, and seekers unto Astrologers
answered, both from the Word of God, and from the Testimony of our most godly
and eminent Divines; published by a Friend to the Truth, in which Book Judicial
Astrology is proved to be

1. Expressly fo^bidden by the Word of God as a grand offense, and ought not to
be practiced, countenanced, nor tolerated, D^u. 18.10, 11. Lev. 20.6. Isai.
47.13, 14. Jer. 10.2.

The Reasons why it is so expressly forbidden, are:

1. It is a practice whereby men do assume to themselves that which is peculiar
unto God, viz. Judgment concerning future events either concerning Kingdoms or
Persons, Isai. 41.22, 23.

2. Because it draws the hearts of men from God the Father, and Christ his Son,
from considering the Works of the one, and hearking to the words of the other,
Isai. 5.12. Col. 1.8, 18, 19. Deuteronomy. 18.10, 16.

3. Because it is false, delusive, and uncertain, Isai. 44.15.

4. Because it nourishes vain and forbidden hopes and fears, Jer. 10.2.

All which Considerations published are to this end.

1. As an alarm, that the Consciences of those that study it may be awakened,
that they may be fully convinced of the great evil that is in it, that
abhorring such an abominable evil that is so hateful to God, and a real
trouble to the Consciences of good men; by leaving the sin, they may avoid the
punishment.

2. That Conscientious Magistrates may know how nearly it concerns them to do
their duties, in vindicating the Glory of God, by putting a period to the study
of Judicial Astrology, a practice indeed that brings the honor of God into so
much contempt in the world.

3. Lastly, That all those that have a desire to learn it, and those who
enquire of Astrologers what good or ill Fortune (as they term it) shall happen
to them in the course of their lives may through Gods Grace stifle such
unlawful desires; all which through the Grace of God shall be the prayers and
supplications of him (put up in the name of the Lord Jesus) who is their friend
to his power,

JOHN ALLEN.
He that converteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from
death, and shall hide a multitude of sins, James ^.20.




