The History of the Life of JESUS CHRIST.
Jesus with shepherds

There were in the Field Shepherds Abiding by their Flocks -- And ye Angel of
ye Lord came upon them -- And said, -- Behold I Bring you good Tidings -- Unto
you is Born a Savior which is CHRIST the Lord. Luke 2. The Evangelical
HISTORY: OR, THE LIFE of our Blessed Savior JESUS CHRIST, Comprehensively and
Plainly Related.

WITH Practical Inferences and Discourses THEREUPON.

In Four BOOKS. I. Of the Birth of John the Baptist. Of the Conception and
Birth of JESUS CHRIST; with an Account of what passed to his Entrance upon the
Ministerial Function. II. The History of the Acts and Miracles of our Savior,
in the first Two Years of his Ministry. III. A Relation of his Acts and
Miracles, in the Third Year of his Preaching. IV. An Account of his Acts and
Preaching, from the triumphant Entrance into Jerusalem. Of his Crucifixion,
Resurrection, Apparitions and glorious Ascension into Heaven.


With a Large Practical Introduction, by way of Preface.

Written in French by the Learned L. E. du Pin, and Englished by a Divine of
the Church of England, with Additions.

Adorned with Copper Cuts.

LONDON: Printed for Abel Swall and T. Child, at the Unicorn at the West End
of S. Paul 's Churchyard. 1694.

THE PREFACE.
I. The Design of this History.
SINCE the only End and Design of Jesus Christ's coming down from Heaven, and
all the Circumstances of his Incarnation, his Birth, Life, Preaching, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension, was to procure Salvation for Men; It is highly
reasonable, that they should fully understand all those Mysteries, which are
contained in the great Work of their Redemption, and be well versed in the
History of that Life, and Death, from which they receive so great Advantage.
They were Enemies to God: Jesus Christ has made a complete satisfaction to his
Father by his Death, To. 5.10.
and by his Discourses and Example has Taught them what they ought to do;
return unto him. They can never sufficiently meditate upon the Sufferings,
which the Son of God endured to expiate their Guilts, that they may make a
grateful acknowledgment of them, by an unfeigned Love of him; nor upon those
Truths which he has Taught them, and exemplified by his own practice, since we
must be saved by the observation of those Truths, and Imitation of his Actions.

For this Reason it is, that the Church of God in all Ages has been so urgent
with Christians, to receive the Holy Sacrament frequently, it being a lively
representation of his Death, and of the Sacrifice, which he offered upon the
Cross for a propitiation to God, and our frequent use of it, being an
Authentic Testimony of our Thankfulness to God for his Goodness. Upon which
account it is called the Eucharist, i. e. a Thanksgiving. But because we cannot
obtain that Life Eternal, which Jesus Christ has purchased for us by his
Death, but by the exact observation of those Laws, he has imposed upon us, and
by following the Example he has left us, he requires his Ministers before the
receiving of the Holy Sacrament to Instruct Men well, both in the Precepts of
the Gospel, and in the Actions of the Son of God. And by this he shows, that
there is nothing that he recommends so much to his Children, as to meditate
upon, and get a full knowledge of the Life and Death of Jesus Christ, either
that they may give him thanks continually for what he has done and suffered
for them, or know by what he has done, what they ought to do themselves; for
all his whole Life, as St. Austin says, Is but one continual Instruction, Aug.
de ver. Rel. c. 14.
how we should lead our Lives; and we never commit any Sin, but by departing
from his Example.

It is true, that the Gospels are the most exact History of the Life and Death
of Christ; for they contain in them all that God has thought fit to make known
to us, concerning the Actions and Doctrins of his Son. And Men can never be too
much Importuned to Read those Books diligently, which contain in them those
Truths, by which they must be judged at the Last Day: But since it is very
conducible to the Right Understanding of the Scripture-Relation concerning
Christ to have the History of his Life, laid down in a continued draught,
according to the Order of Time, and with all the Circumstances of it, which
none of the Evagelists have done, I thought I might do some service to the
Church of God, in general, and to more ignorant and weak Christians in
particular, in composing a short, but perfect Harmony of the Gospels.

And in my performing this undertaking, I have had special care to relate
nothing but the Truth, avoiding all Traditional Stories, and confining my self
strictly to the Relations of the Evangelical Writers; and have adventured to
put in nothing of my own, but the Style and Expression, that I might render the
Sense and Phrase of Scripture more easy and intelligible to the most ordinary
capacities. And that nothing be difficult to them, I have observed these two
things:

1. I have related the Actions of Jesus Christ with all their Circumstances:
But as to his Sermons, and Discourses, I have set down only so much of them, as
are most easy to be understood, and necessary to know, for the improvement of
our Manners. I am sensible, that the Sermons of our Savior make up a great
part of his Life, and that the Truths he Taught are as necessary to be known as
the Actions he did; but since several of his Sermons, especially such as
concern the proof of his Divinity, are scarcely intelligible by any but the
Learned, I have touched, but lightly upon them, and chose to set down more
largely those Truths which are essential, and of Universal concern for all Men's
Salvation, which as I have expressed in short, so also in such words as may
render them more Intelligible to the People.

2. Although I designed to speak of nothing, but what is in the Gospel, and that
I might not be obliged to add any thing, have chosen to relate nothing that is
obscure or controversal, yet sometimes I have been forced to transgress these
bounds meeting with something which could not be omitted, though difficult, upon
which account I have added some explications of them. Jesus Christ has Taught
many Moral Truths in Metaphors and Parables, which are very important for all
Christians to know, but useless, and some times dangerous, unless they be
accompanied with some Reflections, which may help the Reader in understanding
and applying them. For this reason we have intermixed some explications without
breaking the Series of the History, to clear that which is obscure, sweeten
that which is harsh, and so prepare the Bread of Truth, that it may nourish the
weak, as well as the strong; though these observations and remarks are very rare,
short and easily distinguishable from the Relations of the Evangelists, and I
am persuaded, will be thought necessary for the most part by the Reader, who
will think them rather too few, than too many.

But considering that unless we well understand the design of our Saviors
coming into the World, we cannot read the History of his Life with any real
advantage; for since he did, spoke and suffered nothing, but with a tendency to
that end, we can never have a true notion of them, unless we know the true
motive, and the end which he himself aimed at; I judged it necessary to
propound a short History of the Fall of Man, and the Wounds which Men have
received by it* before I present them with the Medicine to heal them, and teach
them in a few words the happiness of that Estate, wherein God Created them, the
lamentable Miseries into which they have fallen by Sin, and the means, which Gods
infinite goodness makes use of to save them. The Discovery of these Miseries
will make them more desirous to know what Christ has done to deliver them; and
by how much they perceive themselves more obnoxious to Gods Justice, by so much
they will the more eagerly lay hold upon Jesus by Faith to save them from it.

II. Man's Creation, and Fall by Sin.
When God created the Heaven and the Earth in six days, he being desirous not
only to provide a Governor for all his Corporeal Creatures, but to put some
other Beings into the places of the fallen Angels in Heaven, Created a Man and
Woman, whom he called Adam and Eve, which signifies the Mother of all Living.
God formed them in his own Image, i. e. gave them an Immortal Soul, endowed
them with abilities, to know and love him, which are two of the most noble
Actions of the Rational Creature, which make up the whole Life, and happiness
of God, which is to know, and love himself from all Eternity. Wherefore he
filled their Minds with Knowledge, and their Will with Love. He Created them
perfect and upright, their Souls in perfect submission to God, and their Body
to their Soul. There was no darkness, or trouble in their minds, because God
was their Light and Peace; and nothing in there Bodies, which might make them
ashamed, because there was nothing disorderly; for which reason it is, that the
Holy Scripture says, That they were Naked, Genesis 2.25.
and were not ashamed. In this Holy and Happy Estate they had a sound Judgment
and perfect freedom of Will, furnished with all Graces necessary to do that
good which God required of them, and to purchase that Glory, which should be
the reward of their Virtue, which is to have a clear Vision of God. They knew
so much of God, as Creatures are capable of; and if they made a good use of
this knowledge upon Earth, they should be Translated to the full fruition of
God in Heaven. Their Innocence exempted them from Death, and all other Evils,
which are the effects of Sin. And their privileges were not only for
themselves, but their Posterity to whom they should communicate not only their
Nature, but Innocence and all the privileges of it.

For the continuance of all these Temporal favors, and obtaining that eternal
happiness, which he has promised them, God required nothing, but an entire
submission to his Will, which that he might have trial of, he gave them a
Command to abstain from the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, which was in
the midst of Paradise, threatening them with Death, if they dared to Touch it.
Nothing was more easy than the observation of this Commandment; but they kept
it not long; for the Devil envying their Happiness, came to Eve under the Shape
of a Serpent, persuading her to Eat the Fruit which was forbidden, and telling
her, that they should be so far from dying, that they shall become as Gods. By
these promises she suffered her self to be seduced, eat of the Fruit, and gave
it to her Husband, who through a wicked Compliance made himself guilty of the
Woman's Sin.

As soon as they had thus broken the Command of their God, they were made
sensible of their Fault by the fearful Change in themselves; for they perceived
they were Naked, and were filled with confusion, because they felt in their
Bodies the disorderly Motions of their Concupiscence. God showed himself to
them no longer as a Father, whose presence was their Joy and Happiness; but as
an offended Lord, who reproved their disobedience and as a severe Judge to
punish their Rebellion, He Condemned the Man to Toil and Drudgery, for his
necessary Food, the Woman to Pains in Childbearing, and drove them both out of
the Terrestrial Paradise, in which he had placed them; he subjected them to all
the miseries of this Life, and passed the sentence of Death upon them, which he
had threatened, condemning them not only to a Temporal Death of the Body, but to
the Second Death, which is more terrible than the former, the Death of the
Soul, which is to Live eternally with the Devils in Hell, and be banished from
the only cause and foundation of all Happiness, God. A just punishment, says
St. Austin for their fault in disobeying so easy a Law of so great a God!

All the Race of Adam being corrupted in him, as in their Fountain and Root by
his Sin, was also liable to the same punishment; for as if he had continued in
his Innocence, all his Posterity had inherited it by their Birth, and all the
Advantages of it; after the same manner, since he has sinned, all Men
naturally inherit his Crimes, and all the Plagues, which are consequent upon
it. This is the Sin, which we call Original, because we are guilty of it from
our Original and Birth; and this is the Sin, which brings upon us all those
Evils, which we feel, either in our Souls or Bodies; for the darkness of the
Understanding, the corruption of the Heart, the proneness of the Will to Evil,
and Opposition to Good, the disorderly Motions of Concupiscence, the turbulency
of our Passions, the excessive Love of our selves, forgetfulness and Aversion
to God, all the Sins which we commit, Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, Griefs, Death,
and Lastly, Eternal Damnation, are the sad Consequences and just punishments of
this Sin, which we come into the World with, and which make us, as St. Paul
says, the Children of the Wrath of God. Ephesians. 2.3.


III. The Incarnation of Jesus Christ.
Out of the miserable condition, into which Man had plunged himself and
Posterity by Sin, there was no way of Recovery, had not God in his infinite
Mercy been pleased to find out a way, which none else could do. He had
compassion on his Creatures, and contrived this means to save them, the Word,
i. e. the Son of God, the Second Person of the Holy Trinity was made Incarnate,
assuming a Body and Soul like us, and united to his Divinity in his own person
the Humane Nature, which he intended to redeem. He became Man, still being God,
and took upon him all the weaknesses and Infirmities of Man, Sin and Ignorance
only excepted. He undertook to satisfy Justice for the Sin of Men, and to
pacify God for the offense committed against him by suffering himself for it.
He condescended to be conceived by a Virgin, Born in a Stable, become an
Infant, converse with Men, and live among them such a Life, as we shall
hereafter relate. He preached, did Miracles, suffered Affronts and Injuries,
endured an Infamous, and painful Death, was Buried in a Tomb, rose again, and
Lastly, ascended into Heaven: After he commanded his Disciples to go, and
Preach in his Name through all the World, and all this to perform and Complete
the Great Work of our Salvation.

Behold how great Love God has showed to Rebellious Man! The Father has given
his only Son, and this Son gave himself for them. Let no Man ask the reason,
why God did not make choice of some easier way to save us, which might cost him
less. It is certain, that the Almighty could have found out some other means,
but it is also certain that we ought to look upon this, which God has made use
of as the most advantageous for us, and most agreeable to our needs, since that
God has preferred it before all others, who is not only the most Powerful, but
Wise Being, who cannot be mistaken in the fittest means for attaining the End
he aims at. Let us not then examine, what other ways God might have taken to
effect this Great Work, but let us devoutly consider, how Glorious to himself,
and how profitable to us, that way is which he has taken.

And 1st. God in the Incarnation of his Son has magnified his Power and
Goodness; for he has demonstrated to Man, that though he is pleased to permit
the Evils, which he could hinder, he can produce great good out of them, and
make those very Sins, which dishonor him, to be serviceable for his glory in
it. He has showed his Mercy, and his Justice; for he pardons the Guilty, and
at the same time he received a satisfaction equivalent to the Offense
committed. By it he has discovered to us, the admirable and unsearchable
strength of his Wisdom, which has found out a way to satisfy at once, both his
Justice and his Love, and has so ordered it, that the Criminal may be saved,
and yet God, who has been offended, not be dishonored; for by the Death of
Jesus Christ, God is revenged, and Man's Sin punished. He bore our grief in his
own Body, and offered such a Sacrifice to his Father, as could not but be
accepted because it was Pure and Innocent, and which paid him as great honor,
as he had received affront by Man's Sin; for it was of infinite value being
united to the Godhead. The perfect submission of the Son of God, even to the
Death of the Cross, has made sufficient amends for the Disobedience of a mere
Man. Men are saved, because another has undergone the punishment due to them;
and God has lost nothing of his Honor, since he was offended by a mere
Creature, but has been infinitely Honored by a God. And as it is glorious to
God, so also is

2. The Incarnation of Jesus Christ as advantageous to Man, by the wonderful
fitness, which it has to all the defects and evils, from which the Divine
Wisdom has thought fit to deliver him; for Gods anger was not only to be
appeased, but Man, who was diseased, was to be cured. Now as the perfection of
Man consisted in knowing and loving God, so the disease of Man was to be
stripped of these, so that he neither knew God, nor loved him, but labored
under blindness of Mind, and corruption of Heart, which Christ by his
Incarnation has removed and cured: For

1. He has restored Man to the knowledge of God. He has opened the Eyes of
Man, to make him know the true God; for the Word who is the Light of the Soul,
John 1.14.
was made flesh, and dwelt among us. The Light which we shut our Eyes against,
came down from Heaven to present it self to us, accommodating it self to the
weakness of our sight, and because we were able to discern nothing but
Corporeal things, he clothed himself with a Body, that so by our Senses he
might insinuate himself into our Souls, and disperse our darkness and
blindness. Jesus Christ being thus become visible, he conversed sometime with
Men, did Miracles to make them believe on him, and by sensible benefits,
healing the Sick, freeing the Possessed, drawed them to him; and so having
insensibly linked them to his Human Nature, which he assumed, to work out
Salvation for them, he Preached the Truth to them: They heard his Word with
pleasure, and this Word purifying their Hearts by Faith, which they had in this
Man, who Preached to them, prepared them by little and little, and at last led
them insensibly to the knowledge of the-God-head, which was hidden under the
Vail of the Humanity.

2. But since it is not enough for Man to know God, unless he Love him; Jesus
Christ by his Incarnation has healed our corruption of Heart, and has drawn
our Affections off from the Love of the Creature, to that of the Creator; for
being Clothed with a Body, he placed his Godhead among those Objects, which
the Soul in the State of Corruption does naturally fix its Love upon, and by
sensible benefits and kindnesses endeavored to bring it to the Consideration
and Love of Invisible and Eternal good things. He showed it, what it ought to
love, as its true Happiness, and not only raised its hopes to attain it, but
Taught it the proper means of arriving at it. Lastly, He convinced it of the
great Love God had for it, and consequently, how much it ought to love him; for
what greater sign of love could he have given us, than in sending his only
begotten Son to Dye for us, who were his Enemies? And what more effectual
Attracture to oblige us to love him again, who has thus loved us first? What
Heart is so hard as not to be melted with such immense kindness? A slight
reflection upon it will make us resolve with the beloved Disciple, and say, Let
us Love God, for he has first Loved us. 1 Jo. 4 19.


And as the Incarnation of Christ, gives us an ample proof of Gods love to us,
so also it shows us the greatness of the Crime, with which we have offended
him. The greatness of the Satisfaction discovers the greatness of our Guilt.
Man could never have conceived the heinousness of his Sin, if God had not
required so great a satisfaction. We usually look upon Adam's sin, as a small
sin, and are apt to accuse God of injustice for punishing a momentary Action,
with eternal Torments; not considering, that the Person, who was threatened with
eternal Torments for his Rebellion, might have enjoyed an eternal Happiness for
his Obedience: But the Incarnation of the Son of God has justified the Justice
of God; for his Blood, which was shed for the expiation of our Sin, is a
faithful Mirror to represent the greatness of our Crimes. By it we see how
much our Offenses displeased God, since he punishes it with Eternal Death, and
for the Pardon of it, requires no less satisfaction than the abasing Tortures
and Death of the Son of God. Nor let us say, that if God loved Men so tenderly,
he might have saved them without exacting of them so great a Satisfaction, as
Jesus Christ made; but let us think rather, that if God, notwithstanding the
love he has for Man, would not save Man any other way than by the Death of his
Son God-Man, he must need have an irreconcilable hatred to Sin, and of all
Evil, that is most odious to him. This is none of the least advantages which we
may gain by the Incarnation of the Son of God, to raise in our selves a hatred
of Sin, and a fear of losing the benefit of our Reconciliation with God by our
fresh Sins, by considering what it cost to redeem us, viz. as the Apostle St.
Peter says, We are not redeemed with Corruptible things, as Silver and Gold; 1
Pet. 18.
but with the precious Blood of the Lamb of God without spot, i. e. by the
Blood of the only begotten Son of God.

IV. Of the Life of Jesus Christ.
Heb. 12.14
Since without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord, we cannot reasonably desire,
that God should make us happy: So long as we remain in our Sins, enemies to him
by our wicked Works, it is absolutely necessary in Order to salvation that Men
should be converted from their Sins, and return to him by a sincere and
unfeigned Love of him. Now to effect this great Work, says S. Austin, God
thought not fit to make use of Violence and Force, Aug. de ver. Rel. c. 16.
but rational inducements; and persuasions, and of all those gentle Methods,
which could be possibly made use of by infinite Wisdom for that end, as fit and
proper for effecting this design, none was thought so suitable, as the Life and
Converse of Jesus Christ with the Sons of Men; by which not only all the
obstacles of our Conversion are removed, but all the sweetest allurements
imaginable are tendered to us.

We are ignorant, what we ought to do to please God, and being blinded with the
false Idea's of Good and Evil, are not sensible, that the only real Good of the
Rational Soul is the enjoyment of God, and the only real Evil is the loss of
this Chief Good. All Men are involved in this Error, and therefore 'twas in
vain to expect a better information from any mere Man; or if any had those true
notions of Man's happiness, yet either Man's natural pride, or the differences of
the Wise about it, would make us either slight our Teachers, or deny our
assent, to what they Instruct us in, as dubious and uncertain.

That therefore we might be Instructed in this Truth without fear of being
deceived, the Truth it self came to dispel our Darkness and enlighten our
Ignorance, and has tendered himself to us as a Master, whose Disciples we need
not be ashamed to own our selves, because this Master is our God. He was made
Man, and dwelt among us. He has proved to us by his admirable Miracles, That
he was a Teacher sent from God to Instruct us; that he is Gods only Son.
Lastly, that he is Wisdom, Light and Truth, and having proved himself to be
God, he has dispersed the Rays of his Doctrine, and Taught by his Preaching,
what is our true Happiness, and what we must do to attain it.

But he did not content himself to teach us; but joined Example to his
Instruction. He persuaded us to the practice of those Truths by his Actions,
which he delivered in his Sermons. He prescribed them fit Remedies for their
Distempers, but because they were bitter and unpleasant, troublesome and
nauseous for Men to take, he first took them himself, although he had no need of
them, that the sick person might be more willing to take them after their
Physician. We must be humble that we may be saved, and this was the way he took
to persuade the Proud to it. God might have commanded his Creatures to be
humble, crying out from his Caelestial Throne, Matthew. 18.3.
in Jesus 's Words, Except ye humhle your selves, and be converted, ye shall
not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: But God did not make choice of this way
to bring Men to embrace this Virtue, Aug. Ep. 42.
but made use, as St. Austin says, of a more effectual and taking way, more
sweet and pleasant; he had rather root Pride out of our Hearts by persuasion,
than force, and invite us to Humility by the example of the Son of God, who
being humble and of no Reputation, says unto us, Learn of me, Matthew. 11.29.
for I am meek, and lowly in Heart. What arrogance can withstand such words as
these, supported by infinite Dignity, and profound Humility of the Speaker? And
who will not think it now a greater shame for him to be elevated with Pride
after the manner of Men, than to be humble and meek in imitation of the Son of
God? And the same may be said of all the Virtues necessary for Man's Conversion,
which I have said of Humility; for whereas there is nothing more prevalent with
Men, than Example; Jesus Christ has made himself an exact Pattern for them,
and for this cause has propounded his Life to us, that he lived upon Earth as
an exact Pattern of our matters.

Sin has separated us from God, and setting us at a distance from him, puts us
out of a possibility of returning to him. We are carried by our Affections,
which are so far from leading us to Happiness, as we suppose, that they hurry
us headlong into our own Ruin and Destruction. Who can discover the Depth of
Gods admirable Wisdom, in making choice of Christ's Incarnation and Life to
redeem Man out of this miserable condition!

God, who is the end at which we ought to aim, and from which we naturally go
farther and farther, is come himself to seek us. We had lost the sight of him,
he has made himself visible: He thought it not sufficient to propose the most
absolute and complete good to their sight in his own Person, as the only fit
object of their Love, but he would show them the way they should go in to come
to the full possession of it. He became himself their Fellow-Traveller and
Guide, and appeared himself as a Person at a distance from God that he might
carry us to God with him. He went before us, and restored all our Defects by
his perfections, i. e. he has reformed all our Sentiments, and all the
affections of our Souls, by the affections and motions, which he showed in the
Human Narure which he assumed for our Salvation. We were not sensible what we
ought to Love or Hate, Desire or Fear, Follow or eschew; but he has Instructed
us by his Example to Order, and regulate the whole course of our Lives, with a
reference to that ultimate End. For, as St. Austin says, Aug. de cat. rud. c.
22.
Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the Son of God, and was made Man, has contemned
the good things of this World, to Teach us to contemn them; suffered many
Sorrows, to give us Courage to endure them; was Poor that we might not glory in
Riches; would not be made a King, to teach us to be Humble; suffered Hunger and
Thirst, to teach us Contentment. In fine, Dyed and Rose again, that we might
learn to contemn Death, in hopes of a Glorious Resurrection. Thus has the Son
of God given us an Example of managing our Words, Actions and Sufferings, and
in so doing we shall be saved.

V. Some directions, how we may read the Life of Jesus Christ, with advantage.
The Life of Christ, being intended, as we have already showed, as the
Universal Remedy of all the Distempers of Man's Soul, deserves our daily
reading, and serious Meditation upon it. All Arguments to persuade Men to it,
come far short of this very consideration. That it is the Life, not of a Man,
but of a God, so that it is in vain to propound any other. All that I shall
add, shall be only some directions to the Reader, in perusing it, which may
help him to make it as Beneficial, as it is designed, and ought to be to us.

1. One of the most Important is, that we should always keep it in our minds,
whose Life it is we are Reading of, that we may not be offended at his
Infirmities and Sufferings, by looking upon them as Involuntary. Jesus Christ
is God, and by consequent Almighty; and therefore nothing could befall him
against his Will, nor could he suffer any thing but what he would, and so long
as he pleased. When we see him dying upon the Cross, let us remember what he
has said, That he laid down his Life of himself, John 10.18. Luke 4.30. John
18.6.
and no Man was able to take it from him. When he falls into the hands of his
Enemies, let us consider, that before this he had often withdrew himself
Miraculously from the Fury of his Enemies, and before he suffered himself to be
taken, he threw them down on the Earth at his Word alone. If at any time the
Evangelists, who have undertaken to describe exactly, what Jesus did as a Man
here upon Earth, do sometimes represent him to us, under such Troubles and
Passions, as happen to Men involuntarily, let them know that the Evangelist,
who has written on purpose to prove his Divinity, teaches us, That all these
Motions were voluntary in him, and that he troubled himself.

But let no Man say, That these Troubles and Infirmities, though voluntary,
were unbecoming God; but, on the contrary, let us honor him the more for them,
since he made choice of them, who is the Wisdom and Power of the Father. Let us
consider the Design why he underwent our Weaknesses and Miseries, and be so far
from being ashamed of his Humiliation, that we should admire the wonderful
propriety and fitness to bring about the End Proposed, which is the Salvation
of Man. The Mockings which the Gentiles treated him withal, were a necessary
Remedy to cure our Pride; and our Physician was willing to take this Medicine
himself, that he might make it more pleasant and tolerable to the Sick, whom he
intended to save.

He sometimes acted as God, and sometimes as Man; but managed all his Actions,
both Human and Divine for our Benefit. If he manifests his Glory by Miracles,
it is to make us believe on him, and to persuade us, that when he suffers it is
not out of Necessity, but Love to us: And if he conceal the Glory of his
Divinity under the Vail of our Infirmities, it is that he may gain our Love and
Service as a Guide to us, teaching us by his Example, what we should do and
suffer. If he opposes his Enemies till they are ready to stone him, but yet
cannot, it is that when they shall put him to Death, we may be thankful for the
Death which he suffered to redeem us. He submitted to Death, in Obedience to
the Command of his Father, to teach us a patient Submission to all Afflictions
God shall please to lay upon us. He was seized with Fear and Sorrow at the
Approaches of Death, which yet he endured voluntarily, and had long desired,
and which he knew was the Cup given him to drink, by his Father; not that we
should think that he drank it unwillingly, but to comfort and instruct those
that are obliged to dye, either through Force or by Necessity of Nature. Thus,
like a good Physician, he subjected himself to all our Weaknesses, that he
might make us courageous and strong, to take the wholesome, but bitter Potion
which he offered to us. Who could have been persuaded of the necessity of
suffering and bearing the Cross, if Jesus Christ had not suffered and been
crucified for us? Who would think himself able to endure Crosses, when Nature
makes so strong an Opposition, if Jesus Christ had not Suffered it himself?
Who, of us, would not tremble at the Efforts which we must sustain in
encountering the horrible Terrors of Death, had not our Spiritual Physician swet
Blood and Water in the same Combat? These voluntary Sufferings of Jesus Christ
are our Consolation under our involuntary Afflictions; teaching us, that they
are no sins, since the Son of God was contented to endure them, and showing us
the Way how to engage God's Love to us by them, saying to God as his Son did,
Not mine, Luke 22.42.
but thy Will be done. Thus the Infirmities of our Savior, though they seem
unbecoming a God, yet are evident Demonstrations of the Infinite Mercy by which
he desired to save us. His Humiliations are all our Honor, since he was
humbled for us only. Let us adore his Condescension, and judge with ourselves
that all our Love is due to that God, who abased himself, suffered and dyed for
our Salvation.

2. Another Direction, how we should read the Life of our Savior with
Advantage, is to read it with a Design of conforming our selves to it. All the
Holiness of Men consists in the Imitation of Jesus Christ; Romans 8.2.
for according to S. Paul's Words, God has predestined us to be conformed to
the Image of his Son. 1 Cor. 15.49.
And the same Apostle teaches us elsewhere, as we have born the Image of the Old
Man, by following the irregular Desires of our Flesh, we must bear the Image of
the New Man, which is Christ Jesus, by regulating our Lives by his: Wherefore
we ought not to be lead by mere Curiosity to the Reading of this History, nor
to know his Actions only, but to learn by what he has done, what we ought to
do. He said to the Jews long since, Joh. 5.35.
who had heard John's Sermons with Pleasure; John was a Burning and Shining
Light, and ye were willing, for a Season to rejoice in his Light: But it is not
sufficient for us to cast our Eyes upon him who is the true Light of Men, for
he has discovered the Way that leads to eternal Happiness, not to those who
only take some Pleasure in knowing his admirable Works, but to those who follow
him by a faithful Imitation of his Example. Before we know what Jesus Christ
has done and taught upon Earth; we are like Travelers, who journey in the
Night, and wander they know not whither, because they cannot tell their Way but
by reading the Life of Christ: We are like the same Travelers, who as soon as
Day breaks perceive their Errors, and return again into the right Way. He came
from Heaven to show us the way thither, and to bring us out of the Paths that
lead down to Hell. He goes before us himself, that we may not wander or lose
our Way, nor take any other Way but that in which he leads us. He assures us,
that all other Ways, but that in which he goes, lead down to Death; wherefore
we must read his Life to make it a Rule and Exemplar of ours, that all our
Conversation, being a lively Expression of his, we may say, with the Apostle,
It is not I that live, Gal. 2.20.
but Christ that lives in me.

But it is not sufficient to read the Life of Christ, if we desire to profit by
it, but we must meditate upon it, and apply all that we read, because this is
the only way to make the right Use and Advantage of our Reading: We need lose
no part of the History of the Son of God; for as he did nothing but for our
Salvation, so there is no circumstance of his Life which we cannot gather some
Advantage to our selves from, if we consider upon it with serious Attention: It
will then be worth our while to take every Part of it into Examination, and see
what Benefit we may reap from it, and what Motions and Affections it may excite
in us; for the reading of the Life of Christ must needs sometimes instruct us,
sometimes shame us, sometimes comfort us, and sometimes encourage us, and
sometimes inspire us with Love, Thankfulness, Reverence, Joy, Grief, Hope or
Fear, according to the different Objects which it presents to our Observation.

All the Life of Jesus Christ is made up of Miracles, Discourses, Actions and
Sufferings. He wrought so many Miracles to prove his Divinity, and to relieve
either the Miseries or Necessities of those who either wanted or desired his
Help: We may make an Advantage of these, by supposing our selves to be in the
Number of those who saw them, and for whose sake they were done. The
Eyewitnesses of them believed in him, admired and adored him, and became his
Disciples: Let us do the same, when we read what they saw, adore Christ,
acknowledge him for our God, believe in his Godhead, and devote our selves
entirely to his Service, since we can never honor him as our God but by
obeying and loving him.

And in the same manner let us apply all the Miracles he did for the Relief of
others needs: He healed no bodily Diseases but what were a Figure of the
Spiritual Distempers of our Souls. Sin is our Leprosy,, our Deafness, our
Blindness, our Palsy, our Death; let us do the same to obtain Health of our
Souls, that we read the diseased Persons did for their Bodies, to obtain Cure;
let us present our selves before Jesus, and say with the Leper, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean; and with the blind Man, Open mine Eyes that I
may see; and so of others. Let us think that Jesus requires the same Faith for
the cure of our Souls that he did of those he healed of their Bodily
Distempers; and let us look upon that Thankfulness, Faith, Love and other
Passions of those who were miraculously cured, as a Pattern of those Affections
which we ought to have for the Graces we have received.

The Discourses of Jesus Christ ought to be read with great Reverence, which
consists in believing and practicing what he teaches. He is the Truth, and
nothing but Truth can save us, and we shall be judged by that which he has
taught. We must hear him, as his Disciples, and be won by his Words: We must
discover our Ignorance to him, that he may inform us and our Ways, that he may
amend them. This must be done, in applying every Word of Jesus Christ, and
examining our selves by it, that we may condemn our selves, if we find our
selves out of the Way which he has taught, and we may reform our Practice by
it. And if there be any thing obscure in his Discourses, let us make our
Prayers to him, to enlighten our Understandings in the Knowledge of it, if it
be necessary to Salvation, practicing those Truths in the mean Time, that are
plain, and worthy of our Observation.

To profit by the Actions of Jesus Christ we must look upon them as the Rule
and Pattern of our Conversations. He would have us admire his Miracles, but
imitate his Actions; for this Reason it is that he commands us to learn of him
not to cure the Blind or raise the Dead, Matthew. 11.30.
but to be meek and lowly in Heart: When he commanded the Leper to tell no Man
of the Cure he had wrought on him, and fled from the People, who would have
made him a King, we should learn to avoid Vainglory and Ambition from him. We
should read the Actions of the Son of God with Design of conforming our selves
to them, when we see him washing his Apostles Feet, putting on the same
Humility which we see in him; and when we see him eating with Sinners, learn
the same Charity. In fine, let us study the Affections of Jesus, and conform
our selves to them; love nothing but what he loves, and contemn the same Things
he despised. He hated Sin, he despised Riches, Honor and Pleasures; he loved
and sought the Glory of his Father, and all his Care was to obey and please
him, for which end he refused not to undergo Poverty, Affronts, Disgrace,
Grief, Sorrow, yea, Death itself: These are the things he would have us learn
from him, and this is what we should think upon and imitate.

Nor is the Advantage less which we may gather from reading the Sufferings of
Jesus Christ. We must look upon them, as we have already said, as voluntary;
and it is good to consider them with relation to the Two Ends for which he
suffered: 1. For our Satisfaction. 2. For our Instruction. 1. He suffered to
satisfy Justice for our Sins, and endured the Punishment of our Offenses, to
deliver us from eternal Torments. The Consideration of this Action ought to
excite in us ^. Love to Jesus Christ, who endured so much to give us a Proof of
his Love to us. 2. Hatred and Abhorrence of him, which could not be expected
but by the Sufferings and Death of God himself, with relation to the Second End
for which Christ suffered, which was our Instruction. We ought to make these
Reflections upon it; in reading them we ought to be satisfied, That Sufferings
are necessary to obtain Heaven, considering that this is the Way our Savior
leads us, and went himself: When we are persecuted, we ought to comfort our
selves with this, that it is an Honor to be treated as our Master was. The
Submission with which he drank the Cup which his Father gave him to drink,
should teach us to welcome the Crosses which God lays upon us, without
murmuring, as Sickness, loss of Goods, Friends, Parents, etc. His Patience in
suffering Affronts and Abuses, should quench all our passionate Resentments and
Desires of Revenge, which rise in our Hearts at the Sense of Wrongs. In fine,
his exemplary Behavior in his Sufferings should teach us to accept the
Persecutions of Men, as ordained by God, and to adore his Justice in their most
unjust Dealings with us, to love our Enemies, and be so far from requiting the
Injuries we receive from them, as to pardon them and do them good, and to
comfort our selves in the meek Sufferings of Evil, by the Contemplation of the
Glory that shall follow; for as S. Cyprian, Quod est Christus, Cypr. de Idol.
van.
hoc erimus Christiani, si Christum fuerimus imitati. If we imitate Christ, we
shall be like him, and enjoy the same Glory.

The last Direction which I shall give those Persons who would read the Life of
Christ with Benefit to themselves, is this; That they would join Prayers with
their Reading. Before we begin to read, we should beg of God in Prayer, That he
would discover to us all the imitable Parts and Circumstances of the Life of
his Son; and after we have done Reading, we must implore his Grace to do what
we have learned from thence to be our Duty; Joh. 1.14.
The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, says the Gospel, being full of
Grace and Truth. He brought Truth to instruct us in our Duties, and Grace to
enable us to practice what he taught us. This Truth which is intended for our
Instruction is diffused through all the Circumstances of his Life, but we must
have Eyes able to discover it; he must give us these Eyes, or else his Words
and Actions will be to us like an enclosed Book, or as so many Riddles, which
we cannot understand: Wherefore, since he has given us abilities to know the
Truth, let us pray him to embrace us with Love, and give us that Grace which he
has merited for us by his Sufferings, and which may make us receive his
Doctrine, and conform to his Example. It Is the Effusion of this which has, as I
may say, perfected the Mystery of the Incarnation. Jesus Christ was made Man to
allure the Love of Men; he lived with them to teach them how he would be loved
by them; he ascended into Heaven, and sent down the Holy Spirit from thence
upon them, to fill their Hearts with that Love that he requires of them. This
is the whole Contrivance of our Salvation; let us acknowledge the Obligation
which we have to love Jesus Christ, and let us learn, by reading his Life,
after what manner he would have us love him, and pray for Grace to love him as
we ought, and enkindle in our Hearts that Fire of which he speaks, Luke 12.49.
I am come to send Fire on Earth, and I wish it were already kindled.

The End of the Preface.
A Table of the Chapters.
BOOK I. Contains the History from John's Conception to the First Year of
Christ's Preaching.
I. THE Conception of S. John. p 4 II. The Conception of Jesus. p 5 III. The
Visitation of the Holy Virgin. p 7 IV. John's Nativity. p 8 V. The Revelation
of Jesus Christ's Conception to Joseph. p 9 VI. The Divine Generation of Jesus
Christ p 1^ VII. The Human Birth of Jesus Christ. p 13 VIII. The Circumcision
of Jesus Christ. p 14 IX. The Adoration of the Magi ibid. X. The Presentation
of Jesus in the Temple. p 16 XI. Jesus 's Flight into Egypt. p 18 XII. Jesus is
found among the Doctors. p 19 XIII. The Preaching of S. John. p 20 XIV. Jesus
Christ is baptized by John. p 23 XV. Jesus Christ fasts and is tempted. p 24
XVI. S. John gives Testimony concerning Jesus. p 25 XVII. Jesus Christ calls
Disciples. p 26 XVIII. Jesus First Miracle. p 27 XIX. He drives the Traders out
of the Temple. p 28 XX. Jesus Christ's Discourse with Nicodemus. p 29 XXI.
John's Second Testimony of Christ. p 30 XXII. John's Imprisonment. p 31 XXIII.
The Samaritan Woman. p 32
BOOK II. Containing an Account of what Jesus did in the first Two Years of his
Ministry.
I. HE Preaches in Galilee. p 35 II. He calls Four Apostles. p 36 III. He
cures a Man possessed. p 38 IV. He cures S. Peter's Mother-in-Law, and several
others. Ibid. V. He goes through Galilee. p 39 VI. He stills a Tempest. p 41 VII.
He cures Two possessed. p 42 VIII. He heals a Man, sick of the Palsy, at
Capernaum. p 44 IX. He calls a Publican to follow him. p 46 X. He heals a Woman
of a Bloody Flux. p 47 XI. He heals Two blind Men and a Dumb Man. p 49 XII. He
heals a Man of an infirmity, which he had had Thirty Years. p 50 XIII. His
Disciples are accused of breaking the Sabboth-day. 52 XIV. He heals several Men
on the Sabboth-day. p 53 XV. He chooses Twelve Disciples, and preaches on the
Mountain. p 54 XVI. What are the Truths which he preached in that Sermon. p 56
XVII. He heals a Leper. p 60 XVIII. He cures a Man sick of the Palsy. Ibid.
XIX. He raised a Dead Man p 62 XX. John sends two of his Disciples to Jesus,
The answer he gave them. Ibid XXI. The Reproofs he gave the Jews. p 64 XXII.
The Conversion of a Woman that was a Sinner. p 65 XXIII. He cures a Man
possessed with a Devil, blind and Dumb. p 66 XXIV. The Pharisees ask him a Sign
p 68 XXV. He propounds many Parables. p 70 XXVI. Other Parables. p 72 XXVII.
Jesus goes to Preach at Nazareth. p 74 XXVIII. He goes through Galilee, and sends
his Apostles to Preach. p 76 XXIX. Herod cuts off John Baptist's Head. p 78
BOOK. III. Containing what Jesus did in the Third Year of his Preaching.
I. HE feeds 5000 in the Desert with Five Loaves and Two Fishes. p 80 II. Jesus
goes upon the Water, and bids Peter come to him. p 82 III. Jesus shows in an
excellent discourse, that he is the living Bread, the nourishment of Souls. p
83 IV. The Pharisees complain that his Disciples eat with unclean Hands. p 86
V. He cures a Damsel possessed with a Devil. p 88 VI. He heals a Man Deaf and
Dumb. p 89 VII. He feeds 4000 Men with 7 loaves. Ibid VIII. The Pharisees ask a
Sign, and he refuses to give them any. p 90 IX. He heals a Blind Man at
Bethsaida. p 91 X. St. Peter confesses that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. p
92 XI. He foretells his Death to his Disciples. Ibid XII. He is Tranfigured. p
93 XIII. He heals a Lunatic p 95 XIV. He foretells his Death, and pays
Tribute. p 97 XV. He checks the Ambition of his Disciples. p 98 XVI. He gives
rules for Correcting and Pardoning. p 100 XVII. He goes to Jerusalem at the
feast of Tabernacles. p 101 XVIII. He heals Ten Lepers. p 103 XIX. He teaches
in the Temple. Ibid XX. He saves the Life of an Adulteress. p 106 XXI. He
teaches in the Temple, and they go about to Stone him. p 107 XXII. He restores
sight to a Man born blind. p 109 XXIII. He proves himself the good Shepherd. p
112 XXIV. He chooses 72 Disciples p 113 XXV. He teaches a Lawyer how to love
his Neighbor. p 114 XXVI. He lodges with Martha, and teaches his Disciples to
Pray. p 115 XXVII. He reproves the Pharisees and Lawyers for their faults. p
116 XXVIII. He gives his Disciples several Instructions. p 118 XXIX. He shows
the necessity of Repentance p 121 XXX. He heals a Crooked Woman. Ibid XXXI. The
Jews seek to Stone him. p 122 XXXII. He teaches them to enter in at the
straight Gate, and foretells the destruction of Jerusalem. p 123 XXXIII. He
heals a Man of a Dropsy, and confounds the pride of the Pharisees. p 125
XXXIV, He teaches that he came to call Men to his Kingdom. p 126 XXXV. He tells
us what we must do to be saved. p 127 XXXVI. He receives Sinners to Repentance.
p 128 XXXVII. He commends Almsgiving, and reproves the Pharisees covetousness.
p 129 XXXVIII. He shows the strict conjunction of Marriage, and praises
Virginity. p 132 XXXIX. He speaks of his Kingdom, and concerning the true hour
to pray. p 133 XL. He teaches Men to be humble. p 135 XLI. He blesses Infants.
Ibid. XLII. He shows that it is hard for rich Men to be saved. p 136 XLIII. He
teaches that the first shall be last in the Kingdom of Heaven. p 138 XLIV. He
raises Lazarus. p 139 XLV. The Jews hold Council against him. p 142 XLVI. He
is rejected by the Samaritans. p 143 XLVII. He foretells his Death a Third
time. p 144 XLVIII. He reproves the Ambition of his Apostles. p 145 XLIX. He
Lodges with Zacheus. p 146 L. They thought he would make the Kingdom of Heaven
to appear. p 147 LI. He heals two blind Men. p 148 LII. He Sups at Bethany. p
149.
BOOK IV. Containing the History of what Jesus did after his Triumphant entering
Jerusalem to his Ascension.
I. HE goes in triumph to Jerusalem p 151 II. He laments the Destruction of
Jerusalem. p 152 III. He foretells his Death again. p 153 IV. He curses the
Fig Tree. p 156 V. He drives the Traders out of the Temple. Ibid. VI. His
Discourse with the Priests and Lawyers. p 158 VII. The Parable of the
Husbandmen. p 159 VIII. The Parable of the Marriage Feast. p 160 IX. He
confounds the Pharisees. p 162 X. He confounds the Sadducees. p 163 XI. He
teaches which is the grrat Commandment. Ibid. XII. He discovers the Vices of
the Scribes and Pharisees. p 164 XIII. He commends the Alms of a poor Widow. p
165 XIV. He foretells the Destruction of Jerusalem. Ibid. XV. He foretells his
Second coming. p 167 XVI. He teaches to Watch. p 168 XVII. The Parable of the
Ten Virgins. p 169 XVIII. The Parable of the Servants. p 170 XIX. A description
of the last Judgment. p 171 XX. The Jews hold Council against him. p 172 XXI.
What was the Jews Passover. p 173 XXII. Jesus made a Supper. p 175 XXIII. He
washes his Disciples Feet. p 176 XXIV. He appoints the Eucharist, and foretells
Judas Treachery. p 177 XXV. He foretells Peter's Denial, and his Apostles flight.
p 179 XXVI. He comforts his Apostles. p 181 XXVII. Instructions given to his
Apostles. p 183 XXVIII. Jesus 's Prayer to God. p 186 XXIX. Jesus Agony in the
Garden. p 187 XXX. Jesus apprehension. p 189 XXXI. He is carried to Caiaphas's
House. p 190 XXXII. Peter denies Jesus Christ. p 192 XXXIII. Judas's despair. p
193 XXXIV. Jesus is accused before Pilate. p 194 XXXV. He is set at naught by
Herod. p 195 XXXVI. A Thief preferred before Jesus Christ. p 196 XXXVII. Jesus
is Scourged and Crowned with Thorns. p 198 XXXVIII. Pilate condemns Jesus. p
199 XXXIX. They Crucified Jesus. p 200 XL. Jesus words on the Cross. p 201 XLI.
Jesus 's Death. p 203 XLII. Jesus 's Burial. p 205 XLIII. Jesus 's
Resurrection. p 206 XLIV. Jesus 's appearance to Mary Magdalen. p 207 XLV. His
appearance to the other Women. p 208 XLVI. He appears to two Disciples and
Peter. p 209 XLVII. He appears to his Apostles. p 211 XLVIII. The Miraculous
Fishing. 213 XLIX. Jesus commends his Sheep to St. Peter. p 214 L. He instructs
his Apostles. p 215 LI. The last apparition of Jesus Christ. p 216 LII. The
Ascension of Jesus Christ. p 217 LIII. The Glorious Life of Jesus Christ in
Heaven. p 218 LIVE. The Conclusion. p 221
THE HISTORY OF THE LIFE Of, our Savior, Jesus Christ.
FOR about Four thousand Years, Book I.
after the Creation of the World, Man lay groaning under the Power and Tyranny
of Satan, to whom he had sold and enslaved himself by Sin. The greatest part of
the World was involved in Ignorance and Idolatry, and the Jews only had the
Knowledge of the true God, and lived in the Expectation of the promised
Messiah: For Man had no sooner subjected himself to the Decree of Death,
through the seducements of the Devil, but God threatened him to raise up a Child
of the Woman, which should maintain a continual War with that Wicked Spirit.
And to this end it was that he discovered himself and his Worship to a certain
Number of Men, from whose Posterity he designed to raise this Conqueror of the
Serpent, and Deliverer of Mankind.

Abraham was the first to whom God promised, That all the Nations of the Earth
should be blessed in his Seed, which he repeated to Isaac the Son of Abraham,
and Jacob the Son of Isaac, and after explained more clearly to the Jews, who
were the Posterity of Jacob's Twelve Sons, wherein this Blessing did consist,
by giving them Hopes of a Savior, whose Birth, Life and Death he foretold in
all their Circumstances: For he so contrived it, that all, that befell them,
should be a continued Figure of this Savior. He appointed them such
Sacrifices, as represented the great Sacrifice which should expiate and atone
for the Sins of Men, and for their sakes wrought such Miracles as were nothing
else but Shadows and Signs of what he would do for the Salvation of the whole
World.

So that all things did, as it were, foreshew this Holy Redeemer. The Prophets,
which God sent them from time to time, put them in Mind of his Coming, and the
Calamities which Divine Justice inflicted upon them for their Irregularities
and Sins, did raise their Minds to a more ardent and earnest Expectation of
him, as their Messiah or Christ. Messiah is an Hebrew, and Christ a Greek Word,
and signify both of them Anointed, the Jews calling him so, because they
expected, He should be a great King, consecrated to God by a special Unction,
of which the Anointing of their Kings and Prophets was but a Figure.

Four thousand Years being at last expired and spent in waiting for him, the
Time appointed by God, and foretold by the Prophets, for the Deliverance of
Mankind, came. The Roman Empire enjoyed a profound Peace under the Reign of
Augustus, and the Jews were governed by Herod, whom the Romans had made King
over them, being some Years before become subject to their Power. This
Government by a Foreign Prince was an Evident Sign that the Coming of the
Messiah drew near, according to the Prophesy of Jacob: Genesis 49.10.
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his
Feet, until [Shiloh] he that is sent, do come. This was the Time, which God
from all Eternity had prefixed for the Execution of his gracious Design, That
Jesus Christ, the Savior both of the Jews and Gentiles, should be born in
Judea; and by him has he accomplished the great Work of Man's Salvation in
such a manner as the Gospel relates, and which we are about to give an account
of in this History, of which I shall make Four Parts, containing so many
Periods of our Savior's Life, and show what passed. I. From the Conception of
John the Baptist to his entrance upon his Ministry. II. In the first Two Years
of his Preaching. III. In the Third Year of his Ministry. IV. From his
triumphant going up to Jerusalem to his Ascension into Heaven.


BOOK I.
An Account of what passed from the Conception of John the Baptist to the
Entrance of Jesus Christ upon his Ministerial Function.
I. The Conception of S. John the Baptist.
Book I. Luke 1.5-22.
THere was among the Jews a certain Priest, named Zacharias, who, with his Wife
Elizabeth, kept all the Commandments of the Lord blameless: They were both of
them very old, and God, that he might at length reward their Patience and
contentedness in a signal manner, having given them no Child, but laid upon
them the Disgrace of Barrenness, which at that Time was accounted a great Curse
inflicted by God. It came to pass, as Zachary ministered in the Temple,
according to his Course, and offered the Incense commanded by the Law to God,
the Angel Gabriel appeared to him, and told him from God, That he should have a
Son, whom he should call John; That this his Son should be great in the Sight
of God, and be filled with the Holy Spirit from his Mother's Womb; That he
should convert many Israelites from their Sins, and should go before the Lord
in the Spirit and Power of Elias, preparing his Ways for him, and disposing
Annunciation to the Blessed Virgin Mary p. 5

The Anunciation of the Blessed Virgin

Men to receive him. Zachary doubting of the Truth of these Promises, answered
the Angel, How shall I be assured of the Truth of thy Words, for I am Old, and
my Wife is well stricken in Years? The Angel reproving his Unbelief, told him,
That from that Moment he should be dumb and not be able to speak, till the
Things, which he had spoken of, should come to pass. And in that very instant
he lost his Speech, and the People, who could not understand him, but by Signs,
perceived by his Silence that he had seen a Vision.

The Days of his Ministration being accomplished, he returned to his own House,
at Hebron, Luke 1.23-25
a City in the Tribe of Judah, and God performed that which he had foretold by
the Angel; for Elizabeth conceived, and hid her self Five Months, that she
might between God and herself raise in her Heart a more perfect Sense of his
Favor, in taking away from her the Reproach of Barrenness, and giving her a
Son, of whom she might hope for so great things.

II. The Conception of Jesus Christ.
Six Months after the Conception of Elizabeth, the same Angel, Luke 1.26-38.
which had foretold the Birth of S. John to Zachary, was sent by God into a
City of Galilee, called Nazareth, to foretell the Nativity of Jesus Christ to
her, who was chosen from all Eternity to be his Mother. It was an Holy Virgin
of the House of David, named Mary, who was espoused to a Man of the same
Family, called Joseph, and living in perfect Chastity, had her Spouse for a
faithful Witness and Guardian of her Purity. The Angel being come to her, said,
Hail, O thou, that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee; blessed art thou
among Women. Her Modesty raised in her a great Disturbance, at the unusual
Appearance of the Angel, and she was surprised at this kind of Salutation. But
the Angel bid her not be troubled, telling her, That she should have a Son, who
should be great, and be called the Son of the Most High, to whom God would give
the Throne of his Father David, i. e. an Eternal Kingdom, and that she should
call his Name Jesus, which signifies a Savior. She reflecting upon her way of
living with Holy Joseph, and not understanding how she could preserve her
Virginity, and yet become a Mother, said unto the Angel, How shall this be,
seeing I know not a Man? The Angel answered her, That this Holy Child, which
shall be called the Son of God, shall be born by the invisible Operation of the
Holy Ghost; and to show her, that God, to whom nothing is impossible, would
work this great Miracle in her by his Almighty Power, he tells her, what had
befallen her Cousin Elizabeth, who having been barren for many Years, was Six
Months since with Child. Being satisfied by this Instance, that she might bear
a Child, and yet continue a Virgin, she humbly submitted her self to the
appointment of God, and said to the Angel, Behold the Handmaid of the Lord, be
it unto me according to thy Word. Then the Angel departed from her, but the
Holy Spirit wrought this great Mystery in her, for which she had been fitted
and disposed a great while before, by the plentiful effusion of his Graces. She
conceived the Son of God, the Second Person of the Holy Trinity, who was
incarnate, i. e. became Man, by taking on him a Body and Soul, like us, in the
Womb of this chaste and humble Virgin.

III. The Visitation of the Holy Virgin.
As soon as Mary had heard that her Cousin was with Child, she went with haste
to see her, Luke 1. 39-55.
and, entering into her House, saluted her, which when Elizabeth heard, she felt
the Infant leaping in her Womb for Joy; and being filled with the Holy Ghost,
she spoke out with a loud Voice and said; Blessed art thou among Women, and
blessed is the Fruit of thy Womb! How great a Felicity is this to me, that the
Mother of my Lord should come unto me? And having informed the Virgin, That her
Child leaped in her Womb, she added; Blessed art thou because thou have
believed; for the Things, which have been told thee from the Lord, shall be
accomplished. These Commendations did not at all puff up the Virgin's Heart
with Pride; she could not be unsensible of the Favors which God had bestowed
on her; but being desirous to give him all the Glory, and not daring to
attribute any thing that the Lord had wrought in her, to her Faith, she
referred all to the Mercy of her Creator, saying, My Soul does magnify the
Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior; for he has regarded the
lowliness of his Handmaid. She adds, That God is pleased, when he sees fit, to
do great Things for his mean Creatures; That he loves to exalt the Humble and
debase the Proud; and that, lastly, He is faithful to his Promises, because he
made her the Mother of his Son, That he might perform the Promises which he had
made to Abraham, and the other Patriarchs.

IV. The Nativity of S. John.
Luke 1. 56-80.
Mary continued Three Months with her Cousin, and then returned to her own
House. In the mean while, Elizabeth's Time of Delivery came, and her Relations
and Cousins met together, to rejoice with her concerning the Birth of her Son.
On the Eighth Day, when he was to be circumcised and named, they all gave him
the Name of Zachary, as his Father was called; but Elizabeth opposed them,
desiring he should be named John, as God had commanded by the Angel. They
answered her, That there was none of her Family called by that Name, and made
Signs to his Father, that he should show them his Will about it: And he
required Writing-Tables, and wrote thereon, His Name must be called John; and
immediately his Tongue was loosed, and his Speech being restored to him, he
made use of it to praise God: But all that had been Witnesses of these
Miracles, and all that heard him speak were astonished, and said one to
another, What manner of Child shall this be? How great, how holy a Man?

But that, which they were ignorant of, was revealed to Zacharias, who being
filled with the Holy Spirit, understood the Mystery of the Incarnation, and the
part his Son was to have in that Mystery; whereupon he prophesied, and said,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his People.
He adds as the Virgin had done in her Song, That God has raised out of the
House of David a Savior of the World, to perform the Promises which he had
made to Abraham, and renewed often by the Mouth of his Prophets: And then he
sums up all the Benefits of the Incarnation in a few Words; he has promised
us, That we, being delivered from the Power of our Enemies, might serve him, by
walking before him in Holiness and Righteousness all the Days of our Life. Then
he speaks these Words to his Son. And thou, Child, shall be called the Prophet
of the most high; for thou shall go before the Face of the Lord, to prepare his
Ways, and to give Knowledge of Salvation, to his People, for the Remission of
their Sins. And indeed God did fulfill what Zachary had foretold of his Son; and
that he might fit this Infant for the great Office he designed him, he made him
eminent in all Spiritual Gifts, and kept him in the Deserts, till the Time of
his appearing to his People Israel.

V. God reveals the Conception of Jesus Christ to Joseph.
While the Fame of those Miracles, which happened at the Birth of John, Matthew.
1.18-25.
spread it self over all the Hill-Country of Judea, the Holy Virgin being
returned to Nazareth, meditated in deep Silence upon the Mystery which God had
wrought in her: She had not told Joseph what had befaln her, but her Bigness
discovered it, and he perceived she was with Child: But being an Holy and Pious
Man, he was not willing to disgrace her publicly, whereupon he resolved to put
her away privately: And in this Purpose he continued, till an Angel appearing
to him in a Dream, said unto him, Joseph, thou Son of David, fear not to take
unto thee Mary thy Wife; for the Child that is conceived in her, is the Work of
the Holy Ghost. She shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his Name
Jesus, because he is the Person which shall save his People from their Sins.
Joseph submitted to this Command, and remained with his Wife, both of them
living in perfect Chastity: And so that which God had long before foretold by
the Prophet Isaiah, was fulfilled, A Virgin shall conceive and bring forth a
Son, Isai. 7.14.
which shall be called Immanuel, which, being interpreted, is God with us.

VI. The Divine Generation of Jesus Christ.
The Time being come when the Virgin should be delivered, she brought forth
Jesus Christ, in the manner which we shall hereafter speak of: But before we
relate the History of this Birth, it is necessary to give an account of the
Person, who was born. Men describe the Genealogies of the Grandees of the
World, that they may make them honorable by the Nobility of their Parentage
and great Actions of their Ancestors, who have no Worth of their own to render
them remarkable. Matthew. 1.1-17. Luke 3. 23-38.
Mary brought forth a Son, of whom the Gospel recites Two Pedigrees and Two
Births, because he had Two Natures: Jesus Christ is both God and Man, and has
united in one Person the Divine and Human Nature. As he is Man, he is descended
of a numerous Succession of Ancestors: As he is God, he has only God for his
Father; as Man, he was born in Time, but as God he was born and is from all
Eternity. What S. John, in the beginning of his Gospel teaches us concerning
his Divine and Eternal Generation, and for what Reasons he became Incarnate, is
this.

He says, That Jesus Christ, as God, is the Word, John 1.1-14.
i. e. the Thought or Speech of God: When a Man thinks, he forms an Idea or
Spiritual Image of the Thing he thinks of, and this Image is called the Word,
i. e. the Speech of the Mind; for it is by the Thoughts that the Mind reasons
with, and speaks to it self. God is a pure Spirit, who knows himself most
perfectly, and that from all Eternity. He thinks then, in knowing himself, and
forms an exact Image of himself; and this Image is his Word. But this Word
infinitely excels all the Thoughts of Men in this, That he is a Thought
subsisting by himself, and a distinct Person from him, that formed it, but yet
the same God with him. The Two Persons love each other infinitely, from all
Eternity; and this Eternal Love is a Third Person, called the Holy Spirit, who
is also the same God, and of the same Nature with the Two other Persons, from
whom he proceeds. This is what the Holy Scripture teaches us of the Holy
Trinity, which is nothing else but the God which we worship, One in Three
Persons, of which the Second is called not only the Son, because he is begotten
of the Father, to whom the Name of Father is given for that Reason, but also
the Word, because he is the Thought, or interior Speech of the First Person,
which begat him by knowing himself, and that from all Eternity, because he
knows himself from all Eternity. And upon this Ground it is that S. John
says, That in the Beginning, i. e. when the World began, the Word was, and the
Word was, in, or with God, for the Thought is in the Mind that forms it; and
that he was God, it being the Property of this Word, as we have said, to be the
same thing with the Being, that begets it.

He is then, as he is God, the Creator of all Things, which makes the
Evangelist say, That all things were made by him, and nothing was made without
him: Whence it is that in Scripture he is called sometimes, the Wisdom of God,
because he was begotten of the Knowledge of his Father. Sometimes the Arm and
Power of God, because God made all Things by him. S. John goes on, and says,
That Life was in him, and that as in its Sourse and Original, because all
things that have Life live by him. He says further, That this Life was the
Light of Men; for Men being Rational Creatures, have Souls enlightened by his
Wisdom and Truth, which are his real and true-Life; and when Wisdom and the
Light of Truth are quite extinct in the Soul, it is dead, as much as is
possible for a Soul to die. Now the Word is that very eternal Truth and Wisdom
which enlighteneth, as S. John says, every Man, and by the Participation of
which all Souls are wise and true, their Truth and Wisdom being nothing else
but an efflux of that Essential and Infinite Wisdom, which is the Word of God.
The Evangelist adds, That this Light shined in Darkness, i. e. among Men buried
in the Night of Sin, so that the Darkness could not perceive it: And for this
end it was that God sent a Man, whose Name was John, of whose miraculous Birth
we have already spoken, that he might make it known to Men, whose Blindness
hindered them from a clear Sight of it; which Office, how well he discharged, we
shall hereafter see. That the Word was in the World, and the World knew him
not, i. e. the Lovers of the World, who were so enamoured with the Creatures
that all their Affections and Reverence was entirely averted from God. That his
own, that is to say, Men, who are his Creatures, but chiefly the Jews, who were
his People, did not receive him, and by rejecting him, who was God, they had
lost the great Advantages which they might have hoped for by him; for to as
many as received him, by believing in his Name, he gave Power to be made the
Children of God; not by a Corporeal Birth, such as Men have one from another,
but by a Spiritual Birth, which they take from God himself. Birth of Christ p.
23

The Birth of JESUS CHRIST

And to procure such an excellent Birth for Men, the Word, says the
Evangelist, was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, i. e. was made Man; and he,
that as God, was born of his Father from Eternity, was as Man born in Time of
the Virgin; of which Birth we shall now speak.

VII. The Human Birth of Jesus Christ.
Augustus, the Roman Emperor, Luke 2. 1-20.
being desirous to know the Number of all his Subjects, published an Edict,
commanding every Person to go and be registered in his Native City. In Obedience
to which Order, Joseph went up from Galilee, with the Holy Virgin, to
Bethlehem, a City of Judah, to have his Name enrolled there, because he was of
the House and Lineage of David: For this Prince was born at Bethlehem, which is
therefore called in the Gospel, The City of David. While they were there, her
Time came, that the Holy Virgin should be delivered, And she brought forth
Jesus Christ, wrapped him in Swaddling Clothes, and because there was no Room
in the Inn, laid him in a Manger. Not far from thence there were certain
Shepherds, who kept their Flocks by Night; these Men, all of a sudden, were
encompassed with a great Light, and saw an Angel, which said unto them; Fear
not, for I bring you good News, which shall fill all People with great Joy,
which is, that this Day there is born in the City of David a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord; and by this Sign ye shall know him, ye shall find the Infant
wrapped in Swaddling Clothes and lying in a Manger. As soon as they had
received this Message from God, they heard a great number of those blessed
Spirits, praising God, and saying; Glory be to God in the height of Heaven, and
on Earth Peace to the Men of his good-liking, i. e. to all truly penitent
Sinners and sincere new Creatures. As soon as the Angels were departed, the
Shepherds went in haste to Bethlehem, where they found Mary and Joseph with the
Babe, who was laid in a Manger; and they acknowledged the Truth of what the
Angel had said unto them. Then they returned glorifying God, published the
Miracles which they had seen, and raised an Admiration in all those that heard
them: But Mary seriously meditated upon all these Things in her Mind, and was
careful to keep a faithful Remembrance of them.

VIII. The Circumcision of Jesus Christ.
Luke 2.21. Lev. 12.3. Genesis 17.12.
By the Law of Moses, every Male Child ought to be circumcised within eight
Days, after the Birth, according to the Command which God had given to Abraham;
for God being about to give this Patriarch a Son, of whose Posterity our
Redeemer should be born, and entering into a Covenant with him to be kept by all
his Posterity, he instituted Circumcision, as a Seal and Sign of that Covenant,
threatening to cut off that Male Child from his People, which shall not be
Circumcised. Abraham himself, and all the Jews, his Posterity, did exactly
observe this Law, and Jesus Christ was willing to submit to it himself;
wherefore the Gospel observes, That he was Circumcised the Eighth Day, and that
he was named JESUS, which was the Name that the Angel had ordered to be given
him before his Conception.

IX. The Adoration of the Magi.
Matthew. 2.1-12.
The Holy Virgin and Joseph continuing still at Bethlehem, the Magi, which were
certain great Philosophers and Astronomers, came from the East to Jerusalem,
and asked, Where the Person was, who was, lately, born King of the Jews?
saying, Numb. 24.17.
That they had seen a Star in the East, signifying his Birth, and conducting
them thither, and were come to worship him. This Question much surprised the
People of Jerusalem, and above all troubled Herod, who was then King of the
Jews. Whereupon he assembled the Chief Priests, and the most learned in the Law
among the Jews, to be informed of them, Where the Messiah, which they expected,
should be born, for he believed that it was he, that the Magi enquired after,
under the Name of the King of the Jews? They answered him, At Bethlehem,
according to the Prophecy of Micah; And thou Bethlehem, Mic. 5.2.
in the Land of Judah, art not the least among the principal Cities of that
Tribe; for out of thee shall come a Governor, that shall rule my People Israel.

Herod, as soon as he had received this Information, sent for the Magi
privately to him, and enquired of them, At what Time the Star, they spoke of,
was seen by them? and sending them to Bethlehem, said unto them; Go, and search
diligently for the young Child, which ye desire to see; and when ye have found
him, let me know it, that I may also pay him the like Adoration. Being just got
into the Way to Bethlehem, they saw the Star again which had appeared to them
in the East; and the Gospel says, they were filled with exceeding great Joy,
for it went before them to conduct them to him, and stood over the Place where
Jesus Christ was. They immediately entered into the House, and falling down
before him they worshipped him, and offered to him, for Gifts, Gold, and
Frankincense, and Myrrh. And thus having paid their Homage, they returned into
their own Country, but did not go by Jerusalem, because they had been
admonished, in a Dream, not to return again to Herod.

X. The Presentation of Jesus Christ in the Temple.
The Holy Virgin and Joseph, having so punctually observed the Law of
Circumcision, were not less exact in the performance of Two other Commandments
of the Law, the One of which concerned Mothers, the other their Firstborn
Children. Lev. 12.2-8.
The First of these obliges every Woman, after her Delivery, not to touch any
hallowed Thing for a certain Time, nor to go into the Temple for Forty Days
after the Birth of a Son and Fourscore Days after the Birth of a Daughter; and,
at the End of that Term, the Mother shall go to the Temple to be purified; for
which end she must offer a Lamb for a Burnt-Offering, and a Pigeon, or a
Turtle-Dove, for the Atonement of her Sins: But if she be no^ able to offer a
Lamb, she is allowed to offer ^ Pigeon or a Turtle for it; which being
sacrificed by the Priest, she is clean.

The Second Commandment of the Law, which concerns the Firstborn Children,
enjoins the Parents to present them to the Lord, and to redeem them with Money.
Exodus 13.2, 15.
Every Firstborn in Israel both of Man and Beast, was consecrated to God, b^ a
Command; which God gave them, when he slew the Firstborn of the Egyptians,
and so forced Pharaoh to let his People go out of his Land By this obliging the
Jews to keep this Benefit, i^ Remembrance for ever. But because every thing
consecrated to God was to be offered in Sacrifice to him, he contented himself
with the Sacrifices of Beasts, and would have Children to be redeemed Not but
that Children might have been devoted to God after another manner, viz. to have
ministered at his Altar: But God having chose for this Service one of the Twelve
Tribes of Israel, viz. Numb. 8.16-18.
the Tribe of Levi, instead of all the Firstborn of all the other Tribes, so
that the Firstborn of all that were not of the Tribe of Levi were to be
redeemed, as not being qualified either for Sacrifices or Priests.

In obedience to these two Laws, when Forty Days were expired, after her
Delivery, Luke 2.22-32.
did the Holy Virgin and Joseph go up to Jerusalem, to offer the Sacrifice
prescribed by the Law for her Purification; and the Gospel observes, That she
offered the Sacrifice commanded such as were poor, viz. Two Turtle-Doves, or
Two Young Pigeons. At the same Time they carried Jesus Christ along with them,
to present him to the Lord, and they redeemed him, being not of the Tribe of
Levi, but of the Tribe of Judah. While they were in the Temple, came in an Holy
Old Man, named Simeon, by the Direction of the Holy Spirit. He was an Holy Man,
and one that feared God, who was filled with the Spirit and longed earnestly
for the coming of the Redeemer, by whom God had promised to comfort his People.
The same Spirit which inspired him with a Desire and Expectation of a Savior,
had promised him, That he should not dye, till he had seen him; wherefore, when
the Holy Virgin and Joseph brought Jesus into the Temple, this Holy Old Man,
being excited by Divine Inspiration, came in, took the Child up in his Arms;
blessed God for the Accomplishment of his Promise made to him, and begged that
he might dye, because his Eyes had seen the Savior which God would show to all
the World, to be a Light to the Gentiles, and an Honor to his People Israel.

When Joseph and Mary had seen and heard these things, they were taken with
great Admiration, till Simeon turning himself to them, blessed them, and said
to the Holy Virgin, That this Child, which she had presented to God, should be
the occasion of the Misery or Happiness of many Israelites, and a Mark for
obdurate Sinners to level their malicious Obloquies, and Contradictions at;
which though they should discover the evil Thoughts and Dispositions of several
Persons, yet, like a cutting Sword, they shall wound her own Soul with Grief
and Sorrow. In the same instant came in also an Holy Widow, called Anna, a
Woman of about Fourscore Years old, who had the Gift of Prophecy, and abode
continually in the Temple, serving God with Fasting and Prayers Night and Day:
She also saw Jesus Christ, and knew him by the same Inspiration that had
discovered him to Simeon, wherefore she gave Thanks to God for the Mercy he had
bestowed upon the World, in giving them a Savior, and made him known to be the
Messiah, to all those that waited for his coming.

XI. Jesus 's Flight into Egypt.
Matthew. 2. 12-23.
The Holy Virgin and Joseph, having performed all that was commanded by the Law,
returned from Jerusalem, and went down to Nazareth: But Herod, who waited for
the coming back of the Magi, that he might know of them where the New King was,
and so get him into his own Power, seeing himself disappointed of his
Expectations, because, as it is said before, they were gone home another way,
fell into an extreme Passion, and resolved to slay all the Children in
Bethlehem, and in the adjoining Villages, that were not above Two Years old;
and accordingly put it in Execution, thinking in this barbarous Massacre to
include him, whose Destruction he chiefly aimed at: But God prevented the
Cruelty of this Prince, and so ordered it, that of all the Children, whose
Blood was shed, as Jesus was the only one, that he sought to kill, so he was
the only one that escaped; for God, by his Angel, warned Joseph, in a Dream, of
the Designs, that Herod had to take away his Life, and commanded him, To take
the Child and his Mother, and fly into Egypt, and remain there, till further
orders. Joseph immediately obeyed this Command, and fled into Aegpt; where,
after the Death of Herod, the same Angel appeared to him, and bid him return,
because he, that sought to destroy the Savior of the World, was himself dead.
Then did Joseph immediately go into the Land of Israel, with Jesus Christ and
the Holy Virgin: But hearing that Archilaus reigned in Judea, in his Father
Herod's stead, he was afraid to go thither, but, being admonished of God in a
Dream, to go into Galilee, he fixed his Dwelling in the City of Nazareth, God
thus accomplishing the Prophecies, which did foretell, That he should be called
a Nazarene.

XII. Jesus's Disputation with the Doctors.
In this Abode with his Parents at Nazareth, Luke 2.40-52.
the Child Jesus grew and waxed strong, being full of Wisdom and Grace. When he
was Twelve Years old, he went to Jerusalem, with Joseph and the Holy Virgin,
who every Year went thither at the Passover; and after the Feast he continued
there without their Knowledge, so that they returned without him, supposing
that he went along with some of their Company, either behind them or before
them: But after they had gone a Day's Journey, and found him not, neither among
the Company, nor yet with their Kindred and Acquaintance, they turned back
again to Jerusalem, to seek him; where, after Three Days, they found him in the
Temple, sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them and asking them
Questions, and raising Admiration, in all that heard him, at his Understanding
and Answers. The Holy Virgin and Joseph were much surprised to see him in that
Place, and his Mother telling him, how much they were troubled at the loss of
him, and the Pains they had taken to find him, said to him, Why have thou dealt
thus with us? He answered them, Why did ye seek me? Did ye not know that I must
necessarily be employed in promoting the Service of my Father? They did not
understand this Answer, but the Virgin kept all these Words in her Heart. Then
Jesus went down to Nazareth with them; and the Gospel says, That he was subject
to them, and increased not only in Age, but in Wisdom and in Favor both with
God and with Man.

XIII. The Preaching of John the Baptist.
While John was in the Desert God enriched him with the Gifts of his Spirit,
Matt. 3.1.
and in that Retirement fitted him for the great Employment he designed him, as
Jesus himself was secretly fitted for the Offices of his Ministry in Joseph's
House: They both waited with Patience for the Time which God has appointed for
the Exercise and Execution of them. And because Jesus Christ was not to appear
till John had preached him, therefore God brought him first out of his Retreat.
This Holy Forerunner of Christ therefore in the Fifteenth Year of Tiberius
Caesar, by the Divine Order, did go into the Wilderness of Judea, and into all
the Country round about Jordan, preaching the Baptism of Repentance, not that
which procures Remission of Sins, Mar. 1.4.
but which disposes Men to receive Pardon, and was a Figure of the Baptism
which Jesus Christ afterward appointed. This Office and Ministry of S. John was
foretold by Two Prophets, which are cited by the Evanlists; Mal. 3.1.
the one calls him the Messenger or Angel of God, which should go before Jesus
Christ, to prepare his Ways before him: The other saying, Isai. 40.3.
That they shall hear the Voice of him that cries in the Wilderness, Prepare
ye the Way of the Lord; and then, every Valley shall be filled, and every
Mountain and Hill shall be made low; the crooked Paths shall be made straight,
and the rough Places plain: Which figurative Expressions import nothing, but
that a thorough Reformation of Men's Manners shall then begin, and be completed
by the Preaching of Christ.

He began his Preaching with these Words, Matthew. 3.1-6.
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand; and to gain the greater
Authority, to his Sermons, he preached Repentance, as well by his Example as
Words, for he was clothed with Camel's Hair, and wore a Leathern Girdle about
his Loins, and lived upon Locusts and wild Honey; a course Garb and Food
suitable for a Penitent: And certainly such a Preacher, as first practices what
himself teaches, must needs be extraordinarily followed. And so indeed he was,
for all Jerusalem, and all the Country round about Jordan, and all Judea
flocked to him, and confessing their Sins, were baptized of him in Jordan.

Among the great Multitude that followed him, there came also certain of the
Pharisees, Matthew. 3.7-10.
and of the Sadduces, to be baptized of him. The Pharisees were a Sect among
the Jews, who professed a more perfect Knowledge and exact Observation of the
Law, and by that means had gotten themselves a great Veneration and Authority
among the People; but, as we shall see in the sequel o^ this History, they were
great Hypocrites, wh^ under the outward Varnish of Virtue and Religion,
concealed intolerable Pride and Arrogance. The Sadduces were another Sect,
which did not believe the Immortality of the Soul, or the Resurrection; they
were not so numerous a Party as the former, but the Persons of the First Rank
were generally of it: To those Persons of these Two Sects, who came to be
baptized by him, S. John speaks thus, O Generation of Vipers, full of the
Poison and Venom of Hypocrisy and Sin, wh^ has forewarned you of the Wrath
and Vengeance which shall shortly fall upon your Heads, and taught you that
Wisdom to avoid it, by coming to me by Repentance? Bring forth therefore Fruit^
worthy of Repentance: And think not to say within your selves, that you are
secure, because you have Abraham to your Father, for God can out of these
Stones raise up Children unto Abraham: And indeed, the Ax is now laid to the
Root of the Tree therefore every Tree which brings not good Fruit shall be
cut down and cast into the Fire.

Luke 3.10-14.
The People, the Publicans, i. e. the Farmer^ and Receivers of the Tribute, and
the Soldiers* asked him, What they should do? He answere^ the People, He that
has Two Coats and Food, let him impart to him that has none. He admonishes
the Publicans to exact no more than what is appointed them; and the Soldiers,
To be content with their Pay, and not to do Violence, nor Cheat or Plunder any
Man.

Luke 2.15-17. Matthew. 3.11, 12.
These wise Answers, being accompanied with so innocent and austere a Life,
begat so great an Opinion of John in the Minds of the People, that they
generally believed that he was the Christ, i. e. the Messiah, so long expected:
To remove this Prejudice concerning himself, he told them, That he baptized
them with Water only, but there comes another, adds he, who is mightier than
I, whose Shoes I am not worthy to bear, or unty, he shall baptize you with the
Holy Ghost and with Fire: He has a Fan in his Hand, and he shall thoroughly
cleanse his Floor; He will gather the Wheat into his Garner, and shall burn up
the Chaff with unquenchable Fire.

XIV. Jesus Christ is baptized by John.
At the same Time that all Judea went to be baptized by S. John in Jordan,
Jesus Christ, Matthew. 3.13 17. Mark 1.9-12. Luke 3.21, 22.
being about Thirty Years of Age, departed from Nazareth, where he had
patiently waited for the Time of exercising his Ministry, which he came into
the World to perform, and therefore went to Jordan, to be baptized by his
Forerunner, among others: But S. John; not being able to endure this great
Humility, opposed his Desire with all earnestness, saying to him, I ought to be
baptized by thee, and come thou to me? But Jesus answered him, Suffer it to
be, as I will, for this Time, for so it becomes us, to fulfill all
righteousness. S. John then submitted to this Command, and baptized Jesus; who
being baptized, went out of the Water, and betook himself to Prayers. And, as
he was praying, the Holy Ghost descended upon him in a bodily Shape, like a
Dove, and remained on him; and a Voice from Heaven uttered these Words, Thou
art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: Then Jesus, being full of the
Spirit, returned from Jordan; and the same Spirit conducted him, and drove him
immediately into the Wilderness.

XV. Jesus Fasting and Temptation.
Mat. 4.1.-11. Lu. 4.2.13. Mar. 1.12.13.
Jesus having passed forty days without eating, or drinking in the Wilderness,
whither the Spirit had conducted him that he might be tempted of the Devil, was
contented after so long a Fast to undergo the pressures of hunger, that he
might give the Devil an opportunity to tempt him. Then the Devil came unto him,
and said unto him. If thou be the Son of God, command that these Stones be made
Bread. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
But Jesus answered him, Man does not live by bread alone, but by every word,
that proceeds out of the Mouth of God.

Then the Devil carries him up to the top of the Temple of Jerusalem, and
enticeth him to cast himself down from thence, that he might prove that he was
the Son of God; for it is written, says he to him, Ps. 91.11.
That God will give his Angels charge concerning thee to keep thee, and in
their hands they shall bear thee, that thou do not hurt thy self. Jesus
answered this place of Scripture by another, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God. Deuteronomy. 6.16.


After this the Devil sets him upon a high Mountain, from whence he showed
him in a moment all the Kingdoms of the World, with all the Splendour and Pomp
that attends them, and promised him all those things, if he would fall down
before him and Worship him, for they are given to me, says he falsely, and I
give them to whom I please: Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Then Jesus answered him, Get the hence Satan, for it is written, Thou shall
Worship the Lord thy God, and serve none but him only. The Devil having thus
finished all the temptation without success, departed for a time; and the
Angels came to Jesus Christ, and readily tendered themselves to minister unto
him.

XVI. St. John's Testimony concerning Jesus Christ
After these things Jesus being come out of the Wilderness went to Bethabara,
Jo. 1.15.-18.
the place where John was Preaching, and Baptizing. This faithful Forerunner,
when he saw him, could not but bare witness of him before all that heard him,
and therefore cried out with a loud voice, This is He, of whom I spoke; He that
comes after me is preferred before me, for he was before me; he adds, We have
received of his Fullness a sufficiency of all Graces, for the Law was given by
Moses, but Jesus Christ has brought Grace and Truth to the World, and that the
only begotten, who is in the Bosom of the Father, is come to discover God to
us, whom no man has ever seen.

Notwithstanding John spoke thus honorably, Jo. 1.19.-28.
and plainly of the Messiah, the Jews took him for the Person he spoke of, and
therefore sent certain Priests, and Levites, who were Pharisees, and
consequently much admired by the people, to enquire of him, Who he was? And he
freely confessed and denied not, but owned, that he was not the Christ, for so
the Gospel delivers the Confession of St. John and the Testimony which he gave
of Jesus to these Messengers. Then they asked, whether he were Elias or some
other Prophet? And when he had answered them that he was not, They said to him,
Who art thou then, that we may give an answer to them that sent us? What say
thou of thy self? I am, says he, the Voice of one Crying in the Wilderness,
Make strait the ways of the Lord. They urged, Why then Baptizest thou, if thou
art not the Messiah nor a Prophet? He replied, It is true I Baptize with Water,
but there is one among you whom ye know not, He it is, who coming after me, is
preferred before me, whose Shoo-strings I am not worthy to unloose.

The next day John sees Jesus Christ coming unto him, Jo. 1.29.-34.
and being unwilling to lose so good an opportunity of discovering him, he
says to them that were with him, Behold the Lamb of God, This is He, that
bears and takes away the Sins of the World. He adds, That this was He, of whom
he had spoken so much already, and he assures them, that he saw the spirit
descending and remaining upon him in the shape of a Dove, and that he had been
taught by Revelation, that this was He, that should Baptize with the Holy Ghost.

XVII. Jesus Christ calling Disciples.
Jo. 1.35.-42.
The next day Jesus passed again through the same place two hours before
Sunset, and St. John, who was there with two of his Disciples, said as soon as
he saw him, Behold the Lamb of God. The two Disciples hearing these words,
followed Jesus, who turning himself about demanded of them, Whom seek ye? They
answered, Master where dwell thou? he says unto them, Come and see. They
went with him and abode with him that day. One of these two Disciples named
Andrew, had a Brother called Simon, to whom he said, We have found the Messiah,
and he brought him to Jesus, who having considered him, said unto him, Thou art
Simon the Son of Jonas, thou shall be called Peter.

The day following the Son of God going into Galilee, Jo. 1.43.-51,
found one named Philip, who was of Bethsaida, of which place both Andrew and
Peter were, and he says unto him, follow me. Philip meets Nathanael, and
tells him that they had found the Messiah promised by the Law, and foretold by
the Prophets, and that Jesus of Nazareth was he. Nathanael answered, Can any
good thing come out of Nazareth? And he followed Philip, who brought him to
Jesus. As soon as Jesus saw him Behold an Israelite indeed without guile or
deceit. Nathanael astonished at his words asked him, Whence know thou me?
Jesus answered, Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the
fig tree, I saw thee. Nathanael says, Master, Thou art the Son of God, thou
art the King of Israel. Jesus answered him, Do thou believe because I said
unto thee, that I saw thee under the fig tree? thou shall see greater things.
Verily, verily I say unto thee, Hereafter thou shall see Heaven opened, and the
Angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of Man, to attend his
triumphant Ascension into the Glories of his Father.

XVIII. The first Miracle that Jesus did.
The third day after his departure from the River Jordan Jesus was at a
Marriage in Cana of Galilee, Jo. 2.1.-11.
to which the Holy Virgin was also invited, and his Disciples. At this
solemnity there being a great want of Wine, the Holy Virgin pitying the
unseasonable scarcity, said to her Son, They have no Wine. But Jesus being
desirous to teach us that in those Actions, wherein the Service and Honor of
God is concerned, we ought to have no respect to Man, but even our Parents
themselves are to be looked upon as Strangers, says unto his Mother, What is
that to you or me? mine hour is not yet come. The Holy Virgin was not at all
disturbed, or discouraged at this answer, but bid them that waited, to do
whatsoever he commanded them. Now there were six great Water-potts of Stone,
which were used in the Purifications, which were common among the Jews. The Son
of God orders them to fill them with Water, and when they were full, he says
unto the Servants, Draw out now and carry it to the Governor of the Feast.
Having tasted of it, and perceiving it to be excellent Wine, but not knowing
whence it was, tells the Bridegroom, that he had done contrary to the Custom,
because he had kept the best Wine till the end of the Banquet. This change of
Water into Wine was the first Miracle that Jesus did, and it was of great use
to manifest his Glory, and confirm his Disciples in their Faith in him.

XIX. Jesus drives the Merchants out of the Temple.
Jo. 2.12,-25.
From Cana he went with his Mother, Kindred, and Disciples to Caparnaum, a City
of the same Province of Galilee, where he stayed but a little while, because
the Feast of the Passover being near, he went up to Jerusalem. Being there, he
found in the Temple certain Merchants, who sold Oxen, and Sheep, and Doves, and
the Changers of the Money sitting at their Tables. And he immediately made a
Whip with Cords, and drove them all out of the Temple, cast the Changers Money
on the Ground, and overthrew their Tables, and said unto those that Sold Doves,
Ps. 69.9.
Take these things hence, make not my Fathers house an house of Merchandise.
This Action of Jesus brought to the Disciples minds these words of Scripture,
The zeal of thy house has eaten me up; but it surpised and incensed the Jews,
who required of him a Miracle to prove his Authority of acting in that manner:
To whom he said, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will rebuild it. They
understood it of the Temple, out of which he had driven the Traders, but he
meant it of his Body, which should be destroyed by Death, and raised again the
third day. He did many Miracles at the Passover in Jerusalem, which continues
seven days; and many Persons believed in his Name, but he would not trust
himself with those, who were won only by Miracles, because he knew the bottom
of their hearts, and exactly discerned, what was unsound, and imperfect in
their Faith.

XX. The Discourse between J. Christ and Nicodemus.
While Jesus was at Jerusalem, Jo. 3.1.-12.
a Jewish Ruler of the Sect of the Pharisees, came to him by night, and said
unto him, Master, We know that thou art a Teacher come from God, for no man can
do those Miracles, that thou do, except God be with him. From hence Jesus
takes an Occasion to teach this Pharisee the necessity of Baptism in order to
Salvation, saying unto him, Except a Man be born of Water, and of the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. To which he adds these important
Truths, That which is born of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is born of
the spirit, is spirit, and that the Spirit inspires whom it pleases. Nicodemus
being surpised, asked him, how can this be? Jesus reproving his Ignorance,
that he was a Doctor, and knew not these things, says unto him, We testify
what we have seen, and ye receive not our Witness.

He then discovers these Mysteries of our Religion to him, Jo. 3.13.-20.
That no Man has ascended up to Heaven, but the Son of Man that came from
Heaven: That the Brazen Serpent which Moses put upon a Pole in the Wilderness,
that all those, who were bitten by the fiery Serpents, by looking upon it might
be healed of their VVounds, was but a Figure of him, who was fixed unto the
Cross for the deliverance of all those that believe in him, from Eternal Death;
That he was sent into the World not to condemn the World, but to save it; That
so great was the love of God toward Men, that he gave them his only begotten
Son to die for them; but this Love will be a just cause of Condemnation to all
those that believe not in this Son* and receive not this Light, that is, come
to enlighten them, loving rather to continue in darkness, because they will not
bring their Works to the Light of Truth, lest they should be convinced
thereby, that the Actions, which they so much delight in, are criminal and
sinful.

XXI. St. John's second Testimony concerning Jesus.
Jo. 3.23.-27.
Jesus being come from Jerusalem after the Feast, tarryed in Judea with his
Disciples, and there Baptized, at the same time that John administered his
Baptism in Jordan. Here the Disciples of John had a dispute with the Jews about
Baptism And they came to their Master, and spoke to him concerning Jesus,
Saying, He, to whom thou bear Witness, does now Baptize, and all men flock
to him. St. John, who would not have gathered Disciples, but that he might
resign them to the Son of God, answered them; A man can receive nothing except
it be given him from Heaven, signifying by this answer, that he acted in his
Ministry only by the power and command of him who had called him to it,

Jo. 3.28.-36.
He then puts them in mind of the Protestations, which he had made before them,
That he was not the Christ. He tells them, that he is not the Bridegroom of the
Church, but the Bridegroom's Friend only. And in that Quality 'twas his only
Joy, and delight to hear the Bridegroom's Voice. He goes on, and says, He must
increase, but I must decrease. He adds, that Jesus Christ came from above, and
therefore is above all; that he speaks what he has seen and heard, and that he
that receives his Testimony, acknowledges that God is true, because God has
sent him, and has not given his Spirit by measure to him, but because he
loves him, he has given all things into his hands: That Jesus Christ is the
Son of God, and he that believes in him, has eternal Life; and on the
contrary, he that believes not, shall not see Life, but is an Object of the
Wrath of God, which shall not depart from him.

XXII. John 's Imprisonment.
St. John did not think he had discharged his Office sufficiently, Mat.
14.3.-5. Mar. 6.17.-20. Lu. 3.19, 20.
in discovering Jesus to be the Messiah at the River Jordan, but he went to the
Princes Court to Preach true Morality and Piety. Herod Antipas, the Son of
Herod the Great, in whose Reign Jesus Christ was Born, and his Successor in one
fourth part of his Kingdom (from whence he is called Herod the Tetrarch) had
Married contrary to all Laws, Herodias his Brother Philips Wife: John went to
reprove him for this Crime, and for all the other evils, which he had done and
told him confidently, that it was not Lawful for him to have her for his Wife,
who was his Brothers Wife. Herod was not presently angry with this Holy Man,
but on the contrary, believing him to be a Just Man, and an Holy, he had a
great Respect and Veneration for him, yea, he feared him, was a diligent Hearer
of him, and followed his advice in many things.

But Herodias was not so well affected to John, for she hated him Mortally, and
sought all Occasions to destroy him. By her instigation Herod became every day
more averse to him, and at length to please her, apprehended him, and put him
into Prison. He had at that time put him to Death, but that he feared the
People, who accounted of, and reverenced John as a Prophet. When Jesus knew
that John was put into Prison, and that the Pharisees had heard that he made
and Baptized more Disciples than John (though he Baptized no Man himself, Jo.
4.1.-4.
but by his Disciples) he left Judea, and returned into Galilee through Samaria.

XXIII. The Samaritan Woman.
Jo. 4.5.-11.
About noon Jesus came to a City of Samaria, named Sychar; and being wearied
with his Journey, he sat down on the brink of a Fountain, called Jacob's Well,
in a parcel of Ground, which that Patriarch gave long since to his Son Joseph.
A certain Woman of this Country came to fetch Water at this Well, and Jesus
says unto her, Give me to drink. This Woman, who thought him to be a Jew,
wondered that he would accept such a piece of Service from her, who was a
Samaritan, for the Jews abhor the Samaritans, and will have no commerce with
them, because they being Strangers had possessed themselves of part of their
Country, and had changed the Laws of Moses by several Pagan Superstitions,
which they mixed with it. This her surprise she discovered to Jesus, who said
unto her, If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that desires drink of
thee, thou would have asked of him thy self, and he would have given thee
Living Water.

The Woman understood these words in the literal sense, Jo. 4.12.-18.
and not knowing but he would draw the Living Water either out of that or some
other Well, She replied, Master, thou have nothing to draw with, and the Well
is deep, how then will thou get this Living Water? Art thou greater than our
Father Jacob who gave us this Well, and drank of it himself, and all his
Family? Jesus answered, He that drinks of this Water shall thirst again, but he
that shall drink of the Water that I will give him, shall never thirst, but it
shall become a Well in him springing up unto eternal Life, which he meant,
either of that Grace, which quenches all humane desires of Earthly and Carnal
Enjoyments, or else of his Celestial glory, which shall perfectly satisfy all
our Appetites. But the Samaritan Woman understood it of Corporeal Water,
which made her to say to Jesus Christ with great earnestness, Lord, give me
this Water, that being a-thirst no more, I may not be forced to come hither to
draw. Jesus said to her, Go, call thy Husband: She answered that she had no
Husband; whereupon Jesus replied, Thou have good cause to say so, for thou have
had five Husbands, and he that thou now have is not thy Husband: in this thou
have said truly.

By these words she perceived that he knew how she had lived; and she said unto
him, Jo. 4.19.-26.
either to divert his discourse to a more pleasing Subject, or that she might
get some Advantage, and Instruction from a Person so knowing, Lord I am
sensible that thou art a Prophet, I pray resolve me this controversy: Our
Fathers worshipped upon this Mountain, and ye say that Jerusalem is the place
where Men ought to Worship, Which of us are in the Right? Jesus takes an
occasion to tell this Woman that God being a Spirit, and the Truth, he will be
adored in Spirit and Truth, and be known by those that worship him; that this
Worship depends not upon Places, and the time is coming when he shall be
worshipped in that manner only. She replied, I know that Messiah will come, and
when he is come, he will Instruct us thoroughly in these matters. Whereupon
Jesus said unto her, I am the very Messiah that thou speak of.

In the mean time his Disciples, who were gone into the City to buy Food, Jo.
4.27.-34.
came and wondered to see him Discourse so freely with the Woman, but the
respect, which they had for him, hindered them from demanding the Reason of it.
Nevertheless she left her Pitcher there, and went into the City, and said to
the Inhabitants, Come and see the Man, who has told me all that ever I did. Is
not this the Christ? Jesus remained still at the Well. And when his Disciples
earnestly desired him to eat; he said unto them, I have meat to eat, which ye
know not of; and then he explains to them, what sort of meat he meant, in these
Words, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his Work^
This Work was the Salvation of Man, and his Meat was the Faith of those, who
were converted by his Preachings.

Soon after these things the Woman, with whom Jesus had talked, Jo. 4.39.-42.
returned with the Inhabitants of Sychar, who believing on him already, because
of the Woman's words, came to desire him to abide with them. He stayed with them
two days, and by his Discourses much confirmed them in the Faith, and increased
the number of those that believed in his Name: Insomuch that they said unto the
Woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying: for we have heard him our
selves, and we know that this is certainly the Christ, the Savior of the World.

The End of the First Book.
BOOK. II.
The History of what Jesus Christ Did and Taught, in the First two Years of his
Preaching.
I. His Preaching in Galilee.
WHEN the two days were expired, Matt. 4.12.-17. Mar. 1.14, 15. Lu. 4.14, 15.
Jo. 4.43,-45.
Jesus went on his intended Journey into Galilee, being filled with the power
of the Spirit, and was joyfully received by the Galileans, because they had
seen the Miracles which he did at Jerusalem at the Feast of the Passover. Here
he began to Preach the Gospel, that is to say, the Joyful news of the Kingdom
of God, which he came to publish to the World, saying The time is come, The
Kingdom of God is at hand, Repent ye and believe the Gospel. And this he taught
in all the Synagogues of this Province with great success; for he was highly
esteemed with all Men, and his Fame went abroad into all that Country.

Jesus being again at Cana of Galilee, where he made the Water Wine, Jo.
4.46,-53.
there came a certain Noble Man to him, who desired him to go down with him to
Capernaum to heal his Son who was at the Point of Death. Jesus knowing the
thoughts of his Heart, and the Imperfections of his Faith, Book II.
said unto him, Except ye see Signs and Wonders, ye shall not believe. But this
Lord (when was one of Herod's Courtiers) being very earnes^ with him to go down
before his Child dyed, he answered him, Go thy way, thy Son lives. And he
believed Jesus's words, and returning home, his Sarvants met him, and brought
him the New^s of his Sons recovery. He then inquired of them what hour he began
to amend, and they told him yesterday about One a Clock in the Afternoon the
Fever left him, which was the very same hour, in which Jesus said unto him, Thy
Son i^ well. This Miracle converted the Noble Man and all his Family, and they
believed on Jesus Christ.

II. The Calling of Four Apostles.
Matt. 4.18.-22. Matt. 8.24.
On the East side of Galilee there was a great Lake which the Gospel calls a
Sea, according to the usual manner of speaking among the Jews, and sometimes it
is called the Sea of Galilee, because some part of this Province adjoyns to
this Lake and sometimes the Lake, or Sea of Gennesareth, of Tiberias, Lu. 5.1.
Jo. 21.1.
from a City of these two Names which stood upon the Shore of it. Jesus walking
by the side of this Lake saw two Fishermen casting their Nets into the Water:
The one of them was Simon, and the other Andrew his Brother, who being one of
John's Disciples, and hearing his Master say that Jesus was the Lamb of God,
followed him, and brought his Brother to him the next day. But they did not at
that time go along with him, but returned again to their Employment of Fishing.
Not far from these, there were two other Brothers, named James and John who
were with their Father Zebadee, in a Ship, mending their Nets These four
Fishermen were of Bethsaida, in a City of Galilee, situated on the South Side
of the Lake, where Jesus first saw them. He called all these Four to him, and
by his Spirit made them to forsake all, and follow him. But it is probable that
they were moved to it by a Miracle which Jesus then did, which is related by
St. Luke after this manner.

Jesus standing by the Lake of Gennesareth, Lu. 5.1,-11.
and being much crowded by the People, who pressed upon him to hear the Word of
God, saw two Ships, out of which the Fishermen were gone to wash their Nets. He
entered into one of them, which was Simons, and having caused him to thrust out
a little from the Land, he sat down, and taught the People out of it. When he
had done speaking, he said unto Simon, Launch out into the Deep, and let down
your Nets to get some Fish. Simon answered him, Master we have Toiled all
Night, and have taken nothing, yet at thy Word I will let down the Net. Having
cast the Net, they took so great a number of Fish, that their Net breaking,
they were forced to call their Companions, who were in another Ship to come and
help them: They came and filled both their Ships so full, that they could
hardly get ashore without sinking. Simon and his Companions being greatly
amazed at this Miracle, cast himself down at Jesus's feet, saying, Lord depart
from me, for I am a sinful Man. Jesus said unto him, Be not afraid, hereafter
thou shall be a Fisher of Men.

It is plain, that it was after this Miracle, that Jesus said to Simon and
Andrew, Follow me. And at the same time it is likely, that John, Mar. 1.16,-^0.
and James were called, who left their Father Zebedee in the Ship with his
hired Servants, and all four of them left their Nets, and forsook all, and
became continual followers of Jesus.

III. He healed a Man possessed at Capernaum.
Matt. 4.13,-16. Mar. 1.21,-28. Lu. 4.14, 15.
Jesus having thus gotten four Disciples, went and dwelt for some time at
Capernaum, a City of Galilee, standing upon the Banks of Jordan, just at the
mouth, where that River empties it self into the Lake of Gennesareth. In this
City he preached on the Sabbath days, and was much admired for his Doctrine by
all his Hearers, for he spoke with great Cogency, and Authority. On a certain
Sabbath as he was instructing the People in the Synagogue, there came a Man to
him, who was possessed with a Spirit of an unclean Devil, and cried out, Let us
alone, what have we to do with thee, tho^ Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to
destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the holy one God. But Jesus rebuking the
Devil, said unto him, Hold thy tongue and come out of the Man. The Devil seeing
himself forced to leave his Prey, racked him with most violent Convulsions,
threw him down upon the ground, and made him cry out with a loud Voice; but at
last left him safe, and sound. The Spectators of this Miracle were seized with
very great amazement, and said one to another, What thing is this? What new
Doctrine is this? surely it comes from Heaven, since the Teacher of it has such
Power and Authority over the unclean Spirits, i. e. the Devils, that when he
commands them they obey him, going out of those that are possessed, though
against their Wills.

IV. Jesus Christ heals Peter's Wife's Mother, and several other Sick Persons.
Matt. 8.14, 15.
Jesus, departing out of the Synagogue, went with the Two Sons of Zebadee to
Andrew and Simon's House, where he found Peter's Mother-in-Law sick of a
dangerous Fever. Mar. 1.29-31. Luke 4.38, 39.
His Disciples besought him for her, and he went to her Bed, and took her by
the Hand, and lifting her up, commanded the Fever to leave her: And the Fever
departed from her the same istant, and her Disease was perfectly cured, so that
rising from her Bed, she ministered unto them, and provided them some Victuals
to eat.

This, with the Miracle which Jesus did in the Synagogue at Capernaum, Matthew.
8.16, 17. Mark 1.32-34. Luke 4.40, 41.
being immediately known in the adjacent Towns and Villages, as well as in the
City it self, after the Sun was set, a great Multitude assembled to the House
where he was; for all that had any Persons Sick of any Distemper, carried them
to him, and he healed them all, by laying his Hands upon them: He also cured
many that were possessed with Devils, by his Word; and the Devils leaving them,
cried out with a loud Voice, Thou art the Son of God: But he rebuked them, and
would not suffer them to discover that he was the Christ, either because he
would not receive any Commendations from the Mouth of unclean Spirits, or
thought it not convenient to have the Truth published by the Father of Lies, or
because he would show the World that he had no Commerce with Devils, foreseeing
the Calumny that the Pharisees invented against him, That he did not cast out
Devils, Matthew. 12.24.
but in the Name of the Prince of the Devils.

V. Jesus Christ's Progress through Galilee.
The next Day, very early in the Morning, Mark 1.35-39.
Jesus went out alone, and gat himself into a Solitary Place, that he might
make his Prayers to God: Simon, and they that were with him, followed him, and
finding him, said unto him, All Men seek for thee, being desirous of thy
Company and Preaching. He answered them, Come then, Let us go into the
Neighboring Villages and Towns, and preach among them, Luke 4.42-44.
for this is the main Employment my Father sent me about. But the People, that
sought after him, coming to the Place, where he was, would have forced him to
stay there with them; but he said the same to them that he had done to his
Disciples before, I must preach the Gospel also to other Cities, as well as
unto you, for therefore am I sent.

Matthew. 4.23-25.
Then went Jesus throughout all Galilee, preaching in their Synagogues, and
healing all that were Sick: Insomuch that his Fame being dispersed through all
Syria, they brought to him from all Quarters those that were possessed with
Devils, and such as were afflicted with diverse Diseases, so that he was
continually followed by a great number of People.

Matthew. 9.18-20.
Jesus seeing himself thus thronged by the People, gave order to his Disciples
to go over to the other Side of the Lake of Gennesareth. When a certain Scribe
perceived that Jesus was about to leave them, he came to him, and said, Master,
I will follow thee, whithersoever thou go. Our Savior answered him, Foxes
have Holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man has not
where to lay his Head: As if he had said, He must be a Man more regardless of
his own Interest, and more courageous than can easily be imagined, that will
choose to follow a Man, who is so far from enriching his Disciples, that he
has not the least earthly Conveniences for himself.

Luke 9.57-62. Matthew. 8.21, 22.
But though he thus rejected the Scribe, he treated one of his Disciples after
another manner, for he commanded him to follow him; but this Disciple desiring
Leave to bury his Father first, he answers him, Follow me, and let the Dead
bury their Dead; i. e. let those that seek not Life and Immortality, as you do,
bury the Dead; but as for you, go and preach the Kingdom of God. He teaches him
by this Answer, That the Preaching of the Gospel is a thing more important than
paying our Respects to Men, which may be performed by all sorts of Persons:
Those Persons, whose Soul is dead in Trespasses and Sins, may bury those whose
Body is dead, but every Man is not fit to preach the Gospel; Men must be Holy,
to exercise that Ministry, and being called by God ought to prefer it before
all things. S. Luke 9.61, 62.
Luke speaks of a Third Person, who being desirous to follow Christ, begged to
go and bid them first adieu, that were at his House, and dispose of his Goods.
Jesus says to him, Whosoever having laid his Hand to the Plough, looks back,
is not fit for the Kingdom of God: By which Answer I understand, That he that
will earnestly labor for Salvation, ought to mind nothing else but that, nor
perplex himself with other things.

VI. Jesus Christ appeaseth a Tempest.
About the Evening Jesus entered into the Ship, Mark. 4.35-41.
to pass over to the other Side of the Lake of Gennesareth: He had with him his
Disciples, who who had sent away the Multitude; but yet there were some of the
Multitude, that getting into some small Ships, which were ready at Hand,
followed him. As they sailed, Matthew. 8.24-27.
there arose a great Storm of Wind, and so great a Tempest, that the Waves beat
with Violence into the Ship, where Jesus was, and filled it with Water: As for
himself, he suffered himself to fall a-sleep, on purpose, to try the Faith of
his Disciples, and therefore slept in the hinder part of the Ship, upon a
Pillow, till his Disciples, seeing themselves in great Danger, went to him and
awaked him, Saying, Master, carest thou not that we perish? Lord, save us. Luke
8.22-25
He says unto them, Why are ye so fearful, O ye of little Faith? Then he arose
and rebuked the Winds and the Tempest, and commanded the Water to be still; and
immediately the Wind ceased, and the Lake was calm. Jesus, then again, reproves
them for having so little Faith, saying to them, Where is your Faith? and Why
are you so fearful? But they, as also those who were in the other Ships, were
filled with Fear and Astonishment, and said one to another, What manner of Man
is this, who commands even the Winds and the Sea, and they obey him?

VII. Jesus Christ frees Two Men, possessed with Devils.
Matthew 8.28-34. Mark 5.1-20. Luke 8.26-40.
Jesus and his Disciples landed in the Country of the Gergesens (or Gergashites,
Deuteronomy. 7.1.) which lies on the East Side of the Lake which they had passed; and
as soon as Jesus was come out of the Ship, there came to him Two Men, possessed
with Devils, crying out, What have we to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of God?
Art thou come to torment us before our Time? These Two Men had their Dwelling
among the Tombs, and were so exceeding fierce that no Man could pass by that
way. S. Mark and S. Luke speak but of one of them, whose Possession they
describe more exactly, either because he was most tormented by the Devils, or
because he was the most remarkable of the Two, or because his Cure was most
admired and talked of, for he had been possessed a long time, and had neither
Clothes nor Habitation, but abode Day and Night in the Mountains, and in the
Tombs, crying and cutting himself with Stones: And though he had often been
loaded with Chains, and had his Feet fettered, yet he had always broken the
Fetters and Chains: And the Devils then carried him into the Wilderness,
insomuch that no Man could ever tame him. This Man saw Jesus Christ a far off,
and he, with his Companion, ran to him, and the Devil that spoke by his Mouth,
prayed the Son of God, not to torment him, by commanding him, as he had done,
to go out of the Man possessed. Nevertheless Jesus commanded him to go out of
the Man; and at the same Time asked him his Name. he answered, That he was
called Legion, because many Devils had entered into that miserable Man: And,
since it is one of their greatest Torments to be restrained from doing Mischief
to Men, they earnestly implored Jesus Christ not to command them to go into the
Deep, but to permit them, if he cast them out of these Two Possessed, to enter
into an Herd of Swine, which was feeding, not far from that Place, upon the
Mountains; the Son of God granted them what they desired, and by delivering
these Hogs into their Power, he teaches us, 1. That he may dispose of all we
have, as he pleases, because we have nothing but what we receive from him. 2.
That the Devil has no Power, neither over us nor our Goods, any farther than
God permits him. 3. That such is the Hatred and Rage of the Devil against
Men, that he would torment them for ever, either in their Persons or Estates,
and would do all he could to satiate his Fury, did not God set Bounds to it, as
he pleases.

This appears evidently to us from what happened to these Swine; for as soon as
Jesus permitted them to enter into them, they made them all run violently upon
the Rocks, and from thence cast themselves headlong into the Lake, where about
2000 of them were drowned. The Keepers of the Swine went immediately into the
Cities and Towns round about, to carry the News of this Accident, and they
brought a great Number of People to the place where Jesus was, to be fully
satisfied of the Truth of their Relation. Here they found the Man, out of whom
Jesus had cast the Legion of Devils, sitting at Jesus's Feet, clothed, and in
his right Mind, and as quiet and calm as he had been furious and mad before.
And those, who had been Eyewitnesses of it, told them all the Circumstances of
his Cure, and they were greatly afraid.

Then came all the City of Gadara to Jesus, and could not look upon him, but
with much Horror: They had a great Veneration for him, who had so absolute an
Authority over the Devils, but were afraid of the Man, who had driven their
Swine into the Sea; and therefore, either because they did not think themselves
worthy of Jesus's Presence, or because they were afraid of greater Losses than
they had already sustained, they besought him to depart out of their Country.
The Man, who had been possessed, besought him, who had been his Deliverer, to
suffer him to go along with him; but Jesus answered him, Return to thine own
House, and declare what great Things God has done for thee. He obeyed his
Order, and went through every City, and through all that Country, thankfully
publishing and commemorating the great Favors that Jesus had done unto him.

VIII. Jesus heals a Man, sick of the Palsy, at Capernaum.
Mark 2.1, 2.
The Son of God departing out of the Country of the Gadarens, as they had
desired him, took Ship again; and, being arrived at the other Side of the Lake,
found a great Number of People waiting for him; and they received him joyfully.
He returned to Capernaum, where, as soon as he was known to be, a great number
of People came unto him, insomuch that not only the House, where he was, but
even all the Space about the Door, could not receive them. Luke 5.17.
There were also sitting by him certain Pharisees and Doctors of the Law, which
were come out of every Town of Galilee and Judea, and from Jerusalem: To all
these Jesus preached the Word of God, and manifested that Power which God had
given to him, Mark 2.3-12. Luke 5.18-26
by Healing the Sick. Among others that came to be healed, there was brought
unto him a Man sick of the Palsy, lying in his Bed, but not knowing how to
carry him to him, by reason of the Multitude, they who brought him, contrived
to go up to the top of the House, and to uncover the Roof, and having made an
Hole, to let down the Bed, on which the Sick Man lay, and so place him before
the Son of God. Matthew. 9.2-8
Jesus seeing their Faith, says unto the Sick of the Palsy Son, be of good
Cheer, thy Sins be forgiven thee. These Words much displeased the Pharisees and
Lawyers, which were present, who thought in themselves, That since God only can
forgive Sins, Jesus, who assumed this Power to himself, must needs be a
Blaspheemer; but he, knowing the Thoughts of their Hearts, says unto them, Why
are your Minds busied about such evil Thoughts? Which is easier to say, to this
Man, who was sick of the Palsy, Thy Sins be forgiven thee, or to say, Arise,
take up thy Bed and walk? but that ye may know that the Son of Man has Power
on Earth to forgive Sins, he says unto the Sick of the Palsy, Arise, take up
thy Bed, and go unto thine House. And the same Moment the Sick Man arose,
before the Multitude, took up the Bed, whereon he lay, and went to his own
House, glorifying God. All the Spectators were greatly amazed at this Miracle;
and although the Power of Healing be much less than that of Forgiving Sins, yet
because it is not so easy to make Men to believe a Cure falsely, of which our
Senses are Witnesses, as Remission of Sin, which is secret and invisible,
therefore all the People, who were convinced by their own Sight, of the
Efficacy of these Words of Jesus Christ, Arise and take up thy Bed, were fully
persuaded of the Truth of the former, Thy Sins are forgiven thee: For which
Reason they glorified God, which had given such Power unto Men, and said, in
the Fear into which this Miracle had cast them, We have seen strange things to
day, such as we never saw before.

IX. Jesus commands a Publican to follow him.
Matthew. 9.9-13. Mark 2.13-17. Luke 5.27-32.
Jesus, departing from this House, walked by the Side of the Lake, and sees a
Publican, as he went along, sitting in the Custom-House, and he says unto him,
Follow me. This Man, who was the Son of Alphaeus, and named Levi, or Matthew,
arose immediately, left all, and accompanied him that called him. Not long
after, he made a great Feast in his House, to which there came many Publicans
and others, of very wicked Lives, and sat down at the Table with Jesus and his
Disciples. The Pharisees and Doctors of the Law could not endure that our
Savior should converse with Sinners or Publicans, which the Jews detested, and
therefore they murmured greatly, and demanded of his Disciples, Why their
Master and they did eat and drink with such sort of Persons? Jesus, hearing
their Complaints, said unto them, They that are whole need not a Physician, but
they that are Sick: I came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentence; go ye and learn what these Words signify, I will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice, Hosea 6.6.
and ye will know that my charitable conversing with Sinners, to convert them,
is more acceptable to God than all your Sacrifices and Ceremonies.

This Answer, nevertheless, did not appease the Murmurings of the Pharisees,
Matthew. 9.14-17. Mark 2.18-22. Luke 5.33-39.
but they came to him with the Disciples of John, and put this Question to him;
Why do the Disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast often, and make Prayers,
but thy Disciples fast not? Jesus answered them, Can the Friends of the
Bridegroom fast, or mourn, so long as the Bridegroom is with them? That were
unfit; but the Time will come when the Bridegroom shall be taken away from
them, and then shall they fast. To this Reason, taken from the Presence of the
Bridegroom, which is the Name which S. John Baptist himself gave to Jesus, the
Son of God adds another, taken from the Weakness of his Disciples, who were yet
in the Entrance upon his Religion, and were very imperfect; for he tells the
Pharisees, That to impose any rigorous Austerities upon Men, who were as yet
weak, is to undo all, and imitate the Imprudence of him, who sews Pieces of new
Cloth to an Old Garment, or puts New Wine into old Bottles.

X. Jesus Christ cures a Woman of a Bloody Flux, and raises a Maid from the
Dead.
While Jesus was thus discoursing with the Pharisees and John's Disciples,
Jairus, Matthew. 9.18-22. Mark 5.22-34. Luke 8.41-48.
the Chief Ruler of the Synagogue, came, and, falling down at his Feet,
besought him to go to his House, and lay his Hands upon his only Daughter, who
was about Twelve Years old, and was then at the Point of Death. Jesus went
immediately along with him, being accompanied with his Disciples, and a great
multitude of People. At the same time it happened, That a Woman, who had been
sick of a Bloody Flux, for Twelve Years, and had spent all her Estate to get a
Cure of it, and had endured much by Physicians, and could get no help, having
heard the Fame of Jesus, came behind him, among the Multitude, and touched him
by the Border of his Garment, for she had so great a Faith, that she was
thoroughly persuaded in her self, If I can but touch his Garment, I shall be
whole: And indeed so she was, for as soon as she had done it, she felt, the
same instant, that she was cured of her Disease. But Jesus, who knew, as the
Gospel says, That Virtue was gone out of him turned himself about in the
Throng, and asked, Who it was that had touched him: Peter, and the other
Disciples, answered him, Master, the People throng, and press thee, and do
thou ask, who it is that touched me? But Jesus said unto them, Some Body has
touched me, for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me; and he looked
all-round about him, to see her who had touched him with so much Faith, that by
it she had received the Cure of her Distemper. The Woman seeing her self
discovered, cast her self down at the Feet of Jesus with Fear and trembling,
and acknowledged, before the Multitude, what had happened unto her. The Son of
God comforted her, and said unto her; Daughter, be not afraid, thy Faith has
saved thee, go in Peace, and be perfectly whole of thy Disease.

Matthew. 9.23-26. Mark 5.35-45. Luke 8.49-56.
While he was thus talking with this Woman, there came a Man to Jairus, and told
him, That his Daughter was dead, and therefore 'twas needless for him to
trouble Jesus to go any further. Our Savior having heard the Message that that
Man brought, said unto the Ruler of the Synagogue, Fear not, only believe, and
thy Daughter shall be healed. When they were come to the House; they found
there Pipers and Mourners, who lamented her with doleful Tunes and hideous
Outcries (according to the Custom of the modern Jews.) Jesus entering in, said
unto them, Why make ye so much a do, howling and lamenting, the Maid is not
dead but sleeps. At these Words of his, they laughed and mocked, knowing well
that she was dead; but being ignorant, that it was as easy for Jesus to raise
the Dead, as it is for Men to awake those that are asleep, He then put forth
the People out of the Chamber, and suffered only three of his Disciples, viz.
Peter, James and John, with the Father and Mother of the Child to go in with
him: Then he goes to the Bed where she lay, takes her by the Hand, and called
to her, saying, Damosel, arise. By these powerful Words he restored her Life,
and she rose; And when they had given her something to eat, she walked, to the
Wonder of her Father and Mother. At his departure he commanded them very
strictly to tell no Man what was done; but the Fame of this Miracle spread it
self in all that Country.

XI. Jesus healed Two Blind Men and a Dumb Man.
Going from thence, Matthew. 9.27-31.
Jesus was followed by Two Blind Men, who cried after him, Thou Son of David,
have mercy on us. When he was come into the House, they came unto him, and he
said unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this, that ye desire? They
answered, Yea, Lord, and immediately he touched their Eyes, saying, According
to your Faith be it done unto you, and their Eyes were opened that very Moment;
but Jesus charged them to tell no Man of the Cure, to teach Men to labor, in
sincere Humility, to conceal the good Actions that they do; and yet he
permitted them to spread abroad his Fame in all that Country: To instruct us by
their Example, That one part of that Acknowledgment which we ought to pay to
God for the Mercies which we receive of him, is to publish them, that he may be
known, praised and glorified by those to whom we declare them. After the Blind
Men were gone, they brought unto him a Dumb Man, Matthew. 9.32-34.
possessed with a Devil: As soon as the Devil was cast out, the Dumb Man spoke,
and the People were ravished with Wonder, and said, We never saw any such thing
in Israel: But the Pharisees began again to say, that which they often repeated
afterward, That he cast out Devils through the Prince of the Devils.

XII. Jesus cures a Man that had been diseased Thirty and Eight Years.
After this, Jesus went up to Jerusalem, to solemnize the great Feast, John
5.1-47.
then kept, which is evidently the Passover: Now there was at Jerusalem a Pool,
called the Sheep's Pool, that is to say, a Pond for Sheep, because it was near
a Gate of the City, called, the Sheep's Gate; but others say, because it was
used to wash the Sacrifices in: Into this Pool did an Angel at a certain Season
come down, and moved the Waters of it, and put such a Virtue into it, that
whosoever, first, after the Waters were troubled by the Angel, entered into it,
was healed of whatsoever Disease he had. For this Reason it was that the Five
Porches or Cloisters of a certain Building, adjoining to the Pool, called in
the Hebrew Tongue Bethesda [the House of Mercy] were always full of Sick
Persons, who waited for the Moving of the Waters; among them was a certain Man,
who had an infirmity Thirty and eight Years; which Jesus knowing, said unto
him, Will thou be made whole? This Man answered, Sir, I have no Man, when the
Water is troubled, to put me into the Pool, and while I am going, my self,
another, who has more Strength or better Help, steppeth down before me. Jesus
says unto him, Take up thy Bed and walk; and immediately his Disease was
healed, and he took up his Bed and walked. It was on Saturday, which the Jews
call the Sabboth-day, that is to say, a Day of Rest, because all Labor is
forbidden them on that Day, by the Law; wherefore, when the Jews saw him
carrying his Bed, they contended with him for breaking the Law; but he said to
them, He that made me whole, said unto me, Take up thy Bed and walk. They then
asked him, What Man it was, but the Man knew not who it was, for Jesus did
immediately convey himself away from the Multitude of People, that were in that
Place. Not long after, Jesus met this Man in the Temple, and says unto him,
Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, hereafter, lest a worse Plague be
inflicted on thee. The Man went to the Jews, and told them, That it was Jesus
which had healed him. The Jews, for this Reason, sought to persecute Jesus, and
so much the rather, because in his Defense of this Action on the Sabbath Day he
had said, My Father works continually, doing Good, and preserving, as well on
your Sabbath as other Days, and I work only as he does: Wherefore they had a
greater hatred against him, not only because he had broken the Sabbath, but had
called God his Father, making himself equal with God. Hereupon Jesus makes an
excellent Discourse to them, to prove his Divinity, and shows them; That he had
received all Power of his Father, to Act, Judge and raise the Dead: That he did
not depend upon his own Assertions, to clear this Truth, but he had John's
Testimony the Nature of the Works, and Miracles themselves which he did; yea,
the concurring Approbation of his Father in Holy Scripture, to render it
credible; nay, certain; but yet he knew that they would not be convinced by all
these Proofs, because they loved not God, and instead of seeking that Glory
which is from God, they delighted in no other Persons Esteem or Approbation but
what they receive one from another.

XIII. The Jews accuse Jesus's Disciples of Sabbath Breaking.
Matthew 12.1 8. Mark 2.23-28 Luke 6.1-5.
The Jews, who had charged Jesus with a Sin in healing a Man upon their Sabbath
Day, as having thereby broken the Law of God, were not afraid to condemn him
for the same Fault upon many the like occasions; for as he passed along the
Cornfieldsd, upon the Sabbath Day, and his Diciples, being very hungry, took
some Ears of Corn as they went along, and rubbing them in their Hands, eat
them; some of the Pharisees complained of it to him, saying, Behold, thy
Disciple do that which is not lawful to be done on the Sabbath Day: But he
demonstrates to them, first of all, by the Example of David, who in an urgent
case of Necessity had eaten of the Shewbread, which none but the Priests might
lawfully eat, that Necessity may create a Dispensation of a Law. Secondly, by
the Example of their own Priests, who were not thought guilty of
Sabboth-breaking notwithstanding they slay and slay their Sacrifices in the
Temple upon the Sabbath Day, according to the Commandment of the same Law;
(...) that the Law does not forbid all sorts of Action upon the Sabbath Day.
But if they pretend that the Temple justifies these sorts of Actions, he might
as well justify this Action of his Disciples, since He was greater than the
Temple. But if they had known that Mercy is more acceptable to God than
Sacrifice, they would not have so rashly condemned the Innocent; That they
inverted the Order of things, in that they would have Man made for Sabbath,
whereas the Sabbath was made for Man. And lastly, That the Son of Man is Lord
even of the Sabboth-day, and so may lawfully command, or permit what he pleases
to be done in it.

XIV. Jesus Cures several sick Persons on the Sabbath.
On another Saturday as he taught in the Synagogue, Matthew. 12.10-13. Mar.
3.1-5. Lu. 6.6-10.
there was a Man who had his Right Hand withered; And the Lawyers and the
Pharisees asked Jesus, Whether it was Lawful to heal on the Sabbath day? And
they at the same time observed whether he would heal this Man, that they might
have cause of Accusation against him. But Jesus knowing their thoughts, bid the
Man stand forth in the middle of the Assembly, and asked them again, Whether it
be Lawful to do good, and save Life on the Sabbath day? And to give them an
undeniable proof of the Lawfulness of it, he adds, What Man is there among you
that shall have a Sheep, which happens to fall into a Pit upon the Sabbath day,
will not lay hold of it and lift it out? How much is a Man better than a sheep?
They could not answer any thing to this but they would not acknowledge the
Truth, so that Jesus having looked upon them with anger, and being grieved for
the hardness and blindness of their Heart, he turned himself to the Man that
had the Withered Hand, and said unto him, Stretch out thy hand, which he did,
and immediately his Hand was made as whole as the other.

Mat. 12.14-21. Mar. 3.6.-12. Lu. 6.11.
The Pharisees seeing this Miracle were enraged against him, and took Council
together, how they might destroy Jesus. Whereupon he withdrew himself with his
Disciples to the Lake of Gennesareth, being followed by a great number of
People, for the Fame of these Miracles being spread abroad throughout all
Galilee, Judea, Idumaea, and all the Country round about Jordan, as far as the
Mediterranean Sea, to the Coasts of Tire, and Sydon, they came in throngs from
all these places to hear him, and to be cured of their Diseases. This caused
him to order his Disciples to keep a small Ship there ready to go into, that he
might not be crowded by the People. He healed all, that were present, of their
Diseases, commanding them at the same time not to discover him, and silencing
with threatenings the Devils, who fell down before him, crying out, and saying,
Thou art the Son of God.

XV. Jesus Christ chooses his Twelve Disciples. and preaches his Sermon on
the Mount.
After these things Jesus retired into a Mountain, where he continued all Night
in Prayer to God, Lu. 6.12.-26. Mar. 3.13.-20. Matt. 5.^-12.
And when it was day he called his Disciples, and out of them he chose twelve,
whom he named Apostles, which signifies, Persons sent, because he sent them to
preach his Gospel, with a power to heal Diseases, and cast out Devils. The
Gospel observes, that he chose whom he would, and that these were the Twelve
which he preferred to this Dignity, viz. Simon, whom he had already named
Peter, and Andrew his Brother, the two Sons of Zebedee, James and John, whom he
Surnamed Boanerges, i. e. Sons of Thunder, Philip to whom he first of all said,
Follovv me, Bartholomew, Matthew, whom he took from the Custom-house, Thomas,
also called Didimus, i. e. a Twin; another James the Son of Alpheus, and his
Brother named Judas, or Thaddaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot.

Then he came down with them, and remained in the Plain near the same
Mountain, vvhither the Multitude abovementioned which came to hear him, and
touched him, because such Virtue went out of him, as healed all manner of
Diseases, flocked unto him. Among them were many possessed with Devils, whom
he freed. After this in the presence of all this Company he made a Discourse,
which contains all the Precepts of the Christian Law, he spoke it to his
Disciples, and begins it by teaching them wherein true Happiness consists,
saying to them, Blessed are the poor in spirit, that is to say, those who are
loose in their desires of Earthly things, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Blessed are they that mourn for their own and others sins, hating the Carnal
pleasures of this World, for they shall be comforted, and filled with spiritual
Joy. Blessed are the meek, and quiet spirited: for they shall inherit the
Earth, i. e. Paradise, which is, as the Fathers explain it, the Land of the
Living, and the Heritage of such as suffer Joyfully the spoiling of their
Goods, which they cannot preserve without offending God. Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after Righteousness: for they shall have their Holy desires
satisfied. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are
they, whose hearts are clean from all Carnal Lusts: for they shall see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers, who not only love, and live in peace themselves,
but labor to make others to be at peace: for they shall be called the Children
of God, being as like the God of Peace, as Children are to their Parents.
Blessed are they that are persecuted for Righteousness sake: for their is the
Kingdom of Heaven. He adds further to his Disciples, Blessed are ye when Men
shall hate you and persecute you for my sake, and load you with Injuries and
Reproaches: Rejoice then, for great is your reward reserved in Heaven. And
after he has thus shown that there is no happiness in this Life but in the
contempt of Riches, Honor and Pleasures, and in the love of Religion, Peace
and Mercy, Purity of heart, and Patience, by which we may render our selves
worthy of that Eternal Life, which God has reserved in Heaven for us He
pronounces a Woe against Riches, against those who live in Plenty, Mirth, and
Worldly Honors because they that place their Happiness in all these things,
shall one day find, that their Pleasures Honors, Comforts, and Plenty, shall
end in Eternal Wailing and Sorrow.

XVI. What are the Truths, which Jesus Christ teaches in this Sermon upon the
Mount.
Matt. 5.13-48. Lu. 16.27-36.
He next teaches his Apostles, that they were the Salt and Light of the World,
to reform their corrupt Manners, and to illuminate their darkne^ Minds, that
they ought therefore to be Pure and Holy themselves, and not to omit any
occasion of dispersing the Light of their Doctrine, because they are set on a
Candlestick, i. e. preferred to the Ministry of the Gospel for that end. That
he came not to destroy the Law of Moses but to fulfill it, and to bring it to
its utmost perfection, by teaching his Disciples a Righteousness far more
complete and excellent, than that of the Scribes and Pharisees, and without
which no Man can be saved. Indeed the Old Law forbids several Sins, and
regulated the exterior Actions. But the New Law, which Jesus Christ gives in
this Discourse, aims at the Reformation of the Heart, and to suppress Sin in
its very Source and Original. For it was said to the Jews in the Law, Thou
shall not kill. But Jesus Christ commands every Man to curb in his Anger, and
not to utter the least affront or abuse of his Brother; and if there be any
differences, not to offer any Sacrifice to God, before they are reconciled. The
Law forbids Adultery, Jesus forbids with the same strictness all Lascivious
Glances, and commands Men to pluck out the right Eye in which they are, i. e.
to deprive themselves of that pleasure of the Sight, which excites irregular
desires in the Heart. The Law commands us to avoid Perjury; Jesus Christ will
not allow us to Swear at all, and Teaches us, that when we are obliged to
confirm our Words with an Oath, that very Oath, though not sinful in it self, yet
proceeds from a bad Cause, viz. as St. Austin says, from the Custom of Lying,
and dealing falsely so much used among Men, that they dare not trust to their
bare Words. The Law regulates Revenge, and requires, that the punishment do not
exceed the Offense, on which it is inflicted; But Jesus Christ is so far from
allowing us to revenge our selves, that on the contrary he teaches us not to
resist evil, not to go to Law, but to give to those that ask, and to yield our
Cheek to those that smite us, i. e. to bear all things rather than lose
Charity. The Jews believed that the Obligation we have to Love our Neighbor,
did hinder us from hating our Enemies: But Jesus Christ will have us to love
those that Hate us, and to do good to those that Persecute us, that we may
excel the Heathens in well-doing, and imitate Himself, who makes his Sun to
rise upon the Evil as well as upon the Good, and so deserve the Honorable
Title of the Children of God.

From Sins he passes to Good actions, and to make them pure, Mat. 6.1-34.
he teaches us to purify the Motives and causes of them, showing us that the
Intention is such to the outward Actions, as the Eye is to the whole Body, and
that they are pure or sinful, according as the Intention is good or Evil, after
the same manner, as the Body is either Light, or in Darkness, as the Eye is
either Clear or Blind. Wherefore he teaches us, that we must not perform our
good Works, as Alms, Prayers, or Fasting, that we may be praised of Men; but of
God, who will reward them. He lays down rules for Prayer, that it should be
made with a full Trust in the Divine Bounty, with perseverance, and with a mind
full of Peace and Love to our Brethren, knowing that he that will neither give
to, nor pardon others, deserves neither the Mercies, nor Pardon he petitions of
God. He makes the force and excellency of a Prayer, not to consist in a
multitude of Words, as if God had need of our Words to manifest our Wants to
him; and that we may know, what we may desire, and request of God, he has
taught us to pray after this manner, Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed
be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy Will be done, in Earth as it is in Heaven,
Give us this day our daily Bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us, and Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us
from evil. Amen. In the next place he endeavors to make the Souls of his
Disciples contemn the good things of this World, by teaching them not to lay up
Treasures upon Earth, but in Heaven, where neither Thief, nor any other danger
is to be feared; that they cannot love God and Mamon, i. e. Riches, at the same
time, and that instead of being sollicitous for the necessaries of this Life,
since God, who nourishes the Fowls, and adorns the Lillies, will not cease to
take care of Man, who is far more precious in his sight, than Flowers or
Beasts: We should first seek the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof
above all other things, and then we may hope, that God will give us all other
things, as an Overplus of favor to us.

He forbids rash Censures and Judgments, Matt. 7.1-29. Lu. 6.37-42.
and condemns those Hypocrites, who cannot see the Beam, which grows in their
own Eyes, but would cast out the Mote out of their Brothers Eye. He teaches
them to distribute Holy things prudently, saying, We must not cast Pearl before
Swine. He sums up our whole Duty to our Neighbors in this short Precept,
Whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye even so to them. He
assures us, That the way which leads to Life is straight, but that which leads
to Hell is bread, and many there be that go in it. He teaches us to beware of
false Prophets, who come in sheeps-cloathing, yet are ravening Wolves. That we
must not Judge of them by their Words, but by their Works. And although they may
do some Miracles, yet God will reject them one day, as a People he never knew.
In the same manner will he also treat all those, who content themselves to say,
Lord, Lord, but do not what he commands, and those only who do his Will shall
enter into his Kingdom. Lastly, he concludes this long Discourse with a
Comparison of his Auditors to Builders, saying, He that hears, and does what I
teach, is like to a wise Man, that built his House upon a firm Rock, which no
Tempest could beat down; and on the contrary, he that does not practice what
he hears, is like unto a Fool, that Built his House upon the Sand, which when
the Wind and Rain beat upon, it was overthrown.

XVII. Jesus Cures a Leper.
Matt. 8.1-4. Mar. 1.40-45. Lu. 5.12.-15.
Jesus having finished this Sermon, came down from the Mountain, and a great
multitude followed him, having heard his Doctrine with Attention, and
Admiration. Then came to him a Man overspread with a Leprosy, and falling down
at Jesus Feet, Worshipped him, beseeching him, and saying, Lord if thou will,
thou can make me clean. This Prayer so full of Humility and Faith pleased
Jesus, who stretching forth his hand, touched him, and said, I will, be thou
clean; and immediately his Leprosy was cleansed. But Jesus straightly charged,
that he should tell no Man of this Miracle, and commanded him to go, and show
himself unto the Priest, that he might declare him clean, and offer the
Sacrifice prescribed by the Law. This Man notwithstanding could not forbear
publishing for all that, what had happened unto him, and the Fame of the Son of
God was so much increased, that he could not appear any more in the City, but
went into the Deserts, where he spent his time in Prayer; but the People did
not cease going to him in great multitudes from every quarter to hear him, and
to be cured of their Diseases.

XVIII. Jesus heals a Man sick of the Palsy.
Mat. 8.5-13. Lu. 7.1,-10.
Jesus being entered into Capernaum, he was entreated by the Elders of the Jews
to go down to the House of a certain Centurion, or Captain of an Hundred
Soldiers, to heal a Servant of his, whom he greatly loved, and who was so sick
of a Palsy, that he was almost brought to the point of Death by it. This
Officer having heard of the Fame of Jesus, had desired some of his Friends to
go to him, and beg this Favor of him. These Men earnestly besought him,
representing not only the danger the Servant was in, but also the Worthiness of
his Master, and the obligations, which all the Nation of the Jews had to him;
for, say they, he loves our Nation, and has Built us a Synagogue. Jesus then
went along with them, and when they came near the House, the Centurion sent
others to him, to desire him that he would not give himself the trouble to come
unto him, and to say, Lord, I am not worthy, that thou should come under my
Roof, but speak only in a Word, and my Servant shall be healed. He adds, that
he did not think himself worthy to go to meet him, nor to receive him, and he
doubted not of the efficacy of his Word, if he would but command the Distemper
to depart from his Servant, since he himself, who was but an under Officer, and
subject to the command of others, could be exactly obeyed by those Soldiers
which were under him. Jesus admired this Man's Faith, who was an Heathen, and
turning himself to them that followed him, He said, Verily, I have not found so
much Faith, even among the Israelites themselves. To which he adds, That many
shall come from the East, and from the West, and shall have a place in the
Kingdom of Heaven with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but the Jews, who boast of
their Descent from these Patriarchs, and under that Title are Children, and
Heirs of the Kingdom, shall be excluded and cast into utter darkness, where
there is nothing, but weeping, and gnashing of Teeth. Which indeed happened to
the Jews, in whose stead, the Gentiles, which knew not God, are called to the
Inheritance of Heaven. To this Faith, which he so highly esteemed, did Jesus
grant the Cure of the Diseased Man, who was made whole from that very hour. And
when they whom the Centurion had sent, were returned to his House, they found
the Servant in perfect Health.

XIX. Jesus raises a Man from the Dead.
Lu. 7.11,-16.
The next day Jesus went to Naim, a City of Galilee, lying near the
Mediterranean Sea, being accompanied with his Disciples and the Multitude, as
he always was. Being near the Gate of the City, there was a Dead Man carried
out to be Buried, who was the only Son of his Mother, who was a Widow, and
followed the Bier, and much People of the City were with her. Jesus seeing her,
was moved with compassiom toward this afflicted Widow, and said unto her, Weep
not. Then he comes to the Bier, and making the Bearers to stand still, he
touched him, and spoke unto the Dead man these words, Young Man I command thee
to arise: And immediately the Dead Man sat up, and began to speak, and Jesus
delivered him to his Mother. And all that were present were seized with fear,
and glorified God, saying, A great Prophet is risen up among us; and, God has
visited his People.

XX. John sends two of his Disciples to Jesus. The answer they received from
him.
Matt. 11.2,-6. Lu. 7.18,-23.
The Fame of the former Miracle spread it self into all Judea, and all the
Country round about, so that John, who was in Prison heard of it. This Holy
Forerunner of Christ, had a full Relation of the Miracles which Jesus did,
from his own Disciples, and would not lose so good an occasion of making them
acknowledge him for the Messiah. He would have them to be convinced of this
Truth themselves, and for that reason chose two of them, and sent them to him
with this Question, Art thou He that should come, or look we for another? Jesus
instead of giving a direct Answer to this Question, wrought many Miraculous
Cures in their Presence, after which, he says unto them, Go, and tell John
what things ye have heard and seen; That the Blind see, the Lame walk, the
Lepers are cleansed, the Deaf hear, the Dead are raised, and to the Poor the
Gospel is Preached. These were the visible Proofs that he gave them, to show
them who he was: And he adds, Blessed are they that shall not be offended in
me, as if he had said, according to the Explication of the Fathers, That it is
easy for Men to accept me for the Messiah, when they see me Work so many
Miracles; but few will believe me to be so, when they see me suffer the
Ignominious Death of the Cross.

These two Messengers being returned to their Master, Jesus turned his speech
to the People, Matt. 11.7,-14. Lu. 7.24,-28.
and discoursed to them concerning John after this manner: What went ye out
into the Wilderness to see? A Reed shaken with the Wind? Or a Man clothed in
soft and delicate Attire? And having thus put them in mind of the invincible
Courage, and austere penitent Life of his Forerunner, He tells them, that he
was a Prophet, and much more than a Prophet, because he was foretold by the
Prophets, and did himself Preach the coming of the Messiah, not as the other
Prophets did at a great distance, but was sent to go before him, and prepare a
way for him: He adds, as a complete Encomium of John, That among those that are
born of Women, there is none greater then John the Baptist, that the Law, and
the Prophets end, and the Gospel begins with him; that it was he, that first
Preached the Kingdom of God, and ever since this Kingdom is taken by Violence,
and the Violent get into it by force. Lastly, That he was the true Elias, since
as it is abovesaid, He had the Spirit and Power, as well as the Ministry and
Office of that Prophet.

XXI. The Reproofs which Jesus Christ gave the Jews.
All these great Titles of John might have made him respected by all the Jews,
Matt. 11.16,-19. Lu. 7.29,-34.
yet there were none but the common People, Publicans, and some loose wicked
Men, who heard his Sermons with Advantage, for the Pharisees, and Doctors of
the Law slighted them, and by that contempt, as the Gospel says, rejected the
Council of God concerning themselves. They used the Son of God himself after
the same manner, who being troubled for the hardness, and blindness of their
hearts, spoke of it with Holy grief before all the People, who had gladly heard
the Commendation of John the Baptist, saying, Whereunto shall I liken the Men
of this Generation? May not the words of those Children, who sit in the
Marketplace, and cry to their Companions, We have piped, and ye have not
danced, we have sung mournful Songs, but ye have not wept, be fitly applied
unto them? for John came neither eating nor drinking, i. e. living a very
severe and Monkish Life, and they say he is possessed with a Devil: The Son of
Man came eating and drinking, i. e. leading a less Austere Life, and they
accuse him of being a Lover of meat and drink, and a friend of Publicans and
Sinners.

After these reflections he considers upon the small advantage, which the City
of Galilee, where he had Preached, and done so many Miracles, had made use of
all these helps, which the mercy of God had vouchsafed them for their
Salvation. He reproves with threats their Impenitence and Obstinacy, and
pronounces against them these terrible Curses Woe unto thee Chorazin, Woe unto
thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty Works, which have been done in thee, had been
done in Tire and Sidon, (which were two Heathen Cities) they would have
repented in Sackcloth and Ashes. And then speaking to the City of Capernaum,
where he had lived longer, than in all the other Cities, he reproves their
pride and hardness in these Words. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto
Heaven, shall be brought down to Hell: for if the mighty works, which have been
done in thee, had been done in Sodom, (the City, which God consumed with Fire
from Heaven for their Sins) it would have remained to this day. Lastly, he
adds, That in the day of Judgment the Inhabitants of Sodom, (whom God punished
so severely for their horrible Lewdness) as also of Tire and Sidon, who never
knew God, shall be punished with less severity, than the Inhabitants of these
Impenitent Cities of Galilee.

XXII. The Conversion of a Woman that was a Sinner.
There was in a certain City a Woman, Luke 7.36,-50.
of a wicked Life, much wiser than those before mentioned, for as soon as she
heard, that Jesus was eating in a Pharisees House called Simon, she went to
him, and going behind him, washed his Feet with her Tears, wiped them with the
Hair of her Head, kissed them, and poured out Ointment upon them, which she
brought in an Alabaster-box. The Pharisee, who had invited Jesus, saw what this
Woman had done, whom he knew to be wicked, and he said within himself, If this
Man were a Prophet, he would know who this is that touches him: For he could
not imagine, that Jesus would suffer himself to be touched by so vile a Sinner.
But Jesus, who knew his thoughts, propounded to him the example of two Men, who
owed to one Creditor, the one a great Sum of Money, and the other a far lesser
Sum, but neither of them being able to pay, he frankly forgave them their
Debts. He then asked him, Which of these Two Debtors would love this Creditor
most? Simon answers him, He to whom he had forgiven most. The Son of God
approving this Answer, made the Application of it in these Words, See thou
this Woman? I entered into thy House, thou have poured no Water upon my Feet,
but she has washed them with Tears, and wiped them with the Hair of her Head.
Thou gave me no Kiss, but this Woman, since the Time she came in, has not
ceased to kiss my Feet. Thou have poured no Oil upon my Head, but she has
anointed my Feet with Perfumes: For this Reason, I say unto thee, her many and
great Sins are forgiven her, because she loved much; but to whom little is
forgiven the same will love little: As if he had said unto him, Thou love
little, because believing thy self to be just, thou think thy self to owe
God but little. This Woman, who is Conscious of her own great Crimes, has
loved him greatly, from whom she hopes for Pardon of so many Sins, and for that
love's Sake is forgiven: Wherefore he says to the Woman, Thy Sins are forgiven
thee. The Guests, that sat at Table with him, were offended at these Words,
saying in themselves, Who is this that pretends to forgive Sins? But Jesus
contemning their Discontents, sent the Woman away, whom he had pardoned, saying
to her, Thy Faith has saved thee, Go in Peace.

XXIII. Jesus heals a Man, possessed with a Devil, who was both Blind and Dumb.
Mark 3.20, 21.
Jesus being returned from the Pharisees House, there came so great a Multitude
of People unto him, that neither he nor his Disciples could get Time to eat
their Food; which, when his Kindred heard, they went to get him Home out of the
Throng, either that they might put him under Confinement, as a Man beside
himself, Matthew. 12.22-37. Luke 11.14-26.
or fearing that he should faint for Hunger, and so be trod down in the
Multitude. Then they brought unto him a Man possessed with a Devil, who was
Blind and Dumb by that means; and he cast out the Devil, and the Man both Spoke
and Saw, to the Admiration of all the People, who speaking of Jesus Christ,
said, Is not this the Son of David, i. e. the Messiah, which, the Scripture
assure us, should come of the Family of David? But the Pharisees and Doctors of
the Law, which were come from Jerusalem, said, That he casts out Devils by
the Prince of Devils: But Jesus confuted the maliciousness of their Thoughts,
by telling them, before the Multitude, That if the Devils, who are Man's
irreconcilable Enemies, should thus cast out one another, their Kingdom would
not stand long; that there were some Persons among the Jews, who cast out
Devils, whom yet the Pharisees did not accuse of casting them out by the Prince
of the Devils; That an armed Man will not be put out of his own House but by a
stronger than himself; so that he did not cast out Satan but by the Power of a
Spirit stronger than Satan, i. e. by the Spirit of God; which ought to be a
convincing Proof that the Kingdom of God is come unto them; that in opposing
such manifest Works of the Holy Spirit, as they had done, they had made
themselves guilty of an unpardonable Blasphemy; that since we judge of a Tree
by its Fruits, they ought to judge of him by his Works, and not condemn him as
a wicked Man, whenas he does nothing but good Actions; that the Calumnies which
they so rashly spoke against him, proceeded from the evil Treasure of their
Hearts, and should not escape unpunished, since at the Day of Judgment we must
give an account of every evil Word, and be condemned for them, as we are
justified by good.

XXIV. The Pharisees desire a Sign of him.
Matthew. 12.38-46. Luke 11.29-32.
Then certain of the Scribes and Pharisees said unto him, Master, we desire that
thou would show us some Sign of thy Mission. They had been Witnesses of a
great Number of Miracles, which they cried down for Cheats and Impostures, and
as if all that he had done already were not enough to convince them, that he
wrought them by the Spirit of God, they desired to see some new thing: But
Jesus gave them no other Answer but this; An evil and an adulterous Generation
seeks after a Sign, and no other Sign shall be given them but that of the
Prophet Jonas.

Jonas was a Prophet, who being sent by God to foretell and Threaten to the
Inhabitants of Ninive the Destruction of their City, within Forty Days, instead
of obeying this Command, took Ship, to go to another Place; but a Tempest
arising in his Voyage, he confessed that it was a Punishment of his
Disobedience, and to appease it, bid them cast him into the Sea: He was
immediately devoured by a great Fish, which at the end of Three Days cast him
upon the Shore, from whence he went to Ninive, and preached as God had
commanded him: The Ninivites believed his Words, proclaimed a solemn Fast, and
so, by their Repentance, escaped the Punishment which God had threatened them.

Jesus propounds this Sign of Jonas to the Pharisees, and makes a double
Application of it, the one to himself, the other to them; for he says, That as
this Prophet was Three Days in the Belly of the Fish, which devoured him, so
should the Son of Man be Three Days in the Heart of the Earth. By which he
signifies, That he should be buried in a Tomb, and should rise from the Dead
the third Day. He adds, for a second Reflection, That as Jonas was a Sign to
the Ninivites, so should he be to the Pharisees; which he explains in this
manner, The Men of Ninive shall rise up in the Judgment against this
Generation, and shall condemn them, because they repented at the Preaching of
Jonas; but a Person greater than Jonas is here. He says further to them, That
the Queen of Sheba shall also condemn them in the Day of Judgment, because she
came from a far Country to hear the Wisdom of Solomon; which Princess they are
so far from imitating, that they despise his Words and Miracles, who manifested
more Divine Wisdom than Solomon ever did.

Lastly, He threatens them with such Fury as the Devil exercises over those
Persons from whom they have been once forced to go out, but have found out a
way to enter again; which are therefore the more enraged. Teaching us, at the
same Time, That we ought to be always upon our Guard, when we are delivered
from an unclean Spirit, because the Devil does not wholly abandon us, but, if
we are not watchful against him, will return with Seven Spirits more wicked
than himself, and by this second Possession make the Condition of that Soul
more miserable a great deal than it was by the first.

As Jesus was thus confuting the Pharisees Malice, a certain Woman of the
Company, lift up her Voice and said, Blessed is the Womb that bare thee, and
the Paps that thou have sucked: But he answered her, Yea, rather blessed are
they that hear the Word of God and practice it.

At the same Time it was told him, That his Mother and his Brethren, Matthew.
12.47-50. Mark 3.31 35. Luke 8.19-21
i. e. his Kindred, stood without, because they could not get at him for the
Press, and desired to speak with him: But he answered: Who is my Mother, and
who are my Brethren? Then looking upon those that were set about him, and
stretching forth his Hands toward his Disciples, he said, Behold my Mother and
my Brethren, for my Mother and my Brethren are they that hear the Word of God
and do it, and they that do the Will of my Father which is in Heaven.

XXV. Jesus Christ delivers many Parables.
Matthew. 13.1-23. Luke 8.4 15. Mark 4.1-20.
The same Day Jesus went out of the House, and came to the end of the Lake of
Gennesareth; but when he saw a great Multitude of People coming unto him, from
the neighboring Towns, he went into a Ship, and instructed the People out of
it, who gave great Attention to him from the Shore. He delivered many excellent
and saving Truths to them in Parables, which was his ordinary way of Teaching.
Parables in the Gospel, are feigned Stories or Comparisons, taken from Nature
Things, the Application of which being something hard to find out, exercises
the Attention of the Mind, but, being discovered, opens some Mystery of
Religion to us, or makes known some important Maxim or Precept for the
Government and Direction of our Manners. As for Example, this is a kind of
Parable, which Jesus speaks of the strong Man, armed, who keeps his House, but
is expelled by a stronger than he. The Application of which is this, as we have
seen; The strong Man is the Devil, whom Jesus Christ drives out of Men's Souls
by the Spirit of God, which is stronger than the Devil.

The First Parable which the Son of God propounded to the People, from the Ship
where he sat, was this. A Man went out to sow, and some of his Seed fell in the
Highway, and it was trodden upon and devoured with Birds: Another Part fell
upon a Rock, and was scorched by the Sun, because it had no Root, for want of
Moisture: Other fell among Thorns, which chok'd it: And other fell on good
Ground, and brought forth Fruit in abundance.

Now, because the Application of this Parable, which our Savior intended by
it, was not easy to find out, he added, He that has Ears to hear, let him
hear, i. e. let him understand the Sense and Meaning of what I say. The
Apostles themselves did understand it no more than others, and therefore when
they were alone with him, they prayed him to tell them, why he spoke to the
People in Parables, and to explain what he had already propounded to them. In
answer to the First Question, he tells them, How great an Happiness they
enjoyed, in being with him, because they saw and heard those Things which many
Righteous Men and Prophets desired to see and hear, but could not obtain it.
And because he made them understand clearly those great Mysteries, which he
propounded to others in dark Similitudes and Parables only, to punish the
Blindness and Obstinacy of their Hearts; which makes them unworthy and
incapable of knowing the Truth.

Then he teaches them, That by the Seed, he spoke of, he understood the Word of
God: They, that after they have heard, regard it not but immediately let
themselves loose to their Sins, are like the Highway. The Devil is figured by
the Birds, who are ready to take the Word out of their Hearts, lest they
believe and be saved. Those that receive the Word with Joy, but the first
Temptation spoils all the Fruit, because the Word has had no deep Root in the
Soul, are the Rock. Others, that choke the Word with Avarice, love of Pleasures
and other Passions, are the Thorns, which must be pulled up, if we will have
the heavenly Seed to thrive in our Hearts. Lastly, the good Ground signifies
those well-disposed Souls, which receive and retain faithfully the Word of God,
and, through Patience and Constancy bring forth as much Fruit as they are able.

XXVI. Other Parables.
Matthew. 13.24.-35. Mark 4.26-34. Luke 13.18-30.
He propounded also several other Parables. He compares the World to a Field, in
which the Owner sowed good Seed, but afterward discerned it to be mixed with
Darnel, which his Enemy had sown in the Night; his Servants, as soon as they
saw it, would have weeded it up, but he hindered them, lest they should root up
the Corn with it, and bad them let it grow with the Corn till the Harvest, when
he would have it separated from the Corn and burnt, but gather the Corn into
his Barn. He compares the Kingdom of God to Seed, which, being cast into the
Ground, springs up, and grows, the Sower knows not how, without any further
Care: Then to Mustard Seed, which being a very small Seed, less than any other,
becomes the biggest among Herbs. Lastly, to Leaven, which is put into the Dough
till the whole is Leavened.

When he had spoken these things, he sent the People away, and returned to the
House with his Disciples, who prayed him to declare to them the Meaning of the
Parable of the Darnel. He tells them, That it signifies, That the Good ought to
tolerate the Wicked, with whom they are mixed, till God shall separate them,
the one from the other, at the End of the World; for then the Sinners shall be
cast into Hellfire, and the Good shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of God.

He teaches them also the same Truth, under the Parable of the Fishermen, who
catch all sorts of Fish in their Nets, promiscuously, but sitting upon the
Bank, separate the Good, which they carry away, and cast away the Bad. Lastly,
he makes them sensible that we ought to part with any thing to purchase Heaven,
by the Comparison of a Man, who sold all he had to buy a Pearl of great Price,
or the Field, in which he knew there was a great Treasure.

The Gospel gives us the Explication of none of the other Parables, that by an
Attentive Consideration of those which are explained, we may find out the Sense
of those that are not, our selves, having first begged of God that Spirit of
Understanding, which Jesus Christ requires of his Auditors, when he says, He
that has Ears to hear let him hear. The Ignorant and Simple, who have not
Abilities to find out the Signification of those Parables which the Son of God
has not unfolded, and who may justly fear mistaking by following their own
Sense, ought to consult their Pastors about such difficult Places, and while we
wait for the Resolution of what we demand, practicing the Truths they know,
which it is easy for an humble and teachable Soul to understand. And for the
help of these sort of Persons it is that I composed this Work chiefly, and
therefore shall give you the Sense of the Three following Parables to that of
the Darnel, out of the Fathers and Doctors of the Church.

All Three of them may signify the Preaching of the Gospel; The Preacher
disperses the Seed of the Word, and this Seed grows by little and little, by
the secret Operation of God's Grace in the Heart of him, 1 Cor. 3.6.
that receives it; for the Preacher Sows, Planteth and Waters. There was
nothing more contemned, at first, than the Doctrine of the Gospel; but, like a
Grain of Mustard Seed, it has grown and filled the whole Earth. Lastly, we
must carefully keep and preserve the Word of the Gospel in our Hearts, that the
Sacred Leaven may leaven the whole Lump, and by its secret Virtue reform all
the Thoughts, Desires and Actions of Man.

XXVII. Jesus Christ goes to Preach at Nazareth.
Matthew. 13.54-58. Mark. 6.1-6. Luke 4.16-30.
The Son of God, after he had finished these Parables, went to Preach in the
City of Nazareth, where he had been conceived and brought up: His Disciples
were also with him. According to his usual Custom, he went into the Synagogue
on the Sabbath Day, where standing up to read, they gave him the Book of the
Prophet Isaias; He opened it, and found the Place, where the Prophet, speaking
of the Messiah, Isai. 61.1.
says, That he was consecrated, and sent by the Spirit of God, to preach the
Gospel to the Poor, to heal the Sick, to publish the Day of Grace from the
Lord, and declare the Day of Judgment. When he had read this Text, he shut the
Book, and gave it to the Minister. Then sitting down he explained this
Prophecy, and shows, that it was accomplished in himself. All that were in the
Synagogue fixed their Eyes on him, while he spoke, and wondered so much at the
gracious Words that proceeded out of his Mouth, that they demanded one of
another, Whence has this Man this great Wisdom (which he shows?) Is not this
the Son of the Carpenter, called Joseph, the Son of Mary? and are not his
Brethren, i. e. Cousins, James and Joses, and Simon and Judas? and are not his
Kindred with us? Whence then has this Man all these thing? The Gospel
observes, That he was not only a Subject of Astonishment, but also of Scandal:
Whereupon Jesus, knowing their Thoughts, says unto them, Ye will surely apply
this Proverb to me, Physician, Heal thy self, as a Reproach to him, that he
would not do as great Miracles in his own Country, as he had done at Capernaum:
But he assures them, That a Prophet that is well received and honored
everywhere else, is neither received nor honored in his own Country: This he
proves by Two Examples, the first of Elias, who, in a Famine, was not sent by
God to the Widows of his own Country, but to a Widow of another Country, to
receive Relief in his need. And the other of Elisha, who cured a strange Lord
of a Leprosy, when there were many Lepers in Israel, who would not desire a
Cure from him.

These Truths much incensed all those that were in the Synagogue; and they
arose in their Fury, and led him out of the City to the Top of a Mountain, to
cast him down from it: But because he could only dye at the Time and in the
manner he himself pleased, he withdrew himself from the Fury of these wretched
Men, and passing through the midst of them, he retreated from Nazareth. The
Gospel observes. That he did but very few Miracles, and healed a very small
Number of Sick People then, only by laying Hands on them; the Infidelity of his
hardened City, rendering it unworthy of his Presence and good Deeds.

XXVIII. Jesus goes about Galilee again, and sends his Apostles to preach.
Matthew. 9.35-38. Luke 8.1-3.
Jesus, being departed from Nazareth, went again throughout all Galilee, going
into every City and every Village, teaching in their Synagogues, preaching the
Gospel, and healing every Sickness and every Disease. And the Twelve Apostles
were with him, to whom also were joined certain Women, who had been freed from
Evil Spirits, and cured of their Distempers: Among whom were Mary Magdalen, out
of whom went Seven Devils, and Joanna, the Wife of Chuza, Herod's Steward, and
Susanna, and several others, who ministered to him of their Substance. In this
Journey he looked upon this great Multitude, to whom he was about to preach the
Gospel, as so many fainting and scattered Sheep, which have no Shepherd to look
after them; and being moved with Compassion, he said to his Disciples; The
Harvest indeed is great, but the Laborers are few, pray ye therefore the Lord
of the Harvest, that he would send Laborers into it.

Since he himself was Lord of this Harvest, and his Apostles were the
Laborers, Matthew 10.1-42. Mark 6.7-13. Luke 9.1-9.
whom he had designed for that Work long before; He called them, gave them
Power to cure Diseases and cast out Devils, and sent them, Two and Two, to
preach the Kingdom of God, having first given them such Rules as he would have
them observe in the Exercise of their Ministry. He ordered them to preach to
the Jews only, and make this the Subject of all their Sermons, The Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand: To use that Power freely that has been given freely; not to
incumber themselves with Money, or variety of Clothes, that they may be the more
free to discharge their Office, because they must receive a necessary
Maintenance from those to whom they Preach: To choose their Abode, in all
Places, with Honest, Good Men: To say, when they go into their Houses, Peace be
to this House; to stay there, so long as they continue in the Place: And to
shake off the Dust off their Feet, against those who will neither receive nor
hear them.

He then tells them, That he sends them as Sheep among Wolves, and that they
ought to live among those Sinners, whom they labor to convert, with Simplicity
and Caution: That, notwithstanding all their Wariness, they shall be
persecuted; that the only way to escape is to fly, and, if they are taken and
carried before Tribunals, they should not trouble themselves, how to answer
their Judges, because the Holy Spirit shall supply them with an Answer: That
they should only take Care not to be discouraged with Fear; and that they
should not fear Men, who have Power over the Body only, but fear God, who can
destroy both the Body and Soul eternally: That if they disown him before Men,
he will disown them before God, at they Day of Judgment; but, on the contrary,
he will acknowledge them for his, who are not ashamed to confess his Name.
Lastly, to encourage them in suffering the greatest Torments, rather than be
wanting of their Duty, he assures them, That nothing should befall them but by
the Order of God, who counts all the Hairs of their Heads, and by losing
their Lives for him in this World, they should save it to all Eternity: That
they could not be his Disciples, unless they took up their Cross and follow
him; and that they ought not to expect better Usage than their Master, whom
they had seen themselves to be called a Samaritan, that had a Devil, even by
those Men whom he came to save.

He concludes this Discourse with Rewards that they shall have, who hear their
Word, and furnish them with Things necessary; saying, Whosoever shall give you
but a Cup of cold Water, to drink, in my Name, verily, I say unto you, he shall
have his Reward. The Apostles having received these Instructions, went
throughout all the Country, preaching to the People, That they should repent;
and God confirmed their Discourses with Miracles, for they cast out many
Devils, and by Anointing many, that were Sick, with Oil, cured them.

XXIX. Herod beheads John the Baptist.
Matthew. 14.1-12 Mar. 6.14-30.
The Fame of Jesus's Miracles spreading more and more in Galilee, came at last
to Herod's Court: Every Man, almost, was guessing who this Man was, that did
such great Miracles; some said he was Elias, others one of the Old Prophets,
who appeared anew; others, among whom was Herod himself, suspected, That it
was John the Baptist risen from the Dead; for not long before Herodias, who had
caused this Holy Forerunner of Christ to be imprisoned, had found out a way to
satiate her Malice, which she had conceived against him, by procuring his Death.

The Occasion was this, Herod making a magnificent Feast, upon his Birth Day,
for all his Court; the Daughter of Herodias came in, and danced before them,
and so pleased all the Company, that the King bid her ask what Favor she would
have, and promised, with an Oath, That he would grant it her, to the half of
his Kingdom: She immediately went and consulted with her Mother what she should
ask: And her Mother bid her ask the Head of John the Baptist. She returned in
haste to the King, and prayed him to give her, by and by, the Head of John the
Baptist in a Charger. Herod was much disturbed at this Request; but a false
Respect to Men hindered him from denying her; and not being willing to be
accused of being worse than his Word, by those who had been Witnesses of his
Oath, he sent and cut off John Baptist's Head in the Prison, gave it to the
Damosel, who carried it to her Mother. The Disciples of John, hearing of the
Death of their Master, buried his Body, and laid it in a Tomb, and went to
Jesus, to tell him the News of it.

The End of the Second Book.
BOOK III.
A brief Relation of what Jesus did in the Third Year of his Ministry.
I. Jesus Christ feeds Four thousand in the Wilderness, with Five Loaves and
Two Fishes.
Matthew. 14.13-21. Mark 6.30-44 Luke 9.10-17. John 6.1-14.
JESUS having heard what was said of him in Herod's Court, and his Apostles
coming at the same Time to him, to give him an account of what they had done
and taught in the Places whither he had sent them: He said unto them, Go into
some Desert Place apart, that ye may rest a while. Wherefore they took Ship, to
avoid the Multitude, who would not allow them so much as Time to eat, and
having sailed over the Lake, they remained in a desert Place over against, and
not far distant from the City Bethsaida.

Coming out of the Ship, they met a great Multitude of People, which ran after
him to that Place; for those that saw them depart, and others, who had
Intelligence of it, went on Foot by the Lake-side, and were come before them to
the Place where they landed: Jesus, seeing their eagerness and zeal, received
them gladly, and went up into a Mountain, and, being set down, taught them many
things concerning the Kingdom of God, and healed the Sick they brought to him.

When it was near Night, the Apostles desired him to send the People away,
because they were in a desert Place, where they could not get Food. Jesus said
unto them, Give ye them to eat: But they asked him, Whether they should go and
buy Two hundred Penniworth, i. e. eight Pounds worth of Bread, to feed so great
a Multitude. He then lifting up his Eyes upon the People, and seeing so great a
Company, he said unto Philip, Whence shall we buy Bread that these may eat?
(This he said, as the Gospel observes, to try him, for he himself knew what he
would do) Philip answered him, Two hundred Pennyworth is not sufficient for
them, that every one of them may take a little. He then asked them, How many
Loaves they had? Andrew, Peter's Brother, says unto him, There is a young Man
here, that has Five Barley Loaves and Two Fishes; but what are they says he,
among so many? Jesus bids them bring them, and commanded them to make the
Multitude sit down.

Then they made them all sit down by Companies, in several Ranks, each
consisting of Fifty or an Hundred Men, and they were about Five hundred Men,
besides Women and Children; when they were all set down in order, Jesus took
the Five Loaves and the Two Fishes, and lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, and
giving Thanks, he blessed them, and then brake them, and gave them to the
People, by his Disciples: And after the same manner he parted the Fish among
them. When they had eaten and were satisfied, Jesus commanded them to gather up
the Fragments that remained, which they did, and filled Twelve Baskets with
them, each Apostle one.

II. Jesus Christ walks upon the Water, and permits S. Peter to come to him.
Matt. 14.22,-36. Mar. 6.45,-56. Jo. 6.15,-21.
The People having seen such a Miraculous multiplication, as was made by Jesus,
looked upon him as the Messiah, and said one to another, This is really that
Prophet, which should come into the World. Whereupon they resolved to make him
their King, and become his Subjects; but Jesus knowing their design, and that
they were coming to take him by force and make him their King, he constrained
his Disciples to enter immediately into a Ship, and go before to the other side
to Bethsaida. But he himself got away from them, and went up into a Mountain,
and continued there alone in Prayer, till it was Night, and very dark.

In the mean while, the Ship into which the Apostles were entered, was tossed
with a great Tempest in the middle of the Lake; the Waves ran so high, and Wind
was so contrary, that they could not get forward, so that when it was almost
Morning, they had not Sailed from the Shore, where they took Ship, above 25 or
30 Furlongs, which is but little more than a League. Then saw they Jesus
walking upon the Water, and coming near them, they cried out for fear,
supposing him to have been a Spirit. But he said unto them, Be of good Courage,
it is I, be not afraid. Peter answered him, Lord, if it be thou, Bid me come
unto thee on the Water: Jesus says unto him, Come: And Peter went immediately
out of the Ship, and walked upon the Water to meet Jesus. But the Wind being
boisterous, and high, he was afraid, and immediately beginning to sink, he
cried out, Lord save me. Jesus took him then by the Hand, saying to him, Oh Man
of little Faith, why did thou doubt? As soon as they were come into the Ship,
the Wind ceased, and immediately they were at the Land, whether they were
going. All these Miracles opened the Eyes of the Disciples, who had not
sufficiently considered upon the Miracles of the Five Loaves. They were
astonished at so great Miracles, and acknowledged the Author of them, to be the
Son of God, and they came to him, and Worshipped him under that Title. As soon
as they were come out of the Ship, the People of the place, where they landed,
which was the Country of Gennesareth, knew him, and went to tell it through all
the Land. So that wherever he went they brought the sick People in Beds from
all adjacent Places, and laid them in the Streets, praying him to permit them
to touch, if it were but the Border of his Garment; and all that touched him,
were Cured.

III. Jesus in an Excellent Discourse, proves that he himself is the Living
Bread and Food of Souls.
Jesus having thus withdrawn himself, Jo. 6.22,-71.
all the People, whom he had so Miraculously Fed with Five Loaves, were much
troubled to know what was become of him: They had seen the Apostles go into the
Ship to pass over the Water, but Jesus did not embark with them, and there was
no other Ship there. The next day, as soon as they knew that he was not on that
side, they took Ship, and went to Capernaum to seek him. And when they had
found him, they said unto him, Master, when came thou hither? for they could
not imagine, how he got over the Water. He answered them, Ye seek me, because
ye were fed with the Loaves. Labor for another sort of nourishment, that
perishes not, but continues to eternal Life, which the Son of Man shall give
you.

They immediately asked him, what Works acceptable to God, they must do, that
they may obtain this Food. He answered them, This is the Work of God, to
believe on him, whom he has sent. But say they, what Miracle do thou Work,
that we may believe on thee? Our Fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness, which
the Scripture calls the Bread of Heaven: As if they had said, Thou have indeed
Fed 500 Men; but thou did it but once: Moses fed Six Hundred Thousand Men,
for Forty Years together with Manna, that fell from Heaven. Can thou do any
thing greater than Moses did? Jesus answered them, verily I say unto you, Moses
did not give you the true Bread from Heaven, but it is my Father that gives it;
and this Bread is he, that came down from Heaven, and gives Life unto the
World. They, said unto him, Lord, give us this Bread for ever. He answered
them: I am the Bread of Life, he that comes to me, shall never hunger, and he
that believes on me, shall never thirst. By which words we are to understand,
That Jesus is the spiritual Food of those Souls that eat him, believing on him
by a lively Faith, which works by Love, and by thus eating him, they obtain
that happy Life, with which they shall be fully and eternally satisfied.

Then he adds, that although they had seen, and been witnesses of so many
Miracles, which he had done, yet they did not believe on him, and by reason of
their Infidelity they should lose the great advantage, which all those, which
his Father should bring unto him should enjoy, viz. to be raised up at the Last
Day, and inherit eternal Life. Nevertheless the Jews murmured against him,
saying, Is not this the Son of Joseph? Do not we know his Father and Mother?
Why then does he tell us, that he came down from Heaven? Jesus was so far from
mollifying or recanting these Truths, though they were offended at them, that on
the contrary, he confirms them more strongly, and having proved from Scripture,
that they should be taught of God; that all, whom his Father teaches, shall
come unto him, and that they themselves did not come unto him, because they did
not understand the Voice of him that sent him, He tells them again, that he is
the Bread of Life; that the Manna did not keep them from dying, who eat of it;
but his flesh was the true Bread, that came down from Heaven, which gives Life
to all that eat of it.

These last words made them the more averse to him, and they disputed among
themselves, how he could give them his Flesh to eat? Nevertheless, he pursued
his Discourse and tells them, that his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is
drink indeed, that they have no Life in them, if they eat not his Flesh, and
drink his Blood; and that he that feeds on them, shall be raised up at the Last
Day, and obtain eternal Life. Lastly, he teaches them what great effects his
Body should work in the Souls of all those that receive it worthily, saying to
them, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in
him, and he shall live by me, as I live by my Father, which has sent me.

These sublime Truths, which he taught in the Synagogue at Capernaum* offended
many of the Jews; yea, several of his Disciples, having hard them, said, These
words are very heard, and unintelligible, who can patiently hear such Doctrine
as this, much less believe it? But they understood them in a literal, which
were meant in a Spiritual sense only. They thought, says St. Austin, that if
they eat his flesh, they must cut it in pieces, as the flesh which is sold in
the Market is. They were not sensible, that besides the manner of eating Jesus
Christ by Faith, they might also really eat him in the Eucharist under the
Figure of Bread, a way wherein there is nothing affrighting. But instead of
believing all, that he, who was the Truth it self, said unto them, by attending
to his Explication of what they did not understand, they were offended at his
Speech, and withdrawing themselves from following him, would be his Disciples
no longer.

The Apostles were wiser than these deserters; for Jesus having said unto them,
Will ye also leave me? Peter answered for them all, Lord, to whom should we go?
thou have the words of Eternal Life, and we believe and know, that thou art the
Christ the Son of God. Nevertheless among these Twelve, which adhered so firmly
to him, there was one which should afterward betray him, which was Judas
Iscariot: Jesus knowing it, foretold the Infidelity and Treachery of that
Apostle, saying, Have not I chosen you Twelve? And yet one of you is a Devil,
and a Wicked Traitor.

IV. The Pharisees complain, that his Apostles did eat with un-washed Hands.
Jo. 6.4.
The Passover was nigh at hand, when Jesus multiplied the Bread, and made the
former Discourse. It appears by this Relation of St. John, that he went not up
to Jerusalem to Solemnize that Feast according to the Custom, for that
Evangelist says, that after this he remained in Galilee, not daring to go into
Judea, because the Jews sought to put him to Death. Then the Scribes, and
Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, came unto him; Matt. 1^.1,-20. Mar. 7.1,-23.
and having observed, that his Disciples did not scruple to eat their Meat with
unwashen Hands, they complained of them to him. Not that there was any
commandment of the Law, enjoining them to wash their Hands before they eat; but
the Pharisees had annexed several Humane Traditions to the Law, which they were
more exact in the observance of, than the Law it self. For this reason it was
that they said unto Jesus, Why do thy Disciples break the Tradition of the
Elders in not washing their Hands, when they eat their Food? Jesus asked them
again, Why do you your selves transgress the Law of the Lord by following your
Traditions? As for example, Why do you persuade Children to think that they do
a Work acceptable to God in giving him Offerings, although they suffer their
Father and Mother to be in want? thus making them to prefer an Humane Tradition
before the Commandment of God, which injoyns Children so expressly to Honor,
and Support those, from whom they have received Life.

Then he shows them, that notwithstanding all their Ceremonial observances,
they wore the Hypocrites, of whom God speaks by the Prophet Isaias; This People
honors me with their Lips, Isai. 29.13.
but their Heart is far from me. Lastly, he calls to the People, and says unto
them with a loud Voice. Hear ye this, and understand my sayings. Nothing from
without a Man, entering into his Body can defile him; but that which comes out
of the Man, defiles the Man. Upon this his Disciples came unto him, and told
him, that the Pharisees were offended at his Words. But he answered them, Every
Plant, that my Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up: Let them
alone, they are blind leaders of such as are as blind as themselves, with whom
they shall fall into the Ditch, and so perish eternally together.

Then he went into an House, and his Disciples desired him to explain to them
his meaning in those Words, Nothing that enters into a Man, defiles the Man,
but that which comes out of the Man, defiles the Man. He unfolded the Parable
to them, and taught them, that every thing that enters into the Body of a Man
is Food, which cannot defile the Man; but that which comes out of his Heart,
are evil thoughts, adulteries, false-witness, and generally all Sins. And these
are the things which defile a Man, and not to eat with unwashen Hands, which is
a mere outward and Ceremonial Rite.

V. Jesus frees a Damsel possessed with a Devil.
Matt. 15.21,-28. Mark 7.24,-30.
Jesus departing thence, went into the Coasts of Tire and Sidon; and entering
into an House endeavored to conceal himself, but an Heathen Woman, which the
Gospel calls a Canaanite, because she came out of Phenicia, the Ancient
Habitation of the Canaanites, discovering where he was, came to him, crying out
and saying, O Lord, thou Son of David, have mercy on me, my Daughter is
grievously vexed with a Devil. He answered not a Word; but when his Disciples
prayed him to free them from her troublesome Importunities and Cries by
granting her desires, he answered them; I am not sent but to the lost Sheep of
the House of Israel, i. e. the Jews. But she was not at all discouraged at this
denial, but on the contrary, as if she had been emboldened by it, she goes to
him, throws her self down at his Feet, and adoreth him, saying, Lord, help me.
He says to her, Let the Children be first filled: for it is not fit to take
the Childrens Bread, and cast it unto Dogs. She replied, True Lord, but yet the
Dogs eat the Crumbs that fall from the Childrens Bread. Then said he unto her,
O Woman, great is thy Faith, be it unto thee, even as thou desire: Go thy
way, for this saying the Devil is gone out of thy Daughter. Then the Woman went
home, and found her Daughter laid upon the Bed, and perfectly freed from the
Devil.

VI. Jesus Cures a Man Blind and Dumb.
Jesus being returned, Mark 7.31-37. Matt. 15,-29.
came to a place near to the Lake, where they brought to him a Man Blind and
Dumb, beseeching him to lay hand upon him. And he took him aside from the
Multitude, and put his fingers in his ears, and some of his spittle upon his
Tongue. Then lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, he sighed, and said unto him,
Ephatha, which in the Syriack Language signifies, Be open, and Loosed. And
immediately the Man's Ears were opened, and his Tongue was unloosed, so that he
heard, and spoke plain. Jesus forbad those, who had been witnesses of this
Miraculous Cure, to speak of it to any Person; but the more he Charged them,
the more they published it, and in their astonishment said, He has done all
things well, he has made the Deaf to hear, and the Dumb to speak.

VII. Jesus Feeds Four Thousand with Seven Loaves.
Then Jesus went up into a Mountain, Matt. 16.32,-37. Mar. 8.1,-9.
and great Multitudes of People came unto him, bringing with them Persons sick
of all manner of Distempers, whom they laid at his Feet, and he healed them
all, insomuch that they glorified God for the Wonders which they had seen, and
could not but follow him, who confirmed the saving Doctrine, which he had
Taught, with so many Miracles. It seems that they had forgotten to bring Food
with them, which Jesus knowing, said One day to his Disciples, I have
compassion on this People, because they have been with me this three days
already and have nothing to eat. I will not send them away fasting, for fear
they faint by the way: for some of them have come a great way. His Disciples
said unto him, how can we provide Bread enough to satisfy so great a Multitude
in this Desert place? He asked them, How many Loaves have ye? They said unto
him, Seven, and a few small Fishes. He commanded all the People to sit down; he
Blessed, and distributed to them the Seven Loaves, and the Fishes, and Fed Four
Thousand Persons so fully, that they filled Seven Baskets with the Fragments
that remained.

VIII. The Pharisees desire a Sign, Jesus refuses to give them any.
Matt. 16.1,-12. Mark 8.10,-21. Luke 12.54,-57.
As soon as Jesus had sent the Multitude away, he entered into a Ship with his
Disciples, and went into the Country of Dalmanutha, which lies on the
East Side of the Lake of Gennesareth, between Gerasa and Chorazin, upon the
Coasts of Magdlaa. Then the Pharisees and Sadducees came to tempt him, and
Disputing with him, asked of him again to show them some Prodigy in the Air.
But instead of doing what they required of him, who were so incredulous, and
self-conceited, that they would not be convinced by so many Miracles, as they
had seen him do, he reproved them because they could foretell, whether it would
be Cold, or Hot, by the different alterations of the Air, as also whether it
will Rain, or be fair Weather, but could not discern that which is Right, nor
acknowledge by so many visible Signs, that the happy time of the Messiah's
coming is now arrived. Then sighing deeply in his Spirit, he returned them the
same answer, which he had given to the like question. This wicked and
adulterous Generation seeks after a Sign, and Prodigy, but there shall no
Sign be given to it, but the Sign of the Prophet Jonas.

Then he left them, and sailed back again with his Disciples, to whom in their
passage, he said, Take heed, and beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, and
Sadducees, and of the Leaven of Herod. The Apostles, thought that he had spoken
of Leaven, because they had forgotten to take Bread along with them, and had
but one Loaf in the Ship; whereupon he reproves them for their little Faith,
for their inconsiderateness upon all that he had done among them, for the
blindness of their heart, which hindered them from understanding, and profiting
by all that he had done in their presence; and Lastly, for their forgetfulness
of all that they had hard, and seen. He asked them, How many Baskets full of
the five Loaves, with which he fed Five Thousand, they took up? and of the
Seven Loaves, wherewith he fed Four Thousand? and Teaches them, that instead of
busying their minds, as they did, with the Bread, that nourishes the Body
only, and of providing for their Temporal Wants, which he could provide for,
when, and how he pleased, they should particularly attend to the Heavenly
Doctrins, which he Taught under the Name and Vail of things Natural, and so to
conceive, that the Leaven he speaks of, is the corrupt Doctrine of the Pharisees
and Sadducees.

IX. Jesus heals a Blind Man at Bethsaida.
When they were come to Bethsaida, they brought a blind Man to him and prayed
him to touch him. Mark 8.22,-26.
And he took the blind Man by the Hand, and leading him out of Town, he
anointed his Eyes with spittle, and laid his Hands upon him, and asked him, if
he saw any thing. The blind Man answered him, I see Men walking, but they seem
to me like Trees. Jesus then put his Hands again upon his Eyes, and the blind
Man began to distinguish Objects better and better, till he came to a perfect
sight. Then the Son of God sent him to his own House, forbidding him to tell
any Man what had happened unto him.

X. S. Peter confesses, That Jesus Christ is the Son of God.
Matthew. 16.13-20 Mark 8.27-30 Luke 9.18-20.
Jesus went from thence with his Disciples, and ascending up toward the Head of
Jordan, he went into the Towns adjoining to Caesarea Philippi, a City situate
upon the same River, on the South Side of Galilee. By the Way he asked them,
What Men said of him? They answered him, That some took him for John the
Baptist, others for Elias, others for Jeremiah, and lastly, others for one of
the old Prophets, risen from the Dead. But, says he to them, whom, say ye,
that I am? Peter answered, and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living
God. Whereupon Jesus says unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Son of Jonas, for
Flesh and Blood has not revealed this, that thou have said, unto thee, but my
Father which is in Heaven: And I also say unto thee, That thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it: And I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever
thou shall loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven.

XI. Jesus foretells his Death to his Disciples.
Matthew. 16.20-28. Mark 8.30-38. Luke 9.21 22.
Jesus, after this Discourse, forbids his Disciples to publish it, that he was
the Son of God: and then begins to tell them, what he must suffer, as he was
the Son of Man: He declares unto them, That he must go to Jerusalem, and be
there disowned by the Jewish Governors, Chief Priests and Scribes, suffer many
Cruelties and Indignities from them, be put to Death, and raised again the
Third Day: Peter, who by reason of the great Love he had for his Lord and
Master, could not endure to hear this Discourse, took him aside and reproved
him; saying, God forbid that such Things should befall thee, Lord. But Jesus
rebuking him, for giving him such Council, which though it testified much
carnal Love and Affection to him, did so plainly oppose the Sacred Purpose of
God, in redeeming Man, said unto him, before all his Disciples, Depart from me,
Satan, for thou art an Offense to me, for thou savourest not the things of God.

All this was transacted privately between Jesus Christ and his Disciples, but
he called the People, Luke 9.23-27.
and began to preach before them all, those Truths which Peter did not
understand, when he discouraged him from suffering Death; for he asserted it
publicly, That if any Man will follow him, he must bear his Cross all his
Days: That to lay down his Life for him and the Gospel, is the only way to be
saved, and to seek salvation any other way, is to destroy himself, and that he
gets nothing by the World that loses his own Soul: That he shall hereafter come
in his Glory, and render to every Man according to his Works, and then he will
disown them before his Father, who have been ashamed of him and his Word before
Men: And he adds, That there are some among his present Hearers, who shall not
dye till they see him in his Kingdom, and in the Greatness of his Glory.

XII. Jesus Christ is transfigured on the Mountain.
The Promise, Matt. 17.1-13. Mark 9.1-13.
which Jesus made in the last Words, he partly performed within Eight Days
after, for he took Peter, and James, and John privately, and led them into a
very high Mountain, where he went to Prayers; and while he was at Prayers his
Face became as radiant and shining as the Sun, Luke 9.28-36.
and his Garments as bright as the Light, appeared as white as Snow. The Three
Apostles in the mean while were asleep, but when they awoke they saw their
Master Transfigured, i. e. clear another Man from what they had seen him
before, for they saw him in that Glory, in which he had promised to discover
himself to some of them; and they beheld also, with him, Two Men full of
Majesty, who talked with him concerning that Death which he should suffer at
Jerusalem: They knew that these Two Men were Moses and Elias; and when they
were about going from Jesus, Peter, that he might detain them with them, said
unto his Master, Lord, it is good for us to be here, and if thou please, let
us make Three Tabernacles, One for thee, and One for Moses, and One for Elias:
But as he was thus speaking, scarce knowing what he said in his Transport, as
the Gospel observes, a bright Cloud over-shadowed them, and there came a Voice
out of the Cloud, which spoke these Words, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased, hear him. This Cloud and Voice filled the Three Disciples with so
great Fear, that they fell on their Faces, to the Earth: But Jesus came to
them, and comforted them, and raised them up: Then they lifted up their Eyes,
and looking round about, they saw no Man, save Jesus only.

As they were coming down from the Mountain, he commanded them to tell no Man
what they had seen, till the Son of Man be risen from the Dead. They obeyed
this Command, but did not understand the Last Words; and they disputed among
themselves about the Meaning of this Expression, Until the Son of Man be risen
from the Dead.

The Disciples having seen Elias with him in the Mount, took an occasion to ask
him, Why the Scribes and the Pharisees did assert, That that Prophet was to
come before the Messiah? Jesus answered them, That Elias shall indeed come and
shall be rejected and evil-intreated, as well as the Son of Man; yea, he adds,
That he is already come, and that the Jews have done what they list to him, and
so will they make the Son of Man suffer, as they have done his Forerunner.
This Answer plainly discovered to the Apostles, That the last Elias, of whom he
had spoken, was John the Baptist, who had gone before the first coming of Jesus
Christ in the Spirit and Power of Elias, as Elias himself, in Person, should go
before the Second Coming of Jesus Christ.

XIII. Jesus heals a young Man, Lunatic and Dumb.
The next Day, Jesus being come to the Place, Matthew. 17.14-21. Mark 9.14-29
Luke 9.37,-42.
where the rest of the Apostles were, he met a great multitude of Men, and the
Scribes questioning with them: As for the People, as soon as they saw the Son
of God, they ran to him, and saluted him, being full of Admiration and Joy.
Jesus then asked the Scribes, What was the occasion and Subject of your
Dispute? but at the same Time came a certain Man to him, having broke through
the Press, and kneeling down at his Feet, prayed him to have Pity on his only
Son, whom he had brought unto him, because his Disciples could not cure him.
This Child was a Lunatic, and possessed with a Devil, which made him Dumb and
grievously tormented him; for when it seized upon him, it threw him down upon
the Ground, cast him often into the Fire or Water, and racked him with such
violent Convulsions, that he cries out, fomes, gnashes with his Teeth, and
pineth away, and much bruising him, hardly departs from him.

The Unbelief of the Jews, who did not as yet firmly believe in Jesus Christ,
though they had seen so many Miracles, was a greater and more dangerous Disease
than this of the Lunatic, and was often an Impediment to the Miracles which
Jesus would have done. For this Reason it is that he would cure that, before he
drive out the Devil, and therefore smartly touched that Wound, that the Men
afflicted with it might feel it, saying; O faithless and perverse Generation,
how long shall I be with you, to convince you? how long shall I suffer your
Infidelity? will you never believe? Bring him hither to me. The Child no sooner
saw him, but the Devil began to tear him with fierce Convulsions, and threw him
down, where he rolled foaming. Jesus asked his Father, How long it was since
his Son began to be vexed after this manner? His Father answered him, From his
Childhood; and added, If thou can do any thing, have Pity on us and help us.
Jesus says unto him, If thou can believe, all things are possible to him
that believes. Immediately the Father of the Child cried out with Tears, Lord,
I believe, help thou my Unbelief, i. e. supply all the Defects of my Faith, to
make it worthy to obtain a Cure for my Child. Then Jesus rebuked the Devil,
saying to him, Thou Dumb and Deaf Spirit, I command thee to depart out of this
Child, and to enter no more into him. Then the Spirit cried out, and much tore
and rent the Child, and left him almost dead; but Jesus, taking him by the
Hand, lifted him up, and delivered him to his Father, perfectly cured: And all
that were present beheld it with Admiration, and were amazed at the mighty
Power of God.

When Jesus was come into the House, his Diciples asked, Why they could not
cast out this Devil? He answered them, Because of your Unbelief; adding, Luke
17 6
That if they had but one Grain of Sincere and Sound Faith, they might by their
mere Word remove both Trees and Mountains: And then he says further, That this
kind of Devil goes not out but by Prayer and Fasting. The Apostles did,
without doubt, profit by these Instructions, for S. Luke teaches us elsewhere,
That they addressed themselves to their Master, Luke 17.5
and said, Lord increase our Faith.

XIV. Jesus foretells his Death, and pays Tribute.
While the Multitude was in Admiration of the great things, Matthew. 17.22 27.
Mark 9.30-32 Luke 9 43-45.
that Jesus did in all Places where he went, his Thoughts were mainly employed
in fitting his Disciples for the Disgraces and Contempt of his Death: He tells
them a second Time of it, and desires them to hearken with Attention to him,
and think seriously of these Words in their Hearts; The Son of Man shall be
delivered into the Hands of Men, who shall put him to Death, and he shall rise
again the Third Day: But they understood not that Saying, and yet this
Prediction, which they could not fully comprehend, made them very sorry, and
cast them into such a Consternation, that they durst not ask him to explain it
to them.

They went through Galilee, and returned to Capernaum. Here the Receivers of a
certain Tribute of Two Drams, i. e. Fifteen Pence an Head, asked Peter
whether his Master did not pay Tribute? To whom the Apostle answered, That he
did. As soon as he came into the House, Jesus prevented him, by asking him,
Whether the Kings of the Earth exact Tribute of their own Children, or of
Strangers. Peter answers, Of Strangers: Then Jesus concludes, That the Children
are exempted; leaving it to him to infer from thence, That he being the Son of
God, was not obliged to pay Tribute to Men: Nevertheless, says he, that we may
not offend them, Go thou, and cast an Hook into the Sea, and take the Fish that
shall be first catched, and open his Mouth, and thou shall find a Piece of Money
of Four Drams, or half a Crown's Value, which give to them for thy self and
me.

XV. Jesus checks the Ambition of his Disciples.
Matthew. 18.1-14. Mar. 9.23-50 Luke 9.46-50.
About the same Time, it came into the mind of the Disciples of Jesus, Who of
them should be greatest, and they disputed about it in the Way to Capernaum.
Jesus, knowing the Thoughts of their Hearts, asked them, when they came into
the House, What they disputed about in the Way? but they durst not answer him:
But when he had called his Twelve Disciples to him, they asked him in general,
Who is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven? He answered them, If any Man
desire to be first he shall be the last of all, and Servant of all. And having
called a little Child to him, he took him, and set him by him; and taking him
up in his Arms, he said unto them, Except ye become as little Children, ye
shall not enter into the Kingdom of God; and that whosoever shall so humble
himself, that he makes himself small, as the little Child before them, he shall
be the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven: And then adds, That who so shall
receive one such little Child in his Name, receives him, and he that receives
him, received him that sent him.

Hereupon John, the Son of Zebedee, says unto him, Master, we saw a Man
casting out Devils in thy Name, and we forbad him, because he would not join
himself and associate with us. But Jesus reproved this Action, and told him,
That this Man would not readily speak ill of him in whose Name he did Miracles;
and that they ought not to look upon him as their Enemy, since he did not
engage in any thing against them.

Jesus then turns his Discourse to these little ones, i. e. to the humble, to
whom he would have them make themselves like, and pronounces a Woe against those
who should be an occasion of Falling or Scandal to them, declaring, That
whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, which believe in him, and
whose Angels continually behold the Face of God in Heaven, it were better for
him to be cast into the Depth of the Sea, with a Millstone about his Neck.

He adds, That the World is full of Offenses, which will necessarily happen,
but Woe unto him by whom they come: That, to avoid them, we must lay before Men
the Torments of Hell, where the Worm, that gnaws the damned, never dies, and
the Fire, that burns them, is never quenched; yea, is so far from consuming
them, that, on the contrary, it is like Salt to them, which preserves them from
consuming, that they may be tormented eternally: That to secure themselves from
these terrible Punishments, we must take away every thing that is an occasion
of Falling; and if need require, cut off Feet or Hands, and pull out the Eyes,
i. e. deprive our selves of those things which may be most profitable and are
most dear to us, when they become Means and Instruments of making us fall into
any Sin.

XVI. Jesus gives Rules for Correcting and Pardoning.
The Son of God, although he uses his utmost Endeavors to keep out Scandals
and Offenses out of his Church, Matt. 18.15-35. Luke 17.3, 4.
yet he will have us keep a due Charity and Compassion in our Hearts for those
that at any Time are the Causes of them: And for this Reason it is, that in the
same Discourse, made to his Disciples, he gives us most excellent Rules to deal
with such Offenders by, both as to their Punishment and Pardon; for, in the
first Place, he orders, That he, by whom any Offense comes, shall be
admonished in private, by the Person offended, that, if it be possible, he may
be gained by this means; but if a private Admonition have no effect upon him,
it must be repeated before Two or Three Witnesses; and if this prove also
unsuccessful, and to no purpose, we must accuse him to the whole Church, and
have no more Society or Commerce with him than with an Heathen and Infidel, if
he contemn the Church's, as he has all private Admonition. And, that the
Church may separate all those from her Communion which may obstruct and hinder
the Salvation of her other Children, he has promised her the Authority of
Binding and Loosing, assuring her, That he will ratify and confirm in Heaven
whatsoever she shall pronounce and declare upon Earth.

In the second place, he commands, when Admonition is successful, to pardon the
Offense received, and that Seven times a Day, if the offender repents of what
he has done so often; i. e. that we must always forgive him who is penitent
and sorry for his Fault; for Peter having asked Jesus, How often he ought to
pardon his Brother? whether he ought to do it Seven Times? Jesus answered him,
I say unto thee, not until Seven Times, but until Seventy Times Seven.

And, to show him the Necessity and Advantage of such a merciful Temper, which
is always ready to pardon; he propounds a Parable of a King, who calling his
Servants to an account, found One that owed him so great a Sum that he was not
able to pay it, viz. Ten thousand Talents, or a Million eight hundred and
seventy five thousand Pounds; whereupon he commanded him to be sold, and his
Wife and Children, and all that he had: But this Servant falling down at his
Feet, begged his Mercy and Patience, and he forgave him the Debt. This Wretch
was no sooner gone out, but he met one of his Fellow Servants, who owed him a
small Debt, viz. an Hundred Pence, which is about Three Pounds, Two and Six
Pence of our Money, he takes him by the Throat, and would give him no Time for
Payment, though he earnestly desired Patience, but cast him into Prison. The
King hearing this, called this ungrateful Servant, reproved his Cruelty, and
delivered him to the Tormentors, till he should pay all he owed. Jesus himself
made the Application of his Parable, saying, So shall my heavenly Father use
every one of you, if ye do not from your Hearts forgive his Brother the
Offenses which he has suffered from him.

XVII. Jesus goes to Jerusalem, to the Feast of Tabernacles.
While Jesus thus instructed his Disciples in Galilee, some of his Kindred,
John 7.1-19.
that did not believe on him, being uneasy, that he confined himself so much to
one Province, urged him to show his Miracles more publicly at Jerusalem, the
Capital City of Judea, for which he could not have, as they thought, a fitter
Opportunity than the present Feast of Tabernacles; for the Jews had Three
solemn Feasts every Year, which they were all obliged to go to Jerusalem to
celebrate; upon which account, an innumerable Multitude of People met together,
in that City, upon those Days: These Three Feasts were, the Passover,
Pentecost, Lev. 23.34.
and the Feast of Tabernacles; This last was kept on the Fifteenth Day of
September, and continued Eight Days, in which the Jews dwelt in Tents made of
the Boughs of Trees, in remembrance of those Tents or Tabernacles, in which
they dwelt so long Time in the Desert, when they came out of Egypt.

This Feast drawing near, Jesus's Kindred, who were much disturbed that Jesus
had never yet been at Jerusalem, neither at the Passover nor at Pentecost,
endeavored to persuade him to go thither, at least at the Feast of
Tabernacles, to make himself known unto the World, and not to deprive those
Disciples of his, that dwelt in that City, of the happy Sight of his Miracles.
He answered them, That they might go to Jerusalem when they pleased, but, as
for himself, he must be wary and cautious what he did, because he had many
Enemies; that the World, which had nothing to object against them, hated him,
because he reproved their sinful Actions: Go ye therefore, says he, up to this
Feast, I will not go up yet, with you; i. e. so publicly, for my Time, to
appear in that manner, is not yet fully come: He let them go therefore without
him, but he went himself soon after, but, as it were, in secret, taking his Way
through the midst of Samaria.

XVIII. Jesus heals Ten Lepers.
Jesus passing by a Town of Samaria, Luke 17.11-19
saw Ten Lepers, that stood afar off, and lifting up their Voice, said, Jesus,
our Master, have mercy on us; And Jesus commanded them to go, and show
themselves to the Priests: Which they obeying, were cured in the Way. One of
them, who was a Samaritan, and consequently a Stranger, in respect of the Jews,
as we have already observed, immediately returned back and glorified God,
casting himself upon his Face at Jesus's Feet, to give him Thanks for the
Restitution of his Health. Jesus, to make known the Gratitude of this Man the
more, said, in a kind of Astonishment, Were there not Ten cleansed? Where then
are the other Nine? It is strange that none of them should return to give God
Glory for so great a Mercy, but this Stranger: And he said unto him, Arise, and
go thy Way, thy Faith has made the whole.

XIX. Jesus teaches in the Temple.
In the mean time, John 7.11-53
the Jews enquired after Jesus, at Jerusalem, at the beginning of the Feast,
and had much Discourse about him, some saying, That he was a good Man, others,
that he was a Deceiver. About the middle of the Feast he came to Jerusalem, and
taught in the Temple, to the great Wonder of the Jews, who could not imagine
how he came to have so perfect a Knowledge of the Scripture, because they had
never seen him study it: Whereupon he tells them, That he speaks not of
himself, and if they were desirous of doing the Will of God, they would easily
acknowledge, that his Doctrine proceeded from God that sent him, and whose Glory
he sought after; but because they observed not the Law, instead of receiving
the Truth he spoke they sought to put him to Death. The People then cried out,
Thou have a Devil, who goes about to kill thee? Jesus puts them in Mind of
that Man, who had a Disease Thirty six Years, whom he cured on the Sabbath Day;
John 5.1-16.
for which, though they themselves Circumcise Men on the Sabbath Day, and do
not think that they have broken the Law of Moses, yet they were so implacably
incensed against him, that they had taken up a Resolve to slay him.

Some People of Jerusalem, who knew how their Magistrates and Grandees hated
him, wondered to see him speak so freely, no Man questioning or opposing him,
and said, Are they convinced that this is really the Christ? Nevertheless, add
they, No Man knows whence Christ comes, but we know whence this Man is. Then
cried Jesus with a loud Voice in the Temple, Ye know me, and ye know whence I
am, yet I am not come of my self, and ye know not him that sent me: Thus
reproving them, for looking upon his Earthly Original, as Man, but did not know
his Divine Original, which he had from God, whose Son he was from all Eternity.

Then several of the People believed on him, being convinced, by the greatness
of his Miracles, that he was the Christ: But the Priests and Pharisees sent
Officers to take him. Jesus, who could not suffer but at the Time prefixed by
his Father, said unto the Officers, Yet a little while I am with you, and then
I return to him that sent me; ye shall seek me and shall not find me, and
whither I go ye cannot come. The Jews did not understand these Words, but
thought that he threatened them to leave Judea, and go to teach the Gentiles.

The Officers did not take him, because his Time was not come; and, in the last
Day of the Feast, he cried out with a loud Voice, If any Man thirst, let him
come unto me and drink; Whosoever believes in me, out of his Belly shall flow
Rivers of Living Water, which he meant of the abundant Graces of God's Holy
Spirit, which should be poured out upon the Souls of those that believe in him,
after he should be entered into his Glory.

Nevertheless, the People were much divided in their Opinions about this
Saying, for some took him for a Prophet, others acknowledged him for the
Messiah, and others, who knew not that he was born at Bethlehem, could not
believe him to be the Christ, because they knew that Christ should not come out
of Galilee, but out of the Town of Bethlehem, and from the Family of David.
Then the Priests and Pharisees asked the Officers, whom they had sent to take
him, Why they had not brought him? They gave them no other Answer but this;
Never Man spoke like this Man. The Pharisees asked them, If they were so simple
as to be lead away with such a Seducement, and follow the Error of the cursed
Populacy, leaving the Pharisees and Grandees, who being Learned and Judicious,
have none of them believed on him?

Upon this, Nicodemus, that Pharisee that came to Jesus Christ by Night, told
them, That the Law does not permit them to condemn any Man before an Hearing.
But they answered him, Art thou also a Galilean, i. e. a Disciple of this Man
of Galilee? From whence they affirmed, That there never was a Prophet that rose
out of Galilee. Thus the Assembly parted, without doing any thing to him; and
every Man returned to his own House.

XX. Jesus saves a Woman taken in Adultery.
John 8.11-11.
Jesus departing from Jerusalem from this Feast, went up into a Mountain, called
the Mount of Olives, (which is distant from Jerusalem, about the space of a
Sabboth-days Journey, which is something less than two Miles) and as soon as it
was day, he returned again from thence to the Temple, where being sat down, he
began to instruct the People that were gathered about him. Then the Scribes and
Pharisees brought a Woman to him, who had been taken in Adultery, and setting
her before him in the midst of the People, said unto him, Master, This Woman
was taken in Adultery. Lev. 20.10.
Now Moses in his Law commanded us to Stone Persons found Guilty of that Crime:
But what say thou? This Question they put to him, that they might have an
occasion to accuse him, either of using too much Cruelty toward Sinners, if he
had commanded the Law to be executed upon her, or of nulling the Law, if he
should pardon her. But Jesus instead of Answering them, stooped down, and Wrote
with his Finger upon the Ground. But they continuing to ask him, he raised up
himself, and says to them, He that is without Sin among you, let him cast the
first Stone. Then stooping down he Wrote upon the Ground, as before. But they
being amazed at this unexpected Answer, and convicted by their own Consciences,
went away One by One. Jesus being left alone with the Woman, asked her, Where
are thine accusers? Has no Man condemned thee? she answered him, No man, Lord.
He says unto her, Neither do I condemn thee: Go, and Sin no more.

XXI. Jesus remains in the Temple Teaching. The Jews go about to Stone him.
The Jews hated Jesus every day more and more, Jo. 8.12-59.
but that did not deterr him from Preaching the Truth undauntedly to all. He
tells them, That he is the Light of the World, and if they follow him, they
shall not walk in Darkness. Hereupon the Pharisees replied, that the Testimony,
which he gave of himself, was not worthy of Credit. But he demonstrates, that
they judged amiss, and the Testimony which he gave of himself, was not
therefore less to be believed, because it was confirmed by the Testimony of his
Father, who wrought so great Miracles by him. They then asked him, Where his
Father was? He answered them, That they knew not his Father, because they would
not acknowledge his Son. He added moreover and said, I go my way, and ye shall
seek me, and shall die in your Sins, Whither I go, ye cannot come. And because
they thought he would kill himself, that they might not follow him, hereupon he
tells them, That he was not from below, as they are, but from above, and that
if they did not believe in him, they should dye in their Sins. They then asked
him, Who he was? He answers, That he was the Son of God? but in such words, as
they did not understand. He adds, That when they have lifted him up on high (by
which he means the Cross, to which he was to be fastened) they should believe
him, and know, that he had done nothing of himself, nor said any thing but what
he has heard of his Father.

These Truths, which blinded the Proud, enlightened several other Persons, who
believed on him, to whom he said, That if they would continue firm in the
Observation of his Word, then they should be his Disciples indeed. That they
should know the Truth, and the Truth should make them free. The Jews replied
that they never were Servants, but free, as being the Children of Abraham. He
answers them, That every one that commits Sin, is the Servant of Sin, and that
they could not be truly free, unless he made them free. That they were indeed
Abraham's Children according to the flesh, but that in rejecting the Truth and
seeking to Kill him, who had told them the Truth, they did not do like Abraham,
but made themselves the Children of another Father, by following his Example
and imitating him. They maintained, that in that sense they had no other Father
but God; but Jesus tells them again, That if they were the Children of God,
they would hear God's Word, and Love his only begotten Son, whom he has sent.
That Murder and Lying being the Works of the Devil, those People, who sought
to destroy a Man, whom they could not prove Guilty of any Crime, and who had
told them the Truth, had the Devil for their Father. They made no reply to
this, but by railing at him. Calling him a Samaritan, that has a Devil. Jesus
answered them plainly, I have not a Devil, but honor my Father; adding, that
there is another that will do him Justice, because he seeks not his own
Glory. Afterward he says, That he that keeps his Word shall never dye, which
he means of Eternal Death. But the Jews, who understood it of the Death of the
Body, took occasion to insult over him, asking him, Whether he was greater than
Abraham, and the Prophets, that he could preserve them from Death, that keep
his Commandments, which these great Men could not avoid, and therefore desire
him to tell them, what manner of Man he would have them to take him for. He
answers them again, That he honored not himself, but derived all his Honor
from his Father, whom they worshipped as their God, but know him not. That as
for Abraham, whom they were always bragging of, he had earnestly desired to see
the Coming of him, whom they contemned, which he saw, and was filled with great
Joy. They replied, Thou art not yet Fifty Years Old, and have thou seen
Abraham? He answered them, Verily, verily I say unto you, before Abraham was, I
am. Upon this they took up Stones to cast at him, but he hid himself, and went
out of the Temple escaping the Fury of his Enemies for that time, that he might
expose himself to all their Malice and Rage, when his time appointed by his
Father for him to suffer, was come.

XXII. Jesus gives sight to a Man born Blind.
Jesus, as he passed the Streets of Jerusalem, John 9.1-41.
saw a Man sitting in the Streets, who was Blind from his Birth, and his
Disciples asked him, whether it was his own, or his Parents Sin, that was the
cause of his Blindness? He answered them, that he was not made Blind for any
Sin, that either himself, or his Parents had committed, but that God might
manifest the more the wonderful Works of his Power. He adds, that it is his
Office to do these Works, in the time allowed him for it, and that so long, as
he is in the World, he is the Light of the World. After this answer, He spat on
the Ground, and having made Clay with the spittle, he rubbed the eyes of the
Blind Man with it, and sent him to wash them, to the Pool, called the Pool of
Silom, where as soon as he had washed, he saw clearly. His Neighbors, and all
those that knew him when he was Blind, and sat in the Streets begging, could
not believe what they saw, but doubted whether he was the same Man, or one like
him. But he told them all, that it was he himself: And further related to them,
That a Man called Jesus had restored his sight. They asked him, where he was?
but he saying, that he could not tell, they carried him to the Pharisees, who
also themselves examined him, and he related to them, how the thing happened.

It was the Sabboth-day, on which Jesus healed this Blind Man, which was the
cause, that some of the Pharisees said, This Man is not of God, because he
keeps not the Sabbath. But others could not believe that a Wicked Man could
do so great Miracles, so that there was a great Division among them. Then they
asked the Blind Man, what he thought himself? He answered, that he looked upon
Jesus as a Prophet.

All these things much astonished the Jews, and they would not believe it, till
they had called the Father and Mother of the Blind Man of whom they enquired,
Is this your Son, whom ye say was born Blind? how then does he see clearly? But
they fearing the Jews, and knowing the Resolution, that they had made, to put
every Man out of the Synagogue, who should acknowledge, that Jesus was Christ,
answered freely, We know that this is our Son, and that he was born Blind, but
we are ignorant by what means he sees, or who has opened his Eyes: He is of
Age, ask him, he shall answer for himself. Wherefore they called the Blind Man
the second time, and said unto him, Give God the Glory; we know that this Man
is a Sinner, and a Wicked Man. He answered them, I cannot tell whether he be a
sinner; but this I know, that whereas I was Blind, I now see clearly. They
asked him again, how he had received his sight? And he answered them, I have
already told, and ye did not mind it, why would you hear it again? Are you
desirous to be his Disciples? Then were they enraged against him, and
reproaching him, said unto him, Thou art one of his Disciples, but we are Moses
's Disciples. For we know that God spoke to Moses, but as for this Man, we knew
not whence he is. The Blind Man replied, That it was very strange, that they
should not know, that a Man, who has so Miraculously opened the Eyes of one
Born Blind, a thing the like to which was never heard of since the World began,
must needs be from God. At this they cast him out of their Assembly with
disgrace, saying, Thou wast altogether born in Sin, and do thou undertake to
teach us?

Jesus heard that they had thus expelled him, and meeting him he said unto him,
Do thou believe on the Son of God? He answered him, Who is he, Lord, that I
may believe on him? Jesus says unto him, Thou have seen him, and it is he that
speaks to thee: He answered him, Lord I believe, and immediately fell down at
his Feet, and Worshipped him, as the Messiah.

Jesus adds, that he came into the World to exercise an amazing Judgment, that
the Blind may see, and they that see, may become Blind, i. e. that they whose
Pride hinders them from acknowledging their Spiritual Blindness may be blinded
so as not to see the Truth: for some of the Pharisees having demanded of him,
whether they also were blind? He answered them, If ye were blind, ye should
have no Sin, but because ye assert that ye see, therefore your Sin remains.
As if he had said according to the explication of St. Austin, If ye were
sensible of your Blindness, ye would desire Cure, and he would pardon your
Sins; but your Sins remain, because you are Wise and Holy in your own conceit,
and so think you have no need of any Person to Illuminate and Sanctify you.

XXIII. Jesus proves himself the Good Shepherd.
John 10.1-21.
Jesus having thus subdued the Vanity of those Proud Men, who undertake to lead
and guide others, being Blind and Ignorant themselves, he Propounds to them
under the Parable of a Shepherd and his Sheep, three different Characters of
three different Persons, who are engaged in the Government of Souls; for he
Teaches them, that there are some, that instead of entering by the Door into
the Sheepfold, enter in some other way like Thieves, to Steal, and Kill, and
Destroy. And he explains this similitude, which they did not understand, by
telling them, that he was the Door, by which we must enter upon the Government
of the Flock. There are others, which being entered by the Door, guide and rule
the Flock as Mercenaries and Hirelings, who forsake the Flock, as soon as they
see the Wolf coming, because they love themselves only, and not the Flock.
There are also the Good Shepherds, who enter not of themselves into the
Sheepfold, But the Porter opens to them, who know the Sheep, and are known of
them, and who love them so, as to lay down their Lives for them, upon
Occasions. Jesus then applies all the qualities of this last, and proves
himself to be the Good Shepherd, by way of Excellence, since he came to lay
down his Life for the Sheep, and that willingly and freely, in Obedience to his
Fathers Commandment: For no Man can take it away from him, and when he has
laid it down, he can take it up again, and none can hinder him. Then he
declares, that the Jews were not the only Sheep, for whom he would dye; that he
had other Sheep, viz. the Gentiles, whom he would bring into his Fold, and out
of both would make up one Flock, consisting of such as hear his Voice, of which
he himself would be the Shepherd alone. This Discourse raised a new difference
among his Auditors, some said, that he was possessed with a Devil, and mad;
others answered, Men possessed cannot speak such excellent things as he does,
much less open the Eyes of the Blind.

XXIV. Jesus chooses seventy two Disciples.
Some time after Jesus chose him also Seventy two Disciples, Luke 10.1,-24.
and sent them two by two into all places, whither he intended to go. He gave
them the same instructions, which his Apostles had had before, and the same
power over Devils. They met with good success in their Ministry, and returned
very Joyful, saying, Lord, The Devils themselves are subject to us in thy Name:
But he teaches them not so much to rejoice that the Devils are subject to them,
as that their Names are written in Heaven, in the Book of Life, as Heirs of
Salvation.

In the same moment Jesus was transported with a sudden and extraordinary
motion of the Spirit, Matt. 11.25,-30.
and addressing himself to God, gave him thanks, that he had revealed the great
Mysteries of Heaven to Babes, i. e. to the simple and mean, but concealed them
from the Wise Men of the World. He adds, That his Father had delivered all
things unto him, and no Man can know God, but the only Son of God, and he, to
whom the Son will reveal him. Then turning to his Disciples, he tells them,
That they were happy in seeing and beholding those things, which so many Kings,
and Prophets, have neither heard nor seen, although they desired it greatly.
Lastly, finding himself full of Love toward Men, he cried out, Come unto me
all ye that labor, and are heavy Laden, and I will comfort you. Take my Yoke
upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and humble in Heart, and ye shall find
rest to your Souls; for my Yoke is easy, and pleasant, and my Burden is Light.

XXV. Jesus teaches a Lawyer to love his Neighbor.
Luke 10.25,-37.
Then a Doctor of the Law stood up, and said unto him, tempting him, Master,
what shall I do to inherit Eternal Life? Jesus having also put this Question to
him, What is commanded in the Law? how read thou? He answered, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, with all thy
strength, and with all thy Mind; and thy Neighbor as thy self. Then Jesus
replied, Thou have well answered: This do, and thou shall Live.

This Scribe being desirous to appear Holy, and an exact observer of the Law,
demanded further of him, Whom he ought to account his Neighbor? Jesus answered
him by a Parable, of a certain Jew, who was robbed, and so much wounded by
Thieves in his Journey, that he was left almost Dead. A Priest and Levite
passed one after another this way, just by him, but would give him no help, but
Samaritan, i. e. a Stranger in respect of the Jews, saw him, as he passed by
him, and had compassion on him: And came unto him, and poured Oil and Wine into
his Wounds, and binding them up, set the Wounded Man upon his Horse, and
carried him to an Inn, where he committed him to the care of the Host, and left
him Money to provide necessaries for him: Jesus desirous that the Lawyer should
make Application himself, asked him, Which of these three Passengers was
Neighbor to him, that fell among the Thieves? He answered, He that showed
mercy on him. Jesus approving his answer, said unto him, Go, and do thou
likewise.

XXVI. Jesus Lodges at Martha's House, and Teaches his Disciples to Pray.
Jesus then goes on his Journey with his Disciples, Luke 10.38,-42.
and entered into a certain Village, where a Woman named Martha entertained him
joyfully in her House. She had a Sister Named Mary, and a Brother called
Lazarus, of whom we shall have occasion to speak in the following part of this
History. While she was busy in preparing all she could for her Divine Guest,
her Sister sat at Jesus's Feet, and heard his Word. Martha complained to him,
that her Sister Mary suffered her to take all the trouble upon her, and prayed
him to command her to help her: Jesus answered her, Martha, Martha, You cumber
your self, and trouble your self with many Worldly cares, whereas there is but
one thing necessary, viz. to hear and receive my Word, which since Mary had
chosen to do, she shall enjoy the Eternal advantage and happiness of it.

By which words, Jesus does not condemn the Hospitality of Martha, but only
teaches her to do it with less care and trouble, and not to prefer an Action,
which though very pious in it self, is of no use, but in this Life, where we have
wants and miseries, to relieve and succor, before an Action, whose benefit is
eternal, which Mary was about, who by hearing the Word of Jesus Christ, begins
to feed upon the contemplation of that God, who is the nourishment of the
Blessed Saints and Angels in Heaven.

But Jesus does not content himself to teach us to hearken to the Word of God,
Luke 11.1,-13.
by the example of Mary, but also he directs us how to speak to God in Prayer;
for upon a certain day, one of his Disciples seeing him at prayer, after he had
finished, said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his
Disciples. Whereupon he taught them that excellent Prayer, which we have set
down in the Abridgment of his Sermon on the Mount, and gave them those good
rules for Prayer there mentioned.

XXVII. He reproves the Pharisees and Scribes for their Sins.
Luke 11.27,-54. Matthew. 23.4,-39. Mark 12.38,-40.
Jesus on a certain day was invited by a Pharisee to Dinner, and as soon as he
was entered into his House, set him down to Meat, without washing his Hands
first, according to the Custom of the Pharisees. His Host was much offended at
his Carriage, and murmured in himself at it, till Jesus said unto him, You
Pharisees are very careful, to keep the outside of your Cups and Platters
clean, but your inward parts, i. e. your heart is full of Rapine, Wickedness
and Uncleanness; and at the same time he teaches them an excellent remedy to
purify themselves from all their filth; Give Alms, and all things shall be
clean unto you.

He objects many other Crimes to these proud Men, who affected to be Honored
and Esteemed of all Men, as the greatest Saints. He discovers their Hypocrisy,
and severely censures their irregular conversation; for he pronounces a Woe
against them, because they were very fearful of omitting small duties, but were
not afraid to commit great Sins, like those Men, who strain at a Gnat, and
swallow a Camel; Because they were very exact in giving the Tenth of their
Garden-herbs, but neglected the more important Duties of the Law, Justice,
Mercy, Faith, and the Love of God; Because they love to have the uppermost
places in all Assemblies, and be saluted in the Markets; Because under the
pretense of their long Prayers, they devoured, and ruined Widows, into whose
Houses they insinuated themselves by that means; Because they would Travel into
all places to convert Infidels to the Jews Religion and afterward make them
more worthy of Hell, than themselves, either by their wicked example, teaching
them to profane the True Religion, which they had brought them over to, or
else so scandalizing them by their sinful Lives, that they chose to return to
that Pagan Worship they had forsaken; Because they undertake to Guide, and
Instruct others, but are themselves so Ignorant and Blind, as to teach Men,
that they are obliged to keep their words, when they swear by the Gift bestowed
upon the Temple, or offered on the Altar, but are not obliged, when they swear
by the Temple, or Altar themselves. He compares them therefore to those
Sepulchers, which have fine white outsides, but are within full of Dead-mens
Bones, and Rottenness.

The Lawyers thought that all these Reproofs equally concerned them; wherefore
one of them taking upon him to speak to Jesus, said to him, Master, in thus
speaking, thou disgracest Us also. But he spared them no more than the former,
but pronounced also a Woe against them, because they impose a Yoke upon others,
which they will not touch with the Tip of their Fingers, and that they will
neither enter into Heaven themselves, not suffer those that would. He tells
them also by way of reproach, that those very Magnificent Ornaments, with which
they adorned the Sepulchers of the Prophets, as a Demonstration of their
Abhorrence of the Fact of those Men, who were their Murderers, were contrary to
their design evident Marks of their Approbation of their Crime, since by
Persecuting those, who Preached the Truth to them, they imitated their Malice
so exactly, that they showed themselves the Children of those, who slew the
Prophets.

He concludes after this manner, saying to them, Fill ye up then the Measure of
your Fathers Sin, that you may have a share in their punishment. And after adds
this terrible Threatening, Behold, I will send you Prophets, Wisemen, and
Scribes, and some of them shall ye Kill, and Crucify, and others of them shall
ye Scourge in your Synagogues, and Persecute them in your Cities, that all the
Innocent Blood, which has been shed by your Fathers may fall upon you: for I
say unto you, that God shall call this Nation to an account, and will pour cut
all this Wrath upon the Men of this Generation. As he was thus speaking to
them, the Scribes and Pharisees began to urge him vehemently, and to ensnare
him by the various Objections, and Questions they put to him, but they could
get nothing from him, for which they could, as they designed, fix an Accusation
upon him.

XXVIII. Jesus gives several Instructions to his Disciples.
Luke 12.1,-53.
In the mean time, an Innumerable Multitude of People being gathered about him,
so that they trod one upon another, Jesus admonished his Disciples, to beware
of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy, and not to fear the
Persecutions of Men, but to fear God alone, and to repose a steadfast confidence
in him. Then did a certain Man of the Company say unto him, Master, speak to my
Brother, to divide the Inheritance fallen to Us peaceably with me. But Jesus
desirous to teach Us that it is every Man's Duty to keep within his own Calling,
answered him, my Friend, who made me a Judge, or a Divider among you? Then he
subjoyns, Take heed and beware of Covetousness, and to insinuate this the more
into the Hearts of his Hearers, he propounded to them this Parable; A certain
rich Man, being troubled for a place, where to lay up the extraordinary plenty,
which his Land had produced, resolved to pull down his Barns, and Build bigger,
and when he had thus secured, and laid up his Goods, he said within himself,
that having a sufficient Provision for many Years, he had nothing to do, but
take his ease, and be merry. But God said to this Man, O thou Fool, This Night
shall thy Soul be required of thee, and for whom then have thou hoarded up
these things? Such is the condition, says he, of him, that lays up Treasure
for himself, and is not Rich toward God.

For this reason it is, that he teaches his Disciples not to be sollicitous, or
careful for the things of this Life; but to seek the Kingdom of God, and the
Righteousness thereof, and God will give all other things to them; That they
should be so far from heaping up Riches, that they ought to sell all that they
have, and give it to the Poor, that they may have a Treasure in Heaven; That
they are indeed but a small number, but notwithstanding that, they should not
be afraid, since it is their Fathers good will to give them the Kingdom. He
tells them further, that they should always be in a readiness to appear before
God, who will come at an Hour, when they least expect him, as Servants, who
watch all Night, waiting for the return of their Master from the Wedding. That
being made Stewards of Gods House, to distribute to his People the Food of his
Word, they should discharge their Duty faithfully, not doing as the Foolish
Steward, who seeing his Lord to delay his coming, consumed the Goods he had
been Trusted withal, in Debaucheries, made use of his Authority to abuse his
fellow Servants, and deserved for his irregular Management to be cast with
Hypocrites and Unbelievers, into that place of Torment, where there is nothing
but wailing and gnashing of Teeth. That since the Son of Man will come in a Day
and Hour, which they know not of, to require an Account of their Management,
they should always watch, as a Master of an House would do, if he knew what
Night the Thief would come to Rob, and Plunder his House. That knowing the Will
of their Master, they are so much the more to blame, if they do not obey it;
and the more they are trusted withal, the greater their account will be. And
we see that elsewhere he gives them this important Instruction; Luke 17.10.
That after that they had done all, that they are commanded, they should be so
far from being proud of it, that they ought to look upon themselves, as
unprofitable Servants, and acknowledge, that they have done no more, than what
they are obliged to do.

He advises them to be very careful in discharging their Ministry faithfully,
because in so doing, they shall be dealt well withal by all the World; whereas
on the contrary, he came to bring division upon Earth, so that the Persons of
the same Family shall be at enmity with one another, some desiring to follow
Jesus Christ, others Persecuting those that adhere to him. Lastly, he tells
them that he came to kindle a Fire upon Earth, and that he had a Baptism to be
Baptized with. This Baptism is no other according to the Fathers, than his
Death, and many understand by the Fire he came to kindle in the World, that
Love, which the Holy Spirit would infuse into Men's Souls, to inflame them
devoutly with the Love of God.

XXIX. Jesus shows the necessity of Repentance.
At the same time came certain Persons to tell Jesus, Luke 13.1-10.
that Pilate the Governor of Judea had slain certain Galileans, as they were
sacrificing, so that their Blood was mingled with their Sacrifices. Whereupon
Jesus asks them, whether they thought that these Galileans were sinners above
all the Galileans, because God had left them to suffer such cruel usage from
Men? He tells, that it was not reasonable to think so, but that the conclusion,
that they ought to make from that accident, is this, That unless they repented
they should all come to as sad and untimely ends as those miserable Men.

The same application he tells them, they ought to make of the Death of those
Eighteen, upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell, and crushed them to Death. And
that he might engage them to make a good use of the time that God gives them,
to complete their Repentance in, for their Crimes; He compares them to a barren
Fig Tree, which the owner of the Vineyard would have had cut down, but deferred
it, because the Gardener desired to try by dunging, and digging of it to make
it Fruitful, and if it still remained barren, then to cut it down.

XXX. Jesus cures a Woman bowed together.
Jesus using always to Teach in the Synagogues on the Sabbath days, Luke
13.11-17.
there came thither a Woman possessed with a Devil, who had been afflicted so
Eighteen Years, and so much bowed together, that she could not look up. He
called her, and laying his Hand upon her, said unto her, Woman, thou art freed
from thy infirmity, and at the same instant she was restored, and glorified God
for her Cure. The Ruler of the Synagogue being angry that Jesus had done this
Miracle on the Sabbath Day, said unto the People, That there are Six Days in
every Week, allowed by God for labor, in them let them come and be healed, and
not on the Sabbath Day, which is a Day of Rest. But Jesus answering him,
demanded of these Hypocrites, Whether it were not as lawful to deliver from the
Bonds of the Devil, on the Sabbath Day, a Daughter of Abraham, whom he had kept
a Captive Eighteen Years, as it was for them to unloose his Ox or his Ass upon
the same Day, and lead them from their Stable to Watering? This silenced his
Adversaries, while the People were astonished at his Actions, which were so
wonderful, and made him so glorious.

XXXI. The Jews go about again to Stone him.
John 10.22.42.
A little after this happened the Feast of the Dedication of the Temple, which
was kept in Winter, Two Months after the Feast of Tabernacles, and by
consequent toward the Beginning of December: Jesus came to Jerusalem at this
Feast, and walked in a Porch of the Temple, called Solomon's Porch, till the
Jews came about him, and said unto him, How long will thou hold our Soul in
Suspense by thy obscure Expressions concerning thy self? If thou art the
Christ, tell us plainly. He answered them, I have already told you, and ye
believe not; the Works which I do in my Father's Name, they bear Witness of me;
but ye believe not, because ye are not of my Sheep: And to show them how great
losers they are, by not being of his Sheep, he adds, That his Sheep hear his
Voice and follow him; that he will give them Eternal Life, and they shall never
perish, because no Man can pull them out of his Father's Hands nor his, because
he and his Father are one.

Upon this, the Jews went about again to stone him; but Jesus aked them, For
which of those many good Works, which they had seen him do, would they use him
so cruelly? They answered him, That they did it not for a good Work, but
because he being a Man, made himself a God. He then proves to them, by their
own Scriptures, That Men are sometimes called Gods; so that he was not guilty
of Blasphemy in giving himself that Name, who was the only Son of God, sent by
his Father, which he proved by so great a Number of Miracles, as God had
enabled him to do among them.

All this did not appease their Fury and Rage against him; but they sought how
they might take him, but he escaped out of their Hands, because his Hour was
not yet come; and having passed over Jordan, he went along the Bank of the
River, to Bethabara, the Place where John at first baptized, and there he
abode: Hither he was followed by a great number of People, whom he taught,
according to his Custom, healing, at the same time, all the Sick that were
brought unto him. Many believed on him, and said, John did no Miracles, but all
things that John spoke of this Man, we have found to be true.

XXXII. Jesus advises Men to enter in at the strait Gate, and foretells the
Destructon of Jerusalem.
Jesus, having remained some Time in that Place, Luke 13.22-35.
went on his Way to Jerusalem, and all-a-long his Journey gave Instructions to
the People where he passed. Among others that came to him, there was one that
offered this Question, Lord, are there few that shall be saved? Jesus, from
hence, takes occasion to advise his Hearers, To strive to enter in at the
strait Gate; for many, I say unto you, shall seek the way to enter in, and
shall not be able. And to show that it will be in vain for them to desire to
enter into Heaven through the strait Gate, who have walked all their Lives in
the Broad Way, He adds, That when the Door shall be shut, it will be in vain to
say, Lord, open to us, for the Master of the Family will say, I know you not;
but if they shall answer, We have eat and drank with thee, and thou have taught
in our Streets, he will answer them, I know not who you are, depart from me ye
Workers of Iniquity: Then shall the Jews weep and lament, to see so many
Heathens come from all Parts of the World, to be possessed of the Glories of
Heaven, and themselves, who are the Heirs of the Kingdom, to be cast out, and
so to be the last, who were once the first.

The same Day came some of the Pharisees unto him, and said, Depart from this
Place, for Herod has a Grudge against thee, and threatens to kill thee, if
thou stayest long in his Jurisdiction: Jesus, knowing the Time of his Death,
and that he should not dye till he pleased, sends them to that Fox (for so he
calls Herod, to show, that though he was a very cunning Prince, yet all his Arts
and Devices could not do him any harm) and bids them tell him, That he had some
Time yet remaining, to cast out Devils and heal Diseases, and then he should
consummate his Sacrifice, by suffering Death at Jerusalem, which was the place
appointed, as it were, for the Slaughter of the Prophets.

Matthew. 23.37-39.
Whereupon he upbraids that unhappy City, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest
the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have
gathered thy Children together, as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings,
and ye would not? wherefore he threatens her with Destruction, and assures her,
That they shall not see him more till her Inhabitants shall say, Blessed is he
that comes in the Name of the Lord.

XXXIII. Jesus heals a Man sick of a Dropsy, and beats down the Pride of the
Pharisees.
Jesus then entered, on the Sabbath Day, Luke 14.1-14.
into the House of one of the chief Pharisees, to dine with him: While he was
here, there came a Man sick of the Dropsy, and stood before him; and he asked
the Scribes and Pharisees, Whether it were lawful to heal a Man on the Sabbath
Day? But they not giving him an Answer, he took the Man by the Hand and healed
him; and having sent him away, made the same Apology for himself as he had done
upon the like occasion; Who is there of you, who, if his Ox or his Ass fall
into a Pit, will not immediately pull them out on the Sabbath Day? and they
could answer him no more to this Question than the former. After this, Jesus
taking notice how they, who were invited to this Feast, chose the chief Places,
he endeavoring to beat down their proud Humor, said unto them; When any Man is
invited to a Wedding, he ought not to sit down in the uppermost Place, lest he
be forced, with Disgrace, to come lower, to make room for some more honorable
Person: But, on the contrary, if he sits down in the lowest Place, he that
invited him will make him go higher, which will gain him more honor among all
the Guests; for whosoever exalts himself shall be abased, but he that humbles
himself shall be exalted.

To this Advice, which he gave the Guests, he adds another to the Persons
inviting them, and teaches them, Not to invite to their Tables the Rich, who
will return their Treats again, but the Poor and the Lame, for God shall
recompense them himself at the Resurrection of the Just, because they have done
it without any Design of Interest, but merely being moved with Charity.

XXXIV. He teaches the Guests, That he came to invite them into his Kingdom.
Luke 14.15-24.
One of the Guests, who sat at Table with him, hearing his last Words, said unto
him, Blessed is he that eats Bread in the Kingdom of God. Then Jesus shows
them, by a Parable, That he came to invite Men to this great Feast of Heaven;
and, that notwithstanding the great Happiness there was in being at that Feast,
they that were invited would not come, because they loved the temporal and
perishing Riches of this World before the heavenly Riches, which remain for
ever. This Parable is of a Man, who having invited many to a great Supper, sent
his Servants to call them to it, when all was ready: But they all made Excuses,
One, because he was to go see a Farm, which he had lately purchased; Another,
because he was to prove some Oxen, which he had bought; a Third, because he was
newly married, and others for other Pretenses: So that the Servant having
related these Things, to his Lord, he swore, That none of those which were
bidden, shall taste of his Supper; wherefore he invited, in their stead, the
Poor and the Infirm, which they met in the Streets and Lanes of the City: When
all these were come in, there was still Room for more; wherefore the King sent
his Servant into the Highways and Hedges, ordering him to compel all that he
met with to come in and fill his House: So the Gentiles came to be called and
invited to Heaven instead of the Jews; some of which Gentiles God did, as it
were, force to come in, such are those Persons who would never think of their
Salvation, if God did not oblige them to it; not by sanctifying them against
their Will, but by taking from them all their worldly Enjoyments which they
loved most, putting them under an happy Necessity of flying to him, and
thinking of nothing but Heaven.

XXXV. Jesus teaches what we must do to be saved.
Jesus went on still in visiting the Places on this Side Jordan, in respect of
Judea, Luke 14.25-33.
where he had formerly preached, and was always accompanied with a great
multitude of People: One Day, as he went along, he turned himself to those that
followed him, and said unto them, Whosoever comes after me, and hates not his
Father and his Mother, his Wife and Children, and Brethren, yea, and his own
Life also, cannot be my Disciple; nor whosoever does not take up his Cross and
follow me. He likewise builds the Salvation of Man upon a general Abjuration of
all Things; for having demonstrated, that he is deservedly accounted a Fool,
who begins to build before he has computed whether he has enough to finish
it; And that no wise or politic Prince will hazard a Battle with another
Prince that comes against him with a strong Army, unless he be assured that he
has sufficient Force to oppose and conquer him: He then adds, So likewise,
whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all he has, cannot be my Disciple:
As if he had said, It is in vain for Men to engage themselves in God's and my
Service, if they have not so far disengaged their Love from all earthly things,
as that they are ready and willing to part with every thing that may stand in
their Way, and hinder their main and greatest Interest, their Salvation.

XXXVI. Jesus receives Sinners to Repentance.
Luke 15.1-3^.
Among the great number of People, which did ordinarily follow Jesus, there were
many Publicans, and others of a Wicked Life, who loved to hear his Sermons: The
Scribes and Pharisees were much offended at his condescending Goodness, in
admitting these sort of Men to come unto him, and they murmured against him for
keeping Company so freely with them, and eating commonly with them: Now, that
he might convince them that their Complaints were unreasonable and causeless,
he asked them, Whether if a Man who has an Hundred Sheep, and one of them go
astray, he will not leave the Ninety and Nine, and follow this Hundredth; and if
he finds it, he brings it Home upon his Shoulders, rejoicing, and invites his
Friends to rejoice with him. In like manner, if a Woman, who has Ten Pieces of
Silver, lose one of them, does she not sweep all the House to find it, and
having found it, rcjoyces with her Neighbors? He then tells them, That as the
Sheep and Piece of Silver, being found again, cause greater Joy than all the
rest, that were not lost, so there is great Joy in Heaven at the Conversion of
a Sinner.

This Truth he further explains by another Parable, saying, There was a Man who
had Two Sons, and the Younger of them having received that Portion of his Goods
which came to his share, went into a far Country, to spend it in Lewdness and
Debauchery: After he had consumed and devoured all, he was forced to keep Swine
to get a Livelihood; and, in this condition, reflecting upon his Misery, he
resolved to return again to his Father, and humbly acknowledging his Fault, beg
his Favor to entertain him again, as a Domestic Servant. As soon as his
Father saw him, he was affected with Joy and Compassion together, and running
to him, fell on his Neck and kissed him, while the Son, not at all elevated
with his Kindness, under the Sense of so much Unworthiness, said unto him;
Father, I have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and am not worthy to be
called thy Son: This humble Confession wrought an entire Reconciliation to his
Father, who, having stripped him of his Rags, and put on him a good Habit, made
a magnificent Feast in his House, to rejoice for his Return. This Action much
displeased the Elder Brother, who returning out of the Field, would not go into
the House, because his Father had done more for his Lewd Brother than he had
ever done for him, though he had always been very faithful in his Duty toward
him. This being objected to his Father, he said, My Son, Thou art always with
me, and all that I have is thine, but it was necessary for me to Feast and
Rejoice, because this thy Brother was dead and is alive again, was lost and is
found. The Application of this Parable is very easy; by the Discontent of the
Elder Son we are to understand the unjust Murmurs of the Pharisees, who were
very angry with Jesus for entertaining Sinners, though the main End of his
coming into the World was to save Sinners.

XXXVII. Jesus commends Almsgiving, and sharply reproves the Covetousness of
the Pharisees.
Jesus Christ propounds another Parable to his Disciples, and makes a
Discourse, Luke 16.1-31.
wherein he takes occasion to reprove the Covetousness of the Pharisees, as he
had done their Envy and Pride before, saying to his Disciples; There was a
certain Rich Man, who had resolved to call his Steward to an account, and to
put him out of his Place, because he had received an Accusation against him,
that he had embezled his Goods: The Steward seeing himself in danger of being
reduced to Beggary, or such Labor as he could not undergo, contrived this Way
to make up his Loss; he called all his Lord's Debtors, one after another, to
him, and discharged them of a Part of their Debts, permitting him that owed an
Hundred Barrels of Oil to set down but Fifty in his Bill, and him that owed an
Hundred Measures to make it but Fourscore, and proportionably the rest. Jesus
Christ teaches his Disciples, not to imitate the Injustice, but Craft of this
Steward, employing their earthly Riches to make them Friends in the Person of
the Poor, and by that means to be received into everlasting Habitations in
Heaven; and so the Children of Light may not be less prudent in things that
respect their Salvation than the Children of this World are in the management
of their Temporal Affairs.

Then he teaches them to be faithful in small things, that they may be
entrusted with great, and not to be slaves to Money and Riches, which he calls
the Mammon of Unrighteousness, and another Man's Goods, either because there is
nothing but Wickedness, which can make them to be looked upon as substantial
good Things, able to make the Possessors of them happy, or because nothing but
Injustice makes Men to look upon them, as their own; for in the Sense of
Scripture we are but Stewards under God, and not Masters of them.

The covetous Pharisees heard these Truths with contempt, and derided the
Speaker of them; but Jesus knew how to check their Scoffs, by discovering the
Hypocrisy of their outward Virtues, for he told them, That notwithstanding all
their Caution to appear Righteous, God knew their Hearts, to whom such Things,
as are admired and commended by Men, are hateful and abominable.

He then teaches them, what shall be the End and Punishment of that
Covetousness, which makes them Deaf to his Reproof, and so obdurate against the
Poor, by an Example of a certain Rich Man, who was clothed in Purple and fine
Linen, and fared sumptuously every Day, without being touched with the least
Compassion for those who were wholly destitute of Food; for there was a Beggar,
named Lazarus, a Man so infirm and diseased that he was covered all over with
Sores; this Man was laid at the Rich Man's Gate, and desired only to be fed
with the Scraps that came from his Table, but could not obtain that Piece of
Charity from this hard-hearted Miser, whose Dogs were more merciful than he,
for they came and licked his Sores, and so by their healing Tongues did what
they could to cure his Disease: At length they both dyed, but their End was as
different as their Lives had been, for the Poor Man was carried, by the Angels,
into Abraham's Bosom, i. e. into a Place of Happiness, appointed for the Souls
of the Saints; the Rich Man also dyed, and was buried in his Body, but his Soul
was carried into Hell. From hence he beholding the Happiness of the Beggar,
whom he had contemned, cried out, Father Abraham, have Mercy on me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the Tip of his Finger in Water, and cool my Tongue,
for I suffer inexpressible Torments in this Flame. But the Holy Patriarch told
him, that it was impossible, by reason of the vast distance between them to
grant his Request, so it was just that he, who had endured so much Grief and
Sorrow in his Lifetime, should receive Comfort and Happiness after his Death;
but as for himself, who had surfeited with the Delights and Pleasures of this
Life, that he should suffer Thirst and Torments in another World. The Rich Man
perceiving that there was no Mercy to be hoped for, for himself, thought of his
Five Brethren, which yet lived in the same Luxury and Riot, and prayed Abraham
to send them Word by Lazarus of the miserable Condition he was in, that by his
Example they might grow wiser and repent. But he answered them, That they have
Moses and the Prophets, and if they neglected to hear them, they would not give
Credit to a Dead Man, though raised on purpose to warn them of their Duty.

XXXVIII. Jesus Christ shows the inseparable Conjunction of Married Persons,
and highly commends Virginity.
Matthew. 19.3-12 Mar. 10.2-12. Luke 16.18.
These Truths silenced, but could not convert the Pharisees, they still hated
him, and sought all occasions to ensnare him in his Talk; and for this Reason
they put this Question to him, Is it lawful for a Man to put away his Wife for
every Cause, as he pleases? Jesus answered them by propounding first another
Question, What did Moses in the Law command? They replied, That Moses, in the
Law, allowed them to put away their Wives, giving them a Writing to testify
their Divorcement. But Jesus refers them to the first Institution of Marriage,
by God himself, saying, That Man and Woman are so straightly united, that they
ought to be looked upon as one Flesh only: And then goes on and says, What God
has thus joined together let no Man put asunder. They still insist upon the
Permission which Moses had given them; but he answered them, That Moses allowed
it only for the hardness of their Hearts, for from the Beginning it was not so;
and that whosoever puts away his Wife, unless in the Case of Adultery, and
marries another, has committed Adultery, and whosoever marries the Woman, so
divorced, is also guilty of Adultery. His Disciples, when they came into the
House, consulted him about the same Thing, and he gave them the same Answer,
from whence they made this Conclusion; That it is not good to marry. Whereupon
he says to them, True it is that Virginity is the best Estate for Men, but it
is above the Reach of Man, unless it be of some few, whom either Nature has
befriended, or human Force has rendered incapable of Marriage, or their ardent
Desire of Heaven has obliged to live in voluntary and entire Chastity: And
since all Men are not capable of so great a Virtue, he concludes with these
Words, He that is able to receive it, let him receive it, i. e. He that has
this Gift of Chastity, bestowed on him, let him live in it.

XXXIX. Jesus speaks of his Kingdom, and of his Coming, and teaches them, That
they must pray always.
Another Time the Pharisees, Luke 17.20-37.
who waited for the coming of the Messiah, and who had drawn up a Romantic
Scheme to themselves, That the Messiah should reign in their Country, with
great Pomp and Majesty, and should raise himself above all the Kings of the
World, demanded of him, When the Kingdom of God should come? He answered them,
That it should not appear with outward Splendour and Pomp, nor be confined to
any particular Place, but that it was already come, and was within them, i. e.
that his Kingdom was Spiritual, and was to be set up in their Hearts by Justice
and Charity.

From hence he takes occasion to tell his Disciples, That the Time will come
when they shall desire to enjoy his Presence but one Day, but shall not see him
more: That he shall come hereafter as a Flash of Lightning, i. e. suddenly and
gloriously, but he must first suffer many things, and be rejected of the Jews:
And that as it was in the Days of Noah, Men eat, and drank, and married, not
thinking upon the Flood, which came suddenly upon them, and destroyed them; and
as the Fire from Heaven fell unexpectedly upon the Inhabitants of Sodom, so
shall it be at the coming of the Son of Man: All our Thoughts must then be
employed in contriving to save our selves, without looking behind us, either to
pity or save others, remembering Lot's Wife, who looking back, contrary to the
Command of the Angel, was changed into a Pillar of Salt,

Luke 18.1-8.
He teaches them also, at the same Time, That we must not be weary of Prayer;
and to show of how great Advantage it is to pray always, and with Perseverance,
he delivers this Parable of a certain Widow, who having a wicked Man for her
Judge, who would not do her Justice, constrained him by her Importunities to
vindicate her Wrongs. By which Example he demonstrates to us, That God, who is
Just, will certainly revenge his Elect, which cry unto him Day and Night, and
will deliver them soon out of the Oppression they suffer. But since such a
Faith as is necessary to support us continually in so excellent a Duty, is very
rare and unusual, he adds, in a kind of an Astonishment; Nevertheless, when the
Son of Man comes, shall he find Faith upon Earth? There will will be few that
will hold out to the End.

XL. He teaches Men to be humble.
Jesus, Luke 18.9-14.
that he might show Humility in Prayer to be as necessary as Perseverance, and
so instruct his more attentive Disciples, as well as beat down the Pride of the
Pharisees, who thought themselves Righteous, and being full of vain Confidence,
in their own false Sanctity, contemned all others, propounds to them this
Parable, Two Men went up to the Temple to pray, the One a Pharisee, and the
Other a Publican, the former stood, and prayed after this manner; God, I thank
thee, that I am not as other Men are, Thieves, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as
this Publican; I fast twice in the Week, and give Tithes of all that I possess.
But the Publican, on the other side, standing afar off, durst not so much as
lift up his Eyes to Heaven, but smote upon his Breast, saying, My God, be
merciful to me, who am a Sinner: Whereupon Jesus adds, I declare unto you, That
this Man returned Home justified rather than the other; for he that exalts
himself shall be abased, but who so humbles himself shall be exalted.

XLI. Jesus blesses certain Infants.
Then some of the Jews brought their Children to Jesus, that he might lay his
Hands upon them, Matthew. 19.13-15 Mark 19.13-16 Luke 18.15-17.
and pray for them. His Disciples rebuking those that brought them unto him,
spoke roughly to them, but Jesus being displeased at this Action, reproved
them, and bid them to suffer little Children to come unto him, because the
Kingdom of Heaven is made up of such, and if we will gain an entrance into it,
we must become little Children, i. e. humble, so commending a spiritual
Infancy, which consists in an Holy Simplicity, and sincere Humility. After this
he takes these little Children up in his Arms, and having Blessed them, by
laying his Hands upon them, He departed from thence to go some whither else.

XLII. He tells them how hard it is for a Rich Man to be saved.
Matthew. 19.16 ^ 30. Mark 10.17-30. Luke 18.18-30.
As Jesus was in his Journey, a Young Nobleman, who was very Rich, ran unto
him, and kneeling down to him, said, Good Master, What good thing must I do,
that I may inherit Eternal Life? Jesus answered him, Why call thou me good?
There is none but God, who is good, i. e. who is good of himself, being
perfect, and essential Goodness, the Original of all Goodness; for all the
Goodness in the Creatures in only an Efflux, and participation of the infinite
Goodness of God. This Young Man commended an Humane and Finite Goodness in
Jesus only, and it seems, that the Son of God refusing the Title of Good
Master, and answering, that there was none Good but God only, would Teach him
to acknowledge a Divine and Sovereign Goodness in Himself. Afterward he says in
Answer to his Question, That if he will obtain Eternal Life, he must keep the
Commandments. And because this Young Man asked him, which of these Commandments
he ought to keep, he said unto him, Thou know the Commandments of the Law,
Do not kill, Do not commit Adultery, Do not Steal, Do not bear false Witness,
Defraud not, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, And Love thy Neighbor as thy
Self. The Young Man answered, All these things have I observed from my Youth,
What yet have I to do? Then Jesus beholding him, loved him, but this Love which
he had for the Young Man, did not hinder him from Teaching him a Truth, which
he could not entertain, for he said unto him, One thing lackest thou yet, If
thou will be perfect, Go and sell all that thou have, and give it to the Poor,
and thou shall have Treasure in Heaven, and then come, and follow me. But this
Lord, who had a great Estate, not being able to accept of his Advice, and
forsake all, went away sad. Then Jesus, who saw him troubled, looking round
about him, said unto his Disciples, Verily, I say unto you, It is very hard for
a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And because they were much
amazed at these Words, he repeated the same Truth again to them in these Words,
Little Children, How hard is it for them that trust in their Riches, to enter
into the Kingdom of God? It is easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a
Needle. This last assertion increased the astonishment of the Apostles, who
said one to another, Who then can be saved? But Jesus removed their admiration
by telling them, that that which is impossible with Men, is possible with God,
who can change the Heart, and make Rich Men to leave all to follow Christ, and
gain Heaven.

Then said Peter unto him, As for us thou see, That we have left all, and
followed thee, What reward shall we receive? Jesus answered him, That at the
Resurrection, when the Son of Man shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory, they
shall sit by him on Thrones judging all the People of Israel. And he further
tells them, that not only they, But whosoever shall forsake his House, or
Kindred, or Lands, for His, and the Gospels sake, shall receive in this World
an hundredfold, Houses, and Kindsfolk, and Lands with Persecution^, and in the
World to come Life Eternal. By which he means, that God, who will reward his
Elect in another World, will give them in this such comforts, as are necessary
to support them in their afflictions, and will find them such Friends, as shall
by their Christian Charity, be as serviceable to them, as their nearest
Kindred, and shall supply the want of all they have forsaken, or lost for his
sake to them.

XLIII. Jesus explains, how they that are first, shall be last in the Kingdom
of God.
Mrtth. 19.30. Matthew. 20.1-16.
The Apostles might well be surprised at the Promise, which Jesus had made them,
That he would set them on Thrones to Judge their whole Nation, especially,
since they had been always so little esteemed among the Jews. From this passion
the Son of God seems very desirous to free them, by repeating to them again the
words, which he had before used upon another occasion, That many of those that
should have been first, shall be last, and many that should have been last,
shall be first. Which Truth that he might thoroughly explain it to them, he
propounds a Parable, and says, That the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Man,
who having sent some Laborers, with whom he had agreed for Wages, early in the
Morning into his Vineyard, did also send others at the Ninth, Third and
Eleventh Hours, promising to give them as much as was reasonable for their
Labor. In the Evening he called all these Men to him, and beginning with those
who came came last, he gave them the same Wages, which he had promised to those
whom he had hired in the Morning; but these last expecting to receive somewhat
more, than the other, murmured against him, for giving them as much as he
agreed with them for: But the Master of the Vineyard, proves that he had done
them no wrong, because he had paid them, what was due to them, and as for the
rest it was Lawful to give them what he pleased. From hence the Son of God
concludes, So the last shall be first, and the first shall be last: for many
are called, but few are chosen. This is all the explication, which our Lord
gives us of this Parable; but the Fathers understand by the Kingdom of God, and
the Vineyard, into which he calls Men to Labor for the reward which he has
promised by an Holy Life, the Church; And this reward is nothing but himself.
Some entered at the beginning of the World into this Vineyard, others in the
middle-age of it, and others shall enter at the end of the World. There are
some that begin to live well in their Infancy, others in their Youth, others in
their Riper-age, and some are not converted, till just before their Death. But
so great is the Mercy and Goodness of God, that they shall all go to Heaven,
and shall be rewarded for their Good Works, which they have done since their
Conversion with the Beatifick Vision of God himself. But we ought well to
consider upon these Words, Many are called, but few are chosen, that we may not
content our selves, to be in the Church, into which God has called us, but may
be diligent, 1 Pet. 2-10.
as St. Peter teaches us, To make our calling and election sure by Good Works,
and to fit our selves for the Kingdom promised to the Elect.

XLIV. Jesus raises Lazarus from the Dead.
As Jesus was thus instructing his Disciples on this side Jordan, the two
Sisters abovementioned, John 11.1-45.
Martha and Mary, sent him word of the sickness of their Brother Lazarus, by
certain Messengers, who spoke to him in these words, Lord, He whom thou Love
is sick: for indeed he loved these Persons, and therefore having heard this
News, he said, This sickness is not unto Death, but is only inflicted on him to
gain Glory to God, and that the Son of God may be Glorified thereby.
Nevertheless he tarryed two days still in the same place, and then said to his
Apostles, Let us go into Judea for Bethany, where the House of Lazarus, and his
two Sisters was, was in Judea, about two Miles distant from Jerusalem, to which
he must go, by crossing the River Jordan.

The Apostles said unto him, Master, The Jews there were lately about to Stone
thee, and do thou think of venturing among them again? He answers them, That
he must discharge his Ministry, while God gives him Time and Opportunity, let
what dangers will stand in the way. And then he adds, Our Friend Lazarus
sleeps, but I will go to awake him. His Disciples understanding his words
literally, said unto him, Lord, if he sleep, he will grow well. Then he told
them plainly, That Lazarus was Dead, and that for the kindness he had for them,
he was glad that he was not present with him to prevent his Death, because that
which he intended to do for him, would be of great use to increase and confirm
their Faith. Thomas, one of the Twelve, seeing his Master resolved to go into
Judea, said to his fellow Disciples, Let us also go with him: It is indeed
dangerous, but we ought rather to die with him, than forsake him, or leave him,
so they accompanied him.

They got not to Bethany, till Lazarus had been Buried Four Days; and when they
came to the House of Martha and Mary, they found many Jews there, which were
come to comfort the two Sisters for the Death of their Brother. Martha hearing
that Jesus was coming, went a little way out of the Town to meet him, and said
unto him, Lord, if thou had been here my Brother had not dyed. But I know,
that even now, God will grant thee whatsoever thou ask of him. Jesus
answered her, Thy Brother shall rise again. She replied, I know, that he shall
rise again at the last Day. Jesus says again, I am the Resurrection, and the
Life, i. e. I am able to raise the Dead to Life at any time, as well now as
hereafter, he that believes in me, as thy Brother did, although he be dead,
shall, if I please, live again; and whosoever lives, and believes in me,
shall never dye, if I please to preserve him. Believe thou this? She answered
him, Yea, Lord, I believe, that thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God,
which should come into the World.

After this Discourse, she went and called her Sister, to tell her privately
that the Master was come, and asked after her. Mary arose immediately and went
to Jesus out of the Town, to the place where Martha met him. The Jews, who were
with her, when she arose to go to the Son of God, seeing her go out so hastily,
followed her, thinking that she went to the Grave of her Brother, to Weep there.

As soon as she came to Jesus, she fell down at his Feet, and said unto him
Weeping, Lord, if thou had been here, my Brother had not Dyed. Her Tears and
Sorrow, accompanied with the Lamentations of the Jews that came with her,
affected the Son of God, so that he groaned in himself, and was troubled, i. e.
he stirred up in his own heart a Voluntary Motion of Compassion and Tenderness,
which appeared outwardly by the same signs, which discover the involuntary
passions and affections of Men. Hereupon he demanded, where they had Buried
him? they said unto him, Lord, come and see. He went along with them, Weeping,
which made some of the Jews to say, See how he loved him; while others said,
Could not this Man, who opens the Eyes of the Blind, have prevented Lazarus
's Death? Jesus still showing the same disturbance of mind, came to the Grave,
which was a Pit, with a Stone laid at the Mouth of it. He commanded them to
take away the Stone, but Martha told him that the Dead Man by this time stank,
because he had been Buried Four Days. But he answered, Did not I tell you, that
if ye would believe, ye should see the Glory of God magnified in raising him
from the Dead? They then removed the Stone, and Jesus lifting up his Eyes to
Heaven, said these words, Father, I thank thee, that thou have heard me always.
As for me, I know that thou always hear me, and thy Power is present with
me, but this I say, because of the People, which is about me, that they may
believe, when they see thy Power granted to me by my Prayer, that thou have
sent me. Having spoken these words he cried with a loud Voice, Lazarus come
forth. And immediately the Dead Man came forth, having his Hands and his Feet
bound with grave Clothes, and his Head wrapped about with a Napkin: Jesus then
bid them loose him, and several of the Jews, who came to see the two Sisters,
believed on him having been Eyewitnesses of this Miracle.

XLV. The Jews hold a Council against Jesus.
John 11.46-54.
As soon as Jesus had wrought this Miracle, some, who saw it, went to tell the
Pharisees of it, who were his Mortal Enemies. Whereupon they immediately called
a Council, with the Highpriests, and said, Why do we lose time and do nothing?
This Man does many Miracles, and if we let him thus alone, all Men will believe
him to be the Messiah, and the Romans fearing, lest he should set up for a
King, and withdraw the People from Obedience to them, will come and destroy our
City and Nation. Caiphas, who was High Priest that Year, said unto them, Ye
understand nothing, nor consider, that it is better to put one Man to Death, to
secure all the People, than that all the Nation should perish. Thus did this
wretched Man express the cruel Motions of Hatred, which he had against Jesus,
but God delivered by him, who thought nothing less the Designs of his Wisdom
for the Salvation of Men, and honored his Priesthood in the Person of his
High Priest, Prophesying by his Mouth of the Death which the Savior of the
World should suffer to save not only the Jews, but also to gather together into
one Church the Children of God, which are dispersed in all other Nations. This
advice so took with them, that from that time the Priests and Pharisees sought
all the ways they could think of, to put him to Death, and to this end, gave
order, that if any Man knew where he was, he should discover him, that they
might apprehend him. But because his hour was not yet come, although it drew very
near, he escaped their Fury for a little time, by not appearing in public, but
going into a desert place, near a City called Ephraim, where he abode some time
with his Disciples.

XLVI. Jesus is rejected by the Samaritans.
The Feast of the Passover being the time wherein Jesus Christ was to
consummate the great Work of our Redemption by the Sacrifice of his Blood, when
that Passover drew near, Luke 9.51-56.
wherein he was to suffer, he prepared himself for Death, and set forward in
his Journey to Jerusalem, with a steadfast Countenance, signifying the firm
Resolution he had taken up, to lay down his Life for Men. It seemed good to him
to go through Samaria, but when he came into a City of the Province, they would
not entertain him, because they knew he was going to Jerusalem, for there was a
great Contest between the Samaritans, and Jews, about the place where God ought
to be Worshipped, the first alleging, that it was Mount Gerizim, and the other
the Temple of Jerusalem. The reason then why the Inhabitants of this place,
through which Jesus passed, rejected him, was because he went to Solemnize the
Feast, and by consequent to Worship in a different place from them. The two
Sons of Zebedee, James, and John, being incensed at the Injury, which they had
done to their Master, said unto him, Lord, will thou that we command Fire to
fall down from Heaven upon them, and devour them? But the Son of God willing to
Teach them, that the Spirit of his true Disciples is a Spirit of Love and
Charity, and not Revenge, turned himself to the two Brethren, and gave them
this sharp reproof, Ye know not by what Spirit ye are acted: for the Son of Man
is not come to destroy men's Lives, but to save them. And they went to lodge in
another Village.

XLVII. Jesus foretells his Death a Third time.
Matthew. 20.17-19. Mark 10.32-34. Luke 18.31-34.
This assurance, and resolution of the Son of God, which appeared even in his
Face, was not in the Heart of the Apostles, who accompanied him, but on the
contrary they were seized with terror and amazement, and followed him with
fear. He takes them therefore apart, and says unto them, Behold, we go up to
Jerusalem, where all things that are Written concerning the Son of Man shall be
accomplished: For he shall be delivered to to the Chief Priests and Scribes,
who shall condemn him to Death, and deliver him to the Gentiles, who shall
mock, and spitefully entreat him, Scourge and crucify him, and he shall rise
again the Third Day; but they understood not this Third Prediction of his
Death, no more than the Two former; and the Gospel assures us, That this
Discourse was concealed from them, so that they knew not the Things that were
spoken.

XLVIII. Jesus reproves the Ambition of his Apostles.
At the same Time Salome, the Wife of Zebedee, Matthew. 20.20-28 Mark 10.35-45
and the Mother of John and James, came to him with her Two Sons, and
worshipped him, as if she were about to pray unto him: Jesus asked her what she
would have? and she answered him, Command that these my Two Sons may sit, the
one on thy Right Hand and the other on thy Left, in thy Kingdom. He returned
her no answer, but turning himself to her Children, for whom she petitioned, he
said unto them, Ye know not what ye ask: Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I
must drink of, and to be baptized with the Baptism that I must be baptized
with? By this Cup and Baptism he understood his Death; and he asked these Two
Brethren, Whether they were able to follow him, and imitate his Sufferings?
They answered, That they were able. Then he tells them, That they should indeed
drink a part of his Cup, but as for the chief Places in his Kingdom, they are
wholly at the Disposal of his Father, to give them to whom he pleases: As if
he had said, according to the Explication of the Fathers, Do not think that my
Kingdom shall be given for Human Motives and Respects, it belongs to those for
whom my Father has appointed it; and they are such as are qualified for it by
their Lives and Sufferings: Put your selves therefore into a Posture of
Fighting and Conquering, and you shall have the Reward which is promised to
Conquerors bestowed on you.

The Ambition of these Two Disciples displeased the other Ten, who were very
angry with the Two Brethren: Jesus, who knew their Thoughts, being desirous to
cure that Pride, which made the one ambitious and the other jealous, calls them
unto him, and teaches them, That they must not be like the Princes and Grandees
of the World, who rule with Tyranny over their Subjects; but, on the contrary,
he that will be great among them must be Servant of all, according to the
Example of the Son of Man himself, who came not to be waited upon and served,
but to serve others for their Spiritual Good, and redeem Souls by his Death.

XLIX. Jesus lodges at Zaccheus's House.
Luke 19.1-10.
They went on their Journey, and came to Jericho: In this City there was a
certain Man, named Zaccheus, one of the chief Publicans, and very rich, who had
a very great Desire to see Jesus: But because the Multitude hindered him from
it, being a Man of a small Stature, he went before, and climbed up into a
Sycamore Tree, in a Place where he knew he was to pass: Jesus, accordingly,
came that way indeed, and lifting up his Eyes he saw Zaccheus, and said unto
him, Zaccheus, make haste and come down, for I must lodge at thy House to Day.
At this Zaccheus came down immediately, and entertained him joyfully, while
others murmuring, against him, said, He is gone to be a Guest with a Man of a
wicked Life. But Jesus made it appear by the miraculous Change which he wrought
in the Heart of this Publican, that he went as a Physician into a diseased
Family, to cure it; for Zaccheus presenting himself before him, said to him,
Lord, the half of my Estate I will give unto the Poor, and if I have done any
Wrong to any Man, I will restore him Fourfold. And Jesus answered, This Day is
Salvation come to this House; And assures us, That Zaccheus, who was looked
upon hitherto, by the Jews, as a Stranger and a Heathen, was by Faith become a
Child of Abraham, as well as they, and so was entitled to the Promises made to
him.

L. Jesus condemns the Opinion of those, who believed that the Kingdom of God
would then appear.
All those who were present, Luke 19.11-27.
harkned unto Jesus with Attention; and as they drew near to Jerusalem, they
thought that the glorious Reign of the Messiah, which they had fancied to
themselves, would immediately commence, supposing that Jesus had undertaken
this Journey, to the Passover at Jerusalem, for this End only, to seat himself
upon his Throne, and to establish the Kingdom he had so often spoke of. Jesus,
knowing their Thoughts, condemned them by this Parable: A certain great and
Noble Man, being about to take a Voyage into a far Country, where he was to
take Possession of a Kingdom, fallen to him, called all his Servants, and gave
them every one a Sum of Money to trade withal and improve, till he should
return: Some of his Countrymen, who hated him, sent after him, and declared
that they would not have him for their King: But he, notwithstanding this
Opposition, having obtained the Kingdom, returned again, and first calls the
Servants to an Account, to whom he had entrusted his Money: One of them had
improved it Ten, the Other Five Times, by Trading, whom he rewarded
proportionably to their Diligence, giving to the last the Government of Five
Gities, and the other of Ten: But one there was among them, who instead of
trading with it, had locked it up, fearing, as he said, the great Severity of
his Master, and so, not daring to hazard what he had entrusted to him. But his
Master condemned this Action, and taking his Money from him, gave it to those
whom he had already so bountifully rewarded. This done, he summoned those who
had refused to accept him for their King, and put them to Death in his
Presence. The Gospel does not deliver the Explication of this Parable; but
since we know the Occasion that Jesus had to propose it, it is very natural to
explain it thus. Jesus himself is the King here spoken of; he is gone into
Heaven, and shall return, in Majesty, to judge both the Quick and the Dead. He
distributes his Graces here below, and expects that we should improve them by a
good Use of them. At his coming again, he will find Three several sorts of
Persons; some will make a good Use of the Grace that they have received, to
whom God will give greater portions of it: Others will not improve it, and
therefore he will take it from them. Lastly, others will revolt from him, and
will not obey his Laws, such as Infidels and Wicked Men; but chiefly the Jews
are meant in this Place, who being God's People, have, nevertheless, made the
most vigorous Opposition to the Establishment of his Church, and therefore he
shall destroy them.

LI. Jesus Christ heals Two Blind Men.
Matthew 20.29-31 Mark 10.46-52
As soon as Jesus was departed from Jericho, being followed by a great Company
of People, a certain Blind Man, named Bartimeus, he Son of Timeus, who sat by
the Way-Side begging, being informed what the Multitude, which he heard going
by, meant, and hearing that Jesus passed by, Luke 18.35-43.
he cried out, with another Blind Man, who sat in the same Road, Jesus, thou
Son of David, have Mercy on me. The People which accompanied Jesus, but chiefly
those that went before him, spoke roughly to him, to make him hold his Peace;
but he cried out so much the louder, as did also his Companion, Thou Son of
David have Mercy on me: Then Jesus stopped, and commanded him to be called;
which some did, saying, be of good Comfort, arise, he calls you: Then he
immediately cast away his Coat, arose, and went, with his Companion, to Jesus;
who asked them both, What would you have me to do for you? They answered, Lord,
that thou would open our Eyes. Then Jesus, being moved with Compassion,
touched their Eyes, and immediately they received Sight, and followed him,
glorifying God; as also did all the People, who had been Witnesses of this
Miracle.

LII. Jesus Christ suppeth at Bethany.
Jesus drew every Day nearer and nearer to Jerusalem, Matt. 26.6-13. Mark 14.3
^ 9. John 12.1-
and Six Days before the Passover he came to Bethany, where he had lately
raised Lazarus, the Brother of Mary and Martha, from the Dead: Here he was
entertained at a Supper, in the House of Simon the Leper: Martha waited, but
Lazarus was one of those that supped with him. While he sat at the Table, Mary
came to him, having an Alabaster-Box, containing a Pound of the Ointment of
Spikenard, of great Value, with which she anointed his Feet, wiping them with
her Hairs, and afterward breaking the Box, she poured the Residue of the
Perfume upon his Head, so that the whole House was filled with the Smell of it.
The Apostles, but chiefly Judas Iscariot, murmured at this waste, and Judas
said, That this Ointment might have been sold for Three hundred Pence (which is
about 9 l. 7 s. 6 d. of our Money) and so relieved many Poor People; not that he
had so much Care or Compassion for the Poor (as the Gospel observes) but
because he was a Thief and kept the Money, which Jesus Christ had collected for
his ordinary Expense, and for the maintenance of the Poor, upon which account
it was that he was so very desirous to have gotten the Price of this Ointment
into his Hands, that he might gratify his own Covetousness. But Jesus himself
undertook the Defense of Mary, and told those that condemned her, That she had
done a good Work, and had embalmed his Body beforehand, for the Day of its
Burial; and that as for the Poor, for whose Relief it was said, that the Price
of this Ointment might have been better employed; they were always with them,
and might receive Relief of them at any Time, but they cculd not have him
always with them, to pay their Duty to him, and give him the Marks of their
Esteem and Affection: And lastly, That this Action of Mary's should in every
Place, where the Gospel is preached, be spoken of in her Commendation. In the
mean while, it being known at Jerusalem, that Jesus was come to Bethany, many
of the Jews came to see him, and not him only, but more especially Lazarus,
whom he had raised from the Dead. As for the Chief Priests, they had determined
to kill Lazarus, because many Jews were converted to the Belief of Christ's
Divinity, by the Miracle of his Resurrection.

The End of the Third Book.
BOOK IV.
An Account of what Jesus Christ did from his Triumphant Entrance into
Jerusalem, to his Ascension into Heaven.
I. Jesus Christ goes in Triumph to Jerusalem.
THE next Day Jesus departed from Bethany, Matthew. 21.1-9. Mark 11.1-10. Luke
19.29-38. John 12.12-18
and as soon as he came to a little Village, called Bethphage, which was
situated at the Bottom of the Mount of Olives, which is distant from Jerusalem
but little more than half a Mile, he said to Two of his Disciples, Go unto the
Village over against you, and ye shall there find a Shee-Ass, and with her a
Colt, on which no Man ever sat, loose it and bring it to me, and if the Owners
ask you why ye do so, ye shall answer them, That the Lord has need of him; and
they will let you bring him. The Disciples exactly obeyed this Order, and
finding every thing as Jesus had foretold, they brought the Ass and Colt to
him, upon which, when they had set him, he rode to Jerusalem. In the mean Time,
the People, which were come to Jerusalem, to the Feast, having received
Information of the Resurrection of Lazarus, from those that were Eyewitnesses
of the Miracle, and hearing that Jesus was coming to that great City, took
Branches of Palm Trees, and went in great Throngs to meet him, crying out,
Hosanna, i. e. Salvation and Glory, Blessed be the King of Israel, who comes
in the Name of the Lord. Jesus riding upon the Colt which his Disciples had
covered with their Garments, came in Triumph, thus accomplishing that Prophesy
of Zachary, Zach. 9.9.
Fear not, Daughter of Zion, behold thy King comes, full of Meekness, and
siting upon an Ass's Colt. A great multitude of People did also spread their
Garments in the way, and others cut down Branches from the Trees, and strewed
them where he was to pass.

When they were come to the Descent of the Mount of Olives, his Disciples being
transported with Joy, to see their Master so highly honored, gave Praise to
God, with a loud Voice for all the mighty Works which they had seen; saying,
Blessed be the King that comes in the Name of the Lord: Peace in Heaven and
Glory in the Highest: And all the People, as well those that went before as
those that followed after, joined with the Disciples in their Acclamations, so
that he was surrounded with Shouts, saying, Hosanna, i. e. Honor, to the Son
of David, blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord; blessed be the
Kingdom of our Father David, which we have seen to come: Hosanna, Peace and
Honor in the Highest Heavens.

II. Jesus Christ bewails the Destruction of Jerusalem.
Matthew. 21.10, 11. Luke 19.39-44.
The Pharisees could not see so great Honor bestowed upon a Man, whom they had
resolved to put to Death, without great Indignation, and therefore argued among
themselves; Do ye not perceive that we prevail nothing? Behold all the World is
gone after him: But some of them could not conceal their Anger, but said, among
the Multitude, to Jesus, Master, command thy Disciples to hold their Peace: But
he silenced them themselves, by saying to them, That the Stones would
immediately cry out, if his Disciples should hold their Peace. Then they came
near to Jerusalem, and Jesus casting his Eyes upon that miserable City, whose
Miseries and Sins he foresaw, shed forth Tears, as a Sign of the Compassion,
with which he was affected for her, and seeing her, cried out; O that thou
had known, at least in this thy Day, the things that conduce to thy Peace and
Safety; but now they are all hid from thine Eyes! For the Time shall come when
thy Enemies shall cast Trenches about thee and invest thee, and keep thee in on
every Side; and demolish thee, and cast thy Children out, and shall not leave
one Stone upon another, because thou have not known the Time wherein God has
visited thee: So that he shows himself much more affected for the Ruin of
Jerusalem than at the Acclamations with which they received him. Being entered
into the City, with so great a Number of People, all the Citizens were moved,
and every one enquired, Who is this Man? To whom the Multitude answered, It is
Jesus, the Prophet of Nazareth, in Galilee.

III. Jesus Christ again foretells his Death.
Besides the Jews, who were come to Jerusalem, John 12.20-36.
to keep the Passover, there were also Heathens, who being Proselytes of the
Gates, were come to worship God at that Feast: Some of these having a great
Desire to see Jesus, did for that Reason come to Philip, one of the Twelve
Apostles; Philip tells Andrew of it, and both of them told their Master. Jesus,
who by his Death was about to obtain Salvation, as well for the Gentiles as
Jews, answered these Two Apostles, That his Hour was come that he should be
glorified: And as a Grain of Wheat brings forth no Fruit till it is dead in the
Earth, where it is sown, so should his Death be the Seed, which should produce
a great Harvest; that the Faithful, which should be produced thereby, should
learn by his Example to hate their Lives in this World, that they may preserve
it to Life Eternal, and that the Service, which they should pay him, in
following him whithersoever he goes, should be rewarded with Eternal Glory. He
also, for their Comfort, brought upon himself the Horrors of his Death, and
therefore stirred up voluntarily a Passion in his Soul, which discovered it
self outwardly by these Words, My Soul is troubled, and what shall I say?
Father save me from this Hour: But considering with himself how great Glory God
would gain by his Death, he added; But for this Cause came I to this Hour:
Father, glorify thy Name.

At the same Time there came a Voice from Heaven, which said, I have glorified
it already, and will glorify it again. They, that were present, said, That it
was a Clap of Thunder, and others said, That an Angel spoke unto him, but he
answered, This Voice came not for me, but for your sakes. And to let them know
what Influence his Death, which he should suffer upon the Cross, ought to have
upon all Men, he says, Now is this World judged, and the Prince of this World,
i. e. the Devil, is cast out; and when I am lifted up from the Earth, I will
draw all Men unto me. Upon this the Jews asked him, How the Death of the Son of
Man could be consonant with the Holy Scripture, which says, That Christ must
endure for ever, and never dye? And they added, Who is this Son of Man? He
answers them, That they should enjoy the Light a little Time; and advises them,
That since it is no fit Time to walk or act, when they are deprived of it, they
should believe in the Light, that is, in him, so long as he is with them.

Jesus having spoke these Words, John 12.36-50
hid himself from them, since they made no deeper Impression upon their Hearts
than his Miracles did, which he had done before them in so great Numbers; for
they were stricken with that Blindness of Heart, which according to Isaiah's
Prophecy, Isa. 6.9.
hindered them from seeing that which they saw, their Hearts being so much
hardened that they could not endure the Remedies which were applied for their
Cure. Nevertheless, even among the Chief Men of the Jewish Nation, there were
several that belived on Jesus Christ, but they dare not own him openly, because
the Pharisees had resolved to put all Jesus's Disciples out of the Synagogue;
and this their cowardly Timorousness proceeded from hence, That they loved the
Praise of Men more than the Praise of God: So that it was in vain for Jesus to
cry out to these sort of Persons, as he does in the next Words; He that
believes on me, believes on him that sent me: I am come a Light into the
World, that whosoever believes in me may not abide in Darkness: I am come to
save and not to judge; he that disregards my Words shall be judged by the same
Word at the Last Day; for I have not spoken of my self, nor taught any thing
but what my Father commanded me to teach: So great an effect had their Fear and
Hardness upon them.

IV. Jesus Christ curses the Fig Tree.
Matt. 21.17-22 Mark 11.12-14.
Perhaps these last Words were spoken in the Temple, for S. Mark says, That he
went thither, and in the Evening returned to Bethany, with his Twelve
Disciples: The next Morning he came again to Jerusalem, and perceiving himself
an hungry, he went to a Figtree, which he saw in the Way, hoping to find
something on it to eat: But because the Time for Figs was not come, he found
nothing; for which Reason he cursed the Tree, saying, Let no Fruit grow on thee
henceforth, for ever; and immediately the Fig Tree withered away: Not that the
Fig Tree, say the Fathers, was really to be condemned, for not bearing Fruit,
since it was not the proper Season for it; but that Jesus Christ would teach
Men by what he did to the Fig Tree, that he expects good Works of them, that he
does not allow them to be without Good Fruits, and that the Punishment due to
their Barrenness is to be given over to it, that since they have not done the
good they are able, they should not be able to do the Good they would.

V. Jesus Christ drives the Merchants out of the Temple.
Matthew. 21.12-22 Mark 11.15-26 Luke 19.45-48
Jesus being come to Jerusalem, went into the Temple, where seeing that Holy
Place profaned and dishonored by Trading and Merchandise, he was moved with
Indignation, and drove out the Buyers and Sellers, overthrew the Tables of the
Mony-Changers, and the Seats of them that sold Doves, and would not permit any
Man to carry any Vessel through the Temple: And to satisfy them of the
reasonableness of this Action, he said to them, Is it not written, My House
shall be called an House of Prayer, by all Nations? but ye have made it a Den
of Thieves. At the same Time came the Blind and the Lame to him, and he healed
them all.

The People were filled with Admiration at all these Things; but the Priests,
Scribes, and Chief Men among the Jews, persisted still in their Resolution of
putting him to Death, and sought all occasions to bring it about, but yet so
that they might have no cause to fear the People. The Miracles which he did,
and the Acclamations of the Children, who cried in the Temple, Hosanna, i. e.
Health and Honor, to the Son of David, much enraged them, and they could not
but discover that Anger, by asking him, If he regarded what these children
said? But he silenced them, by showing them, That that which displeased them,
so highly, fulfilled the Scripture; for, have you never read, says he, these
Words of the Psalmist, Out of the Mouth of Bakes and Sucklings thou have
perfected Praise? Psalm. 8.2.


When it was Night Jesus went from Jerusalem, and returned again the next
Morning; in the Way the Apostles beholding the Fig Tree, which Christ had
cursed, but the Day before, to be quite withered away and dead, to the very
Roots, Peter showed it to him, saying, Master, behold the Fig Tree, which thou
cursedst, is withered away! Whereupon Jesus takes an occasion to show them, how
great is the Force of Faith and Prayer; for he said unto them, That if they
have a steadfast Faith in God, they should not only be able to dry up a
Fig Tree, but to remove Mountains; and whatsoever they shall ask in Prayer, it
shall be granted them, provided that they be careful before Prayer to pardon
those that have offended them, because unless that be done, God will not pardon
them their Offenses.

VI. The Discourse of Jesus Christ with the Priests and Doctors.
Matthew. 21.23-27. Mark 11.27-33 Luke 20.1-8.
Jesus enters again into the Temple, where while he was instructing the People,
and preaching the Gospel, the Priests, Scribes and Rulers came upon him, and
asked him, By what Authority he did these things? He answered them, I also will
ask you one Thing, which if you will answer me, I will tell you by what
Authority I do this. He then asked them, Whether the Baptism of John was from
Heaven or of Men, i. e. Whether it was of Divine or Human Appointment? This
Question much perplexed them, for they durst not affirm that it was from
Heaven, for fear Jesus should retort it upon them, Why did ye not then believe
it? But if they should affirm it to be a mere Human Institution, they feared
that the People, who did generally believe that John was a Prophet, would stone
them; wherefore they chose to answer, That they knew not. Then Jesus replied,
Neither tell I you by what Authority I do these things, which ye behold to be
done by me.

After this he proposes several Parables to these Hypocrites, wherein he
shows, how great punishment they deserved for that unjust aversion and hatred,
which they had taken up against him, and for their obstinacy, by which they
rejected those Truths, which he had preached to them. The first is of a certain
Man, who having two Sons commanded them, one after another, to go and Labor in
his Vineyard. The first told him plainly, that he would not go, but afterward
he repented, and went; the other having promised him to go, went not. Jesus
asked the Priests and Scribes, which of these two Sons did the Will of his
Father? They answered, the first. Then he shows them, that the First figured
the Publicans and Sinners, who repented at the Preaching of John the Baptist,
and that they themselves not believing this his Holy Forerunner, who came to
them in the way of Righteousness, should not get into Heaven so easily as the
Harlots themselves, whose Repentance they would not imitate, nor follow their
Faith.

VII. The Parable of the Husbandmen, that hired the Vineyard.
The second Parable is concerning a Man, Matthew. 21.23-46. Mark 12.1-12. Luke
20.9-19.
who being about to take a long Journey, Let out his Vineyard to Husbandmen,
and about the time of the Vintage sent one of his Servants to them to receive
the Fruits of it. But the Husbandmen beat the Servant, and sent him back
empty. Then he sent another to them, whom they Wounded, and a Third whom they
Killed; others also he sent to them, and they used them after the same manner,
so that he resolved to send his only Son, whom he loved most tenderly, being
persuaded, that they would reverence him. But on the contrary, when they saw
him, they said one to another, Lo! this is the Heir, let us Kill him, and so
get his Inheritance. So they seized upon him, cast him out of the Vineyard and
slew him. Then Jesus said, When the Lord of the Vineyard comes, what will he
do unto these Husbandmen? Some of them answered, He will destroy those wicked
Men according to their deserts, and let out his Vineyard to other Husbandmen,
who shall render him the Fruits in due season. He approved of their answer, and
assured them, that they should be used in that manner. But others who perceived
perhaps, that this Parable touched them, said unto him, God forbid. But Jesus
looking upon them, said, What is then the meaning of this Parable of Scripture,
The Stone, which the Builders rejected, is by the Miraculous Power of God,
become the head Stone of the Corner? And to make a full Application of this
Parable to them, he added, For this reason it is, that I have told you, That
the Kingdom of Heaven shall be taken from you, and be given to a People, that
shall bring forth the Fruits of it. And this indeed happened, for the Jews to
whom Jesus Christ had trusted his Vineyard, that is to say, his Law, and
Church, and who instead of making use of these advantages, had cruelly handled
the Prophets, who admonished them of their Duty, and have Crucified the only
Son of God, are no longer the Lords People, but his Church is now made up of
Gentiles, who heretofore knew not God. Wherefore it is our Wisdom to profit by
the misfortunes of them, into whose Place we are entered, bringing forth Fruits,
i. e. faithfully performing, what God expects of us. The Priests and Scribes
easily perceived, that Jesus spoke of them, and would then have laid their
Hands on him, but the fear which they had of the People, kept them from
attempting it, though they were much troubled, and ashamed to see themselves thus
Painted out in this other Parable.

VIII. The Parable of the Marriage Feast.
Matthew. 22.1-14.
To the same purpose Jesus spoke another Parable, saying, A certain King having
made a great invitation to the Marriage of his Son, sent his Servants, when all
things were ready, to call them to it; but because they refused to come, he
sent other Servants to persuade them, and give them notice, what great
preparations were made for them. But this did not make any impression upon
them, they went one to his Farm, another to his Merchandise, and some laid hold
upon his Servants and slew them, after they had committed many outrages against
them. The King having heard of these ungrateful rudenesses, sent forth his
Armies to slay those Murderers, and burn up their Cities, and in their stead
brought all, that he found in the Streets to the Marriage. This being done the
King came in to see the Guests, and there perceiving a Man, who had not a
Wedding Garment, he asked him, how he dare come thither with such a Vestment?
Wherefore binding him Hand and Foot, he cast him into outer Darkness, where
there is nothing but Weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Jesus made the Application
of this Parable, saying, Many are called, but few are chosen. It is easy to
see, that the Jews were the first Invited to the Marriage of the Kings Son, i.
e. to the Kingdom of Heaven Preached to them by Jesus Christ; that they
despised his Word, and put him to Death; that God has rejected them, as a
punishment for their Sin, and instead of them has called the Gentiles into his
Church, who before had never heard of him. It remains only for us to see,
whether we have a Marriage-Garment, i. e. Charity, which is the White Robe,
which is given us in Baptism, that so if we have it not, we may endeavor to
get it on, before the King comes to examine with the great rigor of his
Justice the State of all those, that are in his Church, to condemn them to
Infernal Darkness, who imagine that it is enough to be called, and will not be
at the pains by an Holy Life, to obtain the Reward promised to the Elect.

IX. Jesus Christ Silenceth the Pharisees.
Matthew. 22.15-22. Mark 12.13-17. Luke 20.20-26.
The Pharisees who had as great a share-in the Application of these Parables as
any other, went away with a firm resolution to search out all Opportunities of
destroying him, who thus confounded them. They believed they had found out an
infallible way to do it, by entangling him in his talk, and therefore made no
delays to make use of it. Whereupon they sent some of their Disciples to him,
who were as much Hypocrites as themselves, and counterfeiting themselves to be
Righteous, with the Herodians, i. e. probably some of Herod's Officers, to
ensnare him, and tempt him to speak something, which might bring him under the
stroke of Justice. These Men therefore went to him, and spoke thus to him,
Master, We know that thou art upright and true, and teach the way of God in
Truth, without regard to any Man, or thing. Give us thy Opinion in this matter,
Is it Lawful to pay Tribute to Caesar, or no? It is certain their design was in
this Question to make him odious to the People, who never could be brought to
submit themselves to the Romans, but by force, if he should assert that they
ought to do it; but if he answered, that 'twas unlawful to pay, they would have
him punished as a Rebel against the Emperor. But he knowing their malicious
intentions, asked them to show him a piece of the Money they paid Tribute
withal, and when he had it in his Hands, he said, Whose Image and
Superscription has it? They answered him, Caesar's. Then he replied, Render
therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are
Gods. In which answer since they could find no fault, they went away full of
disappointment, and admiration.

X. Jesus Christ silenceth the Sadducees.
As soon, as these Men were gone, Matthew. 22.23-33. Mark 12.18-28. Deuteronomy. 25.5.
Luke 20.27-38.
there came to Jesus the Sadducees, i. e. a Sect of the Jews, that do not
believe the Resurrection of the Dead, and put a Question to him about the
Command of the Law of Moses, which obliged a Man to Marry the Widow of his
Elder Brother, dying without Children. They then put this Case to him, That
there was a Woman, who was Married according to this Law to Seven Brethren, one
after another, and they all Dyed without Children, wherefore they asked him,
Whose Wife of the Seven she should be after the Resurrection? He answered them,
That they neither understood the sense of Scripture, nor the Power of God; that
Marriage, which is necessary in this World, to raise up Children, and posterity
to Mortal Men, is not at all so in another World, where no Man shall dye, but
all shall be like the Angels, being immortal. Then he shows them by Scripture,
that the Dead are alive in respect of God, who will one day raise them, and
consequently they were in a great error in denying a future Resurrection. A
Doctor of the Law who heard this answer, could not but acknowledge, that he had
replied well, and all the People continued their admiration of his Doctrine.

XI. He teaches, which is the greatest Commandment of the Law.
A certain Scribe who was a Pharisee, Matthew. 22.34-40. Mark 12.28-34.
and who had seen, how Jesus had put the Sadducees to silence came to him, and
asked him, tempting him, Which is the first, and great Commandment of the Law?
He answered him, This, Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
with all thy Soul, with all thy Mind, and with all thy Strength; and that the
Second, which is like unto it, is this, Thou shall Love thy Neighbor as thy
self: In these two are contained all the Law and the Prophets. The Pharisee
highly approved this answer of Jesus, and confessed, that he deservedly
preferred Love above all other things, for that is more acceptable to God, than
all Whole Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices. The Son of God for his part commended
the Wisdom of this Doctor, and assured him, that he was not far from the
Kingdom of God.

After this no Man durst ask him any more Questions; but Jesus put one himself
to the Pharisees, for seeing them assembled about him in the Temple, He said
unto them, What think ye of Christ, whose Son is he? They answered him, The Son
of David. Whereupon Jesus objected these words of Ps. 110.1. The Lord said unto
my Lord, sit thou on my Right Hand, etc. And asked them how he could be David's
Son, since he being inspired by the Holy Spirit called him His Lord? This
Question they could not resolve him, because they would not acknowledge the
Divine Nature of Jesus Christ, whence it was, that they were Ignorant, that as
God, he was Lord of David, though as Man he was his Son.

XII. Jesus discovers the Vices of the Scribes and Pharisees.
Jesus then turning his Discourse to the People, but chiefly to the Disciples,
Matthew. 23.1-12. Mark 12, 38-40. Luke 20.45-57.
admonishes them to observe, and do those Truths, which the Scribes and
Pharisees taught them, since they sat in Moses Chair and had right to instruct
them. But that they should take heed, how they imitated their Actions: for he
tells them, that they were guilty of Hypocrisy, and commanded others to do,
what themselves would not do; that they affected the highest places and sought
after the greatest Honor; that they used long Prayers indeed, but 'twas to
devour Widows Houses. He taught his Disciples not to desire to be called
Masters, but to acknowledge themselves to be all Brethren; That they had but
one Father, who is God, and one Master, Jesus Christ. And then he repeats the
words, which he had often spoken, He that is greatest among you, let him be
Servant of all; for whosoever exalts himself, shall be abased, but he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

XIII. Jesus Christ commends the Alms of a poor Widow.
Jesus sitting over against the Treasury took notice of those that cast their
Gifts into it; Mark 12.41-44. Luke 21.1-4.
and seeing a certain poor Widow casting in two Mites, (which make a Farthing
of our Money) he called unto his Disciples, and said unto them, That this poor
Widow has given more, then all the Rest; because these Rich Men, who have put
much into the Treasury, have given out of their abundance; but this Woman on
the contrary has out of her want given all she had, even all her Living.

XIV. Jesus Christ foretells the Destruction of Jerusalem.
When Jesus was come out of the Temple to return to Bethany, Matthew. 24.1-20.
Mark 13.1-23. Luke 21.5-24.
his Disciples began a Discourse among themselves in the way, about the
Magnificence and Beauty of that Building, and the large Gifts, with which it
was enriched and endowed. And then came to their Master to show him that, which
they so much admired; and one of them said to him, Master, see thou what
Stones and Buildings here are? But he answered them, That the time shall come,
in which all this great Building, which they see, shall be so utterly
destroyed, that there shall not be left one Stone upon another that shall not
be cast down. When they came to the Mount of Olives, Jesus sat over against the
Temple, and Four of his Apostles, viz. Peter, James, John and Andrew, prayed
him to tell them, When this Destruction of the Temple, which he had foretold,
should happen; when the World should end, and he should come again in Glory,
and what shall be the Signs of these great events? Jesus explained all these
things to them; and first advises them to beware of the Multitude of Impostors,
who should pretend themselves to be the Messiah; as also not to be troubled at
the Wars, Seditions, Famines, and other dreadful Signs, which are nothing but
many presages of the horrible Calamities, which shall come upon the Earth. He
tells them that before these things come to pass, they shall be Persecuted,
brought before Judges, Scourged in Synagogues, be delivered over to Punishments
by their Parents, hated of all Men for the Love they bear to Christ, and many
of them shall be put to Death. But he comforts them at the same time, by
assuring them, that he will give them such Wisdom to speak before their Judges,
as all their Adversaries shall not be able to gainsay or resist; that they
shall secure, and save their Souls by Patience; that in spite of all the Rage
of their Persecutors, there should not one Hair of their Heads perish, and that
his Gospel shall be Preached in all the World. Lastly, he tells them, that he
would raise up false Prophets; which should deceive many; that Persecutions
should make many to fall away; that they shall see Iniquity abound, and Charity
grow cold; but they that hold out to the end, shall be saved, and so receive a
sufficient reward for their Patience.

After he has thus instructed them concerning what should befall themselves, he
then tells them, what shall come upon the City Jerusalem, the Temple, and the
Jews themselves. He says then, That when they shall see Jerusalem invested,
and Gods Temple defiled with execrable abominations they may then assure
themselves, that the Desolation of them is nigh. That they should only contrive
to save themselves with all the care they can, that they may not be involved in
the Calamities of their Nation. That this is the time, that God will pour out
his Vengeance upon the Jews, Who shall see their City trodden down by the
Gentiles, who shall slay them, or carry them Captives into all Nations, where
they shall suffer all the Evils and Plagues, which God has threatened to bring
upon them in Holy Scripture, and to be brought into so great troubles, and
afflictions, as never were, nor ever shall be the like. And indeed all these
things happened to the Jews a little after, in the same manner, as the Son of
God foretold his Disciples; for about Forty Years after, Jerusalem having
filled up the Measure of her Sins by the Death of Christ, and his Disciples,
was taken by the Romans after a long Siege, and War, wherein above Thirteen
Hundred Thousand Jews perished in several parts of the World, Eleven Thousand
of which Dyed of Famine and Sword in the Siege of their City only.

XV. Jesus Christ foretells his second Coming.
Jesus having thus answered the first Question put to him by the Apostles,
Matthew. 24.21-35. Mark 13.24-31. Luke 21.25-33.
he passes to the two others, which concern his Glorious coming, and the end of
the World. He tells them, that his Second coming shall be like Lightning, which
appears suddenly, and in a moment flies from East to West, i. e. he shall be
manifested, and known in all the Earth, and not privately, and be seen in one
place only, as several Seducers would persuade us, of whom some will say, that
Christ is here, and others, that he is there: That he will raise up also false
Christ's, who shall do such astonishing Miracles, that they shall deceive, if it
be possible, even the Elect themselves. But those Holy Souls shall acknowledge
the true Messiah, and gather themselves to him, as the Eagles flock about a
Dead Carcass for their Prey. That to make his Coming the more Glorious, several
extraordinary and dreadful Signs shall go before it, As the Sun, and Moon shall
be Darkened, the Stars shall fall, the Heavens shall be shaken, the Waves of the
Sea shall make a terrible Noise and Roaring, and all Men shall be in a general
Consternation and amazement. That after this Universal change of Nature, They
shall see the Sign of the Son of Man first, and then Himself coming in the
Clouds with Power and Majesty; and he shall send his Angels, who shall utter a
Voice like the Sound of a Trumpet, and shall gather together his Elect from all
parts of the World. He adds, That then his Faithful Servants may lift up their
Heads with confidence, because as we know that Summer is nigh, when we see the
Fig Trees, and others Trees begin to Bud, so shall they know by all these
things, that they shall then see his Glory, and that the Kingdom of God, is, as
it were, at their Doors, and nigh at Hand.

XVI. Jesus Christ teaches his Disciples to Watch.
Mark 13.32-37. Luke 21.34-38.
Jesus having said these things, had only two things more to Teach his Apostles,
viz. the time, when these things should happen, and what the Son of Man should
do upon the Earth, when he should come, as he had said of himself, full of
Majesty and Glory. As to the first he tells them, that no Creature knows the
time, but God only, and that it is very convenient for them to be Ignorant of
it, that they may be watchful over themselves, and not suffer their Hearts to
be overcharged with Surfeiting, and Drunkenness, and cares of this Life: That
they should Watch and Pray always, that they may make themselves worthy to
appear with confidence before the Son of Man. He foretells them, what Signs
should happen before his Second Coming, that he may not surprise those, who
will not Watch for themselves, and that the day of his Judgment shall be as a
Snare, which shall enclose in it all the Inhabitants of the World. And after he
has propounded to them the example of certain good Servants, who in the
absence of their Master discharge their Trust, which he has committed to them
faithfully, and watch always for his coming, because they knew not the time,
when he will return, he concludes, Watch ye therefore, lest the Lord come on a
sudden, and find you sleeping. And then adds, what I say unto you, I say unto
all; Watch.

XVII. The Parable of the Ten Virgins.
Jesus, that he might impress this Truth more strongly upon their Spirits,
Matthew. 25.1-13.
upon which their Salvation depended, propounds two Parables. The First is of
the Ten Virgins, who took their Lamps, and having lighted them went out to meet
the Bridegroom and Bride and accompany them at their Marriage. Five of them,
which the Son of God calls Fools, were contented to have their Lamps light; but
the other Five wisely Foreseeing, that the Bridegroom might tarry, carried Oil
along with them in their Vessels, that they might put it into their Lamps, if
they were in danger of going out. And thus it came to pass, for the Bride groom
delayed his Coming, and they all slumbred and slept. About midnight there was a
great Cry heard, Behold, the Bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him: They
arose immediately, and trimmed their Lamps. But the five foolish Virgins seeing
their Lamps ready to go out, desired some Oil of the wise Virgins, who sent
them to the sellers; and while they went to buy, the Bridegroom came, and the
wise Virgins went in with him to the Marriage. The other Virgins came
afterward, but the Door was shut, and they were forced to knock, saying, Lord,
Open to us; but he answered them, I know you not. The Application of this
Parable is very easy, and the conclusion which the Son of God has drawn from
it, is plain, Watch therefore, for ye know neither the Day, nor the Hour,
wherein the Son of Man comes.

XVIII. The Parable of the Servants.
Matthew. 25.14-30.
The second Parable is of a Man, who being about to take a long Journey, put his
Estate into the Hands of his Servants, and distributed to them several Sums of
Money, according to their several abilities, to Trade with. At his return he
found them to have doubled what they had received, and therefore said unto them
one by one; O good, and faithful Servant, because thou have been faithful in a
few things, I will put many things into thy dispose, enter thou into the Joy of
thy Lord. But finding among them one, who hid his Lords Money in a Pit, he cast
him out, and put him into a dark Dungeon, as a sloathful, and unprofitable
Servant. We have already seen something like this in a Parable before, Of the
Servants, who having also received a Sum of Money, had made different
improvements of it. Here the Sums are diverse, but the Gain is equal; and we
are taught by both these Parables, that to be saved we must make good Use of
the Graces which God has bestowed upon every one, in such Measure as he
pleases; that we shall have the greater Rewards, the greater Improvement we
make of the Gifts of his Mercy; and that we need fear but one thing, which is,
to hide, or not improve the Talent that God has entrusted us withal.

XIX. A Description of the Last Judgment.
After these Parables, in which Jesus teaches his Disciples the importance of
watching always, Matthew. 25.31-46.
that they may not be surprised by his Second Coming, which must needs be very
terrible, as the Fathers say to those who have not labored after Salvation in
this Life, and who suffer Death to overtake them without a due Preparation for
eternal Life: He then informs them, What he will do upon the Earth, when he
shall come again in his Majesty, accompanied with his Angels. He tells them,
That he shall sit on the Throne of his Glory, and all Nations of the World,
being assembled before him he will separate the Righteous from the Wicked, as a
Shepherd separateth the Sheep from the Goats: That he will say to the Righteous
on his Right Hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you, from the beginning of the World; for I was an hungry and ye gave me
Meat, thirsty and ye gave me drink, naked and ye clothed me, sick and ye
visited me, imprisoned, and ye came unto me, to see me. These good Men being
amazed, will then ask him, When he suffered these Wants, and they thus assisted
him: And then he will answer them, I say unto you, that forasmuch as ye did it
to any of these least of my Brethren, ye did it unto my self. Afterward he will
say to the Sinners on his Left Hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into Eternal
Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: And he will add, That the Cause of
their Condemnation is this, that they did not afford him Relief in his need,
not giving to his Brethren. Not that Sinners, say the Fathers, shall not be
punished for their other Crimes, of which they are found guilty; and the Good
shall not be rewarded for the other good Works which they have done; but by
assuring us, That he will judge Men according to the Works of Mercy, which they
have done or omitted. He endeavors to teach us, That without this virtue all
the Good* we do will be unprofitable for our Salvation, and that there is no
Sin, which Almsgiving done by the Spirit of God, cannot blot out. Sinners
shall be damned, because they have not given Alms; as a Sick Man may be said to
dye of his Disease, because he would not use the Medicine which might cure him.
These Two Sentences shall be followed with different Executions, the Sinners
shall go into Eternal Torments, prepared for them; but the Just shall go up
into Heaven, to be enstated in Life and Eternal Glory.

XX. The Jews hold a Council against Jesus.
Matthew. 26.1-5.14-16 Mar. 14.1, 2, 10, 11 Luke 22.1-6.
While Jesus was thus instructing his Apostles, the Priests and Doctors of the
Law were devising all ways to apprehend Jesus by Subtilty, and put him to
Death. He did not hide himself from them, because his Hour was come: He
appeared in the Temple in the Daytime, and the People came together, early in
the Morning, to hear him, and at Night he went into the Mount of Olives. On
Wednesday his Enemies met in the Hall of Caiphas the High Priest, and held a
Council against him: But because they feared the People, they sought to seize
upon him by Craft, and that not on he Feast Day, lest they should cause an
Uproar among the People. In the mean Time Satan entered the Heart of Judas
Iscariot, that covetous Apostle, who, being a Thief, kept the Money of Jesus
Christ, and inspired him with a detestable Resolution to betray and sell his
Master. This Traitor therefore goes to the Priests and Rulers, and says unto
them, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him into your Hands? This
Proposition did please them wonderfully, and they promised to give him Thirty
Pieces of Silver, which comes to about Three Pounds and Fifteen Shillings of
our Money; Which Sum he accepted: From that Time he sought Opportunity to betray
him. This Jesus warned his Disciples of, Ye know that within Two Days is the
Feast of the Passover, and the Son of Man shall be delivered up to the Jews, to
be Crucified.

XXI. What was the Jewish Passover.
The Passover was the greatest and most solemn of all the Jewish Festivals,
Exodus 12.
and God himself appointed it, as a notable Remembrance of the Favors he had
done for his People; and as a sensible Sign of those that he further intended
to do for all Mankind, by the Death of his Son. The Word Pascha signifies a
Passage; and if we would understand why this Name was given to that Solemnity,
we must call to Mind the manner how the Israelites were delivered out of
Egypt, and from the Slavery of Pharaoh. God, that he might oblige that Prince
to free his People, sent several Plagues upon him and his Kingdom, and
particularly slew all the Firstborn in Egypt, both of Man and Beast: But that
the Jews might not be involved in this Massacre, which was intended only to
work their Deliverance, they were ordered by Moses from God to do these Things.
On the Tenth Day of the Moon in March, they took every one an He-Lamb,
according to their Families, without Blemish or Spot, which they Sacrificed on
the Full-Moon of the same Month, at Even, and struct the Blood of it upon the
Lintel and Two Side-posts of their Houses. The same Night they eat the Flesh
roasted with Fire, in haste, with unleavened Bread and bitter Sauces, having
their Garments guirded and trussed up, their Shoes on their Feet, and a Staff
in their Hands, as being ready to depart. In this Night, which was from the
Fourteenth to the Fifteenth Day of the Moon in March, God laid this heavy
Judgment upon all Egypt, in slaying all the Firstborn; and because he passed
over all the Houses of the Israelites, which he saw dyed with the Blood of the
Lamb, which had been sacrificed the Night before, he would have this Lamb
called by the Name of Pascha, or Passover. The Egyptians seeng this Slaughter,
urged the Jews to be gone themselves, who being ready to depart, as we have
already seen, went out of that Country, carrying the Dough along with them,
which they had not Time to leaven. In remembrance of this miraculous
Deliverance, God commanded them to celebrate a great Feast every Year, called
the Passover, that they might have it, as a Monument of this Passage of the
Lord; and he enjoined them, during this Solemnity, which was to continue Seven
Days, That they should eat unleavened Bread, and should begin on the Fourteenth
Day of the Moon of March, in the Evening, to Sacrifice and Eat the Lamb, in
remembrance of their Deliverance out of Egypt. This Evening, which began the
Feast of Passover, was called the First Day of Unleavened Bread, and the Name
of Passover was given equally to the Lamb that was eaten, and to the Solemnity
which began with the Sacrifice of that Lamb: Whence it comes to pass, that we
often meet with such Expressions as these in the Gospel, to Eat, Sacrifice and
Keep the Passover. As the Bondage of Egypt, from which God delivered the Jews,
was a Figure of Man's Slavery to Sin, from which he was about to free Men, so
the Lamb, whose Blood saved the Israelites, is a Figure of Jesus Christ, who is
called, The True Passover, because it is by his Blood that we are truly
redeemed: And for this Reason it is, that he would dye at the Passover, to
fulfill by his Sacrifice the great Mysteries which were represented by all the
Jewish Ceremonies.

XXII. Jesus sups with his Disciples.
This great Feast of the Passover being near, Matthew. 26.17-20
the Disciples asked their Master, Where he would eat the Passover? Jesus
immediately sent Peter and John to Jerusalem, and tells them, That as soon as
they are entered into the City, they should find a Man bearing a Pitcher of
Water; let them follow him, and wherever he enters, let them tell the Master
of the House, That he intends to keep the Passover at his House with his
Disciples; and he will show you, says he, a large upper Room, furnished and
prepared, there prepare all Things necessary for us. Peter and John did as they
were commanded, and in the Evening he came thither with his Twelves Apostles;
where, at the Hour appointed, they sat down to eat the Paschal Lamb. He says
then to his Disciples, With much earnestness have I desired to eat this
Passover with you, before I suffer; for I say unto you, That I will not eat any
more thereof, till it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, i. e. in Heaven,
where not only the Passover, but also all the other Mysteries shall have a full
accomplishment. Then he takes a Cup, and giving Thanks, said to them, Take
this and divide it among you, for I say unto you, That I will not drink any
more of the Fruit of the Vine, until the Kingdom of God shall come.

XXIII. Jesus washes his Disciples Feet.
John 13.1-15.
From this Time Jesus had his Death continually in his Thoughts, which seems to
have been appointed at this Feast of the Passover, which signifies a Passage,
to put him in Mind that his Hour was come, wherein he was to pass out of this
World to his Father. He knew that the Devil had put into the Heart of Judas
Iscariot a Design to betray him; but before he was delivered into the Hands of
his Enemies, he was desirous to give his Disciples, whom he had always loved,
and would love unto the end, a signal Testimony of his Love; wherefore he
rises from the Table, lays aside his Garments, takes a Towel, pours Water
into a Basin, and knowing that his Father had given all Things into his Hands,
and that he was come from God and went to God, he goes about to wash his
Apostles Feet, and to wipe them with the Towel he had about him: Peter could
not endure this great Debasement of his Master, and says unto him in a
Surprise, Why will thou wash my Feet, Lord? And although Jesus answered him,
Thou know not now what I do, but thou shall know afterward; yet he still
asserted, Thou shall never wash my Feet. But because his Master told him, That
if he washed him not, he should have no part in him, he chose rather to see him
do so mean an Office than be separated from him, and therefore replied, Lord,
not only my Feet, but my Hands and my Feet. Jesus said unto him, He that has
been washed already, has no need to wash any part of him but his Feet; and ye
are clean, but not all: Under which Exception he marked out Judas, who being
his Disciple should betray him. This Answer makes it credible, that Jesus did
wash his Apostles Feet, not only to give them a signal Example of his Humility,
but to show us, that although we are purified by Baptism, yet in this Life we
have continual need to cleanse our Affections, which are daily engaged in Human
Affairs; in the same manner as our Feet, how clean soever the rest of our Body
is, do continually gather Soil and Filth, and therefore only need washing.
After he had washed his Apostles Feet, he took his Garments, and sitting down
at the Table, he says unto them, Know ye what I have done unto you? ye call me
Lord and Master, and it is reasonable you should, for so I am; if I then, your
Lord and Master, have washed your Feet, ye also ought to wash one another
Feet: For I have given you an Example, that ye may consider upon it, and do as
I have done unto you.

XXIV. Jesus appoints the Eucharist, and foretells Judas's Treachery.
After this they again returned to their Supper, Matthew. 26.26-29 Mark 14.22-25
Luke 22.19-29 1 Cor. 11.23-25
which being almost ended, Jesus, who having washed their Feet, had, as it
were, prepared them for the Sacrament, which he intended to institute at the
same Time; wherefore he took Bread, blessed it, by giving of Thanks, brake it,
and gave it to them, saying, Take, eat, this is my Body, which is given for
you; do this in remembrance of me. Likewise he took the Cup, gave Thanks, and
gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of this, for this is my Blood, the Blood
of the New Testament, which is shed for many, for the Remission of Sins: Join
this also with the Bread, in remembrance of me.

Matthew. 26.20-25 Mar. 14.18-21 Luke 22.21-23 John 13.21-32.
Jesus then suffered himself to fall into a Trouble and Discomposure of Mind,
either at the Prospect of the Death which he was shortly to undergo, or at the
Thoughts of the monstrous perfideousness of Judas, and said unto the Apostles,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you, who sits at Table and
eats with me, shall betray me: These Words not only astonished them, but
grieved them all, and every one began to say, Is it I, Lord? He answered them,
One of you Twelve, that dippeth with me in the Dish, shall betray me. Instead,
the Son of Man goes to suffer Death, according as it is appointed concerning
him in Holy Scripture, but woe unto that Man by whom he is betrayed, it were
better for that Man that he had never been born. They knew not who it was of
whom he spoke, and therefore questioned among themselves who it was. Peter
seeing John, who was the beloved Disciple, leaning upon Jesus's Breast,
beckened to him, to ask Jesus who it was of whom he spoke: Jesus then answered
him, He it is to whom I shall give a Sop, when I have dipped it. Judas then
boldly asked his Master, Is it I? Jesus said, Yes: And having dipped the Sop,
gave it to him. When Judas had received the Sop, the Devil entered into him, to
embolden him in the execution of that wicked Design, which he had in his Heart
some Time before. Jesus then said unto him, That thou do, do quickly;
whereupon Judas went out: But the rest of the Apostles knew not whither he
went, supposing that Jesus had sent him to buy something, or bestow some Money
on the Poor, because it was he that carried the Purse. As soon as he was gone
out, Jesus considering the Glory which his Father would gain by his Death, and
which he himself should receive as the Reward of his humble Obedience, faith
unto his Disciples; Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God is glorified in
him; and if God be glorified in him* God will also glorify him in himself, and
will streightway glorify him. Then they sung an Hymn, and rose from the Table,
to go to the Mount of Olives, where we have seen that Jesus went usually, at
Night.

XXV. Jesus foretells S. Peter's Denial, and the Apostles Flight.
Jesus having thus discoursed of his Glory, Matthew. 26.30-35. Mark 14.27-31.
Luke 22.31 38. John 13.33-38
raised a fresh Contention among his Disciples, Who of them shall be accounted
greatest, and have the greatest Share in it. Jesus checks their Ambition, by
repeating what he had said to them long before, That it shall not be so with
you as it is with Kings, who rule over their Subjects with Authority, but that
the greatest among them should be as the least, just as he, who was their
Master had been among them; little, not as he that sits at Table, but as he
that serves. He then tells them, That since they had held firm to him in all
his Persecutions, he would prepare for them a Kingdom, as his Father had
prepared one for himself: But he adds, That Satan had desired to sift them as
Wheat is sifted, i. e. to tempt them, that he may make them fall: And he said
to Peter, I have prayed for you that your Faith fail not; and when thou art
converted, i. e. recovered from thy Fall, strengthen thy Brethren. Then turning
to them all, he tells unto them, That he had but a little Time to be with them;
That he went whither they could not come; but he commanded them to love one
another, as he had loved them, because by this Love they should be known to be
his Disciples. Hereupon, S. Peter asked him, Whither he would go? Jesus
answered, Whither I go thou can not follow me now, but thou shall follow me
afterward. He replied, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? Jesus explains
himself further, saying to his Apostles, All of you shall be offended because
of me, this Night; for it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, and the Flock
shall be scattered; but after that I am risen again, I will go before you into
Galilee. Peter answered him, Although all Men should be offended, yet will not
I be offended, for I am ready to go with thee into Prison and unto Death; yea,
I will lay down my Life for thy Sake. Jesus answered, Will thou lay down thy
Life for me? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, That, this Night, before the Cock
crows twice, thou shall deny me thrice. Peter asserted it more passionately,
That he would not deny him, though he dyed for him: And all the Disciples said
the same, consulting the present Sentiments of their Hearts, more than their
own Weakness, which was thoroughly known to Christ. Jesus then asked them,
Whether they wanted any thing, when he sent them without Purse, or Scrip, or
Shoes? And when they answered him No, he said to them, But now, he that has a
Purse or a Scrip, let him take it, and he that has no Sword, let him sell his
Garment and buy one. In which figurative Language he describes the Greatness of
the Persecution, which they must shortly undergo, that it should be so violent,
that if they fly to such ordinary means, as are usually made use of, they must
sell their very Garments to provide Arms for their Defense; For I say unto you,
adds he, that this must be accomplished, Isai. 53.^2.
which is written of me, He was reckoned among the Transgressors. They who took
his Words in the literal Sense, That they must sell their Garments and buy one,
said unto him; We have here Two Swords; but because he understood them in
another Sense, he answered, It Is enough.

XXVI. Jesus comforts his Apostles.
It was almost impossible but that all these Predictions of his approaching
Death would much trouble his Apostles; which when he saw, John 14.1-31.
he comforted them, saying; That they should not be troubled, but believe in
him; That they knew, that if he went before them, to prepare a Place for every
one of them, in his Fathers House, he would come again and take them to
himself. Then he says, Whither I go ye know, and the way ye know. Thomas says
unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou go, and how should we know the Way?
Jesus replied, That he himself is the Way, the Truth and the Life; that they
must go to God by him; and that if they knew him, they would know his Father
also. Upon this Philip says unto him, Lord, show us the Father, and it
suffices us. But Jesus answered him, Have I been so long with thee, and have
thou not known me? And then adds, That in seeing him, we see the Father,
because he is in the Father, and the Father in him, which they might have
discerned by the Miracles which they had seen him do; assuring them, at the
same time, That they that believe in him shall do the same Wonders, and greater
than they, because whatsoever they ask of God, his Father, in his Name, it
shall be done to them.

Then he promises them, that he will by his Prayers obtain another Comforter
for them, which should be the Spirit of Truth, which the World cannot receive
because it knows him not; That he will not leave them Comfortless, but will
come unto them; That they shall see him when the World sees him not (which
happened after his Resurrection, for he appeared to none but own Disciples)
That he will one Day show them, that he is in his Father, because he will
discover himself to those that love him, and show evident Signs of his Love, by
receiving and keeping his Commandments. Judas asked him, Why he would discover
himself to them, and not unto the World? He answered him, If any Man love me,
he will keep my Commandments; and my Father will love him; and we will come
unto him, and make our Abode with him: He that loves me not, keeps not my
Commandments. He enlarges no farther upon Judas's Question. but leaves us to
infer from his Answer, That the Reason why he does not discover himself to the
World. i. e. the Lovers of the World, is, because the World neither loves nor
keeps his Commandments. He adds, That the Doctrine, which he had taught them,
was his Fathers; and that the Holy Spirit would make them understand and
remember all the Truths which he had taught them. Lastly, to confirm them
afresh, he tells them, That he gives his Peace to them, that they may not be
troubled; That if they loved him they would rejoce that he returned to his
Father, who is greater than himself, as he was Man. That he foretold them what
should come to pass, that when it comes to pass, they may believe on him that
has foretold it; That he will speak but little hereafter to them, because the
Prince of this World, i. e. the Devil, is coming, i. e. is about to compass his
Death by the Hands of the Jews, though he had Power over him, because he was
guilty of no Sin; but, as he goes on, That the World may know that I love my
Father, and do that which he has commanded. Arise and let us go hence.

XXVII. Jesus gives his Apostles several Precepts.
Jesus knowing that his Death, Jo. 15.1-27
which he was to suffer in Obedience to his Fathers Will, was nigh, was
unwilling to lose that little time which he had with his Apostles, and
therefore made use of it in Instructing them, and sowing that Seed in their
Hearts, which the Holy Spirit would make to increase in his due time. He tells
them therefore, that they were Holy and Pure, because they had received the
Doctrine of the Gospel; but that they may bring forth the Fruit, which the
Gospel requires of them that receive it, they must abide in him, as the
Branches of the Vine abide in the Body of it, without which they cannot bare
Grapes; That his Father is Glorified, when his Disciples bring forth much
Fruit; and that he will one day cut and cast into the Fire those, who bear no
Fruit, as the Vine-dresser cuts off, and burns the dry and dead Branches of the
Vine; That the Fruit, which he expected of them, is the Love, which they ought
to have one for another, imitating their Master, who gave his Life for his
Enemies themselves; That they have not chosen him, but he had chosen them to
bring forth continuing Fruit, and that he had not used them, as Slaves, but
Friends, in teaching them, what he himself had learned from his Father: That in
choosing them to follow him, he had taken them from the World, and so not being
of the World, they must expect to be Hated and Persecuted, as he himself was.

That they shall be cast out of the Synagogues; John 16.1-33*
yea, men shall think they honor God, and do a Work acceptable to him, when
they put them to Death; and that they shall be thus treated by those, that
neither know the Father, nor the Son that he has sent: That he has told them
these things before they come to pass, that when they come to pass, they may
remember that he has foretold them, and by remembering them, he might encourage
and fortify them, that they may not faint under the most Violent Persecution.

These Truths the Apostles heard with silence, as if they were much afflicted,
and astonished at the loss of their Master Jesus Christ: He told them, that he
was going to him that sent him, and none of them asked, whither he went, but
were only troubled at it. He mildly reproves this their silence, and to comfort
them, he tells them, it was for their Interest that he should go away, because
he could not send the Spirit, who is the Comforter till after his departure
from them: That when this Comforter is come, he will convince the World, and
Principally the Jews of Sin, in not believing in him, whom God has sent to
save them; of Righteousness and Justice, either of Jesus Christ, which was
manifest by his Glorious Resurrection and Ascension, or of the Faithful, who
have believed in him, and have not seen him, whom the Jews having seen, have
not believed on him: That he will convince the World of the Judgment, and
Condemnation of the Prince of this World, i. e. the Devil, whose Kingdom has
been destroyed by Jesus Christ, and of whose punishment all those shall fall
into, who will not free themselves from his Slavery and Bondage, that they may
submit to the Command and Power of Christ: That this same Spirit of Truth,
shall make the Apostles understand all the Truths, that they have heard, and
shall teach them those Doctrins, which he could not instruct them in, because
they were not able to bear them.

Then he adds, Yet a little while and ye shall see me no more; and again, a
little while and ye shall see me, because I go to my Father. His Disciples did
not understand the meaning of these Words, but asked one another what he
intended by them, and were desirous to ask him himself. Jesus perceiving this,
tells them, that they shall weep, but the World shall rejoice. But yet as a
Woman, who in the Time of her Travel has great sorrow, but forgets all her
Trouble and Pains as soon as she is Delivered, for Joy that a Man-Child is born
into the World: In like manner they shall be in Sorrow for a Time, but he will
soon return to them again, and then their Sorrow shall be changed into Joy,
which no Man can take away from them. The Apostles saw this prediction
accomplished in a short time after, for they bewailed his Death, while his
Enemies rejoiced at it; but at the end of Three Days they were filled with Joy
to see him risen from the Dead, and the Jews were much ashamed, and enraged to
see him Worshipped as a God, whom they had Crucified as a Vile Malefactor, and
whose Memory they had endeavored to extinguish from the Sons of Men.

After this he promises them two things. The First was, that after his
Resurrection he would nor speak to them in Proverbs and Parables, as he had
done hitherto, but would speak to them plainly of the Father, that they should
need no explication, of what he should say to them. The Second was, That they
should pray to the Father in his Name, which they had not yet done, and should
obtain whatsoever they petitioned of him. At that time, says he, ye shall ask
in my Name, and I need not promise you, that I will pray my Father for you, for
my Father himself Loves you, because ye have Loved me, and have believed, that
I am come from God: I am come, i. e. born eternally of God, and am come into
the World; again I leave the World, and go unto my Father.

The Apostles thought that they understood these last words perfectly, and
therefore said unto him, Now speak thou plainly, and speak no Proverbs.
And for that reason believed, that he was come from God. He answered them, Ye
now believe, but the Hour is coming, yea is already come, that ye shall be
scattered, and shall leave me alone; but I am not alone, for my Father is with
me: These things have I said unto you, that ye might have Peace in me; Ye shall
have afflictions in the World, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the World.

XXVIII. Jesus 's Prayer to his Father.
Jesus having given his Disciples all these Instructions, John 17 1-26.
lift up his Eyes to Heaven, and praying to his Father, said, My Father the
hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee. And as thou have
given him power over all flesh, so he has given to as many as thou have given
him, Eternal Life, which consists in the knowledge of thee, the true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent. I have glorified thee on Earth, I have
finished the Work, which thou have given me to do. And now, O Father, glorify
me with thy self, with that Glory which I had with thee, before the World was.

He then prays for the Apostles, which his Father had given him, and who having
received his Word, had believed that he came from God, and that he had sent
him; and since he left them in the World, he commends them to his Father, not
to take them out of the World by Death, but to preserve them from Sin. He had
kept them all in his Fathers Name, and had lost but One, viz. Judas. He had
separated them from the World, and because they had not the Spirit of the
World, the World hated them, wherefore he prays his Father to keep them, and
Sanctify them by his Word, which is Truth it self, offering himself a
Sacrifice for them, that he might obtain that favor for them. He also
recommedns all those to God, who should believe in his Name through the Preaching
of his Apostles, and prays for such an Admirable Union among them, as makes all
Christians One, being united together in God by his Charity, as the Father, who
is in the Son, and Son, who is in the Father, are by one Nature. O Father, adds
he, I pray that where I am, those whom thou have given me, may also be, that
they may behold my Glory. And he concludes this Admirable Prayer with these
words, Holy Father the World has not known thee, but I have known thee; these
have known that I have sent thee; I have declared unto them thy Name, and will
declare it, that they may have that love among them, with which thou have loved
me, and that I may be also my self among them.

XXIX. The Agony of Christ in the Garden upon the Mount of Olives.
Jesus having finished the former Prayer, Matthew. 26.36-46. Mark 14.26-42. Luke
22:39-46. Jo. 18.1.
went on his Journey toward the Mount of Olives, and passing over the Brook
Cedron, which runs between Jerusalem, and this Mountain, went with his
Disciples into a Garden, called Gethsemani. Here he commanded them to stay,
till he went and Prayed a little distance from it, and in the mean time to pray
themselves, that they be not delivered over to temptation. Jesus then taking
with him, Peter, and James, and John, began to be seized with fear, trouble,
and grief, and said unto them, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death,
tarry ye here and watch with me. Then departing from them about a Stones cast,
he threw himself upon the Earth; and as he was willing for the Consolation of
his Disciples to endure all the Passions, which Nature ordinarily stirs up, at
the approaches of Death, so he was desirous by his Example to teach them what
to do in that Estate. Through the voluntary perception of the infirmities of the
flesh, he Prayed his Father to save him from that Hour, wherein he had declared
him to suffer Death; but through the Motion of a Spirit, full of Submission and
Charity, he corrected those first Motions, and yielded entirely to the Will of
his Father, saying, My Father, My Father, all things are possible with thee,
remove this Cup from me; nevertheless not mine, but thy Will be done. Having
thus prayed, he arose, and went to his Disciples, whom he found asleep, their
Hearts being filled with sorrow; wherefore speaking to Peter, he reproved him,
Simon sleep thou? and then he said to all of them, What, could ye not Watch
one hour with me? Watch and Pray, that ye enter not into Temptation: The Spirit
is ready* but the flesh is weak. As if he had said, The Spirit would not be
afraid of Death, and ye believe, that ye have strength enough to contemn it;
but the weakness of the flesh makes such a strong resistance against the
Spirit, that it will easily conquer it, unless you beg the Divine grace to
support you against the fears of Death. Having said thus, he returned again to
his Prayers, and said to God, My Father, If this Cup may not pass from me,
unless I drink it, Thy Will be done. Then he returned again to his Disciples,
and finding them so sleepy, that they knew not what to answer him, he went
again to his Prayers a Third time. St. Luke tells us, that there came an Angel
from Heaven to him, to strengthen him, and that the Agony, in which he was, i.
e. the conflict that he had in himself between the Flesh, which dissuaded him
from suffering, and the Spirit, which was willing to submit to the Will of God,
caused such a violent disturbance in his Body, that there issued from it a
Swet, which fell down to the Earth like drops of Blood.

Then he went a Third time to find his Apostles, and saying unto them by way of
Reproof, and Irony, That they might now sleep on and take their rest, because
his time was come; He tells them in good earnest, That the time was come that
the Son of Man shall be delivered into the Hands of Sinners. Arise therefore,
says he, Let us go hence; behold he that betrayeth me is at hand.

XXX. The Apprehension of Jesus.
Jesus had scarcely said these words, Matthew. 26.47-56. Mark 14.43-52. Luke
22.47-53. John 18.2-11.
but Judas Iscariot came with a Band of Soldiers and Officers, which the
Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and Rulers had sent to take him. They were Armed
with Swords and Staves, and had Lanthorns and Torches with them, because it was
Night; and because they knew not him, whom they had Orders to Seize. Judas told
them, That it is he, whom he shall Kiss: Take him and carry him away safely. He
then came to Jesus, and saying to him, Hail Master, he gave him a Kiss, which
was the Sign he had given them to make him to be taken by them. Jesus said no
more to him, but these words, Friend, why are you come hither? What, Judas!
Do thou betray the Son of Man with a Kiss?

Jesus then immediately goes to the Soldiers, whom Judas had brought, and asked
them, Whom they sought? They answered, Jesus of Nazareth: He says to them, I
am He; And immediately they went back and fell to the Earth. Then again he
asked them, Whom seek ye? They answered again, Jesus of Nazareth; he said, I
have told you already, That I am He, and if ye seek me, Let these Men go, which
he spoke of his Disciples, that he might fulfill his Words spoken in his Prayer
to his Father, of them which thou gave me have I lost none. Then he resigned
himself to the power of his Enemies, who laid Hands on him and took him. His
Disciples seeing this, asked him, Whether they should make use of the Sword to
defend him? and Peter drawing his, Smote Malchus, one of the Highpriests
Servants, and cut off his right Ear. But Jesus commanded his Disciples to be
quiet, and Touching Malchus's Ear, healed it, saying to Peter, Put up thy Sword
into the Sheath, for all that use the Sword shall perish by the Sword. Shall
not I drink the Cup which my Father has given me to drink of? Think ye not,
that I am able to pray to my Father, and he shall send me immediately more than
Twelve Legions of Angels? But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that
so it must be?

Then he speaks to them, who came to take him, and says, Ye are come Armed
with Swords and Staves to take me, as if I were a Thief; I conversed every day
among you, and taught in the Temple, Why did you not apprehend me then? But
this is your Hour, and the Power of Darkness, and the Scriptures must be
fulfilled. Then all his Disciples forsook him, and fled, only one Young Man
followed him, having nothing but a Linen Garment upon him; but the Soldiers
laying hold upon him, he left his Linen Garment, and fled from them Naked.

XXXI. Jesus is Carried to Caiphas's Palace.
Matthew. 26.57-68. Mark 14.53-65. Luke 22.54-65. John 18.12-14.
They that had taken Jesus, bound him, and led him first to Annas, who was
Father-in-Law to Caiaphas, and Annas sent him back again to Caiaphas, who was
High Priest that Year, and who had told the Jews, that it was expedient that
one Man should dye for all the People. At his House all the Priests, Scribes,
and Elders were met, who asked him concerning his Disciples, and his Doctrine,
Jesus answered them, I speak publicly to all the People; I always Taught in
the Synagogue, and in the Temple where all the Jews assemble for Worship, and
in secret have I said nothing. Why do ye ask me? Ask them that heard me, they
know what I have Taught. At these words one of the Officers, which were there,
smote him on the Cheek, saying, Answerest thou the High Priest so? Jesus
replied, If I have spoken amiss, show me the Evil I have spoken; but if I have
spoken well, why smitest thou me?

In the mean time the whole Council sought false Witness against Jesus to put
him to Death, but could find none strong enough, although several Witnesses came,
and Testified several Things. At last came Two, who accused him, for saying,
That he would destroy the Temple and re-build another in three Days, which
should not be like the First made by Man's Hands; But this Testimony was not
sufficient. Nevertheless Caiphas rising up in the middle of the Assembly, said
to Jesus, Answerest thou nothing to that, which these Men Testify against thee?
But because he made no Answer to this Question, he put another to him, in which
they all joined; If thou art the Christ tell us plainly? He answered them, If I
tell you, you will not believe, and if I ask you a Question, ye will not Answer
me, nor let me go. But hereafter the Son of Man shall sit on the Right Hand of
the Power of God, Whereupon they replied, Art thou the Son of God? And he said
unto them, Ye have said that I am.

The High Priest himself, asked him also the same Question, and adjured him by
the living God, to tell them, Whether he were the Christ, the Son of God? Jesus
repeated the Answer, Thou have said it, I am He, and added, That they shall one
day see him coming upon the Clouds of Heaven, and sitting at the Right Hand of
God. The High Priest, hearing this, rent his Clothes, saying, He has
Blasphemed, what need we any further Witness? Ye have heard the Blasphemy your
selves, what do you judge of it? They answered, That he is worthy of Death, and
they condemned him immediately: Then they did spit in his Face, Smote him in
derision, blinded his Eyes, and some gave him blows with their Fists, saying,
in Mockery O Christ, Prophecy, who it is, that smote thee! To these insulting
Speeches, they added many other abuses and Blasphemies.

XXXII. Peter denies Jesus Christ.
Matthew. 26.69-75. Mark 14.66-72. Luke 22.54-62. John 18.25-27.
While Jesus passed the Night with the High Priest, being Treated in so
outrageous a manner, the People of the House, and those that took him, were
below in the Hall; when they had made a Fire, and warmed themselves, Peter also
warmed himself with them; for following his Master afar off, to see what would
befall him, he met with a Disciple, who was known to Caiphas's Family, and had
desired the Maidservant that kept the Door, to let him into the Hall. A short
time after coming to the place, where the Servants were warming themselves, the
same Servant saw Peter, sitting at the Fire with the other Servants, and
looking seriously upon him, knew him, and said aloud, This Man was also with
Jesus of Nazareth. And after said to himself, Art not thou one of his
Disciples? But he denied before them all, and answered her, Woman, I know him
not, I am none of his Disciples, nor do I know what thou say. After this he
went out of the Palace into the Porch, and the Cock Crew. As he was going out
another Servant, seeing him said to those that stood by, This man was also with
Jesus of Nazareth. Peter returned and seated himself near the Fire, where some
asked him, If he were one of Jesus's Disciples? But he denied it a Second time,
and swore that he knew him not. About an Hour after, another Officer of the
Highpriests, and Malchus's Kinsman, whose Ear Peter had cut off, bodly
asserted, pointing to Peter, that he was a Galilean, and one of Jesus 's
followers, and speaking to him, said, Wast not thou with this Man in the
Garden? Others also coming in at the same instant, said to him, Thou art
certainly one of his company, for thy very speech discovers it sufficiently,
that thou art a Galilean. Then Peter denied it a Third Time with cursing and
swearing, and said with solemn protestations, I know not what thou speak of
to me, nor what ye say: And immediately the Cock Crow'd again a Second Time.
Jesus then looking upon Peter, brought to his mind, what he had foretold of
him; and presently he went out and Wept bitterly for his Sin. St. Austin
observes, that Jesus being above Stairs, bound, and in the Hands of his
Enemies, could not with his Bodily Eyes, see his Disciple, who was below in the
Hall: so that this Aspect, which the Evangelist speaks of, was an Aspect of
Mercy, and a secret Motion of Grace, which opened St. Peter's Eyes to discover
his own fault, and which mollified his Heart to make him atone for his Sins by
his Tears.

XXXIII. The Despair of Judas.
In the Morning, they that had condemned Jesus to Death, having thought upon
all ways, Matthew. 27.1-10.
how they might put their Sentence in Execution, resolved to deliver him to
Pontius Pilate, the Governor of Judaea, so Constituted by the Romans. When
Judas, who had betrayed him, saw that he was Condemned, he repenting of what he
had done, brought the Thirty Pieces of Silver, which he had received* to the
Priests and Rulers again, and said unto them, I have sinned in betraying the
Innocent Blood. They answered, What is that to us? See thou to That. But he
casting the Money down in the Temple, went away and Hanged himself. The Priests
thought it not Lawful to put the Money into the Treasury, because it was the
Price of Blood, and of a Man's Life. Wherefore they Bought the Potters Field to
Bury Strangers in with it, which is therefore called The Field of Blood. (and
in the Syriack Tongue Aceldama, Acts 1.19.) Thus was the Prophecy of Zechariah
^exactly fulfilled, Zech. 11.13.
That Jesus should be Sold for the Price of Thirty Pieces of Silver, and with
it the Potters Field should be Bought.

XXXIV. Jesus is accused before Pilate.
John 18.28-38.
The Priests and Rulers of the Jews carried Jesus Bound from the Palace of
Caiphas to the Praetorium, i. e. the Palace of the Roman Governor. But because
they were afraid to go into an Heathens House, lest they should be defiled, and
so be made unfit to eat the Passover, they would not go in; Insomuch that
Pilate was forced to go out to them, and ask them, What they accused him of,
that they had brought him to him? They answered him in general. If he were not
a Malefactor, they would not have delivered him up unto him. The Governor said
unto them, Take ye him and judge him according to the Rules of your Law: But
they replied, That it was not Lawful for them to put any Man to Death. They
pretended that the Romans had lately deprived them of the Power of Condemning
Men to Death; by which the Word of Jesus was accomplished, which he spoke to
his Apostles, that he should be delivered to the Gentiles to be Crucified.
Matthew. 20.19.


The Governor not being contented with these rambling Accusations, Matthew.
27.11-14. Mark 15.2-5. Luke 23.1-5 John 18.33-38.
which laid nothing special against him, whom they required to be put to Death,
the Jews said unto him, That Jesus not only perverted the whole Nation, but
forbid Paying Tribute to Caesar, and assumed the Title of a King, and of the
Messiah. Pilate then returning into his Palace, and calling for Jesus, he asked
him if he were the King of the Jews? Jesus answered him, Say thou this thy
self, or did others tell it thee of me? Pilate replied, Am I a Jew? The People
of thy own Nation, and the Chief Priests have delivered thee to me: What have
thou done? Jesus answered him, My Kingdom is not of this World, if it were, my
Disciples would fight to keep me out of the Hands of the Jews; but my Kingdom
is not from hence. Art thou then a King? said the Governor. Thou say it,
replied Jesus, that I am: For this End was I born, and for this End came I into
the World, to give Testimony to the Truth: Every one that loves the Truth
hears my Voice. Pilate asked him, What is Truth? And having said these Words,
he went to the Jews that attended about his Palace, to tell them, That he found
no Fault with Jesus. Then the Priests and the Elders accused him of several
Crimes; but he answered nothing, although Pilate said, Hear thou not how
many accusations they bring against thee? yet still he held his Peace, which
greatly astonished this Governor.

XXXV. Jesus is contemned and scorned by Herod.
The Enemies of Jesus pressing him more fiercely^ accused him of having stirred
up the People by his Doctrine, Luke 23.5-12.
which he has taught throughout all Judea, beginning at Galilee. Pilate
hearing them speak of Galilee, asked whether he belonged to that Province? and
being informed that he was of it, and consequently of Herod's Jurisdiction, he
sent him to that Prince, who was then at Jerusalem. Herod was very glad to see
him, for he had a long Time desired it, having heard such great things spoken
of him, and he hoped to see some Miracle done by him; wherefore he put many
Questions to him, but Jesus answered nothing, neither to them, nor the
Accusations which the Priests and Scribes brought against him, and urged with
great Vehemence. Herod being thus deceived in his Expectations, contemned
Jesus, and derided him, and clothing him in a white Raiment, sent him again to
Pilate. This was the Cause that Herod and Pilate from that Time became Friends,
who had been Enemies before.

XXXVI. A Thief is preferred before Jesus.
Matthew. 27.15-23. Luke 23.13-23 John 18.39, 40.
Pilate could not be brought to put a Man to Death, in whom he found nothing
worthy of Death; wherefore he called the Priests, Rulers and People, and told
them, That having examined Jesus before them, he did not find him guilty of any
of those Crimes of which they accused him; and that Herod, to whom he had sent
them, had passed the same Judgment: But to give place a little, to their Fury,
because he knew, that for Envy and Hatred, only, they had delivered him to him,
he propounded it to them, to Scourge him, and then let him go again.

This not being liked, he contrived another way to save him: He was obliged by
Custom, upon the account of the Feast, to free a Criminal, whom the Jews would
choose, and all the People, who desired Jesus Death, were also very earnest with
him, to show them the same Favor he had always used to grant them. There was
then in Prison a notable Thief, named Barabbas, who had been seized with other
Seditious Persons, because he had committed Murder in the Sedition. Pilate
therefore thinking that if he propounded only Two, viz. Jesus and Barabbas, to
choose one of the Two, for whom he should do this Favor, they would prefer an
Innocent Person before a Thief and a Murderer, says unto them, I find no Fault
in him, whom ye accuse: But since it is a Custom to release a Criminal at the
Passover, whom will ye that I release unto you, Barabbas, or Jesus, which is
called Christ?

There happened also another Thing about the same Time, which is no small Proof
that the Governor had a Design to save Jesus's Life; for as he was sirting
upon the Judgment Seat, his Wife sent one to bid him, Not to concern himself
with this Just Man, because she had suffered Many Troubles in a Dream, because
of him.

Then did Pilate do all that he was able to deliver him from the Hands of his
Enemies; and this was the Reason that he propounded him with Barabbas to the
People: But the Priests and Elders moved the People, and persuaded them to
require his Favor for Barabbas, and that Jesus might be put to Death; so that
when Pilate asked them a second Time, Which of the Two they would have him
release to them? they all cried out, Put this Man to death, and give us
Barabbas. What would you have me do then, says Pilate, with Jesus? The
answered, Crucify him, Crucify him. He said to them the Third Time, What evil
has he done? I find nothing that deserves Death in him; I will Chastise him
and let him go. But they were the more urgent, doubling their Cries, and
requiring with a loud Voice, That he should be Crucified.

XXXVII. Jesus is Scourged, and Crowned with Thorns.
Matthew. 27.26-30. Mark 15.15-19. Luke 23.25. John 19.1-7.
Pilate then commanded, That Jesus should be scourged; and the Soldiers added
several Insolences, which they were not ordered; for they carried Jesus into
the Common Hall, and gathering the whole Band of Soldiers about him, they
pulled off his Garments, put him on a Scarlet Robe, and then made him a Crown
of Thorns, woven together, which they put upon his Head, with a Reed in his
Hand: Afterward, in Derision, they saluted him, and, bowing the Knee,
worshipped him, saying, Hail King of the Jews; and at the same Time they smote
him with their Hands on his Cheek, and with a Reed on his Head, and spit in his
Face. Pilate thought that the Jews could not behold him in this Condition
without Pity, and he resolved to show him to them; he therefore went once more
out of his Palace, and told them, That he had brought him again to them, that
they might know, that he had found no fault in him. Jesus then presently
appeared, having the Crown of Thorns upon his Head, and clothed with the
Scarlet Robe; and Pilate said to the Jews, Behold the Man: But as soon as they
saw him, they cried out afresh, Crucify him, Crucify him. Pilate said to them,
Take ye him and crucify him, for I find no fault in him: They answered him, We
have a Law, according to which he ought to dye, because he made himself the Son
of God.

XXXVIII. Pilate condemns Jesus.
This Cruelty and obstinate Malice of the Jews much amazed and affrighted the
Governor; John 19* 8-15.
wherefore he returned again into the Pretorium, and asked Jesus whence he was?
And because he answered nothing, he said unto him, Speak thou not unto me?
Know thou not that I have Power to crucify thee, or release thee? Then Jesus
answered, Thou could have no Power at all against me, if it were not given
thee from above by God; therefore they that delivered me unto thee, are guilty
of a greater Sin than thy self. This Silence, and these Answers of Jesus, did
not slacken the Governors Endeavors to deliver him; but the Jews at last,
through the timorousness of the Judge, gained their Desires, crying out, That
if he did not punish a Man, who set up himself for a King, he was the Emperor's
Enemy. As soon as Pilate heard these Words, he brought forth Jesus out of the
Pretorium, and sat down on the Judgment Seat, in a Place called Gabbatha, but
in Greek Lithostraton, i. e. a Place paved with Stone: Being there, he said,
Behold your King; but they cried out, Away with him, away with him, Crucify
him. He answered them, Shall I Crucify your King? The Chief Priests answered,
We have no other King but Caesar.

Pilate then seeing that he could prevail nothing, Matthew. 27.24-26. Mar. 15.15
Luke 23.24, 25. Joh. 19.16
and that all his Attempts, he used to save Jesus, did but increase the Tumult,
he called for Water, and washing his Hands before the People, he said to them,
I am Innocent from the Blood of this Just Person, you must answer for it. Then
all the People answered him, His Blood be upon us, and upon our Children. The
Destruction of Jerusalem, which happened about Forty Years after this, and the
dreadful Calamities which attended it, was the sad Accomplishment of this
Curse, which these miserable Wretches pronounced against themselves, in wishing
that the Blood of Christ might fall upon their Heads: Nevertheless, they
obtained their Desires, and Pilate not being able to oppose their Cries,
released Barabbas, condemned Jesus, and delivered him to them, that they might
Crucify him.

XXXIX. The Crucifixion of Jesus.
Matthew. 27.31-38 Mark 15.20-28. Luke 23.26-33. John 19.16-22.
Then they took Jesus, and pulling off the Scarlet Robe, put on his own
Garments, and led him to the Place of Punishment, called Calvary, and in the
Hebrew Tongue Golgotha, i. e. a Place of a Skull. The Cross, on which they
intended to Crucify him, they laid upon him; but as soon as they came out of
Jerusalem, meeting a Man of Cyrene, called Simon, in the Way, they laid it upon
his Shoulders, and compelled him to carry it after Jesus. Among that Throng of
Enemies, who rejoiced to see him, whom they hated so wrongfully, carried to
Execution, there were a great Multitude of Men and Women, which followed the
Son of God weeping, and smiting their Breasts; But Jesus turning to them said,
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but for your selves and for your
Children; for the Time is coming when ye shall account the barren Womb, which
never bore Children, and the Breast that never gave suck, happy: Then shall
they begin to say to the Mountains, Fall on us, and to the Hills to cover us,
for if the green Wood be thus used, what shall the dry be? i. e. If an Innocent
Person be thus cruelly punished and chastised, what must such Criminals as you
expect? It is plain that Jesus foretold to these Women what should happen in
the Siege of Jerusalem; where Crucifixion of Christ p. 200.

The Crucifixion.

the Jews would gladly have been covered with the Mountains, to secure them
from the Fury of their Enemies; and when those who had no Children, were to be
accounted far more happy than those who had the Trouble to see their Children
either devoured, or perish with Hunger before their Eyes.

As soon as they came to Calvary, they gave Jesus Wine, mingled with Myrrh and
Gall; but when he had tasted of it, he would not drink. It is said, That it was
a Custom among the Jews, to give such Malefactors as were to suffer Death, a
certain compound Wine, to support their Spirits in their Tortures; but they
gave Jesus a Bitter Wine to increase his Sufferings. After this they nailed him
upon the Cross, between Two Malefactors, who were carried along with him, and
Crucified on each Side of him, according to Isaiah's Prophecy; He was numbered
among the Transgressors.

Pilate also wrote a Superscription, Isai. 53.12
containing the Cause of the Condemnation of Jesus; and it was fixed on the Top
of the Cross, above his Head: And it was in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, in these
Words, JESUS OF NAZARETH, KING OF THE JEWS. The Chief Priests were offended at
it, and prayed Pilate, Not to write, The King of the Jews, but, That he
pretended himself to be King of the Jews: But Pilate answered them, What I have
written I have written.

XL. Jesus's Words upon the Cross.
When Jesus was fixed upon the Cross, Matthew. 27.39-47 Mark 15.27-35.
he prayed for his Persecutors, to God, saying; My Father, forgive them, for
they know not what they do. The Soldiers also, which crucified him, took his
Garments, and dividing them into Four Parts, to each Soldier a Part, cast Lots
to know which each of them should take. They also took his Coat, but because it
was without Seam, being all woven from Top to the Bottom, Luke 23.39-45 John
19.23-27.
instead of Cutting of it, they agreed to cast Lots, whose it should be; and so
they fulfilled the Prophecy of the Psalmist, They parted my Garments among
them, and upon my Vesture did they cast Lots.

In the mean time the People, which stood about the Cross, Psalm. 22.18.
looking upon Jesus, mocked him: Those also that passed by blasphemed and
affronted him, nodding their Heads and saying, Thou that destroyest the Temple
of God, and have Power to build it again in Three Days, save thy self, if thou
art the Son of God, and come down from the Cross. The Chief Priests, Scribes
and Rulers likewise derided him among themselves, saying; He saved others,
himself he cannot save; if he be indeed the King of Israel, the Christ, the
Chosen of God, let him come now from the Cross, and we will believe on him; he
put his Confidence in God, if God has such a Love for him, as he seemed to
pretend to, by calling himself the Son of God, let God deliver him. The
Soldiers also, who stood by the Cross to guard him, did insult over him, as
well as others, saying, Save thy self, if thou art the King of the Jews. One of
the Thieves also, who was Crucified with him, used the same Language, If thou
art the Christ, save thy self and us; but the other reproved him in these
Terms: Do not thou fear God, since thou art Condemned to the same Punishment,
and that justly? for we suffer no more than our Crimes deserve: But this Man
has done nothing amiss: Then he addresses himself to Jesus, and says unto
him, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. Jesus answered him,
Verily, I say unto thee, this Day shall thou be with me in Paradise, i. e. in a
Place of Rest, where the Souls of the Saints are, which that Day was, indeed, a
delicious Paradise, by reason of Christ's Presence in it.

Among the great Number of People, which stood about the Cross, there were
several Women who were come out of Galilee with Jesus, and had ministered to him
of their Substance. All his Acquaintance also were there, who beheld afar off
what passed; but the Holy Virgin, Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary, stood by
the Cross, and John the Son of Zebedee stood by the Holy Virgin. When Jesus
therefore saw his Mother, and the Disciple whom he loved, standing by her, he
says unto her, Woman behold thy Son, and look upon him with the Kindness of a
Mother; and then he said to his Disciple, Behold thy Mother, and reverence her,
and take Care of her as such. From that Time this Virgin Mother, say the
Fathers, dwelt with the Virgin Disciple, to whose Care her Son had recommended
her: And we need not wonder, says S. Ambrose, that this Apostle has delivered
such great Mysteries of Religion so divinely, since he had with him the Sacred
Temple, wherein the Author of all these Mysteries was conceived.

It was about Noon, when Jesus was fastened to the Cross, and soon after the Sun
was darkened, and the Air was filled with Darkness for Three Hours. About the
Third Hour Jesus cried with a loud Voice, Eli, Eli, Lamma Sabacthani, i. e. My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Some of them that were present, hearing
him say, Eli, Eli, and being ignorant of the Hebrew Tongue, in which these
Words signify, My God, my God, thought he had called the Prophet Elias to help
him.

XLI. The Death of Jesus.
Jesus had done and suffered all that was foretold of him in Scripture, and
there was nothing to be fulfilled, but the Words of the Psalmist, They gave me
Gall to Eat, and when I was Thirsty, They gave me Vinegar to drink. That
therefore nothing might be unperformed which his Father had Commanded, Psalm
69.21. Matthew. 27.50-54. Mark 15.37-39. Luke 23.46-49. John 19.28-37.
he said, I Thirst. And immediately one of the Soldiers ran and took a Sponge,
and dipping it in a Vessel of Vinegar, which stood by, put it upon a Reed, gave
him it to drink, saying, stay, let us see whether Elias will come and take him
down from the Cross. Jesus having received the Vinegar, said, All is
accomplished. And then crying out again a Second Time, he said, Father, I
commend my Soul into thy Hands; and when he had said these words, He bowed down
his Head, and gave up the Ghost.

At the same time the Vail of the Temple was rent in twain, from the Top to the
Bottom, the Earth trembled, the Rocks rent, and the Graves were opened, and as
soon as Jesus rose from the Dead, many Dead Bodies of Saints arose, and
appeared to many Persons in Jerusalem.

So many Prodigies affrighted the Captain and Soldiers, which Guarded Jesus,
and in the Fright they cried out, Certainly this Man was the Son of God. All
the People which were present, and beheld this Sight, were not less affected
than they; so that all returned smiting their Breasts.

Nevertheless the Jews not being willing, that the Body of Jesus, and the Two
Thieves, which were Crucified with him, should remain on the Cross on the
Sabbath Day, desired Pilate that their Legs might be broke, and that they
might be taken down. Then the Soldiers came, and brake the Legs of the Two
Thieves, but coming to Jesus they found him already Dead, and therefore instead
of breaking his Legs, one of them pierced his Side with a Spear, and
immediately there issued out Blood and Water, so that two Prophesies were
thereby fulfilled together, Zech. 12.10.
They shall look upon him, whom they have Pierced; and another speaking of the
Paschal Lamb, which was a Type of Jesus Christ. A Bone of him shall not be
broken. Exodus 12.46.


XLII. The Burial of Jesus.
Among the Disciples of Jesus there was a Man of great Wealth and Honor, born
in Arimathaea, Matthew. 27.57-66. Mark 15.42-47. Luke 23.50-56. John 19.38-42.
a City of Judaea, named Joseph. It is true he was a Disciple only in secret,
because he feared the Jews, but he was no way concerned in their Crime. And
though he was one of the Rulers of Jerusalem, he had not consented at all to any
thing that they had done against the Son of God. The Death of his Master
filling him with more Courage, he went to Pilate and begged leave of him to
take down the Body of Jesus, and Bury it. Pilate could hardly believe, that he
was Dead so soon; but being assured of it by the Centurion, he gave his Body to
Joseph, and Commanded it to be delivered unto him.

Joseph then went and bought Linnen-Cloaths to Bury Jesus in; and taking his
Body down from the Cross, wrapped it in them. Nicodemus the Ruler, who came to
Jesus by Night, being desirous to share with Joseph in paying these last
Offices to their Master, brought a Mixture of Aloes and Myrrh of about an
Hundred Weight, and they two together wrapped up the Body of Jesus in the
Linen with the Perfumes, and Buried it according to the ordinary Manner of the
Jews. There was in the place where Jesus was Crucified, a Garden, and in it a
Sepulcher, which Joseph had Hewn out of the Rock, wherein no Man was ever
laid. Here they laid the Body of Jesus, and went away, having rould a great
Sone to the Mouth of the Sepulcher. Mary Magdalene, and the other Women, who
were present at the Death of Jesus, did also assist at his Burial, and took
notice where they laid him; and having considered on it they went and prepared
Spices to Embalm him, as soon as the Sabboth-day, which was the next day, was
over.

Jesus being Dead, and Buried on Friday, the next day the Chief Priests and
Pharisees went to Pilate, and said unto him, Sir we remember that that
Deceiver, (for so they Termed Jesus) in his Lifetime, said that he would Rise
again in Three days after his Death: Command therefore, that his Sepulcher be
kept under a Guard, till the Third Day, for fear his Disciples should come by
Night and stealing away his Body, should persuade the People, that he is risen
from the Dead, and so they will fall into a new Error, worse than the first.
Pilate said unto them, Ye have a Guard, go, and do as ye will; so they went to
the Sepulcher, Sealed it up, and set a Guard upon it.

XLIII. The Resurrection of Jesus.
Matthew. 28.1-4. Mark. 16.1-4. Luke 24.1-2. John 20.1-10.
On the day after the Sabbath, the first day of the Week, which we call the
Lords day, Mary Magdalene, and the other Women, who had prepared Spices on
Friday in the Evening, went early in the Morning to Embalm the Body of Jesus,
and came to the Sepulcher about Sunrising: But because they had seen the Mouth
of the Sepulcher shut with a great Stone, they were troubled, and disputed in
the way, how they should remove the Stone? But it was taken away before they
came; for an Angel whose Countenance shined like Lightening, and his Raiment
was as White as Snow, came down from Heaven, and rolling away the Stone, sat
upon it. At the same time there was a great Earthquake, which together with the
presence of the Angel so affrighted the Soldiers, who Guarded the Sepulcher,
that they became as Dead Men; so Resurrection of Christ p. 206.

The Resurrection.

when the Women came to the Sepulcher, they saw neither the Guards, nor Stone,
which might hinder the Entrance; but they were astonished mightily, when being
entered in, they found not the Body of Jesus.

Then ran Mary Magdalene to find the Apostles, and having found Peter, and
John, she said unto them. They have taken away the Lord out of the Sepulcher,
and we know not where they have laid him. These two Disciples went immediately
to the Sepulcher: John came thither first, and stooping down to look into the
Sepulcher, but not going in, saw the Linnen-Cloaths lying on the Ground. Peter
came after him, and entering in, saw besides the Shroud, the Napkin, that was
bound about his Head, which was wrapped up in a place by it self. Then John
also going into the Sepulcher, saw the same thing, and they both thought, that
the Body of their Master had been taken away, as Mary Magdelene told them; for
as yet, they neither knew what the Scripture Taught, nor remembered, what Jesus
had so often told them, that he must rise from the Dead. Then they returned to
their own home, and Peter, as he went, admired with himself at the things, that
had happened.

XLIV. Jesus appears to Mary Magdalene.
Mary Magdalene, Mark 16.5-11. John 20.11-18.
though she came with Peter and John to the Sepulcher, yet went not away with
them, but stayed weeping; and her love making her very uneasy, she stooped
down to look into the Sepulcher, where she saw two Angels clothed in White,
sitting in the place, where the Body of Jesus lay, the one at the Head, and the
other at the Feet. The Angels said unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? she
answered, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have
laid him. After she had said these words she turned her self, and saw a Man,
who asked again, Woman why weepest thou? whom seek thou? She taking him for
the Person, who looked to the Garden, where the Sepulcher was, said unto him,
Sir, If thou have taken him away, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will
carry him away. As she was about to leave him, he said unto her, Mary: Upon
this, she turning her self, immediately knew him to be Jesus; and being
transported with Joy, she cried out, Rabboni, i. e. My Master: Jesus says unto
her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father: But go to my
Brethren (so he calls his Apostles) and tell them from me, That I go to my
Father, and your Father, my God and your God. Going immediately to seek the
Apostles, whom she found in Affliction and Tears, she told them, that she had
seen the Lord, and related to them, what he had commanded her to tell them, but
they believed her not.

XLV. Jesus appears to certain Women.
The other Women, who remained about the Sepulcher, Matthew. 28.5-10. Luke
24.3-11.
could not be pacified, but were mightily troubled, because they could not find
the Body of Jesus, which was increased by their seeing of two Men, who appeared
to them in shining Garments. They were the two Angels, which Mary Magdalene had
seen in the Sepulcher. As they were therefore much affrighted and looked down
to the Earth, the two Angels said unto them, Why seek ye him that is alive,
among the Dead? Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, who was Crucified: Fear not, he is
risen, as he said unto you. Remember, what he said unto you when ye were yet in
Galilee, That the Son of Man must be delivered into the Hands of Sinners,
Mrtth. 26.32.
and be Crucified, and be raised again the Third Day. Come see the place, where
he lay; and go quickly and tell his Disciples, and Peter, that he is risen from
the Dead. They added, That he will go before them into Galilee, Matthew. 26.32.
and there they shall see him, according to his Promise.

These words brought the Promise of Jesus to their Remembrance, and the news of
his Resurrection much moderated the fear with which they were seized at the
sight of these Angels. Then they went immediately from the Sepulcher, to go to
his Apostles, and tell them, what they had seen; but as they went they met
Jesus in the Way, who saluted them, and they being transported with Admiration
and Joy, came near unto him, held him by the Feet, and Worshipped him. Then he
said unto them, Be not afraid, Go tell my Brethren, that they go into Galilee,
there shall they see me. They went and told all that had happened to the
Apostles, and all the other Disciples; but all they said appeared to them as an
idle Tale, and they believed them not.

XLVI. Jesus shows himself to Peter and two other Disciples.
While these Women were executing the Orders given them by the Son of God,
Matthew. 28.11-15.
to tell the Disciples of his Resurrection, some of the Soldiers, which Guarded
the Sepulcher, and had fallen down, as Dead at the Sight of the Angel, who rouled
away the Stone, went to Jerusalem, and related all that had passed, to the
Chief-Priests. Upon this the Priests and Rulers assembled, and having consulted
together, they gave a Large Sum of Money to the Soldiers, That they should say
that his Disciples came by Night and took away his Body. The Soldiers took the
Money, and did as they were Ordered, so that this Report flew abroad, and was
commonly told among the Jews for a long time after.

Mark 16.12-13. Luke 24.13-35.
The same day two of his Disciples went to a Village named Emmaus, which is
distant from Jerusalem about seven Miles and an half (or Sixty Furlongs) and in
the way they discoursed about that, which had passed Three days ago at
Jerusalem. Jesus himself overtook them, and went along with them, but they knew
him not. He asked them, What they were talking of, and why they were sad? One
of them Named Cleophas, said unto him, Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem,
that thou know not what has happened there in these days? What things,
replied he? They answered, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, who was a Prophet,
mighty in Deeds, and in Words; how the Chief-Priests and Rulers delivered him
to be Condemned to Death, and have Crucified him. But, added they, We trusted
that it should be he that would have redeemed Israel: And besides all this,
This is the third day since these things happened, Yea, and some Women of our
Company, made us astonished, Who having been very early at the Sepulcher, and
not finding his Body, returned, and told us, that the Angels themselves
appeared unto them, and assured them, that he was alive. This Relation was
confirmed by some of us, who went also to the Sepulcher, and found all things
as the Women had reported to them; but him they saw not. From hence Jesus took
an occasion to reprove their unbelief very severely, saying to them, O Fools,
whose Heart is dull, and slow to believe that which the Prophets have foretold,
That Christ must suffer all these things, and enter into his Glory. And he
explained to them all that was spoken in the Scripture concerning him,
beginning at Moses, and going through all the Prophets. When they came near
the Village, he went on, as if he were going further; but the two Disciples
importuned him to stay, saying, Abide with Us, for it is already late, and the
day is almost spent. Wherefore he went in with them, and being sat at Meat, he
took Bread, Blessed it, and having broken it, he gave it them. And immediately
their Eyes were opened to discern, what they saw not before, i. e. to
acknowledge Jesus, who immediately vanished out of their sight. Then said they
one to another, Did not our Hearts burn within us, while he talked with us in
the Way, and while he expounded the Scriptures? The same instant they arose,
and returned to Jerusalem, where they found the Apostles and the Disciples met
together, saying, That Jesus is indeed risen from the Dead, and has appeared
unto Peter. They also told them, what had happened in the Way, and how the Lord
was known to them by breaking of Bread. Notwithstanding all which there were
several Disciples, that believed nothing of the Truth of it.

XLVII. Jesus appeared to the Apostles.
The Apostles being assembled in a private place, Mark 16.14. Luke 24.36-43.
John 20.19-23.
for fear of the Jews, were discoursing about all these several Appearances of
their Master, and in the Evening being sat down to Meat, and the Doors being
shut, Jesus came in, and stood in the midst of them, and said unto them, Peace
be unto you; It is I, be not afraid. Having saluted them after this manner, he
upbraided them for their unbelief and hardness of Heart, that they would not
believe his Resurrection, nor give credit to the Testimony of those that had
seen him, after he was risen. The Apostles were terrified, and affrighted, and
supposed that they had seen a Spirit or a Fantom. But Jesus to confirm, and
pacify them, said unto them, Why are ye troubled? Look upon my Hands, and my
Feet; It is I my self: Handle me, and consider that a Spirit has not Flesh and
Bones, as ye see me have. Then he showed them the Wounds in his Hands, Feet,
and Side.

The Apostles could not yet believe what they saw, being transported with so
great Joy and Admiration, till Jesus asked them, Whether they had any thing to
Eat. Then they gave him a piece of Broyled Fish, and of an Honeycomb, and he
eat before them: Not to nourish his Body for that being Spiritualized by his
Resurrection, had no need of such Nourishment, as is necessary for it in this
Mortat Life; but to take away all the Doubts of his Disciples, and to convince
them by sensible Proofs, That 'twas he, and that he was really risen from the
Dead. After he had done eating, he gave them the Fragments, and said to them a
Second Time, Peace be unto you; And then added, As my Father has sent me, so
send I you; and then breathing upon them, said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost.
Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosoever sins ye
retain, they are retained.

Thomas was not with the other Disciples, when Jesus appeared to them in the
manner aforesaid, John 20.24-29.
Therefore when he returned to them, they told him, That they had seen the
Lord. But he said, Unless I see in his Hands, the print of the Nails, and put
my Finger into them, and my Hand into his Side, I will not believe. The Son of
God, who made use of all this Infidelity, to establish the belief of the
Resurrection, would not forsake this Apostle in his unbelief, and therefore
Eight days after, when his Disciples were met in the same place, and Thomas
with them, he came to them, the Doors being shut, and standing in the midst of
them, saluted them, saying, Peace be unto you. Then speaking to Thomas, he
says, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my Hands; and reach hither thy hand,
and put it into my Side, and be not faithless, but believe. Then Thomas being
convinced, cried out, My Lord, and My God! Jesus said unto him, Thou have
believed, because thou have seen. Blessed are they, who having not seen, yet do
believe.

XLVIII. The Miraculous Fishing.
Jesus showed himself yet another time to some of his Disciples, on the Banks
of the Sea of Tiberias, John 21.1-13.
Peter, Thomas, the two Sons of Zebedee, Nathaniel, and two others of his
Disciples, being met together, Peter said, that he would go a Fishing, and the
rest would go with him. They all therefore took Ship, and cast their Nets into
the Waters; but that Night they catched nothing. In the Morning Jesus presented
himself to them on the Shore, but his Disciples knew not that it was he. And he
asked them, Children, have ye any thing to eat? They answered, No: And he said
unto them, Cast the Net on the Right side of the Ship, and ye shall find. They
cast immediately and catched so great a Number of Fishes, that they could not
pull it up. Then John, the Beloved Disciple of Jesus, said unto Peter, It is
the Lord. Then Peter presently taking his Garment, which he had put off to
Fish, cast himself into the Water to go quickly to his Master on the Shore. The
other Disciples, who were not far from Land, but as it were Two Hundred Cubits,
(or an Hundred Yards) came to him with the Ship, dragging with them the Net
full of Fishes. Being come ashore, they found Coals burning, and Fish upon
them, and Bread: Jesus said unto them, Bring hither some of the Fish that ye
have caught; And Peter going presently into the Ship, drew the Net to Land,
with a Hundred Fifty Three great Fish in it: And the Gospel observes, that though
it was full of so many heavy Fish, it was not broken. Jesus said unto them,
Come and Dine: Then they went to him, not daring to ask him, Who he was,
because they knew it was their Master. And Jesus having taken the Bread, gave
it them, and likewise the Fish.

XLIX. Jesus commits the care of his Sheep to St. Peter.
When they had eaten, Jesus said to Peter, Simon, John 21.15-23.
Son of Jonas, Love thou me more than these do? He answered him, Yea Lord,
thou know I love thee. Jesus says unto him, Feed my Lambs. He asked him
again a Second time, Simon, Son of Jonas, Love thou me? Yea Lord, answered
Peter, thou know that I Love thee, Jesus says again, Feed my Lambs. Jesus
again the Third time put the same Question to him: Peter was troubled, that his
Master seemed to doubt of his Love, and answered him, Lord, thou know all
things, thou know that I Love thee. Our Savior having made him thus make
some amends for his Sin, in denying him Thrice, by giving a Triple Testimony of
his Love, committed the Care of his Sheep to him, i. e. the Souls of his
People, saying to him again, Feed my Sheep.

He adds, Verily, Verily, I say unto thee, when thou wast Young, thou girdedst
thy self, and went, whither thou please; but when thou shall be Old, thou
shall stretch forth thy Hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee
whither thou would not. The Gospel says, that Jesus signified by these
Words, by what Death Peter should glorify God, and they did indeed concur in
the Martyrdom of this Apostle, whom Tradition teaches us to have been
Crucified, as his Master was Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. c. 25.

After this Jesus commanded Peter to follow him; and Peter turning him, sees
John the Beloved Disciple of Jesus following him; and seeing him, he says unto
Jesus, Lord, what shall become of this Man? But Jesus checks his Curiosity, by
tclling him, that he ought not to trouble himself with what shall befall
others, and orders him to mind nothing, but to follow him. And speaking of
John, he says to him, I will that he tarry till I come; Or according to other
Editions, If I will, that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? These
words seemed to intimate to the Apostles, that John should not dye: But this
Evangelist, who wrote these things himself, observes that Jesus did not say
that he should not dye, and History indeed tells us, That he is Dead. But the
sense of these Words of the Son of God, perhaps signifies that that Disciple
should continue as he was to his Death, i. e. he should not dye a Violent
Death, as Peter should; or that he should Live till the Destruction of
Jerusalem; for these words, Until I come, may signify according to the usual
Language of Scripture, Until I come to take him out of the World by Death; Or
till I come to punish and Chastize this People. St. John did really live till
after the Destruction of Jerusalem, and dyed at last of his Natural Death.

L. Jesus Instructed the Apostles
The Son of God showed himself several times more to his Apostles during the
Forty days, Matthew. 28.16-20. Mark 16.15-18. Luke 24.44-49. Acts 1.3.
that he abode upon Earth, after his Resurrection; and he appeared so often,
says St. Luke, to give them ample Proofs that he was alive, and to talk with
them of the Kingdom of God. And since he had determined to call Men, by
Preaching to the possession of that Kingdom, he gave them necessary
instructions to discharge their Functions well. He explained to them all that
was spoken of himself in the Law of Moses, and in the Books of the Prophets,
and in the Psalms, and opened their Understandings to understand the sense of
Scripture. He shows them that according as it is Written, Christ must suffer
Death, and be raised the Third day, and that Repentance, and remission of Sins,
should be preached in all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

He Communicates to them the Authority, which he had received of his Father,
and says to them, All power is given to me in Heaven, and Earth. Go ye
therefore into all the World and Preach the Gospel, and Instruct all People,
Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, and Teach them to observe all that I have commanded you. He adds, That
they that believe not, shall be Damned; and on the contrary, They that believe
their Word by a lively Faith, and are Baptized, shall be saved; and likewise
shall do Miracles, Casting out Devils, Speaking with Tongues, Drinking Poison,
without getting harm, and Healing the Sick, by laying their Hands on them.
Lastly, since the Apostles had need of Power and Strength to exercise the
Ministry, which was entrusted to them, he assured them of his protection,
telling them, that he would be with them always to the End of the World; and he
promised them to endue them with power from above by the Holy Spirit, which he
would send from Heaven.

LI. The last Appearance of Jesus Christ.
Matthew. 28.16-18.
It is probable that Jesus gave them the greatest part of these Instructions at
the Famous Apearance, Ascension of Christ p. 217.

The Ascension of Jesus Christ.

which he made to them upon the Mountain of Galilee, where he appointed to meet
them. Here he promised them before he dyed to show himself to them: And on the
day of his Resurrection, the Angels, and He himself commanded the Holy Women,
to tell his Disciples, that he would meet in Galilee. They went thither, they
saw him as he had promised, and they Worshipped him. 1 Cor. 15.6.
It is credible that all his Disciples met him there, as the Apostles, and that
it is of the Appearance that St. Paul speaks, who says, That Jesus appeared to
more than Five Hundred Brethren at once. The same Apostle tells us, that he
also appeared to James, but does not relate in what manner. Luke 24.49. Acts
^1.4-8.


Lastly, He showed himself the Last time to his Apostles at Jerusalem, where he
commanded them to abide, till they should receive the Holy Spirit, which he
promised them in these words, John Baptized with Water, but ye shall be
Baptized, i. e. Washed and Sanctified by the Holy Ghost not many days hence.
They asked him, Lord, will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom of
Israel? He answered them, That it is not for them to know the Times and
Seasons, which God has put in his own absolute Power; But ye shall receive,
says he to them, the power of the Holy Spirit, which shall come down upon you,
and ye shall be witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and Samaria, and
unto the uttermost part of the Earth.

LII. The Ascension of Jesus Christ.
These were the last Words, according to S. Luke, Mark 16.19, 20. Luke
24.50-53. Acts 1.9-12.
which Jesus spoke upon the Earth; if they were spoken immediately before he
left his Apostles, it was at Bethany, whither he led them upon the Day of his
Ascension, or upon the Mount of Olives: From which, it appears, he ascended, as
S. Luke relates; He lifted up his Hands to bless his Disciples, and as he
blessed them he was parted from them, who saw him ascend up toward Heaven,
till a Cloud, into which he entered, took him out of their Sight. They still
looked after him with earnestness, and as soon as they had lost the Sight of
him, Two Men, clothed in White, presented themselves to them, on a sudden,
and said unto them, Ye Men of Galilee, why stand ye looking up toward Heaven?
This Jesus, who has left you, and is gone up into Heaven, shall come again in
the same manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven. Then the Apostles adored
him, who had left the Earth to be seated in Heaven, at the Right Hand of God,
i. e. to receive in his Sacred Humanity the Rest and Glory, which was the
Reward of his Labor and Sufferings. They departed full of Joy from the Mount
of Olives, and returned to Jerusalem; where, Ten Days after, they received the
Holy Ghost. Then they went and preached every where, according as their Master
had commanded them; and the Lord confirmed the Word, which he had put in their
Mouth, by Miracles.

LIII. The Glorious Life of Jesus Christ in Heaven.
John 20.30, 31.
This is a full account of all the Gospel teaches us of the Life which Jesus
Christ lived upon the Earth: He did indeed many other Things, and wrought a
great number of Miracles, which are not written, these that are written being
sufficient for our Salvation, if by reading them we believe, That Jesus is the
Son of God, that by Faith we may have Life in his Name: This is the Life which
he has promised us, and into which he is entered by his Ascension; for he told
his Apostles, That he went to prepare a Place for them: John 14.3.
And S. Paul assures us, That he is entered into Heaven for us, as our
Forerunner, Heb. 6.19, 20.
that we may follow him now in Hope; which serves us as an Anchor, sure and
steadfast, in the various Disturbances and Troubles of this Mortal Life.

As to the Life which Jesus Christ now lives in Heaven, the Gospel tells us;
That he sits there, Mark 16.19.
at the Right Hand of God. He siteth, i. e. is at perfect Ease and Rest, having
no more Trouble or Sufferings in his Sacred Humanity, to which he is united for
our Salvation. He sits at the Right Hand of God, i. e. is made equal with
the Father, being God, of like Nature with him, and is raised up above all
Creatures.

This Rest, Acts 7.56.
which Jesus Christ enjoys for himself, hinders him not from acting for us; and
although he sits at the Right Hand of God, S. Stephen saw him there standing
indeed; since he came to the Earth, not only to purchase the Glorification of
that Body and Soul which he assumed in the Womb of the Virgin, but also to
obtain Salvation for all that believe on him: If he has nothing else to do
with his Sacred Humanity, yet it is his business to intercede for the Salvation
of his Saints, till they shall come to be Partakers of his Glory. He there
finishes the great Work of Man's Redemption, which he began upon Earth, in
Heaven. Ephesians. 1.22.4.15.
It Is there, as Head of the Church, as the Apostle calls him, he governs it by
his Pastors, which he has appointed, enlightens it by her Doctors, sanctifies
it by his Sacraments, protects it by the Help of his Grace, and quickens it by
his Spirit.

It Is there that he prays without ceasing for us, and we use him as our
Advocate to defend our Cause before his Father; as our Mediator, to offer our
Prayers to him, and obtain the Mercies and Graces we petition; as High Priest
and Sacrifice, by offering always the same Blood which he poured out upon the
Cross once for all, for the Salvation of the whole World. Hence it was that S.
John saw him in Heaven, in the Figure of a Lamb slain, and laid upon the Altar,
which is before the Throne of God; Rev. 5.6, 7. Heb. 4.16.
it is there that he sits upon a Throne of Grace and Mercy, where we may go, in
a Time of Need, to obtain Pardon of our Sins, before he appears upon his Throne
of Justice, to judge the World.

1 John 2.1.
Lastly, it is there that he calls us, and invites us, to consider upon him in
his Glory, which he has merited both for himself and us, by the Effusion of
his Blood, that by the Prospect of that Eternal Happiness, which he has
prepared for us, he may make us contemn all earthly Things, and stir us up to
follow him in the Way he is gone before us, i. e. to imitate the Examples he
has given us, in this Mortal Life; of which we have related the History in
this Book.

For this Reason it is that S. Paul exhorts us, by these Words, which include
all the Benefit we ought to make of all that is said of the Life of Jesus
Christ. Heb. 10.19-31.
We have freedom to enter with Boldness into the Heavenly Sanctuary, by the
Blood of Jesus Christ; going after him in that new Way which he has trodden
out for us in his own Flesh: And, since he is in Heaven an High Priest, set
over the House of God, let us draw near to him with a truly sincere Heart, and
full of Faith, with a Soul purified from the Filth of an Evil Conscience, and a
Body, preserving the Purity which it has received from the pure Water of
Baptism; let us remain firm and steadfast in our Faith, and in the Hope of that
Glory which he has promised to us (for he is faithful who has promised:) And
to obtain it, let us provoke one another to Love, and to good Works, and let us
encourage our selves so much the more, as we see the last Day draws nigh; for
if we sin wilfully, after we have received the Knowledge of Truth, we must
expect nothing but the terrible Judgments, and the Flame of that Revenging and
Rageing Fire, which shall consume the Enemies of God. He that despised Moses 's
Law was condemned to Death, without Mercy, how much greater Punishment does he
deserve, think ye, who has trodden under Foot the Son of God, and has counted
the Blood of the Covenant, by which we are sanctified, an Unholy and Profane
Thing, i. e. who has profaned, by Sin, the Blood of Jesus Christ, by which he
has been purified in Baptism, and who has abused and affronted the Spirit of
Grace; for we know him that has said, Vengeance is reserved for me, and I know
how to repay it. It is a terrible Thing to fall into the Hands of the Living
God.

LIVE. The Conclusion.
This Living God, which S. Paul speaks of, is the very same Person which we
have seen in this History, dying for the Salvation of Men, upon the Cross: He
was judged, but he shall judge us, and that by the Rules which he has given
us, and the Examples which he left us, in the Time of his Mortal Life: He lived
subject to our Calamities, and suffered Death, which is the Punishment of Sin;
but he was raised in a State of Glory, and entered into the Possession of
Eternal Felicity: He was first of the same Nature with us, that we might one
Day be as he is. If we imitate him in his Life and Death, we shall be like him
in his Resurrection and Glory; but we must not pretend to that Happiness he now
enjoys, if we do not go in the same Path he did, to attain it.

By disobeying his Laws, and not imitating his Actions, we not only renounce
the Glory, to which he invites us, but bring upon our selves inexpressible, as
well as everlasting Torments; for there are but Two Ways, the one leads to
Life, and the other to Death, and he that walks not in the first, must
necessarily go into the second. Jesus Christ is himself the Way that leads to
Heaven, and we go by him when we practice those Truths which he has taught,
and regulate our Lives by the Pattern of his. To live otherwise than he lived,
is not to follow him, but to wander, and destroy our selves; which we do not
seriously enough consider of. We do not examine our selves in which Way we are;
we go on every Day in Ignorance, and when we come to the End of our Race, we
find our selves on a Precipice, because we have followed the Multitude, which
securely went before us, and guided us.

Christians therefore cannot do any thing more important, and conducing to
their Salvation, than to meditate continually upon the Life of Jesus Christ,
and to look upon it as a Mirror, to discover the Blemishes and Faults of their
own; they ought to account Jesus Christ conversing on Earth, as our Guide and
Light, and comparing what they do with what he has done and taught, to
acknowledge themselves in a lost Estate, and in Darkness, so long as our
Conversation is not conformable to his Examples and Precepts. In Heaven they
ought to esteem Jesus Christ as the End to which they continually aspire, and
which they labor daily to attain, that they may support themselves in all the
Troubles and Difficulties which they met with in their Way thither, by the
Contemplation of the Glory which he has promised them. They should, in the
last Place, think always upon his First and Second Coming: They are instructed
by his First, what they must do to fit themselves for his Second; and they
shall be judged at his Second Coming, by the Precepts which they have received
at his Second. They will have no Excuses to make for following the corrupt
Customs, and Examples, and false Errors of the Ages they have lived in, when
they come before that Judge, who has told them, that he will judge them by the
Doctrine he has taught them himself, and by the Life he lived here, upon Earth,
to be a Model of theirs.

That then we may appear before him with Boldness in that Great Day, when he
will judge all Men, let us take the Advice which S. John, the beloved Disciple,
gives us; My little Children, 1 John 2.28.
abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may have Confidence before him,
and may not be ashamed at his Coming. And that we may know what it is to abide
in Jesus Christ, let us meditate upon these Words of the same Apostle; 1 John
2.6.
He that says that he abides in him, ought himself to walk as Jesus Christ
has walked.

FINIS.
INDEX.
A
ABraham, saw Christ's coming with Joy 109. the Jews boast themselves his
Children, 22. Abraham's Bosom what, 131. Adultery, forbidden by the Law, 57.
punished with Death, 40. The Adulteress, 105. he that Marrys another Woman,
while his Wife is alive, is an Adulterer, 132. Egypt, Christ's flight into, 18.
Agony, of Christ, 188. Ambition, Of the Disciples reproved by Christ, 98. 145,
179. Almsgiving, The necessity of it, 119. how it must be given, 58, it
purifies all things to us, 155. Christ commends it in a poor Widow, 165, St.
Andrew, was John's Disciple, 26. Brother of Peter, ibid. goes to Christ, ibid.
brings his Brother, 36. leaves all at Christ's Call, 37. made an Apostle, 54.
Angels, Watch over Men, 99. foretell the Nativity of J. Baptist and Christ, 2.
move the Pool of Jerusalem, 50. comfort Christ in his Agony, 188. open the
Sepulcher, 201. declare his Resurrection, 208. Anointing, Diseases cured by it,
78. Christ's Feet and Head Anointed, 152. Apostles, What it signifies, 58.
Christ chose Twelve, ibid. one proves a Devil, 86. their Mission and
Instructions given them, 76. cure Diseases, 77. continue with Christ in all his
temptations, 179 forsake him, 190. believe not his Resurrection, 208. receive
the Holy Spirit, and a power to bind and loose, 212. sent into all the World to
Preach, 316. and for this end are enabled to work Miracles, 218. Appearances of
Christ, 1. to Mary Magd. 208. 2d. to the Women, 209. 3d. to St. Peter, 211.
4th. to the Disciples going to Emmaus, 210. 5th. to all the Apostles, 213. 6th
to some of them going to the Lake of Gennesareth, ibid. 7th to more than 500
Brethren, ibid. 8th. to St. James, ibid. 9th. his last appearance before his
Ascension, ibid. Augustus's, Edict which he published about the Taxing, 13.
B
BAptism of St. John with Water, 21. his Baptism does not pardon Sins, ibid. a
figure of Christ, 14. slighted by the Scribes and Pharisees, 64. Jesus receives
it, 23. asks the Jews whether it was from Heaven, 158. Baptism of Jesus Christ
with Water, 31. with the H. Ghost and with Fire, 23. no Salvation without it,
29. the Apostles sent to Baptize all Nations with it, 216. Barrabbas, The great
Thief preferred before Jesus Christ, 196. Beatitudes, The Eight Beatitudes, 55.
Blessing, Jesus Blesses Infants, 135. breaks Bread, 81. the Sacrament, 177. he
is blessed and praised by the People of Jerusalem, 151. Simeon blesses the H.
Virgin and Joseph, 18. Bethany, The place where Lazarus and his Sisters dwelt,
140. Jesus Christ raised Lazarus there, 142. Supped with Simon the Leper, 149.
went thither every Night in the Week of passion, 156. he carried his Apostles
thither at his Ascen. 218. Bethlehem, The City of David, 13. Jesus Chr. born
there, 15. Worshipped the Magi, 16. the Children of Bethlehem slain, 18.
Bethsaida, A City of Galilee, of which Peter and other Apostles were, 26.
Cursed by Jesus, 24. there he Cursed a Blind Man, 18. Blasphemy, Against the
Holy Ghost, 67. against Jesus Christ at the Crucifixion, 202. he is called a
Blasphemer, 45. Blind-men, Jesus Healed two at Capernaum, 49. another at
Bethsaida, 91. a blind Man Possessed and Dumb, 67. two at Jericho, 148. several
in the Temple of Jerusalem, 157. spiritually blind, 87. Blood, Christ's Blood
drink indeed, 85. the Blood of the Galil^eans mingled with their Sacrifices,
121. the Woman with a bloody flux, 48. Jesus sweat Blood, 188. out of his Side
came Water and Blood, 204. the Jews wish his Blood upon them, 199. the Blood
of all the Righteous Men slain, shall be punished upon Jerusalem, 118.
C
Caiphas, High Priest of the Jews foretells Jesus Death, 143. Condemns Christ,
192. Calling of St. Peter and St. Andrew, 26. the 2d. time, 32. of St. Philip
and Nathaniel, 40. of St. Matthew, 46. of the 12 Apostles, 54. to the great
Supper, 126. to the Marriage, 160. to repentance, 35. many called, few chosen,
126. Calumnies, Dispersed of Jesus; a Magician that cast out Devils by
Beelzebub, 50. a friend of Publicans and Sinners, 46. a Glutton and Wine
bibber, 64. a breaker of the Law, 52. an Impostor, 195. a Sinner, 110. a
Blasphemer, and Impious, 192. a Samaritan, 108. a seditious Man, 195. a
Seducer, 196. one who sought to make himself a King, 195. forbad paying Tribute
to Caesar, ibid. Capernaum, A City of Galilee, situate upon the Bank of
Gennesareth, 38. Jesus Christ dwelt there, ibid. he reproves their hardness,
65. Miracles which Jesus did there, 38, 39. Centurion's, Faith and Care of his
Servant, 60. acknowledges Jesus the Son of God, 204. Caesar, Ought to have his
dues, 162. Christ, Acknowledged to be Messiah by Andrew and Philip, 26. by St.
Peter, 92. by Martha, 141. by the Centurion, 204. by the Devils, 39. confesses
it himself, 33. the Son of David, 105. Commandments of God to be preferred
before the Traditions of Men, 87. to be kept, 136. the two great Commandments
of the Law what, 163. to love one another, 183. he that loves God, keeps his
Commandments, 182. Confession, Of Sins at Baptism, 21. of Christ by Devils, 39.
by all that Christ will own, 77. Conversion, Of a Sinner rejoices Heaven, 128.
of St. Matthew, 46. of a Woman Sinner, 65. of Zacchaeus, 146. of S. Peter of
the Thief, 202. Corazin, An Impenitent City, 64. Covetousness, to be avoided,
118. of the Pharisees, 131. of Judas, 150. the folly of it, 118. Cross, We must
bear the Cross, 127. Jesus Christ carried his own Cross to Calvary, 200. he is
fixed to it, 201. his Title on the Cross, ibid. he entered into glory by the
Cross, 210. he was lifted up on the Cross as the Brazen Serpent, 29.
D
DEbtors, The Parable of the two Debtors, 65. of the ungrateful Debtor, 101.
Dedication, Feast of, 122. Devils, Acklowledge Jesus to be the Christ, 38. he
gives his Apostles power over them, 76 and to 72 Disciples, 113. some of them
driven out only by Prayer and Fasting, 97. Jesus accused of having commerce
with Devils, 67. Judas called a Devil, 86, into whose heart he entered, 173.
Jesus tempted by the Devil, 24. cast him out of the World, 154. Prince of the
World, Ibid. Destruction, Of Jerusalem, 152, 153. Disciples, Of John, two of
them become Jesus's, 29. two sent to Christ by John when he was in Prison, 62.
fasted often, 47. Disciples, Of Jesus Christ their first calling, 26, 36. the
Twelve Apostles chosen out of them, 54. Seventy Two of them sent to preach,
113. Devils subject to them, Ibid. some forsake him, 86. all leave him at his
Death, 190. the beloved Disciple who, 178. Jesus appears to them, 213. to be a
Dissciple of Christ we must forsake all, 127. Doctor, Doctors of the Law are
the Scribes, 158. Doctrine, Jesus 's Doctrine not his, but God's, 104. it was
accompanied with authority, 38. Pharisees Doctrine to be obeyed, but their
example not to be followed, 164. Dram, a Tribute of Two Drams paid by
Jesus, 98.
E
ELias, John Baptist said to be Elias, 4. he appeared to Christ at his
Transfiguration, 94. Elizabeth John Baptists Mother, 4. Enemies to be loved,
57. Epiphany, Or Christ's manifestation of the Magi, 15 Eucharist, In it Christ's
Flesh and Blood are received, 85. to be received by all, Ibid. its effects,
Ibid. and institution. 177.
F
FAith, Makes Men Children of God, 12. can do all things 96. power of it, 157.
Jesus reproves his Disciples for having little Faith, 42. St. Peter's faith, 82.
Jesus Christ is our food by Faith, 84. the Apostles pray Jesus to increase
their Faith, 97. the Faith of the Apostles, 82. of those that carried the Man
sick of the Palsy to Jesus, 45. of the Woman that had the bloody flux, 48. of
the Blind-men, 49. of the Blind-man at Jericho, 149. of the Centurion, 61. of
the Woman that was a Sinnet, 66. of the Woman of Canaan, 88. Jesus prays that
St. Peter's Faith fail not, 179. requires Faith of Martha, 141. Questions,
whether he shall find Faith on Earth at his Second coming, 135. Faithful, In
small things, 130. the commendation of a Faithful Servant, 104. the unfaithful
Steward put out of his Office, 130. Fasting of Jesus, 24. how to fast, 58.
Feasts, St. Matthew made a Feast for Jesus, 46. the Feast of Simon the
Pharisee, 65. Simon the Leper at Bethany, 149. of Herod to his Lords, 78. to
sit in the lowest Room at a Feast, 125. to Feast the Poor rather than the Rich,
126. the Marriage feasts, 160. the daily Feasts of Dives, 131. Fig Tree, Barren
Cursed, 156. Flight, Of Jesus into Egypt, 18. in persecution lawful, 77. of
the Apostles from Jesus at his apprehension, 190.
G
GAbriel, The Angel appeared to Zachary, 4. to the Holy Virgin, Ibid. Galilee,
Joseph went into Galilee at his return out of Egypt, 19. Jesus leaving Judea
went into Galilee, 33. went over the First time, 35. the Second time, 76. the
Jews would not allow a Prophet to come out of Galilee, 105. Galileans, Jesus
Disciples called so, 105. the Galileans slain by Pilate, 121. Gennesareth, A
City of Galilee, 37. the Lake of Gennesareth, 36. Jesus appeased a Tempest in
that Lake, 41. went upon it, and suffered Peter to come to him on it, 82. the
Miraculous fishing in this Lake -- the first, 37. the second, 213. Jesus Christ
taught upon the Lake, 37. Gentiles, Called into the Church instead of the Jews,
160. desire to see Jesus, 153. are some of Christ's Flock, 112. Gerasa, Or
Gadar, the Miracle done there, 42. the People there desire Jesus to depart out
of their Coasts, 44. Gethsemane, Where the Garden was, into which Jesus often
went with his Disciples, 187. God, Is faithful to his promises, 7. his Love to
Man, 29. to be Worshipped in Spirit and Truth, 33. alone to be Worshipped, 24.
to be loved with all the Heart, 114. not to be tempted, 24. is good only, 136.
never seen by any, 25. he that is of God, hears his Word, 108. to know him is
Life Eternal, 186. he that does his Will, shall inherit Eternal Life, 59. he
is one in Three Persons, 11. he shall be seen by the pure in Heart, 55.
peacemakers are his Children, Ibid. and so are they that love their Enemies,
57. that which is highly esteemed by Men is odious to God, 72. Gluttony. To be
avoided, 169. Grace, Brought by Jesus Christ, 25. he grew in Grace, 20. his
Words were full of Grace, 74. Christ's Grace compared to Living Water, 33.
Great, Greatness, who is the greatest, 98. he that is Servant of all, Ibid.
great Men did not believe in Jesus Christ, or dare not own it, 155. why, 16.
Gospel is glad Tidings, 35. Preached by Christ, 40. we must believe it, 35. we
must leave all for it, 137. the Apostles sent to Preach the Gospel in all the
World, 218.
H
HEll, is called darkness, where there is nothing but wailing and gnashing of
Teeth, 61. the Eternal Fire of Hell, 73. the Burial of the Rich Man in Hell,
131. Herod, The Great King of the Jews troubled at the coming of the Magi, 15.
pretended to Worship Jesus, Ibid. killed the Children of Bethlehem, 18. Herod,
Antipas Son of Herod the Great, Married his Brothers Wife, 31. Imprisoned John
the Baptist, Ibid. beheaded him, 79. believes Jesus Christ to be him, Ibid.
Jesus calls him Fox, 124. bids his Disciples take heed of the Leaven of Herod,
91. is brought before him, but says nothing, 196. his Officers take Jesus,
162. Herodias. Herod's Brothers Wife hates S. John Baptist, 31. made her
Daughter to ask his Head of Herod, 79. Honor, Hypocrites Honor God only with
their Lips, 81. to be given to Parents, 87. Jesus Christ refused Secular
Honor, 82. Hosanna, Given to Christ, 152. Humble, Humility. Jesus Christ is
humble, 113. shall be exalted, 125. Jesus Christ commands it, Ibid. and gives
us an example of it, 201. Hypocrisy, Hypocrites: Hypocrisy is the Leaven of the
Pharisees, to be avoided, 118. Jesus reproves and curses Hypocrites, 116. the
unprofitable Servant has his Portion with Hypocrites, 120.
I
JAmes, The greater, Son of Zebedee, called by Jesus Christ, 36. made an
Apostle, 54. called Boanerges, Ibid. a Witness of Christ's Transfiguration, 93.
agony, 187. reproved for his indiscreet Zeal, 144. and ambition, 145. asks
Jesus about the Destruction of Jerusalem, 166. James, The Less made an Apostle,
55. the Kinsman of Jesus Christ, 74. Jesus Christ appeared to him after his
Resurrection, 166, Jairus's, Daughter raised from the Dead, 47. Jerusalem,
Troubled at the Birth of Jesus Christ, 15. kills the Prophets, 124. her
Destruction, 167. Jesus laments it, 152. reproved also by him, Ibid. Jesus
Christ, The Son of the most High, his Kingdom to have no end, 6. the Second
Person in the Trinity, 7, 10. saves his People from their Sins, 9. is God and
Man, 10. the Word of God, Ibid. the Wisdom and Power of God, 11, the Light and
Life of Souls, 18. subject to Mary and Joseph, 20. increased in Wisdom and
Stature, Ibid. came to save the World, 29. for Sinners, not the Righteous, 46.
fled from being made a King, 87. the Carpenters Son, 74. Son of God and David,
161. the way to God, the Truth and the Life, 181. spoke nothing of himself,
182. is the beloved Son of God, 23, 94 entered into his glory by dying on the
Cross, 210. Imposition, Of hands for curing, 91. for blessing, 136.
Incarnation, Of Jesus Christ, 6. God visited Man by the Incarnation, 8. Gods
promises fulfilled by it, 9. the benefits of this Mystery, 6, 8. Innocents,
Murdered, 19. St. John the Baptist, His Nativity foretold by an Angel, 4.
filled with the Holy Ghost from his Mothers Womb, Ibid. great in the sight of
God, Ibid. his Birth, 7. Circumcision, 8. a Prophet of the most High, dwelt in
the Desert, Ibid. came to manifest the Light to Men, 12. his Preaching and
Baptism, 20. his answer to those that were sent to him, 23. his first Testimony
which he gave to Jesus, 25. his Second, 26. Third, Ibid. Fourth, 30. St. John,
The Evangelist, Son of Zebedee, called by Jesus, 36. made an Apostle, 54. named
Boanerges, Ibid. a Witness of Christ's Transfiguration, 93. and agony in the
Garden, 187. is reproved for his indiscreet Zeal, 144. and ambition, 145. and
for hindering a Man from casting out Devils in Christ's Name, 98. the Beloved
Disciple, 178. who lay on Jesus Breast at Supper, and asked who should betray
him, Ibid. stood at the Foot of the Cross, 230. Jesus commended the Holy Virgin
to him, Ibid. went with Peter to the Sepulcher, 207. acknowledged Jesus on the
Shore, 213. the Apostles thought he should not die, 215. Joanna, One of the
Women that Ministered to Jesus, 76. Jonas, A Figure of Christ, 68. Joseph,
Espoused to the Virgin, of the Family of David, 5. 13. a Just Man. 9. accounted
the Father of Jesus, 74. Joseph, Of Ar^math^ca, a Jewish Counselor, but a
Disciple of Christ, 205. begged his Body of Pilate, Ibid. Buried it in his own
new Tomb, 206. Judas, The Apostle, called also Theudas, made an Apostle, 55.
Brother of James the Less, Ibid. asks Christ why he did not reveal himself to
the World, 182. Judge, The Parable of the unjust Judge and Widow, 134. Jesus
came not to judge, but to save the World, 29. would not judge in Temporal
affairs, 118. shall come again to judge the World, 168. for which he has
received power of God, 57. Judgment, Last, the Description of it, 171. the Time
unknown, 169. must be prepared for by Watchfulness and Prayer, ibid. who shall
appear there with Confidence, ibid. Just, shall be persecuted, 166. shall lift
up their Heads at the last Day, 168. shall shine like the Sun in Heaven, 73.
shall be placed at the right Hand, at the Day of Judgment, 171. shall be like
the Angels after the Resurrection, 163.
L.
LAw, Fulfilled and perfected by Jesus Christ, 67. Moses gave the Law, but
Jesus Christ Grace, 25. the difference between the Old and New Law, 36, 37. all
the Law is comprised in loving God and our Neighbor, 163. the Law continued to
John, 63. Jesus Christ accused of breaking the Law, 51. The Pharisees preferred
their Traditions before the Law, 154. Lazarus, The Brother of Martha and Mary,
115. the Friend of Jesus Christ, raised from the Dead, 142. sat at Table with
Jesus, at the Feast at Simon's the Leper, 149. the Jews would slay him, 150.
Lazarus, The poor Man, the Dogs lick his Sores, 131. carried into Abraham's
Bosom, ibid. Legion, Freed by Jesus, 43. Lepers, The Cure of a Leper, 60. of
Ten, 103. Jesus sups with Simon the Leper, 149. a Leper cured by Elisha, 75.
Life, Jesus Christ is the Fountain of Life, 12. the Way, the Truth and Life,
181. the Bread of Life, 84. what we must do to obtain Eternal Life, 127. Lot,
His Wife, 134. Love of God to Men, In sending his Son, 29. God loves them that
love Jesus Christ, 21. hears their Prayers, ib. he loves his Elect as Christ,
187. Jesus Christ loved Lazarus and his Two Sisters, 140. his Love to his
Sheep, 112. Love of Men to God, This is the greatest Commandment, 114. much is
forgiven to him that loves much, 66. he that loves God keeps his Commandments,
116. God abides in him that loves him, ibid. he that loves Christ rejoices in
his Glory, 182. Jesus's Love for his Father, ibid. Love of our Neighbor, Is
the Second Commandment, 114. equal to the First, of loving God, 163. which are
the sum of all the Law, ibid. is the Fruit which Christ would have us bear,
183. he gave us an Example of it, ibid. and for this counts us his Disciples,
176. is discovered by the Help we afford him, 114. we must love our Enemies,
183. Lunaticks, Healed by Jesus, 39.
M.
MAgi, Worship Christ, 15. Malchus, An Officer, whose Ear Peter cut off, 190.
cured by Jesus, ibid. Marriage, not to be dissolved, 132. Virginity better,
133. God ordained it, 132. not useful after the Resurrection, 163. Mary, the
Mother of Jesus, Of the Family of David, espoused to Joseph, 5. but lived in
perfect Chastity with him, ib. brought forth Jesus Christ at Bethlehem, 10.
went to the Temple to purify her self, 17. observed his Sayings, 20. stood at
the Foot of the Cross, 203. was given to S. John as his Mother, and John to her
as her Son, ibid. Mary Magdalene, is freed from Seven Devils, 76. follows Jesus
and ministered unto him, ibid. stood at the Bottom of the Cross, 203. saw him
buried, 205. and came to embalm him, 206. saw the Sepulcher open, and ran to
tell Peter and John, 207. wept at the Sepulcher, ibid. saw Two Angels, ibid.
and after Jesus himself, ibid. told his Apostles of his Resurrection, 209.
Mary, the Sister of Martha, Chose the good Part, 115. poured the Ointment on
Jesus's Head and Feet, 149. Mary, the Mother of James, The Sister of the
Virgin, a Follower of Jesus; she stood with the other Women at the Cross, and
went to the Sepulcher with them, 209. Martha, Entertains Christ at her House,
114, and was busy in preparing for him, 115. S. Matthew, His Conversion, 46.
made Jesus Christ a Feast, ibid. is made an Apostle, 74. Messiah, was to be
born at Bethlehem, 15. the Jews Error about his Kingdom, 147. Mercy, God is
merciful to the merciful, 55. loves mercy more than Sacrifice, 47. Miracles,
Jesus did more than are written, 218. were Proofs of Christ's Divinity, and
Purity of his Doctrine, 122. John Baptist did none, 124. Mountain, Jesus's
Sermon on the Mountain, 14. a firm Faith removes Mountains, 97. Mount Calvary,
200. of Olives, 187. Jesus was transfigured on a Mountain, 94. showed himself
to his Disciples in a Mountain of Galilee, 217. Moses, Gave the Law, 25. not
obeyed by the Jews, 133. appeared with Christ at his Transfiguration, 94. he
permitted divorce only for the hardness of the Jews Hearts, 133. Murmuring, Of
the Pharisees against Christ for Eating with Sinners, 46. against the Disciples
for Eating with unwashen Hands, 86. of the Jews against Jesus, because he said,
He would give them his Flesh to eat, 84. of the Disciples against Mary, for
wasting the Ointment, 150.
N.
NAin, A City of Galilee, where Jesus Christ raised the Widow's Son, 62.
Nativity, of John Baptist, 8. of Jesus, both Divine and Human, 12, 13.
Nathanael, A true Israelite, 27. Jesus's Discourse with him, ibid. saw Jesus
Risen, 213. Nazareth, A City of Galilee, where the Angel first came to the
Virgin, 5. Jesus brought up there, 19. preached there, 74. did few Miracles
there, 75. called a Nazarene, 19. Nicodemus, Came to Jesus by Night, 29.
Jesus's discourse with him, ibid. opposes those that would have condemned Jesus
Christ, 105. he buried Jesus Christ, 205. Ninivites, shall rise up in Judgment
against the Jews, 69. their Repentance, 68.
P.
Palsy, several Persons cured of the Palsy by Jesus Christ, 40, 45, 60.
Pardon, We must pardon others if we will obtain Pardon of God, 101. before we
go to our Prayers, 157. be always ready to pardon, 100. Parable, What it is,
70. why Jesus spoke in Parables, 71. Parables of the Two Debtors, 65. armed
Man, 67. Seed, 70. Treasure in the Field, 73. Pearl of Price, ibid. good
Samaritan, 114. rich Miser, 119. barren Fig Tree, 121. Marriage-supper, 126.
lost Sheep and Groat, 128. prodigal Son, 129. unjust Steward, 130. unjust Judge
and Widow, 134. Pharisee and Publican, 135. Laborers in the Vineyard, 138.
Talents, 169. Ten Virgins, etc. 170. Passover, What the Jewish Passover was,
173. Jesus went to Jerusalem at this Feast, 144. he staid in Galilee one
Passover, 88. he kept the Passover with his Disciples, 175. Passion, Of Christ
foretold the first, 92. second, 97. and third Time, 144. the History of it,
189. Patience, Necessary in Afflictions, 55. the Soul is possessed by Patience,
166. Pentecost, One of the great Feasts of the Jews, 102. Persecutions, Shall
befall the Just, 76. it is their Happiness, 56. they may fly, 76. some
Persecutors think they do God Service, 184. prayer for Persecutors, 57.
Perseverance, In Prayer, 134. necessary for Salvation, 166. Pharisees, Who they
were, 21. reject S. John and Jesus Christ, 64. preferred their Tradition before
the Law of God, 86. ignorant of the Messias's coming, 90. their Doctrine and
Hypocrisy compared to Leaven, 91. blind Guides, 87. were careful of the
outside, without cleansing their Hearts, 116. their Error about Oaths, 117.
their Pride, 116. ambition for the chief Places, ibid. covetousness, ibid.
hatred of Jesus, 132. seek to ensnare him by Questions, 158. endeavor to take
him, 162. put him to Death, 200. call him Impostor, 206. set Guards about his
Sepulcher, ibid. the Parable of the Pharisee and Publican, 135. S. Peter, The
Apostle, was called Simon, 26. went to Jesus with Andrew, ibid. Jesus Christ
named him Peter, ibid. left all to follow Christ, 37. was made an Apostle, 54.
Witness of Christ's Transfiguration, 93. and Agony in the Garden, 187. went on
the Water, and was reproved for his little Faith, 82. he confesses Christ to
be the Son of God, 92. for which he gave him the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
ibid. he attempts to keep Jesus from Suffering, 93. he promises Christ not to
deny him, 180. but denies him Three Times, 192. he laments his Fault, 193. he
runs with S. John to the Sepulcher, 207. Jesus Christ appears to him. 211. asks
him Three times concerning his Love, 214. and foretells his Martyrdom, which he
should suffer, ibid. S. Philip, Called by Jesus, 26. called Nathanael, ibid. is
made an Apostle, 54. the Greeks go to him to show them Jesus, 153. he desires
Christ to show him the Father, 181. Pilate, Governor of Judea, slew the
Galileans, 121. questions Jesus, 195. sends him to Herod, 196. would have saved
him, 197. caused him to be scourged, 198. shows him to the Jews, crowned with
Thorns, ibid. condemning him, 199. grants his Body to Joseph of Arimathea, 205.
Possessed with Devils, Jesus cures several, 40. at Capernaum, 38, a dumb Man,
49. one blind and dumb, 67. Two Men very fierce, 42. the Woman of Canaan's
Daughter, 88. Mary Magdalene, 76. Two other Women, ibid. Potters Field, 194.
Prayer, Rules for it, 58. the Lord's Prayer, ibid. the efficacy of Prayer and
Fasting, 97. and Faith, 98. how we must pray, 59. perseverance in Prayer, 134.
Prayer and Watching, 114. Prayer against Temptation, ibid. Prayer for
Persecutors, 58. Prayer of Jesus Christ, after his Baptism, 23. in the Desert,
82. before he chose his Apostles, 54. after he cured the Leper, 60. when he was
transfigured, 94. when he taught his Disciples to Pray, 50. after his last
Supper, when he prayed for S. Peter's Faith, 179. For his Apostles and all the
World, 186. for his Elect, ibid. in the Garden, to avoid Death, 188. upon his
Cross for the Persecutors, 201. commending his Soul to God, 204. his Prayer was
always heard, 205. he promises to pray for the Holy Spirit, 181. Prodigy, The
Jews desire one, 68. several appeared at Jesus Death, 204. Prodigal, The
Parable of him, 128. Prophet, Prophecy, a Prophet is without Honor in his own
Country, 75. Caiphas Prophecy concerning Christ's Death. 143. Prophets,
Explained by Christ, 210. the Prophets end at John, 63, who was more than a
Prophet, Ibid. Zachary's Prophecy. 8. Publicans, Instructed by St. John, 22.
received by Jesus, 46. more just than the Pharisees, 61. hated by the Jews, 46.
the Parable of the Pharisee and Publican, 135. a Publican made an Apostle, 46.
and another a Child of Abraham, 147. Purification, Whom the Law obliges in
that case, 16. the Virgins Purification, 17.
Q.
QVeen of Sheba shall condemn the Jews, 69.
R
REconciliation, Necessary before we Sacrifice to God, 56. as also before
prayer, 158. Redemption, Jesus Christ shed his Blood for the Redemption of
Souls, 145. Reward, Shall be great to those that suffer for Righteousness sake,
56. Hypocrites receive their Reward here, 57. the Workman is worthy of his
Hire, 77. Repentance, Preached by St. John, 21. and Jesus Christ. 35. by the
Apostles, 76. Repentance of the Ninivites, 68. in Sackcloath and Ashes, 65. of
a Sinner causes Joy in Heaven, 129. necessity of it, 121. Baptism of
Repentance, 21. Fruits worthy of Repentance, 22. it ought to be Preached every
where, 144. the Repentance of a Woman, that was a sinner, 66. God expects
Repentance, 121. Jesus Christ receives sinners upon their Repentance, 128.
reproves the impenitent Cities, 65. Judas's false Repentance, 194. Reproof,
Given by Jesus Christ to the Apostles, 42. Pharisees, 64. Scribes, 16.
Impenitent Cities of Galilee, Ibid. Simon the Pharisee, 66. Resurrection, Jesus
Christ has all the Power to raise the Dead, 51. he is the Resurrection, and
the Life, 141. he will raise them that eat his Flesh, 85. the Dead shall rise,
163. there shall be no Marriage after the Resurrection, Ibid. Christ raised
from the Dead Jairus's Daughter, 49. The Widows Son of Nain, 62. Lazarus, 142.
the dead Bodies of many Saints, at his own Resurrection, 204. Retreat, Jesus
retires into the Desert, where he is tempted, 5. he retreated from Judaea,
after the Imprisonment of John, 33. into a Desert to pray, 39. to the Seaside,
54. into a Mountain to pray before he chose his Apostles, Ibid. into the Desert
after he had healed the Leper, 60. after his Fame was spread in Herod's Court,
80. into a Mountain, when they would have made him a King, 82. into the Coasts
of Tire and Sidon, 88. Into the City of Ephrem, after the Resurrection of
Lazarus, 143. Riches, Rich-men, a Woe pronounced against them, 65. the Covetous
Rich-man, 119. the Wicked Rich-man, 131. Rich toward God, Ibid. Riches, Are
Thorns, 119. why Jesus calls Riches the Mammon of unrighteousness, 130. rich
Men hardly saved, 136. the good use to be made of Riches, 119.
S
SAbboth-day, A day of Rest, 51. Jesus Christ often accused of breaking the Law
of the Sabbath, because he did Miracles on it, Ibid. justifies himself, 52. and
his Apostles, Ibid. it is lawful to do well on the Sabboth-day, Ibid. it is for
Man, Ibid. Jesus Christ is Lord also of the Sabbath, Ibid. Sadducees, Who they
were, 22. John's saying to them, Ibid. they desire a Sign of Jesus Christ, 90.
their Doctrine called Leaven, 91. they Question with Jesus, 163. he proves the
Resurrection to them, Ibid. Salome, The Wife of Zebedee, prays Jesus for her
Children, 145. stood by the Cross, 203. went to the Sepulcher, 206. Solomon,
Visited by the Queen of Sheba, 69. Jesus Christ greater than he, Ibid. Samaria,
Samaritans, Enemies of the Jews, 33. the Samaritan Woman converted by Jesus
Christ, Ibid. the Samaritans believed on him, 34. they would not let him pass
through their City, 77. the Good Samaritan, 114. the thankful Leper of Samaria,
10. Scandal, The necessity of Scandals, 100. the World is full of them, Ibid.
Woe to the causes of them by their Faults, Ibid. the Eye to be plucked out, and
Hand to be cut off that offend, Ibid. Jesus Chtist a Scandal to the Nazarenes,
74. to the Pharisees, 87. Apostles, 180. he is happy that is not offended in
him, 63. Jesus Christ slights the offense of the Pharisees, 84. he pays Tribute
to avoid Scandal. 98. Servant, We cannot serve two Masters, 58. the Servant is
not Greater than his Master, 77. all are unprofitable Servants, 120. the first
among Christians must be Servant of all, as Christ himself was, 146. Christ's
Servants must follow him, 187. Sidon, A Heathen City, 64. Simeon, An Old Man,
full of the Spirit, 17. saw and embraced Christ, Ibid. his Hymn and Prophecy,
18. Simon, The Pharisee made a feast for Jesus Christ, 65. offended at him for
suffering a sinful Woman to kiss his Feet, Ibid. reproved by Jesus, 66. Simon,
The Leper, Jesus Christ Supped at his House at Bethany, 90. Simon, Of Cyrene
bears Jesus 's Cross before him, 200. v. Sin. Sin, Against the Holy Ghost, 67.
God only forgives Sins, 45. the Church has Power to pardon Sin, 100. Servant
of Sin, 108. Sin forgiven to the Man sick of the Palsy, 45. and Woman that was
a Sinner, 66. Sinner, Jesus Christ called a Sinner, 110. eats with Sinners, 46.
came down from Heaven for Sinners, 128. Sodom, A City punished for her Sins,
50. less Guilty than the Impenitent Cities of Galilee, Ibid. Soldiers, John's
Instructions to the Soldiers, 22. Guard the Cross of Christ, 204. the
Sepulcher, 206. Holy Spirit, John Baptist filled with the Spirit, 4. Jesus
Christ Conceived by the Operation of the Holy Spirit, 6, 9. it proceeds from
the Father, and Son, 11. discovered Jesus Christ to Simeon, 17. came down from
Heaven upon Jesus in the form of a Dove, 23. carried him into the Desert, 24.
Inspired whom it pleases, 29. to be Born of Water, and of the Spirit, Ibid.
Baptism with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, 23. Blaspheming against the Holy
Ghost, 67. it was given after Christ was Glorified, 184. the Spirit of Truth,
Ibid. Condemns the World, Ibid. promised to the Apostles, 181. given them, 212,
216. Star, A Miraculous Star conducted the Magi to Christ, 15. Steward, The
unjust Steward, 119. Sun, Darkened at Christ's passion, 203. and so it shall be
at Christ's Coming, 168.
T
TAbernacles, The Feast of Tabernacles one of the Great Feasts of the Jews,
102. why Instituted, Ibid. Jesus came to Jerusalem in the midst of this Feast,
Ibid. Temple, Christ drove the Traders out of it Twice, 28, 156. the House of
God, and of Prayer, Ibid. the Destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem, 153. the
Vail Rent from the top to the bottom. 204. Temptation, Of Christ by the Devil,
24. by a Scribe, 164. by the Pharisees, 162. by the Sadducees, 163. the Devil
desires to tempt the Apostles, 179. Prayer to keep out of Temptation, 188. by
Watching and Prayer also, Ibid. S. Thomas, Made an Apostle, 55. willing to dye
with Christ, 140 doubts of the Resurrection, 212. sees and believes, Ibid.
Traditions, Preferred before the Law by the Pharisees, 87. Transfiguration, Of
Jesus Christ, 93. Trinity, To be believed, 11. Truth, Jesus Christ is the
Essential Truth, 12. the Truth and the Life, 155. makes us free, 108. Tire, A
Pagan City shall be less punished than the Jews, 64.
V
VIrgin Mary, The Mother of Jesus always a Virgin, 5. a Virgin Conceived, 10.
the Praise of Virginity, 133. the Parable of the Ten Virgins, 183. Vine,
Vineyard, the Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard, 138. the Vineyard, and
the Husbandmen that Hired it, 159. Jesus Christ the true Vine, 204. Vipers,
Pharisees compared to them, 22. Voice, Jesus owned to be the Son of God, by a
Voice from Heaven, 23.
W
WAsh, Water, Baptism with Water, 22. Water changed into Wine, 27, Jesus went
upon the Water, 82. as also St. Peter, Ibid. Water and Blood issued out of
Jesus's Side, 204. living Water, 6. Rivers of living Water, 105 Jesus VVashed
the Feet of his Disciples, 176. Simon the Pharisee reproved for not Washing
Jesus Feet, 66. and the Disciples for not Washing their Hands, 86. Wine,
Water changed into Wine, 27. Wine and Oil poured into VVounds, 114. Wine
mingled with Gall given to Jesus, 201. Woman, The Woman with the Bloody Flux,
48. the Woman of Canaan, 88. the Woman bowed down, 121. the Woman Sinner, 65.
sinful Women converted by John Baptist, 64. a Woman Divorced not to be
Married, 132. the Woman that had 7 Husbands, 163. Holy Women, Delivered from
evil Spirits, 7. follow Jesus and Minister to him, Ibid. saw him dye, 203.
Prepared Spices to emalm him, 206. go to the Sepulcher, 208. saw two Angels,
Ibid. and then Jesus himself 209. tell the Apostles of his Resurrection, ibid.
Word, What it is, 10. Jesus is the Word of God, Ibid. this Word is the Life and
Light of Souls, 12. the Truth and essential Wisdom, Ibid. Word, Of God, happy
are they that observe it, 79. Christ's words are words of Life, 86. he that
keeps them shall not dye, 77. World, Knows not, nor receives Christ, 12. full
of offenses, 99. is no profit when gotten by the loss of the Soul, 93. hates
Christ, 183. an Enemy of Christ and believers, 186. the Devil is its Prince,
154. Christ calls us out of the World, 186. false pleasures of the World, 56.
Z
ZAchary, Father of John the Baptist, 4. Prophesies, 8. Zachaeus, Jesus
Lodges at his House, 146. Zebedee, Father of James and John Apostles, 36.
Zeal, The disorderly Zeal of John and James, 145.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 14. read had, and so p. 17. l. 2. p. 26. l. ult. after saw him
add he said. p. 27. l. ult. after Feast. r. He. p. 36. l. 2. r. will. and l.
ult. dele in* p. 39. l. 6. r. instant. p. 55. l. 10. r. touch. p 57. l. 8. from
bott. after did put not. p. 64. l. 8 from bottom dele use. p 69. l. 20. for
they have r. he has, and for have r. has, and l. 21. for are r. is. p. 70. l.
15. for end r. shore. p. 73. l. 10. for they r. we. p. 77. l. 9. from bott. for
they r. the. p. 78. l. 2. r. followed, l. 7. after with r. in the. p. 81. l. 12
r. thousand. p. 84. l. 7. r. 5000. p. 85. l. 11, 12. and p. 91. l. 12. change
hard and heard for each other. p. 89. l. 4 r. hand. p. 95. l. 11. from bott. r.
their. p. 101. l. 9. from bott. for suffered from r. committed against, and in
the Margin, for 19. r. 10. p. 109 l. 6. from bott. r. Siloam. p. 114. l. 23.
after but r. a. p. 132. l. 1. after. that r. as. p. 135. l. 2. dele will. p.
138 l. 29. dele came. p. 144. l. 1. r. that p. 161. l. 12. r. without. p. 182.
l. 1. after but put his, l. 32. before power r. no. p. 184. l. 26. dele of. p.
187. l. 13. r. thou have sent me. p. 188. l. 5. r. decreeed. p. 201 l. penult.
r. casting. p 204 l 6 before gave r. and. p. 216. c 51. r. appearances. p. 217
l. 7 after meet put them, and l. 10. r. this. p. 223. l. 4. for second r. first.

Other Literal Mistakes in the Printing, are desired to be corrected with the
Pen, by the Reader.


