A TREASURE OF HEALTH.

BY Castor Durante Da Gualdo, Physician and Citizen of ROME.

WHEREIN Is shown how to preserve Health, and prolong Life.

ALSO The Nature of all sorts of Meats and Drinks, with the way to prevent all
Hurt that attends the Use of either of them.

Translated out of Italian into English, By John Chamberlayne, Gent.

Imprimatur,

April 5. 1686. Rob. Midgley.



London, Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
1686.

To the Worshipful, THOMAS CHAMBERLAYNE, of Oddington, in the County of
Gloucester, Esquire; is Humbly Dedicated this little Book, Entitled, The Treasure
of Health.
SIR,
HAving received much dun-e served Kindness from you, I cannot let slip the
first occasion to publish my Gratitude and Respect to you, who not only by your
Wisdom and Prudence in difficillimis temporibus, in the worst of Times,
preserved unspotted and untainted your Religion and Loyalty, but also by your
Temperance, Moderation, and Sobriety, preserved your Health, and have prolonged
your Life almost twenty Years beyond the usual Age of Man; and had happily
practiced the best Rules and Precepts in this small Treatise, long before it
was extant in any Language. Now, that God would please to continue your Health,
and as you were Born before the beginning of this Century, so to lengthen your
Life at least to the beginning of the next, to the Comfort of your numerous
Issue and Relations, the Benefit of your Neighbors, and Relief of the Poor,
shall be the constant cordial Prayer of,

Dear Uncle, Your most Affectionate and Humble Servant, John Chamberlayne.
From Trinity-Colledge in Oxford, 24 of June, 1686.
TO THE READER.
HAving accidentally met with a small Treatise written in Italian, wherein is
briefly discovered the Quality, Choice, Benefit, Hurt, and Remedy of all sorts
of Edible Flesh, Fish, Fruits, Herbs, Grains, and Roots; of several sorts of
Drinks, Sawces, etc. Moreover, of Air, Exercise, Rest, Sleep, Watching,
Repletion and Inanition, Bathing, Rubbing, Venery, Passions, Affections, and
Perturbations of the Mind, I judged that it might be acceptable and useful to
my Compatriots or Countrymen, to make the said Treatise speak English, to the
end, that every one might know what Rule and Measure he ought to observe in his
Diet, and manner of Living: For although Health is at our Births proposed to us
from Heaven, yet there is also need of our constant Care and Diligence both t^
procure and preserve it by our Diet, as well as to recover it by Physic when
it is lost, whereof our Author has largely treated in another Book, which
perhaps hereafter may likewise be made English. I know well that there have
been diverse Books of this kind heretofore published, but the Method hereof
being different from all those, and some remarkable things here, not found
elsewhere; also this Book being of a small price, the Reader will take in good
part the honest Intentions of the Publisher hereof.

A TREASURE OF HEALTH.
CHAP. I. Of Air.
THE Air above all things is necessary for the preservation of Health, and for
the prolonging of our Life; for all Animals live, and stand in need of a
continual refreshment of the ^eart, the which is performed by the perpetual
^rawing in the Air, whereby the Lungs are in a ^ontinual motion, from the hour
of our Birth, to ^e hour of Death: All things else may be avoided ^r some time
except the Air, which no man can want one hour. Now Air compa^^es us about on
every side, and changes our Bodies more than any thing besides, because we
dwell continually in it, and feed upon this dish every moment: And it may
justly be affirmed, that the Air may be more beneficial and more hurtful, than
eating and drinking. The chiefest way of preserving the Health, consisting
therefore in the election of a good Air we ought to choose that which is most
clear an^ serene toward the East, not subject to dar^ Clouds, nor corrupted
with the stinking Vapor of Lakes, standing Pools, Marshes, Dunghils, Privies,
Caverns, Quagmires, or where much Dust is for by reason of the dusty Air about
the Garamantes, (now called Guanguara, a Country in Africa the Men can scarce
arrive to the Age of forty year^ And where the Air is naught, it consequently
happens that the Water is not good, the which nex^ to the Air helps to corrupt
our Bodies, togethe^ with the Food, which in a thick and gross A^ ought to be
thin and subtle, as in a thin Air ought to be gross. That Air therefore is
requisit^ in the conservation of Health, which renders the Days light and
serene, pure and temperate^ whereas on the contrary, the gross, thick,
turb^lent, and infected, does destroy the Health. The naughty and unwholsom
Air, is the cold and Northern; as also the Southern; likewise the noctu^nal
Air, especially under the Rays of the Moo^ and in the open Air: And no less
pernicious is the windy, and tempestuous, corrupted with unwho^som Vapors,
such as is the stinking Putrefactio^ of dead Animals, and other nasty Smells;
f^^ such Air hurts the Head, and offends the vital Sp^rits, and with its
overmuch moisture and humid^ty it loosens the Joints, and disposes them very
much to receive all sort of Superfluities, as does the Air, which fetches a
Vapor out of the Dust, and is infectious: Against which there is great need
that we carefully defend our selves; for that entering into the Body, and
obstructing the Passages, hinders the circulating of the animal Spirits. Choose
therefore the temperate Air, which is the lucid, clear, and purest; for that
does not only cause Health, but which is more, preserves it a long while, by
purifying all the Spirits, and the Blood, chearing the Heart, and the Mind,
strengthens all the Actions, eases Digestion, preserves ^he Temperament,
prolongs Life, retarding and ^eeping off old Age. And on the contrary, the ^ark
and thick Air clouds the Heart, troubles the Mind, renders the Body heavy and
unactive, hin^ers the Concoction, and hastens old Age. The ^emperate Air is
easily known, if presently after ^un-set it grows cool, and if at Sunrising it
soon ^rows hot: This Air agrees with all Ages, all Com^lexions, with all times,
and all seasons; and not ^nly the turbulent and windy Air is unwholsom, ^ut
that likewise which is always still and quiet. therefore when the Air exceeds
in any quality, it ^ught to be allayed and corrected with its contra^y: And if
that cannot be done by natural ways, ^ought to be prepared artificially; so
that if the ^ir should be too hot and sultry, as it is in Sum^er, you should
sprinkle the House with fresh ^ater, or Vinegar; for the Vinegar with its
cold^ess and dryness, qualifies the unwholsom Vapors (...) the Air, and
hinders Putrefaction: And if they ^row the Floor with Flowers and odoriferous
^erbs, which have a moist and humid quality, as Violets, Roses, tops of young
Oa^s, leaves of the Vine, of Lettices, or Willows, Nenufars, or Water Lillies,
boughs of the Mastick tree, and other cool Leaves; and in the mean time you
should take care that none come into the Chambers the strewed, for if there be
a great many, with the^ Breath they re-heat the Room: Besides this, l^ the
Chamber be full of odoriferous Fruits, as swe^^ smelling Apples, Pears,
Quinces, Citrons and Li^mons. But if the Air should be too cold, yo^ must avoid
the Wind, chiefly the Northern, a^ not go out of the House before Sunrising;
a^ strew your Chamber with hot Herbs, as Mint, Peniroyal, Sage, Hysop, Laurel,
Rosemary, Marjora^^ or else make a decoction of these Herbs with Clove^
Cinnamon, Mace, and such like, and sprinkle t^ Chamber therewith; and perfume it
also wi^^ some aromatical Smells, as Incense, Mastick, ^^namon, Ladanum, (a Gum
made of the fat D^^ that is gathered from the Leaves of Lada) N^^megs, rine of
Citrons, Myrrh, Amber, Lignum ^loes, Musk, and the sweet smelling Gum called
St^rax; putting these things on lighted Charcoal; (...) else mix these Perfumes
with liquid Storax, setti^^ it a little while over the Coals. These aromati^^
Odours have the virtue to open the Pores, wh^^ they are stopped, attenuate the
gross Humors, a^^ is good against the cold and moist Vapors of t^^ Body. This
Perfume may be made another w^^ if you take of all these things; to wit, Half
ounce, or six drams of Roses, one dram of A^ber, of Musk half a scruple, of
Behen Album, Sparling Poppy, or red Behen, ana two scrupl^ of the Flowers of
Nymphea, or River-Lillies, thr^ drams of Ladanum, one dram of Mastick, Incen^^
ana two Drams; pound these, not too small, and set them over t^^ Coals. Besides
this, to correct the bad quality of the Air, and to attenuate and dissolve the
gross and slimy Humors of the Body, let there be always burning in the Chamber
a good Fire of some Odoriferous Wood, as Laurel, Rosemary, Cypress, Juniper,
Oak, Pine, Firr, the Latrix or Larch-Tree, Turpentine, and Tamarisk. Moreover,
Night and Day smell to a Ball of Pomander, composed of these following several
Ingredients. Take of Saffron one Dram and a half, of the Oriental Amber half a
Scruple, of Musk half a Dram, of Storax Calamita, (the Gum which proceeds from
a sweet Cane in the Indies) and of Laurel, ana one Scruple; these are
altogether dissolved in Malmsey, and thereof is made a round Ball. One thing is
worthy your Observation and Remembrance, that is, that the Air in hot and moist
Countries (as for Example, in Rome, etc.) is very destructive to the Health;
the Air of the Vineyards is also little wholesome, unless when the Northern or
Western Wind blows. Of Seasons, those are the best, which keeping their proper
temperature, are equally either cold or hot; but the changeable and uncertain
Weather is the worst of all. I must not likewise omit to tell you, that in the
Summer, when the South Wind blows, as in those places which stand toward the
North, are the least wholesome; as in the Winter, the Northern Wind blowing,
those which look toward the South. If you desire to know the quality of the
Air, and disposition of the Weather, at Night in the open Air put a dry Sponge,
and if in the Morning you find it dry, you may assure your self the Air is dry;
if wet, then conclude the Air is moist and damp. The like Experiment may be
tried ^ith new Bread which being exposed to the Nocturnal Air as the former, if
in the Morning you find it moldy the Air is corrupted and putrefied; but if
the Air be hot and dry, the Bread will remain without any change. The malignity
of the Cold may b^ corrected, by artificially causing a good and swee^ Breath,
viz. by keeping in your Mouth Treacle* Mithridate, also the Confection called
Alcarmes, (a term of the Arabian Physicians, whereby they meant a Cordial made
of certain little Scarle^ Worms, of which also is Crimson made) rubbing the
Teeth with this Antidote, which yet becomes better by the addition of Zedoary,
(a Roo^ like Ginger growing in the East Indies) an^ chewing therewith Angelica;
and this Dentifrice or Medicine to cleanse the Teeth, may be made if you take
of Rosemary one Dram, of Myrrh Mastick, Bole-armoniack, Dragons-Blood,
Burnt-Allom, ana half a Dram; of Cinnamon one Dram and a half, Rose Vinegar,
Mastick-water, ana three Ounces, half a pound of Rainwater, of Honey three
Ounces; boil these together over a gentle fire, to the end that they may be
well scummed; afterward add thereto Bezoar (a kind of Precious Stone very
Cordial, being an excellent Antidote to expel Poison; by the Arabic Doctors it
is called Badzahar, i. e. Alexipharmacon, a Remedy for Poison) and as a^
Unguent keep it in a glass Bottle. Of this take a spoonful every Morning
fasting, holding it in your Mouth, and rubbing your Gums therewith, the which
must b^ afterward w^ll washed and cleansed with Wa^^^ distilled in a hot Bath,
of white Salt, and Roch-Allom, ana three Ounces, and thereto may be added a
little ^^stick-water: With this wash the Teeth, for these things cleanse the
Mouth, cause good Breath, f^sten loose Teeth, flesh the Gums, heal the
putrefied Flesh, and make the Teeth white. Besides all this, there is great
heed to be taken in the choice of a House; see whether the Place and the Air be
good or bad, wholesome or unwholsom to dwell in. The House therefore which you
take, let it be seated in the highest place of the City; therein choose your
Apartment at least one pair of stairs high, and let it be very light, and so
placed that it may always receive the Wind in the Summer, and the Sun in the
Winter; and have Windows on all sides; that is, East, West, North, and South,
if it may be, to the end, that no one Air may remain there long, which
otherwise would putrefie and corrupt; and furthermore you ought to avoid not
only lying in a Ground-Chamber, but also tarrying there long, for the highest
are the most wholesome, where you breath the thinnest and purest Air; then you
receive this benefit, that dwelling in the highest and most open place of the
House, preserves, and repairs the radical Moisture of the Body, and hinders Old
Age; but to be in a dark, lower Room, or under the Ground, is very naught; for
Life is maintained by the open Air and by Light, but in the shade a Man grows
moldy and corrupted. I must furthermore advertise you, that of Animals, Herbs,
Fruit, Corn, and Wine, those are to be chosen that grow in high Ground, free
from ill smells, putrefied by the Wind, and receive a temperate and sufficient
warm^h of the Sun, where there be no stinking Lakes and Dung-hills to molest
them, for there the Fruits remain a long while uncorrupted; and this is ^he
only place whereon a man may securely fix to dwell in. It Is also commodious to
have a Country House, whereto you may sometimes repair; for as the Country
provides Food and Victuals for the City, and the City consumes it, so humane
Life, by sometimes dwelling in the Country is prolonged, but by the Idleness of
the City it is shortened: Likewise change of Air is sometimes very requisite and
necessary, though that change should not be made suddenly, but deliberately,
and by little and little. And because to the rectifying the Air, the Clothes do
in some measure contribute, defending the Body from it; for this purpose wear
those Clothes that be warm and dry; in the Winter get a Suit of Lamb-skin,
Fox-skin, of a Marten, or Ermin; and for a good warm pair of Shoes, take the
skin of an Hare, which is very good against the weakness and infirmness of the
Hams; or else that of a Fox, which strengthens all the Members: Some make their
Clothes of Wool, Cotton, or Silk, for those that are made of Linen are least
of all warm. Cover well the Body by Night, especially the Head, which is the
Cell or Domicile of the rational Soul, from which are derived many
indispositions, wherefore one must take great care, that the Head be neither
too hot, nor too cold; and there be many that in the Nightime cover their
Head close with warm Clothes; for whilst a Man sleeps, the natural heat
retires to the inward parts, and the outward parts are deprived of their heat,
whence they are easily offended by the external Cold; and likewise whilst a
Man is awake, much heat, and many Spirits by the Operation of the interior and
exterior Faculties ascend into the Head, and by that means render it more hot:
Therefore there is most need in the Day to keep it cool, but in the Night warm.
One must also beware of being too much in the Sun, or near the Fire, and not to
wash the Head too often, for these hot things open, dilate, and rarifie the
parts of the Head, and more readily dispose it to receive a superfluous
humidity. In the Winter 'twill not be unuseful to sprinkle your Clothes with
this sort of Water: Take of Iris Florentina, or Flower-de-luce, Zedoary,
Spikenard, ana one Ounce, Storax, Mastick, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cloves, ana half
an Ounce, Juniper Berries three Drams, Behen, Amber, Musk, ana one Scruple:
Distill all these things with Wine. In the Summer take of Rose Water four
pounds, of the best Vinegar one pound, of Red Roses one handful and a half,
Camphire half a Dram, Musk seven Grains, Spice of Diambra, Flower-de-luce, ana
one Ounce; pound all these, except the Spice, the Musk, and the Camphire, and
dissolve them all in Rose Water, which being put into a Limbeck, cover it nine
days under Horse-dung. You may also make use of this Powder to sprinkle on your
Clothes, adding Rose Water. Take Red Roses, Violets, ana one Ounce, Peel or
Rind of Citron, Solanum, or Nightshade, of Myrtle, Lignum-Aloes, ana one
Ounce, Camphire, Amber, ana half a Scruple, Musk, Behen, ana five Grains, and
make of this a thin Powder. It Is also good to carry Odoriferous things in your
Hand, in the Summertime, a Sponge dipped in Rose Water, or Rose-vinegar, and
smell to it often; or carry with you this Odoriferous Ball: Take of Roses one
Dram, Red Coral four Scruples, Water Lillies one Dram and a half,
Bole-armoniack one Dram, ^^orax Calamita one Dram and a half, Lignum-Aloes two
Scruples, Mastick one Dram, L^danum two Drams, Amber, Musk, ana two Grains;
these are pounded, and so made into a Ball. In the Winter carry a Sponge
infus^d into Vinegar, wher^in steep Cloves and Zedoary: Or else carry in your
Hand this Ball of Amber. Take of Ladanum half an Ounce, Storax Calamita two
Drams, Bezoar, Mastick, ana one Dram, Cloves, Nutmegs, Crocus, Dyers-Grains,
white Wax, Lignum-Aloes, ana one Scruple, Amber half a Scruple, Musk dissolved
in Malmsey five Grains; make it into a Ball. Besides this, there is need of
defending the Breast and Stom^^k with Lamb-skin, or Hares, or with a Pillow of
Feathers, seeing that the Stomach indisposed, is the Mother of the Distemper:
Besides the Clothes which are used for the Head and Stomach make an Odor of
Saffron, Lignum-Aloes, an^ Amber, for these things strengthen the Brain; bu^
the Musk is to be left out, by reason of its to^ great Evaporation, the hands
are to be often covered with Gloves, in the Winter made of Fox-skin, in the
Summer of Hares-skin, Kids, o^ Lambs. The last thing, though not the least to
b^ observed, is, That with the greatest diligence an^ care you avoid coldness
of Hands or Feet, since that infinite Distempers are wont to proceed and flow
from thence.

CHAP. II. Of Motion.
BEcause Motion is not only requisite to the preservation of the Health, but
also very needful, toward a good habit of the Body; therefore after the Air,
it remains to treat of Exercise, the which is a most powerful and prevalent
thing to keep us in health, being that which purges and drives away the
superfluous Humors of the Body, which are in such sort dissipated and
dissolved, that there is no longer need of Physic, where this is not wanting.
There be many sorts of Motion, and that is the best which is not violent, as
Walking, but is a regular motion of the Body, as being most kindly, and most
agreeable to the Members; but that Motion which is caused in a Coach, in a
Ship, on Horseback, or the like, is the least wholesome. Some Exercises are
strong and wearisom, and others moderate, light and weak: The temperate
Exercise is that which contributes much to the Health; for it corroborates the
natural Health, wastes the Superfluities, enlivens Youth, chears old Age, and
hinders Fullness, fortifies the Senses, renders the Body light and agile,
strengthens the Nerves, and all the Joints, for the exercised Parts become more
robust. This also consolidates the Members, aids Digestion, keeps the Passages
of the Body clear and open, so that the smoaky Vapors of the Spirits may find
a better and more free issue, the which are the chiefest instruments in the
conservation of hum^ne Life, being the reason that the Food finds an ea^^^
concoction, digestion, and assimulation of Parts, and finally a cause of the
evacuation and expurgation of all the Superfluities. The light Exercises are
Fishing, Fowling, and such like Divertisements, which cheer the Mind; and as
moderate and temperate Exercise does wonderfully contribute to the Health, so
overmuch Idleness is very pernicious. Rubbings are also exceeding useful, for
they hinder the Humors from falling into the Joints; and doing it in the right
time, that is, when the Superfluities shall be evaporated from the inward
Parts, it helps Digestion, recreates the Body, and opens the Pores, whereby the
moist Humors, and Vapors of the Body, obtain an easier passage: It also
swiftly draws the Blood to the outward Parts; it thickens the subtle Bodies,
and attenuates the gross, hardens the soft, and mollifies the hard, and fi^ally
confirms the natural heat. The quantity of the Exercise reaches so far, as the
Body can bear without growing too weary, that is, till you wax hot, having a
fresh color, and begin to sweat; which so soon as you perceive, change your
Clothes, and dry well all the Members, and put on other Clothes, and if there
be any need, lie a little in Bed, and rest your self, till you shall be
refreshed, and recover new strength.

Now the time for Exercise is before Meals, having first evacuated the
Excrements of the Belly, and of the Bladder; for it is usually very bad, and
destructive to those who being but just risen from Table, with their Stomach
charged, venture on any Exercise. And as Motion and Exercise performed before
Meals, is a great preserver of Health, so if presently after Meals, it is the
source and original (...) diverse Infirmities: Therefore let all Exercise be
before Meat, to which there ought at least for some small time to succeed a
profound and quiet rest, and remisness of the Body; though from this Rule are
excepted the Rusticks and Husbandmen, who by a continual custom go to their
Exercise, (and that without any hurt) as soon as the meat is out of their
mouths; and herein is verified the saying, That it is better to exercise the
Body full than empty. After a violent Exercise, one ought to beware of catching
cold; for the Motion and Exercise having opened the Pores of the Body, the cold
easily enters therein, bringing along with it Catarrhs, and diverse other
Infirmities. Then in the morning having first gone to stool, the Friction or
Rubbing is to follow, which must be performed on the extremest or farthest
Parts of the Body, beginning at the Knees, and proceed down to the ends of the
Feet; then from the Thighs, bending at the Knees; then from the upper Ribs to
the lower; then from the Shoulders down the Back; and lastly, from the Arms to
the Hands: And this to be done with a Napkin or Towel, lightly rubbing your
Body, till the skin wax something red. In old Men the motion of their superior
Members, as the Arms and the Shoulders, is most necessary, because it diverts
and prohibits the Humors from falling into the lower Parts. And on the
contrary, the rubbing Exercise of the Feet, or the washing them with Water
alone, does accelerate and hasten the Gout in old Men: When it being requisite
that they should sometimes wash their Feet, let them take weak Lie, wherein let
there be boiled red Roses and a little Salt; in this let them wash their Feet,
at such time as the Fits of the G^^t be not upon them. Likewise it would be
good for them to pull off their Shoos and Stockings themselves, without the
help of their Servants, which things moderately exercise the Body, and stir up
the Heat and Spirits. And by the way, I cannot but disapprove of the binding
the Stockings with the Garters; it is rather far more commodious and wholesome, to
wear Drawers and Stockings of one entire piece; for binding the Legs hard,
causes several pains, and hinders the Heat, Blood and Spirits, from circulating
and descending into the Joints, whence they are weakened, and apt to receive
diverse Distempers. Furthermore, it is very profitable in Coughing, to spit, and
cast out the Excrements of the Body: Besides this, before any Exercise, in the
Morning as soon as you are up, rub well your Head, and comb it with an ivory
Comb, from the Forehead upwards to the Crown, giving it at least forty Combs;
then with a rough Cloth, or a Sponge, rubbing your Head, it dispels all the
Superfluities which are there lodged; for thereby the Spirits are rarefied, and
the passages of the Head opened, and the smoaky Vapors are more freely
evacuated: Which thing corroborates all the interior Faculties, that is, the
thinking, the imaginative Virtues, and the Memory; and the use of a Comb does
wonderfully restore the Sight, especially in the mean time looking in a Glass,
the which excites all the animal Virtues, chiefly the Sight; and the combing
the Head oftentimes a day, draws the Vapors to the upper Parts, and easily
removes them from the Eyes; but in combing, do not keep the Head too open. Then
with another Comb, comb the Beard, the which cut often, because (...) chears,
and causes a readiness of Mind. It is expedient likewise to sneeze, after this
universal Evacuation, snuffing up into the Nose a little powder of Pepper, or
other Snuff. Lastly, it is a necessary thing to wash the Face and Hands,
according to this rhiming or Leonine Verse, Si fore vis sanus, ablue saepe
manus.

The washing the Face refreshes a Man, and makes the Heat to retire by
Antiparistasin, and then uniting it self, it becomes more strong. In the Winter
wash with the decoction of Sage, or Rosemary, sometime steeped in Wine; in the
Summer fresh Water is most agreeable, whereto add a little Rose water, with a
little Soap, or rather a perfumed Wash-ball. The Hands ought to be often
washed, for they are the Instruments which keep clean the Organs, whereby the
Superfluities of the Brain issue forth, as are the Ears, the Eyes, and the
Nostrils; and therefore is said, Lotio post mensam tibi confert munera bina,
Mundificat palmas, and lumina reddit acuta.


But after Meals you should not wash the Hands with hot Water, for it breeds
Worms in the Belly; and the reason is this, because the hot Water does extract
and draw forth the natural Heat, whence it happens, that digestion and
concoction of the Food becomes imperfect, the which is a powerful occasion of
the Worms. The Eyes also are to be washed with fresh Water, which cleanses them
from all Gum and Filth; and putting the Eyes into cool fresh Water open, does
wonderfully clear and purify the Eye-^^^ht, afterward drying them with a very
clean and perfumed Towel. Take care also that your Teeth be very clean, which
for want of well rubbing and cleansing, cause a naughty and stinking Breath,
and the superfluities of the Teeth being mixed with the Food, does breed
corruption, and renders it putrified: Besides which, the rotten Teeth do send
to the Brain an infectious Vapor; and nothing is better to keep the Teeth
white and clean, than to wash them twice a Month with Wine, wherein let there
be boiled a Root of Tithymalus, or Spurge. And now to wash the Head sometimes,
we ought not to take that old Italian Proverb or Sentence for our Guide, viz.
Si lavano spesso le mani, raro i piedi, et non may il capo: That is, we must
often wash our Hands, seldom our Feet, and never our Head. But that Maxim is
not good; for washing the Head sometimes does greatly strengthen the Brain,
especially if in the Wintertime you wash it with sweet Lie, wherein let there
be boiled some Sage, Bettony, Staechas, or French-Lavender, Camomil, Myrrh, and
a little odoriferous Wine; and use also Wash-balls made of the Soap of Venice,
or Damascus, about two ounces of the Larch-tree, or Agaricon, (a kind of
Mushroom growing upon high Teees of a white color, very good for the Head) one
ounce; of Ladanum, three drams, of Cloves and Spikenard, ana two scruples, with
oil of Myrtles, and with these Ingredients make a little Ball for your use. In
the Summer boil with your Lie dry Roses, and instead of the Soap, take the yelk
of an Egg fresh and lukewarm. Having washed the Head, your next care must be to
dry it as soon as you can with warm Clothes, so that there remain (...) wetness
or moisture, for the Brain is naturally most humid, and therefore Nature has
given it so many vents and passages, whereby it may evacuate all the moist
superfluities. Moreover, when you have washed your Head, you should beware of
exposing it too soon to the open Air, and therefore it is better to wash it in
the Evening before Supper; but first of all you ought to seek God's assistance
by Prayer, who is the most skilful Physician both of Body and Soul, and without
his gracious and benign influence all Medicines are vain and useless. Then
going abroad, begin some easy, pleasant Exercise, till you perceive a moderate
sweat spread it self over all your Body; the most robust Exercise is rather to
be performed in the Morning, than Afternoon: And here it is worth your
Observation, that as a temperate use of Exercise does mightily aid and
contribute to the preservation of the Health, so overmuch is very destructive
to the Health; and so as Motion before Meals is very necessary and wholesome, so
if done immediately after Meals, draws the Humors through all the parts of the
Body, and the juice which remains as yet raw in the Stomach; whence proceed
diverse and sundry Infirmities.

After Dinner therefore no Exercise is convenient, but a quiet composure and
stilness of the Body is most requisite, especially for one hour after Dinner,
after which a little walking is not amiss, for the better digesting and jogging
down the Victuals to the bottom of the Stomach. Lastly, those Exercises are
best which are performed in the open Air, rather than in Houses; in the Sun,
than in the Shade; and in the shade, either of a Wall, or of sweet smelling
Arb^^rs, are more beneficial, than under any roofed place. Those that by some
Accident or other cannot walk, let them ride in a Horse-Litter, in a Coach, or
Sedan, so that they may in some manner have exercised themselves before Meals;
for by Idleness the Stomach is dulled and blunted, but by Motion it is
enlivened, and receives a better Appetite to its Victuals. Therefore the Body
being sufficiently exercised, repose your self, to the end that the
perturbation ceasing, the Heat and the Blood are recreated (then you may
venture to eat) which whilst they are in revolution, draw the crude Humors to
the Bowels, which do thereby remain very much obstructed. Besides this, we
ought not to neglect the Exercise of the Mind; for a^ the Body with Exercise is
rendered strong and robust, so the Mind is nourished by Studies, and acquires
fresh vigor, and many by a continual Exercise of the Mind, have freed their
Bodies from the greatest Distempers. The Exercises of the Mind are Speculation,
Singing with Musical Instruments, applying your self to some Study, as History,
Theology, etc. for these things delighting the Mind, feed it in such sort, that
all the Virtues become more strong, and better enabled to resist and overcome
Infirmities: And these Exercises performed at due times, that is, after a
perfec^ Concoction of your Victuals, both nourish and corroborate the Mind, and
render the Memory quick and lasting; and hence proceeds that the Learned Men
are most fit and apt to Govern in the Commonwealth. But if out of Season, it
hinder^ Digestion, heaping up and contracting many Superfluities, occasioning
various Opilations, and oftentimes beg^^ting putrid Fevers. And furthermore, if
Ol^ Men should be continually-idle, without any Exercise, Old Age being it self
a putrefaction, by adding putrefaction thereto, they become so much the more
putrefied, withered, and dry; but by Exercise they may live a long time, whence
it happens that we hear this grave Sentence in every ones mouth, That the study
of Health consists in these things chiefly, viz. in not satiating or cloying
ones self with Food, and in not being averse from Labor, and that Exercise,
Food, Drink, Sleep, etc. ought all to be moderate.

CHAP. III. Of Rest.
AS an immoderate Exetcise does very much endamage the Health, so on the other
side does Idleness and overmuch Rest, which does not only offend the Body, but
also weakens the Understanding; for whilst the Body is in Idleness and without
Action, it collects many superfluities, whence afterward infinite Distempers
arise by Crudities, Obstructions, etc. Idleness consumes and corrupts the
Strength, extinguishes the Natural Heat, and increases the Phlegm in the Veins,
fattens the Body, and weakens it. Also as by Exercise the Natural heat is
increased, and the Concoction of the Food is facilitated, so by Idleness it is
hindered and extinguished; and for this reason Idleness is numbered amongst the
chief causes of cold Diseases; and the Poet knowing how hurtful to the Health
is Idleness, says, Cernis ut ignavum corrumpunt otia corpus.
Vt capiunt vitium, ni moveantur aquae.
And Idleness not only corrupts the Body, but is also a great cause of
pernicious Thoughts, as the same Poet says: Queritur Aegestus, quare sit factus
adulter,
In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat.
However by moderate seasonable Repose the Body and Mind are recreated and
refreshed; for, Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est,
Haec reparat vires fessaque membra levat.
And Rest not only to the Body, but also to the Mind, is sometimes absolutely
necessary, when they are tired with Studies, Thoughts, or Actions; according to
another Poet, Otia Corpus alunt animus quoque pascitur illis. In brief, without
Rest, the strength and vigor of the Mind, cannot long endure; whereas on the
contrary, Rest and Repose does in a great measure aid and contribute to the
Speculation, and the profound Invention of Occult things. Rest is good after
Meals, because the Victuals reside in the bottom of the Stomach well united and
coagulated, ^^ich always happens after a good Digestion. And as to the
Phlegmatic, and those of a cold and moist Complexion, Motion is profitable; so
to the hot and choleric, Rest is most necessary. Though it is true, that too
much Rest, called Idleness, as is said before, is exceedingly destructive, both
to the Body and Mind, but especially to the Mind; for it makes Men negligent,
slothful, ignorant, oblivious, and forgetful, and renders them unfit for any
Counsel, Office, or Charge in the Republic. Then the Idleness also of the Body
makes Men fat, lazy, sluggards, weak, and of a pale Complexion, cools and
extinguishes their Natural Heat, increases Phlegm, and fills the Body with
superfluities, begetting cold Infirmities, as the Gout both in the Hands and
Feet, Catarrhs, Obstructions of the Bowels, Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness, and
pains of the Arteries; therefore when at any time you are necessitated to be in
Idleness, and by some business or encumbrance you are forced to abstain from
all manner of Exercise, you must instead thereof observe a slender Diet, and
that Food which is most easy of Digestion, and Broths, which without any
trouble or difficulty are digested, and distributed through all the Body, and
cause a lubricity, or slipperiness in the Belly: And those that make use of
this Method, are to be advised, that they do not lie along, or lean on one
side, but for the most part to sit upright, whereby their Victu^ls may better
descend, and more easily be concocted: And to the end that they may the better
preserve their Health, let them regulate and conform their Diet to these Rules.

Parce mero, Coenato parum, nec sit tibi vanum,
Surgere post epulas somnum fuge meridianum.
Now, the superfluous Rest is no small hurt to the Body, therefore I advise
you, that this Rest be temperate, and not degenerate into a base sloth and
laziness, to which in a small time some grievous Infirmity will succeed; whence
we see those that are in Prison, loaded with Chains and Irons, so that they
cannot move, always incur some Distemper; for their Body grows cold, whilst by
the superfluous moisture the heat is suppressed, not being able freely to
disperse it self through the Body, the passages not only for the heat being
stopped and hindered, but also for the Victuals; whence proceeds the diminution
of the strength, and the Members become lessened, and almost dried up. And on
the contrary, a temperate and moderate Exercise dissolves all the
superfluities, and opens the ways and passages, whereby the Natural heat may
without intterruption diffuse and spread abroad it self. And therefore
Hippocrates affirms, that a moderate Exercise is above all things most
necessary to Phlegmaticks, and to those whose Constitution or Temper is cold
and moist; but to hot and choleric Persons, Rest (though not Idleness) is very
fit and commodious: But besides this, all Learned Physicians agree, that both
Exercise and Rest, if moderate, is a special means to preserve the Health, and
prolong the Life.

CHAP. IV. Of Sleep.
ALL Creatures by long fatigues and watching do waste and consume themselves,
and therefore stand in need of an alternate radical moistness, to supply the
place of that which is spent, and to renew the weakened Spirits: Now, this is
brought to pass by moderate sleeping, the commodity and good whereof is, that
it re-heats and corroborates the Members, concocts the Humors, augments the
Natural Heat, fattens the Body, heals the Infirmities of the Mind, and
mitigates and allays the troubles and sorrows of the Heart; for whilst we
sleep, the faculties of the Mind rest and repose themselves, and Nature
operates more strongly. Sleep also facilitates the digestion of the Food, which
lies in the Stomach, and not only concocts it there, but also distributes it
through the parts of the Body; for the Natural heat concenters in the inward
parts, whereby the Food is the better concocted. Lastly, sleep removes all
lassitude and weariness, caused by overmuch Watching, and therefore it is
called a Rest from all Labor, and the peace of the Mind, as is manifested in
these Verses: Somne es tu rerum placidissime, somne Deorum
Pax animi, quem cura fugit, tu pectora lenis,
Curas passa graves, and multo victa labor.
But however we must avoid a to^ prolix and superfluous sleep, which is no less
pe^nicious, than the other good and commodious; for it chills and dries the
Body, weakens the Natural heat, and breeds Phlegmatic Humors, whence
afterward proceeds much sloth and laziness, and it sends many Vapors to the
Head, which are oftentimes the immediate cause of Rheums and Catarrhs, and is
very destructive to gross and fat Bodies; in brief, it is neither good for the
Body, nor the Mind, nor for Business; he who sleeps too much, is but half a
Man, sleep rendering him in all points like a dead Man, except his digestion of
the Food; for he neither sees, nor hears, nor speaks, nor understands, and is
absolutely deprived of all Reason, the which for the time is a perfect death.
Superfluous sleep moreover, both in sound and infirm Bodies, does beget an
Asthma, or shortness of Breath, and is the constant forerunner and preparative
to an Apoplexy, Palsy, Numbness, or Lethargy, and to a Fever; and besides
those other incommodities which it brings along with it, it hinders the timely
evacuation of the Excrements, causing them to remain longer in the Vessels, or
Guts. Sleep ought to be taken at such time as the Stomach is free from all
smoaky Food, the Vapors whereof arriving to the Brain, and finding it cold and
thick, are congealed and made heavy; and then falling down, they obstruct the
sensitive passages of the Members, just as the Rain is formed in the middle
Region of the Air, by the Vapors from the Earth. Now, on the contrary, too
much watching, and want of sleep, beget overmuch heat in the Brain, and is the
cause of the Anguish of the Mind, and of a bad Digestion of the Food; for by
Watching the Natural heat, w^^^h is called the first or chiefest instrument of
the Soul, is weakened, and quits the concoction in the Stomach, leaving it
imperfect. For the Soul serves the Body whilst we see and move; and being
divided into many parts, is not free, but distributes some part of it self to
all the Members and Senses of the Body; to the Hearing, to the Sight, to the
Feeling, to the Taste, to the Walking, to the Working, and to every Faculty of
the Body; whence being altogether taken up, and employed by so many businesses,
it leaves the Food in the Stomach; and hence proceeds the Crudities, if Nature
does not succor and prevent them by necessary sleep, the which is the Rest and
sweet Repose of the Animal Faculties. Sleep is good for Phlegmetick Persons,
because it concocts the crude Humors, whence afterward is begot good Blood,
whereby a Man becomes more warm, the Natural heat being increased by the plenty
of Blood. Sleep moreover is very useful in Choleric Persons, both as to the
quiet of the Mind, and as to the correcting the Complexion of their Body. But
it is most of all requisite in Melancholy Men, seeing that it is sleep alone
can change their Distemper; for by sleep they acquire a competent stock of heat
and moisture, things that are very contrary to their Complexion. But it is most
of all hurtful to those of Sanguine Complexion. However, sleep in the daytime,
and after Dinner, is to be avoided by ^ll, unless when a Man is compelled
thereto by a Custom and Habit, or that in the precedent Night ^e has taken but
small Rest, or when he perceives (...) kind of lassitude or weariness through
all his Limbs; and in such cases he may have leave, and especially those who
have a wea^ Stomach, and cannot digest their Food; and then also they ought not
to sleep with their Head declined, nor in a Bed, but in a Chair, with their
Head lifted up, and then no longer than an hour. Now, the Diurnal sleep in
respect of the Nocturnal is always pernicious, chiefly in the Dog Days; for
then contrary Operations arise in our Body, that the sleep retracts the heat to
the inward parts, and the heat of the Air to the outward parts, and at such
time the Brain is filled with many Vapors, which afterward being united and
condensed into Water, descend to the inferior parts, and increase the Rheum;
and falling into diverse parts of the Body* they are distinguished by several
names, as is demonstrated by these Verses: Ad pectus si Rheuma fiuit, tunc dico
Catarrhum,
Ad fauces Bronchos, ad nares dico Corizam.
And other evil Accidents do attend such an irregularity; therefore the Divine
Providence has se^ apart the Day for Business and Labor, and the Night for
Rest and Sleep; so that to sleep in the Daytime is to invert the Order of
Nature, an^ disposes the Body to receive innumerable Infirmities; it begets
Catarrhs, ill color in the Face renders the Milt heavy, offends the Nerves
causes Laziness, Imposthumes, and Fevers: An^ besides, who would deprive
themselves (by (...) kind of a voluntary Death) of the glorious ligh^ of the
Sun, and Day, which was created for Man to enjoy, to do whatsoever is
requisite, to follo^ his Affairs, etc. whereas the Night being dark obscure,
and silent, is only fit for Sleep, both for the coolness (...) the Air, and
also for the quiet and tranquillity of the Body and Soul, for then no noise or
rumors interrupt and disturb our Sleep; and therefore it is said; Si vis
incolumem, si vis te reddere sanum,
Curas toll graves, somnum fuge meridianum,
Parce mero, coenato parum, nec sit tibi vanum,
Surgere post epulas, irasci creed profanum,
Nec mictum retine, nec comprime fortiter anum.


But if any necessity (as is said) compels a man to sleep in the day time,
either by reason of night-watching, or to restore decayed strength, he may
venture to sleep a little in the daytime, for the heat being withdrawn to the
inward Parts, causes a better Concoction. But one may sleep in the long days
sitting on a leather Chair, with the Head lifted up, but not bowed backwards or
forward, but on one side, which thing causes less Evaporation to the Brain; but
ft is not good to sleep in a soft and delicious Bed, nor perfumed with Musk, or
Amber, or Lignum Aloes, because there is too much ado, especially when no good
but rather hurt proceeds from thence, for it offends the Brain, and makes the
Head heavy: One ought also to avoid the contrary extreme, and not to sleep upon
Boards, or other hard things, which will break some Vein in the Breast.

Note, That you ought not to sleep a-nights with the Head, Arms, or Feet
uncovered, for the coldness of extreme Parts of the Body are very hurtful, and
destructive to the Brain. You must also take this Caveat along with you, that
is, not to sleep in a Room whereto the R^^s of the Moon have a free access, for
there is sc^^ce any thing more pernicious to the Head, and are a greater cause
of Catarrhs, than if you should sleep in the open Air. Besides this, it is not
good to sleep presently after Food, but to tarry at least two hours after, and
the longer the better, for thereby the Victuals will be the better concocted.
It Is yet more pernicious to sleep immediately after Dinner than after Supper,
for then a man is wakened out of his Sleep before that his Head can concoct, or
dispose of the Vapors which arise from his Food. It Is furthermore noxious to
sleep with an empty Stomach, because it weakens the force of the Body; and in
sleeping you should not make too many turns, for it causes the corruption of
the Victuals in the Stomach, increases the Superfluities, and lastly, hinders
the digestion of those matters, and the sending of them to their natural
Places. So likewise sleeping with the Face upwards is greatly to be avoided,
for it offends the Back and the Reins, hinders the Breathing, and is a
Preparative to the noxious distempers of the Nerves, or Sinews; for the
Superfluities go to the nape of the Neck and Backbone, and to the back-Parts,
so that they cannot be purged out by the Nose, nor the Mouth, nor by the other
usual means, though it is true, that when we be troubled with any pain or
infirmity of the Reins, it is best to sleep on the Back. The manner of Sleeping,
to the end that Victuals may better descend to the bottom of the Stomach, is to
begin your Sleep on the right side, continuing so the space of two hours; then
to turn your self on the left side for a longer space, which mightily aids
Digestion; for then the Liver embraces the Victuals, as a Hen her Chickens, and
lies directly ^^der the Stomach, like a Fire under a Cauldron, and so is caused
a more ready and better Digestion: Afterward in the end of your Sleep, you
must turn on the right side again, to the end that the Food may more easily
descend from the Stomach to the Liver, and that the superfluity of the first
Digestion may find a more free passage to the Entrails. But when the Stomach is
weak, the which you may know by the coldness which is perceived in its region,
by all the sharp and sour Humors, and by the Spittle after the Food, which is
insipid, and without taste, then it is better to begin your Sleep lying on your
Belly, for such Sleep corroborates the Face, the Breast, and the Digestion;
though it is naught for them who are troubled with Rheums in the Eyes, because
it adds more Matter and Humors thereto: But at such time 'twill be better to
apply to the Stomach a Pillow of soft Feathers and little, such as those of a
Vulture; or instead of Feathers, you may fill the Pillow with the clippings of
Scarlet. And amongst the things, which do mostly contribute to the expulsion of
that coldness of the Stomach, is to hold embraced a fleshy Child, or a little
fat Dog, which heating the Stomach do greatly aid Digestion. The quantity of
Sleep ought to be taken till the Concoction in the Stomach is perfected, which
may be known by the Urine, which when it looks clear as Water, d^es demonstrate
that there remains some Crudity, or raw Juice in the Veins, and therefore
requires a longer Sleep; but when the Urine is of a Limmor, or bright yellow
color, it shows that the Juice is fully concocted, and then that Sleep is
sufficient.

But this time of Sleep is varied according to the diversity of the
Complexions, of ^^e Age, and of the Time: For those that are of a hot
Complexion, digest their Victuals quickly, and for such six hours Sleep is
sufficient; but those of a cold Constitution, (the digestive faculty being but
weak in them) stand in need of a longer Sleep: Whence six hours Sleep is enough
for any young Man, but for old Men, eight or nine hours at least; and it is
always better that the Sleep should rather be too long, than a superfluous and
overmuch Waking, whereby the Brain is weakened, whence many phlegmatic
Superfluities arise. And the Signs of a sufficient Sleep is a Lightness and
Agility, which spreads it self over all the Body, and chiefly in the Brain, and
the descent of the Food from the Stomach, and a desire to ease Nature, both of
it and of the Urine, and a cessation of the weariness, caused by the fore-past
waking; whereas the contrary Signs, that is, a heaviness of the Body, and
Belches, which savor of the Victuals, signify that more Sleep is required,
the other not being sufficient. And you must know in brief, that a moderate
Sleep restores the animal Faculties, helps the concoction of the Victuals, and
of the crude Humors, causes a forgetfulness of Labor, and all sorrowful
Thoughts, mitigates the grief of the Mind, moistens all the Members of the
Body, restores all the wasted Faculties, augments the natural Heat, increases
the radical Moisture, clarifies and strengthens the Sight, takes away
Weariness, refreshing the tired Bodies, and keeps back Fluxes and Rheums. But
if took immoderately, it makes the Head heavy, troubles the Mind, weakens the
Memory, and all the animal Faculties, makes the Body cold, multiplies Phlegm,
extinguishes the natural Heat, in^^ces a Nauseating, makes the Face pale, and
is hurtful to all phlegmatic Distempers. Now when a man has taken but small
Rest, and cannot sleep, let him at least take some repose with his Eyes shut,
which may supply the place of Sleep, and is almost as effectual. It Is
observable besides, That in old Men, whose Stomach is cold, and Liver hot, it is
necessary to begin their Sleep on the left side, for so the Stomach is heated,
and the Food better concocted, the Stomach being fomented by the Liver, and on
the contrary, the Liver being cooled.

CHAP. V. Of Waking.
WAking is an intension, or rather an extension of the Soul, and the faculties
thereof, to all the Parts of the Body, which when it is moderate, stirs up and
excites all the Senses, disposes and orders the vital Faculties to their
operation, expelling and driving forth all the superfluous Humors from the
Body, but if immoderate and excessive, it begets Distempers in the Head,
corrupts the temperature of the Brain, causes Madness, kindles the Humors,
excites sharp and acrimonious Infirmities, makes men look lean and
hunger-starved, of a pale and thin Complexion, weakens the concoctive
Faculties, dissolves the Spirits, fills the Head with Vapors, makes the Eyes
hollow, increases Heat, and inflam^^ the Choler, hinders Digestion, and causes
Crudities in the Stomach, because the natural Heat betakes it self to the
outward Parts: And therefore let this be your Rule, that both Sleep and Waking
be always moderate.

CHAP. VI. Of Fullness.
FRom the eating of Food are collected many Superfluities, of which a great
part is spent and consumed, (as we have showed in its place) by Exercise; it is
necessary therefore by some artifice to drive the remnant out of the Body. Now
these Superfluities be diverse, according to the different Places whence they
proceed, as Spittle, Snot, Sweat, Urine, dregs of the Belly, and other
sordities or filthiness of the Body, which if not driven out, are wont to beget
many Infirmities, as Obstructions, Fevers, Pains, and Impostumes; for which
reason we ought with all diligence to procure their Evacuation, for all those
Distempers which proceed from Fullness, are cured by Evacuation; as on the
contrary, those which are derived from Emptiness, are cured by Fullness. However
superfluous Evacuation is to be forbidden, for by it the natural Heat and the
Spirits are dissolved, for then their virtues are not powerful enough in their
operations; and the emptiness of the Stomach c^^ses the Epilepsie, or
Falling Sickness. We must therefore chiefly advertise you, that the
Superfluities and Excrements of the Belly, and the Urine, every day morning and
evening, or at least once a day be evacuated, for it is very necessary for ones
health to keep the Body loose; and this is most profitable in the pains of the
Gout, Stone, or Gravel in the Kidneys. This is done either by Art or Nature,
with common Glysters, or with Oil alone, or with a Suppository of Honey or
Salt, of Butter, or of Soap; and you must not suffer these Superfluities to
remain too long in the Belly, for they are very destructive both to the Head,
and to all the Body. Every time therefore that a man shall perceive any
heaviness in his Entrails, or in the Bladder, or in any other Place where the
Superfluities are gathered together; and every time that he thinks there is a
necessity thereof, let him suddenly excite Nature, and stir up a desire of
sending it forth; for we see in many, that having for some time retained their
Urine, they could not afterward make Water, and have caused the Stone,
Ruptures, etc. as likewise the keeping back of the Excrements, or the Wind,
have occasioned Cholick pains: And therefore the Schola Salerni thus speaks
thereof; Nec mictum retine, nec comprime fortiter anum,
Et
Quatuor ex vento veniunt in ventre retenta,
Spasmus Hydrops, Colica, and Vertigo, hoc res probat ipsa.


We ought with all our might to avoid the superfluous repletion of Victuals and
Drink, because they beget and foment many Evils, for from the overmuch Fullness,
the natural faculties in the Stomach are weakened and oppressed, as on the
contrary being empty, it causes the Falling Sickness. The Vessels when they are
too full of Meats and Drinks, are in great danger either that they burst, or at
least the natural heat is thereby suffocated; and in fat and big Bodies, a
moderate abstinence is very necessary; and therefore the Gluttons do not grow
at all, because their Meat does not digest it self, whence the Body is not
nourished: And therefore the Philosopher being asked, Why he did eat so little;
answered, Vt vivam edo, non ut edam vivo: Or according to the Italian Proverb,
which is, Mangiar e ber per viver far mistiere,
Ma non gia viver per mangiare e bear.
That is, We do not live to eat, but eat to live. For how many men be there,
who being superfluously full, are in the end choked and killed thereby? and
nothing is worse than overmuch stuffing or cramming ones self, in such time
when things are all plentiful; and it is often seen, that many who in a dearth
or scarcity wanting Victuals, when things grow cheap and abound, do presently
kill themselves, by too greedily eating. If therefore at any time by a
disordinate and irregular Appetite, you should chance to over-eat your self,
and that you perceive a nauseating and heaviness in the Stomach, which is
occasioned either by the quality or quantity of the Food, then presently
endeavor to vomit it forth, the which cleanses the Sto^ach, and takes away the
heaviness of the Head. ^o less ought we to avoid too much abstinence from our
Food; for as too much fullness suffocates the natural hea^, so emptiness
dissolves it, whence afterward diverse and sundry Infirmities proceed.

CHAP. VII. Of Baths.
BAthing is one kind of Evacuation; for being made of hot Water, they heat and
moisten, take away all weariness, lessen the repletion or fullness of the Body,
ease and mitigate the pains, mollify, fatten, are good for Children, and for
old persons before Meals, because they draw the nourishment to their Members,
and corroborate them, and contribute to the dissipating their Superfluities,
and driving them forth; and the Excrements of old persons being salt, Bathing
does temperate them. The bathing in Wine is good for the pains in the Joints
and Nerves, the Palsy, Tremblings. Bathing in Oil does wonderfully contribute
to the healing of the Spasmus, Cramp, (or convulsion of the Nerves) in old men;
as also against Cholick pains, gravel in the Kidneys, and stoppages in the
Urine. Coming out of the Bath, you must dry your self with a hot Towel in the
Winter, afterward anoint all the Body with the oil of sweet Almonds, or of
Anise, or Camomil, then pare the Nails, and shave the soles of your Feet. The
Senses are also comforted and strengthened in a sweet smelling Bath, wherein may
be boiled a sprig or two of Sage, and with this hot wash your Hands and Eyes
onc^ or twice a day: Old men ought also to be often chewing of Sage first washed
in Wine, which to the Teeth and the Nerves is exceeding good. We must take heed
too of staying too long in the Bath, for that weakens and dissolves the
Strength, confounds the Intellect, causes Nauseating, Vomits, and the Syncope,
or swooning Fits; whereas staying in no longer than is necessary, it opens the
Pores of the Skin, draws the nourishment to all the Members, begets an
Appetite, attenuates the gross Humors, diminishes the Repletion, dissolves
Windiness, takes away Weariness, mitigates Pains, provokes Sleep, binds the
Belly: It Is bad for fat men, for in them it collects the Humors, and
afterward attracting them to each part of the Body, causes Impostumes. In
short, going to the Bath, remember that: Balnea, Vina, Venus corrumpunt corpora
nostra,
Conservant eadem Balnea, Vina, Venus.
Et
Siquis ad interitum properet, via trita patebit,
Huc iter accelerant Balnea, Vina, Venus.


CHAP. VIII. Of Rubbing.
FRictions or Rubbings are very useful for the conservation of the Health, and
chiefly for old men; and the operation and effects which proceed from thence
are very great; for they hinder that the Humors do not fall into the Joints,
and help Digestion, and if performed in due time, (that is, having first eased
the Body of its Excrements) chears the Body, opens the Pores, whereby the
Superfluities are more easily evaporated, because it swiftly draws the Blood to
the exterior Parts, thickens the slender Bodies, and attenuates the big,
mollifies the hard, and hardens the soft, and finally kindles and corroborates
the natural Heat, and excites the vital Faculties, whence the distribution and
concoction of the Food is more easy and ready: And the Rubbing ought to be
performed until it shall become delightful and pleasant; and it is very
convenient for old men in the Summer and Autumn, if they first void the
Excrements out of the Bladder and Belly; if old men by reason of their weakness
or some occupation, cannot perform any Exercise, instead thereof let them use
short and moderate Rubbing, as is said before.

It would be no hurt moreover, if at Spring, or in the fall of the Leaf, after
the Equinox, with the counsel and advice of some learned and able Physician,
you purge your self of those Superfluities, which remaining behind, do often
give one some annoyance in Summer or Winter.

CHAP. IX. Of Venery.
THE chief end of venereal Pleasures, and carnal Copulation, ought to be the
procreation of Children, which likewise is to be performed with none but a
lawful Consort, joined by holy Matrimony; and its use also ought to be
moderate, and so it glads the Heart of man, stirs up the natural Heat, makes
the Body light, mitigates the passions of the Mind, enlivens the Spirits and
Senses: But the immoderate Venery weakens the Stomach, the Head, all the
Senses, the Sinews, the Joints, and hastens Death.

Those who desire to live chastely without a Woman, let them have recourse to
Fasting. Let us seriously consider, what a wonderful invention of Nature it is
to conserve the Species, by Generation, or begetting of new Animals, it being
very reasonable that every one should give to another, that Life which he has
received from his Progenitor, and thereby obtain or procure, that his Child
should render to his Father, when he is weak and old, that which the Child has
received from him, that is, nourishment and sustentation.

CHAP. X. Of the Accidents of the Mind.
THE Passions of the Mind have great power, and do much contribute to the
changing of the Body, because they make a stirring and motion in the Humors,
and in the Spirits, and these motions immoderate and sudden are raised from the
Center of the Body to the Circumference; as Anger, Joy, etc. or from the
Circumference to the Center, as Fear, and the like, from whence proceed great
motions of the Spirits; and therefore we ought carefully to avoid such
Passions, since it dries the Body, and alters it too much, troubling it, and
changing it from its Natural Complexion; and therefore Plato calls these the
Infirmities of the Mind, viz. Anger, Joy, Sorrow, Melancholy, Anxiety, or
Anguish, Exclamation, Fury, Violence, Brawling, Contention, Hatred, Envy,
Perplexity, Fear, Shame, unpleasant Thoughts, unbridled Desires, Boldness,
Incontinence, Importunity, Iniquity, Ambition, Distrust, Hope, Despair, etc.
All which Passions, besides the great hurt they do to the Body, do also very
much offend the Mind; for Anger, and overmuch Sorrow afflict the Spirits, dry
the Bones, extenuate the Flesh, inflame and burn the Body, putting it into
confusion out of its natural state; whence afterward proceed many evils; as
Catarrhs, and Fluxes in the Joints, although these Passions when they are
moderate, are sometimes good for Men, and does not a little contribute to their
Health. For Example, Anger excites and increases the Natural heat, and
oftentimes it is good to be Angry, to repair that Natural heat, and to collect
the Blood in the Veins; and therefore in cold Infirmities Anger is to be
stirred up, as on the contrary, in hot it is to be avoided. Besides this, the
Passion of the Mind, to wit, Melancholy, weakens the Digestion, whereas Joy and
Gladness fortifies it. And this is the chiefest and truest Reason why Men, more
than all other Creatures are exposed to Crudities, because the Beasts and
irrational Animals, although they eat to satiety, nevertheless do not hinder
the Natural Virtue which concocts the Food; for the concoctive virtue and the
appetitive is equal in them; but Men by their diverse thoughts and perturbations
of their Mind, divert this Virtue from its Operation; and though they eat
moderately, yet they fall into Crudities, whence proceed many Infirmities; and
therefore a Man by all possible means to avoid the thoughts of sad and dolorous
subjects, and all other things which may any wise disturb the Mind, and always
to hope well of every thing; for to have a cheerful Mind in all Infirmities is
good, whereas the contrary is as bad; neither is it good a long while to dwell
upon Thoughts, for it is said, L' Imaginatione fa il caso. You must keep your
self also from frequent weeping, from great fury, and from an appetite or
desire of Revenge; for these things weaken the Brain, and hinder the digestion
of the Matter; so also superfluous Fear weakens the Virtues: And all these
Accidents of the Mind hinder concoction, and alter the natural state of the
Body. For Fear withdraws the Spirits and the Blood, attracting them inwardly to
the Heart, whence the Members grow cold, the Body pale, causing tremblings, the
Voice is interrupted, and the whole force of the Body is deficient; for Fear,
whilst the Evil feared is expected, causes a beating of the Heart, which
causes a commotion of the Spirits, the which being moved, disturb all the
Blood; whence afterward are occasioned Crudities and Putrefactions. Anger is a
vehement mover of Heat, which pours out it self in the outward parts with great
violence; and therefore with Anger the Face looks red, and the Body is more apt
to all Wickedness: Anger furthermore moves the Heart to Revenge, the which
moved, easily inflames the Body, and dry it, and by its fervor all the
Faculties of the Soul are confounded; and therefore it is said, Anger is an
inflammation of the Blood about the Midriff, by reason of a desire of Revenge;
and therefore those that be Angry, have a strong and big pulse, whereas the
fearful have a small and weak, because the Heat returns inward. But in these
cases, the Natural heat one while retires within, another while outward, both
one and the other of these Motions discover themselves in shame, that first the
heat retreats within, afterward comes out, which not returning, causes fear,
and not shame. If after those things which a Man suddenly suffers, if then he
grows passionate, by little and little 'twill cause sorrow, which spoils and
corrupts the Nature of Men, exte^uating, cooling, and drying his Body, darkens
the Spirits, obscures the Wit, and clouds the Judgment, weakens the Memory, and
hinders the Reason; and oftentimes by these sudden motions of the Mind is
caused sudden Death; for either the Faculties of the Mind (which consist in
heat) are dissolved, or else are extinguished by too much cold: And there are
many who have perished by overmuch fea^ and sorrow, which driving all the
Blood and Spirit^ to the Heart, suffocates the Heart, whereupon follows
immediate Death. And therefore Rutilius being denied the Consul-ship, which he
earnestly sought after, suddenly expired: And the same thing happened to Marcus
Lepidus, by a superfluous grief after the Divorce from his Wife. We read
likewise that many by an excess of Joy have died, as also by sudden grief or
fear, though never any by too much Anger. By a great and sudden Joy the Animal
Spirits being loosned, are transported to the external parts, and dissolve
themselves; and thence the Heart being forsaken and destitute of the Blood and
Spirits, grows cold, whereby many, especially those that are very timorous and
cowardly, have lost their Lives. Many others moreover, have died of shame, as
is read of Homer and Diodorus; for which cause these Passions of the Mind ought
always to be used with a certain Mediocrity, or Moderateness; and chiefly Joy
ought to be accompanied with a moderate Laughing, which thing excites the
Natural heat, temperates and purifies all the Animal Spirits, corroborates the
other Faculties, aids Digestion, clears and subtilates the Wit, and renders a
Man able for all Businesses, preserves Youth, and finally prolongs the Life;
and Joy is good for all Persons, except such as have need to become lean,
because it fattens the Body, and multiplies the flesh and moisture. In short,
nothing is more necessary for the conservation of the Heart, than to live
gladly and merrily; not to trouble ones self, or be angry, always to have a
good hope of Health, let all these things be done moderately, for Mediocrity
ought always to be your aim; and therefore says Hippocrates, let your cares and
fatigues, your eating and drinking, sleep, and Venereal Pleasures, let all
these things be moderate: for, Est modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines,
Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum.


That Man therefore that loves his Health, let him delight in Gardens, frequent
green and pleasant places; let him converse with merry and jocond Friends, with
Music and Songs; for by these things the Spirits are restored, and as the
force and strength of a Man is increased by good Victuals, Wine, sweet Smells,
by Tranquillity and Gladness, by flying of Cares and troublesome Affairs, which
render a Man sad; and by frequenting the Company of merry Companions; so
likewise it is good to hear Stories, Tales, and pleasant Discourses, and to
read some delightful Subject; and in reading, great care is to be taken not to
read with the Head in the Bosom, but lifted up, and to read with Spectacles or
a Magnifying-Glass, which strengthens the sight. Besides this, it much
contributes to man's delight to keep Singing-Birds. No less pleasant and wholesome
is it to enjoy a sweet and clear Air, to walk sometimes in the Fields, to rise
betimes in the Morning, than which there is nothing in the World that chears
and glads the Heart of Man; and (as A^istotle witnesses) does wonderfully
contribute to the Health, and to the Studies. Finally, in Trouble and Adversity
let a Man defend himself from slackness and dejection of Mind; as likewise in
Prosperity from an extreme Joy, which knows no bounds; as the Lyrick Poet
Horace does well advise us in these Verses: Rebus angustis animosus atque
Fortis appare, sapienter idem
Contrahes vento nimium secundo
Turgida vela.
Et
Aequam memento rebus in arduis
Servare vitam, non secus in bonis
Ab insolenti temperatam laetitia.


We ought therefore with all care well to compose our Mind, endeavoring with
all our power to know the Truth, for this is the Ambrosia of the Gods, whereby
the Mind is nourished; and by the frequency of good Studies to consolidate and
establish the affectionate motions of the Mind, to the end, that sorrow and
other ill Desires and Passions may be expelled and driven forth; for we ought
not to suffer them to have so great predomination over our wills, that they
shall be able to bias our Affections, and turn them out of the right way, and
to destroy our Bodies; setting before our selves therefore Philosophy, which is
the Medicine of the Mind, to extirpate thence all Evils, let us be guided
thereby, borrowing from thence such Rules that may render our Life happy and
blessed.

CHAP. XI. Of Meat and Drink.
FInally, toward the preservation of the Health of Humane Bodies, Meat and
Drink are the principal Instruments, because without it neither healthy nor
unhealthy, distempered nor indistempered, are able to live; therefore there is
no question but that the use of Food is absolutely necessary; for our Bodies
being in a continual Flux, which every hour, and every moment of time does
consume and dissolve the Spirits of the Body, and likewise the Humors and the
solid parts, if another like substance instead of that which is dissolved, is
not introduced, Death will in a short while follow thereupon; to supply which
defect, the Almighty Creator of all things, by his great Benevolence has
provided for Men Meats and Drinks; and to the end, that by Food may be restored
all that which was wasted from the more dry substance; and with Drinks, all
that was diminished from the Humid substance. In Food therefore it is
considered the goodness, the quantity, the custom, the choice, the order, the
time, the nature, the place, and the Age.

First therefore the Goodness; and therefore that is good Food which is light,
and of subtle Digestion, easily concocted, and in a short time descends from
the Stomach, and is of good Juice; that Food is of good Juice which begets good
Blood, and good Blood is that which is temperate in the first Degree, not too
thin nor too thick; not sharp nor biting, not bitter, not salt, nor sour: The
good Food is that which is easily digested, and such are those that have a
tender substance, and are easily dissolved, as Eggs, flesh of small Birds, to
wit, of Pheasants, Hens, etc. but those Foods are of a difficult digestion
which have a contrary substance, such as are Foods made of Paste or Dough,
unleavened or hard Bread, Coleworts, Old Cheese, Beans, Lupins, Garlic,
Onions, and the Entrails of Birds or Beasts, such things are to be avoided.
Choose therefore those Foods which with their wholesome and laudable Juice
restore the radical Moisture; or else let them not be gross and excrementious:
For the Natural Heat, if weak, especially of Old Men, cannot digest Meats of an
heavy and gross substance; and on the other side, let not the Meat be weak,
that is, of small Nourishment; for such cause a shortness and diminution of our
Lives.

The Quantity of Foods is corrupted by the abundance of it; for so much Food
ought to be taken, as the strength can conveniently bear; that is, whereby it
may be restored, and not over-loaden or pressed down, and that may be easily
digested; for the Natural heat being weak and infirm, it cannot be concocted,
and thereupon follow many Distempers; and therefore it is said, those that eat
large Meals ought not to be merry and jocond; for though they do not find the
punishment thereof at present, yet they can never long escape the danger. Let
therefore the use of Foods be moderate; for as Gluttony is destructive, so an
extraordinary abstinence is no less hurtful: He therefore that studies the
preservation of his Health, let him never eat to satiety, but so, that after
Dinner he may perceive some relicts of an Appetite remaining; for he that does
otherwise, shall suffer all Acids, choleric Fluxes above and below, a loathing
of your Food, a loss of the Appetite, heaviness of the Head, pain of the
Stomach, Obstructions of the Liver and the Milt, Dissentery, or Bloody Flux,
and finally, Malignant Fevers.

And therefore it is better always to leave something to Nature; for those
which fill themselves too much, do greatly endanger their Lives, and thereby
either the Natural heat is suffocated, or some Vein is broken; for from too
much Food proceed several Infirmities, and from those Infirmities Death.

Observe therefore in every thing, but especially in your Diet, this good and
laudable Proverb, viz. Nequid nimis, Too much of one thing is good for nothing;
which ought to be a Maxim not only for the Sick, but also for those that are in
Health; and the former ought always to observe a strict Rule and Measure of
their Diet, for different Infirmities require different measures of Food; for
in long and Chronical Distempers there is need of a more hearty and large Diet,
whereas a more slender is requisite in sharp and acute Distempers, or when the
Disease shall be in its height and prime, it is good to use an harmless and
least nourishing Food; but we ought always to observe how much the strength can
bear, and how long it is able to subsist with this sort of Food.

The Quality of the Food, as well in Healthy as in Sick Persons, is known by
the Complexion, the which in the former is to be preserved by Food of a like
temperament; but in the latter, that is, in distempered People, Food of a
contrary quality is requisite; so that with a moist Complexion dry Meats do
agree, and on the contrary, moist Foods with a dry temperament; and therefore
moist Foods are convenient for those that are of a moist Constitution, as
Children; or for those that are troubled with some dry Distemper, to wit,
Fevers or Agues. Such Foods therefore are to be chosen, which according to the
variety of each Complexion is convenient. Let those of a Sanguine Complexion
avoid hot and moist Meats, and such as beget much Blood; let Choleric Persons
shun such Food as produces Choler, and so likewise the Phlegmatic and
Melancholy Men, let them defend themselves from those things which beget the
like Humors; and therefore the Sanguine and Choleric Men are to abstain from
all sweet things, as Honey, Sugar, Butter, Oil, Nuts, and the like; and rather
to make use of Vinegar, Verjuice, the sour Juice of Limons, Citrons, and
Pomegranats. Moreover, the Food ought not to exceed in any quality; for those
which exceed in heat, dry up the Blood, as Sage, Pepper, Garlic, Nasturtium,
or Watercresses, and the like; and if that heat shall happen to be watery, as
in Melons, it causes putrefaction; and if poisonous, as in the Mushromes, it
often kills a Man; if moist, it putrefies, and opilates; and if the heat shall
be dry, it consumes and weakens the Body. But if the Food is too cold, it
mortifies and congeals, as Lettices, Purslain, and Cucumbers: The fat and oily
Meats loosen the Belly, moisten and increase Phlegm, makes overmuch sleep, and
hinders Digestion. Sweet Foods cause Obstructions, the bitter do not nourish at
all, but dry the Blood; the salt heat and dry, opilate, and are hurtful to the
Stomach; the sharp by their heat fill the Head, and disturb the Mind, as Leeks,
Garlic, and salted Meats: The rough and astringent bind and obstruct, and
beget melancholy Blood; the sharp causes Melancholy, hurt sinewy Members, and
therefore do hasten Old Age.

The Use and Custom in our Diet is of great moment, whence the Ancients
affirmed, that Vsus est altera Natura, Custom is a second Nature: Wherefore as
in the Food it is good to have respect to the Temper; so it is no less
necessary to observe the Custom, the which is one of the principal Roots and
Foundations in the preservation of the Health, and in the continuation of
Infirmities: But here you ought to take notice, that if such a Custom be
naught, you ought by little and little to change it into a good one, but a
sudden change is altogether to be avoided, as very dangerous; therefore it is
good to accustom ones self to every thing, to the end that a sudden change may
not in any wise be hurtful.

The Order also is to be observed in our Diet; whence Meats easy to digest,
easy to go down, and the most tender, if they are taken after Meals, swim on
top, and corrupt. The things of an easy Digestion are known by the fa^ility of
eating them; and you may conclude them such which are quickly roasted.

Such there ought always to precede Food of a contrary quality; that is, of
difficult Concoction: And if you have roast and boiled Meat together, begin
with the boiled, as being the most easy to be digested; and the same is to be
understood of soft Eggs and Milk. The things therefore of an easy digestion,
are to be taken before hard, moist before dry, liquid before solid, and
Laxatives before Astringents: All this is meant of a Stomach which is in no
wise indisposed. The Delectation likewise is to be considered; for by how much
the more pleasing the Meat is, so much the more easily it is digested, and by
the Stomach more willingly is received: But you must take notice, that you
ought not at any time yield that unwholsom Meat should be given to sick
persons, but you may sometimes permit them to have a little of such Food as
will hurt but little, and such whereof the badness may easily be corrected.

The time and season to take any Food, is when the Stomach is empty, having
quite concocted the precedent Victual; and in the Morning, before the Air grows
too hot; and in the Evening, when the Air begins to be less hot, but with
limitation, that eight hours intervene betwixt one Meal and the other: And in the
Summer you must eat in cool Places, and be thinly clothed, and free from
Sweating, but in the Winter the contrary is best. Besides, when you perceive a
good Appetite, it is not good long to defer eating; for the abstaining from
Food when you are hungry, fills the Stomach with putrid Humors, because the
Stomach at such time as it has an appetite, not receiving any nourishment
wherewithal to sustain it, does attract the circumjacent Superfluities, filling
it self with naughty Humors. The Sick in the time of their Fits ought not to
eat any thing. It Is also necessary to take notice of the time of the Year; for
in the Winter, which is cold and moist, you ought to eat libera^^y, and drink
but little, but let the Wine be strong. In the Summer, which is hot and dry,
little Food is sufficient, and very temperate. In the Spring you must eat a
little less than in Winter, but drink a little more. So in Autumn eat a little
more than in Summer, but drink less, and less Water with your Wine: And
therefore to this purpose is said; Temporibus Veris modice prandere juberis,
Sed calor Aestatis dapibus nocet immoderatis,
Autumni fructus caveas ne sint tibi luctus,
De mensa sum quantumvis tempore Brumae.


In Summer the Food is to be considered: To young Children moist Victuals best
agree; but to young men, being hot and dry, the contrary Food is most
convenient. For old men, such Food as heats is best, and moistens their solid
Parts. Moreover, Children should eat often, to render their natural Heat more
strong; but old men seldom, their Heat being weak. Infants and Children require
more Nourishment; but a lesser quantity is sufficient for middle-aged and old
Men, who can very easily undergo Fasting, but young Men hardly, and Children
not at all, especially if they be lively and vigorous.

The Climate likewise, or Place of their Growth, is to be considered in Foods,
viz. of Herbs, Fruits, and Flesh. For Muttons in Italy and Greece are not very
good, but in France and Spain are more sweet, and more wholesome: On the
contrary, the flesh of Veal and of Pigeons are in Italy better than in France
or Spain; and this proceeds either from a purer Air or sweeter Soil in those
Countries.

And lastly, the Nature of each ^ne, and the particular Propriety, is to be
considered; and therefore it is necessary that the best Physician be a
Philosopher, for some have loathed and abhorred Cheese, others Wine, others
Garlic, etc. Some that are lean, and of an hot and dry Complexion, desire to
eat two or three times a day; others that are fat and moist, are content with
one Meal a day, for to those that have a fat and big Body, two Meals a day is
very hurtful.

Besides all these things, it will not be amiss to observe in your Diet these
following Instructions.

1. Eat not to Satiety, for if you should eat more Food than the Stomach is
well able to bear, thence proceed infinite Crudities; and therefore it is
better to abstain a little, than to cram your self too full; for as it is
written, Gluttony kills more than the Sword; for the superfluous abundance of
Victuals suffocates the natural Heat, as too great a plenty of Oil puts out the
flame of a Candle; and therefore it is good to rise from the Table with an
Appetite, as it is bad to eat without an Appetite.

2. The great variety and diversity of Foods is to be avoided, because they
beget many Distempers, especially if those Foods be of contrary qualities, for
their Concoction is weakened and corrupted; and as the variety of Meats delights
the Palate, so it hurts the Health; whence a wise man being asked, Why he
contented himself with one only dish of Meat at Meals; replied, Because he
would not make work for the Physician. So that one single Food at one time is
sufficient and most wholesome, whereas the diversity of Tastes is hurtful, and
the multitude of Viands most pernicious: And therefore our Ancestors lived much
longer than we, because they never used but one simple sort of Food, that is,
Bread and Flesh, whereas we using so great an abundance of all things, our Life
is shortened, and exposed to so many Infirmities. Do not we see the Horses, the
Cows, and other irrational Creatures, how they are troubled but with few
Diseases, only by a constant use of one and the same sort of Food? And
therefore a great Philosopher coming into Italy, wondered at two things, That
the Men eat twice a day, and that they never slept alone.

3. That being at the Table, you ought not to discourse much, to the end that
the time may not be prolonged at the Table, and that the first Food may not
digest before the last, and so the parts of the Food become unequal, whence
proceeds Corruption and Putrefaction.

4. That you do remain a little while, not adding Victuals to Victuals, before
the first be digested.

5. That the Food be well chewed, for that is called the first Concoction, and
is as it were an half Digestion; whereas an imperfect Chewing hinders and
retards Digestion: One ought not therefore to swallow it down whole, as the
Gluttons do, but first chew it sufficiently, till it become very small, and
then swallow it down.

6. That all hot Meat is better than cold, especially in Winter, for the actual
heat of the Food temperates and allays the coldness of the Drink; but you must
not therefore eat the most hot. Hot Meats indeed do most please the Palate, for
Hunger being a desire of hot and dry, we always covet hot Food, whereas Thirst
being a desire of cold and moist, it requires cool things.

7. That in the Winter we use gross Meats, for at that time the natural Heat is
more united in the inner Parts; but in the Summer the contrary happens, and
therefore at such time a light and slender Food is most convenient, the natural
Heat being then but weak.

8. That the quantity of the Meat be double to that of the Drink, the Bread
twice as much as Eggs, thrice as much as Flesh, and four times as much as Fish,
Herbs and Fruits.

9. That you do not use Broths too much at Meals, for it causes the Food to
swim in the Stomach, loosning and taking away the Appetite, begets too much
moisture, whence afterward proceed diverse Infirmities; whereas those which eat
dry Meats, live much longer.

10. And lastly, Because in Meats and Drinks it is hard to perform every thing
exactly, and never to mistake. Therefore let this be your general Rule, That if
at any time you eat naughty Meat, it ought to be tempered and allayed by its
contrary.

What is to be done after Meals.
AFter eating always take some astringent thing, without drinking any thing, or
at least but a little after it, as Pears, Medlars, Quinces, Cheese, or a glass
of fresh Water; which things do as it were seal up the mouth of the Stomach,
whereby the natural Heat becomes more strong, and hinders the Vapors from
mounting up into the Head. Many take half a score Coriander-seeds sugared;
others a piece of Marmalade of Quinces, which helps Dig^stion and the weakness
of the Stomach: And after Meat it is good to walk a little, and moderately, and
then to sit down; whence is said, Post pransum stabis, aut gradu lento meabis.

Which ought to be biggest, Dinner or Supper?
MAny affirm, that the Supper ought to be larger than the Dinner, especially in
Winter, since that the Natural heat strengthens it self in the Night; but the
contrary ought to be practiced in Summer, or if a Man be indisposed and infirm,
then the Dinner is to be the largest, unless he be troubled with fits and
accessions of the Ague: For that a large Supper is more wholesome, the reason
they say is this; because the coldness of the Night recalls the Natural heat to
the inward parts, whereby the Digestion and Concoction of the Food is much
bettered; besides that, sleep does best of all concoct the Food, not only in
the Stomach, but also through all the parts of the Body; but in waking we see
the contrary happen: For the Natural heat extending it self to the exterior
parts, leaves the interior quite destitute, or at least, that which remains is
very weak. To this Opinion our Use and Custom is altogether contrary, chiefly
in those who are exposed to Catarrhs, and Phlegmatic Distempers; for at Night
the Natural heat, weary and tired by the businesses of the Day, is not so
strong and robust as in the Morning; and at Night the Food of the Morning is
not well concocted. The resolution of this doubt is, that the Supper ought to
be light, especially for them whose Bodies are subject to Night-Distempers, as
Rheums, Defluxions, and the like; besides that, from a large Supper are created
many evaporations in the Head, whereby it is not a little offended; and
therefore if the Brain be any ways indisposed, a little Supper is sufficient,
notwithstanding that there is a longer space of time betwixt Supper and Dinner,
than betwixt Dinner and Supper; and therefore that at Night a greater quantity
of Victuals will be concocted, because it is not the number of hours, but the
working of the Faculties which concocts; which in the Morning by reason of
sleep is stronger; and therefore at this time a larger proportion of Food is
more agreeable than at Night; For, Ex magna coena stomacho fit maxima poena,
Vt sis nocte levis, sit tibi coena brevis.
Coena levis vel coena brevis fit raro molesta
Magna nocet, Medicina docet, res est manifesta.


An Advertisement concerning Corn.
COrn is called by several Names, according to the several sorts thereof; viz.
Maslin, Rye, Barley, Wheat, and Spelt, etc. The good are known by their Color,
Weight, Order, and Age; for the new and green Corn is too moist, and viscuous,
and difficult to digest, and very windy. The old Corn is dry, and nourishes
little.

CHAP. XIII. Of Maslin.
Name. IT is called in Latin, Far; in English, Maslin; made of Wheat and Rye,
or Wheat and Barley.

Choice. The best Maslin is that which is fresh, and very clean.

Quality. It has the same quality as Wheat and Barley; but it is temperate in
the first Degree.

Commodity. Maslin is of great Nourishment, and therefore eaten with Meat, it
nourishes wonderfully, and fattens those that are lean, being more nourishing
than Barley; and because it is of a gross nourishment, it is good against
Fluxes and Catarrhs, as well as Rice; but boiled well in fat Broth, it softens
the Body. The Romans used it to make Bread, and it would endure many Years.

Maslin is made of Wheat and Rye, putting it to steep in Water by little and
little, afterward beat it in a Mortar, and dry it in the Sun, whereby it
thickly grinds, so that of one Grain are made four or five parts; and being
dry, may be kept a long time, and is of good Nourishment, in such manner, that
it corrects the vicious and naughty Humors of the Stomach.

Hurt. Being not well boiled and prepared it begets gross and slimy Humors,
and is windy, and if eaten by those who have a weak Stomach, it hardly digests
it self; and therefore it is not good for Old Men, and if used too often, it
very much opilates and obstructs the Liver, and causes the Gravel in the
Kidneys.

Remedy. The hurt of Maslin is corrected if it be well baked with Vinegar and
Garlic; and if it be seasoned with Honey or Sugar, it loses its clamminess,
and is easily digested; and being boiled in good Broth, it is an excellent Food
for those that are in Health; and for Sick also, provided it be moderately
eaten. In many places they make Cakes of it, which, if well seasoned, are
pleasant to the taste, and of great and good Nourishment.

CHAP. XIV. Of Wheat.
Name. IN Latin it is called Triticum; in English, Wheat.

Kinds. There be many sorts of Wheat, named from their Country, their Color,
their Quality, their Shape, from the quantity of their Ears, and from their
largeness.

Choice. The best Wheat is that which is through-ripe, thick, and hard, so that
you can scarce break it with your Teeth; and that which grows in fat Ground,
free from all mixture, full, heavy, smooth, clear, of a Golden color, and is
ripe in less than three Months time: That which is gathered in the Mountains is
the best, especially in Italy, which surpasses all the rest.

Commodity. It nourishes greatly, and its nourishment is solid, and very much
strengthens. The Flower of Wheat boiled in Milk or Water, with a little Butter,
cures the hoarseness of the Throat, lessens Coughs, is good for those that spit
Blood, heals the Ulcers in the Breast; and in Water with Honey, it mitigates
internal Inflammations.

Hurt. It is a little hard and heavy Food to digest, breeds some gross and
viscuous Humors; being not well baked, it begets Windiness, and the Stone in
the Kidneys and Bladder, and multiplies the Worms in the Belly.

Remedy. The few ill qualities of the Wheat are corrected, if it be well baked,
and seasoned well with good Spices, whereby it becomes less windy, and is much
more easily digested.

CHAP. XV. Of Barley.
Name. IN Latin it is called Hordeum; in English, Barley.

Kinds. There be several sorts thereof, as may be seen by their Grain and Ears,
different in shape, and largeness, and also in number of Grains.

Choice. The best Barley is that which is thick, weighty, smooth, white,
betwixt old and new.

Qualities. Barley is cold and dry in the first degree; besides that, it has
something of an astersive or cleansing Nature; its flower is more drying than
Bean-flower, and it nourishes much less than Wheat.

Commodity. Barley nourishes, and easily converts it self into flesh, and is of
great use in several things of Physic; it opens the opilations of the Bladder
by its abstersive faculty, and with its other qualities it allays the sharpness
of the Humors. Barley-Cakes are of a moist and abstersive quality; it may
fitly be given to feverish Persons, for it extinguishes their Thirst; it is
very good for the pains and infirmities of the Breast, and an excellent Remedy
in Hectic Fevers, because it is of a good and large Nourishment; and though it
be cold, it is nevertheless easy to be digested, and qualifies the Breast,
facilitates spitting, lessens the Cough, and cleanses the Lungs. But those are
mistaken, who desiring that it should be abstersive, throw away the decoction
thereof, and instead of it mix th^rewith Chicken-broth; for this virtue goes
away with its decoction; and when you have need of cleansing, boil the Barley
with its husk, but without that, it dries and refreshes.

Hurt. Barley is windy, and Bread made thereof begets cold and gross Humors.
Barley-broth soon grows sour; being windy, it does not at all agree with the
Stomach.

Remedy. Barley-broth being carefully boiled together with Hyssop, Spikenard,
or Cinnamon, is less windy, and more acceptable to the Stomach, and nourishes
far better, especially if you add thereto a little Sugar.

CHAP. XVI. Of Rye.
Name. IN Latin, Secale; in English, Rye.

Choice. The biggest, fullest, and most heavy Rye is the best.

Qualities. It is by Nature hot and dry; it is hotter than Barley, yet not so
hot as Wheat.

Commodity. Rye, of which Bread is made in some parts of this Kingdom, by
reason of its delicious sweetness and moisture, is frequently mixed with Wh^at.

Hurt. The Bread which is made thereof, is of an harder concoction than that of
Wheat, and windy, causing griping pains.

Remedy. If mixed with Wheaten Bread, the one qualifies the malignities of
the other.

CHAP. XVII. Of Oats.
Name. IN Latin, Avenae; in English, Oats.

Choice. The bright, long, and large Oats are esteemed the best.

Quality. They are almost of the same Nature with Rice, but cold and dry.

Commodity. They stop fluxes of the Belly, and looseness, and are very useful in
Pottages and Broths, which may be given to sick or well.

Hurt. All their hurt is, they afford but little Nourishment.

Remedy. Ale made of Oat-meal, called Oat-Ale, is very good and wholesome.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Bread.
Name. IN Latin, Panis; in English, Bread; and it is so called, because it
feeds and nourishes us; or else from the Greek word (...), because it may be
used with all sorts of Food, and is not insipid or disagreeing with their taste
and savor.

Kinds. By the substance, and several ways of baking it, the difference and
variety of Bread is distinguished.

Choice. Bread made of good Wheat, well leavened, and well baked, with a little
Salt, is the best.

Quality. It Is hot and dry in the first degree.

Commodity. Bread well made, nourishes strongly. Bread has three parts, that
is, the thick Crust, the thin, and the Pith. The thin Crust is the best, of
good solid nourishment, and very wholesome.

Fine white Bread is quickly digested.

Hurt. Bread that is not thoroughly baked, ill kneaded, and without Salt, is
very hurtful and unwholsom, especially in smoaky Cities. Unleavened Bread and
Cakes baked under the Ashes are naughty, for they cause Obstructions, and will
not easily be digested. Bread that is made of Darnel and Cockle causes the
Headache, hurts and dazles the Eyesight. Bread of Spelt is hard to be digested.

Remedy. Bread will cause no hurt, if it be always well kneaded, and moderately
salted, and baked in an Oven not overheated. These things take away any ill
quality in the Bread.

Advertisements concerning all sorts of Pulse.
ALL sorts of Pulse are little grateful and sweet to the Taste, and therefore
they are not used by all Nations: Not of any esteem among Persons of Quality,
nor are they much eaten in Germany and Greece, for they are hardly digested
either raw, boiled, or parched, and being eaten, they cause Pains in the
Joints, and the Gout; they are both windy, and inflative, or puffing, and
therefore they are not convenient by the Rules of Health, neither at the
beginning, nor end of a Meal: Not at the beginning, for it causes the other
Food which comes after, to rise in the Stomach; nor at the end, because it
begets Melancholy and bad Sleeps, causing Windiness, and all that open the
orifice of the Stomach, exhaling the Heat, and hinder Digestion: But using it
sometimes, it is to be taken betwixt other Victuals, for thereby its malignity
and naughty qualities are corrected.

CHAP. XIX. Of Vetches, or Pease.
Name. IN Latin, Cicer; in English, Chich-pease, or Vetches.

Kinds. These are red, black and white; the red sort is called Venereum,
because more than the other two it excites Venery; the black, Cicer arietinum,
because of the resemblance to a Rams-head.

Qualities. They are hot and dry in the first degree; the red are hotter than
the white; they digest, cut, cleanse, and evacuate.

Choice. Those are the best which are large full, not hollow, nor worm-eaten;
and the white serve better for Meat than Physic, but the others are more usual
in Medicines, than as ordinary Food.

Commodity. Chich-pease are of a great Nourishment, apt to loosen the Belly,
and provoke Urine, to beget Milk, and Seed, whence they excite Venery, provoke
the monthly Courses; and the Cicer arietinum more strongly provokes the Urine
than all the rest, cleanses the Liver, removes the obstructions of the Milt,
breaks the Stone, causes good Color, contributes to the Lights, purges the
Breast, clears the Voice, and facilitates Childbirth.

Hurt. Chich-pease do indeed nourish greatly, but they are windy, and if eaten
fresh, or ill boiled, beget many Superfluities in the Body, and in the
Intestines, or inward Parts, and are hurtful and very pernicious to the Reins
and the Bladder.

Remedy. They are less hurtful if they be steept in Water during the space of
one whole night, to soften them, and boiling with them Rosemary, Sage, Garlic,
and the Roots of Petroselinum, or Stone-parsley, by some called wild Alexander;
but you must rather use their Broth, than the Pease themselves, with boiled
Wine mixed therewith, and Cinnamon, but it must be eaten in a small quantity.

CHAP. XX. Of Beans.
Name. IN Latin, Faba; in English, Beans.

Choice. The Bean is that which is big and clear, shining, without Spots, and
is not Worm-eaten.

Qualities. It is cold and dry in the first degree, but the green are cold and
moist, and they are but little more than temperate in cooling and drying; they
bind, loosen, cleanse, fatten, and are windy: Beans are good at the cold time
of the year for the Countrymen, and the fresh are good for those whose Stomach
is hot.

Commodity. Beans are very nourishing, purge the Breast, and the Lungs, and
therefore are good for the Cough, and make the Voice clear: The Decoction
thereof being drunk, hinders the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder; and the Bean
by a certain propriety and quality thereof hinders the Distillations and
Defluxions from falling into the Breast, which would cause great Coughs; it
provokes Sleep, and is good against the Megrims.

Hurt. It breeds soft and spongy Flesh, having the same effects in Flesh, as
Corn in Pyes or Puddings; it swells the Body, begets cholick Distempers,
troubles all the Senses, renders the Wit gross and stupid, causes turbulent
Sleeps, and full of trouble. The green do cause very much Excrement, and
nourish more lightly, hurt those which are troubled with Pains in the Head,
beget Windiness, gross Humors and Obstructions.

Remedy. The French-bean is the most secure, and least windy. The Favetta, or
Small-bean, much used by the Italians in Lent, fried with Oil, is least windy.
Beans boiled with Salt, Origan, and Fennel, is very good; as likewise if you
boil them with an Onion, or eat that raw with them: If you boil them without
their Husks, with Leeks, adding thereto Saffron, Pepper, Cinnamon, or Cummin;
these things take away their Windiness, and do not puff up, but are more easily
digested. In short, they ought to be corrected with hot and attenuating things.

CHAP. XXI. Of Lupins.
Name. IN Latin it is called Lupinus; in English, Lupins, or Kidney-beans.

Kinds. There be two sorts of Lupins, Garden-Lupins, and wild, but these latter
are not used in Food.

Choice. You must choose those which are found, large, and heavy.

Qualities. The Lupins are hot and dry in the second degree.

Commodity. The Lupins that are first boiled, and afterward beaten in Water,
nourish best; and thus eaten, they excite the Appetite, and take away the
nauseating of the Stomach; they kill the Worms, open the obstructions of the
Liver and Milt, and make one have a good Color. The Bread is good wherewith
the flower of Lupins and Beans is mixed, sweetning first the Lupins, and drying
them in an Oven, afterward pounding them; for this being added to the flower
of Wheat, makes excellent Bread, easy to be digested, and wholesome, if it be
made and preserved well.

Hurt. They beget gross Nourishment, and are of themselves hard to be
concocted, being of an hard and earthy Substance.

Remedy. First boiled, and afterward beat in Water, they are less hurtful,
especially eaten with Salt, or some Spice.

CHAP. XXII. Of Pease.
Name. IN Latin, Pisum; in English Pease.

Choice. The fresh and tender are the best, and not Worm eaten.

Qualities. The fresh are cold in the second degree, and dry in the first, and
moist temperately: They dry something less than Beans, and refresh, nor are so
windy as Beans, and have not much of an abstersive faculty.

Commodity. They beget good Nourishment, and they are eaten as the Beans, but
they are different in this, that Pease are not so windy or abstersive, and
therefore are not so easily evacuated out of the Body as Beans; but boiling
Beets with them, they loosen the Body. The fresh or green Pease are very
pleasant to the Taste, stir up the Appetite, cleanse the Breast, expel Coughs;
they are good for an Asthma, and all the Distempers of the Breast: these fresh
may be dried in the shade, and eaten in Winter, for they are very agreeable to
the Palate.

Hurt. They beget Windiness. The fresh Pease eaten with their Cods, are
laxative, cause Sighs, and induce strange Thoughts; they do not digest very
well; and are hurtful to those that have weak and loose Teeth.

Remedy. Let them be well boiled with Salt, and with much Oil, afterward
sprinkling a little Pepper on them, and juice of Orange, or other sharp Fruits;
but oil of sweet Almonds is the true sauce of Pease.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Rice.
Name. IN Latin, Oriza; English, Rice.

Choice. The largest and whitest Rice is counted the best.

Qualities. It is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second; it is
something costive, and moreover it stagnates, is abstersive, and has a kind of
sharpness in it.

Commodity. Rice is boiled in fat Broth, whereby it nourishes sufficiently, and
is pleasant to the Palate. It binds the Body, cures Fluxes, is a temperate
Food, and it fattens a man; boiled with Milk, it is more nourishing: It is good
for the Pains in the Stomach, and griping of the Guts, if it be boiled with Oil
or Butter; being seasoned with Almonds, and Milk, and Sugar, it increases the
Seed, nourishes better, but it is gross and difficult to be digested; given to
Hens it will make them lay more Eggs. Of the flower of Rice, the white part of
the flesh of Capons, milk of Almonds, juice of Oranges and Sugar, hereof is
made by the Italians a pleasant Food called Bianco mangiare, or White-meat.

Hurt. Rice being too long time used, causes Obstructions, and being windy, is
hurtful to those that are troubled with Cholick pains.

Remedy. The badness of Rice is removed, if you first wash it, and infusing it
into the decoction of wheaten Flower, after boil it in fat Broth, or in Cows
milk, or milk of sweet Almonds, putting thereto Sugar and Cinnamon; it is good
in the Winter for Laborers, and young men, but to old and phlegmatic folks it
is very hurtful.

Advertisements concerning Herbs.
ALL Herbs are of a slender Nourishment, and of a naughty subtle Juice, and
watery, having many Superfluities, and therefore in the choice of them observe
well these following Rules.

I. That you eat but a small quantity of them; and that they may better
nourish, use them boiled in Broth.

II. That none but Lettice be eaten raw, and that also with Vinegar, to allay
the boiling of the Blood, the heat of the Liver and Stomach.

III. In Winter use hot Herbs, in Summer cool, in Spring and Autumn temperate.

IV. That you do not eat Herbs which begin to put forth their Seed.

V. That Herbs be eaten at the beginning of Dinner, since that almost all are
laxative.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Sorrel.
Name. IN Latin, it is called Oxalis, and Acidula; in English, Sorrel.

Kinds. There be several sorts thereof, but Garden-Sorrel and wild are the
chief.

Choice. The Garden-Sorrel is the best, and of the wild that which is not red,
but all over green.

Qualities. It is cold and dry in the second degree.

Commodity. It is very pleasant in raw Sallads, mixed with other Herbs, for its
smart and sharp taste which it has; it is very agreeable to the taste; it is
very good in pestilential and burning Fevers, for it stifles the heat of the
Choler, extinguishes Thirst, resists Putrefaction, excites the Appetite, and
stops Defluxions. In Summer Flesh and Fish are to be sawced with the juice of
Sorrel, instead of Vinegar, or Verjuice, or juice of Oranges; and so Eggs,
which renders them very pleasant, and excites the Appetite. Many eat Sorrel raw
with Bread; others use the decoction thereof either in Water, or in Broth, or
Water of it distilled, or else the Syrup of its juice. Sorrel takes away the
nauseating and squeamishness of the Stomach; it is good for the Kidneys,
breaking and expelling thence the Stone and Gravel. The seeds of Sorrel drank
in Wine, are an Antidote against Poison, stops Rheums and Fluxes, frees and
preserves one from the Plague.

Hurt. It nourishes little, binds the Body of those that use it too often,
hurts melancholy persons, and sowrs the Stomach.

Remedy. Let it be eaten in a Sallad mixed with other Herbs, among which let
there be Lettice, which is moist, Rue or Mint, which is hot; it ought to be
used only in hot Seasons, and by young, choleric, and sanguine men, and also
in hot Distempers.

CHAP. XXV. Of Marjoram.
Name. IN Latin, Amaracus, and Sampsuchus; in English, Marjoram.

Qualities. It Is hot and dry in the third degree; its Faculties are to digest,
to attenuate, to open, and to strengthen.

Commodity. The use of Marjoram is very good and necessary in Food, for it
corroborates and cleans the Stomach, and mundifie it, expelling thence the
Choler and Phlegm; the smell thereof comforts the Brain, and it is very useful
and effectual given to Dropsical Persons; and it is good to bring down Women's
Monthly Courses.

Hurt. It is too sharp, whence it causes the boiling and inflammation of the
Blood.

Remedy. It is to be used in a small quantity, and never in hot Food, but
rather in such Meats as are of a cold quality, and windy, and which beget gross
and slimy Humors.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Dill.
Name. IN Latin, Anetham; in English, the Herb Anise, or Dill.

Choice. The best is that which is fresh, and is not seeded.

Commodity. It is used for sauce with Meats, in Coleworts, in Fish, and other
sort of Victuals; it has a pleasant taste, helps the Stomach to concoct the
Food, lessens the Hickets and sneezing, and mitigates the pains of the Body;
increases Nurses Milk, dissolves the windiness, is good for the Nerves, and
binds the Belly.

Hurt. The too frequent use thereof hurts the Eyesight, dries up the Sperma or
Seed, offends the Stomach, because it is a sharp Food, moves belching, begets
gross Humors, is hard of Digestion, provokes nauseating, and offends the Reins.

Remedy. It must not be too much, nor too frequently u^ed with hot Food, but
with Fish it may be securely used. Their bad Qualities may be allayed by mixing
therewith Parsley, Beat, and Burrage, or Lettice.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Anise-seed.
Name. IN Latin, Anisum; in English, Anise-seed.

Choice. The first in goodness is that of Egypt, which is the fresh and black.

Quality. It is hot and dry in the third degree, and of a subtle substance,
sour, bitter, sharp, digestive, and dissolving windiness.

Commodity. This Seed cures a stinking Breath, renders the Mouth sweet, is good
for Dropsical Persons, removes the Obstructions of the Liver, provokes Urine,
and stops the white Fluxes of Women, mitigates Thirst; and the decoction
thereof drunk, dissolves the windiness of the Body, is good for the Liver,
Lungs, and Stomach, because it aids and strengthens digestion; it cures the
pains of the Head, provokes Milk, breaks the Stone, helps the Nerves, and
comforts the Brain, hindering the Vapors from rising up toward the Head; a
little of this made into Comfits, is good after Dinner, and taken before Water,
it rectifies it: it is very useful in Pies and Pasties

Hurt. It excites Lusts, and is unprofitable to the Stomach, unless when windy.

Remedy. It must be used moderately; Young, Choleric, and Sanguine Men must
abstain from it, especially in Summer.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Asparagus.
Name. Latin, Asparagus; English, Sparagus.

Choice. The Garden-Sparagus is better than the Wild; the fresh are to be
eaten, and those which with their tops do not bend down.

Quality. Sparagus is abstersive, and temperately hot and moist.

Commodity. It is quickly boiled; whence the Proverb, Citius quam Asparagus
coquitur. It nourishes more than all other Herbs, is is good for the Stomach,
purges the Breast, mollifies the Body provokes Urine, increases the Sperma
genitale cleanses the Kidneys from the gravel, mitigates their pains, and
likewise the Loins.

Hurt. Being used in too great a quantity, i^ offends the Stomach, induces
nauseating, especially when it is eaten fresh, and by its bitterness it
increases Choler, and makes the Urine stink, though it has passed through all
the Body. And lastly if much used by Women, it makes them Barren.

Remedy. Let it be boiled, and let the fir^ Water wherein it was boiled be
thrown away afterward season it with Oil, Salt, and Peppe^ adding thereto
Juice of Oranges or Vinegar; boyle^ in Wine, it is very good: It does not agree
wit^ Choleric, but Old Men, eaten in moderate quantity, and hot and well
seasoned; it is more wholesome boiled in fat Broth.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Betony.
Name. IN Latin, Betonica; in English, Betony.

Choice. The best is that which grows on Sunny Hills, and is tender, being
eaten boiled in Broths.

Qualities. It is hot and dry in the first degree, and cutting.

Commodity. The Betony is full of infinite virtues, whence comes the Italian
Proverb, You have more goodness in you than the Betony. It is good for all the
internal Passions of the Mind, in whatsoever manner it be took. It is good for
those who have took any poisonous thing; and it is very credible, that being
used in Food, it preserves one from all those Evils and Distempers, which it
has the faculty to heal; and it is good for the Jaundice, Paralitick,
Phlegmatic, Epileptick, and Gouty Men. In short, its Decoction being eaten or
drank, provokes Urine, breaks the Stone, and cures most Distempers.

Hurt. It is hard to be digested.

Remedy. It must be eaten together with the Flowers in good Broth, or the
Decoction thereof, being boiled in Wine.

CHAP. XXX. Of Beets.
Name. Latin, Beta; English, Beets.

Choice. The black is the best.

Qualities. Beets are hot and dry in the first degree.

Commodity. This eaten, is good against the Obstructions of the Liver, and of
the Milt. The Roots eaten, take away the stinkingness of Garlic and Onions.
The white boiled and eaten with raw Garlic, is good against the Worms in the
Body, and is abstersive; the Roots pickled, serve instead of Sallade.

Hurt. It nourishes little, and is biting; it hurts the Stomach, by reason of
the Sulphurous quality it has.

Remedy. Eaten with Burrage, or with Mustard and Vinegar it is less hurtful.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Burrage.
Name. IN Latin it is called Buglossum, Borrago, Corrago; in English, Borrage.

Choice. That is to be eaten which is took with its Flower.

Qualities. Burrage or Eugloss is hot and moist in the first degree.

Commodity. This Plant was called first Corrago quasi cor agens, quia cordis
affectibus opituletur, because it has a predominant quality over the Passions
of the Heart: Whence being infused into Wine, it causes cheerfulness of Mind,
and wonderfully comforts the Heart, taking thence all Melancholy Thoughts,
instead thereof introducing Joy and Gladness; it is of good Nourishment, and
begets the best Humors; it is likewise very pleasant in Food: It is good for
those that are in Health, and contributes very much to the recovery of those
that are troubled with faintness and swoonding Fits. Its Flowers are used in
Sallads; the Leaves are infused in Wine, and likewise the Flowers, to make a
Cordial. Burrage is good for Melancholy Persons, clears the Blood and the
Spirits, strengthens the Bowels, and mollifies the ruggedness of the Breast.

Hurt. The Flowers are not easily digested, but the Leaves very readily: It
hurts those that are troubled with Ulcers in the Mouth, because of its
prickliness, otherwise it is good for all Ages, all Complexions, and all times.

Remedy. It Is to be boiled in Broth of good Flesh, or in Water, adding thereto
an Egg. The Leaves are eaten in Sallads, first taki^g away their strings,
whereby they are easier digested. Its ^oughness is corrected by mixing
therewith Beers or Spinach.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Capers.
Name. IN Latin they are called Capparis, in English, Capers.

Choice. Those that are pickled in Vinegar are better than such as are salted,
because these latter are more hot.

Qualities. The salted are hot and dry in the second degree. They are
astringent, attenuating, cutting, abstersive, and opening.

Commodity. Those that are kept in Brine or Pickle, well seasoned, and eaten,
excite the Appetite, and remove the Obstructions of the Liver and Milt, provoke
Urine, kill the Worms, heal the Hemorrhoids, and increase Copulation, being
eaten with Salt, Vinegar, and Oil. Those that are seasoned with Salt are good
for the Gout, Sciatica, Splenatick, and Phlegmatic Persons. Those that make
use of Capers, are seldom troubled with the Convulsion of the Nerves, or pains
in the Milt.

Hurt. They cause Thirst, and are naught for the Stomach, although they stir up
the Appetite; they trouble and swell the Belly, are of small Nourishment, and
are more for Physic than Food.

Remedy. The raw are boiled in Water, afterward eaten with Oil and Vinegar.
The salted ones are steept a little while in Water, and afterward eaten with
Oil and Vinegar.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Artichoke.
Name. IN Latin it is Cinara, and Carduus Sativus; in English, Artichoke.

Qualities. They are hot and dry in the second degree, and opening.

Choice. The Garden Artichokes are better than the Wild, and the tender are
more wholesome than the hard.

Commodity. They are pleasant to the taste, and provoke Urine, but make it
stink; they cause windiness, and remove Obstructions, and increase Copulation;
by drinking the decoction of the Roots in Wine, as likewise by eating the
Artichokes, the breath is purified and made sweet, and all evil smells and
vapors of the Body are thereby taken away. The Artichokes are made white
Artificially, by putting them under soft Mould in the ground at Autumn. They
are eaten at the end of the Meals with Pepper and Salt, to seal up and
corroborate the Stomach.

Hurt. Artichokes beget Melancholy Humors, are very windy, hurt the Head, make
the Stomach heavy, and hinder digestion.

Remedy. Being boiled in Broth, and eaten with Pepper and Salt, at the end of
Dinner, are less hurtful, and more pleasant to the Stomach.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Cabbage.
Name. IN Latin, Brassica; in English, Cabbage, Coleworts, or Cole-flowers.

Choice. The best are those which are long and tender, and growing in the top
of the Plant, which has the Leaves open, and not close, and with the Dew on the
top: The Cole-flowers are the best, as on the contrary, the Cabbages are the
worst, and the frizled least hurtful.

Qualities. They are hot and dry in the first degree.

Commodity. Being eaten little boiled, they make the Body laxative and
slippery; if they be much boiled, they bind the Body; they have a purgative
Faculty: Being eaten raw before Supper with Vinegar, they prevent Drunkenness;
being eaten after, they take away the noysomness of too much Drink, and the
hurt of Wine. The Decoction thereof drunk (but not overmuch boiled) are good
for those that are grieved with a stoppage of the Urine: Coleworts are so much
commended by some, as sufficient to cure all Distempers; they are good for
pains in the Head, for dimness of the Eyes, contributes to Melancholy Persons,
removes Obstructions of the Milt, Liver, Lungs, and all the rest of the Bowels.

Hurt. They hurt the Teeth, the Gums, the Eyesight; they are of little
Nourishment, but swell the Stomach, and cause stinking Breath, and beget
Melancholy Humors, chiefly in Summer.

Remedy. They are less hurtful when they (...) boiled, throwing away the first
Water, and p^^sently putting them in some other hot wate^ Or else let them be
put into the Broth of ho^ Meat, with Fennel, Pepper, Coriander-seed, or
Cinnamon.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Cumin.
Name. IN Latin it is called Cuminum; in English, Cumin.

Choice. The Garden Cumin is much better than the Wild.

Qualities. The Seed, like Anise-seed, is hot in the third degree, and drying.

Commodity. It heats, binds, and dries; it is pleasant to the Mouth, and gives a
good relish to the Victuals; it is good against windiness and pains of the
Body, it cures the overflowing of the Gall, the Vertigo, the Asthma, the
biting of Serpents, the heat of the Urine, and the trembling of the Body.

Hurt. It Is a sharp Food, and if used too often, makes the face pale.

Remedy. It must be used sparingly, and only in Winter, and by those that are
Phlegmatic and of a cold Complexion.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Coriander.
Name. Latin, Coriandrum; English, Coriander.

Choice. The dry and ripe are to be chosen first, and those of Egypt are the
best.

Qualities. The green is cold, and ought not to be used in the Body, or eaten,
but the ripe has a pleasant Odor. The dry is hot.

Commodity. It is very useful for the Stomach, because it represses and keeps
down the venomous exhalations, which would ascend into the Head. Being drunk
wi^h sweet Wine, it kills the Worms. It preserves the ^lesh incorrupted. The
Comfits of Coriander seed, eaten at the end of a Meal, does help the digestion
of the Meat without keeping it in the Stomach, and fortifies the Head and the
Br^in.

Hurt. The overmuch use thereof offends the Head, obfuscates the
Understa^ding, and disturbs the Mind Its J^ice drank is deadly Poison, and
those that drin^ thereof, b^come either dumb or foolish, for it quite bereaves
them of their Senses.

Remedy. I^s p^rnicious ^ualities may be remedied, by st^^ping it one Night in
Water, afterward Can^yi^g these Co^iander-seeds with Sugar, whereby th^^
become not only not offe^sive, but they do ver^ much contribute to the Health.
Let th^se that ^ave drunk the Juice thereof, take the ^ wder of Egg-shells with
^rine, or Treacle with Wine.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Tarragon.
Name. IN Latin, Dracunculus hortensis, in English, Tarragon.

Choice. The best is that which is fresh, tender, and that which grows in
fruitful Gardens, and is sufficiently watered; and the Leaves that hang on the
ground are not to be chosen, but the top and the most tender.

Qualities. It Is hot in the beginning of the third degree, and dry in the first.

Commodity. It Is the best Herb that is to make Sallads and Sawces, and it is
used in cool Sallads instead of Rocket; it is cordial, causing a good Appetite,
and increases Copulation, and wonderfully comforts the Stomach, and the Head,
cutting the Phlegm. It Is a very aromatic Herb, and being eaten, is an Antidote
against the Plague, and other Corruptions; it cures the cold Pains of the Teeth
and Gums, by washing them with its decoction made in White Wind.

Hurt. It heats the Liver, and attenuates the Blood.

Remedy. It is eaten with cold Herbs, as Endive, Lettice, and Borrage-flowers,
but not by young sanguine and choleric men, especially in Summer; it is good
for old men at all times.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Cichory.
Name. IN Latin, Cichoreum; in English, Cichory, or Succhory.

Choice. The most tender is the best, and the tops, and that which has a blue
Flower, always turning to the Sun.

Qualities. Cichory is cold and dry in the second degree, and the wild is more
bitter, abstersive and bindi^g.

Commodity. It contributes wonderfully to the Stomach, opens the obstructions
of the Liver, and is the most powerful and effectual Remedy that can be to keep
the Liver clean, and opens the passages thereof very much. It is good for the
Reins.

H^rt. It hurts those that are grieved with a weak Stomach, and cold, and the
juice which it begets, is of little and not good Nourishment, so that it is
more commenda^le in Physic than in Food. It is ^urtf^l to rheumatick men.

Re^edy. B^ing boiled in Water, and afterwar^s eaten with Oil and Vinegar, and
Grapes in a Sal^ad, or ^lse raw with Mint-vinegar, and mixed with Garlic, and
other hot Herbs, it is less hurtful. 'Ti good in Summer for young men, and th^s
that are of an hot Complexion, may use it at all ti^^^: ^ut it is ^ad for those
that have a cold St^^ach, and are subject to Catarrhs; and these therefore
ought not to ea^ it raw, but boiled in Broth of good wholesome Flesh.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Endive.
Name. IN Latin, Endivia, and Intybus; in English, Endive.

Choice. The Garden-Endive is the best, and most tender, but you must not tarry
till it has a Stalk, or Milk in it; that which is put under ground, and made
white, is the best.

Quality. It is cold and dry in the second degree, but the Garden-Endive is
more cold and moist than the wild.

Commodity. It refreshes the Liver, and all the inflamed Members, quenches
Thirst, provokes Urine, and in the Summer causes a good Appetite, removes the
Obstructions, purges the Blood, cures the Itch, allays the burning of the
Stomach; being eaten boiled in Flesh-broth in the Summertime, it refreshes all
the Bowels.

Hurt. The use of Endive is not to be approved of in those that have the
Stomach cold; it hinders Digestion a^ little, and offends paralitick and
trembling persons.

Remedy. The white is to be eaten in Winter by those whose Stomachs are weak
and cold, adding thereto Pepper, and Raisins of the Sun, or a little boiled
Wine, the boiled is less hurtful than the raw; it is good for young, choleric,
and sanguine men. It Is eaten with Mint, Rocket, Tarragon, and other hot Herbs.

CHAP. XL. Of Fennel.
Name. IN Latin, Faeniculum, and Marathrum; in English, Fennel.

Choice. The sweet and Garden-Fennel is the best, but let it be fresh and
tender.

Quality. The sweet is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first, and the
wild heats and dryes more strongly.

Commodity. It very much provokes Urine, and Milk, and brings down the Flowers:
It removes old Obstructions, purges the Reins, and wonderfully contributes to
the Eyesight; but the dry must be used in a little quantity, for otherwise it
will inflame the Liver, and hurt the Eyes; it purges the Breast and the Brain.

Hurt. It is a sharp Food, hard of Digestion, and of a very bad Nourishment: It
attenuates and inflames the Blood of such as be choleric; it weakens and
consumes the Body, and by the use thereof is begot Melancholy, so that it is
more convenient and wholesome in Physic than Food.

Remedy. The tender is the best, and it is to be eaten in a small quantity: The
young Fennel which is boiled, is to be open, and put a little while in fresh
Water, to take away its naughty and poisonous quality which the Serpents leave
in it. It is good to rub the Eyes withal; but you must eat but little thereof,
for in time it will breed the Stone, which as being opening carries gross
matters into the straight passages of the Urine, where they afterward
condense, and become Stones and Gravels.

CHAP. XLI. Of Sampier.
Name. IN Latin, Crithmum, and Faeniculum marinum; in English, Sampier.

Choice. The green and sweet smelling is best for Pickle.

Quality. It Is hot and dry in the third degree, salt to the Taste, and
something bitter, because of its drying and abstersive faculty.

Commodity. Pickled, it preserves the Stomach, Liver, and Reins.

Hurt. It inflames the Blood.

Remedy. It Is not good for young men in Summer, but for old in Winter, and then
but a small quantity thereof.

CHAP. XLII. Of Lettice.
Name. LAtin, Lactuca; English, Lettice.

Choice. The Monks and French Lettice is the best, and withal tender,
especially if it grows in fruitful Gardens: Those that begin to have Milk, are
to be rejected; they must not be washed, but gently and tenderly cropped.

Quality. It Is cold and moist in the second degree.

Commodity. It is easy to be digested, and exceeds in goodness all the other
Herbs, because it breeds Milk, and quenches the burning Heat of the Stomach,
provokes Sleep, and stagnates the Flux of the Seed: It allays the acrimony or
sharpness of the Choler; it excites the Appetite, and takes away the loathing
of the Stomach, and strengthens it; and in short, it is very good for many
Distempers of the Body.

Hurt. The continual and superfluous use of Lettice obscures the Eyesight,
corrupts the Seed, weakens the natural Heat, and makes Women barren, or at
least if they bear Chi^d^en, it makes them stupid and foolish: It makes a man
slow and lazy, and is hurtful to a cold Stomach, and therefore is bad for old
men.

Remedy. It is less hurtful boiled than raw, and is to be eaten with Mint,
Tarragon, Rocket, Garlic, Onions, etc. and drink some good White Wind after
it; but you must not eat it too often.

It must not be washed, for thereby is taken away one of its best Qualities,
being upon the surface thereof, and causes that the Lettice weakens the Sight.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Hops.
Name. IN Latin they are called Lupulus; in English, Hops, and Hop-tops.

Choice. Those are best which spring from the Plant, without having any Leaves
round about them, and whereof the Stalk is rough and tender.

Quality. They are hot and dry in the second degree, that is, the Hops; but the
Hop-tops, which are in form like Sparagus, are very moist, they heat little,
and dry less; therefore where we say, they are cool, we mean the Hop-tops only.

Commodity. They beget perfect Nourishment, and render the Humors equal,
comfort and cleanse the Bowels, and more particularly the Blood, and make it
clear and pure, separating it from the dregs, bringing them down, and purging
Choler: Hops also do no less cleanse the Liver, not only remove the
Obstructions thereof, but also those of the Milt. The tops being eaten boiled,
mollify the Body, and the decoction of the Flowers is an Antidote for those
that are poisoned, and cures the Itch. The Syrup thereof is excellent good for
choleric and pestilential Fevers.

Hurt. When it is gathered with the Leaves and hard Stalks, it is not easy to
be digested, but is more windy than the tender, and of a worse juice.

Remedy. Let them be eaten, boiled and seasoned with Garlic and Vinegar, or
with the juice of Oranges and Pepper: They are good at all times, for all Ages
and Complexions, especially boiled in good Broth.

CHAP. XLIV. Of Balm.
Name. IN Latin it is called Citrago, Melissa, Melissophyllum; in English,
Balm, and Balm-gentle.

Choice. The most tender is the best, and that grows on pleasant Hills, and has
the good smell of a Limmon.

Quality. Balm is hot and dry in the second degree.

Commodity. It comforts the Heart, and takes away the trembling thereof: It
mollifies the Breast, and removes the obstructions of the Brain; it helps
Digestion, and cures the Hiccoughs; heals the biting of venomous Creatures, and
all phlegmatic and melancholy persons.

Hurt. It excites venereal Pleasures; it is windy, and of little nourishment.

Remedy. Being eaten in Sallads, it is to be mixed with cool Herbs, as Lettice,
and the like.

CHAP. XLV. Of Mint.
Name. IN Latin, Mentha; in English, Mint.

Quality. Mint is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second.

Choice. That which is sowed in the Garden is ^he best, and thereof only the
tender tops.

Commodity. It is very pleasant to the Stomach, and comforts it, especially if
it be cold; it strongly excites the Appetite, and hinders the Milk from staying
in the Stomach, or in the Dugs; and therefore those that love Milk, ought often
to use Mint. Being used in Food, it kills the Worms; and for that effect, Mint
may be given to Children, that is, one dram of its juice, with half an ounce of
Citron-water, or the syrup of Limmon-peel. It takes away the Hiccoughs,
loathing and vomiting, and fortifies the Stomach: whence is said; Nunquam lenta
fuit stomacho succurrere menta.

Hurt. It Is of small Nourishment, inflames the Liver and Stomach, attenuates
the Blood; and because it is a sharp Food, it stimulates Lust, whereby the Body
becomes lean, feeble, and less lusty.

Remedy. If you eat but a little, and with other cool Herbs, it is less
hurtful. It Is to be used in Winter by old phlegmatic and melancholy men; but in
Summer it is naught, especially for young choleric men.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Parsley.
Name. IN Latin, Petroselinum; in English it is called Parsley.

Choice. The tender is the best, which is not yet seeded, or in Flowers,
whereby the Leaves smell the sweeter, and more pleasant to the taste.

Quality. Parsley is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third.

Commodity. It is very much used almost in all Food; it is put into salt Meats;
and in short, it is used about most things of the Kitchen: Eaten raw, or
boiled, it provokes Urine, Sweat, brings down women's Flowers, cleanses the
Reins, the Liver, and the Matrice, and removes their Obstructions, dissolves
Windiness, is pleasant to the Stomach, and the Liver, and its concoction is
good against the Coughs and Poisons. It has the same Qualities of the
Coriander, and is most acceptable and grateful to the mouth of the Stomach, and
mitigates its Heat, breaks the Stone in the Kidneys, and Bladder, removes the
Obstructions, and helps the Coughs and all distempers of the Breast. The Roo^
^eing roasie^ under the Ashes, are eaten with Vinegar, Oil, an^ Salt, in a
Sallad.

Hurt. It is of a difficult Digestion, and does not beget very good Humors,
obfuscates the Eyesight, and is oftentimes hurtful to the Head; but this is
not that Parsley which hurts Epilepticks, but the ordinary Parsley.

Remedy. It is to be eaten raw, with other cool Herbs, as Lettice, Sorrel, and
the like; it is not very bad, if eaten in a small quantity, and boiled in
Broth. The Roots ought to be well boiled, first taking out of the middle their
pithy substance.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Burnet.
Name. IN Latin, Pimpinella, and Sanguisorba; in English, Burnet.

Choice. The Garden-Burnet is better than the Wild.

Quality. This Herb is hot and dry in the second degree.

Commodity. It is used to be eat in Sallads, wherein it is very pleasant, by
reason of the sweet smell it has, resembling a Melon; and this is that which is
sowed in the Garden; the wild has the noysom and rank smell of a Goat, whence
it is called Pimpinella hircina; and this is reduced under the sorts of
Sassafras, for the great virtue and power which it has to cleanse the Reins and
the Bladder, and to break and drive forth the Stone and Gravel of the Kidneys;
it also provokes Urine, and removes the Obstructions of the Liver. The
Garden-Burnet is a singular Remedy against the Plague, as likewise the Wild;
and I remember, that my Father (who besides his other Sciences, had no mean
skill in Simples) told me oftentimes that in the last great Plague which so
infested all Italy, that with the Decoction of Burnet only, infused into Wine,
and with Bole-armoniack, he preserved both himself and his Family in good
Health. Burnet put in Wine, chears the Heart, and makes the Wine more pleasant.
It is also good against all the Passions of the Heart, and Faintness, it clears
the Blood, and multiplies the Vital Spirits, and is good for those that are
Tisical.

Hurt. It Is hardly digested, makes costiveness, heats the Liver, and is of
small Nourishment.

Remedy. A little of it may be eaten in cool Sallads; it is always good,
chiefly for Old and Melancholic Men, when tender.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Purslain.
Name. IN Latin, Portulaca; in English, it is called Purslain.

Choice. The Garden Purslain is the best.

Quality. It is cold in the third degree, and moist in the second; it is
binding and abstersive.

Commodity. It is eaten with great success by those that are troubled with the
Bloody Flux, the overmuch flowing of the Courses, or spitting of Blood. It is
an excellent Remedy for the heat of the Stomach, it abates and restrains Lust,
and eases the Teeth, when set on edge.

Hurt. By eating too often, and too much thereof, it is not a little hurtful,
for then it is hard to be digested, weakens the Stomach, offends the Sight, and
nourishes little, and badly; because it is cold, it takes away the Appetite,
and diminishes the Seed and Venereal desires.

Remedy. You must eat little thereof, and that with Onions and hot Herbs, as
Basil, Rocket, and Tarragon; it is to be eaten alone even by Young and Sanguine
Men, not at all by Old.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Rosemary.
Name. IN Latin, Rosmaris, and Rosmarinum; in English, Rosemary.

Choice. The flowered and tender is the best.

Qualities. It is hot and dry in the second degree: The Flowers are
multiplying, degestive, cutting, abstersive, dissolving, opening, and
strengthening.

Commodity. It heats the Stomach, stops Fluxes, it is good for shortness of
Breath; taken with Honey, it is a Cordial for the Cough; and of its Flowers
with Sugar is made a Conserve, to comfort the Stomach, the Heart, and the
Matrice.

Hurt. With its sharpness it exasperates the Throat.

Remedy. By eating it with Honey, all hurt is thence removed. In Lent the
tender flowered sprigs of the Rosemary being wetted and sprinkled with fine
Flour and Sugar, are fried with sweet Oil, being pleasant to the Taste and
Stomach, and rendered more wholesome with a little Pepper.

CHAP. L. Of Rocket.
Name. Latin, Eruca; English, Rocket.

Choice. The best is the tender, Garden-Rocket, which is not in Flower nor Seed.

Qualities. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first; but the wild
is more hot, and more dry, attenuates, opens, cuts, and is abstersive.

Commodity. It dissolves windiness, provokes Urine, helps Digestion, is most
pleasant in Sallads, increases the Seed, gives strength and courage, and
augments the Milk.

Hurt. It excites Lust, offends the Head, and inflames the Blood.

Remedy. You must mix therewith the Leaves of Lettice, whereby it is made of an
equal temperament; or else put thereto Endive or Purslain: And it is better in
cool times than hot. It is not to be eaten alone, but with cool Herbs.

CHAP. LI. Of Sage.
Name. Latin, Salvia; English, Sage.

Choice. The Garden-Sage is better than the wild.

Qualities. It manifestly hea^s, and lightly dries and binds. It Is hot in the
third degree, and dry in the second.

Commodity. Being eaten, it comforts the Stomach and the Head, is good against
the Vertigo and Megrims: Wine tempered with the Decoction of this, or four or
five fresh leaves eaten before Meals, is good against the bitings of Serpents,
strengthens the inward parts, cures the Palsy and Epilepsie, provokes the
Courses and the Urine, stops the white Fluxes of Women: The Powder of dried
Sage is excellent Sauce for Meats, and is very wholesome for the Body: It is good
against all the cold Distempers of the Head and Joints; it makes barren Women
fruitful, and its Decoction cures the itching of the Genitals: It is used in
Pickle and Sauce, to excite the Appetite, especially when the Stomach is full
of crude and naughty Humors; being eaten by Women with Child, it will make
them retain the Infant; it fortifies the Vital Spirits; the Conserve made of
the Flowers with Sugar, has the same effects; and Mercury, when it is used in
Ointments, is always to be corrected with Sage.

Hurt. Put into Wine, it intoxicates; its smell causes the Headache, therefore
it is to be avoided by those that are incommoded with Catarrhs; it is sometimes
poisonous, for it is easily infected by Serpents and Toads with their venomous
breath.

Remedy. It Is to be washed in Wine, and the Sage ought always to grow together
with Rue, that it may not be infected by Venomous Creatures, which willingly
shade themselves under Sage: It is not good for Young Men, nor in hot Seasons.

CHAP. LII. Of Mustard.
Name. Latin, Senapi; English, Mustard.

Choice. The fresh is the best.

Qualities. It Is hot and dry in the fourth degree.

Commodity. Mustard made with its Seed, does wonderfully provoke the Appetite,
but is sometimes unpleasant, being biting: Of this Seed with Vinegar and Honey
is made a Paste, and thereof little Balls, drying them in the Sun or Oven, and
reserved for the use of Meats, mixing it with Vinegar, whereby it is very
delightful to the Palate, and beneficial to the Stomach: Mustard is eaten to
draw down the Phlegm from the Head; it cures all Defects and Diseases of the
Milt, and corrects the poisonous qualities of Mushromes.

Hurt. Mustard is fuming, and with its Vapor it ascends into the Head,
penetrating sometimes with displeasure the Nose and the Brain, and causes
sneezing.

Remedy. When the Mustard by its biting Faculty offends the Nose, smell to your
Bread, or draw in your Breath at the Nose; it is mixed with boiled Wine to
correct its sharp quality.

CHAP. LIII. Of Spinach.
Name. Latin, Spinachia; English, Spinach.

Choice. The tender Spinach growing in fruitful Ground, and often watered, is the
best.

Qualities. It is cold and moist in the first degree.

Commodity. It opens the Breast, cures the Cough, refreshes the Liver and
Lungs, allays the burning Choler, loosens the Body, etc.

Hurt. It is of bad Nourishment, causes windiness, offends cold Stomachs, and
taken in too great a quantity, it oppresses it.

Remedy. It Is to be fried in its own Liquor, and afterward seasoned with Salt,
Pepper or Cinnamon, and Raisins, with Verjuice, or the juice of Oranges; and so
eaten it is very wholesome.

CHAP. LIVE. Of Watercresses.
Name. IN Latin, Sium, Laver; in English, Watercresses.

Choice. The tender, growing in clear Water, is best.

Qualities. It Is hot and dry, as you may know by its smell.

Commodity. Eaten in Sallads, boiled or raw, it breaks and drives forth the
Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys and Bladder, provokes the Urine and the
Courses, and also hastens the Birth; it is good against the Bloody Flux,
against Dropsies, and the Mother; also it removes the Obstructions of the Liver.

Hurt. The raw is bad for the Stomach.

Remedy. It Is to be eaten boiled, or in a Sallad mixed with Lettice, Sorrel,
and such like Herbs.

Advertisements concerning the Roots of Herbs.
WE have said enough concerning all the Herbs which are used with Meats; it
remains now to treat of the Roots, where by the way you must take notice, that
in the Spring and Summer their virtue disperses it self into the Leaves,
Flowers, and Seeds; but at Autumn and Winter they are more strong and vigorous.
Though it be true, that their use is more frequent in Physic than in Food; for
they have almost all a naughty Juice, and are hard to be digested. Those Roots
may be securely eaten which grow in the Garden, and are of a young, fresh, and
tender Plant. The Roots have two parts, the skin and the wooden parts, and in
some the peel is best: The outward part is more hot than the inward; so that in
cold Roots, the outside is the best; as in the hot Roots, the inside;
especially if they be not woody. Now, as to the length of them, the middle part
is the best, except in those Plants which have a sweet Marrow near their buds,
as we see in Gardens.

CHAP. LV. Of Garlic.
Name. IN Latin, Allium; in English, Garlic.

Choice. The fresh Garlic is the best, which is that which in Lent is eaten in
Sallads; and the dry, which is laid up, having many buds.

Qualities. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree, and sharp; it is of a
biting, digestive, opening, and cutting Faculty.

Commodity. Being eaten in Food, it is an Antidote against all Poison; and
therefore is called the Country-mans Treacle: It kills and drives the Worms out
of the Body, provokes Urine, is good for the biting of Serpents, very useful
for Dropsical and Tisical Men, and makes the voice good. It corrects the hurt
which the change of Air or Water may cause, and temperates the coldness and
moistness of Sallads. Garlic is exceeding good for Seamen, for it purifies
the Air, corrupted with the stink of Tar and Pitch, and helps Sea-sick Persons.

The Agliata (a sort of Food amongst the Italians) is made of Garlic, Nuts,
Salt, and Bread, with two leaves of Sage; which is very pleasant to the Palate
and Stomach, and excites the Appetite.

Hurt. It hurts the expulsive faculties, the Head, the Brain, and the
Eyesight; it causes thirst, is naught for big-bellied Women, renews old pains,
dries up and burns the Blood, hurts the Emrods, or Piles, and Women that give
suck; it causes a noysom and stinking Breath. It Is a sharp Food, and offends
the Liver, which is the principal Foundation of the Health; and when the
Garlic sprouts, it is more hurtful, for that is a sign of putrefaction.

Remedy. By boiling, it loses its malign qualities, but the virtues become more
weak: The raw hurts less, if eat with Oil and Vinegar. It is good for Old Men
in Winter, but naught at all times for Young. The stinkingness thereof is
corrected by eating after it raw Beans, Parsley, or a little Rue.

CHAP. LVI. Of Carrets.
Name. Latin, Carota; English, Carret.

Choice. The red are the best, the great sweet ones, and those of Winter.

Quality. They are hot in the second degree, and moist in the first.

Commodity. The red and the white are well tasted, both pickled, and out of
pickle; they provoke Milk, Women's Courses, and Urine, and open Obstructions.

Hurt. They nourish less than Turnips, neither are they so ea^^ly digested;
they cause windiness, etc.

Remedy. They are to be well boiled, and seasoned with Vinegar, Oil, and
Mustard, or Coriander, or Pepper, and boiled in good Broth of Meat, they lose
all their naughtiness.

CHAP. LVII. Of Onyon.
Name. Latin, Caepe; in English, Onyon.

Choice. The biggest are the best, and such as grow in Marshy Ground, of much
Juice, of a round shape.

Quality. It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second.

Commodity. It corrects that hurt which the change of Water induces, causes a
good Appetite, attenuates the Humors, makes a good color, and increases the
Seed.

Hurt. Being eaten raw, in a great quantity, it causes the Headache, inflames
the Blood, dims the Sight, and hurts the Understanding; it increases Lust,
opens the Emrods, and causes overmuch sleep.

Remedy. If you boil it, it loses the malign and naughty qualities, and becomes
very good, especially with Parsley. To eat it raw, it must be cut in pieces,
and steept in fresh Water, whereby it becomes sweet It agrees with cold
Constitutions, and cold Seasons, but is hurtful to the contrary.

CHAP. LVIII. Of Mushromes.
Name. Latin, Fungus; English, Mushromes.

Choice. Those that grow in the Fields, called Spungy and Meadow-Mushromes,
that look like the Yolks of Eggs, are the least hurtful.

Qualities. They are cold almost in the fourth degree, and moist in the second.

Commodity. They are pleasant to the Stomach; they stir up the Appetite, and
drink up all the Sauce. The Mushromes then that grow upon the Rocks in the
shade, being dried and powdered, and thereof taken the weight of a Scruple,
with Wine and Broth, mitigate the Cholick pains, and Gravel, provoking Urine,
and driving forth the Stone; but it is to be taken four hours before Meat.

Hurt. They cause stupidness, and the Apoplexy, and suffocate.

Remedy. The pickled Mushromes are good enough, being cleansed and well boiled
with sour Pears, Basil, Bread, Oil, Salt, and Pepper. It Is good to eat but a
little thereof, and to drink good Wine after it.

CHAP. LIX. Of Parsnips.
Name. IN Latin, Pastinaca; English, Parsnip.

Choice. The most tender, and such as grow in fruitful Grounds, are the best.

Qualities. They are very hot and abstersive.

Comm^dity. They are eaten boiled, and prepared diverse ways, and they have the
same virtue as Carrots; for they provoke the Courses and Urine, and remove
Obstructions.

Hurt. They give but little, and that too, ill Nourishment; they are slowly
digested, cause much windiness, stimulate Lust, excite the Itch, breeding bad
Blood, and full of Superfluities.

Remedy. They lose their ill Qualities if they be soundly boiled, first taking
away their wooden Marrow from within, and afterward season them with Oil,
Vinegar, and Mustard; or else first boil them, and afterward fry them with
Butter, and salt them. They are good in cold weather for young men, and for all
Complexions, except old and phlegmatic men. This following way is also good:
Steep them first in two Waters, then in a third Water, with Lettice, Coriander,
and Onions, adding after, Oil, Vinegar, Pepper, and Honey, or boiled new Wine.

CHAP. LX. Of Leeks.
Name. IN Latin, Porrum; English, Leeks.

Choice. The best sort is that which grows in marshy places, and small.

Quality. They are hot in the third degree, and dry in the second.

Commodity. They provoke Urine, and the Courses, dissolve Windiness, incite
Copulation, and boiled with Honey, purge and cleanse the Lungs, and eaten with
Salt, clear the Stomach of Phlegm; the Leaves boiled, and thereof a Plaster,
made, cure the Emrods; roasted under the ashes and eaten, they qualify the
poisonous faculty of the Mushrooms; they are good against Drunkenness, and
mitigate the cholick Pains; they cure the Asthma, or shortness of Breath, drank
with Water of Barley, or Honey; they expel the Cough, cause a good Voice, and
make Women fruitful. The Heads boiled in two Waters, bind the Belly, and are
good against the Tenesmus.

Hurt. Being eaten raw, they beget Windiness, offend the Head, cause frightful
Dream^, dim the Sight, burden the Stomach, and hurt the Ulcers of the Reins and
Bladder. They cause the Headache, beget naughty Humors, and corrupt the Gums
and the Teeth.

Remedy. By boiling them twice, and putting them in fresh Water, their Hurt is
taken away: You must eat with them, Lettices, Endive, and Purslain; they are
the ^ood of Plow-men, and of those which labor much. They are to be eaten
after all other Meat.

CHAP. LXI. Of Radishes.
Name. IN Latin, Raphanus, and Radix; in English, Radish.

Choice. The best Radishes are the tender and sharp, which have been first nipt
by the Frost, and those which have a black skin are the sweetest.

Quality. The Radishes are hot in the third degree, and dry in the second; they
are digestive, cutting, abstersive, and rarifying.

Commodity. Eaten, they provoke the Urine, mollify the Belly, expel the Stone
and Gravel from the Kidneys and Bladder. Radishes are pleasant to ^he Stomach,
cutting them to pieces, and putting them in Water, with Salt; they increase the
Milk, and make the Drink relish: They are good against the poison of Mushrooms;
boiled, they are good against old Co^ghs, and eaten after other Food, they move
the Body.

Hurt. They make the Body lean; they cause Windiness, and move stinking
Belches: They are of a slow Digestion, offend the Head, breed Lice, hurt the
Teeth, and the Eyesight, increase the pains of the Sinews and Arteries, and do
cause Hoarsness.

Remedy. Being well washed in Water, and afterward eaten with Sal^ they become
less hurtful. Eaten after Supper, they do not help Digestion, as many have
thought, but the party that eats them, remains thereby prejudiced, though it is
true, that Radishes agree best with them whose Stomach is hot, and not apt to
beget Windiness after Suppe^^: They are good in cold weather for young men, and
those that labor much, but very unwholesom for others.

CHAP. LXII. Of Scallions.
Name. IN Latin, Ascalonia; in English they are called Scallions.

Choice. The red, hard, little, and sweet, are the best.

Quality. They are hot almost in the fourth degree, and dry in the second.

Commodity. They are very good to waken and excite the Appetite, which is
weakened by a superfluous Heat; they are good to make the Drink relish more
savoury; they increase the Seed, and stimulate carnal Copulation.

Hurt. They cause Windiness, multiply the gross Humors, make the Headache;
they procure Thirst, and raise a desire to sleep, offend the Eyesight, and
make the Tongue rugged: And you must have a care of using them too often, for
they hurt the Nerves, whence they are very hurtful to old and Epileptick men.

Remedy. They are first to be squeezed well, and afterward steept a little in
Water, then season them with Vinegar, Oil and Salt, adding thereto a little
Sage and Parsley; hereby they become more sweet and nourishing, less windy, and
easier digested, but they require little boiling. They agree with hot
Complexions.

CHAP. LXIII. Of Tartufoli.
Name. IN Latin, Tubera; in English, or rather Italian, Tartufoli; which
because they are but lately known in England, it will not be amiss to give a
short description thereof. It is then a certain Excrescence within the ground,
without any Root or Stalk, but always hid under ground; therefore to find it,
the Italians lead a Hog in a string, who as soon as he smells them, (for the
Tartufoli are of a strong smell) will stop, and dig with his Snout, and then he
that leads the Hog, digs out the Tartufoli.

Choice. The male, that is, the black, are bett^r than the w^i^e, which are the
female, as likewise the thickest, and biggest, with a hard skin; let them be
also fresh, not putrid, but of a good odor.

Quality. They are hot and dry in the second degree, and suck up all the sauce
whereunto they are put.

Commodity. Being eaten both boiled and raw, they are pleasant to the taste,
for they have the smell of Flesh: They excite venereal Desires, and multiply
the Seed; they are of a gross Nourishment, though not bad; Chestnuts roasted
under the ashes, afterward cleansed, and boiled in a Skillet with Pepper, Oil,
the juice of Oranges, with a little Salt, are very good eaten after, to
qualify the Tartufoli. The Tartufoli dried, and put into a Chest or Trunk
where Clothes are, do impart to them no unpleasant odor.

Hurt. They are windy, melancholic, destructive to the Nerves, Head, and
Stomach: They cause bad Breath, and being used too often, beget Apoplexies, and
Palsies, and are hard to be digested; those that are sandy, are naught for the
Teeth. Besides, there be some of them which suffocate, as the Mushrooms do,
they cause pains of the Stone, stoppage of the Urine, and bring the Gout.

Remedy. They are to be washed with Wine and afterward boiled in fat Broth
with Cinnamon; and let pure good Wine send them down; but they must be eaten at
the end of the Meal.

Advertisements concerning Fruits.
ALthough Fruits are not to be reckoned amongst nourishing Food, seeing that
their nourishment is but little, and that they are apt to breed putrified
Blood, and are full of many Superfluities, nevertheless they being used for
other Commodi^ies and Benefits, in a manner physically, we conclude, that they
must not be used too often, nor too much at once, for that which is taken
physically, and not for nourishment, ought to be used, in a small quantity, and
seldom Now the first benefit which we receive from Fruit is, That they mitigate
the Choler, extinguish the heat of Blood, refresh and moisten the Body.
Therefore they are to be eaten before other Food, and you must drink after them
Wine mixed with Water, to the end that they may pass the more readily to the
Veins, and refresh, and therefore in Summer they best agree with choleric and
sanguine Complexions. The second good is, That the^ loosen the Belly; and
therefore they are to be eaten in the beginning of the Meal, and you must
presently eat other Food after them: But betwixt these Fruits and your Food,
some small time ought to intervene; such are, Grapes, Figs, Plumbs, Mulberries,
Peaches, and Cherries. The third good is, That they bind the Belly; and to do
that, they are to be eaten before Dinner, such as are, Cornels, Quinces,
Service-berries, Medlars, etc. But they must not be eaten in a great quantity,
because they are very difficult to be digested, and are of naughty nourishment.
But in short, for the use of Fruits, take these following Rules.

I. That all Fruits are to be avoided by gouty folks, especially moist, watery,
and viscuous Fruits, for they are full of Vapors.

II. That all fresh and moist Fruits are worse than the dry.

III. That the Fruits which are eaten after Meals, are better baked, roasted,
or boiled, than raw.

IV. That the laxative Fruits which loosen the Belly, are to be eaten before
Dinner, as the astringent after.

V. That astringent Fruits taken before, bind the Belly; whereas, taken after,
they loosen the Belly.

VI. That they whose Stomachs are cold and moist, should eat hot and dry Fruit;
and so contrariwise, whereby they hurt not.

VII. That you eat Fruit thoroughly ripe, except Mulberries, which are to be
eaten before that by their maturity they become black, for then they are the
Food of Spiders and Flies, whereby they infect the Blood, and prepare it to
putrefaction.

VIII. That different Fruits be not used at one Meal.

IX. That the best Fruit are the soundest; and those that are worm-eaten, beget
continual Fevers, and such are known by their ill color.

CHAP. LXIV. Of Citrons.
Name. IN Latin, Citrea mala, and mala Medica; in English, Ci^rons.

Choice. The best a^e full of Juice, and heavy.

Quality. The Peel or Rind is hot and dry in the third degree; the Pulp is cool
and moist in the first; the Juice is cold and dry in the third degree; the
Kernels are of the same temperament as the Peel.

Commodity. Its Peel eaten, and the decoction thereof, causes good Breath, and
readily digests the Food; the Kernels are an Antidote against all sort of
Poison, especially the Bitings of Serpents, and provokes the Flowers, and kills
the Worms of the Belly: Either of them eaten, are good against the Plague,
corruption of the Air, and against all Poison. The water of all the Citron
distilled, is very sweet to the Taste, and mightily contributes to the Heart
and Brain; and the conserve of Citron is a wonderful Alexipharmacon against
pestilential Fevers, for it extinguishes the Thirst, and the Fever, resists the
concoction and putrefaction of the Humors. The water of its Flowers distilled,
is very prevalent against the infection and contagion of the Air, and the
spotted Fevers, for it is a great Cordial, strongly provokes Sweat, and lightly
excites Vomiting. It is credibly reported, That in one of the Cities of Italy,
there being two Persons condemned to die, and going to Execution, they by
chance passed by a House where a man stood eating a Citron, who being moved
with compassion, gave them one to comfort their hearts: Arriving afterward at
the Place of Execution, they were bitten by a Scorpion, without any hurt thence
proceeding; at which every one was so astonished, that they caused them to be
led back again; and the next morning (supposing this might arrive by means of
the Citron) they gave one some Citron to eat, and the other none; then
conducting them to the same Place, and both again being bitten by the Scorpion,
he that had eaten none, died immediately, and the other escaped: a manifest and
certain proof of the great virtue of Citron, and how excellent an Antidote it
is against Poison. The Peel preserved, is good for the foresaid things; and
also the oil extracted either from the Peel or Kernels, is very good to anoint
the Pulses.

Hurt. They are slowly digested, troublesome to those who have hot Brains, and
being eaten late, they cause the Vertigo.

Remedy. Violets, or Sugar of Violets, eaten after them, qualify their
malignity; and being sugared, they are good for every Body, and agree with all
Ages and Complexions.

CHAP. LXV. Of Mulberries.
Name. LAtin, Mora; English, Mulberries.

Choice. The black, the gross, and the most ripe, are the best, and let them
not be touched by Flies and Spiders, and gathered before the rising of the Sun.

Commodity. They lenifie the roughness of the Throat, quench the Thirst, and
make the Body slippery, excite the Appetite, extinguish the Choler; being eaten
before Meat, they are quickly digested, but eaten after, they are as soon
corrupted; which also happens, if they find in the Stomach any naughty Humors.

Hurt. They nourish very little, as do likewise the Pumpions; nevertheless they
do not cause Vomiting, neither are they disagreeing with the Stomach, as those
are. They beget Windiness, and pains in the Stomach, and trouble it, especially
if they find it full of naughty Humors, and they are easily corrupted.

Remedy. Being washed in Wine, they become less hurtful; those that eat the
sour Mulberries, must use therewith a little Sugar. They agree in hot weather
with young men, especially if sanguine and choleric, and with them whose
Stomachs are clear and free from all naughty Humors.

CHAP. LXVI. Of Quinces.
Name. IN Latin, Cotonea mala, and Cydonia; in English, Quinces.

Choice. The Apple Quinces are better than the Pear-Quinces, for those are
larger, these are little, plain, and channelled with yellow partitions, downy,
odoriferous, and ought to be more ripe than the others. The third sort of
Quinces, are those which are grafted the one within the other.

Quality. Quinces are cold in the first degree, and dry in the second.

Commodity. They are to be eaten in the last Course, for they seal up the
Stomach, help Digestion, and move the Body, if they be eaten in a competent
quantity; and if there be need to bind the Body, they are to be eaten before
Meals, which thing secures the Head from Intoxica^ion: They are pleasant to the
Taste, they waken the Appetite, cherish and comfort the Heart, fortify the
mouth of the Stomach, stagnate the Flux; they mend a spoiled Stomach, stop
Vomiting, and keep the Vapors down, that they cannot ascend into the Head; and
though in themselves they are astringent, yet by accidents they provoke Urine;
being eaten raw, they are good against the Bloody Flux, and expel mortal
Poison: The Marmalade of Quinces made with Honey or Sugar, is good both for
sick and well persons.

Hurt. Eaten raw, they beget Windiness, cause pricking pains in the Belly, hurt
the Nerves, and excite cholick Pains, are hardly digested, and smelling thereof
often offends the Head; those that are kept for Winter, if they touch one
another, are spoiled.

Remedy. They are less hurtful, when ripe, and boiled in Honey; or else after
they are baked, put much Sugar and Musk with them; but the best and readiest
way is, to boil them in a Pipkin closely covered, putting Coals both, atop and
under.

CHAP. LXVII. Of Figs.
Name. IN Latin, Ficus; English, Figs.

Choice. The white are the best, ne^^ the red, and last of all, the black; and
those th^^ have a thin Rind, are more easily digested: The^ are to be eaten
without their skin, and the ripest and the most clean are the best.

Commodity. They nourish very much, purg^ the Kidneys, expelling the Gravel,
preserve from Poison, and nourish more than all other Fruits, take away thirst,
cleanse the Breast, fatten, caus^ good Color, aid Copulation; and those that
ar^ thoroughly ripe are most wholesome. The dry ar^ good for the Cough; tosted
Figs are good applye^ to aching Teeth, to draw away the Rheum. Fig^ with Nuts,
leaves of Rue, Salt, etc. eaten, preserve a Man from the Plague. They are good
a^ all times, especially in Autumn; they agree with all Complexions, and all
Ages, except decrepid Men.

Hurt. If you eat many of them, they bege^ windiness, offend the Stomach of
those that ar^ troubled with Cholick pains, and are full of Crudities; they
hurt the ulcerated Reins, cause Thirst, and are naught for the Liver and Milt,
and opilate; they cause the Itch, and breed many Lice.

Remedy. When you eat the fresh, you must drink fresh Water after them, whereby
they find an easier descent in the bottom of the Stomach, and temperates their
heat; or else eating Pomegranats after them, or other Food sauced with ^^e
juice of Oranges and Sorrel.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of Apples.
Name. IN Latin, Poma, and Mala; in English, Apples.

Choice. There be almost infinite sorts of Ap^les; but the best, are the sweet,
great, and co^ured; and above all, such as are most ripe. ^he Pippins challenge
the superiority and pre^erence beyond all others; next to them, the ^ear-mains,
etc.

Qualities. The sweet Apples are hot in the ^^rst degree, and temperately
moist; but the sharp and sour Apples are cold and dry.

Commodity. They notably comfort the Heart, ^pen the Breast, ripen Phlegm, make
one spit, and ^re good baked, for those who are in Health, if their Stomach be
very weak, because they com^^r it, and excite the Appetite; but then they ^ust
be roasted under the ashes, and eaten with ^omfits made of Anise-seed; of these
is made ^he Syrup of Apples, which is a great Cordial, and is good against
Melancholy Passions.

Hurt. They hurt them that have a weak Sto^ach, and those that are troubled
with pains in ^he Nerves, especially if eaten raw, and in a ^reat quantity.
They must be suffered to hang ^n the Tree till they be thoroughly ripe,
otherwise ^hey are very pernicious, and of very bad nourishment: The sour and
sharp Apples cause wi^diness and much Phlegm, and make the Memor^ short.

Remedy. Apples become very good by roastin^ and eating them with Sugar, or
else Cinnamo^ or Sugar of Roses after them. The Pippins a^ least hurtful.
Apples may be kept all the Winte^ in Hay, but let them not touch one another.

CHAP. LXIX. Of Medlars.
Name. Latin, Mespilum; English, Medlars.

Choice. The best Medlars are t^^ biggest, which have Pulp enough, and little
Stone^ but let them be well ripened either in Hay, (...) hanged up in the Air.

Qualities. Medlars are cold in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Commodity. They are pleasant to the taste comfort the Stomach and the Belly,
mitigate the heat of the Stomach, stop Fluxes, stay Vomitin^ but provoke Urine.
Their stones also be^ to powder, and drank in White Wind, togeth^^ with a few
Roots of Parsley boiled, do send o^ the Stone and Gravel of the Kidneys: There
b^ found a sort of Medlars without any stones, which being grafted on a
Quince-Tree, come to be (...) a notable largeness, and pleasant taste.

Hurt. They are slowly digested, and do likewise hinder the digestion of other
things; an^ many burden the Stomach, breeding little, b^ gross Nourishment.

Remedy. Eating after them pectoral things, as Violet-Sugar, Liquorish,
Sugar-c^ndy, etc. they lose their hurt. They are good in Winter for young
choleric Persons, and such as have a strong Stomach.

CHAP. LXX. Of Nutmegs.
Name. IN Latin, Nux Myristica; in English, Nutmegs.

Choice. The best are the fresh, red, heavy, solid, fat, and full of moisture.

Qualities. They are hot and dry in the end of the second degree, and
astringent.

Commodity. They make the breath sweet, increase the sight; held in the Mouth,
they cure the Vertigo and Syncope, strengthen all the Bowels, and especially
the mouth of the Stomach, the Liver, the Milt, and the Matrice; they provoke
Urine, and stop Vomiting, excite the Appetite, consume the Windiness, cause
Digestion, and are very good in Sauces for those that have a weak Stomach, and
for a cold Liver, because it heats notably; to anoint your self with the Oil of
Nutmegs, is very good for the Stomach, and trembling Members.

Hurt. They cause inflammations of the Body, and therefore they ought not to be
eaten by Young, Choleric, and Sanguine Men, chiefly in hot Weather; but Old,
Phlegmatic, and Melancholic Persons may make use thereof in their Victuals,
most securely and especially in Winter. They are moreover very hurtful to those
that are troubled with Piles or Emrods, and those that are bound in the Body,
because Nutmegs are very astringent.

Remedy. They are less hurtful, if used but a little at once, and mixed also
with Ginger, which by its moistness qualifies and allays their dryness.

CHAP. LXXI. Of Pepper.
Name. IN Latin, Piper; in English, Pepper.

Choice. You must take care in choosing it, that the grains be not hollow, dry,
and light; but fresh, heavy, and black; for then it is manifest that it is
thoroughly ripe and good.

Qualities. Pepper is hot and dry in the end of the third degree.

Commodity. The white Pepper grows in one Plant, and the black in another; and
there is as much difference between them, as there is between the Vines which
bear red Grapes, and those that bear white. Black Pepper helps Concoction,
excites the Appetite, disperses Windiness, fortifies the Stomach, and strongly
heats the Nerves; draws, dissolves, and removes the dimness of the Eyes. It
hastens Child birth, is good against the Cough, and all Distempers and
Defections of the Breast; being beaten to powder, and masht with Raisins of the
Sun, it draws down the Phlegm from the Head, and preserves the Health.

Hurt. It hurts hot Complexions in Summer, and in hot Countries, inflames the
Blood, and dries the Liver.

Remedy. It loses most part of its hurtful qualities by a moderate use thereof,
and is most wholesome for Old Men that are Phlegmatic, and full of Rheums, but in
cold Weather, and eat with cold and moist Meats, but not too finely powdered,
but big, unless you desire it should penetrate into all the parts of the Body,
then beat it very small.

CHAP. LXXII. Of Pears.
Name. IN Latin, Pyrum; in English, Pears.

Choice. Of these also, as of Apples, there be infinite sorts, but the best
are, first, the sweet and well-ripe Muscadine; the second, the Icy Pear; the
third, the Bergamot; the fourth, the Bon Chrestien; and the last, are Wardens,
and hard Winter-Pears, which are good baked.

Qualities. Pears for the most part are cold in the first degree, and dry in
the second.

C^mmodity. They are pleasant to the taste, excite the Appetite, strengthen the
Stomach, and cause a more quick evacuation of the Excrements: The Bergamots are
the most wholesome, they are good against the Poison of Mushromes and Snails;
they make good Perry, and putting them into a Glass of Wine, if they sink to
the bottom, they signify that the Wine is pure and right, but swiming on the
top, they discover that the Wine is mixed with Water, and falsified. Drying
them in the Sun or Oven, first quartering them, and picking out their Kernels,
they are very good in the Winter, put into Wine, or hot Water, and sprinkled
with a little Sugar.

Hurt. Being eaten before Meals, they become very unwholsom, and naught for
those that are troubled with Cholick pains, and windiness, because they beget
cold Blood, and augment the said Distempers: They are also no less pernicious
to such as are grieved with the Gravel in the Kidneys, and difficulty of Urine;
for the wild beget gross Humors, and the sour offend the Nerves, are naught
for Epileptick folks, and those that are vexed with the Tenesmus.

Remedy. They are less hurtful, being eaten after all other Food, raw; but let
them be fully ripe, or baked, with a good deal of Sugar, drinking after them
good Wine; or else stew them in Wine with Sugar and Cinnamon, whereby they are
easily digested, and do not offend the Stomach; but be sure you drink Wine
after them: For, Sine vino sunt Pyra virus. They are good in Autumn and Winter
for all, except very old and phlegmatic. Muscadine Pears are to be eaten
before other Food, for otherwise they putrefie, and cause continual Fevers.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of Service-Berries.
Name. Latin, Sorbum; in English, Service-berries.

Choice. The best are the biggest, odoriferous, thoroughly ripe, without
corruption, and which for some time have been hanged up in the Air, or ripened
in the Hay.

Qualities. The Service-berries are astringent like the Medlars, but with a
more weak effect. They are cold in the first, and dry ^n the third degree.

Commodity. Being eaten (...) ^re Meals, they stagnate all sort of Fluxe^ (...)
^^en they are eaten after Meals, they c^^ (...) ^^th, comfort the Stomach, and
^^op superfluous Vomiting.

Hurt. They hinder Digestion, if eaten too much, burden the Stomach, bind the
Body; and beget gross Humors.

Remedy. They are to be used rather in Medicines and Physic, than in Food; and
after Medlars, the best thing that you can make use of, is to eat a few Beans,
or as some say, a little Honey. They are good in Autumn and Winter for Young
Men, and all that are of a Sanguin^ Complexion; but it is requisite that they
be eat^^ moderately, for otherwise they breed naug^^^ Blood.

CHAP. LXXIV. Of Grapes.
Name. IN Latin, Vva; in English, Grapes.

Choice. The best are the white, ripe, and sweet Grapes, with a tender skin,
and without stones.

Qualities. The ripe Grape is hot and moist in the first degree; the sour is
cold and dry.

Commodity. It nourishes exceedingly, makes a Man quickly fat, as is seen in
those that keep and look after the Vineyards; it refreshes the inflamed Liver,
provokes Urine, increases the Venereal Appetite: It is also very good for the
Breast and Lungs, profitable to the Stomach, and all pains of the Entrails, to
the Kidneys and Bladder. Those that have no stones are better than the rest,
and excellent for the Cough.

Hurt. Grapes cause windiness, trouble the Belly, beget Cholick pains, bring
Thirst, and make the Body swell, and torment the Milt; the sweet fatten the
Liver which is sound, but hurt that which is hard; the sour nourish less, bind
the Body, and increase Catarrhs; Grapes preserved a long while, hurt the
Bladder.

Remedy. Grapes eaten before Meals, are less hurtful; as also by eating with
them Pomegranats, Oranges, and other sharp Food; the white Grape is less
hurtful than the black; and if for a few days you hang them up, they lose their
windiness, and become better.

CHAP. LXXV. Of Almonds.
Name. IN Latin, Amygdala; in English, Almonds.

Choice. The best are the sweet and fresh, not spoiled by Age, and growing in
hot places.

Qualities. The sweet Almonds are hot and moist in the first degree; the bitter
Almonds are dry in the second degree, more abstersive, and opening, more
strongly purging the passages of the Bowels, and attenuating the gross and
viscuous Humors.

Commodity. The sweet Almonds nourish sufficiently, fatten the Body, help the
Sight, multiply the Seed, make spitting easy, purge the Breast, and cause
sleep, augment the substance of the Brain, clear the passage of the Urine,
remove the obstructions of the Liver, Milt, and of all the Veins, make smooth
the Throat, cleanse the Breast and the Lungs; their Oil is good for Cholick
pains, and the P^ssions of the Breast; the green are eaten in the beginning of
the Spring, they excite the Appetite, and take away the loathing of Women great
with Child: They are also eaten in Summer with a little Sugar, when the kernel
is tender; and then they are soft and delicate. The bitter are a good Remedy
against Drunkenness; before Meals you may eat ^ix or seven of them; eaten, they
are Poison to Foxes; and in all Physical uses they are better than the sweet:
And whereas these latter are more delicious and pleasing, so the former are
more wholesome.

Hurt. If you eat them when they are very dr^, they are of a hard and slow
digestion; remaining a long time in the Stomach, they cause the Headache, and
beget Choler.

Remedy. Let the Almonds be eaten in Summer, when they are as tender and soft
as Milk; or else Almonds with the skin blancht, and a great deal of Sugar with
them, which makes them digest quickly; those that are eaten with the skin, are
very hardly digested; therefore let them be peeled and well cleans'd. They are
good at all times, for all Ages and Complexions, but prepared with Sugar or
Honey.

CHAP. LXXVI. Of Oranges.
Name. IN Latin, Aurea Mala; in English, Oranges.

Choice. The best are those that are very heavy, and fully ripe, with a smooth
skin, and of a pleasant and middle taste; for the sweet are too hot, and the
sour too cold, which offend the Stomach.

Qualities. The Peel is hot and dry in the beginning of the third degree; the
Pulp, that is, the substance of the Oranges, is cold and dry in second degree;
the Kernels are hot and dry in the second degree: The sweet are temperately
hot, and are good for the Breast; others are sour, which are cold in the first
degree: others are of a middling taste, betwixt sweet and sour, which are cold
and dry temperately.

Commodity. The sweet Oranges, eaten before Meals, are good for the Stomach at
all times, and are pectoral; they are wholesome for Melancholic, and Rheumatick
Persons, and take away Obstructions: The sour Oranges quench the Thirst, and
awaken the Appetite; their Juice sprinkled on roasted Meats, or fried Fish,
give them a pleasant relish; with Sugar, they must be eaten before Meals, as
China-Oranges. Others are neither sweet nor sour, and these are grateful to the
Palate and Appetite; they are excellent good in Choleric Fevers, they make the
Throat smooth, and take away Thirst: The powder of their skin dried, is very
good to kill the Worms; and being taken in Wine, preserves the Body from the
Plague.

Hurt. The sour or Sevil-Oranges do strongly bind the Body, and cool the
Stomach, contract the Breast and the Arteries; the sweet increase the Choler in
burning Fevers.

Remedy. The hurt and malignity of the sour Oranges is easily repaired and
mitigated, by using therewith Sugar, or eating after them their Peel candyed,
which being thus eaten in a small quantity, are very good for the Stomach. The
China-Oranges are good at all times for Old Men, and the sour in hot Weather,
for Young, Choleric, and Sanguine Men, and especially in Pestilential Fevers.

CHAP. LXXVII. Of Chestnuts.
Name. IN Latin, Castaneae; in English, Chestnuts, and Marroons.

Choice. The best Chestnuts are the biggest, and therefore the Marroons are the
best; and after they are gathered, they are to be kept a long while, whereby
they become more savoury and wholesome.

Qualities. Garden-Chestnuts as well as wild, are hot in the first degree, and
dry in the second; they are also very astringent.

Commodity. Being windy, they provoke Copulation, they afford large and wholesome
Nourishment; they cure the Flux, and mingled with Honey and Salt, they heal the
bitings of Mad Dogs; when they are roasted under the Ashes, they stop Vomiting.
In places where there is but little Corn, they dry them, and smoke them in the
Chimney, afterward they cleanse them; which thus prepared, serve instead of
Bread. Chestnuts lightly roasted under the Ashes, afterward boiled in a little
Skillet, with Oil and Salt, adding thereto Pepper, and the Juice of Oranges:
And they are used for Tartufoli, or Testiculi Terrae, much eaten in Italy and
Spain.

Hurt. Being eaten overmuch in Food, they cause the Headache, bind the Body,
are hard of Digestion, cause windiness, especially if eaten raw.

Remedy. They are less hurtful, if roasted on the Coals, and covered a little
while under hot Ashes, and afterward eaten with Pepper and Salt, or Sugar,
which is good for choleric, as with Honey for phlegmatic men: The boiled are
better than the roasted, for they acquire a suffocant quality from the smoke;
they are good in cold weather for all Ages and Complexions, provided they be
well boiled, and taken in a small quantity, drinking good Wine after them.

CHAP. LXXVIII. Of Lemmons.
Name. IN Latin, Mala Limonia; in English, Limons.

Choice. The best are such as have the smell of a Citron, that are very ripe,
and of a good color, having been Stazati of the Trees.

Qualities. The little as well as the great are cold and dry in the second
degree; but the biggest excel the rest, both in Juice, Peel, and Substance.

Commodity. They have the same virtue as the Citrons, but more weak: Their
juice excites the Appetite, stops Vomiting, cuts the gross Humors, and resists
malignant Fevers, and kills the Worms; the juice of the sour Lemmons taken to
the quantity of an ounce, and mixed with Malmsey, sends out the Gravel of the
Kidneys; the little ones have the same effects, but more strongly. If they be
cut in pieces, and eaten with Rose Water and Sugar, they cause a good Stomach,
and give a pleasant relish to the Drink, and also break the Stone in the
Bladder. They are also eaten instead of a Sallad, cut in pieces, with Water,
Honey, and Vinegar, having the same Effects as is said before.

Hurt. They are a great cooler of the Stomach, beget cholick Pains, and cause
Leanness, breed melancholic Humors; for with their sharpness they bite the
Stomach, nourish little, and strongly bind the Body.

Remedy. They are to be used in a small quantity, without the Peel, steept a
little while in Water, then eaten with Sugar and Cinnamon; they are not good for
cold Stomachs; they are good in hot weather for young and choleric, and are
naught for old and phlegmatic men.

CHAP. LXXIX. Of Pomegranats.
Name. IN Latin, Punica mala; in English, Pomegranats, from the many Grains
which are therein contained.

Choice. The best are such as are large, ripe, and easy to be peeled, and the
sour, for they have juice enough.

Qualities. The sweet are hot, and moist temperately, and pleasant to the
Stomach; the strong and sour are cold in the second degree; and those of a
middling taste and indifferent nature, are very dry.

Commodity. The sweet are good for the Stomach, the Breast, and the Cough, and
increase venereal Desires; the sharp and sour are good for the Liver and
burning Fever; refresh, and cool the dryness of the Mouth, extinguish the
Thirst, and moderate the i^^at of the Stomach: Their Wine and Syrup is good for
the same purpose; strongly quenches the Choler, and hinders the Superfluities
from dispersing themselves through the Bowels, keeps down the Vapors from the
Head, and provokes Urine. The Peel of Pomegranats dried, is very good to be put
in a Trunk amongst Linen and Clothes, for it gives them a sweet smell, and
preserves them from Moths.

Hurt. The sweet Pomegranats cause Heat, and Windiness, and therefore their use
is forbidden in Fevers; the sour are enemies to the Breast, and offend the
Teeth and the Gums.

Remedy. The one sort of Pomegranats qualify the malignity of the other; and
therefore the grains of the one and of the other are to be mixed together,
whereby of two such Contrarieties is made one excellent Temperament; or else
eating a little Sugar with the sour; but after you have well sucked all the
grains, you must spit them forth: The sweet are good in Winter for every one,
but the sour only in Summer, and then too for young choleric men; but they are
naught for old men, because they contract their Breasts. Their juice is not to
be eaten alone, but as sauce with Food; the middling sort are eaten after Meals
with Sugar, or Salt, whereby are represt the Vapors which would ascend into
the Head.

CHAP. LXXX. Of Filberds.
Name. IN Latin, Nux Avellana, ab Avello, a Town in Campania; in English,
Filberd.

Choice. The Garden-Filberds are better than the wild; also the red, big, and
not much covered, full of moisture, which are not rotten, nor worm-eaten; the
long ones are more pleasant to the taste than the round Filberds.

Qualities. The fresh are temperate in the first degree, but the dry are hot
and dry, almost in the beginning of the second degree.

Commodity. They are more nourishing than Nuts, increase the Brain, and two or
three of them eaten at the beginning of the Dinner, are good against the Pains
and Gravel of the Kidneys; being eaten with Rue and dry Figs to Breakfast, they
preserve the Body from the Plague. The round are covered as the Corianders, are
most pleasant and grateful to the Stomach.

Hurt. They are very hardly digested, yet are not at all disagreeing with the
Liver; they cause Windiness, beget much Choler, and Pains in the Head,
especially if you eat too great a quantity of them, and too often.

Remedy. You must eat such as are very fresh, and in the Summer steept in
Water, with a little Sugar on them, and the dry only in Winter; young men, and
such as labor, or have a strong Stomach, may eat them often. The sugared
Filberds are least hurtful.

CHAP. LXXXI. Of Walnuts.
Name. IN Latin, Nux Juglans; in English, Nuts, or Walnuts.

Choice. The best Nuts are the big, long, ripe, and which are fresh, not old,
nor corrupted within.

Qualities. The fresh and green are hot and dry in the first degree; the dry
are hot in the third degree, and dry in the second, but with age and keeping
they grow dry; and by how much the more dry they are, so much the more oil they
afford.

Commodity. They fasten loose Teeth, and eaten with Figs, Rue and Mandorle,
they preserve a man from deadly Poison; and are good against the Plague, but
they must be eaten at Breakfast, and thus prepared: Take two dried Nuts, and as
many Figs, twenty leaves of Rue, a few grains of Salt; take all these, and beat
them together into a lump, and of this every morning take a small quantity
fasting, and it is a certain Antidote both against Poison and the Plague. The
same thing is no less expedient for the Bitings of mad Dogs, spreading a little
thereof upon a Plaster, and applying it to the Sore; the green bark of the Nut
may supply the place of Pepper in Meat. The use of Walnuts is very laudable and
wholesome after that you have eaten any Fish, for they cut and take away the
slimyness thereof; whence is said: Post pisces nuces, post carnem caseus adsit.

They kill the Worms in the Belly; and preserved with Sugar, or Honey, and
Cloves, they become very pectoral, profitable for the Stomach, and the cold
Bowels.

Hurt. They are called Nuces, quasi Noces, quia nocent, because they hurt the
Throat, the Tongue, and the Palate; for being eaten in too great a quantity,
chiefly the dry, excite the Cough, cause the Headache, beget Crudities, the
Vertigo, and Thirst. The shade of a Nut-tree is very pernicious, for it sends
forth a naughty Vapor and Exhalation, which makes the Head heavy, and offends
those that sleep under it, and with its destructive odor penetrates the Brain;
and therefore being planted near the Highway, she thus heavily complains, and
bewails her hard lot, as the Poet describes it: Nux ego juncta viae, cum sim
sine crimine vitae,
A populo saxis praetereunte petor.


Remedy. Eating them fresh, but first steept in good Claret, and in a small
quantity, and they are less hurtful; and though they are very old, yet that bad
quality may be remedied, by soaking them one whole night in hot Water, and
afterward cleansing them: Garlic also takes away all malignity from them;
those that are conserved with Sugar and Honey, become very good in cold
weather, and warm the Stomach; the dry are good in Winter for old, phlegmatic,
and melancholic men, because they open the Breast. One Nut mixed in the
Pottage-pot, make the Flesh quickly boiled; when the Nuts are fruitful, it
signifies abundance of Corn.

CHAP. LXXXII. Of Pine-Kernels.
Name. IN Latin, Pini Nucleus; in English, the Kernels of a Pineapple.

Choice. The best are those Kernels which are taken off from Garden
Pine-Apples, and especially of the female Pine, for they are more savoury; but
above all let them be sound and fresh.

Qualities. They are hot in the beginning of the second degree, and moist in
the first.

Choice. Being eaten fresh in Foods, they nourish sufficiently, and that well
too: They correct the moistness which would putrify in the Broth; boiled with
Honey or Sugar, they purge the Breast, provoke the Urine, restore Strength to
the weak, cleanse the Reins and the Bladder of their Superfluities, are good
for the heat and distillation of the Urine; they cure the Pains and Convulsions
of the Nerves, and of the Sciatica, or Gout; they are profitable to the
paralitick and stupid persons, and to those that are grieved with Tremblings;
they cleanse the Lungs, and the Ulcers thereof; they are very useful in the
distempers and defects of the Breast, and do very much contribute to the Cure
and Health of Tisical men.

Hurt. They are something hard of digestion, and afford a gross nourishment,
and bite the Stomach, and when they are rancidi, they excite Lust, and fill the
Head with Vapors.

Remedy. Steep them first in warm Water at least an hour, then let the
phlegmatic eat them with Honey, and the choleric with Sugar.

CHAP. LXXXIII. Of Pistack-Nuts.
Name. IN Latin, Pistacium; in English, the Pistack-Nut.

Choice. The biggest are the best, of a smell something like Turpentine; let
the Fruit be gathered from old Trees, but let it be fresh and green: These Nuts
are better than Almonds.

Qualities. They are hot and dry in the second degree.

Commodity. They are wonderful good in awakening and exciting the venereal
Desires; they remove the Obstructions of the Liver, and strengthen it, purge
the Breast and the Kidneys, are useful for the Stomach, for they comfort it,
and hinder nauseating; they attenuate the gross Humors, are restorative, and
therefore are put into Compositions which are made to fatten one; being drunk
in Wine, they heal the Bitings of Serpents.

Hurt. They are hurtful to Children, and such as are of an hot Complexion,
because they attenuate and inflame their Blood; they cause the Vertigo, and
eaten in too great a quantity, burden the Stomach.

Remedy. They may be safely eaten at the beginning and end of a Meal, taking
after them dry Grimosele, or Sugar of Roses; they are good in Winter for old
and phlegmatic, but naught for young, etc. They say, Pistack-Nuts are produced,
by grafting an Almond on a Willow-tree.

CHAP. LXXXIV. Of Carnation-Cherries.
Name. IN Latin, Cerasa austera; in English, Carnation-Cherries.

Choice. The biggest and most ripe are the best.

Qualities. These Cherries are usual, and more proper to make Wine, being not
pleasant to the taste when raw, as the sweet ones; they are sour, and bind the
Belly, cut the Phlegm, refresh, dry and strengthen.

Commodity. They are grateful to the Stomach, for they extinguish the heat of
the Choler, and cut the slimyness of Phlegm, excite the Appetite, and are very
good preserved with Sugar.

Hurt. They exasperate the Stomach with their sharpness.

Remedy. They are not good raw, unless with Sugar, or baked, and preserved in
Glass-vessels, which is more wholesome than raw: They are very good against
pestilential Fevers; they are good for those that are choleric, but naught for
old and phlegmatic men.

CHAP. LXXXV. Of Apricots.
Name. IN Latin, Malum Armenium, because they were first brought from Armenia;
in English, Apricots.

Choice. The largest, soft, ripe, of a good color, are the best, and most
sweet to the taste.

Qualities. This Fruit is cold and moist in the second degree.

Commodity. They are good for the Stomach, quench the Thirst, excite the
Appetite, provoke Urine; their kernels kill the Worms; the infusion made of the
dry, cures sharp Fevers; they are to be cut asunder, and dried in the Sun,
sprinkling them with beaten Sugar.

Hurt. They are indeed pleasant to the Stomach, but they weaken it, and are
more corrupting than Peaches; they move the Flux of the Belly, swelling and
filling the Blood with watery Humors, and dispose it to corruption: They are of
very bad substance, convert themselves into Choler, and putrify quickly; they
cause pestilential Fevers, and breed gross and viscuous Phlegm in the Liver and
Milt.

Remedy. They are to be eaten before all other Food, drinking good Wine after
it, or Aniseed, or Meat well seasoned with Salt, or with Spice, or else a
little old Cheese.

CHAP. LXXXVI. Of Cherries.
Name. IN Latin, Cerasa; in Engish they are called Cherries.

Choice. The best Cherries are such as are of an hard substance: Let them be
fully ripe; the watery Cherries are to be avoided, for they are cold, and do
easily putrify; the sour Cherries are more wholesome.

Qualities. The sweet are cold and moist, but the Carnation or sour Cherries
are more cold.

Commodity. The sweet move the Body, and are easily concocted by the Stomach;
being eaten in the Morning, they quench the Thirst, refresh and provoke the
Appetite: The dry are astringent, chiefly the slimy and viscuous, and are very
pleasant to the Stomach, because they extinguish the burning heat of the
Choler, and cut the viscosity of the Phlegm, and make a man have a good stomach
to his Victuals, especially if they be boiled with a good quantity of Sugar
upon them.

Hurt. The sweet are enemies to the Stomach, especially the watery, begetting in
the Belly viscuous and putrid Humors, for they quickly putrify, and swell the
Stomach with the wind which they beget, if you eat too much of them.

Remedy. You must eat but few at once; and then immediately after them, take
some Meat of an excellent substance, either salted or sharp: They must not be
eaten as Food, but Physic, to quench the thirst and heat of those who labor
in hot weather; and at such times they are good for young and choleric, but
naught for old and phlegmatic men.

CHAP. LXXXVII. Of Cornel-berries.
Name. IN Latin, Cornum; in English, Cornel-berries.

Choice. The biggest, and not too ripe, are the best.

Qualities. This Fruit has the quality of drying strongly, and they are also
very astringent.

Commodity. They are an effectual Remedy against all Fluxes of the Belly,
because they bind the Body: They are pickled green as the Olives, and of the
ripe is made a Conserve with Sugar, and Honey, whereby they are good against
the Bloody Flux, and strengthen the Body; and thus prepared, they may be given
to feverish persons.

Hurt. They are of a small and bad Nourishment, and hard to be digested.

Remedy. They are to be eaten at second Course, a few only, and with Sugar.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. Of Dates.
Name. IN Latin, Dactylus, fructus Palmae; in English, Dates.

Choice. You must choose such as are sweet, ^ipe, and that are very sound
within.

Qualities. The Date contains no small heat in it ^elf, especially when it is
made sweet, whence ^his Fruit is hot in the second degree, and moist ^n the
first.

Commodity. They are pleasant, fatten the Li^er, cure the Cough, and make the
Body slip^ery.

Hurt. They breed Blood, which is soon ^hanged into Choler: They hurt the
Teeth, and ^he Mouth, and make the Emrods come forth; ^hey gripe the Stomach,
and fill the Body with ^aw and viscuous Humors, which cause Obstructi^ns, not
only in the Liver, but also in the Milt, ^o all the Bowels and Veins, whence
proceed long ^^d terrible Fevers.

Remedy. They are less hurtful, being eaten ^oyled, and preserved with Sugar,
or else eaten ^^ter the raw, some sharp Food. They are good (...) no time, for
no Age nor Complexion, unless, as said before, prepared with much Sugar, which
^alifies them sufficiently.

CHAP. LXXXIX. Of Olives.
Name. IN Latin, Olea, and Oliva; in English Olives.

Choice. The best are those of Spain, big, wit^ little stones, growing in warm
Places; let the^ be well pickled.

Qualities. This Fruit when it is thoroughly ripe is moderately hot, but when it
is not ripe, it i^ more cold and binding: They strengthen and bin^ the Belly;
those that are pickled, are hot in the second degree, having a little of an
astringent faculty.

Commodity. They purge the Stomach of Flegm^ and the pickled excite the
Appetite; and their Pickle is good to wash the Mouth withal, for i^ binds the
Gums, fastens loose Teeth; those tha^ are pickled in Vinegar, quench the
Choler, an^ stop Vomiting.

Hurt. Pickled Olives afford but small Nouris^ment, and are of an hard
digestion; the salted i^ flame the Blood, and beget Choler, and hinde^ Sleeping.

Remedy. They are to be eaten in a small quantity at once, and those that are
pickled in Vineg^^ are better than the others, and that have goo^ Pickle: They
are good in cold weather for (...) Ages and Complexions; the Olives are to be
eaten after the other Food, that they may strengthen the Stomach, and help
Digestion; but now the^ eat them in the beginning, in the middle, an^ end of a
Meal, with Flesh, Fish and Eggs: but it is a very bad custom, for we ought to
observe an order in our Food, especially if we consult our health and welfare.

CHAP. XC. Of Peaches.
Name. IN Latin, Mala Persica; in English, Peaches.

Choice. The best Peaches are the odoriferous, well-colored, fully ripe, so
that they come clear from the stone, and that have an excellent taste; the
Nutmeg-Peaches are the best of all.

Qualities. Peaches are cold and moist in the second degree; their Kernels are
hot and dry.

Commodity. They are good for the Stomach, and make the Body slippery; those
that come clear from the stone, and that are very ripe, ought to be eaten
before Dinner, for they beget an appetite: But you must drink after them old
and odoriferous Wine; and therefore let them be steept in Wine, the which does
not thereupon become impoysoned, as having attracted to it self the poisonous
quality; but it is rendered bad, for the Peaches which are spungy, having drawn
out and extracted the spirits and quintessence of the Wine, that which remains
behind, becomes flat and dead, losing all its virtue.

Hurt. They loosen the Stomach, begetting Humors, which are quickly putrified
and corrupted, as being of a soft and watery nature, whence they do also breed
much Windiness, and cause the Dropsy; whence some thinking to correct their
malign Influences, do cleanse and steep them in Wine; but instead thereof
commit a greater error, for their hurtful juice is sooner transported to the
Veins, and thereby becomes more hurtful.

Remedy Having eaten them with an empty Stomach, you must drink an odoriferous
and aromatic Wine after them; but the Nutmeg-Peaches must be eaten after
Meals, which refreshes and seals up the mouth of the Stomach, as do likewise
the dry. They are good in Summer for young and choleric, but naught for old
and phlegmatic men, and whose Stomach is weak; but roasted under the ashes, are
a delicate Food, and most pleasant to the Sick; for they are good against the
Passions of the Heart, and with their pleasant smell they take away a stinking
Breath, which proceeds from the Stomach, and cheer the Mind: The dry are more
wholesome, and make the Stomach better, and stop Fluxes. The Kernels cure the
Pains of the Body, kill the Worms, dissolve Windiness, cleanse and comfort the
Stomach, remove the Obstructions of the Liver, break the Stone in the Kidneys
and Bladder; and in short are very good to preserve the Health, if every
morning you eat eight or ten of them, but two or three are enough for those
that are troubled with an hot Liver.

CHAP. XCI. Of Plums.
Name. IN Latin, Pruna; in English, Plums. Of these are found infinite sorts.

Choice. The best and most commendable are the Damascene Plums, so called from
Damascus, a City of Syria, where they grew.

Qualities. Plums are cold and moist: But of the several sorts of Plums, some
are sweet, others are sharp and sour: They are cold in the beginning of the
second degree, and moist in the end of the third.

Commodity. They purge the Choler, extinguish Heat, take away Thirst, refresh
and moisten the Body, whence their Juice boiled may serve to excite the
Appetite, and to quench the thirst in Feverish Persons, and thereof is made an
Electuary with Scamony, and without, to loosen the Belly, with the pulp or
inside of Damascene Plums and Manna: With the infusion of Sena, Polipodium,
Anise-seed, and Cinnamon is made another excellent Electuary, whereof the
quantity of half an Ounce being taken before Meals, does pleasantly loosen and
make the Body slippery, and is grateful also to the Palate, as Marmalade of
Quinces.

Hurt. They are hurtful to those whose Stomach is cold and weak, to decrepid
and phlegmatic Men, and such as are troubled with Cholick pains.

Remedy. The hurt of Plums is remedied and corrected by eating Sugar with them
at the first Course, or eating after them salt Meats, and drinking good Wine;
they are very good for Young, Sanguine, and Choleric Men, chiefly in Summer.

CHAP. XCII. Of Cucumbers.
Name. IN Latin, Cucumer; in English, a Cucumber.

Choice. The best Cucumbers are such as are large, and fully ripe.

Quality. They are cold in the end of the second degree, and moist in the third.

Commodity. The Cucumber is an excellent thing for the cooling and refreshment
of those that are thirsty in Summer; for it qualifies the heat, and lessens the
dryness of the Tongue; they are a good Remedy for the Reins and Bladder,
provoke Urine, are very convenient for hot and dry Stomachs, r^store those that
suffer indispositions, by reason of overmuch heat.

Hurt. The Cucumber used too often, is of very bad Nourishment; and if not
quickly concocted by the Stomach, it is corrupted, and converted into Humors
little inferior to deadly Poison. It diminishes the Sperma genitale, and
extinguishes the Venereal Appetite, begets slimy Phlegm in the Stomach, the
which despersing it self raw through the Veins, occasions long Fevers:
Cucumbers in Phlegmatic men's Stomachs causes nauseating, Cholick pains, and
Hypochondriack Passions.

Remedy. It must not be eaten before Meals, for like Radishes, it rises in the
Stomach; after Dinner it is less hurtful, and more easily digested. Cucumbers
are naught for Old Men, and such as are of a cold and moist Complexion; and to
qualify it, let them eat a few Seeds of Anise: They are good for Young and
Sanguine Men, and being boiled, are less hurtful.

CHAP. XCIII. Of Straw-berries.
Name. IN Latin, Fraga; in English, Straw-berries.

Choice. The best are the red, and through-ripe Straw-berries, large, of a
pleasant Odor, and such as grow in the Garden, are better than the wild.

Qualities. They are cold in the first degree, and dry in the second.

Commodity. They are very pleasant to the taste, extinguish the heat and
sharpness of the Blood, and refreshing the Liver, they quench the burning
Choler, take away Thirst, provoke the Urine, and excite the Appetite. Their
Wine dries up the fluxes and rheums of the Eyes, and clear the Sight, applied
to the Eyes, taking away the little Clouds of the Eyes, and cleanse the Eyes
hurt by the Smallpox. The Straw-berries do not receive any venomous quality
from the Toads and Serpents, though they often tread upon and pass over them,
as being of a very low growth; they stop Loosnesses and Flux of Women, and are
good for the Milt; the Decoction of the Leaves and Roots drank, eases the
inflammation of the Liver, and cleanses the Kidney and Bladder; and the Water
of Straw-berries distilled, stops the Bloody Flux in all parts.

Hurt. They are of little Nourishment, and are easily corrupted in the Stomach:
Straw-berries are very hurtful to trembling and Paralitick Men, and those that
are troubled with convulsions of the Nerves; their Wine intoxicates, they
easily putrify; whence those that eat many of them, fall oftentimes into
Malignant Fevers.

Remedy. They must be first cleansed from their Leaves, and from all filth,
afterward put into good White Wind, and then eaten sprinkled with Sugar. They
are convenient in hot Weather for Young Men, and for Choleric and Sanguine
Complexions, and strong Stomachs; they are to be eaten before other Food, and
in a small quantity; as Cherries, Mulberries, and such other Fruits.

CHAP. XCIV. Of Melons.
Name. IN Latin, Pepo; in English, Melons, or Pompions.

Choice. You must choose such as are of an exquisite Odor and Taste, pleasant
to the Palate, fresh, and ripe.

Qualities. Melons and Pompions are cold in the second degree; the Melons moist
in the end of the second, the Pompions in the third.

Commodity. They are very refreshing, they cleanse the Body, provoke Urine,
take away Thirst, stir up the Appetite. Those that eat of them, secure
themselves from the Stone and Gravel; and therefore the Emperor Albinus was so
much delighted with them, that in one Night he eat ten Melons of Ostia, and an
hundred Peaches of Campania, which were counted the best of all others.

Hurt. They cause windiness, and the Belly-ach; and therefore such as are
grieved with Cholick pains, ought to abstain from them, for they breed naughty
Nourishment, easily converting themselves into the same Humors that they find
in the Stomach; and by reason of their coldness they are difficultly digested:
They do moreover excite Vomiting, and Choleric Fluxes; and being corrupted,
they beget Malignant, Spotted Fevers.

Remedy. They are not to be eaten, unless with an empty Stomach, because, as is
said before, they are changed into the same Humors they meet with in the
Stomach. The eating of Melons is also good, if after them you eat old Cheese,
salted Meats, and drink good Wine after them, but not very strong. They are
good in hot sultry Weather, and agree with all Ages, except Decrepid,
Phlegmatic, and Choleric Men, to whom they are very pernicious.

Advertisements concerning Flesh.
FLesh is more nourishing than all other Food; for being hot and moist, it is
easily turned into Blood, and afford great Nourishment; concerning which it
will be good to observe these following Rules.

I. You must always take notice, That Flesh, Herbs, Fruits, Corn, and Wine are
to be chosen in high and odoriferous places, such as are refreshed with wholesome
Winds, and recreated with the warm beams of the Sun, where there are no Ponds,
Lakes, and standing Waters, for in such pl^ces they are quickly corrupted.

II. That the flesh of all those Creatures which live in Fens, Marshes, and
standing Pools, be avoided; to wit, of Ducks and Geese.

III. The flesh of Creatures too Old, are naught, hard, dry, sinewy, of small
Nourishment, and hard to be digested; whereas on the other side, such as are
too Young do over-abound with moisture, and are full of superfluities, though
more easily concocted in the Stomach.

IV. The flesh of the Male Animal is more hot and dry, and more easily digested
than that of the Female, the which is more cold and moist, and for that cause
less digestible; yet the flesh of the Female is better for feverish Persons
than the other, because it is less hot and more moist; and therefore in Summer,
to sick Persons you must give young Pullets, and not Cockerels.

V. All Female flesh begets worse Blood than the Male, except that of the
She-Goat, which affords better Nourishment than that of the Male.

VI. Salted flesh is hurtful, begetting gross and melancholic Blood, and bad
Juice; for it dries much, and nourishes little.

VII. Fat Meat is easily digested, yet breeds many superfluities, and therefore
is of small nourishment, takes away the Appetite, hinders the Digestion, and
makes the Stomach languish: The lean nourishes better, and begets fewer
superfluities; whence the middling betwixt both is more wholesome, because it
breeds temperate Blood.

VIII. The flesh of Birds is more light, more dry, and more easily digested,
than that of four-footed Beasts; and therefore more convenient and agreeable
for those who are more given to the exercise of the Mind, than of the Body, for
they are digested more easily than all the rest, and because they breed Blood
which is clear, clean, and full of Spirits, and fit for the exercise of the
Mind.

IX. The flesh of wild Creatures, and such as frequent the Woods, is better
than that of tame; and the Blood which is bred by eating of them will have
fewer superfluities, by reason of the much running, and exercise which they are
accustomed to, and because they live in a more dry Air, especially such as
frequent the Mountains, and their flesh will keep longer uncorrupted; for they
have less fat, and therefore beget fewer superfluities, nourish better, and
breed a more sound Blood: But tame Creatures are more moist than wild, by
reason of their little motion, and the moistness of the Air wherein they live.

X. In moist times and complexions the flesh that inclines to dryness is most
convenient; and so on the contrary.

XI. The flesh of gelded Creatures is the best, as being most temperate; for
it is hotter than the Female, and colder than the Male.

XII. The flesh of black Creatures is more light and sweet than that of the
white.

XIII. The flesh which sticks to the Bone, is of best Nourishment; and the
flesh of the right side is better than the left, and the forepart is better
than the hinder; for the forepart is hotter, and more easily digested, but the
hinder-part is colder, and more gross; the flesh which is near the Heart is
better than the other farther off; for being strengthened by the heat of the
Heart, it is more fit to nourish.

XIV. The flesh which is dry must be boiled, the moist roasted.

XV. Roasted flesh is fatter, of greater Nourishment, though more hardly
digested than boiled, which though of less, yet is of better Nourishment, and
therefore more wholesome; at Dinner boiled Meats are best, at Supper roasted, as
being of an harder digestion, and therefore better concocted in the Nightime.
Fried and broyled Meats beget nauseous Humors and Crudities in the Stomach,
and are of a difficult digestion, though very nourishing.

CHAP. XCV. Of Lambs.
Name. IN Latin, Agnus; in English, a Lamb.

Choice. Let it be a Male of one Year, brought forth in Spring, and that has
fed on sweet Herbs; but the sucking Lambs flesh is too moist and slimy.

Qualities. The Lamb is moist in the second degree, and hot in the first; but
the sucking-Lamb is moist in the third degree, and is very viscuous; but when
it is a year old, though it abounds with moistness, yet being taken from Milk,
the heat increases, and the moisture decreases.

Commodity. It begets good nourishment, is easy to be digested, especially
when fed with sweet Herbs; it is good against Melancholic Humors, it is
convenient in hot Weather, and in hot Countries; for those that are of a
choleric and adust Complexion, that which does not suck is more easily
digested, breeding good and greater Nourishment.

Hurt. The flesh of a young sucking Lamb is too moist, waterish, slimy, and of
gross Nourishment, and therefore very hurtful to Phlegmatic and Old Men in cold
Weather and Countries; they breed many viscuous Humors in the Stomach, because
they have in themselves a superfluous moistness, and so much the more, by how
much the younger. This Food is not good for sick Men, especially for such as
are troubled with the Falling Sickness, and other Passions of the Brain and
Nerves.

Remedy. You must not eat them before they be a Year old, but let them not have
Copulation; they are to be roasted with Sage, Rosemary, Garlic, Cloves, and
other hot things, which may dry up their moisture; and with this flesh the
sauce ought to be such as is cutting and drying: Lambs flesh is always to be
roasted or baked, not boiled.

CHAP. XCVI. Of Beef and Veal.
Name. IN Latin, Bos, Vitulus, and Taurus; in English, an Ox, Calf, and Bull.

Choice. The Ox ought to be young and fat, and that has been put to the
Plough: The Veal or Calf ought to be sucking of a Dam, which is fed in
excellent Pasture.

Qualities. The flesh of an Ox or Cow is cold in the first degree, and dry in
the second; but when it is very young, it has more moistness than the young
flesh of other Animals, which by Nature are more dry.

Commodity. The Ox affords great Nourishment to those that labor much, and
breed much Blood, and stops Choleric Fluxes. Veal al^o nourishes greatly,
begetting excellent Blood, and is easily dig^sted. The Field Veal is not near
so good as the House sucking Veal.

Hurt. Cow Beef is very unwholsom, of bad Nourishment, of hard Digestion,
breeds Hemerodes and Melancholic Infirmities. Ox Beef is of a gross substance,
but good for healthy and sound Bodies. The worst of all is Bull-Beef, which is
a gross, hard, dry flesh, and of very ill Nourishment.

Remedy. The flesh of an Ox lying twenty four hours in Brine, and afterward
well boiled, is good. Veal is to be well roasted or baked.

CHAP. XCVII. Of Kid.
Name. IN Latin, Haedus; in English, it is called a Kid.

Choice. The red and black are to be chosen; but let it be a sucking Kid, a
Male, and not above six Months old.

Qualities. It is temperately hot until the second Month; its flesh is very
good, neither too moist, nor too dry.

Commodity. It is of an excellent Nourishment, and very easily digested; it
wonderfully contributes to the Health, and is very good both for sick and
healthy Persons, and for such as labor much, and for studious Men.

Hurt. Kid is naught for Old and Decrepid folks, and such as have a weak, cold,
and watery Stomach; and is very hurtful for all those that are grieved with
pains of the Stone, and the Falling Sickness.

Remedy. Its hurt is remedied by roasting it well, especially those parts which
are most humid, and eat it with Oranges, or else baking it with Pepper and
Salt; but the boiled is to be eaten cold, if at all.

CHAP. XCVIII. Of Deer.
Name. IN Latin, Dama; in English, a Buck or a Do, or Fallow-Deer.

Choice. Of the Deer, let those that you choose be young, fat, and exercised
enough, which dissolves their naughty Humors, and purges the Blood from many
superfluities, and makes them more easy to be digested; nevertheless they
incline to Melancholy, as do almost all Wild Beasts.

Qualities. They are hot and dry in the second degree.

Commodity. They are of a great and good Nourishment; and in this they excel
other wild flesh, they are good against the Palsy, Cholick pains, and make
lean such as are too fat.

Hurt. They are hurtful to lean and slender folks, because they breed a sharp
Blood, and cause Convulsions of the Nerves, especially if the Beast be old, for
then it is more difficultly digested: It Is naughty flesh in hot Weather.

Remedy. When it is boiled, it is to be well sawced with Oil or Butter, to the
end that the flesh may become more moist, and more easily digested. At great
Men's Tables they eat this flesh boiled, roasted, and baked in Pies, or great
Pasties. It Is good in Winter for Old and Phlegmatic Men, but does not in any
wise agree with Young and Choleric folks. The Female of this Creature is one
of the most fearful Creatures that is, and most weak, having no manner of
Weapon or Defense to preserve her from Dogs and Wild Beasts, as she thus
complains; Dente timetur Aper, defendunt Cornua Cervum,
Imbelles Damae, quid nisi praeda sumus.


CHAP. XCIX. Of Wether.
Name. IN Latin, Vervex; in English, a Wether.

Choice. The young Wethers of one years growth are to be chosen; for then their
flesh is very good, and agreeable both with sick and healthy Persons: Let them
feed on sweet Herbs, and so they will excel all Flesh.

Qualities. This flesh is temperately hot and moist.

Commodity. It breeds good Blood, because it is sweet, of a good nourishment,
and easily digested; the Broth of Wether-Mutton is excellent, for it is very
good against Melancholic Humors, and maintains the Body in an equal
Temperament: Let it be eaten boiled with Parsley, or else the hind-quarters
roasted with Rosemary and Garlic, beaten together.

Hurt. When the flesh is Old it is hurtful; for it is drying, both by reason of
the Age, and for want of its Stones; is of hard digestion, and less sweet and
pleasant.

Remedy. Let the flesh be young, and boiled with opening and Cordial Herbs, or
roasted as is showed before: This flesh is good in all Seasons and Countries,
and for all Ages and Complexions.

CHAP. C. Of Stags.
Name. IN Latin, Cervus; in English, a Stag.

Choice. The young and sucking is to be chosen, or else let it be gelded.

Qualities. The flesh is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.

Commodity. The flesh of the young ones is a very laudable Food, and of good
Nourishment. The Horns of a Stag burned drive away all Venomous Creatures; and
the Bone which is found in their Heart is very Cordlal, and a good Antidote
against Poison, and therefore used in Treacle.

Hurt. This flesh breeds gross and melancholic Humors, hard of digestion,
nourishes little, causes Palsies, Tremblings, and Quartan Agues.

Remedy. Boiling it together with the Heads of other gross Animals, or baking
it in Pasties, but let it be young, or gelded, and it is not hurtful: It Is not
to be eaten in Summer, chiefly by Old and Melancholic Men, in Winter more
securely; for in Summer they feed on Vipers and Serpents. The Hanches are the
best part.

CHAP. CI. Of the Wild and Tame Boar.
Name. IN Latin, Aper; in English, Boar, whereof is made Brawn.

Choice. The flesh of that Boar which has been long Corn-fed, is the best.

Qualities. It is hot and moist.

Commodity. Brawn made of the flesh of tame Boars, and young, is a delicate
Meat, having not so much excrementitious moisture as Bacon or Pork.

Hurt. The hard and horny part is difficultly concocted.

Remedy. It must be well pickled in Brine, and the longer you keep it, the
better it grows.

CHAP. CII. Of Rabbets.
Name. IN Latin, Cuniculus; in English, a Rabbet, or Coney. This Creature is
very like a H^re, though less; by their continual digging their Berr^es under
Ground, they have taught Men the w^y of Undermining; whence the Poet says,
Gaudet in effossis habitare Cuniculus antris,
Demonstrat tacitas hostibus ille vias.


Choice. You must choose the young, fat Rabbet; in Winter its flesh in the
Night Air becomes tender: The old ones have an impure flesh, very unwholsom,
and unpleasant to the taste.

Qualities. The Rabbet is cold in the beginning of the first degree, and dry in
the second; though less dry than the Hare, and of better Nourishment.

Commodity. It Is of good and large Nourishment, consumes the superfluous
moisture and phlegm which it finds in the Stomach, and comforts it: This flesh
is whiter, and much less dry than that of a Hare, and therefore nourishes
better, and is more easily digested; provoking the Urine, and is good for such
as are troubled with the Leprosy.

Hurt. It is hurtful to Melancholic, and chiefly to Decrepid Persons, and in
hot Weather; for it begets gross and very bad Nourishment, and this flesh is
not very pleasant to the Palate.

Remedy. This flesh is less hurtful if boiled a little, and afterward roasted,
with odoriferous Herbs, Cloves, Nutmeg, or Cinnamon, and well larded.

CHAP. CIII. Of Hares.
Name. IN Latin, Lepus; so called from the lightness of its feet, and
swiftness in running; which gift is bestowed on this Creature, instead of
Weapons, whereby he may save himself from other wild Beasts and the Hunters. In
English, an Hare.

Choice. The best is the young Hare, caught by the Dogs after a long Chase, in
Winter, the flesh hung out in a clear Night, becomes tender.

Qualities. The Hare is dry in the beginning of the third degree, and hot in
the first.

Commodity. Young Hares are very sweet, and pleasant to the Stomach, boiled in
Water and Wine with Sage; or roasted with Sage and Cloves, or else baked: They
are good for such as are too fat, and desire to be lean; they cause a good
color and beauty in the Face; whence the Poet jesting, says, Si quando Leporem
mittis mihi, Gellia, dicis*
Formosus septem Marce diebus eris
Si non mentiris, si verum Gellia narras,
Edisti nunquam Gellia tu Leporem.


The Blood of an Hare fried and eaten, is good against the Dysentery, inward
Imposthumes, and old Fluxes, breaks the Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys and
Bladder, and drives it out; the Brains of a roasted Hare eaten, cures the
trembling of the Members; and the same thing facilitates the breeding of Teeth
in Infants, and lessens the pains thereof. Bathing ones self in the Broth of an
Hare, is very good against the Gout.

Hurt. It is hardly digested, breeds gross Blood, binds the Belly, induces
waking, and troublesome Dreams; it is bad for melancholic and studious Persons,
of small and bad nourishment.

Remedy. It becomes less hurtful, being well larded and roasted with Aromatic
Spices. It Is not good, unless in Winter for Young and Sanguine Men.

CHAP. CIV. Of Bacon or Pork.
Name. IN Latin, Porcus; in English, Bacon or Pork.

Choice. That is the best which is neither too little nor too old, but of a
middle Age, and a Male gelt, and brought up in the Fields.

Qualities. It Is hot in the first degree, and moist in the second; but the
sucking-pig is more moist, therefore not to be eat, because very hurtful.

Commodity. It Is of a large and commendable nourishment, maintains the Body
slippery, and provokes Urine. Bacon, especially the Hams, are good to excite
the Appetite, and to boil with other flesh; for by its good taste it makes the
Beer relish, and cuts Phlegm.

Hurt. This flesh is hurtful to delicate Persons, and such as live in ease,
causes the Sciatica and Gout, especially the flesh of a sucking-pig; and
because it is too moist and viscuous, and of much Excrements, it putr^fies
easily, and converts it self into the Humors which it finds in the Stomach,
causes Phlegm and Cholick-pains, the Stone in the Kidneys, and Obstructions in
the Liver. The Sows have very bad flesh, and full of melancholic Humors,
begetting gross nourishment; whence those that eat too much of this Food,
abound with many Excrements. It gluts and loosens the Stomach, takes away the
Appetite, provokes nauseating, and is easily turned into Choler.

Remedy. Pork is less hurtful, eaten in a small quantity, of a middle Age, and
let the flesh be lean, but of a fat Beast, powdered, roasted with
sweet smelling Herbs; or else fried with Salt, Fennel, or Sage, whereby it is
more pleasant to the taste, and more wholesome, for it has not so many moist
superfluities: This flesh is good in very cool Weather for Young Men that have
not an hot Stomach, and for such as labor; but naught for Old and Idle folks.

Advertisements concerning the Parts of Beasts and Birds.
AMongst the Parts of Birds and Beasts, some are better than others; for all
the extremities, as the Head, the Neck, the Feet, the Tail, in respect of the
rest, are hard, of little and gross Nourishment, and hard to be digested; but
better and more savoury are the Parts about the Wings, Back, and Breast.

The Parts of Animals.

I. The Head. LET the Head be of a temperate Creature, of a moderate Age and
Complexion: That of a Kid is of better and greater Nourishment, provokes Urine,
loosens the Belly, and excites venereal Desires; but eating too much thereof,
it thickens the subtle Humors, and breeds gross; it burdens the Stomach,
because it is not easily digested, and will hardly go down, unless eaten with
strong Mustard, and other Aromatic things. The Head is hot in the first
degree, and moist in the second, and in cold weather very good for young and
choleric men.

II. The Brain. ALL Brains hurt the Stomach, and induce Nauseating; are a
phlegmatic Food, of gross Nourishment, hard Digestion; but seasoned with
Spices, and Aromatic things, it becomes better: The Brains of Birds,
especially of wild Fowl, are very good, eaten with Orice, Pepper and Vinegar,
to take away their moist Humors.

III. The Eyes. THE Eyes are eaten by very few People: They are of a watery
Nature, composed of different Substances; they are viscuous, whence they are of
an hard digestion, except above all the rest, the Eyes of a young Kid, or of a
Calf.

IV. The Tongue. THE Tongue excels the other Parts in pleasant Taste, and
goodness of Aliment, and is also easily concocted.

V. The Neck. THE Neck of Birds are as the Hearts of Beasts, hard to be
digested, but by reason of their often motion, they beget fewer Superfluities.
The Necks of roasted Pigeons are good for such as are in health, and for those
also that have lost their Stomach.

VI. The Duggs. WHen the Duggs or Udders are full of Milk, they are very
pleasant to gluttonous Folks, especially those of young Sows and Heifers; and
if they are well digested, they afford good Nourishment; but if the Stomach is
not able to concoct them, they breed crude and viscuous Humors.

VII. The Wings. THE Wings of Birds are of an excellent Nourishment, for they
are without all Superfluities.

VIII. The Heart. THE Heart has a fibrous and hard Substance, whence it is not
easily digested, but rightly seasoned; and if well digested once, it gives no
small and good Nourishment.

IX. The Liver. THE Liver of all four-footed Creatures is very bad Food, for it
is not easily digested it self, and hinders the digestion of other Food: It
wearies and burdens the Stomach; but if the Beast be fed with dried Figs before
it is killed, and if it be a Male and young, its Liver is a delicate Food,
nourishing the Body exceeding well; and is particularly good for them who in
the Dusk cannot see at all; such is that of the Goose fatned with Milk, or of a
fat Hen. The hurt of the Liver is removed by boiling it well, until the blood
which is within it be consumed; and let it be boiled with Sage and Laurel,
afterward wrapped up with the Gizard, and when it is thoroughly boiled, let the
sauce be the juice of Oranges. The Livers of Hens and Capons are the best; that
of a Kid is next; then that of a Goose; and lastly, the Liver of an Hog. The
Liver is good at all times, for all Ages and Complexions, provided it be so
qualified, as is said before.

X. The Lungs. THE Lights are so much more easily digested than the Liver or
Milt, by how much they are more rare, but they nourish less, and breed Phlegm.

XI. The Milt. THE Milt is very pleasant to the taste, by reason of a certain
sharpness which it contains within it self, but is of a bad nourishment, and
being a receptacle of melancholic Humors, it makes those who eat too much of
it, melancholic.

XII. The Kidneys. THE Kidneys nourish badly, digest worse, especially of old
Creatures; but of young ones, and of those that suck, as young tender Pigs, and
Kids, they are better.

XIII. The Tripe. THE Tripe is good for such as labor and tire their Bodies,
for it is harder than the flesh of its Creature: It is cold and dry in the
second degree; it is good for those that are troubled with great Heat in the
Stomach and Belly, because it breeds cold Humors; it hurts them that have the
Scurf, the Leprosy, and other melancholic Infirmities. The best is that of a
fat Beast, killed in the flower of its Age, well fed, and clean; let it be a
long time boiling in fat Broth, with Mint and Spices enough; it is not good,
unless in cold weather, for young men that work hard, of a strong Stomach, and
hot Constitution. The Kids-Tripes challenge the Superiority; Calves-Tripes
claim the next place; and Ox-Tripes the last.

XIV. The Spleen. THE Spleen, as it is the receptacle of gross melancholy
Blood, affords little Nourishment, and is hardly concocted, therefore not fit
for Food.

XV. The Bowels. THE Intestines affords not very good, but thick Aliment; and
the Bowels of younger Quadrupeds, as Calves are of better juice, and more
easily concocted, than of old.

XVI. The Testicles. THE substance of the Testicles or Stones is like that of
the Udder: They afford an excellent Nourishment to the Body, multiplying the
Seed, and increasing Copulation; those of fatted Cocks and Cockrels are
pleasant to the Taste, of an excellent and great Nourishment; for it is said,
Tantum nutriunt, quantum ponderant. The Stones of old Creatures are of a slow
Digestion, do somewhat press the Stomach; but first boiling them with Mountain
Pennyroyal and Salt, and afterward frying them with fresh Butter, whereby
they are less hurtful: They are good in cold weather for all Ages and
Complexions, except decrepit and phlegmatic men.

XVII. The Feet. THE Feet of Beasts are better than those of Birds, for by
reason of their continual motion, they are more easily digested, but beget
gross and viscuous Humors; they are to be eaten at first Course. The Feet of
Birds are no good Food; but Kids, Lambs, Calves-Feet, and other young Creatures
which run much, are good for choleric men, and such as have a thin Blood,
cause Sleep, nourish much, soder the broken Veins in the Breast and Lungs, cure
Tisical Distempers, and excite the Appetite, hurt those that are troubled with
Wind, the Gout, Pains in the Joints, and the Sciatica: They are good at all
times for young and choleric, though naught for old and gouty persons; but
boiling them till they be soft, and then preparing them with Vinegar and
Saffron, takes away all their ill.

CHAP. CV. Of Butter.
Name. IN Latin, Butyrum; in English, Butter.

Choice. The best is the fresh, and sweetest, free from all ill tastes.

Quality. It Is hot and moist in the first degree.

Commodity. Butter purges strongly, and eaten with Sugar or Honey, it ripens
gross Catarrhs; for it extracts the Superfluities which are congested in the
Breast and Lungs, cures the Asthma and Cough, mitigates Pains and Aches,
especially eaten with Honey and bitter Almonds, it nourishes well and
sufficiently.

Hurt. It loosens and weakens the Stomachs of such as use it too much, prepares
the Body for the Itch, and Smallpox.

Remedy. Its hurt is remedied, by eating after it, strengthening, binding, and
astringent Food, or Sugar of Roses; it is good at all times both for young and
old, for it purges the Catarrhs, opening and cleansing the Breast.

CHAP. CVI. Of Cheese.
Name. LAtin, Caseus; English, Cheese.

Choice. The good Cheese is the fresh* made of temperate Milk, but let it be of
a good Pasture.

Quality. The Fresh Cheese is cold and moist in the second degree, but the old
is hot and dry.

Commodity. The Fresh mollifies and fattens the Body, is pleasant to the Taste,
and not hurtful to the Stomach, and of all other Cheeses is most digestible,
but let it not be hard Curd. The Cream Cheese is most wholesome, but it must be
eaten the same day on which it was made. Cheese is only to be eaten, to shut up
and close the mouth of the Stomach; and we must beware we eat not too much
thereof, especially of old Cheese, which if eaten in too great a quantity, is
very pernicious: And therefore this Rule is to be observed, viz.

Caseus est sanus, quem dat avara manus. For thus only it may be eaten without
hurt.

Hurt. The old is hardly digested; and therefore is said, Caseus est nequam
quia digerit omnia se quam.

It induces Thirst, inflames the Blood, causes the Stone, obstructs the Liver,
digests slowly, especially if the Stomach be weak, and offends the Reins.

Remedy. Eating it with Nuts, Almonds, Pears, Apples, etc. it is less hurtful;
it requires a strong Stomach to digest it, and therefore is only good for young
men that labor.

CHAP. CVII. Of Milk.
Name. IN Latin, Lac; English, Milk.

Choice. The most precious Milk is the Woman's; the second, Asses Milk; the
third, Sheeps Milk; the fourth, Goats; and the last, Cows Milk.

Quality. It Is moist in the second degree, and as to the heat it is temperate.
Milk is composed of three Substances; the first watery, called the Whey, which
is cold and moist, nitrious and loosening: The second is fat, called Butter,
and is temperate: The third is gross, whereof is made Cheese, and is viscuous
and phlegmatic.

Commodity. It increases the Brain, fattens the Body, is good for the Hectic
Fever, takes away the heat of the Urine, nourishes sufficiently, makes the Body
handsome, increases Lust, cures the Cough, opens the Breast, and restores the
Tisical men; drinking the quantity of three ounces with a little Sugar, not
drink, nor eat, nor move, nor sleep, till it be digested.

Hurt. It hurts such as are troubled with Fevers, and Head-achs, and cholick
Pains, soreness of the Eyes, and Catarrhs, the Stone, Obstructions; is naught
for the Teeth and Gums.

Remedy. It is less hurtful, if eaten in a small quantity; drink it with a
little Salt, Sugar, or Honey, that it may not curdle in the Stomach; drunk in
the morning fasting, it is good for young and choleric men, but bad for old.

CHAP. CVIII. Of Cream.
Name. IN Latin, Flos Lactis; in English, Cream.

Choice. The best is of that Milk from which the Butter has not been separated;
let it be fresh, and of an excellent Pasture.

Quality. It Is cold in the second degree, and temperately moist.

Commodity. It quenches Thirst, and the heat of the Stomach, and is very
powerful to digest.

Hurt. It binds the Breast, sends naughty Vapors into the Head, causing
sometimes Suffocations and Syncope; and as all Milk curdled, is suddenly
putrified, it forces down the Food raw from the Stomach, hardly digests it
self, breeds the Stone and Liente^y, and is only good in hot weather for young,
etc.

Remedy. It Is to be eaten with Sugar, for the first Course.

CHAP. CIX. Of Whey.
Name. IN Latin, Serum; in English, Whey.

Choice. The fresh, made of the best Milk, is the most excellent.

Quality. It Is cold and dry in the first degree.

Commodity. It Is good for men of an hot Complexion, cures such as are troubled
with a Flux of choleric Humors, quenches Thirst, burning Choler, and provokes
Sleep.

Hurt. It hurts the Stomach, especially a cold one, weakens the Nerves; and the
salted is worse than the fresh, because it gives bad Nourishment, causes
Thirst, binds the Belly, begets Windiness, increases the Gravel and Stone in
the Kidneys, and ordinary Vessels, and is of an hard Digestion.

Remedy. It Is less hurtful, eaten fresh in the last Course with much Sugar;
young choleric men, and such as labor, may eat it at all times.

Advertisements concerning Birds.
THE different Nature of Birds is discerned from the Time, the Age, the Food,
the Place, the Air, and from being gelded. You must therefore diligently
observe these four things: And first,

The Time. Because at such Time as Birds couple, as well domestic as wild
Fowl, they thereby grow lean, and feed little; the which is manifestly apparent
in tame Fowl: Hens in the Winter after they are trod, do fatten sufficiently,
and become tender; some Birds are better in Summer, at which time they eat the
Corn; others in Autumn, because they eat Grapes, Figs, Apples, Berries, and
such like Fruit; other Birds are more acceptable in Winter, as Thrushes,
Black-birds, Wild-geese, Cranes, and all Waterfowl. Secondly,

The Victuals. For some feed on Flesh; as Eagles, Vultures, Kites; and others
that have crooked Tallons, as feeding on Carrion, are not eaten by us; some
live on Worms, but most eat Corn, as Pigeons, Doves, Turtles, etc. In short,
some are nourisht on Land, others in Rivers; some in Lakes, and others in the
Sea; and there is no small number of Birds which feed on Herbs: And it is
observable, that besides this, the flesh of wild Fowls have always the taste of
such things as the Birds feed on, as of Ants, of Worms, of Fish, of Slime, and
of Mud. Thirdly,

The Place. Mountain-Fowl are always to be preferred before the rest, before
tame Fowl, and such as frequent Marshes, Fens, and Lakes: For according to the
variety of the Place, the flesh is varied and changed; as sometimes to be dry,
of few Excrements, and easily digested; or moist, full of Excrements, and of a
difficult concoction, which does often happen in the same Bird. Besides,
gelding or cutting a Fowl, makes it fat and sweet, as appears in the flesh of
Capons. Fourthly, and Lastly,

The Age. For the flesh of young Birds is always better than that of old, which
is hard, dry, and difficultly digested, and of small nourishment. But now let
us proceed in particular to the flesh of Birds which are used for Food.

CHAP. CX. Of Ducks.
Name. IN Latin, Anas; in English, a Duck.

Choice. The young, fat, tender, and wild Duck is the best.

Qualities. It Is hot and moist in the second degree.

Commodity. The Duck is the most hot of all the other tame Fowl; its Wings and
Liver are the best, because they give a good and ready Nourishment. When it is
fat it fattens, and causes a good Color, clears the Voice, increases the Seed,
kindles Lust, expels Windiness, and strengthens the Body; the Liver of a Duck
is a delicate and whols m Food, cures the Hepatick Flux.

Hurt. It Is of an hard digestion, and gross nourishment; it inflames and makes
Feverish such as are of an hot Complexion: The flesh is hard, of a bad and
excrementious nourishment.

Remedy. The wild and young Ducks are least hurtful, and such as having been
killed two days, are first made tender by hanging in the open Air, afterward
eaten roasted full of Odoriferous Herbs and Spices.

The Old Ducks are the worst, especially such as are brought up and frequent
the Streets of the City, and are nourished with the filth and nastiness,
drinking the stinking Water which runs down the Channels. The best are such as
live in the open Air, whereby they become more wholesome and acceptable to the
taste: The Duck is good in cold Weather, for hot Stomachs, and such as labor
much.

CHAP. CXI. Of Capons.
Name. IN Latin, Capo; in English, it is called a Capon.

Choice. The best is the young, fat, and well-fed Capon, that is brought up in
the open Air.

Qualities. The Capon is temperate in all Qualities.

Commodity. It nourishes better than all other Food, and greatly also,
increases Lust; and for the daintiness of its flesh, goes beyond all others;
for it begets perfect Blood, and equallises all the Humors, makes a good
Brain, excites the Appetite, agrees with all Complexions; is good for the
Sight, strengthens the Natural heat, but let it not be too fat.

Hurt. The superfluous and overmuch eating thereof is very pernicious to idle
and sedentany Persons, by reason of its copious Nourishment, and the great
quantity of Blood which it breeds in the Body; and therefore it is no small
cause of the Sciatica, and Gout, to which Disease it is credibly reported that
the Capons are very apt, and subject to more than any other Fowl.

Remedy. You must eat but little thereof, and perform some large Exercise after
it; it is good at all times, for all Ages and Complexions; and therefore
alluding to (...) goodness and usefulness, instead of Cap^ne, the Italians say,
Qua pone, which signifies, bring it here, set it before us.

CHAP. CXII. Of Pigeons.
Name. IN Latin, Columba; in English, a Dove, or Pidgeon.

Choice. Such as live in Dove-houses and Towers are the best of all, especially
when they leave their Nests, beginning to feed themselves, and are of an
indifferent bigness.

Qu^lities. The tame Pigeons are hot and moist in the ^econd degree; the wild
are more hot, and less moist.

Commodity. The Pigeons, as well those that live in Houses, as those that
build in Towers, afford good Nourishment, breed excellent Blood, are good for
Old and Phlegmatic Men, strengthen the Legs, cure the Palsy, increase the Heat
in weak Men, stir up Venereal desires, purge the Reins, and are easily
digested; using them in the Sickness-time, they preserve a Man from the Plague,
provided he eat no other flesh. The wild are very good for pains in the Joints
and Limbs, and contribute much to the Eyesight, which is weakened for want of
Spirits, to tremblings, and augment the strength. Pigeons split asunder in the
middle, are very beneficial being applied to dying men's Feet*

Hurt. They are very unwholsom for hot Complexions, kindle and inflame the
Blood, wherefore they do not agree with feverish Persons; they burden and make
the Head heavy, especially the Heads of them: And the wild Pigeons do the
same, though much more, the which are of a difficult digestion, and are a great
cause of Fevers.

Remedy. Taking away their Head, they are less hurtful; and likewise boiling
them in fat Broth with Verjuice, Plums, Vinegar, and Corianders. They are good
in Winter for Old and Phlegmatic Men.

CHAP. CXIII. Of Pheasants.
Name. IN Latin, Phasianus; in English, Pheasant; so called from Phasis, a
River of Colchis, where these Birds resort in great multitudes.

Choice. The best Pheasants are the young, fat, and hunted ones.

Qualities. The flesh of a Pheasant is temperate in all Qualities, and is of a
middling sort, betwixt a Patridge and a Capon.

Commodity. The flesh of this Bird is most agreeable with Humane Nature; it is
the Food of great Lords and Princes, it comforts and strengthens the Stomach,
is of a great nourishment, fattens exceedingly; so that lean and slender
Persons by the use of this Food in a short while gather flesh: And so the
Hectic Fevers, and Tisical Persons, as well as those that are in Health, find
the benefit of this Food; it increases the Vigor, and all the Faculties,
neither does it beget superfluous moistness: In short, the flesh of a Pheasant
is better than that of a Pullet, because it is more dry by the Air, by its Food,
and by its greater Exercise.

Hurt. The superfluous use of Pheasants cause the Gout; but because the
Phe^sants don't give solid nourishment, but breed thin Blood, therefore it is no
Food for Plough-men, and such as Labor, for with such fat and viscuous Food is
more agreeable.

Remedy. You must eat moderately thereof: Pheasant is good in Autumn and
Winter, for all Ages and delicate Complexions.

CHAP. CXIV. Of Hens.
Name. IN Latin, Gallina; in English, an Hen.

Choice. The black Hen is the best with its Crest elevated, and double with red
Gills, and let it be fat and young, and which has not yet laid Eggs. The wild
Hens are much better than the tame.

Quality. The flesh of an Hen is temperate in all Qualities.

Commodity. It nourishes the Body wonderfully, is easily digested, when it is
tender, breeds good Blood; being a temperate flesh, does not convert it self
into Choler or Phlegm, excites the Appetite, increases the Understanding, clears
the Voice, and it has a wonderful Propriety and Faculty, to temperate Humane
Complexions. Cockerels have the same effects, but they are such as have not
begun to crow, nor to tread the Hen; for their stones are of great nourishment,
and when they are fat, are easily digested, and are good and convenient at all
times, and for all Ages, especially in Summer Cockerels, or young Cocks boiled
in Verjuice.

Hurt. Old Hens are of an hard digestion.

Remedy. You must keep them till they are tender, which makes them soon ready;
and then drown them in Wine, afterward boil them with a Figg, or Nut in their
Belly.

CHAP. CXV. Of Cocks.
Name. IN Latin, Gallus; in English, a Cock.

Choice. In Physic the old Cocks are chosen.

Qualities. The flesh of a Cock is more dry than a Hen, and more hot and
sulphurous.

Commodity. They are more useful in Physic than Food; for their Broth drank,
dissolves Windiness, is good for Cholick-pains, moves the Body, provokes Sleep
and Lust.

Hurt. A Cock has hard flesh, and not easily digested.

Remedy. It must be made very tender.

CHAP. CXVI. Of Turky-Cocks.
Name. IN Latin, Gallus Africanus; because they were first brought out of
Africa into Europe; though in English, they are called Turky-Cocks, as if they
came from Asia.

Choice. The best Turky-Cocks are the young, and such as are fatned in the
Fields, rather than about the House; killed in Winter, and made tender in the
Night-Air.

Qualities. This Fowl is hot and moist in the second degree.

Commodity. For goodness, nourishment, and pleasant taste, the Turky-Pullets
will not give place to our Hens or Pullets; for their flesh is the best and
whitest, and excels all others in wholsomness; for it is more easily digested,
nourishes better, and begets fewer superfluities, breeding good Blood, provided
it be very tender, well roasted, baked, or boiled; it restores the weak,
increases the Seed, and stirs up Carnal desires.

Hurt. It hurts such as are Idle, causing Catarrhs, and the Gout.

Remedy. You must eat it but seldom, in a small quantity, and roasted with
Spice.

CHAP. CXVII. Of Larks.
Name. IN Latin, Alauda, Corydalus, or Galerita; so called from a Crest it
wears on its Head, and is the biggest sort; in English, a Lark.

Choice. The best Larks are the least, when they are fat.

Qualities. They are hot, and temperately moist.

Commodity. The Larks which in Autumn are found in great plenty, as likewise in
Winter, if they be fat, do nourish well; and being eaten roasted, excite the
Appetite, are easily digested, especially roasted with Sage and Lard, or boiled
with diverse sawces; but they must be thoroughly done, fat, young, etc. They are
good in Autumn and Winter for all Complexions; and the crested Lark boiled in
Broth cures the Colic, and its Ashes have the same effect.

Hurt. This Bird is without any hurt, only the old, which are hardly digested.

Remedy. The old Larks must be eaten with good sauce, and fresh.

CHAP. CXVIII. Of Black-Birds.
Name. IN Latin, Merula; English, Blackbird.

Choice. The best are the fat, and such as are taken in cold Weather.

Qualities. The Black-Birds are hot, and dry in the beginning of the second
degree, as the Thrushes.

Commodity. They nourish sufficiently, and when they are fat and young, their
flesh is more esteemed of by many than that of a Thrush, though they are much
deceived, for the latter is more sweet; nay, there are some so foolish, that
they hate Black-Birds because they eat Worms and Grasshoppers.

Hurt. Their flesh is of an hard digestion, especially when they are old, and
are naught for Old Men, and such as are troubled with the Megrims and Frenzy.

Remedy. They are less hurtful boiled in Good fresh Broth, stuffed with Parsley,
and other opening Herbs.

CHAP. CXIX. Of Geese.
Name. IN Latin, Anser; in English, a Goose.

Choice. The best are the fattest, such as are brought up in the Fields, and
near any Water. The best parts are the Wings and Liver.

Qualities. Geese are hot in the first degree, and moist in the second.

Commodity. The flesh of young Geese afford good nourishment, fattens those
that are lean and meager. If you feed the Geese with Milk, their Liver is much
more pleasant, digests and nourishes well and enough: The bottom of the feet of
a Goose, roasted and fried with the Comb of a Cock, are very pleasant to the
taste. The flesh of Geese increases Seed, inflames Lust, and Carnal dc^^res,
and renders the Voice more acute and clear. Geese are useful in many respects,
that is, for the Quills, Feathers, Flesh, Fat, and Dung or Excrements.

Hurt. The flesh of a Goose is very hardly digested, has many superfluities,
and is more hot than that of a Pidgeon; and therefore is not good for feverish
Persons, chiefly if the Goose be old.

Remedy. The hurt of old Geese is removed by boiling them well; and the young
ones are to be roasted with sweet-herbs, and Spices: The wild Geese are better
than the tame; they are good in Winter for those that have a strong Stomach,
and use much Exercise; whence they do not agree with Old Men.

CHAP. CXX. Of Plovers.
Name. IN Latin, Spardalus; in English, Plovers.

Choice. You must choose them young and tender; and take notice that the gray
Plover is much better than the green.

Qualities. They do not exceed in any quality, but are temperate.

Commodity. They are an excellent and wholesome Food, are very easily digested,
and afford a good nourishment.

Hurt. There is but one bad quality in them, which is, that they are of a
Melancholy Juice.

Remedy. Let them be well roasted, but they must not be eaten by such as are of
a Melancholic Nature, but by those of a different Constitution.

CHAP. CXXI. Of Eggs.
Name. IN Latin, Ovum; in English, an Egg.

Choice. The Eggs of a fat Hen, fed with Corn, and which are trod by the Cock,
and laid fresh, are the best, and next to this is a Pheasants Egg; but those
of a Goose or Duck are naught, because they have a strong smell, and are of an
hard digestion; and therefore a young Hens Egg is beyond all, and let it be
small, long, and fresh, because it demonstrates the strength of its heat: And
to this end observe this Distich.

Regula Doctorum debet pro lege teneri,
Quod bona sunt ova, parvula, longa, nova.
Or this: Ova recentia, vina rubentia, pinguia jura,
Cum simila pura, naturae sunt valitura.


Qualities. They are hot and moist temperately; for the White is cold, and the
Yolk is hot, and both moist.

Commodity. Eggs are of a copious and ready nourishment; whence the Proverb, As
full of mirth as an Egg is of meat. They are good for Old Men, and such as are
in Health, increase the Seed, excite Copulation, are good for Tisical Men, open
the Breast, clear the Voice, especially the soft Eggs supt up, sucked with some
Salt; those which are called poached, are the best, eaten with Salt, Spice, and
Vinegar; boiled in their shell, the exhalation of the Vapors are hindered. The
hard Eggs are not easily digested, and the fried Eggs much less.

Hurt. They hinder digestion, if you eat other Food immediately after them,
they are easily turned into those Humors which they find in the Stomach.

Remedy. You must eat the fresh Eggs only, and of them only the Yolk; and
between the Eggs and other Food let there be some interval of time, and let
them not be eaten with Fish.

CHAP. CXXII. Of Sparrows.
Name. IN Latin, Passer; in English, a Sparrow.

Choice. You must choose the Sparrows that build in Towers or Mountains, in
Autumn, that feed on Corn and Grapes, they are more fat, and breed good Juice.
The Solitary Sparrow is the best.

Qualities. The Sparrow is hotter than all the other Birds, and its flesh is
dry; and moreover, being so exceeding hot, it is accounted luxurious, and
therefore does not outlive one Year.

Commodity. The young Sparrows afford good Nourishment, and aid Copulation: The
Mountain Sparrows have a wonderful virtue against the Stone in the Kidneys and
Bladder.

Hurt. The Sparrows are unpleasant to the Palate, by reason of their too much
dryness; are of a difficult digestion, inflame, and beget naughty nourishment,
that is Choleric, and Melancholic, and excites Lust.

Remedy. They must be eaten in a small quantity; the Hen-Sparrows, and the
young ones are the best; they must be eaten in Autumn.

CHAP. CXXIII. Of Peacocks.
Name. IN Latin, Pavo; in English, a Peacock, or Pea-Hen.

Choice. The best is that which is bred in a good Air, young and tender.

Quality. It Is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Commodity. They nourish enough, chiefly such as have a hot Stomach, and toil
much.

Hurt. They are of an hard and slow Digestion, breed melancholic Blood, and
bad Nourishment, hurting such as live in idleness. They spoil Gardens.

Remedy. You must eat the young and tender, that has hung some days in the
clear Air by the Neck, with a weight at its Feet, then roast it with Cloves,
and such like.

CHAP. CXXIV. Of Partridges.
Name. IN Latin, Perdix; in English, a Partridge.

Choice. The young, tender, and male Partridge, is the best.

Quality. It Is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.

Commodity. It breeds good and slender Nourishment, is easily digested,
fattens, dryes the moistness of the Stomach* and contributes much to the
preservation of the ^ealth: The flesh is better, and more commendable than that
of an Hen; it increases Lust, and will not corrupt in the Stomach; it cures
those that are infected with the French Disease, the Epilepsie, if eaten a
whole year together.

Hurt. The old Partridges are of a very hard substance, and of a bad taste,
hurt melancholic men, and bind the Body.

Remedy. You must only eat the young Partridges, and the old ones are to be
mortified, and made tender in the Winder, in the clear Air of the night.

CHAP. CXXV. Of Star^s.
Name. IN Lati^, Sturnus; in English, a Stare, or Starling.

Choice. The young Starlings, made tender as the Partridge, are the best.

Quality. Its Flesh is temperate.

Commodity. The Effects which it produces, is not much unlike those of a
Partridge, for it nourishes well; and they say, it also cures the Pox,
continuing to eat every day through the year one Stare, and no more.

Hurt. The old Stares are of an hard digestion, breeding naughty and
melancholic Humors.

Remedy. You must eat the young and tender with good Sauce.

CHAP. CXXVI. Of Quails.
Name. IN Latin, Coturnix; in English, Quails.

Choice. Those are to be chosen, that are nourished and bred in Places where
there grows no Hellebore, which have been caught by a Hawk, and let them be fat
and tender.

Quality. They are hot in the first degree, and moist in the second.

Commodity. They are good for melancholic men, for their moisture temperates
the moistness of this Humor; they are very nourishing, and pleasant to the
taste.

Hurt. They are easily corrupted, and as some affirm, prepare the Body to
Fevers, and cause the Cramp and Falling Sickness, wherewith this Bird is
troubled; though some ho^d, that this is not meant of Quails, but some other
Bird which is bigger.

In short, you must not use this Fowl too often, because it breeds naughty
Excrements, very easily putrified; and these being fat, loosen the Stomach,
take away the Appetite: Therefore if any one has a mind to eat them, let him
choose the Quails that are young, and very fleshy, but let him avoid the too
fat ones.

Remedy. By eating them [with Vinegar and Coriander-seed, you may mitigate and
lessen their malignant qualities. You must eat them seldom, and in Autumn, when
they have their Gizzard full of Corn, or breed them up in your House; they are
not good for old and phlegmatic men: In Autumn, as is said, they are less
hurtful than at any other time of the year, and they must be diligently
roasted, but not larded with Bacon Fat, but with the Fat of Veal, or such like:
In Summer you must forbear them, for then they are very much extenuated by
nourishing their young ones, and therefore easily beget Fevers.

CHAP. CXXVII Of Thrushes.
Name. IN Latin, Turdus; in English, A Thrush.

Choice. They are to be chosen in Winter, but let them be very fat, and such as
are fed with Juniper and Myrtle-berries: Their Flesh is of a good taste, and
very pleasant to the Palate, especially if fat, and roasted with a quick fire;
they must not be drawed, or their Intrails taken out.

Quality. They are hot and dry in the beginning of the second degree.

Commodity. They nourish, if not much, at least very well, for they are easily
digested; neither are they windy, at least the Mountain-Thrushes: They are very
good both for sick, and those that are in health, because they breed good
Blood, chiefly the fat ones.

Hurt. The old and lean Thrushes are of an hard Digestion, breed melancholic
Humors, especially such as have a black Flesh, and hurt such as are troubled
with the Megrims, and Frenzy.

Remedy. You must eat the fat, young, fresh, roasted with Sage, and larded, or
else boiled in good Broth with Parsley and Raisins; they are good in cool
weather for all Ages and Complexions.

CHAP. CXXVIII. Of Turtles.
Name. IN Latin, Turtur; in English, a Turtle.

Choice. The best are the young Turtles, and fed some days in the House,
whereby they acquire a little more juice and moisture.

Quality. They are hot and dry in the second degree.

Commodity. They nourish excellently, are of a good savor, easily digested,
fortify the Stomach, increase Lust, purify the Wit; roasted with Cloves, and
juice of Oranges, they are very good against the Dyssentery, and other Fluxes.

Hurt. Old Turtles are naught for choleric and melancholic men, because they
infect the Blood with the same Humors, being a dry Flesh, and of an hard
Digestion.

Remedy. You must eat the young, and fat ones, and fed in the House some days
with moist Food; and you must mortify them two days in the clear Air; they are
good in cold weather for old and phlegmatic men.

Advertisements concerning Fish.
THE Fish in respect of Flesh are of a less nourishment, but gross, phlegmatic,
cold, and full of Superfluities; the old nourish more than the young, and those
that live amongst Stones and Rocks are the best. Fish are of an hard Digestion,
and the sign of their Indigestion is Thirst, seeing that they all cause Thirst,
if they remain long time in the Stomach, nay sometimes they corrupt. Concerning
Fish you may observe these following Rules:

I. That all Fish should be eaten hot, and not cold.

II. That you must not stuff your self too full of any sort of Fish, but eat
less thereof than of Flesh.

III. That you must not eat them too often, and when you use them, they are to
be eaten with Anise-seed, Fennel, and other Spices, whereby in some sort to dry
up their moistness.

IV. That you do not eat Fish after great Labor and Exercise, for then they
easily corrupt; neither may you eat Fish after other Food: Those that have a
weak Stomach, and full of bad Humors, may eat no sort of Fish; therefore they
may not be given to old men, and such as are not healthy, for they do rather
diminish, than increase the natural Heat.

V. Fish and Flesh at the same Table are to be forbidden: Likewise Fish and
Milk, or any thing belonging thereunto, for they breed many naughty Distempers;
no less inconvenient are Eggs.

VI. That great and viscuous Fish pickled and salted, are something better than
fresh, and less hurtful, but let them not be too salt, for the Salt is very
offensive to the Brain: The fresh Fish beget watery Phlegm, soften the Nerves,
and are only convenient for hot Stomachs; the salted and seasoned Fish are not
so moist, and therefore better; the dry are of a bad nourishment.

VII. You must also observe, that the clearer and deeper the Water is, the
better are the Fish that are nourished therein.

VIII. That the maritime Fish are more wholesome than the fresh Water Fish,
being more hot, and less moist, and their nourishment draws near to Flesh.

IX. Amongst the Sea and River-Fish, those are most commendable which live in
rocky Places; next to these, in sandy Places, in sweet, clear, and running
Waters, where there is no filth; but those Fish are naught which live in Pools,
Lakes, Marshes, Fens, and in any still or muddy Water.

X. That amongst all the Fish, both in the Sea and Rivers, those which are not
too big, are the best, and which have not an hard and dry Flesh, without any
fatness or slimyness, or naughty taste, or smell, not viscuous, but crisp and
tender, not apt to corrupt, but that will keep a long while, and such as have
many Fins and Scales.

XI. Fish are cold and moist, and therefore naught for cold Complexions, though
they increase the Milk, and Seed, and are very convenient for choleric men.

XII. The best way of dressing and preparing Fish, is to broyl it over the
Goals, or Gridiron; to boil it is the next way, and to fry it is the worst
manner, especially for such as have a weak Stomach. The roasted Fish are better
than the boiled, and the boiled better than the fried; but you must take
notice, that the roasted Fish must not be covered, to the end that their
Vapors may be exhaled.

CHAP. CXXIX. Of Eels.
Name. IN Latin, Anguilla; in English, an Eel.

Choice. You must choose such as at Spring are taken in the sandy Sea, and not
muddy, and boil them as soon as you have caught them; those of the clear Water
are the best.

Quality. Eels are cold in the first degree, and dry in the second.

Commodity. It Is of a delicate taste, and good nourishment, and being salted,
keeps a long time, and becomes very good for phlegmatic Stomachs.

Hurt. It offends the Stomach, is of an hard digestion, for its Flesh is
viscuous, and using it too often, breeds the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder,
causes the Gout, and Convulsions of the Nerves, hurts all the Bowels,
especially the Head; the salted Eels are naught for melancholic men, because
they increase this Humor: In short, whosoever eats too much thereof, goes in
danger of his life.

Remedy. They are less hurtful skinn'd fresh, throwing away the Head, and
roasting the Tail with Laurel, often sprinkling thereon powdered Sugar, fine
Flower, and Cinnamon. The little ones are eaten fried with Pepper, and the juice
of Oranges.

CHAP. CXXX. Of Carps.
Name. IN Latin, Carpio; in English, a Carp.

Choice. Of Carps, the most fresh and sweet are the best.

Quality. This Fish is moderately hot, and moist in the beginning of the third
degree.

Commodity. It Is the most noble of all the Fish, and of so pleasant and
grateful a taste, that it is second to none; it has a tender Flesh that
nourishes well, in what manner soever it be eaten, whether boiled, roasted, or
fried: It is preserved sweet with the Leaves of Laurel, Myrtle, and Cedar.

Hurt. From the eating thereof accrues no hurt or damage to the Body, unless
that its Flesh being so pure and tender, is easily corrupted.

Remedy. You must throw away its Scales and Guts, then put it into Salt for six
hours, afterward sprinkle it with Oil, then sauce it with Vinegar, wherein let
there be boiled, Saffron, Pepper, Cloves and Cinnamon; it is good at all times,
for all Ages and Complexions.

CHAP. CXXXI. Of Crabs.
Name. IN Latin, Cancer; in English, a Crab, or Crevise.

Choice. The best are those that frequent the Rivers, and other sweet Waters,
such as are tender, and caught at Spring or Autumn, at Full Moon.

Quality. This Fish is cold in the second degree, and moist in the first.

Commodity. They are good for Tisical men, because they nourish exceedingly,
provoke Urine, increase the Seed, cleanse the Kidneys; and they cure such as
are bitten by a mad Dog, if you take their ashes, and dry the Crab in the Oven,
whereof you must give the Party bitten some quantity for forty days, but you
ought to cauterize the wounded place with Iron: And to take of the powder in
Rosa canina, with Water, or Milk, fattens much, and therefore is good for
Consumptive persons, and by its tenacity it hinders the colliquation of the
Members, and cures the Ulcer in the Lungs.

Hurt. Its Flesh is something hard of digestion, whence it breeds gross and
phlegmatic Humors in such as eat too much thereof.

Remedy. It must be well roasted under live Coals, and afterward eaten with
Pepper, and with strong Vinegar; it is good in Summer for young and choleric
men of an hot Complexion.

CHAP. CXXXII. Of Lampreys.
Name. IN Latin, Lampetra, qu. Lambens petras; in English, a Lamprey.

Choice. Those that are taken in Rivers, at the Spring are the best, for then
they are more hot, and the spinal Marrow is tender.

Quality. They are temperately hot, and moist in the first degree.

Commodity. They are of an excellent Nourishment, increases the Seed, is of a
most delicious taste, and a very dainty Dish for the Table.

Hurt. It is not of an easy digestion, especially if not boiled, and seasoned
well, is very bad and pernicious for the Gout, also for such as are grieved
with Convulsions of the Nerves.

Remedy. Let them be steept or insused in Malmsey, or strong Wine, stopping the
mouth with Nutmegs, and the holes with Cloves, boiling them in a little Pipkin
with Small nuts, Bread, Oil, Spices, and Malmsey; it is good at all times for
all Ages and Complexions, except decrepit persons.

CHAP. CXXXIII. Of Pikes.
Name. IN Latin, Lucius; in English, a Jack, or a Pike.

Choice. The best sort are they that live in Rivers, or else in Ponds, not
muddy, but let them be large, fresh, and fat.

Quality. They are cold and moist in the second degree.

Commodity. This Fish is very nourishing; its Jaws burnt, and reduced to a
Powder, and the weight of one dram drank in a good glass of Wine, break the
Stone.

Hurt. It Is of an hard Digestion, bad Nourishment, burdens the Stomach, and
increases Phlegm.

Remedy. Being boiled together with sweet Herbs, and with Oil, or else broyled
on the Grid-iron with Orice-roots and Vinegar, it is good in Winter for young
and choleric men.

CHAP. CXXXIV. Of Oysters.
Name. IN Latin, Ostrea; in English, Oysters.

Choice. The best are those of the Lucrine Lake, or those of England, but let
them be fresh, and taken in a Month which has an R in it, and they must be
eaten quickly.

Quality. They are hot in the first degree, and moist in the second.

Commodity. They waken and stir up the Appetite, increase the Seed, and move
the Body.

Hurt. They increase the Phlegm, and cause Obstructions.

Remedy. They are to be eaten with Pepper, Oil, and Vinegar; they are then best
roasted over the Coals; they are good in cool weather for young and choleric
men, of a strong Stomach.

CHAP. CXXXV. Of Sturgeon.
Name. IN Latin, Accipenser; in English, Sturgeon.

Choice. Those that are taken in Rivers are the best, for they become more fat
and savoury than in the Sea.

Quality. Sturgeon is hot in the beginning of the first degree, and moist in
the second.

Commodity. It nourishes sufficiently, increases the Seed, and refreshes the
Blood, and is counted a dainty Dish, and holds the chiefest place. Of the Spawn
or Row of this Fish salted, is made Caviare, which is eaten boiled or raw, to
excite the Appetite, and to make the Drink relish.

Hurt. The Fat of this Fish breeds viscuous Humors, and the fresher it is, the
harder of digestion it becomes.

Remedy. It is less hurtful if you eat thereof the Joul, and the Belly only,
and let it be boiled in Water and Vinegar, and so eaten.

CHAP. CXXXVI. Of Lobsters.
Name. IN Latin, Langusta; in English, Lobsters.

Choice. Those of the River are better than the Sea-Lobsters.

Qualities. They are like Crabs, cold in the second degree, and moist in the
first.

Commodity. They are good against Hectic Fevers, and Consumptions; they
fatten, and with their tenacious moistness resist the dissolution of the solid
Members, and with their coolness expel the heat of the Body; they are very
nourishing, and their Broth cures shortness of Breath.

Hurt. Lobsters breed cold and phlegmatic Humors, and are of a hard digestion.

Remedy. Broyling them like Crabs on the live Coals, and afterward eating them
with Pepper and Vinegar, they are more easily digested: They are good in hot
Weather for Sanguine and Choleric Complexions.

CHAP. CXXXVII. Of Sprats.
Name. IN Latin, Sardina et Sarda; in English, Sprats.

Choice. The best are such as are caught in Spring, in Sandy Seas.

Qualities. Sprats are cold in the beginning of the first degree, and moist in
the end of the same.

Commodity. Being boiled as soon as ever they are took, and eaten, they give
good nourishment, and a pleasant taste. The salted and pickled Sprats, or
Anchoves excite the Appetite, cleanse the Breast from all its superfluities;
and therefore such as are in good Health, may eat them moderately in the first
Course.

Hurt. They are moist, and cause windiness, especially eating the backbone of
them.

Remedy. Boiling them in a little Pot, or laying them over the Coals in a sheet
of Paper, with Oil and Parsley; or preserving them some few days with Salt and
Orice-Roots, their hurt is thereby removed. They are good for all Ages and
Complexions in Spring, provided you eat not too much of them.

CHAP. CXXXVIII. Of Tench.
Name. IN Latin, Tinca; in English, a Tench.

Choice. You must choose the Female, caught in Rivers, or in Ponds which are
not muddy, at Autumn and Winter.

Qualities. This Fish is cold and moist in the second degree.

Commodity. It is very nourishing, but excrementitious. The Tenches cut in
pieces along the back, and applied to the Pulse, and soles of the Feet,
mitigate and diminish the heat of the burning Fever.

Hurt. It is of an hard digestion, nourishes badly, burdens the Stomach,
especially such as live in Ponds, if eaten in the Dog Days.

Remedy. Baking them with Garlic, Sweet-herbs, and Spices, they become less
hurtful. The Tench is a Food to be used in cold Weather, by Young and Choleric
Men, and of such as labor much.

CHAP. CXXXIX. Of Tortoises.
Name. IN Latin, Testudo, a testa qua tegitur; in English, a Tortoise.

Choice. The Land-Tortoises are better than those of the Water; big, full of
Eggs, and fed with good food, before they be eaten.

Qualities. They are cold in the second degree, and temperately moist.

Commodity. They are very nourishing, and therefore are to be given last to
Tisical and lean Persons. Their Blood drank is good for those that are troubled
with the Falling Sickness: Of the flesh of Tortoises baked, is made a Food for
Sick Men, to refresh and restore them.

Hurt. They breed a gross and phlegmatic Blood, make Men dull and sleepy, and
are slowly digested.

Remedy. Let them be well boiled, throwing away the first and second Water, and
well prepared with hot Herbs, Pepper, and Saffron, or Yolks of Eggs. They are
good for young and Choleric Men.

CHAP. CXL. Of the Tunny-Fish.
Name. IN Latin, Tucos; in English, the Tunny-Fish.

Choice. The young ones are the best, caught in the Month of September; and you
ought to choose the lean ones rather than the fat.

Qualities. It Is cold and moist in the second degree.

Commodity. Its flesh heals the bitings of Mad Dogs. The Eggs are salted, and
thereof is made Botarghe, which does very much excite the Appetite.

Hurt. It breeds much Excrements, is hardly digested, burdens the Stomach, and
increases Phlegm.

Remedy. It must be broyled fresh on the Grid-iron, with Salt and Coriander,
sprinkling it continually with Oil and Vinegar, with a little Fennel, or a
sprig of Rosemary.

CHAP. CXLI. Of Salmons.
Name. IN Latin, Salmo; in English, a Salmon.

Choice. Choose that which is young, sweet, and tender.

Qualities. Salmon is cold and moist in the first degree.

Commodity. This Fish is very pleasant to the Palate, being of a tender flesh,
and very easily digested; it affords a good Juice, and is inferior to none,
nay, by some is accounted the best of Fish.

Hurt. When it is pickled in Salt, and hardened with Smoke, it is of an hard
digestion.

Remedy. Let it be boiled, and afterward pickled in Vinegar: Some broyl it
fresh on the Grid-iron.

CHAP. CXLII. Of Soles, Plaice, and Turbet.
Name. IN Latin, Solea, Passer, and Rhombus; in English, Soles, Plaice, and
Turbets.

Choice. The fresh are best, eaten as soon as taken.

Qualities. They are hotter than others, as being Sea-fishes.

Commodity. These Fishes are highly commended amongst Seafish; for they have a
delicate flesh, and are of an easy concoction; being white fleshed, they yield
good Juice, plentiful Nourishment, and are not easily corrupted.

Hurt. Being dried in the smoke, they are naught, and harder of concoction.

Remedy. You must eat good sauce with them, which will qualify all their
malignity.

CHAP. CXLIII. Of Gudgeons.
Name. IN Latin, Gobius; and in English, Gudgeons.

Choice. They must be chosen out of clear Brooks, and boiled, or rather fried
alive.

Qualities. They are an harmless Food, and temperate in all Qualities.

Commodity. Gudgeons are the best amongst the small sort of Fish, and are a
very wholesome Aliment, easy to be concocted, and remain not long in the
Stomach, and are profitable both for Pleasure and Health, and may safely be
given to sick Persons: Minnows, Dace, and other little Fish, are like these.

Hurt. They are soon corrupted, if eaten after things of an hard digestion.

Remedy. They must be eaten first.

CHAP. CXLIV. Of Perches.
Name. IN Latin, Perca; in English, Perch.

Choice. The biggest are the best.

Qualities. They are cold and moist, of a glutinous and slimy substance.

Commodity. They have a soft, moist, and tender flesh.

Hurt. They have a very excrementitious Juice, and nourish smally.

Remedy. They must not be mixed with several Meats.

CHAP. CXLV. Of Cod-Fish.
Name. IN Latin, Asellus; in English, Cod-fish.

Choice. Eat it whilst fresh and tender.

Qualities. It Is hot and dry.

Commodity. If fresh, it is of good Juice, and easy Concoction.

Hurt. When dry, it is not easily digested, and is of a gross nourishment.

Remedy. Such as labor much, may eat it.

CHAP. CXLVI. Of Barbels.
Name. IN Latin, Mullus Barbatus; in English, a Mullet, or Barbel.

Choice. The little ones are better than the great, and such as are caught in
stony places, and not in muddy Ponds, or still Seas.

Qualities. They are hot in the first degree, and dry in the beginning of the
second.

Commodity. They are very pleasant to the Palate, drowned or suffocated in
Wine, and eaten, they extinguish the Venereal Appetites, and drinking the Wine,
induces an odium, or averseness to all sorts of Wine after that. This Fish
being applied to the biting of Venomous Creatures, heals it.

Hurt. Their flesh is hard, not easily digested; the Wine wherein they were
suffocated, makes Men impotent, and Women steril; and eaten too often, it hurts
the Eyesight.

Remedy. It must be broyled, and eaten with Oil and the Juice of Oranges, or
Vinegar, whereby it will keep many days, and become better. It Is good in hot
Weather for Choleric Men, for those that use much Exercise, and have a strong
Stomach.

CHAP. CXLVII. Of Trouts.
Name. IN Latin, Trutta; in English, a Trout.

Choice. Let it be big, and bred in swift Waters.

Qualities. It Is cold in the beginning, and moist in the end of the first
degree.

Commodity. The River-Trout nourishes well, breeding a cold Humor, which
refreshes the Liver and Blood, and therefore good in burning Fevers. They
increase the Seed, and are good in Summer for Young and Choleric, but naught
for Decrepid and Phlegmatic Men.

Hurt. They are easily corrupted, and therefore are to be eaten presently.

Remedy. Let them be boiled with half Water and half Vinegar, and eaten with
some sharp sauce. And so we have done with the Fishes; next we will treat of
Sawces and Spices; and first, of Vinegar.

CHAP. CXLVIII. Of Vinegar.
Name. IN Latin, Acetum; in English, Vinegar; from the French words Vin aigre,
sharp Wine.

Choice. The best is that which is made of the most excellent Wine, wherein let
there be infused some Roses, or Elder-flowers, and let it be old.

Quality. The Vinegar is cold in the second degree, in respect to the heat of
the Wine; and so much the more, by how much the Wine is older, and more strong;
but it has a certain heat, which it has acquired from putrefaction, though the
coldness does overcome that heat in it: The Vinegar that is made of weak Wine
is cold, but that which is made of old is hotter; but its piercing acuteness
does not proceed from the heat, but from the cold, sharp, and subtle parts
thereof (as is the North Wind.) It is moreover dry in the third degree.

Commodity. It Is cutting, digestive, and opening; it is very good to extinguish
the heat of Choler, and Thirst, strengthens the Gums, excites the Appetite,
removes Obstructions, aids Digestion, and is good for hot and moist Stomachs,
weakens the Blood, the Choler, and resists Putrefaction; therefore in the time
of the Plague, many used it, to preserve themselves.

Hurt. It breeds melancholic Humors, offends the Nerves and Sinews, hurts the
Stomach and the Joints, and is very bad for Women that are troubled with Fits
of the Mother; is inconvenient for lean folks, pricks the Stomach and the
Intestines, spoils the Eyesight, diminishes the Senses, and lessens the Seed,
weakens the Strength, offends the Breast, begets Coughs, and those that use it
too much, grow old and withered immediately; therefore is not good for Ladies,
for it causes wrinkles, etc.

Remedy. You must not use it at Breakfast, and always moderately; and let it
not be too sharp: And boil therewith Raisins, or else Anise-seed, or
Parsley-seed, and Fennel. which things remove all hurt from it; and lastly, add
thereto a little Sugar.

CHAP. CXLIX. Of Verjuice.
Name. IN Latin, Vva immatura, and the Liquor Omphacion; in English, Verjuice.

Choice. You must choose such as is not too sharp, but of a pleasant taste.

Qualities. It Is cold in the first degree, and dry in the second.

Commodity. It Is excellent good in Summer to temperate, and qualify the heat
of Blood, to quench the burning Choler, to stir up the Appetite; whence it does
wonderfully contribute to young and choleric Men, and to all hot Infirmities.

Hurt. It strongly binds the Breast, begets Coughs, causes Convulsions of the
Nerves, and is bad for Cholick-pains.

Remedy. The Malignity thereof is removed by using it together with flesh,
especially with Pigeons, and other hot, sweet, and fat Meats; but if you eat
it with Fish, you must also use hot Spices: It Is bad for Old and Phlegmatic
Men. You must not use it with Salt, for then it dries too much, and kindles
Fevers.

CHAP. CL. Of Cloves.
Name. IN Latin, Cariophyllon; in English, Cloves.

Choice. The best are the fresh, of a pleasant smell, and sweet taste.

Qualities. They are hot and dry in the third degree.

Commodity. They comfort all the principal Members, the Heart, the Brain, the
Liver, and the Stomach; they render the Food very sweet and pleasant, cause
good Breath, provoke Urine, help Digestion, contribute much to the cold
Distempers of the Body, stop Vomiting, cure nauseating, and the
Falling Sickness, Cramp, stupid Diseases, and stop Rheums and Fluxes.

Hurt. They offend the Bowels, excite Lust, bind the Body, and are hurtful to
Choleric Men in Summer; and using them too much, they make the Food bitter.

Remedy. You must use them in a moderate quantity, in cold Weather, in moist
Food, and Phlegmatic Complexions.

CHAP. CLI. Of Cinnamon.
Name. IN Latin, Cinamomum, and Cinamum; in English, Cinnamon.

Choice. The best is such as is not old, but fresh, odoriferous, of a sharp
taste, and red color.

Qualities. It Is hot and dry in the third degree.

Commodity. Using it often in Food, it is excellent good for the Stomach, and
the cold Distempers thereof, dissolving the moistness and wind; it clears the
sight hurt by Rheums, removes Obstructions of the Liver, provokes Urine, causes
Sleep, expels the windiness from the Body, lessens the pains in the Kidneys, is
good against Coughs and Catarrhs, cleanses the Breast, dries up the moistness
of the Head, makes sweet Breath, excites Venereal desires, comforts the Heart:
It has the property of Treacle, and it resists putrefaction.

Hurt. It is naught for Choleric Men in Summer, and in hot Countries; for it
inflames the Bowels, and the Blood, it hurts Gouty folks; for being hot and
opening, it prepares an easy passage for the Humors to penetrate the Feet and
Joints.

Remedy. It must be used in cold Weather, moderately, by old and phlegmatic
Men, and such as have a weak Stomach.

CHAP. CLII. Of Saffron.
Name. IN Latin, Crocus; in English, Saffron.

Choice. The best is the fresh, and well colored; the strings whereof are
whitish, long, not brittle; which being washed, dies the Water, and has a
pleasant smell.

Qualities. It Is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Commodity. It comforts the Stomach and Bowels, opens the Obstructions of the
Liver, is good for the Milt, makes a good Color, hinders Putrefaction, induces
Sleep, excites Venery, glads the Heart, provokes the Courses, and the Urine,
and facilitates Childbirth; but you must not take more than two Drams thereof
at the farthest.

Hurt. It gets into the Head, causing pains and drowsiness, and obfuscates the
Senses, causes Nauseating, takes away the Appetite; and taken in too great a
quantity, that is, three Drams, it becomes Poison; for it causes sudden Death
by Laughter, and its smell hurts the Head.

Remedy. It may be taken a little at once, by Old, Melancholic, and Phlegmatic
Men in Winter.

CHAP. CLIII. Of Ginger.
Name. IN Latin, Gingiber; in English, Ginger.

Choice. You must take care that it be fresh, of a good smell, and of a sharp
brisk taste; let it not be rotten, but sound, so that when you cut it, it may
not fall to powder.

Qualities. When it is fresh, it is hot in the first degree, and moist in the
third; but when dried, it is dry in the second degree: It contains within it a
certain moisture, whereby it is easily corrupted; Ginger moreover is resolving
and cutting.

Commodity. It heats the Stomach, and the whole Body, consumes the
Superfluities, dissolves Windiness, helps Digestion, is good for the Memory,
wipes away Phlegm, clears the Sight, and dries up the Humidities of the Head and
Throat: Preserved with Honey, it is good for Old Men.

Hurt. It inflames the Liver; wherefore it is not good in hot Countries, in
Summer, for hot Complexions.

Remedy. Use it moderately, or else candyed.

CHAP. CLIV. Of Honey.
Name. IN Latin, Mel; in English, Honey.

Choice. The best is that of the Spring, and Summer, though Aristotle praises
the Autumnal Honey. That of the Winter is the worst; it ought to be white and
clear.

Qualities. It is hot and dry in the second degree.

Commodity. Honey is abstersive and opening, provokes Urine, and cleanses its
passages, is good for old and phlegmatic Men, of a cold Complexion; it is a
Pectoral Medicine, and is very convenient to preserve things; it is of a small,
but very commendable nourishment. Democritus being asked how a Man might keep
himself in Health? Answered, by Oil without, and Honey within. It heats the
Stomach, moves the Body, resists Corruption, and converts it self into good
Blood.

Hurt. It breeds windiness in the Guts, is turned into Choler, obstructs the
Liver and Milt, excites Fevers, and causes Cholick-pains, and eaten raw, makes
Coughs: Although it be a Pectoral Medicine, yet it hurts the Head; and eaten
immoderately, it obfuscates the Intellect, and increases Choler.

Remedy. In boiling, you must always take away the scum thereof; or else eat it
with Fruit, and other sharp Food: It must not be used but in cold Weather, and
by old and phlegmatic Men.

CHAP. CLV. Of Oil.
Name. IN Latin, Oleum; in English, Oil.

Choice. The Oil of Olives is very sweet and commendable, and agreeable with
Nature; but let it be sweet, and two years old at least, but not too old; let
it be of ripe Olives. Oil of sweet Almonds does challenge the second place.

Qualities. It Is hot and moist in the second degree.

Commodity. Drank once a day, it kills Worms, and sends them out, mollifies the
Body, fattens, and increases the substance of the Liver; and drinking a good
quantity thereof, is an excellent thing to make one vomit out any Poison.

Hurt. If you eat too much thereof, it takes away the Appetite.

Remedy. You must eat it moderately, and seldom; and such as are healthy and
nice Persons, may use Oil of sweet Almonds, but let it be fresh.

CHAP. CLVI. Of Sugar.
Name. IN Latin, Saccharum; in English, Sugar.

Choice. The best is that they call Loaf-Sugar, the whitest, most heavy, and
solid.

Qualities. Sugar is temperate, though something inclining to hot, and is good
in all sort of Food, except in Tripes; for being put thereon, it makes them
stink like the Dung of an Ox newly made.

Commodity. It nourishes more than Honey, maintains the Body clean, and
cleanses it from Phlegm, mollifies the Breast, clears the Stomach, is good for
the Kidneys, the Bladder, and the Eyes.

Hurt. It causes Thirst, and therefore when with thirst you perceive a
bitterness in your mouth, you must not use Sugar, for then the Stomach is full
of Choler, wherein the Sugar converts it self, and is very pernicious to the
Stomach, and naught for men of an hot Complexion, as are the young and
choleric men.

Remedy. The Malignity of Sugar is qualified, by eating it with Pomegranats, or
sour Oranges.

CHAP. CLVII. De Sappa.
Name. IN Latin, Sappa, and Defrutum; in English, Wine and Water sodden
together, till two third parts are boiled away.

Choice. New Wine of sweet Grapes is the best, and it is better, and more
clear, if it be made of white rather than red Mustum.

Qualities. It Is hot in the second degree; for though by the Decoction it
receives heat, yet this proceeds from the Natural heat: It is moist temperately.

Commodity. It nourishes strongly, keeps the Belly slippery, recalls the Pulse,
and is good against the binding of the Breast, Distempers of the Lungs, Ulcers
of the Reins and Bladder, and against Poison.

Hurt. It is hard of digestion, and by its sweetness opilative; and therefore
is altogether inconvenient for such as are troubled with Obstructions in the
Liver and Milt: It is of a gross substance, and therefore windy, and naught for
the Stomach.

Remedy. It must not be used for Food, but Sauce, and therewith put Pepper, and
other Aromatic things, in Winter; or else mix with it sharp and acid things,
which cause an equal temperament.

CHAP. CLVIII. Of Salt.
Name. IN Latin, Sal; in English, Salt.

Choice. The best is the white, thick, and dry Salt.

Qualities. It is hot and dry in the second degree; astringent, purging,
dissolving, and attenuating; and therefore is said, Sal primo poni debet,
primoque reponi.

Amongst all Sawces it is most commendable, and without which no Food is good,
because it is very necessary to preserve the Health, and is put into Food to
render it more savoury; according to this Verse, Name sapit esca male, quae
datur absque Sale.

Commodity. Salt is put into Victuals for three Reasons: First, that thereby
the Food may descend more easily into the Stomach, it being of an heavy
substance. Secondly, to make it more savoury. And thirdly, because it resists
Poison and Putrefaction; consuming by its dryness that moisture, whereby
putrefaction might have been occasioned; it excites the Appetite, and digestive
Faculty; it hinders the Stomach from nauseating and loathing the received Food,
dissolves, attenuates, and dries up the superfluous moistness, provokes the
Entrails to evacuate their dreggs, and is therefore used in Clysters and
Suppositories.

Hurt. Things too much salted, are acute, beget Melancholy, and Vapors, offend
the mouth of the Stomach, breed naughty Nourishment, dry up the Blood, weaken
the Sight, diminish the Seed, cause Scabbiness, and Itch, Ring-worms, and other
such Tumors and breakings out in the Face and Body, and stop the passages of
the Urine.

Remedy. You must use it in a small quantity; and it is not good for such as as
have the Breast straightened, or have salt Humors.

Finis Condimentorum.
CHAP. CLIX. Of Water.
Name. IN Latin, Aqua; in English, Water.

Choice. The best is the clear, pure, and subtle Water, free from all tastes;
and that is the best, which being set on the fire, is easily heated, and taken
thence, is soon cool: In the Summer let it be cool, in Winter warm; let it
neither be salt nor bitter, nor taste of Mud, Brimstone, etc. nor any Mineral
Waters. Let its Fountain be situate toward the East, and run to the North: The
Water which runs on pure Earth is better than such as runs upon Stones; you
must take care that it be not heavy, nor burdensome to the Stomach, but light,
and quickly digested. On the contrary, those Waters are naught which run from
Marshy places, which have any ill smell, or participate of Minerals; as also
are Snow-waters, and Ice dissolved; and likewise such as in Winter are cold, in
Summer hot, for all such cool the Stomach, and obstruct the Milt.

Qualities. It is cold and moist.

Commodity. It is good for hot, fat, and fleshy Men, and mixed with Wine for
such as use much Labor and Exercise. And though this does not nourish, yet it
refreshes, and restores the strength, and is the conduct of the Food, excites
the Appetite; and oportunely given in burning Fevers, it produces a joyful and
happy success; for it is most contrary, and disagreeing with the Nature of
Fevers, refreshing and moistening the Body: It does likewise very much
contribute to Nightly Distempers.

Hurt. It is bad for such as are too hot, lean, and idle Men, and such as
unaccustomed to drink it; such as have a weak Stomach, and are troubled with
Convulsion of the Nerves. It hurts the Teeth, the Breast, and weak Entrails;
the drinking of fresh Water is bad for Old Men; and those that use it too
frequently, will inevitably fall into Old Age, and cold Infirmities.

Remedy. The Malignity of Water is corrected by beaten Pepper; and if you would
drink it immediately, you must put therein Anise-seed; and for sick Men boil
therewith Cinnamon, and such like things: Else make Honey-water, or Metheglin,
which has great Virtues, takes away Thirst, cures the cold Infirmities of the
Brain, Nerves, and Joints, is good against the Cough, cuts and expels gross
Phlegm from the Breast and Stomach, moves the Body and the Entrails, purges the
Bowels, and passages of the Urine, and therefore is good against Cholick-pains.

Advertisements in the Choice of Wines.
WIne is reckoned amongst Food, because every thing that nourishes is Food; and
amongst all the Liquors we drink, Wine may justly claim the Superiority, for it
is more wholesome, and by reason of its subtle and penetrating substance, it
mixes better with the Mass than does the Water, and other Drinks: Besides, that
it is most pleasant and grateful to the Palate, it restores the radical
Moisture, and chears the Heart. Wine is a most sweet Liquor, and an excellent
restorative of all the Faculties, and is the most certain prop and maintenance
of our Life; and therefore our Ancestors called the Tree Vitis, quasi Vita, as
if it were the Tree of Life: But the use thereof is to be regulated by these
twelve following Instructions.

I. That when the Wine is strong and full of Spirits, you must always mix Water
therewith, either simple Water, or else the decoction of Aniseed, or prepared
Coriander, and with it mingle so much Water, as may suffice to take away the
Heat and Evaporation which gets into the Head: And because you may make a
better mixture, and the hot parts of the Wine may be cooled, mix it an hour
before you drink it; but if the Wine be small and waterish, do not mix it, for
it moistens the Body too much, and causes Windiness in the Entrails, and
intoxicates more easily; and therefore such as have a weak Stomach should omit
this.

II. That you never drink Wine after Dinner or Supper, until the concoction of
the Food be ended, for then it helps Nourishment, penetrating more easily the
Body, whereas at first it would hinder Digestion.

III. You must have a care that you do not drink Wine cooled with Snow, or icy
Water; for it is very pernicious to the Brains, Sinews, Breast, Lungs, Stomach,
to the Entrails, the Milt, Liver, Kidneys, Bladder, and causes Wind; whence it
is no wonder, that such as use Wine in Snow or Ice, are troubled with Cholick
pains, Infirmities of the Stomach, stoppage of Urine, and other pernicious
Evils; whereas the ancient Gr^eks were wont to drink it hot, with good success.

IV. You must avoid drinking Wine fasting, because it troubles the
Understanding, induces the Cramp, is exceeding hurtful to the Brain and Nerves,
fills the Head, whence proceed Catarrhs; which is seen by experience in the old
Turks, who drinking no Wine, are not much troubled with Catarrhs or Toothache,
whereas we who use it frequently, begin to perceive Rheums and Catarrhs in our
Youth: Therefore when you find that the Wine has offended your Head, and causes
Pains therein, immediately provoke Vomiting.

V. That it is not convenient after fresh and moist Fruit to drink a thin Wine,
for the Wine being a good Penetrator, does presently induce and lay open a
passage to the Members for the malignity of this Fruit: But this is to be
understood, if you drink a superfluous quantity thereof; but if you drink it
moderately, it corrects the hurt of all such Food.

VI. If at the same Table, both small and strong Wine is used, begin with the
small, reserving the strong for the last, which comforts the mouth of the
Stomach, and helps Digestion.

VII. That by how much the Food is more cold and gross, so much the more need
is there of strong Wine; but when the Food is more subtle, hot and digestible,
let the Wine be weak; and therefore such as feed on Beef and Fish, are to drink
stronger Wine than such as feed on Pullets, etc.

VIII. That such as use much Wine, ought not to eat much, for Wine serves
instead of Meat and Drink, and therefore Nature cannot easily digest them both.

IX. Wine that is weakened with Water, is more wholesome and commendable than
that which is naturally weak, for the latter more easily putrifies.

X. That such as have a weak Brain, a hot Liver and Stomach, and dwell in
sultry Countries, ought to drink a little Wine, mixing Water therewith; but if
cold, the more Wine and less Water will not be amiss.

XI. You must also observe the season of the Year; for in Winter, drink very
sparingly, but strong Wine* in Summer, more largely, but small, and mixed with
Water.

XII. You must moreover consider the Age; for as Wine is very bad for Children,
so it is most proper for old men, seeing that it qualifies and allays their
cold Complexion: And therefore Plato denies Wine to Children, gives young men
leave to drink it moderately, and allows old men a more plentiful use thereof,
saying, that Children before they are twenty two years old, ought not to drink
any Wine, because that will add fire to their fire, and young men ought not to
drink it strong, but well tempered.

The Qualifications of Good Wine.
GOod Wine ought to be clean, pure, and clear, inclining to a red, called
Claret, or Cherry-colour; but let it be of stony and mountainous Places,
situate toward the South: Let it be of an excellent Odor, for such Wine
increases the subtle Spirits, nourishes excellently, and breeds very good
Blood; let it be of a pleasant Taste, but let it by no means be too sharp or
sweet, but of a middle temper, for if too sweet, it inflames, obstructs, and
fills the Head, but the sharp or sour Wine hurts the Nerves and Stomach, and
begets Crudities.

Of Bad Wine.
THE gross, stinking, corrupted, flat Wines, are unpleasant to the Taste, and
unwholesom; all which are to be avoided, for they cause the Headache, corrupt
the Blood, breed melancholic Spirits, and in short, are destructive to the
whole Body.

Of Watrish Wine.
THE weak and watrish Wines will not endure a great mixture of Water, nourish
smally, do not heat much, and may therefore be safely given to feverish
persons: They do not offend the Head, having few Vapors; they allay the
Headache, caused by moistness, and the pains of the Stomach, that proceed from
Heat.

Of Strong Wine.
FRom the aforesaid things, we may draw up this Conclusion, viz. That strong
Wines do not at all contribute to the preservation of the Health; no more do
Wines of Corsica, Malmsey, Muscadine, and the like, especially being fat and
red, for they nourish too much.

The Effects of Good Wine moderately drank.
WIne, if used discreetly and moderately, does communicate innumerable Benefits
both to the Body and Mind: For as to the Mind, it is rendered more secure and
calm, the Spirits are strengthened, and dilate themselves, Joy and Gladness is
augmented, sad and unpleasant Thoughts are banished; it clears the
Understanding, excites the Wit, bridles Anger, takes away Melancholy, enlivens
and encourages the Spirits, changes Vices into Virtues, makes an impious man
pious, a covetous man liberal, a proud man humble, a lazy man diligent and
careful, a dull and heavy man facetious and witty. Then as to the Body; it is
very nourishing, resists Putrefaction, helps Digestion, and breeds good Blood,
cuts Phlegm, dissolves Windiness, provokes Sleep, excites the Appetite, fattens
healthy men, restores consumptive men, opens Obstructions, concocts crude
Humors, provokes Sleep, opens a passage for the Superfluities; whence Wine was
justly called by the Ancients, Theriaca magna, since that it heats all cold
Tempers, and refreshes hot, as also it dryes the moist Tempers, and moistens
the dry.

The Remedy of the Malignity of Wine.
TO correct the Malignity of the Wine, you must not eat sweet and opening
things, but bitter and astringent: Whence Wormwood taken before, hinders
Drunkenness; and the same effect have seven or eight bitter Almonds, or a
Sallad of Lettice, and Kernels of Peach-stones before Meat, as Marmalade of
Quinces, and such like, after Meat.

Of New Wine.
NEW Wine, called Mustum, is of a difficult Digestion, offends the Liver, and
the Entrails, swells the Belly, by the Ebullition which it causes in the Body,
whence arises Windiness; it provokes the Urine, induces the Dysentery, is of a
gross Nourishment, etc. but one good quality it has, for it loosens the Belly.

Of Old Wine.
WHen the Wine is above four years old, it is hot and dry in the third degree,
and the older it is, the more heat it acquires. The best is such as is
odoriferous, something strong, full of Spirits, which is neither bitter nor
sour, but pleasant to all the Senses, helping the expulsive Faculty, dissolving
ill Humors; it is good for those that have raw Humors in the Veins, and in
the other Vessels; it hurts their Sinews who use it too much; it is naught for
Copulation, because it dryes up the Seed, disturbs the Understanding, offends
the little skins of the Brain, and hinders Sleep; whence it is to be used for
Physic, and not for Drink, unless you use it very moderately, and mixed with
much Water: It Is naught for young and choleric persons, but good for old men,
especially in Winter.

Of Rough Wine.
THE Wines which are properly Rough, have so small a heat, that they scarce
arrive to the first degree, and are dry in the second: They are good for the
great Heat in quotidian Fevers, Inflammations of the Liver, and dryness of the
Stomach; they refresh, take away Thirst, cure Fluxes, stop Vomiting, but let
them not be too sharp or sour, but moderately binding, subtle, and not of too
high a color; they are good for young men of an hot Stomach, and are naught
for phlegmatic and old men, because they bind the Breast, beget Coughs, do
neither nourish well, nor breed good Blood, and hinder Sweat.

Of Red Wine.
THE Red Wine is hot in the first degree, and as to the rest, temperate: The
best is of a subtle substance, clear, and shining; it breeds very good Blood,
nourishes well, takes away the Syncope, and makes Sleep pleasant; the gross
burdens the Stomach, hurts the Liver and Milt, causing Obstructions, and is
slowly digested; the dark red is more nourishing, and more obstructing.

Of White Wine.
THE Wine of a Citron, or Limmon color, is called White Wind: It is
odoriferous and strong, hot in the beginning of the second degree, and dry in
the first; it must not be kept longer than a year, for it will be too hot; let
this Wine be clear, made of ripe Grapes, growing on Hills. It resists Poison,
and all Putrefaction, purges the Veins of corrupt Humors, gives a ^ood Color,
increases the Strength, chears the Heart, corroborates natural Heat, provokes
Urine and Sweat, causes Sleep, is good against the quartan and quotidian Ague;
it comforts the Stomach, and being well tempered with Water, is good at all
times for all Ages and Complexions, provided it be not too old.

Vinorum Finis.
CHAP. CLX. Of Ale and Beer.
Name. IN Latin, Cervisia; in English, Ale and Beer.

Choice. You must choose the clear, thin, and pure Ale.

Quality. Ale is hot and moist, Beer is cold and moist.

Commodity. Beer and Ale is the common and familiar Drink in England, and no
doubt but profitable and wholesome it is, as Experience shows; but the different
Preparations, or brewing thereof, make no small difference in the Drinks: The
difference of Waters of which it is made, is greatly to be considered,
therefore according to their Natures you must judge of the Drink. Also the
different Corn or Grain is to be considered: As Drinks made of Wheat Malt
nourish more; some people mix Wheat and Barley together; others mix some Oats
with Barley for Malt; generally in Ale are used no Hops, or less Hops than in
Beer, therefore Ale is more nourishing, and loosens the Belly.

Hurt. All new Drink is very unwholesom, especially if it be troubled, or
thick, for it obstructs the Bowels, and breeds the Stone.

Remedy. If it be not too strong, but clear and thin, all hurt thereof is
remedied, whereas the thick and muddy Ale is very unwholesom; for if Ale goes
in thick, and comes out thi^
Then needs must leave some Dregs within.


Diverse Ways to loosen the Body.
FRom eating d^ proceed many Superfluities in our Bodies, part whereof are
consumed by Exercise, and part r^main behind, which are to be expelled by Art:
The Superfluities are different, according to the diversity of places whence
they proceed, such is Spittle, Snot, Sweat, Urine, the Excrements of the Belly,
and other Filth and Dregs of the Body, which if not driven forth ^occasion many
Evils, as Obstructions, Fevers, Aches, and Imposthumes; and therefore with all
diligence one ought to evacuate them, either by Nature, or by Art: By Nature,
using moist and liquid Foods; By Art, taking some Clyster, in Summer made with
oil of Violets and Roses, in Winter with common Oil, or of sweet Almonds; or
else making a Suppository of Butter, filling a leaden Pipe with Butter, and a
little Salt: The other way is, To take half an ounce of flower of Cassia, a
little before Meals, or else an ounce and a half of honey of Roses loosning, or
else syrup of Roses, three hours before Dinner, once or twice a week. To this
purpose, it will not be amiss before Dinner to eat half an ounce of Calabrian
Manna, or to drink it in a little Broth: Or else (and it is a sovereign
Medicine likewise) dissolve Manna in Burrage-water, afterward distill it i^ a
hot Bath, in a great Limbeck, whence proceeds a most clear and pure Water,
whereof take one or two ounces, at night before Supper, or in the morning, six
hours before Dinner.

FINIS.

