THE Great Corruption OF Subtle Self, Discovered, and driven from it is
Lurking-places and Starting-holes.

AND The contrary Grace, Self-denial commended, as an indispensably necessary
requisite to the Acceptable and Successful performance of all
Commanded-Duties, and as notably fitting for taking up of the Cross, and
following Christ.

In Seven Sermons

By Master JAMES DURHAM, late Minister of the Gospel in Glasgow.

EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most
excellent Majesty, ANNO DOM. 1686.

THE Epistle Dedicatory. To the Right Honorable and very noble Ladies, my Lady
Duchess of Rothes, and her Graces Eldest Daughter the Countess of Rothes, who
Christianly ambitions it, as her greatest honor in following the Lord, to
tread in the footsteps of her living noble Mother, and of her deceast
Grandmother, the Countess of Crafurd, Sister-German to the two Illustrious
Princes, James and William late Dukes of Hamilton, and of Her great
Grandmother my Lady Boid, all three eminent Paterns of Piety in their day.
Most Noble Ladies.
THe incomprehensibly Great and Glorious JEHOVAH, the Almighty Creator of
Heaven and Earth, Who is, and was, and is to come, the First, and the Last,
Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, the beginning of all without
beginning, and the end to which all re^er without end, who has eternally his
being only, and altogether, in and from himself, without Participation with,
or Derivation from any, other, and from whom, as the first Fountain, and
Original Being, the Sole-self-being, and Being of Beeings, all the Creatures
Inanimat, Vegetative, Sensitive, and Rational, whether Angels or Men, are but
derivated, and borrowed Bits of Being, in comparison with whom, they are but
up-starts of yester-day, and (as it were) Time-nothings, has (as it is highly
rational, just, equal, and congruous he should) made all things for himself;
and has in a more special manner, formed, and new-made his own chosen and
peculiar People for himself that they might show forth his praise; and has
bought them with a price, and redeemed them, not with corruptible things, as
silver and gold from their vain conversation, but with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a a Lamb without blemish, and without spot, slain from the
foundation of the world; who are therefore not their own, but infinitely
oblidged to glorify God both in their spirits and bodies which are Gods; none
of whom beyond all living, ought to live to himself, nor die to himself, but
living and dying ought to be the Lords; since the Lord Christ both died and
roast, and revived, that he might in a peculiar manner, be Lord of them both
living and dead; It becomes them from the constraining power of the love of
Christ to judge thus, that they should not live to themselves, but unto him,
who out of love died for them, and to endeavor through Grace to be in a
capacity, each of them, for him, and her self, to say, I am crucified with
Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life
that I now live in the flesh, is by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved m^,
and gave himself for me; and, to me to live is Christ, The very End and Scope
that I propose to my self, in desiring life with any of the conveniences,
accommodations and comforts thereof, is the Honor and Glory of Jesus Christ:
as of all persons in the world, it is most unworthy of them, and worst becoming
them, to be inordinat Self-lovers, Self-pleasures, or Self-seekers, so it i^
highly suitable for them (being singularly and signally oblidged thereto) to
deny themselves and to take up their cross and follow him: and yet,
notwithstanding all these mighty, matchless, and marvelous obligations, they,
even they, alas! are frequently, and not altogether without success, insinuated
upon, by deceitful corrupt Self, that immixeth with their best, and most
Spiritual Duties, and in part spoileth them; they are the more called and
concerned, watchfully to guard against it, that it does, as a thin, subtle,
spiritual humor very secretly, and insensibly diffuse it self through the whole
Mass and Body of the Duties of Religion, and by it is venomous quality, in less,
or more, tinctures, and vitiats them all; The most sovereign antidot against
which poison, and the most powerful extracter, and suck^r out of it, is
sincere Love to Jesus Christ, flowing from the Lively Faith of his Love.

Your Noble Ladyships, as his genuine and kindly Disciples, have been a
considerable time trained up in his School, and been by him, the great Teacher,
taken much pains upon (I hope with good success) that ye might be made to learn
well, to take out, and be Spiritually Perqueer in that first great high and
difficult Lesson of Christian Religion, Self-denial (which, as i^ is an
absolutely necessary, and indispensably requisite to the whole of it, so it is
universally influential on the same, and more particularly, on patient,
pleasant and cheerful taking up, and bearing Christ's Cross after him;) as
otherwise, so by the late great breaches that the Holy Lord has thought good
to make, and that within a very short space of time, upon several of your Noble
near and dear Relations; thereby at once, laying very heavy loads of Crosses
and Afflictions upon you, and graciously instructing you, with a strong hand to
deny your selves, that ye may christianly bear them, and be made observable
proficients by them; taking his own infinite and all-sufficient self, to fill
the empty rooms of these deceast dear Relations, which all the world cannot do
(which is your great and highly valuable mercy, whatever strangers to him may
think to the contrary) yet he that has filled Heaven and Earth can easily do
it, O! blessed design; let him, with your most cordial allowance, and at your
most earnest desires drive it vigorously, and successfully about you; that when
others of his People shall hear and see your ways and doings, they may be
comforted, and made to say, verily God has not done in vain, nor without
precious and blessed Fruit, all that he has done, to yonder Noble Ladies:
which very excellent and singularly useful Grace of Self denial is notably
cleared and commended in these few following Sermons; as the contrary
corruption of sly and subtle Self is by diligent search found out, and chased
from it is many lurking-places, and starting holes, and the ^uc and cry raised
after it, as a common and notorious Thief, that is always secretly and
sacri^igiously filshing, pilfering, purloining and stealing somewhat from us,
that is Gods due in all that we do; which therefore on the cry we would
earnestly and closly pursue, as one of his greatest Enemies, which saucily and
malapertly presums to rival it with him, and lifts it self up to sit on his
Throne, and to bring him down to stand at it is Footstool, the very Image (as
it were) of jealousy provocking to jealousy, making us so far as it prevails,
to be gross Idolaters, and also one of our own greatest Enemies, whatever be
it is plausible pretense of friendship to us, and in whatever handsome-like
dress and shape (for it can, in a manner, nimbly turn it self into all shapes)
it officiously offers to commend it self to us; it (as it were) eats much of
the fat, and drinks much of the sweet of our Sacrifices of praises, prayers,
and of all our other Duties; it pitifully impoverisheth us, when we might be
rich, and seem to be so, and makes us, when we appear to be very fruitful, to
be almost utterly empty vines, because, by it is means, a great part of our
fruit is brought forth to our selves. Now heartily desiring that these few very
searching, but very sweetly savouring Sermons of the singularly Self-denyed
long since deceased Author, may come along to all the Readers of them, and to
your Ladyships in particular, with a full blessing; and hopeing that you will
not offend at my adventuring to shreud them under the umbrage of your noble
Names, I am.

Most Noble Ladies Your Graces, and Your Ladyships Servant in the Gospel. J. C.

SERMON I.
Matthew. 16.24. Then said Jesus unto his disciples, if any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me.
THese Words contain a main and most profitable point of Doctrine, which our
blessed Lord Jesus taught his Disciples before his suffering; he had been
telling them, that he was to go up to Jerusalem, and what things he was to meet
with, and suffer there; This discourse had a very strange-like aspect upon
them, they could not away with it, nor digest it, that their Lord and Master
should suffer, and be thus reproachfully dealt with; Peter therefore rashly,
and inconsideratly takes him aside, and presumptuously arrogats to himself, the
liberty to rebuke him, and to offer him (as he for the time thought) a more
safe advice; Be it far from thee, Lord (says he) this shall not be unto thee;
he will by no means have him go to Jerusalem, as judging it un^^fe and
unseasonable at such a time; for which presumption, (as having a tendencie to
defeat the grand design of his coming into the World, to Peter's own and the
unspeakably great prejudice of many others;) after the Lord had rebuked him
sharply, even at a higher rate of severity, than he did for his thrice denying
him; he does on this occasion, deliver a general Doctrine concerning the
necessity of their, and of all his Disciples, denying themselves, and taking up
their Cross without which they could not be his Disciples, nor follow him, who
eminently denied himself, and took up the Cross for their sakes; and who would
have them to follow him in the same way.

There are Four very considerable things in the Words. 1. The great Work and
Business, that all Christ's Disciples and Believers in him are called to, which
is to come after him, and to follow him; If any man (says he) will come after
me, and follow me. 2ly. The great let and obstruction that lies in the way of
ready, resolute and cheerful following of Christ; and that is a man's own self,
or selfishness, which, if it be not removed, laid by, and overcome, in some
measure, he cannot come after Christ, nor follow him; Let him (says he) deny
himself, and follow me; 3ly. The great Duty that lies on all the followers of
Christ, or that whereby they are fitted, and helped to follow him; viz. Right
bearing of the Cross; Let him (says he) take up his cross and follow me. 4ly
There is the great necessity of this Doctrine. Let him (says he) deny
himself, and take up his cross; Luke has it, Chap. 14. v. 27. Whosoever
bears not his Cross, cannot be my disciple; it must be, it is indispensably
necessary.

But before I come to these main things in the Text, I shall speak a little to
Three circumstances set down therein, which will make way for clearing the
Purpose. 1. Who gives out this Doctrine? It is Jesus; Then said Jesus. 2ly. To
whom is it given? Unto his disciples. 3ly. When, at what time, and on what
occasion was it given? Then, viz. after, and upon occasion of Peter's ^arnal
advice suggested to him, in the for-going Words. A word to each of these
shortly.

As for the First; Considering Christ, as the Great Prophet, and Teacher of his
People, not ^nly in general, Teaching what Doctrines he in ^is Wisdom, judged
needful for them, but as ^eaching his Disciples, this Point of Doctrine in
^articular: which he leaves with them, when ^e is about to leave them; we may
thence, Ob^er, That the great Scope of Christ's teaching, is, ^o bring men from
themselves to Him: If we join the ^wo Parts of the verse together, this will be
clear; ^f (says the Lord) any man will come after me, ^e must deny himself,
and follow me; It is in ef^ect the end, not only of his Doctrine, but of his
dying, and rising again; So the Apostle ^peaking of Christ's dying, 2 Cor. 5.15.
Says; ^f one died for all, then were all dead; That hence^orth these who live,
should not live unto themselves, but unto him who died for them, and rose
^gain. It Is held forth as the end of Christ's dyng, and of Paul's preaching him:
This implies ^hese three things, That Christ's end in teaching, ^s, 1. To draw
men from themselves, as their ^ighest end, in what they do, and to bring them
^o set the Lord always before them, and to design his Glory, as the principal
and ultimat end of all their actions; that they may seek to have him (as it
were) increasing, though they should decrease; as John speaks, Chap. 3 v. 30.
To debase, bring down, and lay themselves low, and ^o exalt and set him very
high on his own Throne. ^ly. To draw them from resting on, from trust^ng in,
and leaning to themselves; to resting on, trusting in, and leaning to himself
only; We h^ (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.9. The senten^^ of death in our
selves, that we should not trust our selves, but in him who raises the dead;
a^^ says Solomon, Prove. 28.25. He who trusts his own heart is a fool; This
then is a seco^^ Branch of Christ's drift in the Doctrine of t^^ Gospel, even to
draw men from resting o^ themselves for Salvation, or any thing true^^ Good,
and to bring them to himself, that th^^ may rest on him alone for all things.
3ly. T^ draw men from delighting in themselves, or (...) any thing in
themselves, and to bring them sin^ly to delight in him; for as men have a
dire^^ act (so to speak) in looking to themselves, so the^ have a reflex act in
delighting in themselves or in some excellency they fancy to have foun^ in
themselves; That men may be brought from these broken Cisterns, and from all
trust and delight in themselves, or in any thing in the creatures, and may come
to Him, the fountain (...) living waters, in whom only quietness and re^^ to
Souls, is most certainly to be found; is the great drift and design of his
Doctrine; as is very clear, Isai. 55. v 2, 3. and elsewhere.

The Uses are, 1. To teach us, to take we^ with, and to study to take out this
Lesson of Self denial, to be weaned from Self, and from a^ things in Self; it is
amongst Christ's last Lesson to his Disciples, when he is about (as it were) to
make his Testament, and Last-Will; it would therefore be the better, and more
exactly learned. 2ly. To show you what is indeed Christ^ Doctrine, and what is
not; more especially, i^ such times of Tentation and Trial, as these are
wherein several Points of Doctrine come to be ^ontroverted, and called in
question; You ^ould try, if it aims at this, as it is great Scope, (...) draw
you from making your self your end, and from trusting, and delighting in your
Self; (...) the exalting of him, to trusting and delight^^g in him; whatever
Doctrine is not consonant ^ith, or is contrary to this, is certainly not ^^om
Christ; with whatever specious, and plauble pretenses it may be palliated and
varnished ^ver: whatsoever it be, if it draw thee not ^om, but to thy Self; to
idolize thy Self, or any thing i^ thy Self; It is not (I say) from christ; but
as it draws thee from thy Self, and ^rives thee to debase thy Self, and to
exalt him, and to give him his own room and place, it is of God, it is of
Christ. 3ly. To let you know, ^ow ye profit in Christ's School, what progress ye
make in his Gospel, and what good ye have got of it; in so far as ye make
progress, in denying and debasing your selves, and in exalting, and setting up
of Christ very high, in so far have ye profited, and got good by the Gospel:
This ^ppears eminently in Paul, Gal. 2. v. 19, 20. Through the law (says he)
I am dead to the ^aw, that I might live unto God; I am crucified with Christ;
nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me. His estimation of
himself is ^uite gone, his own Righteousness is slain, he is dead to the Law,
in that respect, that he may live to God. This was through Grace, the effect of
Gods Law on him, that he was brought very low in his own esteem, even crucified
and dead to himself, and Christ set up in him, and extolled very high: and to
the same purpose, Gal. 6. v. 14. He says, God forbid that I should glory in
any thing, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is
crucified to me, an^ I unto the world. He was a greatly mortify man, his
corruptions, in some respect, as much slain and put to death, as if he had been
out (...) the World; there was neither strength no beauty in them, to draw him
from delighting i^ Christ; he saw no worth in them, to be s^ much as a
tentation to him; Nay Christ himse^^ ^hes such room in his heart, that the very
Cro^ of Christ, and his reproach bulk more in his eye than all the world
beside; I fear there is more of this in notion and discourse, than in
experience and practice amongst us; however ye would know, that coming to
Christ, or foll^wing hi^ in profession only, is not the kindly fruit of the
Gospel; but it is the bringing of Self low, an^ the setting up of Christ high
in your hearts, an^ so the coming to him, and following of him realy and
sincerely; which is the genuine frui^ thereof.

For the 2d. To whom is this Doctrine give^ out? It is to his Disciples; Mark
Chap. 8. v 34 Takes in the Multitude with the Disciples; h^ taught them all
this Lesson; Hence Observe, That there is none, neither ignorant, nor more
knowing; neither believer, nor unbeliever, but they have need to be taught this
Lesson of Self-denial; We need not stand to prove it, even Peter hes need of
it, who by his unsanctified, and unseasonable advice offered to the Lord, was
an offense to him, an^ thereby bewrayed much sinful Selfishness; The rest of
the Disciples, and the Multitude have need of it, so deeply rooted is this
principle of Self in all; and who has not need of it?

The First Use, serves for humbling of us, when even the Disciples of Christ
have need to be taught this Lesson of Self-denial, we sure have much more, who
are not so well acquainted with the way of following Christ as they were; and
therefore have much reason to fear that this evil of Selfishness is much
prevalent amongst us.

The 2d. Us^, Serves, in a word, to exhort all, whatever their Condition, and
Degree, or proficien^y in Christianity be, to study this Lesson well, it is
profitable to all, not only beginners, but those, who are further advanced, all
stand greatly in need of it.

As (...) the 3d. to wit; The time and occasion, at, and on which he taught
this great Lesson; It was Then, which we may look upon several ways. 1. As it
is knit with the tentation, that he saw Peter led away with; for he knew the
natural propensity of them all unto it. Whence, Observe, That oftentimes we may
read and discern our own corruptions in the discoveries of the corruptions of
others; Yea, it is profitable for us so to do. Christ holds not here at the
rebuking of Peter; but knowing that all had need of the same Lesson, he
accordingly teaches them all; This were a far more profitable way of looking
upon the falls and failings of others, to take Warning, and receive Instruction
to our selves from them, than to be rigidly censuring them, or to be vainly
overvaluing our selves, or superciliously undervaluing others, because of them;
They were broken off because of unbelief, (says the Apostle, concerning the
unbelieving Jews to the believing Gentiles) and thou stand by faith, be not
high minded, but fear; and, says he, 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that thinks that
he stands take heed least he fall. Or 2dly. We may look on it thus, That when
Christ sees a Tentation take hold on Peter, he takes occasion therefrom, to
break the force of it, and to bea^ and bear it down, least it take hold of, and
infect the rest, by it is Contagion. Whence, Observe, That whoever would resist
any tentation, and more especially tentations to Self-seeking, would do it in
the entry, and at the very first; When any Idol of Self sets up it is head, we
would instantly knock it down; and indeed if we look to our way, it will be
found, that this one special mean, by which tentations become s^ strong, so
prevalent, and almost unconquerable, that we do not take them at the beginning,
and endeavor not to crush them at their very first appearing; when one Devil
comes in, and is not quickly cast out, he readily brings in seven worse:
Therefore, as ye would not be mastered with, and trodden under foot, by your
corruption, and by the Law that is in your members, give not way to it in the
least, but set your self in the strength of the Lord, to oppose and hear it
down, in the first risings of it; That Precept Principijs obsta, is most
necessary to be practiced here, even above, or beyond what it is in any other
case in the world. Or, 3dly. We may consider it, as it looks to our Lords high
Indignation at the nature and kind of the Tentation, as being plaistered over
with fair words, and specious shows of respect to him; which Indignation is
manifested by these very sharp words, Get thee behind me Satan; on which
follows the Exhortation, Then said he, etc. Whence Observe, That there is no
sort of sin, and more especially no sort of selfishness, that Christ abhorres
more than that which is palliated with pretended respect to him: Albeit Peter
offered this advice to his Master, from some kind of respect to him; yet we
will not find a more severe check, and sad rebuke given to him, or to any
other, than that which he gets here, because selfishness was in his counsel,
and the professed respect was but carnal and biased; wherein he prefers,
either his own, or his Masters bodily welfare, to the Will and Honor of God.

For clearing the Doctrine yet a little further, ye may take it up in these two
Branches. 1. That there is a selfishness, even among Christ's Disciples, that
comes in, and covers it self with the show of respect to Christ. 2ly. That
there is no selfishness more dangerous, and more detested, and abhorred of God
than this sort of selfishness. I shall instance the subtility, and danger of
this sin of Selfishness, shreuding it self under pretended respect to Christ
shortly, in some particulars. It comes in, one of two ways; either when men do
that which is right, as to the matter; and yet it is but Self that they are
seeking; or when they do that which is wrong; and yet they cover it with
professed respect to God: There are several kinds of both; First, We may see it
in things lawful, and first, in these, Men will have a kind of Zeal for God,
and yet be seeking themselves; as it was with Jehu, who boasts, that he is
zealous for God, and yet in truth, it was mostly for the Kingdom. 2ly. As
Selfishness vents it self, under the pretense of Zeal, so under the pretense of
honoring God, when yet i^ is only, or mainly respect to Men's Selves, tha^ is
sought after by that pretended respect to God; what greater respect could
readily have been pu upon Christ, when so despised by the Rulers, than to offer
to make him a King? as the people did, John 6. and yet, says he to them, Ye
seek me not, because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves,
and were filled; That is, ye seek me not out of respect to me, as God, but
because ye conceive, ye would have a good life under me; for ye think, if I
were your King, ye would have an easy life of it, and that ye needed not plow,
nor sow, nor work, otherways for your Bread; This is a subtle sort of
Self-seeking, when men profess, and pretend to seek to have Christ Great, and
yet in the meantime, there main design is to make themselves great. 3ly.
Selfishness vents it self, in following that which is Duty on the matter, under
the pretense of doing it, in obedience to a Command; and yet it is not really
the Command that puts on to it, but Self, or Selfish respect; as the Lord
charge his professing People, Zach. 7. v. 5, 6. When ye did fast, did ye at
all fast unto me? did ye not do it unto your selves: And, Matthew. 6. v. 5. etc.
Christ charges this on the Pharisees, That they gave Alms, Fasted, and made
Long-Prayers, as out of obedience to Gods Command; when, in the mean time, all
was done to be seen of men. Secondly. Selfishness comes in, and vents it self
in things unlawful, by covering them with a professed respect to Gods honor;
as we see it was with Saul, 1 Samuel 15. Who, when he is challenged by Samuel,
for sparing the best of the Cattle, and Sheep, says, These are to sacrifice
unto the Lord thy God; But says Samuel, v. 22. Obedience is better than
sacrifice, and to hearken, than the fat of rams; for rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft, and stubbornness, as iniquity and idolatry: There is nothing more
abominable in the sight of God, than to shreud a selfish end and design, under
the specious pretext of honoring him; But more of this afterward.

The First Use of this serves for warning, to take good heed to our selves,
when things look, and promise fair, we would try and examine well from what
root they spring, and on what bottom they stand; for many things fair in
appearance, may be rotten and corrupt at the root and bottom; many things may
look like respect to, and zeal for God, which yet he will reject, and cast, as
proceeding from no true zeal, nor respect to him: Therefore in all things, but
more especially, in public matters, do not think, that the honesting and
plaistering over of a thing with pretended respect to Christ, is enough to make
it pass current: As for instance, amongst the men that have invaded us, there
are two things much talked of, and cried up, and they have indeed a fair
outward show, viz. The interest of Christ, and the interest of his People, and
this they pretend to be the main design of their actings, That Christ's Kingdom
may be advanced, and that his People may be the only great men of the World,
and the only Rulers of the Kingdom; and this once being pretended as the end
and design, they are apt to conclude, that there is no mids or mean that can
come readily wrong to compass it by: But if we try this by the Rule, it is to
be feared, that there is very little of Christ's honor, or the true good of his
People in the matter; indeed, when men keeping themselves in their own
stations, are found to have abilities for, and Gods call to Rule and Govern,
they are, in that caice, to embrace that employment; but while men pretend to
exalt Christ, and the interest of his People, take heed that it be not
Self-seeking, or seeking to make themselves Great, which is really their
chiefest aim, and that they might have a better life of it: The Interest of the
People of God, as they are the People of God, never leads them to seek after
Greatness, in respect of earthly Privileges and Dignities; Therefore, look
well to your steps, and upon what principles and grounds ye move toward such an
end; and withal, take heed, that in prosecuting this end, ye out-shoot not
your selves, that ye go not beyond your line, and that ye move not without your
own Sphere; interest in Christ, and true respect to his interest, will never
prompt, nor nor advise you to such exorbitant stretches, nor warrant you in the
breach of any of his Rules: The passions of men work not the righteousness of
God.

The 2d. Use, serves to be as a mark and evidence, whereby we may try, what
sort of duties, actions and worship will stand before God: none but such as are
singly for God, and not for our selves, as the main end of them; Let the action
be never so good, if it is end be selfie, the more Gods honor be pretended; it
is the more abominable in his sight; for clearing this Use alittle, ye may take
some marks of difference, whereby ye shall know, when, albeit men cover, and
palliat their actions with pretexts of Gods honor, yet Self is their great
end. 1. Selfishness predominantly venting it self in any duty, alters and
changes, as it were, the very nature of the Duty or Service; in so much as that
which is Spiritual Service, when done to Christ, is turned into carnal, and
mere external service, when done to Self; Thus, those, who ( John 6,) sought
for their own selfish ends, to have Christ made a King, would have turned
Christ's Spiritual Kingdom into an earthly and worldly Kingdom for their own
advantage; it is an evil token, when respect to Christ is vented carnally in
some thing that smells strong of respect to the great Idol of Self. 2ly. As
Selfishness creeping in, changes some way the nature of the Service, so it
changes the manner and way of serving him; There is an unlikeness to him in
the way of the service, while Christ is only pretended, and self indeed
intended O! but the manner be unlike him; as we may see in the Disciples, Luke
9. v. 54. When the Samaritans refused to give Christ lodging, Shall we, (say
they) desire fire to come down from heaven to consume them as Elias did? Was
Elias thus honored, and shall not our Master be as much honored as he? ye
know not (says our meek Lord Jesus to them) what Spirit ye are of; My Spirit
(as if he had said) is not fiery, as yours i^;) The wrath of man fulfills not
the righteousness of God: When there is bitterness, even against wicked men,
look well that it rise not more from some selfish end or passion, and from
respect to your selves, then from real respect to Christ, however it may be
much pretended; for true zeal never vents it self in carnal revenge, or
bitterness. 3ly. It is unlike Christ in the means; when Christ's honor is not
singly intended, and when men take not Christ's own way to do his own work; they
readily do not light upon, or, are not led into his means to attain that end;
or though the end be good, yet they come not to their end, in Christ's way, and
by his means; and be assured, when the mids cannot abide the trial, it is a
shreud evidence, that it is not Christ that we are seeking, but our selves; we
must not do ill, that good may come of it; though the end be approven, if the
mids be not approven also, Christ will cast such service. But I come now to the
Four great things in the Text.

The First whereof is, The great task or work that Believers are called to, and
it is, to come after Christ, and to follow him: If any man (says he) will
come after me, and follow me. We shall shortly explain this, to make way for
what we aim at, The Words then suppose, That a man who is a Disciple of, or a
Believer in Christ, has Christ before him, and is following after him, for
clearing whereof, take this Doctrine, That a Beltevers great work and task is,
in all things wherein he is proposed as a Pattern, to be a follower of Christ,
and runner after him; There are several general Scriptur-exhortations that hold
forth this, as these, and such like; Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye therefore followers of
God, as dear children, and so followers of Christ; 1 Cor. 4.16. Be ye followers
of me; compared with Chap. 11.1. Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ: But
that this may be the more clear, I shall speak a little to these three things.
1. In what respects Believers are to look to Christ, in following him. 2ly.
What is this following of Christ? 3ly. What is opposite to following of Christ?

For the First of these, The Scripture holds out Christ in several respects, or
under several considerations, which will help to clear, what it is to follow h
m: And 1. It holds him out, as the End and Scope that we should have before us,
in all our Actions: So 2 Cor. 5. v. 15. We should live to him that died for us;
or, as the Mark we aim at, in our Christian race; Thus Paul says, Philip.
3.14. I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus; his design is to win Christ, to know him, and to enjoy him; he is
restless till he be at him; So that following of Christ is a running and
pursuing closs and hard after him, without turning to the right or left hand,
or looking back, till we be up at him, and fully apprehend him, as our Mark.
2ly. The Scripture holds him out, as the Prize, and we are to follow him, as
one following after a Prize (as the Apostle says he did, Philip. 3.14.) even
the prize of the high calling of God in Christ; We are to follow him as our
wages, and the reward of all our Service, and as the great mercy, that all
Believers mind and long to obtain; I (says the Apostle, Philip. 3.8.) count
all things but dung, that I may win Christ. 3ly. The Scripture holds out Christ
before us, as a Pattern and Copple, that we are to conform our selves to, in all
our Actions, and as the example that we should imitate; which is one of the
main things aimed at in this place, and through the Scripture, even to draw us
to look on Christ in his Life, Carriage, Actions, Death and Sufferings; and to
imitate him; Christ also suffered for us (says Peter, 1 Ephesians. Chap. 2. v. 22.
Leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps; And says the Lord,
John 13.10. I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to
you, Believers carriage should be a transumpt extract and double of Christ;
Learn of me (says he, Matthew. 11.29.) for I am meek and lowly in heart: We
should prefer his will to our will, as he did the Fathers; being tender
hearted, meek, lowly, humble, as he was, in suffering, to deny, and lay aside
our selves, as he did, etc. 4ly. Christ Jesus is held out, as a Master and
Teacher, and so we are to follow him, as one that teaches us what to do;
whether it be as a Teacher that Instructs, or as a Master that directs what to
do. Ye call me (says he, John 13.13.) Master and Lord, and ye say well, for
so I am. 5ly. He is held out to us as a Leader, or guide in our way; and so we
are to follow him; Behold, (says the Lord, Isa. 55.4.) I have given him for a
witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people. 6ly He is set out
as a Captain and Commander; so he is called, Heb. 10 The captain of our
salvation, and Isa. 55.4. a Commander; Soldiers take Orders from their
Commanders, and must keep their Rank and File, and when they scale the Walls of
a Town, and offer to take it by storm, they must follow their Commanders closs
at the back; even so should we follow Christ. 7ly. The Scripture sets out
Christ as the Shepherd that cares for the Sheep, that waits upon, and seeds his
People. I am (says he, John 10.) the good shepherd; and when he goes forth,
his sheep follow him, v. 4. Not only must they take their Directions from him,
as a Commander, but they must keep near his feet, hear what Lessons he gives
out to them, and hide themselves under his shadow, from them that come to
trouble his flock. 8ly. He is held out to us as our Forerunner. Heb. 6.20.
Whither the forerunner is for us entered; as our heavenly harbinger, he is
gone to Heaven before us, to take up our lodging, to provide quarters for us;
and we are called to have our conversation in Heaven, as he is exalted to
Heaven, our conversation should be in Heaven also, Colos. 3.1. and Philip.
3.18. 9ly. He is held out to us as the Author and finisher of our faith, as he
that works all our works in us, and for us, as he that must give us the Lesson,
and understanding to take it up, make the way plain, and carry us through it;
Looking (says the Apostle. Heb. 12.2. unto Jesus the Author and finisher of
our faith, Giving him the trust of carrying us through, These two words bid us
trust Christ with the beginning and perfecting of the work, and never to take
our eye off from him.

For the Second, What this following is, 1. It will be the more clear by
showing you, what it is opposed unto. And first, it is opposed to men's taking
of another way than Christ took, and to the taking of another Guide, or Leader
than him; for whosoever follows a stranger, they follow not him, 2ly. It is
opposed to men's turning of their backs on Christ; for following supposes the
setting of the f^ce toward that which is followed; Therefore, Heb. 10.33.
drawing back, is opposed to believing, or living by faith, which is nothing
else but following of Christ. 3ly. It is opposed to sitting up; for such as
stand still, or sit down in the way, though their face be someway toward
Christ, yet they follow him not; If thou will return, O Israel, says the Lord,
Hos. 4.16. return unto me. Make not a half returning, do not halt, nor sit up
in the way; for followers are going on, and running out the race, 4ly. It is
opposed also to running before Christ, or making haste; for these go before
him, that step out ere he open the door, or seek to go another way than by the
living way into the Sanctuary, or most Holy; or take the Counsel and Direction
of others; and do not wait upon his; as Saul did, we find also this fault in
part in the Disciples, in their prescribing away to him to be avenged upon the
Samaritans, and not waiting on his prescribing to them.

The Use of it, in a word, serves, To exhort Believers, To consider what
Relations Christ stands in to them, and in their Christian Walk to make use of
them. 2ly. To try hereby what progress they make in their Christian Course and
Walk: and 3ly. To study Christ well, and to confirm themselves to him; as their
great Pattern, Example, Leader and Commander, all along their Christian Walk.

SERMON II.
Matthew 16, 24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take
up his cross, and follow me.
IT is not easy, but a matter of singular difficulty, sincerely and honestly
to follow Christ; As is clear from the high and hard Duties which Our Lord
calls for in these Words, as simply, and indispensably necessary to the
following of Him, viz. That a man deny himself, and Willingly and Cheerfully
take up his Cross.

In this part of the Verse (as we formerly show) there are Four things
contained. The 1. is the Great Work and Business that all that comes after
Christ, or are Christ's Disciples are called to; and that is, to follow him.
2ly. There is the great Obstruction that lies in the way of this, or that
hinders Believers in following of him; and that is a man's own self, or
felfishness. 3ly. There are the great qualifications, or duties which are
required in, and from Christ's Disciples, in order to their following of him;
they must deny themselves, and take up their cross, and so follow him; and
these are helpful to one another, Self-denial helps to contented and cheerful
closeing with the Cross; and that again proves greatly helpful to the following
of Christ. 4ly. There is the great necessity of these qualifications, or
duties, to all and every one that would follow Christ; they are so
indispensably necessary, that there can be no following of him, without them;
all that would follow him, must needs deny themselves, and take up their cross.

For making way to what we principally aim at, somewhat has been spoken in
short, to the First of these, and we shall not insist further on it, especially
seeing what respects the following of Christ may fall in afterward, amongst the
Duties that are required of these that come after him.

I shall therefore come to the Second thing viz. The great Obstruction that
hinders Believers in the following of Christ, whether we speak with respect to
the matter, or manner of this full and comprehensive Duty; which is (as we
said) a man's Self, or selfishness. Hence,

Observe, That a man's own self, or selfishness is the great thing that
obstructs Christ's followers, and hinders them in the following of him; This is
that which makes them stumble, and fall in their way, so that if it be not in
some measure removed, and rolled out of the way, there can be no following of
Christ: This is clearly supposed in these Words; for if Self did not obstruct
in the following of Christ, he needed not have pressed this great Duty of
Self-denial, as necessary to the following of him: But that we may the better
clear this Doctrine, we shall take it up in these three Branches, which are
manifestly supposed, and employed in the Words, and in the Doctrine. 1. That
there is such a corruption as Self in, and among Christ's own Disciples, and
Followers; for to them he speaks, and on them, he presses this duty of
self-denial, supposing that they, even they had such a corruption in them, as
Self, and might be too much swayed by it. 2ly. That this Corruption goes
along with, and waits upon Believers, in their following of Christ; nay,
alas! it steals in upon them, and twists it self in, into their most spiritual
Duties; and therefore Christ knowing this, presses the study of Self-denial, in
order to their right following of him, in the way of Duty. 3ly. That this
Corruption (at least where it bears swey) is the great thing that obstructs,
letts, and impeds Believers in their following of Christ, and in their Duty,
and therefore when he is giving Direction, how people may get him followed, he
first proposes the removal of Self out of the way, as the great thing that
obstructs following of him.

For clearing and confirming of the first of these, viz. That there is such a
Corruption as Self in, and among Christ's own Disciples, and Followers; there
are three things that we shall speak a little to. 1. What is to be understood
here by a Man's Self, or what it is that we call Selfishness. 2ly. What makes it
out, that this Corruption of Selfishness is in, and amongst Believers, or
Christ's followers. 3ly Why the Lord suffers Believers to be so much kept at
under with such a gross Corruption.

For clearing of the first of these, viz. What is to be understood here, by a
man's Self, or what it is that we call Selfishnesse, we shall offer these four
things to be considered. 1. What uses to be called a Man's Self; In the General
it comprehends what is in Man, whatsoever a man is of himself; but more
particularly. 1. It is taken for that habitual Corruption of nature that it is
in all and every one; which the Apostle calls Flesh, Romans 8.8 The old man,
Ephesians. 4.22. The body of death, Romans 7.24 And this is commonly called sinful
or corrupt self. 2ly. It is taken for a man's natural affection, and desire to
his own being and well-being, for his natural desire to preserve himself, and
his desire toward these things that tend thereunto, and to his well-being; for
as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.29. No man ever yet hated his own flesh, but
nourishes it, and cherishes it; And we find this affection to our selves,
made the measure of our love to our neighbor; and therefore the Scripture
says, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; This is called natural Self.
3ly. It is taken for a man's Parts, Gifts, Moral Induements, Meekness, Patience,
Fortitude, etc. Or his outward moral actions whereby he commends himself to
others; Hence a man is said to follow himself, when he walks according to his
own wisdom and counsel; and to trust in himself, 2 Cor. 1.9. When he trusts in
his own wisdom, strength, courage, moral blamelessness, or the like; This is
called moral self. 4ly. It is taken for these Graces of of the Spirit, whereby
a man is renewed after the image of God; and in this respect, a man is opposed
to his own corrupt Self, Romans 7.20. It is no more I that do it, but sin that
dwells in m^, and Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; And
this may be called Spiritual, Sanctified, or Renewed-Self: now all these point
at something habitu^l in the man; but when we say that Self obstructs in
following of Christ; we understand it not simply, with respect to any of these
last three, nay, not with respect to the first, at least as more properly
considered; for ^t is not the having of Grace, and moral Parts, or gifts of
Wisdom and Learning, etc. Nor a man's natural affection, and desire to his own
being, and well-being, that (considered in themselves) obstruct his following
of Christ; but the man's undue estimation of these, and their bearing the great
sway with him in his carriage: and though the corruption of nature does greatly
obstruct the following of Christ, and is the bitter root, out from which the
Selfishness we here speak of springs; yet it is someway distinct from it, I
mean, from that habitual, and (to speak so) complex body of natural corruption
in us, which (as we said) is commonly called sinful or corrupt self; but that
which we speak of, is a special propension and inclination in all men to
miscarry, by an inordinate respect to themselves, and to these things that
respect themselves. Consider, 2ly. That this Selfishness may be looked on,
other more generally, or more particularly. 1. More generally, it may be looked
on, as it goes through the whole conversation and actions of a man; and as it is
in every man the same; for all men naturally have the same principle of
Selfishness, or of inordinat respect to themselves, swaying them in the whole
of their conversation and actions. 2ly. More particularly, it may be looked on
as it runs in such and such a channel, and especially vents it self in this or
that particular way, or toward such or such a particular sin, or idol; and in
this respect it differs much amongst men; the Selfishness of one man venting
more in one way, and toward one thing, and the Selfishness of another man,
venting more another way, and toward some other thing; and when we speak of
Selfishness here, it is not of the last, but of the first of these that we
mean; that is of that selfish propension, or inordinat respect to a man's Self
that swayes a man in the whole of his conversation; and is the same in all men,
whatever more special and particular ways it has of venting it self amongst
men: for though the sins and evils whereunto men are particularly addicted be
diverse, yet the corruption that swayes to all these is one and the same.
Consider, 3ly. That this inordinat respect to a man's Self, that swayes him in
all his actions, and makes him miscarry in reference to himself, may be looked
on again two ways; either first, As it is opposed to the things of others, as
when a man sees to his own things, and not to the things of another, and this
is called particularness, or particularity, and is expr^sly prohibit by the
Apostle, Philip. 2.4. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also
on the things of others. 2ly. As it is opposed to God, and the things of God
(in which sense we principally speak of it here;) For, whereas a man should
keep himself, and all that concerns himself in subordination to God, this
inordinat respect to himself, makes him put himself, or something in or
belonging to himself, out of the right place, or out of that place of
subordination to God, that he should keep himself in; and makes him put himself
in Gods place and room: So that from all this it may be clear, that by the
Selfishness we here speak of, we are not simply to understand that habitual
corruption of nature, or this, and that particular Lust, that this or that man
may be more peculiarly ^dicted to, nor a man's natural affection, and ^esire to
himself; nor yet a man's parts, and ^oral endewments; nor a man's Graces; but ^at
inordinat respect to a man's self; which is, as we said) the same in all men
naturally, ^^d which swayes a man in the whole of his con^^rsation, and makes a
man put himself, or some^^ing in himself, in Gods place and room: and ^^us it
is taken in the Scriptures, where Living (...) our self, 2 Cor. 5.15. Seeking
our selves, Jere^iah 45.5. and pleasing our selves, Romans 15.1. ^re spoken of
man's self, especially, as these are ^pposed unto living, to seeking of and
pleasing ^od; it is not this, or that act, but to be sway^d from this principle
of inordinat respect to ^ur selves, all which intimat an inordinat respect
(...) this or that act, or to any thing we do, or ^eddle with; so as in all
that we do, to live to ^ur Selves, or to have our Selves before us, in ^e whole
tract of our way, as the great and last ^^d that we aim at, and as the great
and chief ^^inciple, that we are swayed by,

That Self is thus to be understood in these ^ords, is clear; for 1. The sin
that Christ re^ukes Peter for, was not so much his love, either (...) his own,
or his Masters precious Life, simply, (...) it was his laboring to have Christ
more sway^d by respect to his life, than to his Duty. 2ly. ^t is clear, that
when Christ says, except a ^an deny himself, He means, except a man be ^ead to
every thing in himself, or that belongs ^o Self, when, and as it comes in
competition ^ith him, he cannot be his disciple; Therefore, ^e find it
commended in Levi, that he preferred God and his Duty to Him, to all relation
Deuteronomy. 33. v. 9. He said unto his Father and his Mother, I have not seen him,
neither did he (...) knowledge his Brethren, nor knew his own Ch^^dren; and
Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. Moses gets honorable testimony, for his preferring of
Christ and his duty to him, and to his People, to the Honors, Pleasures, and
Riches of Phara^^ Court; and Paul says, 2 Cor. 5.16. He kne^ no man after the
flesh, 3ly. Christ explains (...) own meaning in the following words to the
Tex^ while he says, He that saves his life shall lose i^ he condemns not a
natural affection to, nor^ moderat care for the preservation of a man's li^^ but
that inordinat respect to it, and care for (...) that obstructs duty and
service to him, an^ makes a man put his life out of the right place^ and
therefore, by a man's Self, or Selfishne^^ here, we understand (I say) that
corruption whereby a man has such an inordinat estimat^on of, or respect to
himself, or any thing in, o^ belonging to himself, as puts him, or it in the
place, or room of God, or, as puts the man Self uppermost, and makes all things
subordina^ to it. Consider, 4ly. For further clearing wha^ Self is, these Six
things, wherein the Scripture holds forth this sin, and wherein it vents o^
shows it self. 1. It vents it self, or kythes i^ making a man's Self the chief
end of his actions so that he lives to himself, and for himself, an^ not to
God, nor for God; and Self terminats al^ his designs and endeavors; Thus it
vented in Ephraim, who, Hos. 10. v. 1. is said, to be a^ empty vine, because,
He brought forth fruit to himself; that is selfishness, when all a man's study
and care is to bring forth something to himself; and herein Baruch was guilty
also, as that chal^nge proves, Jerem. 45.5. Seek thou great ^ings for thy
self? seek them not; And compar^^g 1 Cor. 2.2. Where the Apostle says, I
de^^rmined to know nothing among you, save Christ, and him crucified, with 2
Cor. 4. v. 5. Where he yes, we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the
lord; We find it clear, that a man who has any thing in his eye, before and
above Christ in his ^ctions, is seeking himself, and not Christ, and ^o makes
himself his end; which is called Self-^^eking. 2ly. Selfiness vents it self in
becoming ^he great principle and motive, that ingadges a man to do such and
such a Duty, or to abstain from such and such a sin; men, no doubt, may ^o
many commanded duties, and abstain from ^any sins that are forbidden, merely
from a ^rinciple of Self, and as being acted and moved ^hereunto by Self: The
Pharisees gave alms. ^ut it was to be seen of men, and to have glory of ^^en,
Matthew. 6.2. To give alms, is a command^d Duty, but their motive being Self,
Christ ^ayes of them, They have their reward: and how ^rdinary is it for men
that have no higher prin^iple than Self, to abstain from such or such sins,
because of the prejudice that thereby they may ^ring to themselves? yea, it
seems that Jonah himself, tho a truly, if not an eminently Godly ^an, was too
much swayed, moved, and acted ^y self, both in his refusing at first to go to
Nine^^eh, and in his after discontent, when God upon the repentance of that
People, spared them, and did ^ot the evil which he said he ^ould do unto them,
he was sinfully, and self^s^ly afraid, least he should be counted a false
Prophet; and therefore he says, Chap. 4. v. 2. Was not this my saying, when I
was yet in my own country? therefore I fled into Tarshish; This in Scripture
is called Self-pleasing, in opposition to which, it is said, Romans 15. v. 3.
That Christ pleased not himself, etc. 3ly. This corruption of Self comes in,
and vents it self, when men make something in themselves, the object of their
trust and confidence, or that wherein thy trust, and whereupon they stay, and
lean themselves; as when men, in undertaking any thing, lean to their own
wisdom and understanding; or in going about any duty, lean to their own
strength; which we find Paul disclaiming, while he says, 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that
we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves; or when
men build their peace with God, and hopes of happiness on any thing in
themselves, on their duties, or their own righteousness; as the Pharisees did,
who trusted in themselves, that they were righteous, Luke 18. v. 9. And these
spoken of, Romans 10. v. 3. Who being ignorant of Gods righteousness, went about
to establish their own, and would not submit to the righteousness of God; this
is called Self-confidence: and indeed before people can be taken off this, and
be made to trust in the Living God, they must be made to despair in themselves,
as 2 Cor. 1.9. clears. 4ly. This corruption of Self shows it self in this, when
a man makes himself, or something in himself, as his own wisdom, will or
affections, the great rule and ground of his Actions; when in this or that
Action, he takes counsel from himself, and suffers Self to govern, guide and
sway him, in what he does; This is that which Peter was guilty of here, in the
counsel that he gives to Christ, as Christ's answer clears; who tells him That
he savoured not the thing that be of God, but the things that be of men; And
this these wicked people spoken of Jer. 44.17. Who rejected the Word of the
Lord, were gu^lty of, in saying, We will certainly do whatsoever thing goes
forth out of our own mouth; such are called Self-willed, Tit. 1.7. and 2 Pet.
2.10. Presumptuous are they, (says he) self-willed; They will not be guided;
nor ruled by the counsel, or will of God, but will needs follow their own
carnal wisdom, inclinations and affections, for attaining their ends. 5ly. This
corrup^ion of Self, shows it self, in too high estimation of a Man's Self, or of
any thing that is in himself: and this is, either when a man has nothing in
himself, to found that esteem of himself upon, When (as the Apostle speaks.
Gal. 6.3. he thinks himself to be something, when he is nothing; or, it is when
there may be something to found it upon, some excellent parts, moral virtues,
spiritual gifts, or graces; yet he is more lifted up, and taken up with these,
than he should be; This is contrary to that direction of the Apostle, Romans
12.3. For every man not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think,
but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man, the measure of
Faith; The Apostle knew that every man was much given to think too well of
himself, and of his own Parts, Gifts, and Graces; and therefore he lays on this
charge, That no man think of himself above what is meet; this is called
Self-estimation, or Self-conceit; Yea; it may be rather called, and truly is,
Self-deceit, as the Apostle clears, Gal. 6.3. where he says, If man think
himself something, when he is nothin^ he deceives himself, 6ly. This
corruption of Sel^ vents and shows it self in this, when it is something in a
man's self, whereupon his satisfaction or disatisfaction mainly depends, when he
he^ no other ground of content, or discontent, bu^ something in himself, when
it goes well wit^ himself, he is satisfied; but when any thing mis-carries, as
to himself, or thwarts, or goes cros^ to him, he is dissatisfied, he is up or
down and thinks it right or wrong with him, as he (...) forborne, or touched, in
that which concern^ himself: Thus it was with Jonah, Chap 4. and with Baruch,
Jer. 45. v. 3.5. When he says Woe is me now, for the Lord has added grief to
my sorrow, etc. It seems to have been some apprehended prejudice, or haz^rd to
Self, that so much affected him; and the Pharisees in gettin^ the reward of
esteem and applause, when they gave alms, and made long prayers, were
satisfied with that; This is called Self-love, 2 Timothy 3.2. For it is that which
m^inly affects men, as it goes up or down, well or ill with them, as to their
own particular condition; so that, if they themselves be well, if they be in
prosperity, in esteem and credit, they care not who be in adversity, or under
contempt and disgrace; and if it be evil with themselves, they regard not ^ow
it be with others.

But now we come to the 2d. Thing, viz. That this Corruption of Selfiness is
even in, and amongst Believers, and the honest followers of Christ: I shall
confirm it from these grounds. 1. From the remainder of corrupt nature that is
^et in Christ's followers, or Believers, for even ^hey themselves have much of
unrenewed nature (...) them; and in as far as they are unrenewed, ^hey cannot
but seek themselves in some respect, and in some measure, as well as others,
and ^ave much of this Corruption in them; the Apostle 2 Cor. 5.15. says, They
that live, should ^ot henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died
for them; Supposing that before, to wit, while they were spiritually dead,
there was a living to themselves wholly; and that now after they were made to
l^ve Spiritually, yet in as far as they were unrenewed, there was also a living
to themselves. 2ly. The many warnings, and directions given to Believers, to
guard against this sin, plainly say, and prove, that there is such a Corruption
in, and amongst them; ye see here, that Christ speaking even to his own
Disciples, calls them to study Self-denial, and Romans 12.3. The Apostle presses,
That no man think of himself above that which is meet. 3ly. The many reproofs
given to Godly men for falling in this sin, proves that there is something of
it, in, and amongst them: It Is the great thing the Lord reproves in Jonah, who
was selfily (to speak so) displeased and angry, both at the Lords spareing of
Nineveh, and at the withering of the Gourd, Chap 4. So that the Lord says to
him, Does thou well to be angry Jonah? We see also the Lord reproves this sin
in Baruch, Jerem. 45.5. Seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not:
And the sad check that Christ gives Peter here, when he says to him, Get thee
behind me, Satan, is a very clear proof of, as it is a sore reproof for this
si^ that vented in the carnal counsel which he too^ upon him to give our Lord.
4ly. The bitte^ fruits of Selfiness that are amongst Believers, ar^ sad proofs,
and confirmations of this truth, tha^ there is much of this Corruption even in
them Look to the ways wherein Self vents, and shows it self, whether in making
our selves our end, o^ in our being moved, and acted by self, as our greatest
principle and motive; how many instances, from the Old and New Testament might
be brought of Godly persons, that have failed in these? nay, we need no further
proof than that which is within our selves, to bear witness to this; O! how
much do men, in Preaching, Praying, and Living, act from, and to Self, Preach
to themselves, Pray to themselves, and Live to themselves?

For the 3d. thing which we proposed to be spoken to, on this branch of the
Doctrine, viz. Why does the Lord suffer Believers to be so much kept at under,
with such a gross corruption, as Self, or Selfiness? In answer to this
question, there are these few reasons, or ends which we shall offer, The 1.
whereof is, that he may make and keep humble his own Followers; that the
continual sight of this Corruption, and the stirrings of it, may put, and keep
them in mind of the remainder of corrupt nature, that is yet in them, and may
prevent dotting upon any Gifts, or Graces in themselves; for this end then,
viz. to discover what venom lurks in their nature, to prevent pride, and keep
humble, there is something of this vile corruption left, and suffered to stir
them, ye see, 2 Cor. 12. A messenger of Satan is sent to buffet Paul, least he
should be puffed up, or exalted above measure, through the abundance of
revelations; Intimating thereby, that there was a hazard of being puffed up;
and to prevent that, a messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him; I will not
say that this corruption of Self was the Scourge, that was sent to humble him,
but it is clear, that the quickness, and liveliness of this corruption of
Self, was the cause why this messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him, in
order to the keeping of him humble, and Self-denyed. A 2d. Reason, or end is,
That the Lord thereby, may quicken his own People, to more lively exercise of
their Grace, when they know that there is such an enemy in their bosom, as no
natural thing, or nothing in nature can ingadge and sway them to fight against;
For, what is there, I pray, in any man naturally to engadge him, or to help him
to fight against Self? nay, nothing can do this, but supernatural special
Grace; and even that will not do it to any good purpose, if it be not keept in
lively exercise; and therefore (I say) that the Lord may quicken, and stir up
Believers to the lively exercise of Grace, he suffers this Corruption to be in
them, and to stir, and now and then to move more strongly in them, that thereby
he may necessitat them thereto; and no doubt, by fighting seriously against
this Corruption, Believers not only evidence the truth of their Grace, but the
livelieness of it, and much sincere respect to God; as we see in Abraham's case,
to whom the Lord says, Now I know that thou fear God, in that thou have not
withheld thy son, thine on^y son from me; It was not simply the offering of his
Son, but his only Son, the Son of his Love, that evidenced the greatness of his
respect and love to God. A 3d. Reason, or End is, That God thereby may further,
and promote the mortification of this Corruption, and make his People fall out
with themselves the more; he does not only suffer it to be in them but he will
suffer it sometimes to stir strongly in them, to vex and trouble them, and to
keep them at under, that they may be the more stirred up against it, and made
the more to study the mortification of it; though it be in them, yet if it lay
quiet, and did never stir, and move strongly to the obstructing of them in
their following of Christ, it might get leave to live in them, without such
vigorous opposition; but when it moves strongly, and stands up in the Believers
face, and comes in upon him in all duties, seeking to corrupt them; It cannot
but provock him the more against it, and stir him up more seriously to
endeavor the mortification of it: and therefore we find, that our Lord Jesus
would have Believers taking occasion from the stirring of their corruption to
fall on it, and to seek to have the v^ry life of it taken away, when he says,
Matthew. 18.8. If thy right hand, or thy right foot offend thee, cut them off;
or, if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; And we see,
that the more Paul is buffeted, he is the more in Prayer. 2 Cor. 12. And that
by the out-breaking of sin among the Corinthians, they are stirred up to a
greater indignation, and revenge against it, than before. 2 Cor. 7.11. A 4th
Reason is, That God may teach his People to know how little they are oblidged
to themselves, and how much they ^re oblidged to him, for any good they get
done; and O! but it be needful for them, to learn this lesson well, seeing we
are naturally strongly inclined to trust in, and lean to our selves; and that
this inclination is not soon subdued in us; yea, Christ, and his Grace (to
speak so) get it not fully subdued here: however Believers, by the being, and
strong stirring of Self in them, to the obstructing them in their following of
Christ, may see how much they are oblidged to God, and to the power of his
Grace, when they are helped to do any thing that is spiritually good, and to
follow their duty aright; and may there from be excited to make more use of
Christ, and to trust him more for making his Grace sufficient for them, as it is
sa^d to Paul, 2 Cor 12. v. 9.10. My grace is sufficient for thee, for my
strength is made perfect in weakness; whereupon he says, most gladly therefore
will I glory in my infirmities, for when I am weak, then am I strong; when he
was denied to, and out of conceit with himself; and all Self-sufficiencie; then
by looking to Christ, and trusting him, he was made strong.

We shall now come to the Uses of the Doctrine, The first whereof is, for
information, to let us see that it is the natural inclination of us all, to be
more swayed with respect to our selves, than with respect to God; for if this
be true of the followers of Christ, how much more must it hold true of all
others, who are not really his followers, of such Whose God is their belly,
whose glory, is their shame, and who mind earthly things; as the Apostle
speaks, Philip. 3.19 In speaking to the Use, I shall a little touch at these
two things, What are the main things that inordinat respe^^ to a man's Self
incline, and leads him to; 2ly Ho^ this corruption may be discerned, and taken
up.

For the first of these, I shall not speak of all man's predominant Lusts, or
Idols, that inord^nat respect to himself inclines and leads him to but of some
of the main things that it swayes him unto; and 1. It leads, or swayes a man to
seek, to be something in the World (this is a main Idol^) as to be ri^h, or to
be learned, or to be great, and honorable in the world; This we see in Baruch,
Jerem. 45.5. who sought great things for himself. 2ly. As it le^ds and swayes a
man to seek to be something in the world, so it leads, and swayes hi^ to seek
to be esteemed something; which is another great Idol, that Self inclines to;
and this we find to be the great thing that Paul condemns in the Preachers at
Corinth^ th^^ they vented their Eloquence, and Gift, to the end that they might
be much esteemed of, and might be called great men, or great Preachers; and
this is that which Christ condemned in the Pharisees, that they justified
themselves before men, and sought the esteem, applause and testimony of men,
while as they did not approve their hearts to G^d; and indeed there is not any
one thing that inordinat respect to Self, does readily swey men more to than
this. 3ly. Though a man cannot reach either of these, to be something, or to be
esteemed something in the world; yet then Self will swey a man at last, to
think something of himself, when he cannot get esteem from others, or when the
esteem others has had of him is lost; yet, even then this Corruption can make
that a ground whereupon to put a man to think something of himself; when one
Idol is broken, it makes him set up another; yea, it may be to think the more
of himself, because others think little of him: yea, his esteem of himself may
flow, not so much from what is external, as from what is internal and
spiritual, and lies betwixt God and him, and so it becomes the more dangerous;
we find that even Paul was in some hazard of an undue esteem of himself, upon
the account of what was between God and him. 2. Cor 12. 4ly. Inordinat respect
to self, leads a man to study to promote, and uphold all these; that is, his
being something, his being esteemed something, and his own estimation of
himself as something, even when he is at a loss in that amongst others; and
this comes in as a mids, or mean unto these, as the end; It makes a man leave
nothing undone, that may contribute any thing unto these; and will suffer him
to do nothing that may be opposite, or cross to these: ye see, 1 Cor. 13.3. how
far Self will go, in seeking to maintain an esteem amongst others, or a man's
esteem of himself; it will even put him to give his body to be burned; and we
see what the Apostle says, Gal. 6.12. Of false Teachers, that loved their own
outward ease, peace, pleasure, and estimation so well, that for preventing the
breach, and interruption thereof, by persecution, and that they might be in
esteem, (especially with the Jews) They urged, and pressed circumcision; As
many (says he) as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, they constrain you
to be circumcised, only least they should suffer persecution for the cross of
Christ: So then the most part of a man's actions, in so far as he is Selfie, are
directed to one, or all of these ends; either to be something, or to be
esteemed something, or to keep up an estimation of himself, when the other two
fail.

For the 2d. thing, viz How this Corruption may be discerned, or taken up? ye
may consider these things for helping to it. 1. If men be doing the Duties they
should do without respect to these ends, or without expectation of coming to be
something in the world, or of credit and estimation, by following of them, yea,
with an expectation of the contrary, even of the Cross of Christ in following
them; This is an evidence that Self carries not the swey; for when it bears the
swey, Duties are followed with respect to these Selfie ends, and are deserted
and forsaken, when these ends are not attainable by them: Our Lord says, John
6.26. To some that followed him, Ye seek me not because ye saw the miracles,
but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled; As if he had said, if ye
had not gotten some temporal good by following of me, ye would not have
followed me; and therefore when he preaches of Bread of another nature, than
that which nourishes the Body, they forsook him: we may also see somewhat of
it in Jonah, who fearing to lose his credit, fled to Tarshish, whereas, if
there had been ground to have expected reput and credit, he had readily been as
forward as any to go to Ninieveh on Gods call. 2ly. When things that concern
Gods honor equally; or that are in themselves equally good, are not so equally
pleasing, and acceptable to us because of some circumstances accompanying them,
wherein Self may be concerned; that says, that Self bears much swey in us; as
for instance, when God does good, and brings glory to himself, in effectuating
some good works, by such and such an instrument; if there follow upon this,
secret envy, and emulation in us, and no thankfulness to God, because it is not
done by us, or because we have no hand in it, then certainly Se^f bears swey in
us, as it did in Joshuah, who was angry at Eldad and Medad, their Prophesieing
in the Camp, he would have had none equ^lled with, let be preferred to his
Master Moses, because that tended, as he thought, to derogat from his own
respect and reput; single regard to Gods being glor^fied in this, or that work,
will make us rejoice, whenever, and by whomsoever it is done. A 3d way to
discern when Self sweyes, is by the carnal anxiety, perplexity, grief, and
disquietness, (which are the effects and fruits of it) that men have, when they
miss their selfy end: we have had, it is very probable, some expectation of
peace, and of the thriving and prospering of Gods Work; and that it would have
brought Ministers and Professors in estimation; try what fruit and effect
follows our disappointment; if it be carnal anxiety, and disquietness, it says,
Self hes born much sway with us; as we see it did with Baruch, by this very
effect and fruit of it. Jer. 45.3.5. He cries, Woe is me, for the Lord has
added grief to my sorrow, I fainted in my sighing, and found no rest; It might
have been thought, that this was some holy grief, and affectedness of Soul, for
the miseries of Jerusalem; But the Lords answer, Seeks thou great things for
thy self, shows, that the ground of his sorrow was more Selfie, and that his
disqu^etnsss, was but a Selfie disquietness in a great measure, at least;
because he was like to be disappointed of the great things he expected: We had
need to consider well, what the nature of our grief is, and on what grounds we
are disquieted in sad times; whether it be mainly, for something that concerns
our selves, or for that which concerns the work, and people of God. 4ly. It may
be discerned when self bears swey, by a willingness, and earnestness to have
any thing that may serve these ends, we spoke of, followed forth; as when
persons would have their good spoken of, and commended: and any evil that may
mar their to much coveted esteem covered; In opposition to which the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 12.6. I forbear least any man should think of me above that which
he sees me to be; Being a self-denyed man, as he, keept in (as it were) and
covered the good which he had; so the selfie man cares not how many know the
good that is in him, nay, he is desirous, that many may know of it. 5ly. It may
be discerned, when Self swayes; if men would observe their thoughts,
contryvances, projects and designs, it will readily be found, that there are
many of them imaginary and vain; examine but the current of them, and it will
be found, that they are taken up with that which is pleasant, or profitable to
Self: and alas! the great scope of the most of People, in all their designs,
and endeavors, yea, in all they do, or say, is Self; And as Solomon says,
Eccles. 6.7. All the labor of a man is for his mouth; So we may say, that our
back, or belly, our credit, or name, our ease, or pleasure, or one thing or
other, concerning Self, takes us up, and that all our labor is spent in
serving of it; this is the Fruit, the bitter Fruit of that Corruption that
dwells in us.

The 2d. Use serves to humble all flesh, that there is such a corrupt principle
in us: And first, If there be such selfishness, and opposition to God, even
amongst Christ's followers, then what ever their parts, and gifts be, what ever
their graces, and nearness to God be, it becomes all of them to be humble, when
they think on this sinful inclination, that is in them, to set up themselves in
Gods place, and to get up, as it were, into his Chair; and that ye may stand in
awe, and be humbled, when ye think on this Corruption; consider what things it
has in it; as 1. An horrible guiltiness, which might fill us with fear, and
terror, and put us to tremble; there is no guilt like it in other Corruptions,
this is the very height of guiltiness, being Idolatry, a man's putting himself
where God should be; and accordingly, all the heavy threatenings, and plagues of
God, because of Idolatry, belong to it. 2ly That this is not a simple act of
Idolatry, as the making, and the worshipping of the Calf in the Wilderness was,
but it is an habitual continued tract of Idolatry; It is our very nature, to
be Idolatrous this way; and we are as much; and as often Idolatrous, as we are
only, or mainly for our selves, and swayed by Self; yea, it goes along the
whole course of our life; and if one Idolatrous Act should humble us, much more
should a tract of Idolatry, and an idolatrous way, humble us. 3ly. That thi^ is
not only a sin, and a great sin in it self, bu^ the Seed also, and Root of
other Sins, for it as far as our actions are sinful, they spring from the
flesh, and particularly from this Root of selfiness, as the Apostle shows, 2 Timothy 3.2. When once men become lovers of themselves; they are ready to become
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemous, disobedient to parents, unthankful,
unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of these that are good, traitors, headie, high-minded, lovers
of pleasures more than lovers of God; All the Legions and Armies of Sins,
follow this Sin. 4ly. It is the sin that most of all blasts our Duties, and
provocks God to wrath and jealousy, whatever Ephraim did, was blasted by it,
Hosea. 10.1. He was but an empty vine, bringing forth fruit to himself; and
James says, Chap. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, to consume
it upon your lusts; Ye would have some Parts, or Gifts, that ye may be
esteemed; or would be born through in such and such a trial, that ye may not be
ashamed before men; but such selfie ends blast all, and keep us from receiving,
when we ask; and besides, (I say) his sin provocks God to wrath and jealousy
above any sin, as that which eminently robes him of his Glory more than any
other sin does; This provocks him to blast, break in pieces, and to pour our
his fury like fire on People. 2ly. If this should be ground of humiliation to
Christ's followers; then it should be so to others also; Mark tells us, Chap.
8.34. That Christ preached this Doctrine of Self-denial, not only to his
Disciples, but to the Multitude also; as knowing well that they were under the
^ower of this corruption, of inordinat Self-re^pect; which exposed them to the
hazard of ^eing burnt in the fire of Gods jealousy: Therefore it concerns you
all, to lay this sin to heart, and to be humble; O! stand in awe to come in
competition with God, do we (as the Apostle says) provock him to jealousy? are
we stronger than he? sure we are not: therefore take warning to walk softly,
and humbly before him.

SERMON III.
Matthew, 16. Verse 24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his cross and follow me.
IT is become sinfully natural to all the children of men, to exalt and lift up
themselves in their own esteem and affection, above all things besides, to set
Self upon the Throne in their hearts, and to make all other things subservient
to it; yea, not only must all other Idols bow down before, and do homage unto
this great Idol Self, (they being desired, and affected, not so much for
themselves, as in a subserviencie to it) but alas! the great and glorious God
himself also, is, by them made to stand (as it were) at it is footstool, and it
set above him, and preferred to him; so that we may say, they must needs be
very blind, who see not, that amongst all the detestable things that the hearts
of men are set upon, and which Gods Soul hates, this is the most hateful at
detestable.

We show you what is the Scope of the Words; our Lord Jesus observing that
Peter counsel to him, and the offense which he therein laid before him,
proceeded from that bitt^ root of inordinat respect to himself, who, for seeing
his own hazard, in his Masters, do^ thereupon tempt him, to respect his own
ea^^ and freedom from trouble, more than his duty (I say) our Lord observing
this, and knowin^ how great, and common an evil this is in al^ men, and how
much of it there is, even in, an^ amongst his own followers, after he has
rebuked Peter, he teaches all that will come after him this great Lesson, That
they must deny themselves, and take up their cross, and follow him: from which
we Observed, That Self or Selfiness, is the great thing that obstructs, lets
and impeds believers, in their following of Christ; And that we might speak the
more clearly, and distinctly to this Doctrine, we took it up in these three
Branches. 1. That there is such a Corruption as Self, in and among Christ's own
Disciples. 2ly. That this Corruption comes in, insinuats it self upon, and goes
along with Believers, in their following of Christ, and their Duty. 3ly.
That this Corruption is the great thing that obstructs Believers in their
following of Christ, and their duty: we have already spoken unto the first of
these.

We now come to speak of the 2d. viz. That this Corruption of Self, or
selfiness comes in, insinuats it self upon, and goes along with Believers, in
their following of Christ, and of their duty; It is not only the great
principle that the corrupt wicked world walks by, and that Believ^rs themselves
are too much sweyed, by in their ^atural and civil actions (though even in
these ^hey should live to Christ, and not to themselves;) ^ut further it is
that which too much sweys them ^ven in these actions, and duties which concern
them more properly and immediately, as Chri^^ians, and in their following of
Christ; it was ^^at which sweyed Peter here, who, though he ^as a man whom
Christ had chosen, and called ^ut of the world, and who had become one of ^is
Disciples and Followers, yea, who had, for (...) considerable time followed,
and was now fol^owing him, and who, with-all had but just now ^iven a notable
Testimony to Christ; yet notwithstanding of all this, he so much favors of the
flesh, and this corruption of inordinat re^ect to himself does so far insinuate
upon him, and does so much sway him, that he takes upon ^im, to diswade and
keep back our Lord Jesus, from the greatest and most concerning work, ^o the
Glory of God, and Salvation of Sinners, that ever was upon earth, even from
suffering, and, laying down his life, as a Price of Redemption for his elect
People; but this truth is not only clear f om this instance of Peter, but is
plainly supposed, and employed in this great Lesson, that Christ teaches his
Disciples, when he says, Let a man deny himself, and take up his Cross, and
follow me, insinuating thereby, that this corruption comes in upon men, and
stands in their way in following of him.

For further clearing of this Branch of the Doctrine, there are two things
which I shall speak a little to. 1. To some particular instances, showing
wherein this Corruption of Self comes in, an insinuates it self upon men, and
even upon Believers. 2dly. I shall show you, how it comes t^ pass, and whence
it proceeds, that this Corruption does so insinuat it self upon them, an^gers
footing in them, in all that they do.

For the first of these, there are many particular instances, that may be given
of Se^fs coming in upon men, and even upon Believers, in following their Duty,
and that either more discernably, and palpably, or more secretly, and subtly;
but we shall touch upon these few, as namely. 1. In Peoples closing with, and
making use of Christ by Faith, that is a Duty upon which all other Duties
depend, and here Self comes in to obstruct this greatly. For, 1. If we look to
our Justification before God, which is only by Faith, closing with, and resting
upon Christ's Righteousness, and upon nothing in our selves, we will find, that
Self endeavors to obstruct this; for we are kept back from closing with, and
resting upon Christ's Righteousness, for Justification, from an inordinat
respect to, and confidence in our own Righteousness; as is clear from, Romans
10.3. Where it is said of the zealous Jews, that being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, they did
not submit to the righteousness of God; It was respect to their own
Righteousness, and their solicitude, how to establish that which kept them
from submitting to Christ's Righteousness, 2dly. If we look to the Believers
use-making of Christ by Faith, after Justification, and here Self seeks to come
in, seeking to share, and partake with Faith; it comes in and greatly obstructs
their use-making of him by Faith, for Light, Life and Strength, to enable for
Duty, and for the supply of their wants, and leads them in into themselves for
these; yea, it comes in, and greatly obstructs their use making of him, for
peace and acceptance with God, and in order thereunto, (sometimes at least) it
makes them seek to commend themselves to God, either by some good internal
qualification, or by their external Duties, and their tender, and holy walk:
And therefore in opposition to this, we find, that as the Apostle counted all
his parts, gifts, external privileges, and blamelessness before his
Conversion, to be but loss, not only useless, but prejudicial and hurtful in
the matter of Justification before God; So likewise does he account his most
spiritual duties, after Convers^on; and seeks not by them, to commend himself
to God, as expecting favor and acceptance with him, upon their account, as is
clear, from Philip. 3.7, 8, 9. Where speaking in reference to the time past, he
says, v. 7. What things were gain to me, these I counted loss for Christ; and
as to the time present, and even with respect to his Graces, and spiritual
Duties, he says, v. 8. Yea, doubtless I count all things but loss, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, that I may be found in
him, not having my own righteousness (whether before, or after Conversion)
which is according to the Law, etc. Where it is plainly his Scope and Design,
to show that as he would rest on none of those, as to the founding of his peace
and acceptance before God; so he found in some respect, what he had of these,
through a remainder of this woeful Self, a great obstruction to him, in his
use-making of Christ^ Righteousness for this end, and was thereby in so far to
count them to be but loss. 2ly. This may be instructed, not only in the matter
o^ Faith, but in all our actions, and in the whole of our Conversation, and in
all those actions, wherein we are called to follow Christ daily, in which Self
insinuats, even upon Believ^rs; which is mainly pointed at in the Words: I
shall therefore instance it, First, More generally, in all that men do
orforbear th^s will be found to swey them, and, alas! frequently to have too
much influence on Believers, setting them on to, or deterring them from such
and such a thing; It did strongly insinuat upon Peter, in these Four actions of
his. 1. In his most unsound, and unseasonable counsel to Christ here. 2ly, in
his rash undertaking, That though all men should be offended in him, yet he
should never be offended. 3ly. In his foul Act of denying Christ,
notwithstanding of his fair undertaking. 4ly. In his dissembling mentioned,
Gal. 2. For before (says Paul) that certain came from James, he did eat with
the Gentiles; but when they were come, he withdrew, and separated himself,
fearing them which were of the circumcision; All these his miscarriages, no
doubt, did proceed from this bitter root of Self; It was inordinat respect to
himself, that made him suggest such an sinful, and impertinent advice to his
Master; It was his Self-confidence, that made him undertake so rashly, and it
was fear of the loss of his life, and inordinat Self-love to his own
preservation, that moved him to deny Christ, as it was fear of the loss of
Self-esteem amongst them of the circumcision, that moved him to dissemble; so
that whether a man ^ndertake the doing of Duty, or be deterred ^om it, this
Corruption of Self, seeks to insinuat ^n the Person, to move and swey him this
way, ^r that. 2ly. This will be yet more clear, if we ^ok on Christian Duties
more particularly; O! ^ow very much does Self insinuat upon people, and bear
swey with them, in these? Consider it (...) the duty of Prayer, and ye will
see what swey ^t bears there, it is said by James Chap. 4. v. 3. ^e ask, and ye
receive not, because ye ask amiss, to ^o consum it on your lusts; They had
corrupt selfie ^nds before them, in their asking, the gratifying ^f some one
Lust or other, by which they were ^ept from receiving of that which they asked;
^ok to it in Preaching; ah! how often does ^elf bear swey with Ministers in
that Duty? the ^postle tells us, Philip. 1.11. That some indeed ^each Christ,
even of envy and strife; out of (...) sinful emulation, and self desire, to be
as much ^spected and esteemed of, as the Apostle him^^^f was. Look to it in
fasting and mourning, (...) in feasting and thanksgiving; how much Self ^ars
swey in these high duties; ye may see what (...) spoken to this purpose, Zach.
7.5.6. When (...) fasted (says the Lord ^here) in the fifth and ^enth month,
even these seventy years, did ye at ^l fast unto me, even unto me? and when ye
did ^t, and when ye did drink, did ye not eat for your ^ves, and drink for your
selves? Ye may look to (...) in the matter of Repentance, Humiliation and
^eeping in which this Corruption of Self will be ^und to bear a great swey;
wicked Ahab humbled himself, being no doubt, moved thereunto, from (...) Selfie
principle; and ye s^e, comparing Genesis 27. with Heb. 12. that Esau cries and w^
for the blessing, being also, no doubt, mo^ thereunto, from this principle of
Self; And ^^lievers themselves may too much be influen^^ by Self, in that
exercise. In short, there is (...) any particular Christian Duty, for the man
which Self may not swey people in; and wh^ in it may not (at times at least)
bear too m^ swey (as I just now said) even in Believ^ 3ly. You may lock to it
in the matter of suf^^ing, wherein we should be most Self-deny^ and yet even in
that, this Corruption of Selfi^ will insinuat it self upon us, either to dis^^
us from suffering, and thus it prevailed w^ Peter here, who, forseeing his own
hazard in (...) Masters, studies to diswade him (if he could from suffering;
yea, it was this that prevai^ with him afterward to deny Christ; or ot^ ways to
engade us in, and to put us upon suf^ing for some by respect, or selfie end;
yea (...) may prevail so far with a man, as to move h^ to give his body to be
burned, in a good cause^ the matter, though he be one that wants cha^^ty, or a
sincere principle of love to Christ; T^ is clearly employed, in what the Apostle
sa^ 1 Cor. 13.3. Though I give my body to be burn^ and want charity, it
profits nothing. 4ly. (...) may notice it in the tract of a man's imagination
thoughts, affections, desires and designs, in (...) which Self comes in, as the
great Idol of (...) heart, and sweys men; O! what Selfie ima^^nations,
thoughts, affections, desires, and d^signs are men filled with? and how much do
the se^k to please themselves in their own fanci^ and imaginations? how do
their minds purs^ vanity? and how much do their thoughts and ^esires run out
upon, and after mere vanities? and all in order to some piece of satisfaction
to ^elf; So that we may say with Solomon, Eccles. 6.^. Better is the sight of
the eye, than the wandering (...) the desire, or the walking of the Soul, as the
lord is, that is, it is better for a man to hold himself satisfied with what he
presently injoyeth, ^an to weary himself with roaving thoughts a^out, or
extravagant and unsatiable desires after ^hese things which he has not: and it
seems, that the two Disciples who were going to Emaus, ^hen they said
concerning Christ, Luke 24.21. ^e trusted that it had been he, which should
have ^deemed Israel; wanted not some carnal Selfie-^^presentation of him, and
of the nature of his ^ingdom, in their minds. 5ly. If we look to it, (...) the
most heavenly, spiritual frame and dispo^^tion of Believers in Duty, ye will
find, that ^is Corruption intrudes it self upon them, even ^n that; we see in
the foregoing words, that ^eter was in a very good Frame, when he gives ^ch a
notable testimony to Christ, and yet this will follows hard upon the back of it,
in the car^al and selfie advice that he gives him: we see ^kewise, 2 Cor. 12.
when Paul is caught up to ^e third Heavens, he is in hazard of being exalt^d
above measure, by this Self. We need not ^nsist much further in this; if we
look to Adam, and Eve in their perfect State, we will find, that ^he tentation
to inordinat Self-love, Self-seeking and Self-pleasing did much prevail with
them, to ^lose with Satan's suggestions, when he had told them, That they should
not surely die, but should ^e as Gods, knowing good and evil; and when they saw
the fruit was good to make one wise, they d^ take and eat of it; I shall not
debate, let be d^termine, what was the first sinful step in the fall, but it
seems evident, that Selfiness, or (...): inordinat respect to Self, insinuating
it self upon them, had a great hand in it; what wonder th^^ is it, that this
Corruption bears so much swey (...) all their Posterity?

I come now to the 2d thing proposed, vi^ To show how it comes to pass, or
whence it pr^ceeds, that this Corruption insinuats it self easily upon us, and
swayeth us so very much all that we go about, beyond what any other co^ruption
readily does? In order to the cleari^^ of which, there are three things to be
conside^ed. 1. What is the nature of this sin of Sel^^^^ness. 2dly. What is the
way that it takes to ^^^gyre, and bear in it self upon us, in all that (...)
do. 3dly. We would consider the strong inc^^nation and propension that is in
our nature to a^mit of, and to cherish this corrupt Self.

As for the first, to wit, the nature of this s^^ I shall not insist upon it
here, further than (...) make some discovery of it is deceitfulness in the^
four, 1. In it is counterfeiting grace. 2ly. In i^ showing it self, and
appearing like unto Conso^ence. 3ly, In it is pretending some good en^^^^ for
what it sollicites to, 4ly. In it is palliatin^ and covering it self, under a
specious and plaus^ble pretext of some moral, or natural good, (...) deceiving
the person whom it insinuats upon; a^^ which make it to prevail so much with
us, in a^ that we go about. First, (I say) it is deceitfu^ness appears in
counterfeiting of Grace; wh^^ this Corruption comes in, and insinuats it se^^
upon a man, it very often appears like grace, and makes the man himself think
it to be so; as ^or instance, it will sometimes appear like Zeal ^or God, at it
did in Jehu, whose zeal for a Kingdom, looked like zeal for the Lord God of
Israel; it did so likewise in Christ's own Disciples, Luke 9.54, 55. Who,
thought their zeal was good, like to the zeal of Elias, when they would have
had fire coming down from heaven to con^ume these Samaritans, that refused
their Master ^odging, which yet for all that was not so, for ^hey were acted by
a carnal and selfie principle, and were of another, and more carnal Spirit than
Elias was, and therefore Christ tells them, that ^hey knew not of what spirit
they were, insinuating that they were not acted in that desire, by that Spirit
wherewith Elias was acted; and as Self, counterfits Zeal, so it counterfits
humility also, as we may see in Saul, who did hide himself amongst the stuff,
when he was to be made King, ^ Sam. 10.22. Which appeared very like to
humility, and self-denial, and yet no question, it was some selfie
consideration, that mainly moved him to it; and we may see somewhat of it even
in Moses himself, in his refusing to obey Gods call, when he was sending him to
Pharaoh, to bring forth the Children of Israel out of Egypt, Exodus Chapters 3.
and 4. His refusal may seem to have flowed from humility, yet the way which the
Lord takes to convince him, and the kend^ling of his anger against him, plainly
say, that it was some fear of hazard to himself, or of his own life, or risking
his repute, that made him refuse: 2ly. Look to the deceitfulness of this sin
^in it is showing it self, and appearing like unto Conscience; and thus it is
often found, when men once ingadged in such or such a way, thin^ themselves
bound and oblidged in Conscience t^ follow it; while, in the mean time, it is
but Se^ coming in under the color, and appearance o^ Conscience, that sets
them on to follow it, an^ makes them restless in seeking to prosecute wh^^ they
are once ingadged in; we may see a famou^ instance of Selfs appearing like
Conscience i^^ Jonah, Chap. 4. To whom the Lord says, Do^^ thou well to be
angry Jonah? And he answers I do well to be angry, even unto death; It is ver^
probable, he would not have spoken thus, if h^ had not thought it was
Conscience, and zeal toward God, that moved and acted him; but ye^ his pity on
the gourd, when God had withered and taken it away, shows, that it was not so
much Conscience, as an inordinat respect to himself and to his own credit and
reputation, that moved him; ye may see it, in the dominion of i^ in Herod,
Matthew. 14.19. When the dancing daughter of Herodias sought the head of Joh^.
the Baptist, It is said, that the King was sorry, ne^vertheless, for his oaths
sake, and for them that sa^ at meat with him, he commanded it to be give^ her;
Sure it was not so much, if at all, consci^ence of his oath, (which being
sinful in the matter of it, should not have been kept) a^ it was fear, least
he should be thought and re^puted a perjured man, by them which sat at me at
with him, that moved him to command Joh^ to be beheaded; if it was not also
lothness to displease the wanton Damsel, and her incestuous Mother. 3ly. The
deceitfulness of Self appears, in pretending some good end, for what it moves a
man unto; it comes not in directly, as driving (...) any evil design, but
pretends a good one; as ^^tan did, in the tempting Eve, and for making ^e
tentation take the better with her, in the day says he to her) that ye eat
thereof, ye shall (...) as Gods knowing good and evil; and Self insi^uating
upon her, under this specious pretext, ^^at the fruit was good to make one
wise, she is prevailed with to take and eat of that forbidden ^uit; O! believe
it, that Self has always some ^ne plausable-like, and flattering design or
other to speak so) in it is head: we see likewise, that Satan (who attempts and
gains much by his ^entations to this inordinat respect that men have ^o
themselves) when he comes to tempt Christ, Matthew. 4. He does much press this in
all his ten^ations, that he should see well to himself, by providing meat for
himself, and by making himself great in the world, and by making his greatness
known, for Satan knew well how great a b^it this is to all the world, though
our blessed Lord Jesus, being free of all original corruption, and of all
inordinat respect to himself, so that the Prince of the World had nothing in
him of that sort, to work upon by his tentations, he utterly resisted, and
perfectly overcame them all, and was not in the least prevailled upon by them.
4ly. The deceitfulness of this Corruption appears by it is covering it self
under the specious and fair pretensions of some moral or natural good; Thus we
see, when Self has ingadged men in the eager, restless and covetous pursuit of
the world, it will labor to palliat, and honest it, with the specious pretext
of virtue; and will say to them, it is good to be virtuous, and to follow your
calling carefully, and diligently, and to provide for you and yours; it may be,
it will also make use of Scripture, and tell them, tha^ he who provides not for
his own, is worse than a^ infidel; Thus also, when it offers to diswade a man
from suffering for Christ, it will shreud it self under the specious pretext of
some natural good, and will tell him, that it is natural and kindly for a man
to be very careful, and warry of his life, and to see, by all means to the
preserving of it: Thus it did insinuat upon Peter here, in the advice which he
gave to his Master, by which he would have had it taking on him also, Master,
Spare thy self, be more tender of they own life.

But, 2dly. we come to consider the subtle way that it takes to bear in it
self upon us, in all that we do. As 1, in this, that it does not appear, as
inconsistent with, or opposite to Grace, or to the Law of God, as most other
sins do; but rather, as very well consistent with both; nay, sometimes it will
endeavor to make pretended respect to Grace, and to the observance of Gods
Law, subservient to the attainment of it is own ends, and will set a man on to
study, and to stir up, and draw forth his Gifts and Graces, ^o exercise, and to
endeavor something of conformity, in his way to Gods Law, out of too much
respect to some carnal and selfie end. 2ly. It does readily change it self into
various Shapes and Forms, so as it may be most taking with, and pleasant unto
men; most other Corruptions come in upon us, in one Shape and Form, but this
appears in all Shapes; It comes in sometimes (as I said before) like Grace;
sometimes like Conscience; sometimes like innocent natural respect, and love to
our selves; sometimes like public spiritedness, etc. It Is ways are moveable;
and as Satan, when he assaulted our Lord, Matthew. 4. changed his temptations on
him, and took different ways to prevail with him; so does Self; when a man
falls short of one design, it will put him on another; when he misseth riches,
it will put him to seek after credit; and if he fail, and come short of both,
it will set him on to seek his own ease, quietness and pleasure, in a more
private way. 3ly. It proves restless, and makes the man whom it sweys, restless,
and uncessant in his way; it disquiets and vexes him, whatever he do, or
whithersoever he go, so long as it is designs and ends are not attained, and
accomplished (which they never will be) This Self is never at ease, when (to
speak so) it gets not it self, when it reaches not the thing it would be at:
we see an instance of this in Jonah; but amost remarkable one in Balaam, Numb.
22. One answer from the Lord will not satisfy him, but again he must go and
consult him; having a Selfie design, and desire after Balacks silver and gold,
which he largely promised him, if he would come and curse Israel, it would not
suffer him to rest and sit at home: Since then this Corruption takes such
subtle ways to bear in it self upon us; It is no great wonder, that through
our unwatchfulness and ignorance, or non-consideration of it is devices, and
wiles, it prevail so much over us, in all that we go about. But 3ly. If in a
word, we add to these the consideration of the aptness, pronness and strong
propension of our nature, to reset, harbor, intertain, and cherish this
Corruption of Self, beside our unwatchfulness, in circumspection, and
negligence to observe, and guard against it; Is it any great wonder, that it
gets so much way, and prevails so much over us in all that we go about?

The Uses of the Point are Three, the first, whereof is, That seeing this
Corruption does thus steal in upon the followers of Christ, in all they do;
then sure it should make all fear and tremble because of it; especially, when
we come to meddle in these things which more immediately concern God; we would
always think of, and keep this in our eye, that we may be in duties of worship
to God, even the most spiritual and lively of them, and yet have nothing to
boast of before him, because in them we act much from Self and to Self, and are
very like to Ephraim; the best bringing forth fruit in a great measure to
themselves; yea, we would consider, that we may begin well to a duty, and yet
before the close of it, this Corruption may so twist it self with the duty, as
utterly to spoil and corrupt all, or in a great measure: There is therefore so
much the more need to walk in fear of it; and seeing Adam was stolen off his
feet, by a Tentation to this sin, when there was no sin nor corruption in him
before, how much greater must needs the hazard of all his posterity be? and how
very much are we concerned, and called to walk up and down in much fear and
trembling, in much holy jealousy over our selves, least we be altogether, or
much influenced, and sweyed by this corruption, in what we do: if the great
hazard that wear in from this corrupt Self, were more thoroughly believed, and
more seriously pondered, we would be more convinced of the necessity of walking
softly, of living near God, and of making much use of Christ, for the subduing
of it, and of all our other Corruptions.

The 2d. Use serves to exhort us to learn, not to Judge of our selves, by our
own actions simply, nor of our actions by the substance, or matter of them, but
to judge of them, as they partake of, o^ are more or less free from this
corruption: That is very observable which our Lord says to the Pharisees, Luke
16. Ye are they which justify your selves before men, but God knows your
hearts, for that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is an abomination in the
sight of God: We may follow pu^lick Ordinances, and go about Duties of Worship
in secret, and in our Families, and may have a kind of liberty, and many good
words in our Prayers; and something like tenderness in our walk; and yet if we
be sweyed only, or mainly by this corrupt principle, and have our selves for
our end, all will be but abomination before God, how highly so ever they be
esteemed of by ourselves or others: and therefore try what your performances,
and duties are by what there is, or is not of this corrupt principle of Self in
them; Look what it is that brings you to Public Ordinances, and what makes you
pray in your Families, or in Secret; whether; it be that ye may not be looked
on as mere Atheists, but may be esteemed Religious, or, if it be singly to
glorify God: and that ye may be helped in the trial of this, I shall give you
some Marks, or Evidences, whereby ye may know when Selfiness, or Self-seeking
has dominion over you, in your Duties, first, domining Selfieness in spiritual
Duties, appears by this, when a man is not the better of his Duties, but is as
vain, light, frothy, carnal and corrupt after them, as he was before, he fell
about them; as for instance, when a man is not the better of Prayer, but is as
vain, frothy and carnal, and his corruption, as little mortified after it, as
before he went about it; as it was with these of whom the Apostle James speaks,
Chap. 4. v. 3. Who asked and received not, because they asked amiss, to consum
it upon their lusts; They were not the better of their Prayers, they did not
mortify corruption; ye may see the like in the Pharisees, who, though they
made long prayers, as it is, Mat. 23.14. Yet they were not the better of them,
but as our Lord speaks, verse 27. They were like whited sepulchers, which
indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and
of all uncleanness: In short then, when people are much in Duty, and yet they
are not spiritually bettered by Duty, but their Spirits remain vain, frothy,
and carnal, it is an evidence, that Self predomines, or carries the great swey
in their Duties, but when they are bettered, and such an evil frame (as we just
now spoke of) in some measure got helped, and the Soul made more stayed,
humble, and spiritual, it evidenceth a denied way of following Duty; singleness
in Duty, ordinarily humbles and leaves the Soul in some better frame than it
found it. 2ly. A regnant Selfie way of following Duty, is never waited upon
with solid spiritual peace; a man that is mainly sweyed, and ruled by this
Corrupt principle in Duty, may have a strong conceit, that his way is good, and
as he gets applause, may grow to a great height of carnal security; but as he
has no peace with God, so neither has he any solid spiritual Peace in his own
Conscience, in the performance of Duties; for when Selfiness predomines, or
prevails, it obstructs the sweet influence which otherways duties might have
upon the Souls Spiritual Peace; whilst Ephraim brought forth fruit to himself;
he was but an empty vine, that neither brought forth acceptable, and pleasant
fruit to God, nor such as could have any influence on his own solid spiritual
peace, but the single, and Self-denyed way of following Duties, much quiets the
Soul, and hes sweet influence on the solid spiritual peace thereof: Thus we
see, Phili. 4.6, 7. That the peace of God which keeps or guards the heart and
mind through Christ Jesus, is the sweet fruit, if not being in a carnal and
Selfie way careful for any thing, and of making our requests singly known to
God, by Prayer, and Supplication, with thanks giving. A 3d. evidence of it is,
when a man, not only has no solid spiritual peace, in following Duties; but on
the contrary, has much anxiety and perplexity, through fear, least he attain
not, or miss his selfie end; he is perplexed and vexed with the thoughts of
such and such events, which may follow upon what he does, tossed, in a manner
tormented in himself, with thinking what if this, that, and the other thing
follow upon what I do? whereas the man that walks singly in the discharge of
his Duty, remains settled, composed, and much freed from these perplexing fears
of events; as we may see in Paul, Acts. 2.13. Who, when it was told him, that
he should be bound at Jerusalem, and he thereupon is besought with tears, not
to go thither, is not perplexed, nor troubled in the least, but stayedly, and
composedly says, What mean ye to weep, and break mine heart? for I am ready
not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord
Jesus; Nothing comes wrong to the Self-denyed man; but every thing that comes
in betwixt the Selfie man, and his end, perplexes him, and ^u^s him on the
Rack; as we see in a measure in Baruch, Jerem. 45.3, 4. Who cries out, Wo's me,
for the Lord has added grief to my sorrow, I fainted in my sighing, and found
no rest; He is greatly perplexed, and the Lord points at the rise of it, when
he says to him, verse 5. Seek thou great things for thy self, seek them
not: Believe it; our sinful anxiety, perplexity, and disquietness will always
be found, if well searched after, to have something of Selfiness at the root of
it. A 4th. Evidence Is, That a man who walks by a principle of Self, and seeks
himself only, or mainly, in what he does, is up or down, as he finds or misses
himself; if his duty go with him, though he have no access to God in it, he
will be well satisfied; as for instance, if he Pray well, in the opinion of
others, and win at the following of other Duties, so as to be esteemed of, as a
wise virgin, that not only hes a Lamp, but oil in it, he is content, and that
even though he have not Oil in his Lamp; But where singleness is, a man is
never satisfied in the performance of Duties, though he get applause, and
esteem from others, unless he obtain ^he main end of Duties, viz. The honor of
God, and some nearness to, and fellowship with him in Christ: There will be
somewhat of all these even in Believers where this Corruption much prevails,
though it have not dominion, by which it is prevailing power may be known.

The 3d. Use serves for warning, seeing there is such a Corruption, that cleaves
to Christ's followers, and that deceitfully and subtly bears in it self upon
them in all that they do^ then 1. Labor to discern it, and to be watchful over
it. 2ly. Labor carefully to guard against it. First, I say, labor to discern,
and to be watchful over this Corruption; and more especially, when it works
most deceitfully, and subtly, and insinuats it self under specious and fair
pretensions, when it looks like Grace, or a principle of Conscience, when it
shreuds it self under the pretext of some honest design, or of some moral, or
natural good: O! do not judge of things as they appear at the first; but search
to the bottom of them, and consider well whence they rise, and whither they
tend: There are some things that look very fair and specious like at this time,
which, if we examine them narrowly, will we apprehend, be found to spring from
this bitter, and corrupt Root; the men that have invaded us, and overturned
these Kingdoms, give it out, that they are for great and good things; But look
well that there be not much Self-seeking, lurking, and lodging under such
specious, fair and plausable pretensions; There are four things highly
pretended to by them (some of which we touched a little before) 1. They talk
much of, and pretend the interest of Christ, and that they seek to have him
great, and his Kingdom to floorish in these Lands; and indeed, none can deny
these to be very good, and desirable things; but yet notwithstanding, when his
interest is sought, and followed in a carnal way, and when m^n seek their own
interest, cry up themselves, and endeavor to make themselves great, under this
specious pretext of respect to Christ's interest, and to the making of him
great, This certainly is not good: what greater honor could we readily have
wished to be put upon Christ, then seeking to make him a King, as the People of
the Jews spoken of, John 6.15. did; and yet behold what he says to them, verse
26. Ye seek me, not because you saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the
loaves, and were filled; intimating thereby, that it was respect to themselves,
and to an easy way of living, that mainly made them ^ut respect on him, and
court him to be their King; but they quite mistook the true nature of Christ's
Kingdom: and therefore, when the respect that men profess to have to Christ, is
such as alters the nature of his Kingdom, and turns that which is a Spiritual
Kingdom into a Carnal, and Worldly one, we would be aware of it. 2ly. The
interest of the people of God, and of Christ's Followers, is much pretended, and
cried up; and indeed that also is a good and desirable thing; But as Christ's
Kingdom is not Temporal and Worldly, no more is the great interest of his
People; This was it, that Korah, Dathan, and Abiram pretended to be for, while
they were in the meantime crying down all Government, Civil and Ecclesiastical,
for they say unto Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16.3. Ye take too much upon you, seeing
all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them
wherefore then lift ye up your selves above the congregation of the Lord? Where
we plainly see, that they made high pretensions of seeking after the interest
and welfare of the Congregation of the Lord, or of the Lords People; and yet
notwithstanding these high and self-denyed like pretensions; The scope of the
place, and these Words, ye take too much upon you; evidently make it appear,
that their design was, to bring themselves into the Government; and therefore
the Lord commands them to take Cen^ers, and to put fire therein, and to put
Incense thereon, before the Lord; that it might be known, to whom the right of
Governing did belong, by divine destination; so when men pretending respect to
the interest of the People of God, overturn Governments, will needs themselves
become their Patrons, and Protectors, (when yet his People are not calling them
to be so) bring in Confusion for Order, we would be on our guard; for the true
and great interest of Gods People, as such, consists in somewhat else 3ly.
There are great pretensions made to, and cryings up of just Liberty and
Freedom, which is likewise a good and desirable thing, as it is very sad, when
men are deprived of it; yet a great deal of Selfiness may hide it self under
such pretensions; Consider what the Apostle says to this purpose. 1 Pet.
2.16. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as
the servants of God; The Sco^e of which Word is, to show us, that Christian
Liberty lies not in men's seeking to be masters of themselves, and to be free
from Subjection to others, and to have all others brought in subjection to
them; for he expressly commands us, v. 13. To submit our selves to every
ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or
unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well; and v. 18. He commands servants
to be subject to their own masters, with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward; and when they do well, and suffer for it, he
requires them, to take it patiently, for even hereunto are ye called (says he)
because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should
follow his steps; To be free with this freedom, is the best freedom and
liberty, even Liberty indeed; to the same purpose, says the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 6.1, 2. Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count their own
Masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God, and his doctrine be not
blasphemed; and they that have believing masters, let them not despise them,
because they are brethren etc. He stricks against two gross particular errors,
and faults that were then amongst Servants; one, that they thought that they
should not serve their Pagan Masters, because they were ungodly; the other,
that they thought they should not serve their believing Masters, because they
were Brethren; both which faults he would have them amending; and adds, If any
man teach otherwise, he is proud, knowing nothing, dotting about questions, and
strifes of words, and the root of all this is, their supposing that gain is
godliness, from such (says the Apostle) withdraw thy self; For this is a
selfie way; but Gods way is contrary, to wit, not to count gain Godliness, and
to pursue it under a fair pretext of acting for God, and his People, but to
count Godliness great gain, for it has the promises of this life, and of that
which is to come. 4ly. There are great pretensions to more light, and to a more
spiritual way of Worship, to more pure and spiritual Ordinances, and to a more
purely constituted Church, all the members whereof must needs be Saints, and
regenerat persons, so far as men can judge; These are indeed very specious
Pretenses; but it is to be feared, there is much Self seeking at the bottom of
them, if men were humbly excluding themselves, they would, in that case, look
more like those that deny themselves; but when they seclude others, to include
themselves; it seems that selfiness, and self-conceit bears too great swey, and
looks somewhat like these, who say, Isai. 65.5. Stand by thy self, come not
near to me, for I am holier than thou; and yet God says of such, that they
were a smoke in his nose, a fire that burns all the day: Neither is it any
new thing for People to seek themselves, under the pretense of waiting for, and
venting of new Light; for there was somewhat of this even in the Apostles days;
as could time permit, we could easily make appear, from Romans 14. and 15.
Chapters, from 1 Cor. 8, 9. and 10. Chapters, and from the Epistles written to
Timothy; nay, we find, that Peoples seeking to vent their Light, though true
Light, when it has not been to edification, is reproved as a fault, and
accounted a pleasing of themselves, while it is said, Romans 15. v. 1.2. We ought
to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves; and let
every one of us please his neighbor, for his good to edification: The Apostle
makes it a pleasing of themselves, to urge the ou^most extent of their Ligh^,
in some lesser things, as in the use of their Christian Liberty, to the
wronging, or stumbling of the weak Jews: and seeing these men with whom we have
to do, pretend highly to new Ligh^, we are concerned narrowly, and impartially
to search and try these things, that come out under that name and notion; and
should not rashly and precipitantly embrace them; There is a passage, at which
we may tremble, while we speak of it, and ye at the hearing of it, 2 Timothy 3 v.
1, 2 3, 4, 5. This know also, (says the Apostle) that in the last days,
perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, proud, blasphemers, etc. Which show, that all these very grossest
evils, do readily follow men's being lovers of themselves; but withal, it is
added, having the form of godliness, but denying the power of it, from such
turn away; intimating that selfiness, would never be able to get abominable
sins covered, were it not for a form of Godliness, but yet such being lovers of
their own selves, are truly guilty of denying the power, and true principles of
Godliness, we are fallen into these last days, and perilous times, and
therefore ye would take heed, least love to your own selves, or selfiness,
though joined with a form of Godliness lead you unto the sins mentioned here.

The 2d. Part of the Use serves (as we hinted) to warn you to guard against
this Corruption of Selfiness, or of Self-seeking; and here I shall give you
some Directions, which, if they were suitably followed, might through Gods
blessing, prevent Self bearing so great a swey in us, especially, in spiritual
Duties. The First whereof is, That ye would learn to set Christ in his own
place, in the heart; for, if he have not his own place and room there, Self
must needs bear swey in us: but when Christ gets his own place Selfiness is
thereby kept out; therefore 2 Cor. 4 v. 5. Paul proves, that he preached not
himself, because he preached Christ Jesus the Lord; whoever they be, that
labor not to set up Christ in their hearts, and to esteem highly of, and to be
much in Love with him above all things; will have a worse Guest coming in to
take up his room; and indeed, it is not much to be wondered at, that Self
reign, and prevail amongst People, and that they be mainly, or very much sweyed
by it, in the whole of their way, when Christ is either not at all, or but very
little in account and esteem with them. 2ly. Labor to eye God always, to have
a constant depending on him, to have his awe and dread much upon your hearts,
and to be much with him; O! study to live up unto that sweet advice which
Solomon gives, Prove. 3 v. 6. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean
not to thine own understanding; and if it should be said, what shall we do, if
we lean not to our own understanding? he answers, In all thy ways acknowledge
him, and he shall direct thy paths; do as the Psalmist did, Psalm. 16.6, even
set the Lord always before you, and then he being at your right hand, ye shall
not be moved. 3ly. Be much in prayer to God, as the Apostle was, when a
messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him. 2 Cor. 12 8. for this thing (says
he) I besought the Lord thrice that it might depart from me; So do ye, wrestle
much with God by prayer against it, but study in prayer to make much use of
Christ, for getting victory over it, in his strength, who wa^ manifested for
this purpose, that he might destroy the works of the devil, and this work of
his this Corruption of Self amongst others; little praying, and little use
making of Christ in prayer, makes Self predomine, and bear so much swey in us,
as it does. 4ly. We would be more frequently looking to our own infirmities,
that either to the good that is in our selves, or to the infirmities of others:
Thus we find Paul dwelling in the thoughts of his own insufficiency, weakness,
and infirmity, while he says, 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our
selves, to think any thing, as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God; he
always puts a difference between what he was by Grace, and what he was in
himself, and looks upon himself as himself, as being able for nothing: looking
too much upon the good we have, or seem to have, and too much upon the
infirmities of others, makes us proud, and puffs us up, but looking to our own
infirmities, more than to our own good, or the infirmities of others, keeps
down the risings of Pride, and looks Self out of countenance, and lets us see
that there is much in our selves to humble us, and nothing at all to be vain,
or proud of, and that we want a great deal more than we have. 5ly. See that ye
father right (to speak so) any good that ye have, as the Apostle fathers all
upon, and ascribes all his good to the free Grace of God, while he says, 1
Cor. 15.10. But by the grace of God, I am what I am, and his grace which was
bestowed upon me, was not in vain, but I labored more abundantly than they
all, yet not I, but the grace of God, with me; We find it also much pressed
upon us, that we would remember, that we have nothing, but what we have
received; The due and kindly remembrance, and consideration whereof, would
prevent our growing proud conceited, and vain of what we have. 6ly. Resist the
first beginnings, and risings of Selfiness in the heart; and as Solomon
exhorts, Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the
issues of life; if once we give loose reigns within to this, or to any other
Corruption, it will shortly prevail over us, and break out; as for instance,
let men once greedily receive, and admit of honor, when it is given them, and
they will greatly astect, and seek after it, er'e all be done; Consider what
our Lord says to this purpose, John 5.44. How can ye believe, that receive
honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only? When
men are Selfie, in seeking to be high and happy in the World, and do not place
their honor and happiness where God has placed it, they must needs be carried
away with this Corruption of Selfiness: believe it, they cannot be Christ's
Disciples, who endeavor, not through Grace to suppress the risings of this
Corruption in themselves, and to resist tentations to it; as ye may see John
the Baptist did, by comparing Luke 13 v. 15.16. with John 1^ 20. and 3.28. Its
said in Luke, That all men mused in their hearts of John, whether he were the
Christ or not? but he puts them out of all doubt concerning this, while we are
told, John 1.20. That he confessed, and denied not, but confessed, that he was
not the Christ; and accordingly speaking to his Disciples, John 3.28. He says,
Ye your selves bear witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am
sent before him; Here was a great occasion, and tentation offered for
Self-se^king, but he confessed, and denied not, but confessed, that he was not
the Christ; He was very much concerned, careful and solicitous to prevent the
first beginnings, and to oppose the first risings of Self, and of all
Tentations to it: We see the like in Paul and Barnabas, who could not endure to
have this tentation offered them, and therefore, it is said of them. Acts 14. v.
14. 15. That when the Priest of Jupiter would have done sacrifice to them, with
the people, they rent their clothes, and cried out, that they were men of like
passions with themselves. 7ly. All that would guard against this evil of
selfiness, and carry aright in Du^y, would be much in Self-reflection before
the undertaking of Duties; in the discharge of Duties, and after the
performance of Duties; it is lamentable, that most of us never reflect upon, nor
consider, from what principle, or motive we are put on to Duty, but if the work
be good, for the matter we look after no more; and that many never reflect upon
themselves, in the discharge of Duty, that they may ^ee what bears most swey
with them in it; nor yet after the Duty is done that they may know either what
their carriage has been in the Duty, or what the effect of it is to them;
whereas, if we were searching our selves, and reflecting upon our selves, all
these ways, and considering, whether it be love to our selves, or respect to
the honor of God, that puts us on to Duty, and which of the two bears greatest
sway with us in the Duty; and whether we be more lifted up, or more humbled,
when the Duty is over, it would be found a notable help, for holding ^out, and
chasing away this Corruption: as Self-examination is profitable in other cases,
for bring^ng to light the hidden things of darkness, so it is greatly useful in
this case. 8ly. Beware of any thing that may foster or seed this selfie
principle in you; and in prosecution of this Direction beside these things
which we have spoken to already, that use to be tentations to this Corruption,
there are these Four things, that we would have you to guard against, as
tending to feed and foster this corruption, or corrupt selfie principle. 1.
Guard against designing to be some body in the World, and to make a great
figure at such a time as this especially; I grant, men may endeavor to make
the best they can of an evil World, and may of two evils of trouble choose the
lesser; but here there would be keeping within these bounds and limits fixed by
the Lord, and walking according to his prescribed Rules; and when it is
otherwise, certainly men are not right: It has been, and still is a tentation,
and snare to many in these times, their making use of occurring revolutions and
changes, merely or mainly for Selfie ends; I would beseech you, by all means to
guard against this now, even against that which was good Baruchs tentation, to
affect to be great, or to seek great things for your selves; but learn to be
content with what ye have and to rest satisfied with the condition tha^ God
has ^ut you in. 2ly. Beware of exces^^^e, and prepost^ou^ desires, to eshew
all trouble, and what may bring you under sufferin^ in your Persons, Estates or
Goods, for this hat^ in it much of an inordinat Selfie respect to you^ own
interest; the Disciples of Christ are called to be always ready to forsake all
these things for his sake, and to deny themselves, and to tak^ up their cross
and follow him; and such as den^ not themselves, will never be in a holy
read^ness to take up the Cross; I deny not, but that it'^ Duty for men, to see
to their own preservation so it be done soberly, and by lawful means; ye^ I
think God is angry with the People of Scotland, for too peremptory laying down
this as (...) ground, and for sticking too tenaciously by it, tha^ they may,
and must take every way, and us^ whatsoever mean, without examining the
warrantableness of it, to escape suffering, as if i^ no case they were called
to suffer; It Is true, w^ should not draw on suffering upon our selves, nor run
rashly upon suffering, when we are no^ called to it; but when Christ brings the
Cros^ to our door, and calls us to suffer, we should willingly undergo it; and
if this were once solidly resolved on, it would lay and calm many unnecessary,
and disquieting debates amongst us (...) but many first lay down this for a
conclusion that they should not, that they must not suffer, and accordingly
solve all their doubts, and debate all matters so, as they may not suffer; this
certainly does manifestly and mightily, tend to the feeding and fostering of
Self, and will doubtless prejudge solid spiritual Peace; and would therefore be
watchfully guarded against. 3ly. Beware of unnecessary ingadging your selves in
the contentious debates, and questions of this time, the particular nature
whereof, I will not ^ow speak to; I shall only say, as they tend but ^ittle to
edification, so very probably they tend much to the fostering and cherishing of
corrupt ^elf; and Self getting men once ingadged, it will make them very
greedily to maintain, and stand ^y what they are ingadged in, if not also
strive ^o lay the more and more weight upon it. ^ly. Guard against adventuring
hastily, and rash^y to vent what new opinions ye take up at such (...) time,
and against seeking Selfily, or from affecting ^ovelty to propagat them; for
Selfiness will here ^lausibly insinuat it self, and suggest, that it is ^ot fit
to smother such new light and opinions; and herefore, when debates about new
things arise, ^eedless debates, Which (as the Apostle says) ^oes but gender
contentions and strifes about words, and when ye think that ye have win to be
clear about them, beware of being too forward, and ^ver busy, inventing your
opinion of them, or ^eeking to proselyte, and gain others to your ^pinion and
way, but as the exhortation is, Romans 15.2. Let us not please our selves, but
let ^very one of us please his neighbor, for his good, ^o edification, even as
Christ pleased not himself; And before ye vent any such opinion to others,
^onsider well, if it be profitable and edifying to them, and seasonable for
such a time; or whether ^t may not be better, though the thing were certainly a
truth in it self, to have the faith of it to your selves before God, (as the
Apostle will Romans 14.^^) than by unseasonable venting of it and rigid p^essing
of it on other tender Christi^ns, who are not so clear about it, to disturb
their spiritual repose; this would certainly be found, to be a sober and
suitable Christian way, not to be swayed only, by what is our own ligh^ and
opinion about such a thing, but also to regard, what may edify one another,
For the Kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink (or in questions about
unnecessary things) b^ in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost and
yet these debates that were in the Apostle days, were as material as any of
ours are now as being about some parts of the ceremonial Law of Gods own
institution, not then utterly antiquated; which yet turned into vain janglings
when they diverted them from their main wor^ of building up themselves in the
most holy Faith and edificing of one another in Love; Christians may be
Ignorant of several things, that they take up too much of their time about, and
be nothing the less acceptable with God, and no les^ useful and profitable
amongst his People, and therefore we would look well that we foster not Self at
this time, in these things, but study to deny our selves, and take up our cross
and follow Christ, and to know these things that concern the kingdom of God
mainly, and then let inferior, lower, and less necessary things come in, in
their own time, and place convenient.

SERMON IV.
Matthew 16.24. Then said Jesus unto his disciples, if any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
WHatever be the Spiritual Evils, Maladies and Distempers, under which the
followers of Christ labor, it is a great advantage to dis^ern and take up
aright the Causes of them, and the Springs whence they flow, in that case, they
may be the more easily cured; Therefore our blessed Lord Jesus, the great
Healer, and infinitely skilful Physician, who knows best how to cure all these
Spiritual Diseases, and Distempers (which often abound amongst His Followers)
having in Peter's carriage, a clear evidence and proof, how easy it is to
withdraw the neck and shoulder from his yock, and to decline Duty, and flinch
from it, in the hour of Tentation; and being about to make a notably edifying,
and profitable use of it to all his followers, in the succeeding Ages of the
Church; he (as it were) searches into, and makes clear discoveries of the
rise of this evil disease of back-drawing from Duty in a time of trial, and
shows the bitter Root whence it Springs, and then applies the remedy.

In the Words, he points at the cause of men's back-drawing from Duty, in a
trying time especially, viz. Their being too much taken (...) with, and swayed
by some one Selfie respect (...) another, or by some inordinat regard to
themselves; this was the very thing, that made Pet^ to stagger and stumble, and
our Lord on the occasion plainly signifies, that this is the stron^ pull-back
of his followers, and the great obstructer of them, in their ready and resolute
following of him, in all called for Duties, at any ra^ of hazard; and therefore
he proposes it, as the first and main thing, that is to be taken a cours^
with, and overcome, even this carnal and corrupt disposition of Spirit,
Self-seeking, where by men naturally are more swayed, than by respect to God,
and to his Glory; and he laye^ it for a sure ground, that none can make
progress in following of him, till that obstruction be some what at least
removed, and rolled out o^ the way, which if it lie still unremoved there will
unavoidably be stumbling, and not a following of Christ, as it becomes
Disciples.

We took up this great obstruction in these three Branches; The first whereof
is, That there is such a Corruption even in Believers; as to be much affected,
swayed, and influenced in what they do, by a Selfie principle; to be off, or on
at Duty, according as somewhat of Self is concerned, or not, to be more swayed
by that than by the Duties that are called for from them, or by the right end
thereof, or by the Rule which is given them to follow. The 2d. Branch is, That
this Corruption of Selfiness does often wind, steal, and insinuat it Self in
upon the most Spiritual Duties of the most Spiritual and Holy Followers of
Christ; and did accordingly subtly ^nsinuat it self on Peter, in as sublimely
spiritual and greatly momentuous a matter, as ever was ^eard of in the World,
even our Lords execut^ng of his Fathers Command, in the great Work of
Redemption, and laying down of his Life for his Elect; and whilst he is about
the perform^ng of what belonged to him, as his part of the Covenant of
Redemption: Even then (I say) ^his Corruption creeps in on Peter, and makes
him, under a very specious pretext, by propos^ing a most unseasonable, and
prejudicial overture to his Master, to become an offense to him, though he that
was like us in all things except Sin, was a brazen wall against the Tentation,
so that it could not possibly take upon him; yet it says this much, that this
subtle Corruption may steal in on the best of Christians, since it did so on
Peter, and that immediately after his giving of a most solemn and celebrious
confession of his Faith in Christ, and of him; of these two Branches, we have
already spoken.

The Third follows now to be spoken of, which is, That wherever this Corrupt
Self bears sway and dominiers in men, it utterly marrs, and obstructs them in
following of Christ; It is that which lets and impeds their Sanctification, and
Obedience in Duties called for from them, in their following Jesus Christ; or
ye may take it thus; This Selfie Corruption, or corrupt Selfiness, whereby men
do prefer, and oppose themselves to God, and his will, and to the concerns of
Jesus Christ, hinders, and obstructs, and (as it were) myres them in their
following of Christ so that they never win up to it, while this cleaves and
sticks to them unmortified; therefore when ou^ Lord was giving Directions to
his Disciples, how they may win to follow him; he first (as I said proposes
this as the great impediment, that must be taken out of the way, else they
cannon come after him, nor are meet to follow him; This is so very clear, in
the whole current of the Scripture, that when it speaks of this Self, an^ of
Christ, the one of them is opposed to the other, as 2 Cor. 5.15. To live to our
self, and to live to Christ, are opposed as inconsistent; so Philip. 2.21. It Is
said, that all men seek their own things, and not the things that are Jesus
Christ's; Where seeking of our own things, and the things of Christ are opposed,
as incompatible; and Romans 16.18. Serving of men's selves, and their own bellies,
is opposed unto, as utterly inconsistent with serving Christ; they that are
such (says the Apostle) serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
bellies: I shall further clear and confirm this truth in Three general
instances, 1. Let us look to the way that Christ calls to walk in, and let a
man advise with flesh and blood, and follow the counsel that corrupt Self
gives; and it will be found to speak quite another thing than what is the mind
of Christ; therefore, the Apostle Paul says, Gal. 1.16. That in following of
Christ's call, he consulted not with flesh and blood; Intimating this much, that
if he had consulted with flesh and blood, it had been long ere he had obeyed
his call, if at all; flesh and blood has quite another language, as Christ says
to Peter in the verse preceding the Text, Thou savourest not the things that
be of God, but the things that be of men. The breath of flesh has (to speak so)
another smell, another scope and end than the breathing of the Spirit of Christ
has. 2ly. If we look to the matter of Faith in Christ, we will find it very
clear, for flesh and blood, or this Corruption of Selfiness, is the great
obstruction that keeps men from believing; what, I pray, kept the Jews, and
what keeps all others, while in their natural state, from submitting to the
Righteousness of Christ? even this, That being ignorant of Gods righteousness,
they go about to establish their own righteousness, and so submit not
themselves unto the righteousness of God; It Is men's natural self-esteem, the
good opinion, and conceit of their own righteousness, which they cannot find in
their heart to quite and forgo, but stick tenaciously by it, and glory in it,
as that which will not miss to justify them before God, and procure his
acceptance; This, this is the great Rock of Offense whereon the Jews stumbled
long ago, and whereon multitudes in the visible Church, do at this day stumble,
and break their necks, and come never up to a sincere closure by Faith, with
the righteousness of Christ. 3ly. It will yet be further clear, if we look on
suffering for Christ and for the Truth, which is the more immediate scope aimed
at by our Lord here; There is a very plausible, proper and pertinent-like
tent^tion that comes in the way of suffering, Master, be it far from thee, this
shall not be unto thee, pity and spare thy self, and in sparing thy self, spare
us; There is such a prevalent inordinat love to ones Self, that as Satan said
of Job, in a calumniating way, Skin for skin, and all that a man has will be
give for his life; So we may say, what will not a man give, do and adventure on
to spare and preserve this self? nothing is so precious and dear to the man, as
that wherein Self is concerned; which was that which the false Apostles so much
valued and sought after, (as Paul shows, Gal. 6.1, 2.) and from immoderat love
to it declined suffering; and is it not obviously to be seen, in our ordinary
practice? we love not to sail against cross winds, to be Religious, when they
that depart from iniquity, make themselves a prey; and to hold fast Christ's
name, and not to deny his Faith, where Satan dwells, and has a throne, and
where such as Antipas Christ's faithful Martyrs, are put to death, we have no
likeing of.

For yet further clearing of this matter, I shall speak a little to these two
things. 1. To the corrupting influence that Selfiness has on Duty. 2ly. To the
reason of it.

As for the first, The corrupting influence that selfiness has on Duty; let us
try Duty from the very rise, to the close of it, in our following of Christ,
and we will find that it has such an influence on it all along, whether we
consider Duty, in reference to our selves that perform it, or in reference to
God, to whom it is performed: first, Consider Duty, in reference to the
performer of it, and behold the corrupting influence of Self. 1. In discerning
Duty, Selfieness will readily shut out light, and shuffle by many things to
get some pretext for walking contrary to what light points out as Duty, if it
should even go with Balaam, to seek after new light, not holding with the clear
light that it has already gotten; and if it dar not go directly against that
light, yet it will un-necssarily adventure on re-examination of it, secretly
wishing, and ^eeking after another light; In this case, it is just ^ith God,
when men out of love to Gain, or ^erferment, or somewhat else of that kind,
will ^ot submit to Duty clearly holden forth to them, ^ut will needs seek after
new Light, To answer them according to the idol of their own heart; Thus it was
with that wretched Prophet, and it ^ay be so with others, less or more. 2ly.
Look ^o it in men's following of Duty, and there it will be found so to obstruct
and langle them, as it were, that they cannot run the way of Gods Commandments,
till the loins of the mind, the affections, and this especially be girded up,
as the Apostle exhorts, 1 Pet 1.13. 3ly. This Corruption has such influence,
that it will much blast a person in Duty, I mean, it will not only unfit, and
indispose him for it, but it will make him dry and dead, in the performance of
it; as the Apostle insinuats it to have been with those false Teachers, who
preached themselves, they had Words but wanted the Power. 1 Cor. 4.19, 20. And
as it may be thus in Preaching, so it may be in Prayer, and other Duties of
Worship; in Christians conversing together for mutual edification, it will
readily make their discourse frothy and little profitable, and turn all, as it
were, into empty sound. In the Second Place, as it blasts and corrupts Duties
by it is influence these ways, in reference to the performer of them; so in
reference to God, to whom they are performed several ways; As 1. it makes the
most precious Duties in themselves to be accounted but as sins before God, so
Zach. 7.5. The Lord bespeaks his professed People thus, When ye fasted and
mourned, did ye at all fast to me? Thus it was with the Pharisees, their
public and long prayers, which were gone about to be seen of men, and to
compass some one or other selfie design; that which they looked on as
acceptable Duty, the Lord accounts the very ground of a challenge; and indeed
it is both a just and great ground of challenge, when corrupt Self gets Gods
room and place. 2ly. As it changes, in a manner, the very nature of the Duty,
so in some respect, it destroys and annihilats it; Thus Ephraim is accounted to
be an empty vine without fruit, because he brings forth fruit to himself.
3ly. It deprives the man of Gods gracious reward; as the giving of a little
aims, if it were but a cup of cold water, in the name of a disciple loses not
it is reward; so when much more is given from a carnal and selfie principle, as
to be seen of men, it has no reward; yea, when men come, as it were, to the
very top of Duty, if it be performed on this account, it has no reward
following, but such as they will ruse themselves little of, verily (says the
Lord) they have their reward; and to this purpose says the Apostle, 2 Cor.
9.17. If I do this thing willingly, I have a reward, that is, if I go about my
Duty of Preaching the Gospel sincerely, I may humbly and confidently expect the
reward; but if otherwise, I cannot: what shall I say more of the woeful
influence of this corrupt Self? It is a great breaker of the peace; it is a
mighty obstructer of inward peace and joy; This is our rejoicing (says the
Apostle 2 Cor. 1.12.) the testimony of our conscience that in simplicity, and
godly sincerity, we have had our conversation in the world; insinuating plainly
thereby, that if he had been without this sincerity, and had made himself his
end, he could not have had either joy or peace; This may serve to confirm this
part of the Doctrine.

We come now to the 2d thing proposed for clearing of this Point, to wit, The
Reasons why, or how it comes to pass, that selfiness has such a corrupting
hand in, and influence upon men's Duties, yea, often in a great measure, even
upon the Duties of Believers. 1. It proceeds from the nature of this
Corruption, which is such that it has more universal influence than other
Corruptions, it runs through all Duties, and more or less spoils them, it has a
hand (to say so) in every ill turn; other Corruptions run, some in this, and
some in that channel, but this runs (as it were) in every channel, it is the
great Idol, to which all the demigods of lesser idols bow, and submit
themselves; it, as it were, swayeth it is Scepter over them all; Thus when the
Apostle James is drawing (as it were) a catalogue of evils. Chap. 4. he says,
whence come wars and fightings amongst you? art they not from your lusts, that
war in your members? It is always some one selfie end and concern or another,
that brings men in tops with the Rule of Duty: If we look to schisms,
divisions and offenses, they will be found to come from this bitter root, Romans
16.17, 18. Mark them that cause divisions (says the Apostle) for they serve
not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and by good words and fair
speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple; Thus it might be instanced in most,
if not in all the particular miscarriages of men. 2ly. It proceeds from the
singularly great opposition of this Corruption to Grace, and the utter
inconsistency of the one of them with the other, where this Self reigns, it is a
non-such enemy, to the following of Christ; other Corruptions are but as
Branches of this, and make sudden excursions by more transient acts, but this
lies closs (as it were) in ambush continually, it lies at the root, for it
contends with Christ for the Throne and prerogatives of his Crown; It Is
therefore more directly opposite to him, and inconsistent with his honor than
other Corruptions, 2 Cor. 4. v. 5. 3ly. It Is of a very corrupting influence,
because of the pleasant flattering nature of it; there is so great sibness and
affinity betwixt men and this Corruption, that it is therefore called Self; It
has a kind of Dominion and Law over men, that they think they cannot with
reason, nor without prejudice to themselves, refuse to comply with it is
dictats; as is clear in that sad instance of our first Parents, Adam and Eve,
the Aple is holden out by it, as pleasant to the eye, and good for food, and to
make one wise, to know good and evil; The Selfie tentation says, it is so very
desirable, and so good a thing, that it were unreasonable to refuse to eat of
it, there is such a seeming suitableness and congruity betwixt men and Self,
that there is no resisting of it except powerful Grace come in for inabling to
withstand and resist it; it has such a dominion, that all men out of Christ are
living to themselves, This is their great scope, and end in all that they do,
an^ they think it is very reasonable, and suitable that it should be so.

The First Use of this serves for warning, That since this is so very fruitful
a Corruption by it is great influence, and since it is so prevailing a
Corruption, so often, and so much, that the greatest falls and miscarriages of,
even Believers, may be drawn from this, as the special Spring and Fountain of
them; we had therefore so much the more need to watch against it, that it wynd
not it self so far in upon us, as to bear sway; for if it prevail, there will
be little right in Duty; there will be little peace and tranquillity in the
mind and Conscience; and little thriving in any thing that is good; if it be
dark here, how great will the darkness be? We would therefore by all means cast
it out, that it steal not in to mar not only peace and comfort, but even Light
it self: First, then when ye are consulting what to do in difficult Cases and
Emergents, take heed and be aware of listening to Selfie arguments, pleading
for, and pretending pity to Self. 2ly. Beware of it when it comes to the Duty,
that when it prevails, not to diswade from the Duty, it go not along with you
in it; there is need of watchfulness and singleness in the one, as well as in
the other. 3ly. Beware of it when ye have done the Duty; for we may have some
success in Duty, and yet by Selfiness and Selftickling-reflections on it, when
done, we may cast all down, and get our reward: In a more special manner, we
would be aware of, and guard against Selfiness in these cases. 1. When the
Tentation to it is most lively, and is readiest, and likliest to prevail and
bear sway: sometimes there will be fewer motives and incentives to this
Corruption, and then the hazard is not so great; but when it comes to the
bussiness of suffering when corrupt nature, and carnal reason offer t^ speak
against the Duty, that is like to be waite^ with Suffering, and plausibly to
persuade the le^ting it alone; then beware of Selfiness; It is (...) strange
word that Christ has to his Disciples Woe unto you when all men speak well of
you; Tha^ is, it is not only very ordinarily an evidence o^ being in a wrong
way; but it is also a kind of snare to men, though they be in the right way, or
the thing be right that they are about. A 2d^ Case is, When the Tentation suits
our particular humor and inclination, or when that to which we are tempted,
agrees well with our more particular affections; it is no great matter for some
to stand out against professed malign opposition to Godliness, nor for others
to stand it out against Sectarian Errors, because their inclination and
affection swayes them so to do; but to stand it out against both, is another
matter, and to keep our selves from our iniquity, (as David professes he did,
Psalm. 18.23. Is a great matter, and a special practique; It Is nothing to stand
out against that which (to speak so) is another man's tentation; but it is much
to stand it out against a man's own proper tentation; As for instance, hundreths
have gone over to the side of malign opposers of Godliness, these years past,
because their inclination swayed them to side with that sort of men; but they
have need now to be upon their guard, that have been preserved from the former
evil, that they go not over to the way of Sectaries, especially such whose
inclination does any way dispose them, to like of that way. A 3d. Case is this,
When all things go well with persons, and they are fair before the wind,
sitting quiet in much outward peace and case, as it was with David; who is then
sooner prevailed with by tentations, as proudly to number the people, and to
give way to his lust, and for hideing of that, to be accessory to the killing
by the Sword of the Ammonites, faithful and valiant Uriah, (all proceeding from
prevailling Self) Than when he was wandering up and down the hills and
mountains, and had no place to hide his head in; It Is harder in a time of case
than in a time of trouble and hard exercise, to resist any Tentation, and a
Tentation to Selfiness in particular: yea, this will hold even in respect of
Christians spiritual condition, when it is good, and when manifestations of God
some way abound with them, as they did in a great and extraordinary measure and
manner with holy Paul, 2 Cor. 12. They are then in eminent hazard to be puffed
up; and after being in such a condition by not watching against this Self, have
got sorer and more dangerous wounds, than when their bands have been straiter.
A 4th Case is, When the Tentation to Selfiness is near, and offers us a fit
reason, and opportunity for gratifying of Self, for sometime the Tentation to
Selfiness will seem to be far away, and may be so comparatively, and then the
hazard is not so great, as when it comes very near, and close up to us, we
would at least then stoutly resist it; Thus, Act. 14. When the People of Lystra
came to offer Sacrifice to the Apostles, as if they had been gods, tempting
them at a high rate to Selfiness, how was their spirit stirred? And how did
they show their dislike of, and indignation at it, by renting of their cloths?
So when all the People were in expectation of the Messiah, and were wondering
what a man John Baptist might be, John Chap. 1. Then, in that very nick of
time, did he confess and not deny, but confessed, that he was not the Christ;
and so resolutly resisted the Tentation to Self-seeking: I say, in the case of
particular, and present Tentations, men are in much greater hazard to be
prevailed over by this corrupt Self, than when Tentations to it are at a
greater distance as Herod, when the people cried out, at his Oration to them,
the voice of God, and not of man, he is so taken and tickled, with this
sacrilegious and blasphemous applause, and so puffed up with proud Self, that the
true and jealous God falls on him instantly, stricks him dead, by contemptible
worms; Tentation at a distance may more easily be resisted, but not so easily
when it comes near, and, as it were, whispers a man in the ear, (as Peter did
our Lord) then it would be inte^tained, as he did Peter with a get thee behind
me Satan; we should not so much as listen to the Tentation, nor come in
talking, let be in treating terms with it; many by too good an opinion of their
own strength, so run themselves (as it were) in the mire, that they come not
well, nor easily out again, and by the way, take it as one mean for preventing
the prevailing of the Tentation, even to guard against lanching too far into
it; we would hold back, and not enter into the depth of it, but keep near land,
near the shore.

Before any further proceeding, let me speak a few words in application to this
time; there are in our present Tentations, somethings visible and palpable,
that call aloud on us, not to come near, but to keep at due distance; as if we
consider in the first place, the principle that acts those men who have
brought these Lands under subjection to them, and would now have us making our
selves accessory to the same guilt with them; it were good that we took notice
of the Apostles words, Romans 16.18. These men serve not our Lord Jesus Christ,
but their own bellies, and by fair words, and good speeches, deceive the hearts
of the simple; a Tentation may come to us under very good words, and fair
speeches, and yet if we look well to the design, and drift of it, we will find
it to be Selfie; the principle so much talked of, and magnified is called
Self-preservation, but it may more fitly be called, preserving of themselves,
in their power and greatness. 2ly. If we consider the means that they make use
of, and the ways and methods which they follow, we will find that the prospect
is, to be great, to be the head, and not the tail, and to be sole Masters; and
indeed it were a wronging of our light to deny, that ^elfiness is prevalent
here; That it is this which puts them to take such and such measures, and not
others, and to give such and such orders is too, too p^lpable; and if they walk
on this ground, ye are concerned to be aware. 3ly. If we look to the great
motive, that pousseth on the Tentation, we will find it to be Selfiness; on the
one side, there is utter ruin and undoing, and this has great weight with
Self; on the other side, there is great gain and advantage, much peace, ease
and freedom from trouble, and these are very taking with Self; I grant these
things considered abstractly, and in themselves, are not evil, yet a^^ Selfie
motives and would therefore be the bett^^ weighed. 4ly If we consider the
effect that these have upon the multitude, it will be soun^ to speak out much
Selfiness; what is it that mak^ all Scotland, Shyres and Burghs so willing an^
ready to send out their Commissioners, but the weight that a Selfie Tentation
has with them that if they do it not, it will be worse with them So then, when
regard to Self predominantly influenceth all, we are called to look well how
w^^ ingadge and how we go on; for it will not ordinarily be found that Christ's
mind and Self agree well together, nor that ever Christ's mind, and natural
hear^ so universally accorded; It was never so seen in Scotland before, at
least we never saw it so before, when People were called to appear for the good
and advantage of Religion, and of the Kingdom; Therefore ye had need so much
the more to fear, when ye see the principle to be Selfie, the means and motives
to be Selfie, and when ye see them taken so well with, and to have such an
effect upon the Multitude, pose and put your own hearts to it; if upon the one
hand, ye were delivered from hazard; and if upon the other hand, there were not
such temporal advantages, whether it be not very probable ye would not be so
soon clear to meddle in this matter; and when men are called to Act, they, no
doubt, are concerned to be so equally poised, that the Balance may not be cast
only upon such a ground as that; and to be so Single, as they may have peace in
their own Consciences toward God.

But it may be Asked here, how can this Tentation be known, when any thing
offers it self to us, under a fair and specious pretext, and yet is nothing
else but Self? For Answer, I say, it may be known, and I shall from Peter's way
here, give some few marks, whereby it may be known; First, then it walks, and
is more swayed by events, than divine Rules of Duty; therefore, when our Lord
is called in duty, to go to Jerusalem, and gives an account of what is to
befall him there, Peter says, Far be it from thee, Lord, this shall not be
unto thee; Whereas Singleness looks by, and over events to Duty, as it did in
Paul, Act. 21. who would needs go to Jerusalem, notwithstanding all the most
importunat, mournful and heartbreaking disswasions of his Christian Friends,
from going thither, because of what Agabus foretold he was to meet with,
declaring himself ready, not only to be bound but to die there for the name of
the Lord Jesus; I will not say, but the consideration of Events may have it is
own weight in men's consultations, especially about their temporal affairs, but
it is dangerous, and unsafe to take them for grounds of clearing the Conscience
about Duty. 2ly. This Tentation to Selfiness does ordinarily lay more weight
upon what deals with, and moves the Affections, than on what clears and
convinces the Judgment and Conscience, by sound reason; If thou do this or
that, it will be waited with such and such hazard and prejudice, and if thou will forbear, thou shall have such and such advantage by the forbearance; Peter
is much here in pathetick dissuading, but offers no reason; so it is said of
these false Teachers, Romans 16. v. 18. That they deceived with good words, and
fair speeches, There was more plausible insinuations on the affections, than
any strength of solid reason, and argument. 3ly. This Tentation loves better to
round in the ear, and in secret, than to show it self in the light, and more
publicly; Thus Peter here takes our Lord aside, and rounds his advice in his
ear, being unwilling to bring it under public consideration, and canvassing,
(forgetting that he had dealt with one who was not capable of being taken in
the least, with the most secret subtle and plausible Tentation:) Hence
oftentimes men will not only bring over themselves, but others also to comply
with a Tentation, by that which they dar not bring forth to the Light, and to
open view; motives working on the affections, may sometimes do in secret, but
when a thing comes to light, and above board, then there must be reasons
brought forth, which being wanting, this Tentation deals by motives, (as I
said) in secret; There are but few cogent reasons brought to induce us to
acknowledge these men that will rule over us, but many motives: if we do it
not, this and that, and the other piece of suffering will follow upon our
refusing, and is it not best, we be all one? and the like, no satisfying
evidence given that the thing is night. 4ly. This Tentation is ordinarily
violent, it cannot endure to be contradicted, or opposed; it enters into men
with a mighty for ^en^an^ spea^, so that the clearest word from Scripture will
not so convince, as to divert from complying with it, nay, they will not be
taken off till God himself powerfully convince and rebuke, as we may see in
Ba^aam (and Peter himself must be rebuked with a sharp get thee behind me
Satan,) and this comes to pass from the influence that this subtle Self has,
on prejudging of men's light, as it is said of a gift, that it blinds the eyes of
the wise, and perverts the understanding of the prudent; It makes a man so
partial, as he will step over clear and convincing Reasons, and yet not observe
himself doing so, neither will he suffer to be contradicted; Therefore let this
warn you, to look well how ye behave in these times, and that ye weigh things
singly, and impartially, as in the sight of God; There will be but little
advantage found in all the motives that are brought for life, and the
conveniences and accommodations of it, when the truth of what our Lord says
shall fully appear, He that saves his life, shall lose it; keep then O! Keep at
a distance from every thing, that may endanger the life of your Souls, or wound
your Peace.

The 2d Use serves to exhort you to beware of intertaining and harboring this
Corruption, as well as of letting it in; for it is of such a nature, that where
it once gets entry, it still presses, and in more gross ways to be further
in; and it keeps life and vigor, as long as any Corruption; and therefore, If
we think our selves concerned to keep it out, we should do much more, to cast
it out.

But there are a few Questions, that occurr here to be spoken to. The First
whereof is, whether or not this Corruption can consist with Grace? Ans. Ye must
distinguish this, as other Corruptions; there is a sort of Selfiness that has
dominion, is un-interrupted, and carries full sway; and there is a Selfiness
that has not dominion, but is in part subdued, interrupted, opposed, wrestled
with, and protested against The first sort we find to have been in the
Ph^risees, who were poisoned and swelled with (...) at that height, that it
quite spoiled all their Dutie^ the other sort does now and then set up it is he^
in Peter, in the Sons of Zebedee, and the oth^ Disciples, but it is born down,
and issues in (...) sad challenge: So then for a direct and short answer to
the question, we say that Selfiness in it Reign and Dominion cannot consist
with Grace being so considered, it is directly opposed t^ Christ, and allowed
to take his room; and (...) an evidence, and distinguishing Character of (...)
graceless man, from a sound Believer, whose desire, design and endeavor it is,
being constrained thereto, by the love of Christ, not to live henceforth to
himself, but to him that died for him; but the Selfiness that is in part
subdued, interrupted, opposed, wrestled with, and protested against may consist
with Grace, as is clear in Peter, and others of the Saints, and even singularly
Self-denyed Paul was in hazard to be puffed up with the abundance of
Revelations, though Grace bare it down.

The 2d Question is, Whether a Believer may attain that length, as to be freed
from Selfiness, in any Duty that he performs? I Answer, That a Believer cannot
in any Duty, be absolutely free from all S^lfiness; for being but in part
renewed, he is propor^ionably but in part Self-denyed; yet beside that, it
cannot have dominion over him as no other Corruption can, he may, through
Grace, come to have a great hand over it, so that it shall not much prevail,
yea, by his protesting against it, by his vigorous opposing of it, and
wrestling with it, and by his ^slyking of it, and lamenting over it, he may ^n,
and does oftentimes, to a considerable vic^ry over it, and to a good measure of
single^ess in his Duty, but never deliberatly, and al^wedly proposes it to
himself, as the great ^ope he aims at, as the natural man does.

A 3d. Question is, May not a natural man, a ^ypocrite discern Selfiness, be
challenged for it, ^d some way wrestle against it? and if so, what ^fference is
there betwixt Selfiness in the Hy^ocrite, and the Believer? I say, for Answer,
that the furthest length that the natural man ^meth, in the discerning of
Selfiness, he falls ^ort of, and so differs from the Believer in these ^ree
things. 1. The Hypocrite, or natural man ^ay discern that Selfiness which is
more gross, so (...) he may take up the motive whereby he is main^, if not only
swayed to Duty; he may discern ^mself to do, or forbear such a thing, which he
^ould not do, or forbear, if Self were not concern^; As Pilat might have
discerned, and belike ^d discern, that it was Selfie respect to Caesar, ^at made
him deliver Christ to be crucified, and ^alaam very probably discerned, that it
was ^ve to the Gold, that made him so very desir^us to go with the Messengers
of Balak; and Saul, when he persecuted David, knew that ^avid was more
righteous than he, and that the ^eason of his persecution was the bussiness of
^he Kingdom; but the natural man, or hypo^rite has not a discerning of
Selfiness in the ^oot, as well as in the Branches of it; which ^he Believer
has, when in any measure in case, and at himself; The natural man discerns not
the Self-inclination of his nature, judging himself be, because of it, sold
under the same, and gro^ing under it, as being the very slave to it; T^ the
Believer attains through Grace, suitably his gracious state; but never the
hypocrite, (...) if at any time, the hypocrite wrestle against S^ it is not
against it as his end, he may well straightened, and difficulted, in his choice of
mi^^ to come by his end; as Balaam was, whether go, or stay, forward, or
backward; but (...) Believers wrestling is against it, as his end (...) The
Hypocrite comes short in this, that any ^cerning that he has of Self, is nor
universal, (...) may discern it in some few of it is Branches, (...) in some few
of his actions, but not in all, no^ most, for he has nothing to discern Self
w^ but Self, and a selfie-eye is not fit to discer^ Selfie Root; and therefore
there is always so^^ thing, yea, much that he sees not; he is (...) challenged
for all the Branches of it, for (...) as well as another, which he would be,
(...) he had a savingly enlightened Mind and Con^ence to discern and challenge
for all, (...) most readily he is not challenged when S^ is more subtle, and
(to say so) spiritual, (...) contradicts not Duty, but more insensibly ste^ in
on him, as it was in that case of the pro^ Self-seeking Pharisee, Luke 18. Who
said, a^ all had been right, and nothing wrong, God, thank thee, etc. 3ly. A
natural man comes she as to the discerning of Selfiness in the matters (...)
Faith; he may possibly discern it, when he p^^ himself in the room of God, or
his Self-en^ when it is more gross, but when it comes to re^^ing on something
in Self for Salvation, or to stick^ng to somewhat in Duties, and in the most
spi^tual Duties, he does not discern this; and the ^eason is, because that
which manifests this is ^piritual Light, and it is the Spirits Work to con^nce
of not believing on Christ; and a natural ^an being under the Covenant of
Works, and ^he obligation thereunto, as such being his rule, and he not being
enlightened according to the co^enant of Grace, there is nothing in the covenant
of Works, that clearly discovers to him this ^orruption in the matter of Faith:
Answerable (...) these three, in as far as the natural man has ^ght, he may be
challenged, and some way ^rive against Selfiness, but no further; he may
^restle against a particular Idol, but not against ^l Idols; and when he
wrestles against that same ^dol, it is but one part of Self-wrestling against
another part of Self; and when he strives or ^restles faintly, as it may be, or
rather, when ^elf-love wrestles against Selfiness in such and ^uch a Duty, it
is but Self wrestling against Self; ^s we may see in Balaam, who, when he sees
the ^ngel, and is feared for his life, he will go back ^gain, but not from any
discerned and hated ^elfiness, but from a new fear of Self-hazard; and
accordingly, when he had no hope to pre^ all thereby, he leaves off his
divination, and yet ^bides not at this resolution; but his heart keep^ng the
Corruption still living, he gives wicked ^dvice to Balack for bringing the
People of God unto a s^are and under his wrath thereby; So then ^he greates^ o^
all ^^ge that a Hypocrite can have ^or Selfiness, (...) bu^ i^ some particul^r
Act, and ^is wrestl^ng i^, but (as I said) by one piece of Self against
another, or by one Idol or (...) against another; that which makes the wrestl^^
is something competing with that which would fain be at; it is not how to get
him born down, but rather how to get himself (...) or keept up; as in other
cases might be clear^ whether a Hypocritical Balaam go backward forward,
whether he curse or bless, he (...) seeks himself; he turns himself to bless,
wh^ he is restrained from cursing, he seeks not a^^ divination, when he sees
that God will not su^^ it to succeed, yet still rotten at the heart, this
reigning Corruption of Self, turn himself he will, and alter his case as it
may, it must ways contribute to that, as his great end.

There is a 4th Question of affinity with (...) former; how does this reigning
Self in a Hy^^crite differ from subdued Self, in some measu^^ in the Believer?
and how may this difference known? I answer, first, Selfiness in the Hy^^crite
is the great thing that bears him up, (...) puts him forward in his Duty, (and
as it were prompts him to it; and when this wind of te^^^tion blows, he goes
actively about his duty, (...) sails fair before the wind; but when that wh^^
cease, he is quite becalmed, and faggs; (...) Selfiness greatly unfits the
Believer for Duty The Hypocrite always prays best, when there (...) many to
hear him; but when Selfiness preva^^ over the Believer, frothiness and levity
of spi^^ greatly impeds him, in spiritual performance^ Thus Selfiness, in a
sort helps the Hypocri^^ but hurts the Believer; and therefore, as it (...)
good token, to find Selfiness an impediment, a^ obstruction in the way of Duty,
so it is an e^^ token, when a man finds himself, and that to his ^^^isfaction,
helped by it. 2ly A man in whom ^^lfiness reigns is satisfied, when he has
obtain^^ his end, which is himself; as when he has ^erfomed any Duty, and gets
applause from ^^en, he is well pleased and satisfied; but where ^elfiness is in
part subdued in a Believer, (...) in any measure it prevail in the Duty, ^hen
he looks back on the Duty, he readily ^^es so much carnalness and selfiness in
it, that it ^ill prove a greater burden, and more weighty ^xercise to keep him
low, sober and humble, ^an all the applause and success of the external
^erformance can contribute to the blowing of him ^p; and therefore it is an ill
token, when men ^^re very well pleased and satisfied with their do^ng of Duty;
and a good token, when men are ^ot well pleased, nor satisfied either with
themselves, or with their own performances, but se^^ously humbled under
discovered Selfiness, Car^alness and short-coming therein. 3ly. Selfiness ^n
the natural man, or Hypocrite, is the thing that ^e would fainest be a^; to get
the good conceit and opinion of himself upholden, is his great desire and
design; but Selfiness in the Believer, is that which he would fainest be freed
from; there is nothing that stands so much in the Believers way ^s this
Corruption of Self does, and there is nothing that he covets more to be rid of.
4ly. Where Selfiness reigns, and has the Throne, men are impatient, (as I said
a little before,) to be thuarted and contradicted; and if they fall to be
contradicted, they become either quite faint and discouraged, or more carnal
and proud: where Selfiness is in part subdued, Christians are glad, when at
themselves, when they (...) with any thing that may humble them, and h^^ down
that Corruption; not darring to be (...) content to meet with reproach, when it
is wi^^out their own Sin, or when a fault is told the for laying of their
pride; Hence Paul, 2 Cor. says, That he will most gladly rejoice in his
^^firmities, in troubles, persecutions and reproa^^es; When he saw he could not
well bear relations without somewhat to keep him low; a^^ (if I may so say) it
is a kind of lightning Souls, in any good measure mortified to this Id^^
whilst they are wrestling against it, when (...) thing in providence falls in,
and (as it were shames Selfiness, and helps them to beat it dow^ it is made
very welcome, as a thing which the stood in need of; as David welcomed Abiga^^
who came seasonably to divert him from pros^cuting his rash, passionat and
Selfy resolution against churlish Nabal, and all the men of h^^ house. There is
a 5th Question, which is thi^ whether when Persons are so much haunte^ with,
and so frequently assaulted by Selfiness, when it so hangs on them, and besets
them so easily i^ every thing that they go about, that they cannot get it
shaken off, whether (I say) in this cas^ they should nor leave Duty, and let it
alone? To which I Answer shortly, That the thing which should direct us in the
point of Duty (...) neither Corruption within, nor Tentation without, but the
Rule prescribing, and the command laying on the Duty; therefore they would be
so far from giving way to this Tentation, for leaving off their Duty, that on
the contrary, they would so much the more seriously and diligently set about
it: But it will be Objected, that ^^rsons so doing, will sin. I Answer, First,
Per^^ns may indeed sin, but it is accidentally, and to say so) in a
circumstance, but they sin di^^ctly, and in a manner madly against the com^^nd,
when they quite cast off Duty, because of ^^hering Selfiness. 2ly. In quiting
Duty on this ^^ound, they fall into the same sin, they say they ^ould eschew,
and also into another with it; for that, I pray, is it, that keeps a person
back ^^om Prayer (for instance) because of his fear (...) Selfiness, when he is
called to it, but Selfiness ^ontradicting the Command. 3ly. Though Persons sin
necessarily (by a necessity they themselves have contracted) in doing their
Duty, through a mixture of this Corrupt Self, yet not ^o, as when they
altogether give over Duty; for when Duty is in obedience to Gods Command gone
about, Self gets not such way, nor does it so much prevail, as when it is quite
neglected; by neglecting of Duty, we bring our selves under the certain guilt
of direct and downright Rebellion against a divine Command, to eschew an
accidental sin, which also God might graciously, in a great measure prevent: I
thought to have spoken a word here to you that know, or at least acknowledge no
other rule, counselor or end, but flesh and blood, but carnal and corrupt
Self; I shall only desire you, for the Lords sake, to consider, how sad your
case must needs be, when all your merely civil, and formal way in Religion
shall be found to have referred to your self, only as your end, and when God
shall say to you, when ye prayed, heard the Word, and read it, when ye did eat
and drink, ye did not any of all these things to me; and yet this is the case,
not only of the more grossly profane, but also of all merely legal and formal
Person^ pretending to Godliness, as if because of these external performances,
God had by special Grace differenced them from others, while in the mea^ time,
they still go about to establish their ow^ righteousness, and quite neglect to
make use o^ Christ's: If this Corruption of Selfiness be such an obstruction to
Believers, what must it be to you, who live to your selves, as if ye had bee^
born to your selves, nay, as if ye had given a being to your selves, who were
never divorced, nor delivered from the dominion of Self? The Lord himself open
your eyes, that ye may see the deplorableness of your state and condition.

SERMON V.
Matthew. 16.24. Then said Jesus unto his disciples, if any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me.
YE may Remember, we drew these Words to Four Heads. 1. The great and main
design, that such as would ingadge with Christ should have before them; even to
come after Christ, and follow him. 2ly. The great obstruction that lies in the
way of men, coming after, and following of Christ, and that is Selfiness, or
inordinat regard to a man's Self; which makes him fall short in that Respect and
Duty which he owes to Christ. 3ly. The Qualification that is required in, or
the Duty that lies upon the man that will come after, and follow Christ in
three steps; every one of which qualifies (to say so) another. 1. He must deny
himself. 2ly. Take up his cross. 3ly. Follow Christ. 4ly The necessity of this,
Let him do it.

Of the First two, we have spoken already, and come therefore now to speak a
word to the third, viz. The Qualification required in, or the Duty that lies
upon a follower of Christ, in these three steps proposed; The first whereof is
Self-denial; whence we Observe (the Words clearly give us the Doctrine) That is
is requisite in all that would follow Christ, and give up their names to him to
be his Disciples, that their chief work be to deny themselves; This is the
first thing that he requires here, and the first step of the way, without which
none can follow him, nor make any progress in their way of following him; for
clearness cause, ye may take the Doctrine in these three Branches, or look upon
it these three ways. 1. As it holds out Christ's calling unto this, and his
laying it on his followers, as a Duty, to deny themselves. 2ly. As it is a
requisite qualification, fitting them for following of him; showing, that
Self-denial is that which notably qualifies a Person to be a follower of
Christ. 3ly. As it holds forth a necessity of the Duty, that a man must needs
by any means deny himself, that would come after, and follow Christ; all the
three return to, and resolve in this, even the commending of this Grace of Self
denial, and in pressi g the necessity of it; and therefore I shall speak of
them complexly together. 1. By showing what Self-denial is, 2ly. By clearing
those three forementioned Branches. 3ly. By making use of them; and all this
will be the easier, and we may be the shorter in it, that we have spoken of the
contrary corruption of Selfiness somewhat largely before.

For clearing then of the First of these, to wit, What is meant by Self-denial;
Consider First, what is meant by Selfiness, which is nothing else than a man's
excessive, and inordinat regard to himself, and being too much swayed with
Selfie-respect; and therefore to deny our selves, is to be abstracted from all
inordinat Selfie-respects, and considerations, in the following of Christ, as
if we had not a Self (to speak so) as if we had no reason, wit, will, nor parts
of our own; so to be denied to these, as if we had them not at all, or as they
were not ours, or in us. 2ly. Consider how this word is used. 2 Timothy 3.5.
Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof; That is, though they
make profession of Godliness, yet they no more care for the power of it, than
if there were not such a thing; they have no regard in their life to God, but
whatever be their profession of him in word, yet in their works they deny him,
as it is, Tit. 1.16. So that a man who is denied to himself aright lives in
respect of any inordinat estimation of, love to, delight in, and care for
himself, and endeavors to walk as singly, in respect of these, as if no such
affections, or passions were at all in him. 3ly. Consider, and compare some
Scripture-phrases, and examples, and they will help to clear what Self-denial
is, as 1. That Phrase which we have, Heb. 11.24. in the example of Moses, By
faith, Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, and choosed
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God; It is the same word in the
Original that is used here, He denied to be called the Son of Pharaohs
daughter; he had so little undue respect to his own ease, pleasure, profit,
and preferment, that when the Tentation to these comes in his way, he walks as
singly and self-denyedly, as if he had met with no such thing; when that
Tentation assaulted him, he resolutely refused, and denied to admit of it. A 2d
Phrase we have in Paul's example, Gal. 6.14. God forbid, (says the Apostle)
that I should rejoice save in the cross of Christ, whereby the world is
crucified to me, and I unto the world; Opposing therein his own single way, to
the Selfie way of these false teachers, who preached circumcision to eschew the
Cross, and shows what it was to be denied in that way, Even to be crucified to
the world, and to have the world crucified to him? So that the world had no
more power to tempt him, than a dead man hanging on a Cross would have had. A
3d. Phrase we have, in the example of Levi, Deuteronomy. 33.9. Who said unto his
father and mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his
brethren, nor knew his own children; In executing Justice, at Gods command, he
did it as impartially, and Self-denyedly, as if he had never seen Father nor
Mother, Brethren nor Children, or as if he had been under no obligation, or tie
of respect, by virtue of such near and dear Relations The 4th and last Phrase,
we have in the person and example of David, Psalm. 131. v. 2. I have (says he)
behaved and quitted my self as a child that is weaned of his Mother, my soul is
even as a weaned child; Importing, That he had no sort of allowed inordinat
purpose, project, or design in the world for himself, no more, in a manner,
than a Child, but just now weaned from his Mother has any project at all; but
was ready to take off Gods hand, whatever he was pleased to dispense, and carve
out to him; and that he was not swayed by any particular allowed inordinat
respect to himself, or by any finistruous selfie design, but wa^ lying before
the Lord, ready to receive, and take on any impression, that he should please
to put on him. If now we lay these three together, we will in a good measure
see, and understand, what Self-denial, or a Self-denyed Person is, and what is
called for from a man that would deny himself in following of Christ; it is even
to endeavor to be as single, as if he had not a Self, and that he be denied to
all inordinat respects to, and considerations, dead in a manner, to all undue
Self-love, Self-pleasure, Self-advantage, Self-estimation, Self-design,
Self-confidence, and the like.

In the Second place, for clearing it in these three Branches which we
proposed. 1. We find Self-denial called for as a Duty, as a fruit of new
Obedience, and as a tie and obligation that lies upon Christians, by virtue of
Christ's purchase; So 2 Cor. 5.15. Where living to our selves, and living to
Christ are opposed; and not living to our selves, implies a denying of our
selves; and says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Ye are not your own, ye are
bought with a price; Therefore let it not be your work to live to your selves,
but to glorify God in your bodies and in your spirits, which are Gods. 2ly. It
is called for, as a great part, and someway as the whole of our likeness, and
^onformity to Christ, who was the greatest ex^mple, and highest pattern of the
exercise of this Grace; and how often find we this thus pressed? ^s Matthew.
11.28. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly of heart; and Philip. 2.5. Let this
mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus, And what was that? who being
(says the Apostle) in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, etc. Herein did his wonderful Self-denyed stouping appear, that being
equal with God, he descended, as it were, from that height, to the very lowest
step of humiliation, and so emptied himself, and made himself in a manner
nothing, in comparison of what he was; Let that mind therefore be in you, says
the Apostle; The same exhortation we have proposed, and pressed, Romans 15.2, 3.
Let every one of us please his neighbor, for his good to edification; for even
Christ pleased not himself; but as it is written, the reproaches of them that
reproached thee fell upon me; His example in this is proponed for our
imitation, and we are called, and oblidged to study conformity thereunto; see
also how Christ presses it upon his Disciples, John 13. v. 13, 14.15. Who,
when he had washed their feet affectionatly, humbly, and Self-denyedly, says
to them, I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you.

3ly. It is called for, as it is a requisite qualification of Christ's followers;
and so we come to the 2d Branch, which I proposed for clearing of this matter;
Self-denial fits and qualifies for following of Christ, and for all other
Duties; (...) that before a man can to any purpose follo^ Christ, he must needs
be thus qualified; for the clearing whereof, ye may consider, how it fi^ and
qualifies a man for any Duty that Christ ca^ him to. 1. In so far as it makes
him single i^ taking directions from Christ, and suffers him not to be biased,
by himself, or by Selfie respect to any thing within or without himself, an^
this seems to be Christ's great design, and scope as to Peter here, that before
he can suitably follow him, he must be at a point with forgoing his life;
Therefore in the following words, he says, whosoever will save his life, shall
lose it, signifieing thereby, that a man that is not denied to life; let be to
the external comforts, conveniences, and accommodations thereof, is no in a
fit capacity to do the Duties to which Christ calls him. 2ly. Consider, that
as it qualifies for Duty, so it guards against snares; with the rightly
Self-denyed man, death and life have no^ great weight, that by which he is
mainly swayed being conscience of Duty, and regard to the glory of Christ. He
is so crucified to the world, and the world so crucified to him, that it has
little or no influence on him, to make him flinsh, or draw back from what
Christ calls him to; Therefore Paul says, Act. 20.24. In reference to Bonds,
and Imprisonments, that were to attend him in every place; None of these things
move me, neither do I count my life dear unto my self, so that I may finish my
course with joy, etc. Selfiness exposes and casts a man open to many snares,
and is like some intanglement, which Self-denial rids him of delivers him from,
and guards him against; Therefore ^^e Apostle exhorting Timothy to this, tells
him, that no man that goes a warfare, intangles him^^lf with the affairs of
this life, The Self-denyed ^an lays by all intanglements, that are ready ^^n
every occasion to be pull-backs to him from Duty; he shakes off these, and so
is free, for the ^arfare that he is called to; or he is like to a ^an, who
being well armed is not much, if at ^ll hurt by strokes. Lastly. It qualifies
by keep^ng the man in solid peace, and sweetly chear^ng contentment, in
enjoying what he has: and ^as there is no greater discouragement, impediment
and obstruction in following of Christ, than an^^iety, fretting, and
mal-contentment; So there ^s no greater qualification fitting for following of
him, than inward calm serenity and peace, arising from a holy Self-denyedness
of Spirit; for such a man has not (in a manner) a will or wit of his own to be
thuarted and contradicted; he has no Self-pleasure to be marred, no
Self-credit to be robbed of, no Self-ease to be disturbed, no Idol to be bereft
of; he is denied, and dead, in a great measure to all these; Therefore Paul
says, Philip. 4.11, I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content; He is meet for any condition, he can easily digest all things, and
fret at nothing; He knows how to be abased, and how to abound, every where, and
in all things; he is instructed to be full, and to be hungry, to abound, and
suffer need, and can do all things through Christ who strengthens him; and v.
18. He has all, and abounds: A most excellent and desirable qualification of a
man who thus is, as one having nothing, and yet possessing all things; He has
no anxious perplexing project, nor disquieting fore-casting thoughts that he
leans to, or depends on, but is content with whatever God gives him, and carves
out to him; he has no Selfie-designs, and so can meet with no great
dissapointment; and therefore is fitted to suffer adversity, and not to be
cast down by it, and to bear prosperity, and not to be puffed up by it; for he is
not, as to his satisfaction bottomed on Creatures, but on Christ, and therefore
is neither up nor down, as the Creature Comforts ebb or flow, stay or remove,
but rests on a solid foundation.

And so we come to the 3d Branch proposed, viz. The absolute necessity of this
Grace or Duty, which will appear, if we consider these things. 1. The nature of
Selfiness, and of Christ's way, and how inconsistent the one is with the other,
Selfiness, or living to our selves, and living to Christ, being, (as we show)
always opposed one to another in the Scripture; Therefore a man must either
deny himself, or deny living to Christ; when a man follows the counsel of Self;
he rejects Christ's counsel; where Self is taken in, Christ is kept at the
door; and where Self is set up, Christ is thrust down, and made, as it were, a
stepping stone for Self to come at it is point, and as a stirrup for Self to
mount to the Saddle by; Self subordinats all things to it self, and Christ
among the rest, and therefore, whosoever would follow Christ, and live to him,
must needs deny themselves. 2ly. Consider more particularly, the way wherein
Christ calls his followers to walk, and the Duties that he requires of them, or
the nature of the race that he wills them to run; and in every piece of it, we
will find something opposite and contradictory to Self; look to believing in
Christ, it destroys Self, neither can domining Selfiness consist with it, it
quite excludes all boasting on selfie accounts: Look to suffering for Christ,
no man can take up the Cross and follow Christ, ti^l first he deny himself;
will any man, unless he be self-denyed in a considerable measure, think ye,
hazard, or part with his House, Land, Estate, Wife, Children, or Life, for that
which carnal wisdom and corrupt Self will be ready to represent, but as a
little momentuous matter: as Peter said to our Lord, so it will be ready to
say, Spare and pity thy self; No, says Christ to Peter, and to all his
followers, resolve to take up your Cross, and follow me; and in order thereto,
deny your self, your ease, profit, pleasure, credit, etc. in a present World.
3ly. If we consider the manner of doing these Duties which Christ calls for,
this qualification of them will be found to be necessary, yea, whether it be
doing or suffering; we are called to follow him therein in a single sincere and
denied manner, if we would please him, not only to do Duty, but to do it from a
right principle, and to a right end; not only to bear the Cross, but to bear it
patiently, and cheerfully; will ever a man think ye follow and honor Christ
that way, if he get not victory over himself? will he suffer the loss of his
Goods, and take the spoiling of them joyfully, if they be his Idol? will he
suffer reproach for Christ, if he cannot endure to have the least word spoken
to the prejudice of his name, on any account? will he endure to be put to
wandering up and down, without any certain dwelling place, in hunger, and cold,
and nakedness, if he be addicted to his ease, and pleasure? or will he hazard
his Life, or turn his back on Houses, Lands, Wife, and Children, if his
affections be inordinatly carried forth toward them? 4ly. Consider tha^ the
end which all Christ's followers should have before them, whether in doing, or
suffering, is exceeding inconsistent with Selfiness; for they are called to
doing of Duties, in obedience to his command, and with regard to his honor,
without incroaching, or trenching thereon; and when they have done all, and
suffered to the yond most; they are not to esteem of themselves the more highly
on that account, but to reckon themselves the more oblidged to Christ, who has
thus helped, and honored them; and not to be as the Pharisees who did all to
be seen of men; They had two great ends before them, in all they did, which he
will by no means endure in his followers; one was estimation and applause from
men, the other some merited reward from God; Therefore, in opposition to these,
Christ says, Matthew. 6.13. Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does;
in any good that ye do, be denied to your selves, take no notice of it, as
affecting estimation from it, as having confidence in it, let not your selves
think that ye have done some worthy deed; For this end makes Duties that are
good in themselves, to be as no Duties on Gods account; Ephraim is reputed an
empty vine, when he brings forth fruit only to himself: Now before we come to
the Use, take a word or two of Warning, or Caution; and 1. Consider, that when
we speak of Selfiness, or Self, we speak not of it here, as it is taken for a
sinful corruption in man simply, and in it self, but as it is lawful, yet
venting it self inordinatly, and so sinfully; as a man's respect to his own
well-being simply is lawful, but when it vents it self, (as I said)
inordinatly, and sinfully it is unlawful, as when it comes in opposition to,
or in competition with Christ, or any thing that is Christ's; a man may, no
doubt, lawfully seek to save his Life, or his Goods, or Name; but when it comes
to this, that he must either hazard the loss of these, or wound his own
Conscience, or the profession of Religion, or deny Christ a testimony, when
called for; in that case, he must be, as if he had not a Life, Goods, or Name;
or Credit. 2ly. Consider, That when we speak of Self-denial, it is not so to be
understood, as if a man could be completely, and perfectly denied to himself,
or as if he could be quite without the reach of being hurt by any Tentation to
Selfiness; for, so long as corrupt nature, in the remainder of it, is in men,
there will never be absolute perfection in Self denial; but that which we mean
is, that a man sincerely study to mortify all inordinat respect to himself;
That when a tentation to it assaults, he endeavor honestly to repel and
refute it, and with holy peremptoriness deny to grant what it se^ks, nay, to
abominat it, as Christ does, that sinful and unseasonable motion of Peter's, for
saving his Life; This is it that the saints are called to, even when the
Tentation comes, to suppress, bear, and beat it down: Thus, our Lord, John
21.18. notably reconciles these two, when he says to Peter, When thou wast
young, thou girdedst thy self, and walkedst whither thou would, but when thou
shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee,
and carry thee whither thou would not; thus he spoke, signifying by what
death he should glorify God; Peter had a natural desire, not to die a violent
death and therefore in this respect, was led whither he would not; yet it is
said, that Peter, by laying down his life, and suffering a violent death,
glorified God, because the debate he had with Self was decided in Christ's
favors, (to speak so) and the tentation to pity Self, was not hearkened to,
but resisted and overcome.

In the third place, according to the method proposed, we come to to the Uses
of the Doctrine, which are three, the first whereof shows what is the Duty that
the followers of Christ are called to. The Second exhorts to it. The Third
reproves short-coming in it, and discovers the rise of this short-coming.

The First Use then serves to show the great Duty that the follower of Christ
is called to, or what a Christian should be, even a Self-denyed man; If we
follow the Duty in application, it will be found to comprehend many things;
more generally. 1. It is a complication of all, or at least of many Graces, and
Duties, ^s of Patience, Submission, Singleness, Sincerity, Meekness, Humility,
or lowliness of Mind, thinking well, and highly of God, and meanly of our
selves. etc. As it is a complication of many Graces, and Duties; so 2ly. It is
an antidot against many vices, and evils, against Pride, High conceit,
Hastiness, Passion (which is not taken much heed to) Fretting, Grudging,
Coffeehouse, Disquietness, Anxiety, and many more evils, which we will not
now particularize; But shall more particularly draw the Use to a few things,
which the Scripture points at, and which a man must necessarily be denied to,
or else he is not fit to follow Christ. 1. He must be denied to the principles
of carnal Reason, to his own wit, to the counsel of flesh and blood, he must
not consult therewith (as the great Apostle tells us, Gal. 1.16. he heeded it
not, and which is one of the main things intended here;) he must not be much up
nor down, with external conveniences, or inconveniences, or events, which
carnal reason uses to stretch very broad. 2ly. He must be denied to his credit
and estimation, and in that, be like to a little Child; and in this respect, he
that is Minister and Servant of all shall be greatest of all; he must nor be
like the Pharisees, who sought the uppermost seats at feasts, and greetings in
the market, Nor love, or seek to be called Rabbi, but he must be content to
bear reproach, and not to fret nor canker under it. 3ly, He must be denied to
his ease, outward accommodation, or pleasure; he must not seek to please
himself; his great design must not be to have, or maintain an easy life to
himself in the World; but he must be content, to accept of any condition God
carves out to him herein. 4ly. He must be denied to his profit, as he must be
crucified to all creature comforts in general, so to this in particular; he
must not seek his own things only, but the things of others also. 5ly. He must
be denied to his own Righteousness, Gifts, Privileges and Parts, to his good
works, and whatever is commendable, and good in himself, and so account of
himself, as if he had them not, counting all these things to be but loss and
dung that he may win Christ, and be found in him. 6ly. He must be denied to his
own strength and ability, and to Self-confidence, deadned to every good thing
in himself, so as to rest on it. 1 Cor. 1.9. We received (says the Apostle)
the sentence of death in our selves, that we might learn not to trust in our
selves; Trusting in our selves, is a very ordinary fault, and it is a hard
matter to go about Duty, without lipning to our selves. 7ly. He must be denied
to all inordinat love and affection, to all near and dear natural relations, to
Wife, Husband, Father, Mother, Children, Brother and Sister,, yea, and to his
own life also, however love to these be not only lawful, but a commanded and
commendable Duty, yet when they come in competition with Christ, and any
concern of his, we must carry toward them, as if we hated them.

The 2d Use serves for exhortation to this Duty; Take, O take Christ for your
Pattern, and learn at him, to deny your selves, and let his example be a motive
to stir you up to it, as well as a Coppie and Pattern for your imitation; For 1.
Christ came not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him. 2ly. In
all his conversation, he pleased not himself; but, as it is written, the
reproaches of them that reproached his father f^ll on him 3ly. The manner of
his deportment was in much patience, meekness and lowliness of Spirit, when he
was buffeted he blessed and p^ayed even for his persecutors when he was spitte^
o^ and e^^^ed, he^ evil^^ not again. 4ly. Let us look to him (...) Sufferings,
O! how submissive is he there? F^^her (says he most sweetly) not my will, but
thine be done; Was there ever such a Cup of Wrath put in the hand of any to
drink, as was put in his? at which, though he had a sinless natural reluctance,
yet he will not have a will of his own, in that case, but submits to his
Fathers will; he will not hear on that ear (to speak so with reverence) but
with his mouth he contradicts the sinless reluctance, and aversion of his holy
innocent humane nature. 5ly. In a word, look to him in his Birth, all along in
his Life, in his Suffering, and Dying, there is nothing in all these, but it
speaks out somewhat of his denying himself: as all the steps and degrees of his
humiliation, and stouping so very low, smells strong of Self-denial, so they
serve to teach his Disciples, how to follow him in that way, and to provock and
stir them up thereto: Therefore, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, we
exhort you to study this Lesson well, and to learn it of him; even to live so
in the World, as if there were nothing in it to tempt you; to live as if ye
were dead, and as if all were dead about you, in respect of being swayed by any
inordinat respect to your selves; and so much the rather, because, at this
time, God seems to be calling more especially to it, the Cross being at our
door, to which there will be no kindly stouping without Self-denial, Men will
not without this endure to be troubled with quartering of Soldiers in their
houses, let be to lose all they have in the world which they have been long a
winning; they will rather reason thus with themselves, What will become of us,
and of our houses and families, if we hold by this, or if we do not the other
thing? we will therefore comply, and not strive against the stream, and thereby
bring ruin on our selves, and ours: make therefore Christ your Pattern, and
believe, that as he requires this of you at all times, so in a special manner
at this time, when the trial is come, and Self fawns and hangs on us, pleading
for Self-pity, and persuasion: And to press the exhortation, consider the
necessity of it, If any man (says the Lord) will follow me, let him deny
himself; If ye think Christ worthy the following, ye must resolve to part with
Self; the young rich man must sell all that he has, and take up his Cross, and
follow Christ, or else part with Christ, and go back to the World, and that
will be a woeful parting; It is on this account ordinarily, that men part with
Christ, whether it be eternally, or for a time only; such as will not deny
themselves in Justification, they deprive themselves of Christ's Righteousness;
such as will adhere to the World, will get no more; Selfiness made Demas
forsake Christ, and embrace a present World; It made many to preach
circumcision, to eschew persecution, and to take a wrong way in the matter of
Justification, as the Apostle shows, Gal 6. It prevailed that far with Peter,
as to make him deny his Master. But ye will readily say, this seems to be very
hard, not only in reference to the end, which is heaven and glory, but in
reference to the wa^ unto it, to tell men, that they must deny themselves, ere
ever they can well enter, let be proceed in the way to heaven; There is here a
twofold great difficulty, not only to deny our Estates, Friends, Relations,
Natur^l Reason, Wit, Will, Sense, Opinion, Reputation (that sticks close and
long) but also to be content to be accounted and cal^^d fools, and to be
mocked, and cried out upon, as the very offscourings of the World, even (...)
deny Life it self, and to choose Death, even a ^iolent Death: I confess this is
indeed hard, even ^ery hard to Flesh and Blood; but I must also ^^y, that it is
a hard and difficult business, to fol^ow Christ, and to continue in following
of him, (...) all his Tentations; Remember therefore, and ^onder the one, as
well as the other; when ye ^re disposed to think it hard to deny your selves,
^emember, and consider also, that it is hard, and difficult to win to Heaven,
It Is a strait gate, and a narrow way that leads to it, and but few and it; It Is
hard to keep a good Conscience in ^ollowing him, and therefore it is no marvel,
that the qualifications seem to be hard, that are ^equired of all them that are
called to walk in that way: Yet let me say further, that though (...) be hard
and difficult simply considered, ^et it is not so comparatively considered,
viz. ^us, That a man must resolve either to deny himself, or renounce and part
with precious jesus Christ, that pearl of great price; Is there any ^omparision
betwixt Self and him? With whom, (...) we suffer, we shall also reign with him;
whom if we ^eny, he will also deny us; If we resolve to live without regard to
him, and prefer Self to him, ^asting the Balance to the side of our selves, he
^ill live without us, and rid himself of us; does ^ot the word subjoined here,
a little after ^e Text plainly hold forth the absolute ne^^ssity of
Self-denial, and the dreadful prejudice (...) Self-seeking, Self-love, and of
Self-preference? Him that denies me before men, him will I de^ before my
Father, and the holy angels; If we consider aright, and believe the
incomparable wort^ and matchless excellency of Christ, and the unspeakable
advantages that wait on Self-denye^ following of him, especially at the close
of o^ race and course, with the sweet facility in running of it out, that his
promised assisting-grac^ can cause, it will not be found so very hard, an^
insuperably difficult a bussiness to follow Christ in the way of Self-denial,
as carnal reason represents it to be, to make men skar at it and decline it,
the great gain that comes at last, wi^ to an infinite overplus, make up all the
loss.

The 3d Use serves, to reprove our short-coming in this great Duty of following
Christ; an^ to show the rise of it; First I say, it is groun^ of reproof for,
and points at our great disconformity to Christ, in this Grace of Self-denial*
Ah! should we not, as dear Children, follow him therein? if so, how dreadfully
disconfor^ are we unto him? How lamentably little are w^ like to the name that
we bear? We are called Christians, and are found very unlike Christ, living
much, or altogether to our selves, swayed by Self, and Carnal Reason, in our
walk, fretting and foaming under the Cross, disconten^ with our Condition and
Lot, Selfie in our speaking and dealing, unwilling to quite our ow^ Will, come
of it what will, resolute to serve our own pleasure and ease, and to be
somewhat in the World, though we should be eternally ruined thereby: When our
Grace is stretched, even to the utmost length of the Charity that we can
warrantably give it, what observable vestige, or footstep will it be found to
have of beautiful conformity to Christ, and particularly of conformity to him
in Self-denial, wherein Christians ought in a special manner to resemble
Christ? We have been long professing to follow Christ, and yet, alas! we have
scarcely stepped this first step; what means the fainting, and fear that is
at but the noise of trouble? what means the strong propension and bensil that
is to keep off the Cross, though with the loss of a good Conscience? Certainly
it flows from Selfiness, and from our not being as weaned Children; What
means the great conceit that we have of our selves, and of any thing we have
or do? When the left hand should not know what the right hand does; if we do
any good deed, all the World (as it were) must hear and know of it; This sure,
argues a great deal of Selfiness; O! then let us all be ashamed of our great
disconformity, and unlikeness to the Pattern, and of our lamentable short-coming
in this respect. 2ly. I say, it discovers to us, and lets us see whence it
comes, that we thrive so ill, and come so little speed in following of Christ;
It Is even from this, some one Self-Idol or another, and till this be denied, we
will not thrive, nor make progress in following Christ; Some one concern of
Self or another, gets too much of the hearts love and esteem; There is
therefore a necessity of being denied and mortified to all these, otherwise we
will still be clogged, entangled, made to halt and stick, and be kept from
going forward in the way of following Christ: I shall clos^ this Discourse with
one word of advertisemen^ and it is this, that ye would not look at
Se^^denyall, as a common (if I may speak so) Grace or Duty, that is easily
reached, and come b^ but as such an one that is (as it were) the ro^^ from
which many other Graces spring, and (...) foundation on which many other Duties
are bui^^ and as having in it a pre-disposing fitness for ev^ry other Duty; and
withal, as being that which calms, and quiets the mind of a Christian, a^^
guards his heart against the perplexity, a^^ torturing anxiety and vexation
that in a time trial and trouble, carnal and unmortified person are troubled
with; Now God himself help (...) to it, and to more of it for Christ's sa^^ AMEN.

SERMON VI
Matthew 16, 24. Then said Jesus unto his di^ciples, if any man will come after
me, let h^^ deny himself, and take up his cross, and f^low me.
OUR Lord Christ having discovere^ somewhat of the temper and di^position of
his Disciples, and f^lowers, to be very loath, shy i^ scarring to meet with the
Cro^^ as Peter's advice to him plainly manifested; a^plyes himself to instruct,
and give them the Lesson for the time to come, how they may (...) only get free
from that propension to shift Cros^es and difficulties, that occur in the w^^
of Duty, and of following him, that is ha^^ ^y incident to all men, but also
how they may get themselves sweetly composed for profitable, and comfortable
meeting with, and going through ^hese Difficulties and Crosses, and guarded
against ^uch sinful scarring at them; If any man (says he) will come after
me, in hope to reign with me eternally hereafter, he must not seek himself; but
on the contrary, must deny himself, and study to be without all inordinat
respect to himself; yea, he must be so far from seeking himself; that he must
denyedly take up his cross (and that daily, as Luke has it) and follow me; And
this is the 2d. Qualification which Christ requires of his followers, That we
are now to speak a little to.

The Words indeed are borrowed, and met^phorical, yet they set out obviously
enough the afflictions that Gods People meet with in following him, in the way
of Duty. The Cross properly is that Tree, or piece of Tree made use of in these
times, for executing and putting men to death, by crucifying them, and so it
signifies, and sets forth not only a painful, but also an ignomineous and
shameful Death; It is said of Christ, Heb. 10.2. That he suffered pleasantly
the pain of the Cross, and regarded not the shame of it; Hence it is ordinarily
taken in the Scriptures of the new Testament, to hold out the great and sore,
the painful and shameful sufferings and afflictions that the followers of
Christ are called to lay their account to meet with, and which they often
actually meet with, himself having suffered, and died this way, as he was man;
To this purpose says the Lord, Matthew. 10.38. He that takes not his cross and
follows after me, is not worthy of me; That is he that is not content to meet
with any sort o^ suffering in following of me, even such as I m^ self met with
from men, is not meet to follow me^ His Cross implies not only suffering, and
affliction in the general, but that sort of affliction which every follower of
Christ in particular must resolve, and lay his account to meet with; The Cros^
that is appointed and shaped out for him, as to such and such circumstances in
particular, For as much (say h the Apostle, 1 These. 3.3. as ye your selves
know that we are appointed thereunto: Taking up of the Cross, is a following
forth of the same similitude, to point out this, that as a follower of Christ
must resolve to have the Cross on his back daily, so he must not unduely
decline, or seek to shift it; neither must he be drawn and dragged to it with
grudging and repining, but he must be ready pleasantly to take it up, and
patiently to bear it, when ever he is called to it, be ready to submit to every
cross dispensation that the Lord shall please to carve out to him.

In the Words, we have three main things employed. 1. The Lot and Measure that
the followers of Christ may meet with, and should lay their account to meet
with in following of him, the Captain of their Salvation, and that is the
Cross. 2ly. The Duty that Believers are called to in reference to the Cross,
and these afflictions that they are to meet with, Let him take up his cross,
and that daily, as Luke has it. Chap. 9.23. 3ly. We have this Duty considered,
as it stands betwixt these two, Let a man deny himself, and Let him follow me;
for thus the words relate to the Scope that Christ drives at in this place.

As for the first of these, it contains in it several things, as 1. That
Believers are to reckon to meet with sad afflictions, in following Christ, and
no less than such as are both painful and shameful, and accompanied with
reproach, compared here to sufferings on the Cross. 2ly. That they are to lay
their account to meet with these continually, they must resolve to take up
their Cross daily. 3ly. That there are (beside the general afflictions of the
People of God) some proper and peculiar to every one of them, every man is to
have his share of the public, general, and common Crosses and Afflictions, and
his particular Cross beside. 4ly. That they must resolve to meet with these,
even in the following of Christ, and while they are in their Duty; we shall take
in all these in this one Doctrine. That Believers, even in their following of
Christ, and in the doing the Duties they are called to, are ordinarily
accompanied with considerable crosses, afflictions and difficulties; Christ's
Words laying it down, as a conclusion not to be controverted, that his
followers must resolve to bear the Cross daily, and with no less certification
than that, otherwise they cannot come after him, give a very clear rise to the
Doctrine; and the truth of it being such, that none do professedly call it in
question, let be downright deny it, that it might be judged unnecessary and
superfluous, to offer at any proof of it; yet the practice of most calling for
it as necessary, we shall speak a little to the clearing, and confirming of the
point; the truth whereof is manifested by the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, and by the experience of the People of God, in all Ages: There are
three sorts of afflictions that the People of God meet with, and that are
spoken of in the Scriptures. 1. Some that are properly chastisements 1 Cor.
1.32* So the Corinthians are said to be chastened of the Lord, for profaning
the Lords Table, That they may not be condemned with the world; These are not
the afflictions, so much at least, meaned here. 2ly. Some are properly trials
that the people of God meet with, in following of their Duty, and not properly
for their Duty, and while they are walking tenderly; Such were holy Jobs
afflictions, which he met with, while he was sincerely and faithfully, in a
great measure about his Duty to God and man, very sharp ones: neither are these
so much intended here. 3ly. Some that Believers meet with from men, because of
their faithful following, and cleaving closs to their Duty, while they suffer
in their Estates, Persons, etc. for well-doing; These are the Crosses and
Afflictions mainly meant here, though we would not exclude the former sorts;
they must resolve, both in their Duty, and for their Duty, to meet with the
Cross, to be reproached and persecuted; Take but one passage out of the Old
Testament, Psalm. 44. v. 22. Where the People of God say to him, For thy sake we
are counted as sheep for the slaughter, and all this is come upon us, yet have
we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant: and this
is so ordinary a Lot, that Paul cites it, Romans 8.36. As a truth verified in his
time, and to be verified in all times following; And if we come to the New
Testament, beside that just now mentioned, Romans 8. See 1 Cor. 4.9. I thank God
(says the Apostle) he has set forth us Apostles last, as it were appointed to
death, for we are a spectacle to the world, and to angels and men; we are fools
for Christ's sake; but ye are wise; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are
honorable, but we are despised; even unto this present hour, we both hunger
and thirst, and are naked, and buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place;
being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer; being defamed, we
entreat, we are made as the filth of the world, and are as the off-scourings of
all things unto this day. And see how he inlarges this, as the way of his
fighting, and doing Duty. 2 Cor. 6. In much patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, in distresses, in stripes, and imprisonments, in tumults and
labors, etc. And 2 Cor. 11.23. In labors more abundant, in stripes above
measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths often, of the Jews I suffered five
times forty stripes save one, thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I
stoned, thrice I received shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the
depth, in journieing often, in perils by water, in perrills by robbers, in
perils by my own country men, in perrills by the heathen, in perils in the
city, in the wilderness, in the sea, and by false brethren, etc. So Heb. 10.32,
33. Where there is a great sight of afflictions spoken of, Partly, while
Believers were made a gazing-stock by reproaches, and afflictions, partly while
they became companions of them who were so used; and suffered the spoil of
their goods joyfully, and Heb. 11. throughout; How largely is this Doctrine
followed forth, Chap. 12. And all the Cloud of believing Witnesses brought in,
in the exercise of their Faith, walking through Sufferings; yea, it is so
received a Truth, that in the Old and New Testament, we find it laid down (as
it were) in Maxims, Psalm. 34.19. Many are the afflictions of the righteous:
Acts. 14.22. Through much tribulation we must enter into the kingdom of God; 2 Timothy 3.12. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution:
No man that will resolve to keep a good Conscience but he must resolve to have
this for his Lot; and we find both the Old and New Testament joined together,
for verification of this Truth, Gal. 4.29. But as then, he that was born after
the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, so is it now; These
that have nothing of Gods Grace in them, will still persecute those that have
it, the Seed of the Serpent will always persecute the Seed of the Woman, so
that the followers of Christ are not, even in their doing of Duty, exempted
from Crosses and Afflictions, and that of the sharpest, and most searching
nature: if it were needful to follow forth the confirmation of this by reasons,
several might be given, but take only a few of many, in some passages of
Scripture; the first whereof, is, Romans 8.29. Whom he did foreknow those he
predestinat, to be conformed to the image of his Son; Who has chalked out
their way wherein they must follow him through many afflictions to Glory, that
so they may be made conform to him, both in holiness, and in suffering; which
holy Image of his in them, is the Butt of the wicked worlds malice, and
persecution; I say, he makes use of afflictions, to further their spiritual
conformity to him, who, as he learned obedience by suffering, (though he needed
not) so Believers are brought up at the same School, that their haughtiness may
be laid, their dullness rouzed and helped, and they taught obedience. The 2d
place and reason is, in Deuteronomy. 8.2, 3. Where Moses gives this for a reason, why
the Lord kept Israel so long in the wilderness, even that he might humble
them, and prove them, and know what was in their heart, etc. Where first, we
see that the design of afflictions is to humble Gods People; whilst all things
go well with them they are ready to be puffed up, and to think well of
themselves, and of their duties, but God brings on crosses to put them upon a
search, and to make a discovery to them of their sin, and so lays their pride,
and in this respect there is a necessity of affliction. 2ly. That all
afflictions come to prove the People of God, and to try what is in their heart;
not so, but that God knows exactly what is in their heart, but he will needs
have them to know it also; Believers are ready to say in their prosperity, (as
David did, Psalm. 35.) We shall never be moved; and never to think of being
shaken; but God causes, or permits a Cross-wind to blow, and then somewhat
comes whereof they did not think, and makes them change their tune, and say,
Thou hide thy face, and I was troubled; And this is both profitable, and
needful that they may know that they are not so stable, and immovable as they
imagined. 3ly. That they may know, That man lives not by bread only, but by
every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God; That is, That man lives not
so much by outward means, and second causes, as by Gods blessing; which is
another use and end of afflictions, even to bring his People off from leaning
to second causes and means, to a more immediate dependence on God himself; and
to make them look beyond plowing, sowing, harvest, labor, our own diligence,
pains, skill, prudent foresight, and fore-casting, care and dexterous
management, for through-bearing, direction, guiding, and provision in all
things they stand in need of; for if prosperity went always along with the
Duty, men would readily be by assed, and inclined to follow duty for wrong
ends; therefore the Lord will have it otherwise, that it may be known who they
are that follow him, for prosperity attending duty, and who for the right end.
The 3d and last place, (containing another reason) which I shall name, is if
that which we have, Romans 5.3. We glory in tribulation, knowing that tribulation
works patience, etc. We are not troubled at afflictions (as if he said)
because we get so much good of them; and what is that good? Tribulation draws
forth Grace into exercise, and makes it to grow, which did before much
languish, and in a manner lie by; there are several Graces in a Christian, that
are not (to say so) in such a capacity of acting, and being exercised, as when
they are under the Cross; what has patience to do, that has not affliction,
and tribulation to try and exercise it? or how shall experience grow without
patience? and how shall hope grow strong and shine, where there is little or no
experience? therefore Tribulation comes and works Patience, and Patience
Experience, and Experience Hope; Tribulation not only affords occasion and
matter to Patience, but through Gods blessing works it, by tameing the Person,
bringing low the height and haughtiness of his Spirit, and making him put his
mouth in the dust; (and this is one good that comes by afflictions) and
Patience again brings forth experience, when a man is brought to a suffering
Lot, and by suffering calmed, and meekned, he gets many experiences of Gods
love, tender care, and vigilant providence; that he would rather have than want
his sufferings; he gets the experience of Gods faithfulness, in making good his
Promises, in sustaining and bearing through under suffering; and as many
troubles as he has, he gets as many out-gates, neither would he want such
sweet experience, whatever his Crosses may be, that he falls under; and this is
a Second Good that comes by affliction; a Third Good is, that experience brings
forth hope; For when Christians are accustomed to afflictions, and find the
good of them, and get fresh experience of Gods faithfulness, and love under
them, they scar not so much at them; for the blessed out-gates that they have
gotten before, give them ground to hope for more; and this makes them
pleasantly, cheerfully, and courageously to march through all their Af^^ictions
and Tribulations.

The First Use serves, to discover the great unsuitableness of our practice to
this Truth; There is not any Truth less controverted, nor more confirmed, How
comes it then to pass, that we look upon the Cross, especially when i^ comes
for Duty, as it were a strange and uncouth thing, whereof we had never heard
before, or, as if God had oblidged himself to keep the Cross from of us? Think
it not strange (says the Apostle 1 Pet. 4.12.) concerning the fiery trial, as
if some strange thing happened unto you; O! do not think your selves exempted
from, or set quite without the reach of any Trial, Affliction, or Tribulation
that any of the People of God have met with before you, or in your time.

The 2d. Use serves, to reprove our too great averseness from, and starting at
Trials, Crosses, Afflictions, and Tribulations, Let us put our selves to it,
and enquire how these two can stand together, to wit, the certainty of their
suffering persecution, that will live Godly, and our fancieing that a godly
man, not only may, but must be free of persecution? 2ly. if it be a certain
truth, that the People of God must enter into his kingdom through much
Tribulation,, how comes it to be so little believed, and that so very few are
found laying their account with it in particular? Is not this undenyably
evident, by so much sinfully distempering fear of it, and seeking anxiously,
and unwarrantably to shift and stave it off ere it come, by thinking shame of
it, and freting under it, when it comes, and by impatient longing to be freed
from it? alas, these are shread and sad evidences, that it is not really and
thoroughly believed, that the kingdom of God must needs be entered into through
much tribulation.

The 3d. Use serves, to provock us to wonder, that seeing Christ thus bargans
and capitulats with all his followers, without exception, that they take up
their cross daily and follow him, through the straitest and darkest steps of
trouble; we are so little actually put to it, for every day that we are free of
some great Cross, is more than condition, and speaks Christ (to say so) to be
better than his word; every day of such freedom lays a new obligation on us,
to be thankful, and to bear our little Crosses the more patiently; to this
purpose, the Apostle be speaks the Christian Hebrews, Chap. 12.4. Ye have not
yet resisted unto blood, in striving against sin; It was blessed Jesus his lot,
and of multitude of his Martyrs to suffer to Blood and Death; should we then,
because of our little petty suffering, fret and be anxious? It Is both our sin
and shame, it is but very little that we have yet suffered in comparison of what
we should lay our account with, and in comparison with what others have
suffered; why then is there so much un-warrantable snifting of suffering, and
so much repineing and grudging under it, as if God dealt more hardly with us
than with others?

The 4th. Use serves for warning, That since laying account with suffering is
so necessary, ye would not think of getting it shifted, going about too
diligently, by carnal wiles to shift, becomes a snare to many; let never your
selves think, that ye can live godly in Christ Jesus, and escape all suffering
and persecution; if ye shift Christ's Cross sinfully, ye will bring Christ's
curse on you; This is the great guilt of the body of our Land, and of this
Place, that many having in a manner, laid by the Cross of Christ, dare hazard
on the curse of Christ without dread of it; This will be found to be a foolish
exchange, it is far better, without all doubt, to follow Christ with the Cross,
than to meet him and the Curse; they will never repent it, who have chosen
affliction rather than Sin, and to follow Christ with the Cross rather than to
comply with any sinful course or practice; O! how dreadful will it be to all
them (under whatsoever specious and plausable like pretenses they may do it)
that have by refusing to follow Christ, bearing his Cross, run themselves into
the danger of his Curse, the Lord save us from such desperate folly and madness.

The 5th. and Last Use (which may be the First Doctrine, from the Second part
of the Text, to wit, the Duty called for from Christ's followers, which is, to
take up their Cross) is. That since there are none who ingadge to be followers
of Christ, but must resolve before hand, on whatsoever difficulties they may
meet with in the way; and since the Cross is so certain, they would not
unsuitably strive against it, but prepare for to take it up, and carry it after
him; what man, (says our Lord, Luke 14.) going to build a house, sits not down
first to count the cost; or, what king going to make war with another King,
sits not down first, to consult, if he be able to meet with him, etc. Where his
Scope is so obviously to this purpose, that we need not say any thing more
particularly to that notable passage; The reason of the Doctrine is, because
not only is the Cross necessary, and unavoidable, but also because those are so
foolish, as not to prepare for it before it come, will very readily be
surprised with it, when it comes; if they be not by such previous, serious
forecast and resolution at a point, established, and ready armed to encounter
the Cross, when it marches up furiously against them, they will be taken at a
great disadvantage, and will not be able to stand it out, but will readily run,
and be routed; hence it is, that in a day of trial, so many miscarry, and fall
off. If it be here inquired what I mean, by preparing for the Cross ere it
come? Ye may take it in these few directions; the First whereof is, That we
would endeavor to have our interest in Christ clear, otherwise it is hardly
possible that we can endure the Cross; hence it is, that the Apostle bespeaks
the Christian Hebrews, Chap. 10. v. 34. Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your
goods, knowing in your selves, that ye have in heaven a better and enduring
substance; this was one main ground, on which they did so cheerfully suffer the
spoiling of their goods; the suitably endeavored certainty of the one greatly
facilitats the suffering of the other. 2ly. We would through Grace study to
carry denyedly, in reference to all earthly enjoyments and comforts; we would,
as the Apostle exhorts, 1 Cor. 7. v. 31. Use the world as not abusing it; We
would so use all things in the world, that we may not be brought under the
power of any of them, holding a loose grip of them all, ready to forego our
hold of Wife, Children, Houses, Lands, Money, even of all Relations, and
Enjoyments, as if they were none of ours, when the Lords calls to it; In a
word, we would seek to be crucified with Christ, and to have the world
crucified to us, and our selves crucified to the world, and weaned from it; a
notable preparation for bearing the Cross. 3ly. We would study to be much taken
up with the seriou^ thoughts of things not seen, to come, and eternal, to admit
those things to have great weight with us, and to be much conversant with them,
even to have our hearts and our conversations in heaven; This was it that
greatly influenced Moses refusal to be called the Son of Pharaohs daughter, and
his choice of a share of the People of God their affliction, even the respect
that he had to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. And the Apostle
Paul gives this as a reason why he made so light account of affliction, 2 Cor.
4. While (says he) we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things
that are not seen, for the things that are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal; Few serious and stayed thoughts of Heaven,
little delightful dwelling in the contemplation of the approaching full
manifestation of the glorious privileges of the Sons of God, with much minding
of earthly things and grovelling in the earth, make the Cross seem very
terrible, and even intolerable; whereas heavenly mindedness, and much looking
at things unseen and eternal, notably ward off the dint of the blows of
afflictions, that they do not much get in on the heart, to divert from
following of Christ, by anxious and vexatious thoughts about them. 4ly. We
would study to be much in forecasting of, and in acquainting our selves with
the saddest difficulties ere they come; not looking at our selves, as exeemed
from the heaviest and most sadly circumstantiated afflictions that any of Gods
People have met with; Thus shall that which is less be the better born, unjust
shame and reproach will not be thought so very much of, neither will there be
such startling at a cross word, nay, not at Bonds and Imprisonment, and
spoiling of Goods, when we have laid our account in our thoughts to meet with
the greatest afflictions: God has hitherto kept the greatest part of us from
any very considerable personal Trials, and Tribulations, and we are ready to
look at these as being quite worn out of use; but we would bring them near, and
habituat our selves in our thoughts to them, and by Christian bearing lesser
ones, be fitting our selves against the coming of the great Cross and Trial; if
we cannot endure little petty Trials, such as a frown, a check, or a word of
reproof from others, how will we behave, when it comes to greater Sufferings if
the running with Footmen weary us, how will we be able to contend with Horses?
if we faint in the land of peace, what will we do, when it comes to the
flowings of Jordan? 2ly. When many of you are upon every trifling occasion,
chideing; jangling and brauling in your Families, and every small matter awakens
Passion; and when we are not learning Christianly to bear the smallest things,
how can we expect to be able to bear the greatest Crosses? It were very
desirable, that we made it our study to accustom our selves daily to bear our
little Crosses suitably; when injuries are offered to us, though we be not
called to be outterly senseless under them, yet we would learn to carry them
with Christian meekness, and moderation; but when men allow themselves in their
Passion, and Revenge, because of Injuries do^ them, and proudly scorn and
disdain to take (...) affront, this teaches proud Self a habitual wa^ of
carrying thus on every occasion, and mightil^ unfits for future greater Trials.

From the Duty that a follower of Christ is called to. Observe. 2dly. That the
followers of Christ would heartily welcome, and cheerfully submit unt^ the
cross that they may meet with for his sake, an^ on his account: Let him take up
his cross, Insinuats That he is not to reason or dispute against, no^ sinfully
to shift it, neither is he reluctantly to be drawn and dragged to it, but to
take it up w^llingly and pleasantly (when called to it) and when it is taken
on, to carry it contentedly and cheerfully, without all grudging, fretting, or
repining: There are several things that do both confirm and press this point.
As 1. The great good that comes by willing, ready and cheerful taking up, and
bearing of Christ's Cross, such as the trial and improvement of Graces,
furthered conformity to Christ, access to glorify him, much of the Spirit of
God, and of Glory resting on the Sufferer, the honest Sufferer for Christ, even
all the peaceable fruits of Righteousness, that afterward wait on them that are
exercised thereby; It Is true, no affliction is for the present joyous, but
grievous, and even the Believer in Christ may find difficulty, yea, not only
so, but much aversness, and resistance from the unrenewed part, but the
regenerat part makes him patiently and pleasantly to stoup; Thus the Lord says
of Peter, That he should be carried whither he would not; There was in him not
only a purely natural aversion from Suffering, (such was in blessed jesus
himself, without any the least sinful discomposure) but somewhat culpably so,
through ^he remainder of indwelling Corruption, but the regenerat part, through
assisting Grace prevailled, so that he glorified God by his Suffering of a
violent Death. A 2d. Thing that confirms, and presses this, is, not only the
great good and benefit that comes to us by it, which makes Paul to glory in
the midst of tribulations and James to exhort Christians, to count it all joy
when they fall into diverse tentations; but also the great and honorable
privilege that is in being counted worthy to suffer for his name, rejoice
(says Peter) in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings: And if we
consider a little more particularly, we will find, that there are a great many
privileges, that wait honest and cheerful Sufferings for Christ, beside all
the good of it. As namely 1. When God puts the honor on some to be
instrumental in high and honorable pieces of service to him, particularly in
suffering for him, which is most honorable; giving them not only to believe in
Christ, but also to suffer for his sake, (as it is, Philip. 1.29. Where there
is an observable gradation) all Believers have not this honor. 2dly. There is
a measure of mystical Christ's Sufferings to be filled up; For as Christ is not
complete without his body, the Church, so his Sufferings in that respect are
not complete till that appointed measure be filled up. So, Col. 1, 24.
Believers are said, to fill up what is behind of the sufferings of Christ
mystical, and there is thereby a great privilege, and piece of honor put upon
them; It Is true, their Sufferings are neither meritorious nor satisfactory to
Divine Justice that is already done to their hand, it being the peculiar and
incommunicable privilege of the personal sufferings of Christ, but to be
joined with him in the same work, in order to the sam^ general end, viz. The
glorifying of God, is, doubtless a great honor. A 3d. Privilege is, that
Believers Sufferings for Christ make way according to Gods disposal, and order
of things, for more eminent degrees of Glory, Matthew. 5.11.12. It Is true, they
merit none, yet he has in his wisdom ordered that connection, and promised,
that if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him; and if we suffer with
him, that we shall also be glorified together with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. Romans 8.17.
And says the Lord to his Disciples, Luke 22.28, 29. To this purpose, Ye are
they that have continued with me in my tentations, and I appoint unto you a
kingdom, etc. It is not indeed by way of merit, but by way of connection, that
much Suffering is recompensed with much Glory: It Is a righteous thing with God
(says the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. to render tribulation to them that trouble
you, and to you that are troubled rest with us; There is a sort of
Righteousness, in making much Suffering for Christ to be followed with much
Glory, so that though the Saints righteousness, be a righteousness of Grace,
yet there is somewhat in Gods Righteousness, and equal, or suitable way of
dealing, that men's out great Glory, according to great Sufferings for Christ. A
4th Privilege is, more liveliness in Duties, more immediate access to God under
the Cross, a greater nearness to him, and greater manifestations of of his
comforting presence under Suffering for Christ, then is ordinarily attained unto
otherwise; So much is declared by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye be reprached
for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of God, and of G^^^y
rests upon you. A 5th Privilege is, That Sufferers for Christ are someway
equalled to the most eminent Saints, Prophets and Apostles, that have gone
before them; To this purpose, says our Lord to his Disciples, Matthew. 5. v. 11,
12. Blessed are ye when men shall revile, and persecute you; for so did they
persecut the Prophets that were before you; And to be dealt with as all the
great men of God, and the Prophets before us were, and to be put in the same
rank, roll, and catalogue with them, is no small Privilege, nor is it any
little honor, for such poor creatures as we are, to be thus highly ranked, and
classed. There is a 3d thing that confirms, and presses the Point, and that
is, the Fountain whence this willing taking up, and cheerful bearing of Christ's
Cross flows, which is, the believing contemplation, and consideration of the
Love of God in Christ, of the faithfulness of his Promise, and Covenant, and of
his tender Fatherly care, and pity toward his Children; Ye have forgotten,
(says the Apostle) Heb. 12.5. the exhortation that speaks to you, as to
Children; My son, despise not thou the chastning of the Lord, neither faint
when thou art rebuked of him. (Importing, that they had forgotten the nature of
affliction, and of the relation that they stood in to God, when they fainted
under the Cross,) For whom the Lord loves, he corrects, and chastneth every
son whom he receives, and if ye endure chastisments, ye are dealt with as
Sons, etc. As if he had said, Gods ch^stning puts this honor upon you in that,
as it flows from his special Love, so it declares you to be his Sons; all your
chastisements are effects of his Fatherly Love to you, and of his tender care
of you, and by this Character he d^fferenceth you from bastards.

The First Use serves, to exhort, stir up, and provock all Christ's Followers,
sweetly to take on, and cheerfully to bear the Cross of Christ, when he calls
to it, and lays it on; We would rejoice, and be exceeding glad, and count it
all joy; we would rejoice, in as much as we are made partakers of the
sufferings of Christ, as our Lord, and his Apostles James and Peter from him
exhorts us: Ah! how far are we removed from this in our practice? we should
glory in tribulation, and glorify God in the fires, yea, should make our Cross
for Christ a great ground of our cheerfulness and joy; not that we would have
Christians either to be rash and hasty in drawing on Suffering on themselves,
even in a good cause, or to be carnal, vain, conceity and proud under it; but
when the Lord calls us to it, we would readily stoup to take on his Cross, and
carry it handsomely and cheerfully, that we may commend, and give a good word to
the Cross of Christ to others, that they may know the exhortations to
Sufferings this way, and the promise made to honest Sufferers are not in vain,
that they may be encouraged to adventure on Suffering for Christ when he calls
to it, in hope of being made, to experience, somewhat of the same allowance for
^eir honorable through-bearing.

The 2d. Use serves to reprove, not only our ^suitable shifting of the Cross,
but also our ^avie and heartless bearing of it, when God ^yes it on; It may be,
when we cannot possibly ^et it shifted without gross and palpable guilt, ^e
will stoup, as it may be, to take it on, but ^e unwilling to bear it far, and
are ready to ^eary greatly of it; It Is true (as I said) we ^ould not be
culpably accessory to the bringing (...) it on our selves, but when he lays it
on, we ^ould not show such aversion from it, neither ^ould we account it to be
so heavy and uneasy a ^oke, nor walk with so much discouragement under it, as
if it were not the honorable Cross (...) precious Jesus Christ, and as if
there were no ^romise of an out-gate from it, nor of assistance (...) bear it;
or, as if our life consisted in the a^undance of these outward things; this is
^ertainly exceeding blameworthy, and very un^ecoming the followers of Jesus
Christ.

The 3d Use serves to teach us, not to tie our ^omfort to an outward prosperous
condition in ^he World; nor to be anxious, when our prospe^ity is turned to
adversity; but to labor to be ^lear in our Duty, and to walk evenly in
follow^ng of Christ, not being very solicitous what we may meet with, in
following him; for if we consider rightly, we will find, that men's sinful
^hifting of the Cross, and their earkingly care^ull way of walking under it, is
that which hightheth the difficulty of it, and makes it to become doubly a
Cross; whereas, if there were a Christian resolution before hand to take it on,
and a kindly stouping to it, when it comes; (...) would blunt the sharp edge of
the Cross, lighten it, and make it easily portable: Much more might be said, in
prosecut^ng of this Use, which we will not now insist in, only consider well,
an^ lay due weight on our Lords words, especially when the Cross is come to our
door; If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, take up hi^ cross
and follow me; and the Lord himself graciously enable us to do so.

SERMON VII
Matthew. 16. Verse 24. Then said Jesus to his di^ciples, If any man will come
after me, let hi^ deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
THE bussiness of following Christ aright, is one of the greatest, and gravest,
of the most concerning, and highly momentuous bussinesses in the World, in
comparison with which, all others are but bussinesses in the By; which our Lord
knowing infallibly well, would have all His Disciples to know it also, and to
acknowledge it; and therefore insists the more in it, holding forth the
indispensablie requisite qualifications of his followers, viz. That they must
deny themselves, and take up their cross, which two qualify, fit, and prompt
for the third, to wit, following of him.

We spoke somewhat of taking up the Cross, as it holds forth the case that
Christ's followers are in, ordinarily in the World, and it is to have the Cross,
some one sad affliction, or another, where we considered it, as a Duty that
they are called to; being commanded to take it up, when they meet with it, not
to shift it, but to stoup pleasantly to the taking of it on, and to bear it
cheerfully after him; Now ere we come to speak of the Uses, that Christ aims at
in all this; we would take notice of that word ^ast in, not sure ^y guess, but
purposly, His Cross; whereby it ^eems, he puts a difference betwixt the common
afflictions of all, and the more particular afflictions of this and that
Believer; as if he had said, it is not enough, that Believers should submit to
afflictions in common, but they must submit to ^hese particular afflictions
that are theirs, or shaped out to them in particular, this, and that, and ^he
other; every Believer has his own particular affliction, or cross, beside that
which is common to all, which he is called to submit unto and take on, Whence
Observe, That these who would follow Christ aright, must not pitch upon waill,
or make choice of their own Cross, but submit unto that Cross that is
particularly carved out for them, and allotted to them; Which leads us to touch
on these two things; one whereof is, that beside the lot which all Believers
have in common, under public calamities, every Believer, and Follower of
Christ has his own Cross, particularly shaped out for him; whether it be a
distinct particular Cross, or that which is common and public but accompanied
with some peculiar circumstances, in reference to him; The other is, That the
Believer in Jesus Christ, should welcome the Cross, as it is circumstantiated
to him, and as it is his particular Cross; we need not speak of the first of
these distinctly by it self, it being obviously employed in the Second Our Lords
words are clear to this purpose, Matthew 23.4. Behold, I send unto you wise men,
and Prophets, and some of them ye shall kill, and crucify some of them ye shall
scourge in your Synagogues and persecute them from city to city; Where he
speaks of several sorts of Crosses, that men approven of God shall meet with,
and which the^ must take up, and carry after him, as he is pleased to carve
them out to them; the experience o^ all the Lords People, in all Ages, and
times further clears, and makes it out; there are non^ of the Saints who have
not had their own Cross; there have been some, who have been crucified, and
killed, some scourged, and others persecuted from city to city, etc. Abel,
Abraham, Moses, David, Job, Jeremiah, and the rest had all the Cross, yet was
there something in ones Cross that was not in another; So Heb. 11.36, 37, 38.
Where the account of Believers Sufferings is summed up, it is said, That some
had trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and
imprisonment, they were stoned, saw^ asunder, etc. Some had one sort of trial,
some another, as the wisdom of God thought meet to allot to them: we need not
here descend to particulars, some are crossed in the spoiling of their Goods,
some in their Children, some have their Children taken from them by Death, some
have them preserved alive to be a cross to them, some have crosses in their own
Persons, some in their Families, some are under poverty and want, some are
under reproach and contempt, and so forth: If ye would have some reasons of
this Point, ye may take these shortly. The First whereof may be drawn from Gods
infinite Wisdom, and absolute Soveraignity, he thinks meet that it should be so;
as the Potter has power over the clay, to put it in what form or shape he
will, much more has he, the great God, who is former of all things, power over
his own creatures, to exercise, and handle them as he thinks good; to which
purpose there is much ^xcellently discoursed in the Book of Job; He think fit
to exercise one Person this way, and ano her that way, and who may say to him,
what do thou? he is not ^ound to give a reason of his acti^^s. 2ly. There
are some reasons relating to us, and our condition, and to the end that God
has before him, in this variety, which show, that it is good it should be so:
As 1. There must be a suitableness betwixt the Cross and the Person, every
Believer is not in a like case, and therefore there is reason, that there be
some difference among them, in respect of their Crosses; they have their
several Idols, and these require several and suitable Crosses, to bring, and
keep them down; as for instance, when ones predominant is Pride, and Self
conceit, he readily so disposes, that contempt and reproach are made to meet
such a man, as most suitable to beat down that Idol; If his Idol be
covetousness, he can, and oftentimes does make Riches take wings and flee away,
or he cankereth, and imbittereth them, some one way or another; If the Idol be
strength of body, he readily by pain, or sickness lays him low, and on his
back; or, if the Persons Idol be his Children, (as its very probable Absalom
was David's) he readily either removes them by Death, or blasts all expectation
conceived (...) them, so that they become the greatest instruments of their
trouble and grief; This great an^ Infinitely skilful Physician gives not the
same Po^tion to all his diseased Patients, but varieth it according to the
nature of the disease, and constitut^on of the several Persons. 2ly There must
be a sui^ableness betwixt the Cross, and Gods end; if hi^ end be a trial of the
Person, that will be a try^^ to one which will not be so to another; and as h^
has several sorts of Persons, so he has severa^ Graces to try; which requires
several sorts o^ Crosses, Some would think but little of the wan^ of wealth, if
they had their health, therefore h^ exercises them with sickness, and
infirmity o^ body; others could much submit to the want o^ both, but cannot
endure to have their name rubbed on, and he will needs have that to be their
trial; if one man's exercise were but just the same exercise of another, he
would think the less of it: and therefore in reference to all these it is very
suitable and congruous to the Follower^ of Christ, that they submit to their
own Cross, to the Cross that is carved out to them in partiticular; sweetly to
submit to the present Cross and as it is circumstantiated, is the present duty;
therefore our Lord Jesus says, The cup that my Father has given me, shall I
not drink it? He has a cup mixed and prepared to him peculiarly, which he
takes and drinks out pleasantly; as it is every Believers duty, not only to
resolve in the general, to take on the Cross, but also to take on his Cross in
particular, to drink the cup mixed with such and such ingredients, suited to
them, and put in their hand, as their trial. ^ly. There is a suitableness
betwixt the Cross, and the good that the Lord intends thereby to ^he Believer,
a suitableness betwixt the Physic and the Disease; the Plaster and the Wound
de^igned to be cured and healed: It is therefore ^ery absurd to think, or say,
any cross but this, ^ven as absurdly unreasonable, as it would be for (...)
sick man to say, If I had gotten the Pills, or Potion that such another Person
got, I could have digested it, would have been the better of ^t, but I cannot
away with this bitter, and very ^npleasant one; Whereas the physic that the
other Person got, would have done thee no good ^or suited to thy Disease; for
the good of the Physic lies in this, that it is exactly suited to ^he disease
whereof thou art Sick.

The Use of it Serves to teach us, not to half our submission to the Cross, nor
to think a submission to the Cross in general will do the turn; some are ready
to say, that they would submit to any thing but this; or, this is a thing that
they cannot endure; but if it were not a Cross of that sadly exercising nature,
it would not suit your condition; Therefore there would be 1. A submission to
the kind of the Cross, and as it is circumstantiated; whether it be a Cross on
our Body, Goods, Name, Children, Husband, Wife, etc. Whether it be a Cross that
we have more ease under, or a Cross that does continually trouble us. 2ly.
There would also be a submission to the time of the coming on of the Cross, or
to the time whence it bears date; one will be ready to say, I could submit to
this Cross, but its come upon me unseasonably, when as, if all things were well
known, and considered, it wo^ be found to come very seasonably. 3ly. The would
be submission to the continuance of t^ Cross and affliction, whether for a day,
mone^ or a year, or throughout thy whole lifetime, it were even from thy youth
up, to thy dyt day, there must be a submission to Gods ter^ day, and date of
expiration. 4ly. The^ would be submission to the measure and degr^ of it,
wh^tever measure or height God is pleas^ to bring our affliction and Cross
unto, it must (...) submitted to, for it has probably come to greater measure,
and a higher degree in man of the Saints before us, who were sawn asund^
stoned, slain with the sword, who wandered abo^ in sheeps-skins, and
goats-skins, being destitu^ afflicted, tormented. Finally, There would (...)
submission, as to the Parties or Persons from whom it comes more immediately;
Some think, and will be ready to say, that they could endure a Cross, but think
it hard, and intole^able to endure it, from such and such Person^ from such and
such Instruments, as from Hu^band, or Wife, Parent, or Child, Brother, o^
Sister, Kinsman or Friend, etc. But from whomsoever it comes, whether from
Friends or Fo^^ from Country men, or Strangers, from False brethren, or from
He^thens, it must be submitted unto; for herein the^e is nothing strange and
submission, in this respect, is a part of ou^ beautiful conformity, to the
great Pattern, ou^ blessed Lord Jesus, whose cross, affliction, and trial it
was, to have Heaven, and Earth, and Hell, the Gentiles, and People of the Jews,
and these that did eat bread at his own table, combyning against him: very
readily, and ordinarily, when we dare not fret at the Cross, in the general, or
as to the substance of it (to speak so) we will pitch on some circumstance or
particular of it, and carp at that; but it is not right, and suitable
submission, which is not to the Cross, as so circumstantiated, and suited to
our particular condition.

The 2d Use Serves, for trial of our submission; right and kindly submission is
universal, and absolute, and teaches us to present a blank to God, and to
allow him to put in, or write down, what Cross he thinks good, as to the
matter, and manner of it, the time of it is coming, the continuance of it, the
measure or degree, the Parties and Instruments from whom, and all the other
circumstances of it.

The 3d Use Serves, for discovery, and reproof; if we examine our selves
narrowly, and impartially by this, it will be found, that there is much which
we account, and call submission, that is not worthy that name; O! how sadly
does it reprove the practice of many of us, who, if not in whole, yet in part
presume to offer, at the carving out of our own condition, and cross to God,
and do not sweetly submit to his carving of it out to us; quarrelling Gods
wisdom, as if this and that were not rightly done, reflecting on his skill, as
if he had not taken up our disease ^right, or had not suited the cure unto it;
God has thought good, not only to afflict Scotland, but in such a manner, and
measure, and by such instruments, overturning Church and State, pouring
contempt and reproach upon us, at home, and abroad, opening all mouths against
us, and redacting us to slavery and bondage; It is this, that the People of God
are called to submit unto, in all it is sad circumstances, and n^ to fret at
such a dispensation, nor to take up a^^ prejudice at holiness, because of it,
nor to suff^ our passions sinfully to rise against instruments and wherein it
is otherwi^e with us, we are ce^tainly reproof worthy.

From this, and the former Doctrine, concer^ing cheerful bearing the Cross of
Christ, some will be ready to Obj ct, and say, we would no^ care to take on
any, or to encounter any difficulti^ if we knew it were Christ's Cross; Yea, we
would think it an honor to suffer, if it were on the account of giv^ng a
testimony to him; but it our great doubt, that any Cross we are under cannot be
called Christ's Cross; and when w^ cannot discern it to be of that nature, we
ca^ neither have that sweet peace, in submitting t^ it, nor can we with that
cheerfulness bear it (...) becomes: To which I Answer. 1. Christ's Cro^ consists
not always in the measure of the afflict on that thou indurest; it may be a
part of Christ Cross, when it is but a word of reproach, a tau^ or mock, that
thou suffers; Therefore it is said Gal. 4.29. He that was born after the flesh
pe^secuted him that was born after the spirit, etc. No^ it is clear from Genesis
21.9. That this persecution was Ishmaels mocking of Isaac; and Heb. 11.3^ Some
of these worthies had trial of cruel mockings: There is by the way a deceit
that would be taken heed to here; some flatter themselves so far, as to think
that they would lay dow^ their life for a Testimony to Christ, who y^^ cannot
abide a reproach or mock; but is it likely they would suffer the loss of Life
for Christ who cannot endure to be called Hypocrites, o^ to be reproached, or
ill-spoken of unjustly, (...) seditious Persons, and troublers of Israel? But
^o hold closs by our point in hand; even that would be looked upon, as a part
of suffering for Christ, and so a part of his Cross; which in the first rise of
it is for him, or for something of his work in thee; were it but a mock, or a
reproachful word betwixt Man and Wise, Parent and Child, Child and Child,
Servant and Servant, Neighbor and Neighbor, when somewhat of God in the
Person draws out the reproach, it is a part of Christ's Cross. 2ly. We would not
always limit suffering for Christ to the main, and fundamental things of the
Gospel, (for which Christians think, if they were called to suffer, they would
be cheerful in their Sufferings) but though they be things less thought of, and
comparatively of less moment indeed, if it be a point of real Truth, or Duty,
It is Suffering for Christ, when we are called to Suffer on that account; John
the Baptist did not Suffer for the Gospel, or for any great Gospel Truth
strictly taken, but for a reproof given to Herod, for saying, that it was not
lawful for him to have his brothers wife, for bearing witness to a point of
truth concerning what was moral; and yet doubtless he was a sharer of Christ's
Sufferings in that particular; There is not in some respect, a more and a less
in the matter of Duty, and in the matter of Truth, or in re^pect of Suffering
on the account of, or for Truth; but if it be indeed Duty, or Truth, it is to
be Suffered for, and is as w^ll approven of God, and has a comfortable Out
gate, as well as Suffering for that, which simply considered, is of far greater
moment, and this comparatively but of little; This is clear in the example of
Moses who would not leave a hoove behind him; (...) Daniel, who would not shut
his windows; an^ in Mordecai, who would not bow the knee (...) Haman; all which
many would have thought w^ little to be stuck at, and far less to hazard all o^
yet having found these things to be Duties t^ which they were in Conscience
oblidged, the^ discerned no such distinction in the command (...) God, betwixt
less and more, in the matter o^ Duty, so as to allow them to abandon, and d^ny
the lesser more than the greater; nothing (...) too little to suffer for, that
God has commanded 3ly. It is not only Christ's Cross, when we Suffe^ immediately
for duty to him; but also, when we Suffer for Duty to men, if it be commanded
by him; Suffering for a Duty of the Secon^ Table of the Law, is Suffering for
Christ, as we^^ as Suffering for Duties of the First Table; an^ not, as many
think, that it is only Suffering for Christ, when it relates to Duties of the
first Table; A Christian Child, no doubt, may Suffer, for performing, or for
not neglecting Duty to his Father, and so for Christ; and the Apostle speaking
to Christian Servants, 1 Pet. 2.19. Tells them, If ye endure grief, suffering
wrongfullie, for conscience toward God, it is thankworthie, and Chap. 3.14. He
says to all, If ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye; Whatever be a
man's Duty, it has the promise of happiness, whether it be a Duty rela^ing to
the First, or to the Second Table, when he Suffers for it; and so it is
suffering some way for Christ. 4ly. We would not limit Suffering for Christ to
a direct Suffering for him, as when the quarrel, opposition, or persecution is
stated down right on his account, or for his sake; for there is an indirect
Suffering for Christ; as when men are ashamed ^o afflict, or persecute directly
and expre^sly for Christ's sake, or for any thing of Christ, that appears in
such a Person, or Persons, they pretend some other ground of quarrel, but still
from a secret Heart-picque and prejudice at some what of Christ in them; as it
may be, they will call them seditious, unclean, intemperat, and the like, and
under that disguise put upon them, persecute them, blast their reputation, and
defame them; while in the mean time, the true and principal, if not the alone
ground of the quarrel is, a malicious hatred of somewhat (as I said) of God
discovered to be in the Person or Persons, and not hatred of the sin, wherewith
they reproach them; otherwise they would hate that sin in themselves and in
others, which yet they do not; a plain evidence, that the Persons either
supposed, or real Sin, is not the ground of the quarrel, however pretended, but
that they reproach them with it on a malicious design, thereby to obscure, and
cry down the good that is in them; such men will not readily say, this or that
man is a godly man, and therefore he must suffer, but he is this, and that and
the other odious thing, and therefore away with him, he is not worthy to live,
as they said of Jeremiah; and how often were the Apostles persecuted under the
false pretex^ of their being turners of ^he World up side-down? and that horrid
and hellish things were most falsely charged by persecuting Pagans, on the
Primitive Christians, that under that disguise they might the more freely
persecute them? yet all these were for Christ, 5ly. We would not limit
sufferings for Christ, to things simply lawful, or unlawful, for it may be,
sometimes for things indifferent in their own nature, which y^ being so and so
circumstantiated to us, may dra^ on Suffering; and these Sufferings may be
Suffe^ings for Christ; a thing may be indifferent, an^ lawful to some, which
to others stated under such and such circumstances may be accounted^ receding
from some part of a just Testimony, o^ a refusing to give a Testimony; even
though the matter be not (as I said) such in it self, an^ in it is own nature,
yet it may be so circumstantiated to some Persons, as it may be liable to tha^
construction, if they shall recede from, or for bear it; as in the example of
Daniel, who suffers for opening his windows, which was a thin^ indifferent in
it self, and not essential to his wor^shiping of God; but having used to open
his windows, and pray toward Jerusalem before, and now being brought on the
Stage, and a Decre^ having gone forth from the King, that none should put up a
Petition to any God or man, bu^ to the King only, for so many days, he finds
himself bound in Conscience, and that on very just ground, to do as he had wont
to do before, and that on the manifest hazard of his life, least his malicious
enemies should have it to say, that he receded from his Duty, and that he
thought more shame now, or was more afraid now, than^ before to worship the
true God. 6ly. We would not limit Sufferings for Christ, to wrongs and injuries
that come at us mediatly, by evil men, as the instruments; for the Cross may
sometimes come immediately from the hand of God, as Pain, Sickness, Scarcity,
Want, etc. may come that way, and we can blame no instruments for them, and
they may be casual and accidental, as to us (though nothing be so in respect of
Divine Providence) yet even these may ^e Sufferings for Christ, though not in
respect of ^he matter, yet in respect of the manner, viz. When they are
christianly submitted to, and ^atiently born, with respect to Christ's honor,
and the Soveraignity of God, which so overaweth, and keeps down our
Corruption, that ^ave dar not fret nor repine under Gods hand; when ordinary
Crosses are thus born, they come in amongst the Sufferings for Christ;
Therefore Paul reckoning up his Sufferings, 2 Cor. 11. He brings in his
Ship-wracks, and other Crosses in his voyages by Sea, in the prosecution of his
calling, his hunger, and thirst, etc. So that, even in these, Christains may
come in to share of the consolation that flows from patient bearing of the
Cross, and have them reckoned to them as Crosses for Christ in some respect,
because the same principle of Love that puts them to bear the Cross, that comes
on them directly for Christ, and the Gospels sake, makes them bear these other
Afflictions, and they walk by the same Rule, and have the same End before them
in them, that they have under direct and more proper Sufferings for Christ;
therefore they may some way partake of the same name; and when Scripture speaks
of the Crosses of Gods People, and of their being chastened every morning, it
secludes not this immediate sort of Suffering from Gods own hand, more than that
which is mediat, by the intervention of Instruments, from coming into the
account, and reckoning of Sufferings for Christ; which is not a little
comfortable.

But 2dly. Some will Object, and say, we would have peace, if we knew when we
are called to Suffer for Christ, but we know not when or whether we be called
in this, and that part^cular to Suffer; this is an Objection that uses t^ be
made, and a question that uses to be moved and debated, more especially, by
such as have no great mind to Suffer; If it be asked then when are Christians
called to Suffer? We Answer, it Is beside our scope and design, nor is (...)
easy, if at all possible to assign particular, an^ exact Rules of trial and
direction in all the emergent cases, wherein Christians may be called to
Suffer; These being so ^ery many, and so various, there being withal so much
need o^ singleness, impartiality, and Se f denial, in the application even of
general Rules, yet we shall touch on some general instances of Cases wherein we
are called to Suffer, as namely, First. When we cannot keep by our Duty, and
eschew S^ffering, but by taking our selves to some sinful midse; I mean of
whatever nature the Duty be, and of whatever nature the sin be, when the midse
is sinful; it will, I suppo^e, be granted by all, that we are bound to prefer
Suffering to sin. 2ly. When the midse is not only directly sinful, but when we
cannot eschew Suffering, but sinfullie, we are called, in that Case to Suffer,
for the mean may be lawful in it self, and yet so circumstantiated, that to us
it may be sinful; as a man may, through want of present light be doubtful,
whether or not he may use such and such a mean to eschew Suffering, and he is
not wilfully cherishing his ignorance; only he knows not for the time,
whether it be lawful for him or not, to use such a mean, if he should in that
case, do such a thing, he should do it doubtingly, and so sinfully; and till
God give more clearness, it is better for such a man to hazard on Suffering;
for if in that case, he use the mean, or ^o the thing, he will do it sinfully;
though in it self, and it may be to another, it be not sinful. 3ly. When we
cannot without sin, eschew some manifest prejudice to the work of God, or some
notable reproach on his People, even though the mean be lawful in it self, we
are called in that case, rather to Suffer, for though the mean be lawful, yet
if it should be used by us, it is very probable, it would derogat from, and
reflect upon our profession, and be matter of stumbling to the People of God,
and minister occasion to adversaries, to insult or speak ill; as for instance,
it was not simply unlawful, or sinful, for Nehemiah to flee to save his life,
yet he says, should such a man as he flee? He finds on due consideration, that
for such a man, in such a place, and so stated to flee, would have been a
reproach to his profession, and would have stumbled many; therefore he judges
it unsuitable to redeem his life at the too dear rate of such a repro^ch, and
that he is called rather to hazard on Suffering: men would not be vain, and
carnal in ^^eking to maintain their own credit, in a suffering time; yet they
would concernedly see to the credit of the Gospel, and of their profession; and
it is on this ground, that Paul goes in many of hi^ Suffe^ings, that by his
Sufferings others may be streng^hned, ed^fied and confi^med, and ma^e m^^^
hold, and no ways prejudiced, and the mou^hs of adversaries stopped, that were
ready to take advantage, and speak evil; and to come by these ends, he rejoiced
in Sufferings. A 4th. Case is, when our doing of such and such a thing has a
longer train of consequents following it, than the^^ is any great matter in the
thing it self, which may give advantage to the enemy, or may bri^^ prejudice to
Gods Work, or to his People, we a^^ called, in that case, rather to forbear,
and ha^^ard on Suffering; as for example, it was but (...) little thing in it
self, for Daniel to shut the wi^dows, and for Mordecai to bow before Haman But
when either of these is considered, with the train that followed on it; whilst
thereby it (...) attempted, to beat them from their stedfastnes^ their yielding
to such a thing, would have give occasion of boasting, rejoicing, and triumph
t^ the enemy, and of sorrow and sadness to the People of God, and might seem to
be a recedin^ from a called for Testimony; and upon these cons^derations they
find themselves concerned and clea^ly called, rather to hazard on Suffering,
than (...) do such a thing, which in other cases might have been done: This
Case, as also the former call for much Holy Wisdom, Prudence, an^ Self denial,
and much Light and Direction from God; and I have instanced them for this cause
that we may not think, that we are not called to Suffer, when the thing is
little, or such a in other Cases, or in other Circumstances might be done; It
is true, the thing may be little considered simply, and in it self, and if
there were no more following on it, is such as might b^ done; but when we see
it is designed, and made use of to be, as it were, a needle to draw with i^ a
long thread of consequences, and to bear and bind upon us such things, that in
Conscience we cannot comply with, nor allow of; we are not in that case to
consider, and weigh the thing, as abstracted from, and divested of the
consequents ^d circumstances thereof, but as it is attend^ by, and clothed
with them; we shall not ^stance any more particular Cases: but earnest-beseech
every one gravely to perpend, and under these, as they shall find themselves in
^ch and such circumstances to be concerned, and always to remember, that it is
better to ^oise to suffer affliction than sin, or the pleasures (...) it, which
endure but for a season.

2ly. From Christ's requiring, that the Cross ^ay be taken up, and born, as it
leads unto, and furthers, in the following of him, and as (...) fits and
prompts, for following of him, Ob^^ve, in a Word (for we hasten to a close)
that suffering of it self, never profits, or ad^antageth men in the way of
holiness, nor is it ac^^ptable to Christ; but only as it fits for follow^^g of
him, and furthers ^s therein; For Crosses and Afflictions are common to good
and bad; and that which makes crosses and afflictions ac^eptable to him, and
profitable, comfortable, and lovely to Believers, is this, that they are
^lessed toward their furtherance, in following ^f him, toward their advances
in conformity to ^im, and communion with him:

For Use, Take this as the great Scope, and ^pshot of Sufferings, and take it
also for a mark, ^o try right Suffering by; It is not the mea^ure of Suffering,
but Suffering, as it has this ^weet fruit growing on it, even progress in
likeness to Christ, in holiness, and in fellowship with him, that makes it
pleasing to God on Christ's account, and profitable to us; and indeed it may
make a very sad and humbling discovery of our present condition, as to most of
us; our Sufferings have not been few, and have met with several sad
dispensations; (...) alas! how little h^ve they participat of the ^ture of the
Cross of Christ? It Is t^^e, in respect the material cause of them they have
been ^or h^ yet in so sa^ as few are bettered, and faith ^o holiness by them,
and made to run after him, in (...) way of hi^ Commandments; we may sadly say,
the has been but little, lament^bly (...) ^^ff^^ing Christ: we have much
reas^^ ^o ^ear, that as have many things to count s^^, in reference t^ greatly
abused glorious Gospel, so his inpar^icu^ abused Crosses and Afflictions; he
has smitten (...) and we have not suitably grieved neither have (...) turned
to the hand that smote us; ah! what pro^ing is there in respect of the inward
mortificati^ of Sin, and of delight in God; or in respect of a ^sible holy, and
examplary conversation becom^ the Gospel of Christ, by all our Sufferings? Is
the not, beside these great defects as to the power godliness, some wearing out
of the very form of (...) that had wont to be? abused Crosses may be very sad
article in our Libel and Indirement; an^ when we grow not better by Crosses, we
read^^ grow worse.

3ly. From our Lords requiring from all that w^^ come after him, the taking up,
and bearng of h^ Cross, as it fits following of him Observe, That the right
taking up and bearing of the Cross notably qu^lifies and fits men for following
of Christ; Therefore do^^ he here propose i^, as a fit and suitable middle, for
coming at that end; It i^ not the Cross co^sidere^ simply, and in it self (as I
said) that fits for following of Christ, but the kindly submitting to, and
bea^ing of it, that has this blessed fruit and effect; Lam. 3.27. It is good
for a man (says Jeremiah) that he ^r the ^ock in his youth, he sits alone, and
keeps silence (...) Kindly submitting to the Cross, makes humble ^d patient,
and suffers not the afflicted man to fret, ^r to prescribe to God; many take on
the Cross, ^ou do not (to speak so) bear it; and many bear when it is in a
manner so bound on them, that ^ey cannot get it sh^ken off; who yet fret,
repine ^d grumble under, and greatly weary of it, as an in^lerable burden; but
this kindly bearing of it, ^akes silent and sweetly submissive of the afflicted
^^rsons own accord; If ye endure chastening (says ^e Apostle, Heb. 12.7.) God
deals with you, as ^ith Sons; This genuine and kindly exercise under ^e
Cross, bespeaks a clearing and comforting evi^ence of Sonship.

The Use of it serves, in short to discover to us ^^e great let and obstruction
that lies in the way ^f our ready, resolute and cheerful following of Christ
^ven our not being folding, yielding, toward, and ^^actable to the Lord, by the
Cross, but much in^lining either to shift, or shake it off; either to fret
under it, or at best preposterously to seek after a ^hange of it; of what ever
nature it be, whether a ^hare of that which is more common and public, or ^om
whatmore particular, and domestic or personal; we should have it for our great
work and task, to bear, and by hearing, to be benefited and bettered by our
Cross; to be always in a posture of readiness to Suffer, which will lay our
pride, and keep down our easily discomposing and distempering passions, it
would contribute to the grouth of Grace, and would through Gods blessing, be as
a weeding-iron to draw up the weeds of corruption from among the herbs, and
would make them die, which alas! often grow ranker than herbs; (...) Cross
rightly born would, in a word, notably h^ to follow Christ.

4ly. Observe, but in a short word, That there (...) no following of Christ
aright, unless we resolve (...) take up and bear patiently, and pleasantly our
o^ particular Crosses shaped to us; If any man (says o^ Lord he^e) will come
after me, let him take up his cr^ and follow me; The way of following of
Christ, is (...) hedged as it were, with thorns, that through man Tribulations
and Afflictions all that will follow hi^ must needs enter into the Kingdom of
God; an^ the Christian race, and c urse of Godlines^ has (...) many enemies on
all hands, and from all quarte^ that the man who resolves not to suffer for
Christ will make no progress in it; There is nothing more frequently proposed
unto, and pressed upon (...) the professed followers of Christ than this; and it
(...) here laid down by him, as one of the first, and gre^^ articles of his
capitulation (to speak so) with a^ that will come after him; the necessity
whereof i^ powerfully pressed, and put home by all these weighty arguments
which follow our Text, to the close of the Chapter, which are all linked
together with this, that if any man will come after Christ, he must deny
himself, take up his cross and follow him; who is infinitely worthy to be
followed, notwithstanding all the Crosses that attend and follow his followers,
while they sojourn in this present evil, sinful and troublesome Wo^ld, out of
which, when they shall be gone, they will exchange their Cross for^ an
incorruptible Crown.

FINIS.

