SEVERAL PROPOSALS Offered (by a Friend to Peace and Truth) to The Serious
Consideration of the Keepers of the LIBERTIES of The People of England, In
Reference to a SETTLEMENT OF PEACE and TRUTH in this Nation.

AS ALSO A True NARRATIVE In short Is chiefly to make known two or three Sums
of MONEY concealed: AND Many of the Actings of the Proposer, SAMVEL DVNCON,
Late of Ipswich in Suffolk, are declared. From the year 1640. to the year 1652.

Printed at London, by James Cottrel. 1659

SEVERAL PROPOSALS, etc.
1. THat those that did lend Moneys, Horse or Arms, or ought else, upon the
Propositions in or about the year 1642. and have continued to assist the
Parliament and Army upon the account of truth and peace, may now be freed from
further charge; and if possible, that they may be paid, especially those that
are not able to forbear it.

2. That those that have not lent, may be invited to lend the fifth and
twentieth part; and that a sufficient number be appointed to receive it; and
that it may be for the payment of the soldiers, that hereby, all may be equal
in lending.

3. That those that are much increased in their outward Estates since they
first did lend, may be invited to make some reasonable addition.

4. That those that have been satisfied their moneys lent, by Lands or
otherwise, be now again invited to lend the 8th and 20th part.

5. That all those Lands that have been purchased or given from, or by the
Commonwealth or Parliament, may be double in the Assesments, that thereby the
Lands of all well-affected men under 40 l. a year, may not be assessed any
longer; yet that all men may be assessed for their stock of money, beside the
stock they use in their Trades or farming. And that all their Lands that have
not assisted the Parliament, but in any thing acted to the contrary, that their
Lands be double in the Assesment, to those that did assist the Parliament and
Army.

6. That all Houses and Lands that are the Commonwealths, and can be spared
from needful uses, as namely White hall, and diverse others, may be sold to pay
the Soldiers, and public faith money, lent in 1642. and 43. or about that
time.

7. That the Officers in the Army may be reduced to as small a number as may
be, and that they be contented (especially in times of peace) with less pay:
for the people and private soldiers are much offended at the pomp and pride of
some Officers.

8. That the private soldiers may be duly paid every month.

9. That there may be Registers, one or more in every County, that by them all
Wills, Sales, (of any considerable value) and all Bills and Bonds, Conveyances
and Morgages, etc. may be registered at a reasonable price, so that every man
may see what is his, and what is another; and to prevent suits at Law, which
now are and have been very vexatious, hazardous, and chargeable.

10. That there may be peacemakers appointed in every County, that may have
power given them to hear and determine all matters in variance, and to give
Judgment etc. that there be no going to Law one with another.

11. That those peacemakers may give and send our Summons instead of Writs,
and that there be no Arests but after those Summons: that no Conveyance of any
Lands or Goods, made by the parties, be good, but null, except it be with the
peacemakers consent, for the satisfaction of the party complaining: provided
that the Trial may not hold above one month after the Summons.

12. That all Laws that are Tyrannical, or that thereby the people may and have
been snared and oppressed, in conscience or otherwise, may be taken away; all
Deodands, etc.

13. That care be taken that all Moneys or Lands given for Charitable Uses, be
disposed of to Gods glory; and not be imbezzel'd, nor continued to any
superstitious or idolatrous use or uses.

14. That all Copyholders may be at a reasonable rent by the Acre, for their
Lands, without Fine or Bond-services, etc.

15. That the people be left free to choose and maintain their own Ministers
respectively, to preach to them; provided they be not professed Enemies to the
Commonwealth, and that they meddle not with State-matters to disturb others.

16. That all impositions by way of Tithes, be taken away and abolished; and if
any be dissatisfied therewith, let them read the Husband-mans Plea, and
Hartfordshire Petition, exhibited many years since to the Parliament, and
Anthony Person, and other late Writers.

17. That none that do live in the fear of God, and are sent as by his
immediate power into the Ministry, may in the least be interrupted, or
outwardly disturbed, nor others in the time of their speaking; and that none be
faulted for speaking one to another.

18. That there may be no observation of days or places imposed upon tender
Consciences, nor nothing forced from them to maintain those meeting places they
make no use of, but rather, that Parishes may be united, that such meeting
places and Churches (falsely so called) as may be spared, may be workhouses,
for the better setting the poor on work, and relieving those that are not able
to work: and that there may be special care taken for the better relief of the
poor and impotent.

19. That all swearing, whoring, Theft, Murder, and all other wickedness and
ideleness, and Pride, as much as may be, may be punished and suppressed in
whomsoever, without partiality.

20. That there may be a Model of Civil Government and Laws in short, set out
and declared to the People, that all may set their hands to it; and those that
cannot for the present, let them have three or six months time given them, to
give in their Reasons to the contrary to the Parliament, that so there may be a
general and particular Agreement among the people, of all Civil Laws and
Government in outward things; and that no Laws be in force, but what shall from
time to time, be made and agreed upon, by the Keepers of the Liberties of the
People, and the people by subscribing their Names as aforesaid: and that a^l
those Laws, and Civil Government be, with the names of the subscriber^,
registered in a County book. And that there be present care taken by this
Parliament to make an Addition to their number of men to sit in Parliament,
such as do fear GOD; hating covetousness, and of known faithfulness to the Come
monwealth. An Agreement of the People would be the first thing done; for a
house, (and so a nation) divided in it self, cannot stand: we have over and
over seen it by experience.

The NARRATIVE of the Proposer, as follows.
1. The said Samuel was, for refusing to pay the Ship Money about the year
2640. strayed three times, and at last forced to go in his own Arms against the
Scots, when the late King intended to force a new Book of Common Prayer upon
them: but with much ado, the said Samuel prevailed with the Leaders or
Commanders to accept of a man in his room, which he was forced to hire at a
great rate.

2. By Bishop Wren's Innovations, for refusing to kneel at the rails, the Table
being set up Altar-wise at the east end, he was kept a long time in the
Commissaries Court, and Arches, at great expenses, and Journies from Ipswich to
London, vexations troubles and charges; and there a Significavit and
Excommunica ion came out against me, etc. whereby I was damnified about 300 l.
whereupon my self, and two Men more in Ipswich, did Petition the Parliament
against Bishop Wren, Sir John Lamb, and his Commissary, his innovations; and
for Reparations, and as I have heard, the Committee of that Parliament whereto
Sir Thomas Witherington was then Chairman, had drawn up a Report to be made to
the House for 300 l. apiece Reparations; but presently the King did challenge
the five or six Members, and thereupon the disturbance did grow so great, that
we could have no proceedings. Our Petition and attendance with Witnesses, and
several Journies of our selves and Witnesses, from about Ipswich to London, was
a very great trouble and charge to us.

3. About that time, the King went from the Parliament to Newmarket; and whilst
he was there, we had an Assizes at Bury S. Edmunds (so called) in Suffolk, at
which Assizes my self, and one man more in Ipswich (who since dyed in the
Parliaments service, a Captain) did draw a Petition to the King, showing that
the great grievance of the Country was, his not returning to the Parliament;
and said in it, That if there were any in the Parliament that had offended any
known Law of this Nation, that they might be brought to a fair trial, according
to Law, etc. And with our diligence about that Petition, it was signed by the
Grand Jury, and most of the Justices: as I remember, by all upon the Bench
except one, as also by a numberless number of the hands of the whole County, it
being a very great Assizes: and three, a Knight, and two other Justices for the
County were appointed to carry that Petition to the King, to New Market, and
were just ready with their coaches to go to New market; and then the King
hearing of it, he did send a Messenger or Message, That no Petition should be
brought to him, at the peril of the Bringers. But then my self and some others
did go to Judge Crook his chamber, and desired him to deliver our Petition to
the King: he did read it, and receive it, and promised that if it were
possible, he would deliver it to him; but soon after, we did hear that the King
went to Nottingham, and refused all Petitions and Invitations from the
Parliament and People; and in a short time, as we did hear, he set up his
Standard at Nottingham, and raised an Army against his Parliament, and
well-affected people: Whereupon the Parliament did in their just defense raise
an Army against the Seducers of the King, etc. And upon this account from time
to time I have acted, and have been employed in the service in brief, as
follows.

1. My self, my own Father, and Wives Father did lend upon the propositions and
public Faith, about 300 l. most of all which was at last my loss.

2. My self continued a daily Actor in sending out Hors-men and Arms; and after
a short time, my self and three more had a Commission sent us from the then
Lord Gray of Wark, to secure and dis-arm all that had not associated and lent
upon the public Faith: by virtue of which Commission, I my self, without the
assistance of the other two, the fourth man being passed or passing away into
the Army, a Captain with a Foot-company raised by us at a great charge; my self
alone did raise and procure to be raised from those that had not lent nor
(...), a Troop of 74 horse completely manned and armed, with about 300 l. in
money. And at the earnest Request of the la^e Commissary General Whaley, I did
pass with him, and those Horsemen and moneys, ^o Huntingdon; and at that time
the late Protector Oliver was at Huntingdon, waiting to raise those horses
li^led, etc. but had got few or none: then he, the said Protector, desired me
to stay a while, and make use of my Commission there: which I did, and in a
short time we raised a considerable number of horse, arms and money: But
because I did know that the County of Suffolk was left in a dangerous
condition, I returned back, and refused no service for the good of the
Commonwealth and County, and continued sending Horse and Arms to the late
Protector and Parliaments Army: and upon Letters from the late Protector Oliver
directed and sent to me, I did from time to time send him also honest able men;
some by his Letter, to Ely, to Col. Walton there: and those men were sent out
at my own cost and charge. If I mistake not, I did send from Ipswich among
diverse other men, the late deceased General Blake, and others that are dead,
and many of them alive, that have been very serviceable; and from time to time,
I did entertain soldiers, Commanders and diverse others, related to, and
members of the Parliament and Army, at my own cost and charge. And I was made
high Collector for the very first Assesment, when no man durst do it, and was
forced to go to several places with a party of Horse, at my own cost and
charge, to force some ill-affected to pay their Assesments. And I was continued
high Collector in all the most troublesome times, until the year 1651. and in
those days it was a very hazardable, dangerous and troublesome office, and so
much the more, because most part of the time, there was no treasurer that did
act in that County: whereby, and by reason of the unruliness and necessities of
the soldiers at some time, I was exposed to very great troubles and losses; To
instance but in two or three, namely, Not long before the great Army went into
Scotland, Captain Chillenden, Captain Disher and Lt. Sheres did get by force,
and by cunning and deceit from me several sums, as follows; which of right,
do belong to the Commonwealth.

1. First, Captain Chillenden from time to time, by his cunning and flattering
words, would have what moneys he did come for, with Warrants for Col. Whaley's
Regiment; and a little before their going into Scotland, after he had received
his money upon a Warrant for that Regiment, he told me that he had one Warrant
more, to receive as I remember about 2200 l. as he said it was for the
Committee for the Army. Alderm Allen, and others with him earnestly desired me
to let him have what I could possibly upon that Warrant, and used many
arguments to persuade me, and said that what moneys I did let him have upon
that warrant, was almost as good as given him: for he was buying of
Fee-farme-rents, and could make use of that money a long time. Whereupon I did
at that time let him have, and appointed him to receive; which he had, or did
accept of great part; and at several times after, upon that Warrant, at his
earnest request, I did pay him, and order him to receive upon that Warrant, in
all, the sum of about 1700 l. and but 1000 l. of that is entered in my account;
so that there is about 700 l. of that at money in his hands, for ought I know
to this day. One other time when he brought a Warrant for about 3000 l. for
that Regiment, at the same time there was at my house a party of Horse which
came for the like sum upon warrant, as I remember belonging to the late
Protectors Regiment; and they did earnestly desire to have that money which I
had, which in all was at that time, as near as I could estimate, about 3000 l.
And whilst my self, the Agent for the Army, and both parties were in a lower
room of my house, parling which party should have it, or whether my money
should be divided between the two Regiments, this Chillenden went out of the
room with some or all his party, and went to a Lock-Smith, and borrowed iron
instruments, and then with his party got privately up into my chamber where the
money was in a great chest with three locks, and broke it open, and took and
carried away all the money, unknown to me; which, as near as I could estimate,
was as aforesaid about 3000 l. and I heard presently that he was gone to an Inn
in town with all the money. Whereupon I sent for him to bring back the money,
which he did not, but came himself with one or two more, and told me, as I
remember, that there was but about 2100 l. which I was forced to accept of a
Receipt or Discharge for no more: so that at that time in all likelihood, I
lost about 900 l. he did also at his coming out of Scotland, to blind the
Committee for the Army, attach 500 l. of my money in the treasury at
Guild Hall, whereupon I put in Bayl to answer the suit, and in time had
Judgment against him, and demanded my money of all the treasurers: but by
reason there was money due to Alderman Allen, and others, which Capt.
Chillenden had in his hands, Alderman Allen and Chillenden were then so
powerful, that though I put in Bail, and had Judgment against Chillenden, yet
I could not get my 500 l.

2 Capt. Disher by cunning deceit and lies got into his hands, and has it to
this day, the sum of 600 l. which does belong to the Commonwealth, and near or
about 100 l. due from him to my self. Lt. Sheres by telling an untruth got into
his hands, and for ought I know keeps it to this day, about 170 l.

3. There is a Warrant in Capt. Blackwel's hands for the payment of 264 l. 8 s
due to me for Biseet, which I have been and am much damnified for want of.

Many other things might be related and inserted, but too large, etc. Let us no
longer jangle, nor force one another about Religion or Worship, for it is the
power of GOD only and his Spirit, that brings and leads into all truth, and
makes us of one faith, etc. And let us all in that power and spirit wait to be
taught by him, and let us not quench the Spirit in our selves nor others; and
doubt ye not but the LORD will send Laborers enough into his harvest: The
Kingdom is His, the Power is His, and let all Glory and Praise be given to Him.
AMEN, AMEN.

A POSTSCRIPT.
Dear Hearts,
IN the light there is seen more great storms and tempests arising: And by the
LORD GOD you are and have been warned: therefore as you have seen and felt his
Judgment, in the power and wisdom of God, ye and all people are to learn
righteousness. The Power and Providence of GOD has wrought the People of this
Nation great Del^verances and Mercies, more then Man did or could expect;
Therefore stand fast and go not back, but in his Power and Wisdom act. Take
heed ye meddle not, as others have done, with the LORD 's Anointed, for he has
and will rebuke Kings for their sakes. Let no tender Consciences be any more
persecuted for tithes, nor the Spirit and movings of GOD quenched or resisted,
neither in your selves nor in others: for then Woe, woe, woe. They that do witness
the Law, the LORD CHRIST, the Covenant of GOD in their hearts, they need no
Laws without, nor no Teachers without, etc. But in reference to others, and in
reference to the peace and outward well-being of all the people, it is in the
wisdom of GOD judged fit that there should be a sudden care taken that some
men, that are much in the wisdom of the flesh, but especially such as are much
in the Wisdom, Power and Life of GOD, be appointed to draw up a Model of all
Civil Laws and Government for this Nation: That after it be well considered of,
it may be sent out to the People to subscribe; and those that for the present
cannot, let them have three or six months time to give their reasons to the
contrary. The persons appointed may be six of the House, and three called
Presbyterians, three called Independents, three called Baptized, and three
called Quakers.

In the humility of GOD, and in his Power and Wisdom, these are to be
considered of, and speedily done; and is offered in humility, with other
Proposals, by a Friend to Truth and Peace, who now again in this day of GOD 's
power is made willing, and with the same power shall be made able to be
serviceable to all people in any thing that is equal and just,

Samuel Duncon.
Many thousands are very sensible of the great want of Registers and
Peacemakers in every County.



FINIS.

